THE IMAGE of both Churches, after the most wonderful and heavenly Revelation
of saint John the Evangelist, containing a very fruitful exposition or
Paraphrase upon the same. Wherein it is conferred with the other scriptures;
and most auctorised histories. Compyled by John Bale an exyle also in this
life, for the faithful testimony of Jesus.

Go ye out of Sodom, for the Lord will destroy that City.

Genesis 19. Come away my people, least ye be partakers of her sins.

Apoc. 18. Flee from filthy Babylon, and go clean away from the land of the
Caldees.

Hier. 50. Printed at London by Thomas East.

A Preface unto the Christian Reader.
SO highly necessary (good Christian Reader) is the knowledge of S. John's
Apocalips or Revelation, Apoc. 22. 1. Cor. 6. Romans 12
whether thou will, to him that is a true member of Christ's church, as of any
other book of the sacred Bible. For in none of them all are ye faithful
diligent hearers and readers more blessed, nor more lively so declared
observing the contents thereof, the^ in this one book. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 22.
Apoc. 4. 1. John 5. Mat. 16.
No where is it more clearly specified, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost to be one everlasting God, and Jesus Christ to be the eternal son of
that living Father (which are the first and chief grounds of our Christian
faith) then here. No where is the durable kingdom and priesthood of the said
Jesus Christ more plentuously spread, Apoc. 14. Hebr. 7.
more plainly proved and more largely uttered, the^ in this holy oracle. No
where is the doctrine of health more purely taught, Apoc. 1. John. 7. Apoc. 21.
faith more thoroughly commended, nor yet righteousness more highlye rewarded,
then here. No where are heresies more earnestly condemned, blasphemous vices
more vehemently rebuked, Apoc. 18. Apoc. 15.
nor yet their just plagues more fiercelye threatened, then in this
compendious work. Herein is the true christian church (which is ye meek
spouse of ye Lamb without spot) in her right fashyoned colors discribed.
Ephe. 5. Apoc. 21. Apoc. 17. Apoc. 2.
So is the proud church of hypocrites, ye rose colored whore, the paramour of
Antichrist, and the sinful sinagoge of Satan, in her just proporcion
depaynted, to ye merciful forewarning of the Lords electes. Why this book
is called the Image of both churches.
And that is the cause why I have here entitled this book, the Image of both
Churches. Neither here spares the holy Ghost their hypocrisy nor pride,
their Idolatry nor whoredom, their covetousness, nor most cruel tyranny,
with their other outrageous myscheues. No, he touches them so nyghly that we
should ye better know them, and be the more ware of them, that he shows them
to be such a spiritual sort as makes daily marchaundise of ye bodies and
souls of men. Apoc. 11. Apoc. 18. 2. Pet. 3.
Let us never look to have a more open mark of that wicked generation, take
heed of them if we lust. He that will live godly in Christ, and be a pacyent
sufferer. He that will stand in Gods fear, and prepare him self to
temptacyon. He that will be strong when adversity shall come and avoid all
assaults of Antichrist, 2. Timo. 3. Eccle. 2. 1. Pet 5. Ephe. 6.
and the diuill, let him give him self wholly to the study of this prophecy.

Not one necessary point of belief is in all the other scriptures, A brief sum
is this book of the whole scriptures.
that is not here also in one place or other. The very complet sum and whole
knitting up is this heavenly book of the universal verities of the Bible. All
that Moses taught in the law, David in the Psalms, and the Prophets in
their wrytinges concerning Christ's spyrituall kingdom both here and above,
Luc. 24. Esaias. 9. Apoc. 21.
meet for this present knowledge are herein briefly comprehended. Ephe. 4.
John. 16. Hebr. 2. Apoc. 18.
So is his eternal vyctory for us, over sin, death, hell, and the dyuill,
with his perpetual cleerenesse, authority, and empire world without end,
compendiously here expressed. He that knows not this book, knows not what
the church is whereof he is a member.

For herein is the estate thereof from Christ's ascension to the end of the
world, Col. 1. Apoc. 4. Apoc 12. Apoc. 21.
under pleasant figures and elegant tropes decyded, and no where else
thoroughly but here, the times always respected. He that delights not to
behold the condition of his own city, is thereunto no loving citizen. And
after the true opinion of saint Austen, Ephe. 3. August. Apoc. 21. Hier. 50.
either we are citizens in the new Jerusalem with Jesus Christ, or else in the
old supersticious Babylon with Antichrist ye vicar of satan. He that with
diligence shall search yt matter, specially in this present revelation shall
thoroughly perceive the certainty thereof. John. 5. Mat. 7.
Consider the dignytie and worthiness of this most precious Jewel that the
Lord has left here to our co^solatio^. First God the eternal father gave it
unto Christ his well-beloved son in our ma^hood. Mat. 13. Romans 15. Luce. 10.
John. 21. Apoc. 1. John. 12. Apoc. 22.
Christ now glorified committed it unto the holy Ghost, which is here called an
Angel or messenger. The holy Ghost delivered it unto John ye peculiarly
beloved disciple of Jesus. And John last of all left it with the universal
church to their christian eruditio^. Mark now if any other treatise of the
sacred Bible had ever so worthy a foreward setting forth. Gilbertus porre^a.
Mat. 25. Lucc. 11*
This is not that it should be altogether neglected, and not looked upon* No
man lights a candle (says Christ) and conueyeth it under a bushel that men
should not see thereby. Mat. 5. Mark. 4.
Never was this gracious gift given of God to be hidden as it has been of
long time, but to be opened to all the congregations. A more necessary
doctrine to the christian erudition is not in the whole scriptures; all
cyrcumstaunces considered. For besides all that is before expressed, Iacobus
faber super Dionisium.
it contains the universal troubles, persecutions and crosses, that the
church suffered in the primatyue spring, what it suffers now, and what it shall
suffer in the latter times by the subtle satellytes of Antichrist which are ye
cruel members of Satan. What this book contains.


What it opens to the Reader.
It manifests also what premyes, what crowns, and what glory the said
congregation shall have after this present conflict with the enimyes, that the
promised rewards might quicken the hearts of those that the torments fears.
Dyosius Alexa^drinus in chiliaste.
A prophecye is this Apocalips called, and is much more excellent the^ all the
other prophecies. Like as the light is more precious then the shadow, the
verity then the figure, the new testament then the old, and the gospel then
the law, so is this holy oracle more precious then they. That Esaias, Hieremie,
Ezechiell, Danyell, Oseas, with all the other Prophets warns before hand to
follow concerning Christ, and his church, Robertus Tuiciensis et Haymo.
this mystery declares effectually fulfilled. It is a full clerenesse to all
the cronicles and most notable histories which has been written since Christ's
ascension, Sebastianus mayer in prefacione.
opening the true natures of their ages, times, and seasons. He that has store
of them, and shall diligently search them over conferring the one with the
other, time with time, and age with age, shall perceive most wonderful causes.
For in the text are they only proponed in effect, and promised to follow in
their seasons, and so ratified with the other scriptures, but in the cronicles
they are evidently seen by all ages fulfilled. Yet is the text a light to the
chronicles, and not the cronicles to the text.

Unto saint John ye Evangelist were these Gilbertus porreta in prologo
Apocalipseos.
mysteries of the whole Trinity reveled (as I showed before) such time as he
was of the Emperor Domicianus exyled for his preaching into the isle of Pathmos
at the cruel complayntes of the Idolatrous priests and bishops, and of him so
written and sent out of the same exile into ye congregations. In one day were
all these marueils seen and in the same written, Haymo in libro. 6. cap. 18.
as witnesses Haymo with diverse other expositours, and as seems agreeable to
the text (which is a great wonder) in toke^ yt the Lord as David reports him,
Psalm. 44. Apoc. 1. Apoc. 21.
is a very swift writer, which at ye same time earnestly occupied ye hand of ye
said John Of such a nature is ye message of this book with the other contents
thereof, that from no place is it sent more freely, August. Bedas.
opened more clearly, nor told forth more boldly, than out of exyle. And
this should seem to be the cause thereof. In exyle was it first written, as a
little before is mencyoned. In exyle are the powers thereof most earnestly
proved of the^ that has faith. Rabanus et alii doctores.

Hieronimus in libro deviris illustribus.


As appears yet by Justinius the martyr. Militon the Asiane, Hireneus,
Hipolytus, Victorinus, and other which were there of the first expositours in
the primative church, and in the end suffered for it ye death of their bodies.
And though it were than the last book of the Bible, Franciscus Titelmannus de
auetoritate Apoca.
and has been ever since fardest from knowledge and least regarded of them
all, yet was it the first that received any man's exposition, as a book thought
most necessary to be known of the Christians.

Into the deserte sends the Lord his church, Apoc. 12. Georgius Aemilius.
when the filthy spirit by his spightful spirituality speweth out his
execrable waters, throwyng the third part of the stars into the earth with
his tail. He gives her two Egles wings to fly thither with, Psalm. 54. John.
13. Luke. 4. Mat. 10. John. 8.12.
which are the light precepts and examples of Christ to declyne their
mischieues. For he both ^^ed his self when occasions were given him, and
commanded his disciples to flee from city to city in time of their
persecutions. He provides her there a resting place for iij. years and an
half, which are the days of Helyas, Danyell, and John. And all this is not
that she should there be idle. ^. Reg. 17. Dani. 12. Apoc. 11.
Flattery dwelling at home, and sucking there still his mothers breasts, may
never tell out the truth, he sees so many dangers on every side, as
displeasur of frindes, decay of name, loss of goods, Flattery may never tell
forth the truth.
offense of great men, punishment of body, and ieopardy of life, with such
other like. The forsaken wretched sort, has the Lord provided always to
rebuke the world of sin for want of true faith, of hypocrisy, 1. Cor. 1.
Math. 4. John. 16.
for want of perfect ryghtuousnesse, and of blyndnesse, for lack of Godly
judgment.

For naught is it not therefore yt he has exiled a certain number of believing
brethren the realm of England, of the which afflicted family my faith is that
I am one. Why god exileth the faithful brethren,
Where upon I have considered it no less then my bound duty under pain of
damnation, to admonyshe Christ's flock by this present revelation of their
perils past, and the dangers to come for contempt of the Gospel which now
reygneth there above all in the clergy. Protestacio^ of the author hereof


I am not the first which has attempted this office, or taken upon me this
odyous enterprise, full of rebukes and slanders, and that makes me the
boulder. Justinius becoming of a profane philosopher a perfect chrystian,
Franciscus Titelmannus libro. 2. de auth. apoc.
wrote an exposicion upon this Apocalips, and was slain for the verity in the
year from Christ's incarnatyon a. C. and liiii. Melyton the Bishop of Sardis
in Asia (which was one of the vii. congregatio^s unto whom John wrote) made
also a book of the same, Hieronimus ^. in libro de ilustribus, viris.
and lived about the same time in the year of our lord a.c.lx. Hyreneus a
discyple of Polycarpe byshope of Smyrna (which was also one of the said
congregations) left behind him a commentary upon the same book, Sebastianus
meier et fra^ciscus Ticelmannus.
and suffered strong martyrdom for the truth in the year of our lord a
c.lxxv. Hypolytus a byshope in Aphrica, Petrus equilynus and sophronius Grecus.
a man of much godly wisdom and learning wrote upon the same about the year
of our lord.cc. and.xx. In like manner Uictorinus the bishop of Pictauis about
the year of our lord cc and.lxx. Ticonius the Aphricane, anno. dom. ccc. and,
xc. Saynct Hierome to Anatholius Anno. Dom. cccc. and.x. And saint Austin also,
Ioannes tricemius de scriptoribus eccles^^sticus.
Anno dom. cccc. and.xx. with diverse other more. Primasius bishop of V^icina
wrote.v. little books upon this Apocalypse unto Castorius whereof this is the
beginning. Ambrosius ^usbertus.
Tuis vir illustris et religiose castori (which volume I have read) and he
lived in the year of our Lord.cccc. and.xl. Redas et Meyerus
Aprigius bishop of Pace^ in Spain, made a notable work upon ye same about ye
year of our lord.ccccc. and.xxx. So did Cassiodorus Apulus, as Petrus
Equilinus calls him, anno. dom. ccccc.lxx. and called his book complexiones
in Apocalipsim.

So did Isidorus junior the bishop of Hispalis in Spain, Ioannes. Tritemius de
scriptori hus Ecclesiasticis.
Anno Do. DC.xxx. with all those that here follows. Of whom I have seen almost
so many, as have there beginnings here registered. Ex benedictinis monachis.
^edas presbiter Anglus. li. iii apocalipsis saneti Iohannis inqua. Alcuinus
monachus Anglus. li. i. Haymo Hirsuelde^sis Germanus, Petrus equilinus et
Hermannus a^^edell.
li. vii. Legimus in ecclesiastica historia. Strabus fuldensis Germanus, lib.
i. Sicut in secularibus literis. Rabanus maurus, Germanus, li. i. Ambrosius
Ansbertus Gallus, li, x. de illustratione afflatus. Ioannes Tritenuus
Spanheme^^^^ abba^.
Robertus Tuiciensis Germanus, lib. xii. Vt tu quoque venerabilis colo. Ioachim
Abbas Calaber. li. viii. Quia profunda libri huius. Monachus quidam
Cantuariensis, li. i. Legitur Genesis.xxviii. Vidit. Easterton monachus Anglus
lib. i. Posuit castra sua in medio.
Ex Canonicis regularibus.
Richardus de sancto Victore, Scotus, Franciscus citelma^nus and Sebastianus
meyer.
libro primo. Gaufredus Antisiodorensis, Gallus, lib. i.
Ex Carthusianis monachis.
Henricus de Hassia, Germanus, lib. i, Dionisius Rikel Germanus, lib. i. Ecce
puer meus electus.
Ex sacerdotibus prophaenis.
Ambrosius de septem tubis, li. i. Tempus autem arbitror. Thomas vvalde^^^
Ranulphus c^strensis.
Berengarius Thuronensis, Gallus, lib. i. Gilbertus porreta, Gallus. li. i.
Omnes qui pi^ volunt viuere. Author a centum annis, Anglus, libro. i. Ioannes
Hus, Bohemus, li. i. Cum finierin^ testimonium. Paulus Burgensis, Iudeus, lib.
i. Licet opinio expositorum. Otho brunfel^ius et Conradus ^^ontorius
Mathias Dorinck, Germanus. lib. i. Costasie doctor Anglus, lib. i. Ecce de
scripsieam tibi triplic. Iacobus Stralen, Germanus, lib. i. Vidit Jacob in
somno schalam.
Ex Carmelitanis.
Ioannes Baconthorpe, Anglus, lib. i. Apocalipsis Jesus Christi. etc. Ioannes
Tytleshale, Johannes Tritemius. Arnoldus Bostius
Anglus. li. i. Est autem Apocalipsis, Grecus sermo. Thomas de ylleya, Anglus
li. i. Apocalipsis reuelacio dicitur. Ioannes Barath, Hannonius, lib. i. Ego
Ioannes vidi ostium. Ioannes de Vernone, Gallus, lib. i. Nicolaus de Alsacia,
Germanus, lib. i. Ioannes Bloxam, Anglus, lib. i. De apparicione septem
sigillorum. Ioannes Elyne, Anglorum Heliades Johannes Balei libro. 2.
Anglus, li, i. Secundum Isidorum ethimolo. Ioannes Tilneye, Anglus, li. i.
Septem ecclesijs in Asya. Henricus Winchingham, Anglus, li. i. Apertum est
templum Dei. Ioannes Thorpe, Anglus, lib. i. Ioannes Egidius, Gallus, lib. i.
Apocalip. etc. Ioanni Euangeliste. Ioannes Haynton, Anglus, lib. i. Beatus qui
legit verba.
Ex Augustinianis.
Augustinus de Auchona, Italus, Ambrosius choriolanus Nicolaus. Bertrandus
lib. i. Iordanes Saxo, Germanus, lib, primo. Bertrandus parayte, Tholosanus,
lib, i. Augustinus de Roma, Italus. li, primo, Philippus de Mantua, Italus, li.
primo. Ioannes Capgraue, Anglus, li. primo. Syluester Meoccius, Venet. lib. i,
Promaiori intelligentia.
Ex dominycanis.
Iordanes Botergius, Germenus. Leander Bonouiensis. Antoninus Archiepiscopus.
li. i. Hugo Bar chinonensis, Gaillus lib. i. Asser pinguis panis eius etc.
Albertus Magnus Germanus lib. i. Confiteor tibi pater. Stephanus Bisuntinus,
Gallus lib. i. Nicolaus Gorham, Gallus li. i. Bernardus de Trilia. Narbonensis,
li. i. Paganus Bergomensis, lumbardus. li. i. Aluarus de Caturco, Tholosanus.
Nicolaus Bertrandus Sebastianus me^erus.
lib. i. Fredericus de Venecijs, Italus lib, pri, Ioannes Annius, Viterbiensis
li, prim. Hieronymus Sauanarola, Italus, lib. i
Ex Franciscanis,
Alexander de Hales, Anglus, lib. primo. Titelmanus Bernardus Lutzenburgus.
Io^an. Tritemius.
Helias de Hanibalis, Italus, lib primo, Petrus Ioannis Cathalanus. li. primo,
Ioannes Walleys, Anglus, lib. primo, Petrus Aureolus, Tholosanus. libro. 1.
Nicolaus Lyranus, Germanus. libro. ij. Oportet te iterum prophetare. Astesanus
Astensis, Lumbardus, li. i. Bernardinus Senensis, Italus, li. i. Beatus qui
legit et audit. Theodoricus Andree. Tholosanus, lib. i. Ioannes de Rupe scissa.
lib. i. Franciscus Titelmannus, Germanus, li. ii. Superioribus diebus eruditis.
Ex neotericis.
Martinus Lutherus, Germanus. lib. i. Varias prophecias inuenimus in. The
writers of our time upon the Apocalips.
Sebastianus Meyer, Bernensis. li. i. De lib. Apocalipseos cum. Georgius
Aemilius, Germanus lib. i. Mira quedam inest auiditas. Franciscus Lambertus,
Gallus. li. vii. Israeliti^ a Mose Dei lege. Huldricus Zwinglius, Heluecius
lib. i. Ioannis Brencius, Sueuus lib. i. Ioannes Caluinus, Gallus. li. i.
Melchior Hofman, Germanus. lib. i.
And many other more.

Doctors are followed agreeing with the scriptures.
Of these Commentaries have I taken both example to do this thing, and also
counsel to understand the text, to none of them wholly addict, but as I
perceived them always agreinge to the Scriptures. What chronographers and
historianes I have herein followed for the times and ages of the christian
church, besides the Scriptures, it will evidently apeare to the reader in the
marge^t of this volume. Apoca. 8 Apoca. 11 Apoca. 14. Esaias. 1. Gene. 10. Hiere.
23.
I know there will be great thonderings, lyghtninges, and earthquakes at the
coming forth thereof, for so is it here often promised of the holy ghost.

The boystuous tyrauntes of Sodoma with their great Nemroth Wynchester, and the
execrable citizens of Gomorra, with their shorn sinered captains, will stir
about them. Much pain have they of long time taken, and many have they
cruelly burned, as was seen of late years in Couentrie, London, and in other
places more, Fabianu^ et alij in chronicis.
to obscure the knowledge thereof. Who can suppose the^ that they will now sit
still their mischeues made so manifest? Our worldly wise brethren also, which
are neither hot nor cold, will starcle a course at the matter. Apoca. ^.
Eccle. ^0. 2. Cor. 11.
I know somewhat is to be suffered at their hands also. For they always tarry
their times, and will not wake the shrewed curre for hurting themselves.

Graciously has the Lord called them, specially now of late, Gala. 1. Esa.
60. Math. 22.
but his voice is nothing regarded. His servants have they imprisoned,
tormented, and slain, having his verity in much more contempt then before.
We looked for peace (says Hieremye the Prophet) and we fare not the better at
all. We waited for a time of health, Hiere. 8. Hiere. 14* Psalm. 11^. Apoca. 13.
and we find here nothing else but trouble. And no marucile, consideringe the
beasts head that was wounded, is now healed up again so workemanly, as
the.xiii. chapter here me^cioneth. The abominable hypocrisy, Esaie. ^ Math.
23* Apoca. 13. 2. Tim. 3. Apoca. ^.
Idolatry, pride, and fylthinesse of those terrible termagau^ts of antichrists
holy household, those two horned whoremou^gers, those co^iurers of Egypt, 2.
Pet. 2. Jude. 1.
and lecherous locustes leaping out of the smoke of the pit bottomless,
which daily deceyueth the ignorant multitude with their sorceryes and charms,
must be showed to the world to their utter shame and confusion.

They know as did Balaam the sorcerer, that over a gorgious glittering whore
every fleshely man is inordynatly wanton, Nu. 24. Jude. 1. Prove. ^. Hier^. ^.
(...). 6. Apoc. 2. Osce. 8. Apoc. 18.
ferce, and greedy. Folowinge his ways therefore, they have always for lucres
sake, gloriously garnished their holy mother, the madame of myschife, and
proud sinagoge of Satan, with gold, silver, pearl, precious stone, veluets,
silks, miters, copes, crosses, cruetes, ceremonies, sensinges, blessings,
bablinges, Gala. 4. Osce. 4. Ezech. 16, Psalm. 102. Hiere. 6.
brawlynges, processions, popetts, and such other mad mastryes (whereof the
church that Christ left here behind him knew not one jot) to provoke the
carnal idyotes to her whoredom in the spyryte. The Lord has long suffered
them of mercy, Esaias. 58. Psalm. 54. Gene. 12. Mat. 19. Act. 5. 1. John. 3.
and wythhoulden from the^ his rightful hand of their deserved vengeance,
yet will they not fall to repentance nor amend their daily mischifes.

To tell them freely of their wicked works by the scriptures, I have exyled my
self for ever from mine own native country, kyndred, fryndes, acquaintance
(which are the great delyghtes of this life) and am well contented for Jesus
Christ's sake and for the comfort of my brethren there, to suffer poverty,
penury, abiection, reprofe, and all that shall come besides. A commandment
the Lord has given in this book unto them whom he has called of mercy
from their wretched beggeries, Apoc. 18. Hier. 50. Apoc. 18. Apoc. 17.
to spare no rebukes, but to power out double upon that bloody ^awde and
malicious mother of theirs. Never was this commandment more effectually to be
followed then now, his holy word of salvation so presently set at naught,
despised, and persecuted of her mad moodie mynisters. 1. Cor. 1. Romans 1.
Apoc. 18. Mat. 23.
Unto heaven are her sins gone up in these latter days, as S. John here
witnesses, requiring vengeance for the innocents blood that she has so
cruelly shed. And the Lord has remembered her wickedness according to his
promise, Apoc. 18. Luce. 13.
as partlye has been seen in this realm, and in diverse other more.

I doubt not but within short space she shall be wholly turned over into the
bottomless pit again with all her heathenish ceremonies, Apoc. 1^. Apoc. 9.
Apoc. 14. Apoc. 18. Apoc. 21.
superstitions and sorceries, and never return hetherwarde no more then the
great mighty mylstone yt is thrown into the seas bottom, Christ so restored
unto his right spouse. Wonders will appear concerning this and such other
matters, to him that shall diligently examine the scriptures and historyes
alleged in ye margent. For only minister I an occasion here unto them of a
farther search. 2. Cor. 8. Mar. 9. Luce. 11. Mat. 21.
Nothing will be hidden from him, that asks with meekness, seeks in faith,
and in prayer desires the glory of the Lord. Evident will those secret
mysteries be unto him, which are privily hid unto other under dark ambages
and parables. 2. Cor. 3. Esaias. 6. Col. 2. Apoc. 10. Luce. 8.
Though this heavenly treasure of health be under lock and keye of unknown
similitudes, and so be shut up from the untoward and wicked generation for
their unbelievers sake, yet will it be plain enough to the faithful beleuers
instauntlye calling upon him which has the key of David to open unto them the
door of his infallible verities. Jacob. 1. Apoc. 3. Col. 4. Jacob. ^. Psalm.
10^. Ephe. ^.
They shall be sure to find there that shall richly delyght them, and that
will greatly replenishe the most wholesome desire of their ^oules, concerning
their necessary salvation in Christ.

The more the figurative speech abounds here, Franciscus La^bertus in
prefacione.
the more let them confer it with the other scriptures without all honyed
colors of retoricke or of crafted philosophy, specially with those which of
their own nature jointly agrees to the same. Nothing ought here to be sought
of curiosity, Georgius Aemilius in prefacione.
but of love toward God, for defense of his most pure doctrine, and for
auoydance of ye crafty snares of the viuel. A perfect preparation is it to a
constant soul when the battle is seen before, the end thereof known, and
the remedies learned. Here are we admonished before hand of two most
dangerous evils, Gilbertus porreta, and Georgius Aemilius.
neither to agree to those tyrants which battayleth with the Lamb in his
elect members, nor yet to obey those deceiptful bishops yt in hypocrisy
usurps the churches tytles. Of such tirryble plagues of vengeance as were
coming toward the Israelites, Esaias. ^. Hiere, 8. 1. Mac. ^.
the Lord ever warned them before by his Prophets. And none was there that
escaped them so clearly, as they did which regarded those warninges, watching
evermore the conclusions of them. Much less harm felt they of Antiochus
Epiphanes that had read Daniels prophecy before, and marked it, 1. Mac. 1. Dan.
11. 1. Mac. 6, Luc, 2.
then they which knew it not when the Tyraunte came upon them. Through
dyligent expecration in the faith of Gods promises, received just Symeon and
Anna the savior of the world in his tender infancy.

Mention makes the holy Ghost here of Gog and of Magog two tirryble fierce
enymies to Christ's congregation, Apoc, 20, Ezech, 38*
and shows before hand their purposed mischieues. Let us not suppose it to be
a fable, Ezec, 39, Apoc, 13. Number. 23, 1. Ioh, 4,
that he so earnestly tells us. Neither let us think but this warning is of
love, if we list so to take it, and accept it for a truth. Immedyately after
the Apostles preaching* was this prophecy given to the Christian church (which
has been always a small congregation) least they should vnbewares at the
subtle suggestions of these two enimyes, VVha^ this prophecy was given and to
what end.
throw aside the sincerity of Christ's Gospel. So glorious are the pretenses
of ye Romysh Pope and Mahomete, Ioannes Oecola^padius in*
that they seem unto them which regard not these warnings, the very
Angels of light, and their churches most holy congregations, being very
devils with their filthy dregs of darkness. The Pope in his church has
ceremonies without number. Ier^miam and Daniele^.
None end is there of their babbling prayers, their portases, beads, temples,
aulters, songs, hours, belles, Images, Popish ceremonies without number,
Organes, ornaments, Jewels, lights, oylings, shauings, religions, disguisings,
dyuersitie of feasts, constrained vows, fastings, processions, and pratlings,
that a man would think they were proctours of Paradise. On ye other side Mahomet
in his church is plentuous also in holy observations. Guihelmus Tripolitanus de
statusaracenorum.
They wash them selves often, they frequent their temples, they pray five times
in the day, they reverently inclyne, they lie prostrate upon the ground, they
fervently call to God, they are temperate in feedyng, not curious in their
buyldynges, Ioannes Cuspinianus de origin turcarum.
they abstain from wine, they abhor Idolles, they hate them that are proud,
and commend all soberness. And these vertuys have they to appear most
innocent livers. But unto what end this holiness leads, the sequel hereof
declares. Daniell ^aketh these two but one, because they are both of one
wicked spirit, Dan. 7. Oecola^papadius in Danielem. ^ Apoc. 13.
and reports his blasphemous mouth to utter presumptuous things. Saint John
says also that the Dragon speaks blasphemies against God in them both.
Mark both their voices, and ye shall find these sayings most true. The Pope
makes his boast, he is the high priest, he is of equal power with Peter,
he can not err, Ioannes Oecola^padius in Danielem. Theodorus Bibliander in
christiana consultatione.
he is head and spouse of the church, and he is Christ's immedyate vicar. By
this braulyng boaste he makes men to believe, he may constitute laws, keep
under the Gospel, distribute kyngdoms, sell promocions and benifices, set up a
Purgatory, provide satisfactions, make new bodies to Christ, redeem dead men's
souls, and remit sin for money.

Mahomete braggeth also, Ioannes Oecola^padius in Daniele^.
that he is ye great prophet, ye promises Messiah* ye Apostle of both
testame^ts, abled both by ye law and the gospel, and that he has his name from
ye eternal throne of God. He is well contented that Christ be an holy Prophet,
and a most worthy creature, Ioannes Cuspinianus et Bibliander.
yea* the word of God* the soul of God* and the spirit of God, conceived of ye
holy ghost, and borne of Mary the virgin, but he will in no case grant him to
be the son of God, nor that he dyed here for man's redemp^ion. Both these two
mayntayners of mischief allows Moses law, the Psalter, Ioannes
Oecola^padius in Daniele^.
the Prophets and the Gospel, yea, they commend them, auaunce them, sing
them, read them, honor them, and reverently use them in all their doyngs.
Theodorus Bibliander in christiana consultatione.
Yet will they have their own filthy laws preferred above them, the Pope his
execrable decrees, and Mahomete his wicked Alchorane, else will they murder men
without measure. Thus though they outwardly appear very virtuous (yet are they
the malignaunt ministers of Satan, denying the Lord which has redenied them.
By these may we measure their inferior marchandies, Mat, 23, Apoc, 13, 2,
Tim, 4, Apoc, 18, Hier, 50,
having their lyuery and mark.

Of these has our loving Lord premonyshed us in this heavenly work of his,
and graciously called us away from their abominations, least we should be
partakers of their sins, and so receive of their plagues. If we unthankfully
neglect it, the more danger is ours. Let no man take the corrections of this
book to malice. A christian request of the Author
But if he chance in it as in a clear glass to perceive him self spotted,
let him wash away the deformities, for Gods word spares no man's iniquytie.
Read my whole Commentary, else judge me not. In no wise rebel I here against
any princely power, or authority given of God, but against Antichrists
filthy tytles. Antichrists titles are not of God,
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be ever more with thee (good faithful
Reader) and with all those good men that intierly hunger for his
righteousness, Amen.

Thus ends the Preface of the Image of both Churches, out of Saint John's
Apocalips.
A brief Paraphrase or compendious Elucidacion upon the Apocalips or
Revelation of Saint John the Evangelist, gathered out of the pure scriptures,
and sincere word of God, by John Ba^e, an e^yle also in this life, for the
testimonye of Jesus.
The first Chapter.
The Text.
1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, 2, which God gave unto him, 3. for to
shevve unto his servants the things which must shortly come to pass. 4.
And heuen^ and shevved by his Angel unto his servant John, 5. which bare
record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all
things that he savve, 6. Happy is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of the prophecy, and keep those things, which are written therein,
7. for the time is at hand.

The Paraphrase.
OF Jesus Christ* the son of ye living God, Mat. 16. Joan. 16. Act. 20. Mat.
28. John. 5. Luce. 10.
this is the wonderful revelation, concerning the diverse and doubtful estate
of the Christian church from the Apostles time to the latter end of the world.

2 Which revelation with all judgment and power, Phil. 2. Psalm. 8. John. 17.
2. Cor. 2. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 2. John. 16. Mat. 13.
God the everlasting father has wholly given unto him, now taken up from the
earth, glorified, and set above all the works of his hands.

3 Evidently to declare, yea, to make manifest and known unto his true
faithful servants believing in his words, and walking in his ways, the
tokens, signs, and marueils, which must by his unchangeable ordinance,
shortly in this latter time, follow in effect, without premonishment or warning
taken of the wicked sort.

4 And the said Jesus Christ sittyng on the right hand of the majesty of God,
Mar. 16. Heb. 1. John. 15. Act. 2. John, 1^ Luke. ^^. John. ^^.
and being much more excellent then the angels, has according to his former
promise, sent forth his spirit of truth, most specially unto his dearly
beloved Apostle and peculyar dyscyple saint John the Evangelist, not only to
deduce him into all knowledge and verity, but also to manifest unto him the
secret mysteries of things to come.

5 Which John has already (as an earnest doer in his masters cause) most
constantly wytnessed his eternal godhead in ye everlasting word, Act. 4.
John. 1. Psalm. 118 2. John. 1.
against ye Hebionites, which denied him to com in the flesh, John. 19.21 1.
John. ^. 1. John. 2. 1. John. 4,
and has faithfully affirmed his natural manhood in all that he saw being
conuersaunt with him, against Carpocras and Cerinthus, which blasphemed the
same in the utter confusion of all such Antichrists.

6 Blessed is he (says Saint Ihon) which after meek prayer and godly
meditacyon, Apoca. 22 Math, 7. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Peter. 4 1. Cor. 4.
having the gift of understanding and grace of interpreting the scripturs,
does sincerly and faithfully without craft or color, publyshe and declare
the mistycall words of this heavenly prophecye. Ephe. 4. Math. 5. Luke 2.
Iacobi. 2 Math. 7
Blessed are they also, which in a fervent faith hongeri^g and thristinge for
the righteousness, and with Simeon and Anna desirous of ye glory of God, does
lovingly hear and earnestly mark the wholesome words of the same said godly
prophecye, and that will deligently apply the^ selves to observe the rules,
and take the premonishementes of Godly doctrine there in written.

7 For the perelous days are come that the disceytfull swarm of Antichrist
peruertinge ye truth, John. 13. Psalm. 118 1. Cor. 1 1. John. 4. 2. These. 2.
Gala. 3. Romans 1. 1. Tim. 4. Math. 15.
shall bring the world into pernicious and dampnable errors. And ye Ieopardous
time is at hand, that the wrath of god shall be declared from Heaven upon all
ungodliness of these seducers that with hold his truth in vnrightuousensse,
and set hi^ commandments at naught for their own vile traditions. 1. Tim.
4. Math. 15.


The text.
1 Ihon unto the seven congregacions which are in Asia. 2. Grace be with you.
3. And peace from him which is, and which was and which is to come. 4. and from
the seven spirits which are present before his throne, 5. and from Jesus
Christ which is a faithful vvytnesse. 6. and first begotten of the dead, 7.
and prince over the kings of the earth, 8. Unto him that loved us, and
vvashed us from our sins in his own blood. 9. and made us kings and
Priests unto God his father. 10. even unto him be glory and dominion for
evermore, Amen.

The Paraphrase.
1 John the elect Apostle of Jesus Christ sends these greatinges to the vii.
churches or christian congregations, John. 13.19
which are in the land of Asia the less. Marc. 16.


2 Grace (which is the mercy, favor, and acceptacion of God) be with you.
Psalm. ^8.


3 And also peace (which is the trauquilitie of conscience in them that believe
in Christ) dwell ever among you, Ephe. 2.
Romans 8. Philip. 4.
from god the father everlasting which is essencially in and of himself, Math.
6 Hiere. 7 Psalm. 73. Exodus 15. Miche. 4. 1. John. 5. Apoc. 3.5.
and which was before the constitucion of the world, and which shall be after
the world be finished for ever and ever without end.

4 The same grace and peace again be unto you from God the holy Ghost here
mentioned under the title of.vij. spirits, for that he is manifold and
plentuous in gifts.

5 The third time also the same said grace and peace be unto you from the Lord
Jesus Christ the only son of God, Esa. ^^. Colo. ^. John. 3. John. 14. Esa.
61. 1. Pet. 2.
which being the eternal verity it self, was in preaching his Gospel, a
witness thereof both faithful, true, and perfect, and in no wise could lie,
that ye should the rather believe him.

6 He was the first of all men that ever were in this mortal nature or body of
death, Colo. 1. 1. Cor. 15. Osec. 13. Act. 1. Phil. 2. 1. Tim. 2 1. John. 2.
recovering again the favor of God lost in Adam, and that with victory over
sin, hell, death, and the devil, ascended into Heaven, and became in that
flesh glorified, the son of God, that ye should be the bolder of him, and
the rather take him for your only advocate.

7 He is also a m^ste mighty Lord over the kings, rulers, Psalm. 7^.
Math. 28 John. 17.
and magistrates of this world, having now all power given him in heaven and
in earth, Apoc. 19. Luke. 1. Math. 2^
with a writing upon his vesture that he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and that of his kingdom there shall be no end, that the wicked
tyrauntes should the rather fear, least they feel him a terryble judge at the
latter day.

8 For so much as he has so intyrely loved us, 1. John. 4.^. Esa. 53. 1. Cor.
15. 1. Tim. 2. Heb. 9.
as to be smytten and wounded for our offencest, and as to give his life for
our wicked wretchedness, yea for so much as he of most natural kyndenesse would
be cruelly slain to wash us, purify us, and cleanse us in his own most
innocent blood, 1. Pet. 1. 1. John. 1.
from the most cankred vileness of our sins, to provoke us to love him
again.

9 For so much also as he has made us a living kingedome to god through faith
in him, Exodus 19.
Abacuc. 2.
and consecrate us priests to offer up our bodies by a new Christian life as
a sacrifyce holy and acceptable unto God his everlasting father. Apoca. 5.
Romans 12.


Philip. 4. 2* John. 5. 1. Timo. 6
10 Unto him with the said father and with the holy ghost be perpetual praise
glory, power, and dominyon for evermore. Amen.

The text.
1 Behold, he comes with clouds. 2. and all eyes shall see him, 3. and they
also which pearsed him. 4. And all kynredes of the earth shall vvayle. 5. Even
so, Amen.

6. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending (says the Lord
almighty) 7. which is, and which was, and which is to come.

The Paraphrase.
1 Take heed for most certain it is though Christ in his first coming as
a merciful savior, Zacha. 9. 2. Cor. 8. Phil, 2, Luke, 25, Jude, 1, Math, 24
apered here upon earth poor, simple, and ignominious, yet shall he in his
latter coming appear in ye clouds of heaven, with majesty, power, and
glory, Esaie, 3. Rom, 14 2, Cor, 5 Zach, 12,
acco^panyed with the infinite host of angels as a rigorous judge,

2 And upon him shall all eyes look, both man and angel shall behold him,
John, 19,
and stand before his terrible judgment seat, no creature good nor bad
exempt.

3 Yea, th^se cruel tyrauntes also shall at that hour appear befere him,
which did not only flee his most innocente body, but also that has ever since
spightfully persecuted his faithful members unto death for the truths sake.

4 And all kinredes of the earth, yt is to say, whoremongers, glouttons, Math,
23, Deuteronomy, 32, Ephe, 5, 1, Cor, 5, Heb, 13, Sapi, 5, Luke, 25,
extorcioners, ydolatours, murderers and tyrauntes, shall bewail them selves
for the sight of him.

5 Whose ryghtfull judgment is not so heatefull unto them, but it is as
greatly desired of the faithful multitude, saying in their hearts continually.
Even so be it, Amen. Apoca, 22, Rom, 8, Ephe, 1,
For they at that hour shall be wholly delivered, gloryfyed, and sealled up
with Christ for the everlasting children of God.

6 I am he (says the Lord God almighty) which has begun all things and
finished the same, Apo. 21. Esaias. 41 Apoca. 22. Esaye. 44. Zach. 9. Romans 1.
Gene. 17. 1. John 5. Exodus 3. Miche. 5.
being signified by Alpha (which is the first letter of ye Greek Alphabete) and
Omega (which is the last) because this present reuelacion was written in Greek,
and unto the^ which only knew ye Greek tongue.

7 I am the same (says the said Lord God everlasting, the father, the son
and the holy ghost.iii. distinct persons in one essenciall Godhede) which is
essencially in and of him self only, which was without beginning, and begun
all things, Abacuc. 3. 2. Cor. 9. Nume. 23. Psalm. 138.
and which shall be whithout endinge and finyshe all things, alone able to
exhibyte all virtue, power and strength, and alone unable to execute errors,
lies, and sin, which is of fragilite, weakness, and imperfectness.

The Text
1 I Ihon your brother and companion in tribulacion, 2, and in the kingdom of
patience, which is in Jesus Christ. 3. was in the isle of Pathmos for the word of
God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ. 4. I was in the spirit on a Sunday.
5. and heard behind me a great voice, as it had been of a tro^pe, saying. 6. I
am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. 7. That thou seist write in a
book, 8. and send it unto the congregacio^s, which are in Asia, 9. unto
Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thiatyra* 10. and unto
Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicia.

The Paraphrase.
1 I the faithful writer of this present reuelacion, Apoc. 22. Mar. 3. Mat. 5.
Luc. 6. John. 15. Luc. 14.
called John the Apostle, your natural loving brother, so inferly caueting
your souls health as (...) companion of yours also in adversity, trouble, and
persecucion, for the truths sake.

2 And a partaker with you in the afflicted kingedome, and in the pacient
cross of s^ffere^ce in Christ Jesus.

3 Was now of late in a certain isle of Licia called Pathmos, Hieronymus in
cathalogo scriptorum Ecclesiaticorum.
exiled for ye Gospel preaching, and made a vile abject for testifying the name
and word of the said Jesus Christ the only (...) of the world.

4 I being thus carefully afflicted and driven from all solase and bodily
comfort, on a certain sunday or day dedicate to the Lords remembrance, Luc.
24. Psalm. 142. 2. Cor. 12.
was in the spirit rapte, and clearly taken up from all worldly affects (so
sweetly did the Lord releue his poor persecuted servant.)

5 And I heard certainly with mine ears a loud shirle voice behind me,
Math. 5. Ezech. 3. Romans 8. Exodus 19.
as I was in this sweet heavenly traunse, which was so vehement, and stout to
my judgment, as it had been ye noise of a great trompe, uttering these words
unto me.

6 I am the first and the last the original beginner and the (...) finisher of
all things, Esai. 58. Apoc. 21. Esai. 48. Apoc. 22.
under A^pha and Omega the first and last Greek letters, as under an allegory
to be understand.

7 With all dilygence* therefore write, Exodus 17. Abac. 2.
that thou shalt see here and make a perfect registre of the same.

2. Cor. 11. Mar. 16.
8 And that done, send it lovingly unto the vij. Christen congregatio^s, which
are in ye land of Asia, committed of the Lord, unto thy administration in his
word.

9 Send it unto Ephesus, send it unto Smyrna, direct it unto Pergamos, commit
it unto Thyatyra.

10 And unto Sardis, and unto Phyladelphia, and unto Laodicia, Eusebius
Cesariensi^ in historia ecclesiastic. lib. 5. ca. 23.
and finally by them to the.vij. Climates of the universal world. For though
it be here to them only lymitted, yet is it to all people universally meant.

THE TEXT.
1 And I turned back to see the voice that spoke to me. 2. And when I was
turned, I savve seven golden Candelstickes. 3. And in the midst of the
Ca^delsticks, one like unto the son of man, 4. Clothed with a lynnen garment
down to the ground, 5. And gyrded about the breast with a golden gyrdle, 6.
His head and his heirs were white as vahite vvoll, and as Snow.

7. And his eyes were as a flame of fire. 8. And his feet like unto brass,
as though they brent in a furnace. 9. And his voice as the noise of many
waters. 10. And he had in his right hand vii. stars, 11. And out of his
mouth went a sharp two edged svvorde. 12 And his face shone even as the son
in his strength.

The Paraphrase.
1 And suddenly I turned back (says saint John) ernestly to behold from whence
this voice should come, John. 20. Zacha. 6. Ruth. 2. Job. 28. Number. 8. Zach. 4.
or who it should be that should speak these words unto me.

2 And as I had turned my self, anon I beheld.vij. golden Candelsticks,
betokening not only the said vij. congregatio^s in Asia, but also ye universal
Christianity of ye whole world. For vij. in the scripture most commonly
signifies all or the whole of that it comprehends. Gene. 2. Hebr. 4.


3 And in the midst of the said.vij. Candelstickes, Esai. 12. Iohel. 2. Math.
8. Phil. 2. Math. 28. John. 10. 1. John. 2. Act. 7.
I saw one like unto Christ, which when he was conuersaunt here among us, not
only called him self, ye son of man, but also appeared in shape and
apparel, as the same. And this betokens Christ always to be present and
assiste^t to his co^gregations, as a shepehard, and advocate, a teacher, and a
redeemer, to keep them, help them, inform them, and save them.

4 I saw him clothed with a side linen garment down to the ground, Sapi.
18. Dan. 7. Colos. 2. Dan. 10. Eccl. 45. Esai. 66. Psalm. 102. Cant. 7. John.
13. 2. These. 3.
signifying his abundant righteousness wherewith all his faithful beleuers
are in this world largely replenished.

5 He was gyrded also about the pappes with a golden gyrdle. His pappes are
his most sweet words and promises replenishing our souls with most suffrane
consolation and gladness. And they are speared up together fast unto him with
the shynyng cheane of charity or love. Which in ye whole, betokens that he
is of righteousness and love, fast and sure unto us in his word and promise.

6 His head (which is his eternal Godhead) and his hears (which are his
infallible verities thereof proceeding) are both so purely white as snow, 1.
Cor. 11. Cant. 1. 1. John. 1. Cant. 5. Psalm. 11.18. Mala. 4. Apoc. 2.
in the incomprehensible mysteries of his divine majesty, and so perfectly
white as wool (which is of a meaner sort) in the lower mysteryes of our
redemption.

Hebr. 4. Apoc. 19. Luc. 22. John. 19.
7 His eyes (which are his Godly wisdom and knowledge) were as a burning flame
of fire, most effectual, pure and quick in working.

8 And his feet (which are his humane affections and most sweet desires of our
health) were like unto brass, most beutiful, Hebr. 4. Prou. 27. Esai. 53.
clean and precious to behold, and as though they had been proved, tried and
depured in a whot burning furnace. For in them was his frail, tender, and
mortal flesh, by manifold troubles, sore vexed, persecuted, and slain.

Act 8. Psalm. 67. Ezech. 43.
9 His voice (which is his holy Testament or Gospel) was as the sound or noise
of many waters. Dan. 10. Apoc. 5. Phil. 2.
For many peoples of diverse and sundry nations, kynreds, and languages, has
confessed and still does confess him God and man by the same, though the one
understand not the other.

10 And he had in his right hand (which is his mighty power) seven stars,
Psalm. 117. Baruc. 3. Phil. 2. Hier. ^. Prou. 3. Esai. 41. John. 9. Romans 1.
Math. 5.
which are not only the seven preachers of his vij. congregations in Asia, but
also all the true minysters of his word, the world over. For them has he in
his right hand. They are under his governance, will, protection, and custody.
So long as he retayneth them, they are wise, godly, and profitable, but if he
once throw the^ forth, then are they blind, wicked, and accursed, yea, and good
for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot. Blessed are they
therefore, which fall not besides yt hand.

11 Out of his mouth (which is his holy spirit) proceeded a sharp two edged
sweard. This is his strong, Apoc. 19. Ephe. 6. Hebr. 4. Job. 19.
mighty, and quick word, or his sacred scripture, so sharp that it pearceth
through, Math. 10. Iere. 17. Luce. 21.
even to the diuyding a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the Joints
and the mary. And is a iudger of the thoughts and intentes of the heart, whom
finally nothing shall be able to resist.

12 And his face (which is the eternity of his Godheade, Dan. 10. Math. 27.
Hebr. 1. John. 6. 2. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 1.
glorified nature, and spiritual kingdom) shone even as the clear son in
his most strength, whose brightness no creature can behold without ye pure
sight of an vncorrupt faith. For the fleshly carnal man in no wise
understands things belonging to the spirit of god, but judges them
folishnesse.

THE TEXT.
1 And when I savve him, I fell at his feet, even as dead, 2. And he laid
his right hand upon me, saying unto me. 3. Fear not, I am the first and the
last. 4. And am a live, and was dead. 5. And behold I am a live for evermore.
6. And have the keys of Hell, and of Death. 7. Write therefore the things
which thou have seen. 8. And the things which are, and the things which
shall be fulfilled hereafter. 9. And the mystery of the seven Stars which thou
savvest in my right hand. 10. And the seven golden Candelstickes. 11. The seven
Stars are the Angels of the seven Congregacions. 12. And the seven
Candelstickes, which thou saw, are the seven Congregacions.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 And when I had thus seen him (says saint John) and dilygently marked all
these points in him, Dan. 10. Apoc. 22. Col. 3. Romans 12. Psalm. 43. Romans 8.
Job. 14. Psalm. 137. Jacob. 4. Psalm. 87. Dan. 10. Hiere. 1. Esai. 41. Math. 17.
Esai. 44. Romans 6. John. 12. Apoc. 21.
I fell down at his feet as one almost dead for fear. Consider in this that
ye nature of the true knowledge of christ, is to throw down and to mortify
the flesh with his corrupt affections, and to cast us in fear till his hidden
mysteries be thoroughly perceived.

2 And he (says saint John) to comfort my weakness, laid his right hand upon
me. He releued me with his power, grace, and help, when he saw me humbled
before his face, and fearfully astonyed at the wonderful brightness of his
high mysteries: And not without his word, for he said unto me.

3 Let not fearfulness overcome thee, nor doutfull dread oppress thee. But
take unto thee faith (which is the chief remedy in fear) and know that I am
the first and the last, the maker and the restorer of all creatures. I am he,
of who^ all things depend and unto whom all things belong.

4 I am now alive, as thou see euydently, and the very life it self, yet was
I slain now of late, and my body dead and buried.

5 Behold me therefore earnestly, for now in a gloryfied nature, John. 14. 1.
Cor. 15. Romans 6. 1. Pet. 4. Hebr. 7. 1. John. 2. Romans 6.
in a body impassyble and immortal, I am a live for ever and ever, ready to
make interpellatio^, and to obtain mercy for all the worlds sins, death
having over me no more dominion.

6 I have in my hands and under my power, Esai. 22. Apoc. 3. Math. 16. Romans 8.
Apoc. 21. 1. John. 1.
the keys both of hell and death, yt neither hell nor sin, death nor ye diuil,
shall be from he^ceforth able to prevail against my electes. No condemnation
shall be unto them that are surely grafted in me.

7 Take pen and incke therefore, Romans 8. Apoc. 21.
and seriously wry^e ye things which thou have already seen.

8 And note faithfully ye meruayls which are by the power of God accomplyshed,
1. John. 1. John. 5. Luc. 21.
and the wonders also which shall be fulfilled hereafter.

9 Mark first of all with due cyrcumspection the secret mystery of the vij.
shyning stars, Apoc. 3. Dan. 12. Act. 11.
which thou saw now of late in my right hand.

10 And diligently consider ye seven golden Candelstickes also. Zach. 4. 1.
Cor. 15. Dan. 12.


11 The vij. stars in signification are the messengers of Gods word or the
Apostolic preachers appointed to the vij. congregatio^s in Asia, Math. 5.
Eccl. 50. 1. Pet. 2. Phil. 2. John. 15. Apoc. 2.
and in them to all ye world. These ought in the church, as the stars in ye
firmament to shine in wholesome doctrine, and in godly conversation, and as the
lights of the world, neither in life nor preaching to mynistre any manner of
darkness.

12 Consider also the seven golden Candelstickes which thou saw about me,
John. 8. Luc. 2.
to be the said.vij. co^gregations. Upon whom I ought to shine, which am the
light of the world. In whose works I ought to appear, Par. 28. Ephe. 1. 1.
Cor. 7. 1. Pet. 1.
which am the clerenesse of the Gentiles. They are called here.vij. Golden
Candelsticks, as most precious in value, for so much as they are precious in the
sight of God, and were also redeemed, and boughte with a great price even with
the precious blood of the undefiled lamb Jesus Christ.

The second Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 Unto the Angel of the congregation of Ephesus write. 2. These things
says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks in the
midst of the seven Golden Candelstickes. 3. I know thy works, and thy
labor, and thy patience. 4 And how thou canste not forbear them, which are
evil. 5. And examinest them which say they are Apostles, and are not. 6. And
have found them liars. 7. And have suffered, and have patience, and for my names
sake haste labored, and haste not faynted. 8. Nevertheless I have somevvhat
against thee, for thou haste left the first love.

9 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and repent. 10. And do the
first works. 11. Or else I will come unto thee shortly. 12. And will remove
thy Candelsticke out of his place, except thou repent* 13. But this thou have,
because thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans. 14. Which deeds I also
hate. 15. Let him that has ears, hear what the spirit says unto the
congregations. 16. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of
life, 17. which is in the midst of the Paradyse of my God.

THE PARAPHRASE.
MY dearly beloved servant Johan (says the Lord Jesus) my will is that thou
shalt signify by writing unto the messenger or preacher of the Christian
congregation of Ephesus, John. 19. Apoc. 1 Ephesus. Jacob. 5. Dan. 9. Luc. 19.
Math. 5. John. 4. Romans 7. Phil. 1.
which dwelling in this earthly mansion, is as was Daniel, full of wholesome
desires. She looks for the Kingdom, she seeks for the glory, she
hungreth for the righteousness of God, she thursteth for the living waters,
she longs for to be delivered from this body of death, she coueteth to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, yea, ferue^tly she desires to rest in the
arms of her almighty spouse.

2 Tell her therefore that these sayings has he, Apoc. 1. Math. 28. John. 17.
Luc. 14. John. 14. Apoc. 22.
which holds the vij. stars in his right hand, and walks in ye midst of
the vij. golden Candelstickes, which has in his power all ministers of his
word, to retain the^ or to cast the^ out, and remains among the
congregations, to behold their acts, and reward them according to their
doings.

3 I know thy works (says he) I perceue thy labor, Exodus 3. Hebr. 4. Math.
5. Luc. 6. Romans 12.
thy anguish, thy affliction, thy pain, for unto me nothing can be hid. I
consider also thy pacient sufferance in adversity, and thy troublous cross
for my words sake, thy constant faith, and thy unbroken spirit.

4 And I ponder thy fervent and godly zeal, wherein thou can in no wise
forbear the^ that are wicked, and evil, but thou hate blaspheemers, and
abhorrest ye enemies of god.

5 I much commend thee for yt thou diligently examinest them which call them
selves Apostles, and are none, Phil. 3. 1. Tim. 3. 1. John. 4. 3. John. 1. 2.
Pet. 2.
which boast the^ selves to be christian teachers, and are nothing less.

6 And by thy diligent search have not only proved them false, 2. Tim. 2. 1.
John. 2. 2. Cor. 11. Apoc. 1.
and deceiptfull Antichrists but also you have expelled the^ least they should
do harm.

7 And though thou haste been grievously vexed and persecuted of those false
Prophets, yet have thou patiently suffered, and firmly stand by ye truth for my
names sake. Thou have taken pains, and not faynted in thy labors, so strong
has ye spirit of God been with thee. And all these points in thee I greatly
allow.

8 Yet have I somewhat against thee, Gala. 6. 1. Cor. 11. Jude. 1. Prou. 25.
Gala. 5. Act. 5. Ephe. 2. Eccle. 8. Gala. 5.
for so much as thou art fallen from thy first charity, the fruits of true
faith not being so abundant and plentiful in thee as they were in the
beginning of the Gospel, nor you so effectual in working mercy and pity.

9 Call therefore to thy remembrance, from what perfection thou art fallen,
and repent thy slipper weakness and slothful negligence, which has not
suffered thee to persevere in thy first calling.

10 And return to thy first works again, Psalm. 50. Math. 10. John. 15. Ephe.
4. Phil. 1. Math. 14. Luce. 13. Math. 21. Romans 1. 2. These. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2.
Pet. 2.
walking in that fervent faith, in that godly spirit, and in yt sweet love of
thy neighbor, that thou did walk in before, and diminish not, but
increase evermore in all goodness

11 Else will I come shortly unto thee as a straight looker upon thee.

12 And except thou repent from the heart with full purpose of amendme^t, I will
remove thy Candelsticke out of her place. I shall take away from thence the
sincere doctrine and pure preaching of my word, and suffer men's fantastical
traditions, old women's dreams, the spirits of error, the doctrine of
devils, the lies of hypocrites, Apoc. 9. 1. Cor. 1. Romans 1. Apoc. 2. John. 12.
Esai. 1.
with all blyndnesse, darkness, abhominatio^, and idolatry, there to remain.
For where as my word is not sincerely taught, believed, and observed, but
uncharitably despised, hated, and persecuted, there shall not my church
remain, but in her place shall stand up the Sinagoge of Satan, with blyndnesse
and induration. For that congregation is not mine, which has not my word. No
longer is it my church, then it has my verity. Turn back again therefore to
Abraham, Isaac, 2. Cor. 4. 1. Mac. 2. Ephe. 2.
and Jacob, to the Prophets and Apostles, and exercise the first works
leaving all papistrie.

13 This warning have thou of me, for that thou hate the unseemly deeds of
the Nicolaytanes, The Nicolaytanes. Act. 6. 2. Pet. 2. Iud. 1. Psalm. 25. Heb.
13.
so called of one Nicolas a proselitie of Antioche, and one of the vij. Deacons
ordained by the Apostles. Whose corrupt custom was among other to defile holy
wedlock in making their wives common, and in boasting them selves lawfully so
to do by ye example of the said Nicolas.

14 Whose uncomely acts I hate and abhor also, Eccle. 10. Math. 13. Mar. 4.
Luce. 8. Joan. 16.
having matrimonye in honor, and the chamber thereof undefiled. This
premonishement have I given thee also, least thou in process of time should
fall to Apostasy, and utterly decline from ye truth.

15 Let him that has ears (says the Lord) which is judgment and discretion
in ye spirit, Mat. 5. Romans 8. 1. John. 5.
diligently hear, and earnestly mark, what the holy ghost speaks, what
premonishme^ts he gives, and what reward he promises to the faithful
congregations.

16 To him yt by the spirit of Christ and by faith, Romans 8. 1. John. 5. Luc.
10. Romans 14. Ephe. ^. Joan. 17.
victoriously overcomes the world, sin, hell, death, and the diuil, I will
give to eat of the tree of life to have rejoice here in ye holy ghost, to have
comfort, peace and gladness in me.

Gene. 2. Cant. 4. Joan. 20.
17 And after this life eternal beatitude which is in the midst of the
beautiful paradise, or ye triumphant church of my Lord, my God, and my
celestial father, and yours also by me.

THE TEXT.
1 And unto the Angel of the congregation of Smyrna, w^yte, 2. These things
says he that is the first and the last, 3 which was dead and is alive, 4. I
know thy works, and tribulation, 5. And poverty, but thou art rich. 6. And I
know the blasphemy of the^ which call themselves Jews, and are not, but are
the congregation of Satan. 7. Fear none of the things which thou shall
suffer. 8. Behold the diuill shall cast some of you into prison to tempt you, 9.
And ye shall have tribulation ten days. 10. Be faithful unto the death, 11.
and I will give thee a crown of life. 12. Let him that has ears, hear,
what the spirit says to the congregations. 13 He that overcomes, shall not
be hurt of the second death.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 Apply thee also (my friend John) with all festination, Smyrna. 2. Cor. 15.
Eccle. 14. Math. 10. 1. Pet. 4.
to write unto the faithful mynister of the congregation of Smyrna, which
trauaylyng in this veil, of myserie, as the odoriferous myrrha gives forth
the sweet smell of all good christian works, and distrybuteth freelye the
precious treasure of godly examples. She believes in God, she seeks his
only glory, Coll. 3. 2. Tim. 4. Prou. 13. Tobi. 2.
she follows his word, she rebukes sin with patience, she opens her
hands to ye poor, she gives meat to ye hu^gry, drink to the thirsty, Mat.
25. 1. Cor. 13. Phil. 2.
lodging to the stranger, clothes to the naked, comfort to the sick, and
relief to ye prisoner. She is meek, gentle, obedyent, pacient, and merciful.

2 Infourme her therefore that these things says he, Apoc. 1. Act. 7. Luc. 24.
Joan. 20. 1. Pet. 2. ^. Tim. 6. Joan. 12. Sapi. 9.
which is the first and the last, the maker and redeemer, the founder and
restorer of all creatures.

3 Which was once dead to redeem her from eternal death, and now is alive to
restore her to life everlasting. Let her not doubt therefore to suffer here
like as he has suffered. For as he is now immortal and has the over hand of
death, so shall she be and have the same.

4 I know thy works (says ye Lord) to spring only of faith, Gala. 5. Act. 14.
Hebr. 10. Mat. 5. Luc. 6.
and to be fashioned according to the word of God. I perceive thy manyfolde
trybulations, how thou art outwardly afflicted by continual persecution of
enimyes, and inwardly crucyated in conscience to behold the damnable errors,
frowardness, blindness, and utter contempt of Gods truth, which reigns in
the wicked.

5 I consider thy poverty in the spirit, yt nothing you esteemest ye pride,
the riches, the vain glory, Math. 5. Esaias. 61. Romans 6. 1. Cor. 4. Hebre. 11.
1. These. 2. Tobi. 14. 1. These. 2. Jude. 1. Romans 2.
and the wanton desires of this world, yet art thou rych, for the kingdom of
heaven is thine. For with Abraham, Job, Moses, and Helyas in thy heart thou
seek the only glory of God: and with all these things most highly am I
pleased,

6 But this pleases me not, yt thou for my words sake art so blasphemed of
ungodly hypocrites, Esai. 1. Joan. 11.
which call themselves Jews and are not, which boast themselves for ye
peculyar people and chose^ children of God, and are nothing less, but are
without fail the congregation of Satan, and the tyra^nous rabble of ravenous
ruffyans.

7 Certain it is that by such spyrituall tyrauntes, Esai. 1. Joan. 15. Psalm.
58. Hiere. 18. Joan. 14.
thou must sustain opprobrious rebukes with manifold afflictions and pains.
But let neither their subtle sleights, nor their cruel snares be troublous
unto thy mind. Luc. 21. Math. 5. 2. Tim. 3. Phil. 3. 2. Pet. 2.
Neither doubt you their false practices, nor yet their vengeable lies, who^
both you must suffer, with hate, slander, reuylings, false witness, spite,
shame, and vengeance. Considering this patiently to live in Christ, is to
suffer persecution, and that among those belly gods nothing is more to be
looked for the^ the cross of contradiction and death.

8 And take this for a warning before hand. Mat. 4. Joan. 8. Apoc. 12. Mar. 13.
1. Mac. 2. Luce. 21. Hebr. 11. Sap. 3. Jacob. 1. 1. Cor. 11.
The diuil doubtless which is the common adversary, and the head captain of
their empire, shall with vyolence bring some of you, not only under the
captivity of cruel governors, but also into the thraldom of wicked laws and
damnable constitutions, yea and consequently throw you into prison, chains,
sorrow, hunger, thirst, cold, poverty, care, and wretchedness, to tempte your
hearts, to try your patience, to prove your sufferaunce, and to trouble your
faith, least ye should else steadfastly stand by Christ's doctrine, to his glory
and profit of your brethren.

9 But let this solase you for ye time. Apoc. 19. Hiere. 51. Sap. 3. Apoc. 2.
Job. 14.
Their malice shall not always endure. Their mischief will have an end. For
though ye have here trybulation, and suffer grievous persecution, he ye sure,
Esai. 25. Apoc. 12. 1. Mac. 10.
it shall no longer continue then.x. days. The term of man's life is but
short. And that once finished, God shall wype away from him all tears, and
take away all sorrows, and bodily pains.

10 Persevere therefore stedfastlye, and be strong in the spirit unto the end.
Mat. 24. Ephe. 3. Eccle. 2. Apoc. 3.
Let not faith fail thee unto the departing from this transitorious life.

11 And I shall replenishe thee with the reward of faithful perseuera^ce. I
will give thee the crown of eternal life, with full tranquillity, joy, and
beatitude.

12 Let him yt has ears of understanding, with diligence attend, not what the
Hipocrites has fantasied for lucre, Mar. 4. 1. These. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Act. 1.
Mat. 10.
but what the holy spirit of God does here graciously utter unto the christian
congregations.

Prou. 4. Esai. 30. 2. Mac. 9. Apoc. 14. Psalm. 115. Ezec. 33. Romans 8.
13 He that so constantly perseuereth in the truth of God, that neither
flattering persuasion, worldely promotion, nor cruel torment can pluck his
mind from it, shall never take harm of the second death. For the death of
them which truly believes, is precious in the sight of the Lord their God.
Neither shall sin be imputed to him that has faith, nor yet dampnation to
them, which are in Christ Jesus.

THE TEXT.
1 And unto the Angel of the congregation in Pergamos write. 2. This says he
which has the sharp svverd with the two edges. 3. I know thy works, and
where thou dvvellest. Even where Satan's seat is. 4 And thou keep my name,
and haste not denied my faith. 5. And in those days Antipas was a faithful
witness of mine, which was slain among you where Satan dwells. 6. But
I have a fevve things against thee, 7. That thou have there them that maynteyne
the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balaac to put occasion of sin before
the children of Israel, that they should eat of the meat dedycate unto
Idols, and to commit fornication. 8. Even so have thou them that maintein the
doctrine of the Nicolaytans, which thing I hate. 9. But be converted, or else I
will come unto thee shortly. 10. And will fight against them with the
svverd of my mouth. 11. Let him that has ears, hear, what the spirit
says unto the congregations. 12. To him that overcomes, vvil I give to eat
Manna that is hid. 13. And will give him a white stone. 14. And in the stone
a new name written. 15. Which no man knovveth, saving he that receives it.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 Fail in no wise good John (said the said Lord Jesus Christ (consequently
to make known to the christian Preacher of the congregation of Pergamos,
Pergamos. Colo. 3. Ephe. 2. Luc. 12. Mat. 16. Hebr. 11.
which though she remain here beneth upon earth, yet is she the very high
building of God many times assaulted and stricken of the wicked for confessing
his truth, but never yet overthrown nor utterly distroyed. This Church is not
only high through grace, faith, the word of God, the spirit of God, the
invincible verity, and all other graces and gifts of the holy ghost, Joan. 16.
Gala. 5. Psalm. 78. Ephesians. 6. Romans 11.
but also for the glory of the name of god, for the strength of his power, for
the secret mysteries of his heavenly judgments, and for the most constant
assertion of his godly truth.

2 Show her this heavenly message from him, Apoc. 1. Hebr. 4. Ephesians. 6. Mat.
10. Joan. 16. Apoc. 19. Psalm. 138. 1. Cor. 2. Hebr. 11.
which has from his mouth proceeding a fine sweard, sharp edged on both the
sides, whereby is meant his mighty word, so effectual, quick, and strong in
operation, that the infallible judgments thereof does not only condemn, but
also distroy utterly all falsehood, filthiness, lies, lewdness, and wickedness.

Apoc. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Pet. 2. Esai. 1. Phil. 2. 2. Tim. 3.
3 By my everlasting foresight (says the Lord) I know thy christian works, and
for thy faithes sake I allow the^ and praise them. I perceive also where thou
do remain and dwell, even where as is the resting place of Satan, and the
very kingdom of the diuill, whereas Gods heavenly word is oppressed,
contemned, and blasphemed, of the infidels, tyrants, and hypocrites.

4 But I much commend thee, that thou dwelling among them, Luc. 2. Act. 4. Act.
8.
and sustayning daily persecution and rebukes, have so strongly perseuered in
the truth, yt thou have neither denied my name nor forsaken my faith.

5 And specially in those terryble days wherein that godly preacher and
faithful witness of mine called Antipas, Antipas Apoc. 1. Joan. 16. Job. 1.
Apoc. 20.
among other was most cruelly murdered and slain, yea, before your faces to put
you the more in fear, least ye should still confess my name and word, to the
hindraunce of Satan's kingdom, for there he dwells in deed. There is his
seat, his trone, his habitacle.

6 Notwithstanding all these faithful points, Osee. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Jude. 1.
yet have I somewhat against thee, wherein thou art rebuke worthy.

7 For thou art conuersaunt with them that contrary to their christen
profession support the execrable doctrine of yt subtle sothsayer and cursed
^harmer Balaa^, Nu. 22. Primasi. 9. Affrican. Nu. 24. Hier. 9.
which by pestilent counsel caused king Balaac to provoke the children of
Israel to work wickedness, Prou. 6. Psalm. 88: 1. Cor. 8. Esa. 34.
and so to have the curse of God through this occasion. He should set, before
their eyes, the most fair damsels of the Madianytes precyously apparelled. And
they once tangled with their wanton beauty, should not only defile the laws
of their fathers by ye eating of meats dedicate to unclean Idols, but also
fall into the high displeasure of god, for committing with them most vile
fornication. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 4. 1. Joan. 4.
Such unwholesome teachers are among thy people, take heed if thou list.

8 Thou art also very familiar with such ungodly Apostates and false Apostles
as maintain the uncomely examples and teachings of the Nycolaytanes, Jude. 1.
Act. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Romans 1.
which corruptyng godly marriage not only permit their own wives to be common,
but also they abashe not to defyle the wives of other men. Whose damnable
doyngs I detest and abhor.

Ezech. 18. Phil. 3.
9 I counsel thee therefore to repent in time, and to be converted from ye
errors of those covetous glutto^s and ravenous lechours, 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
Baru. 6. Dan. 14. 2. Tim. 4.
which co^demyning holy matrimony permit all kinds of uncleanness, and
nothing more greedily devour, tha^ that is offered up to Idolles in their
dedycations and feasts. Call back these abuses with sweet teachings, Ephesians.
4. Psalm. 8. Jude. 18. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 4.
exhortations, desires, and patient rebukes, else will I within a while visit
thee to thy displeasure.

10 Yea, and I will valiauntly fight against those Balaamitanes, which give
false counsel for filthy rewards, and against those Nicolaytanes that change
holy wedlock for whoredom. Apoc. 19. Ephesians. 6. Hier. 9. Soph. 3. Ose. 12.
And with the sword of my mouth, which is the invincible verity, shall I
judge them, condemn them, and utterly distroy them with all those shaven
Madyanites yt with their whorishe inventions, painted traditions, and
ceremonyall supersticions, has taken from me my most dear Israelytes, bought
with my precious blood. With the breath of my mouth shall I consume thee, and
bring thee to naught.

11 Let him that has but one ear of just understanding, 2. These. 2. Job. 4.
Luc. 8. Joan. 10.
take gentle warnyng by such charitable premonishments as the holy spirit of
God gives unto ye christen co^gregations.

12 To him that through constante faith in the name and doctrine of God, Nath.
16. Hebre. 11. 1. Joan. 5. Math. 16. Nehe. 9. John. 5. Psalm. 33.
neither fears the world, sin, death, hell, nor the diuil, will I give to
taste, eat, and sauer an hidden manna, a secret sweetness, a wisdom in the
spirit, that he shall feel the goodness thereof, and rejoice to know how
sweet the Lord is, and what an heavenly treasure it is to trust in him. Which
manna is hid from the wise of this world.

13 I will also give him for a token of perpetual peace and love, Math. 11.
Esai. 55. Romans 8.
yt pure and precious stone Jesus Christ, so white as ye lilly flower,
innocent and clean from all contagious vices, to be his only and whole wisdom,
righteousness, light, health and redemption.

2. Pet. 2. 1. Cor. 1.
14 And in the said white stone Jesus Christ (which is also the book of life)
will I give him a new name written. 1. John. 2. Psalm. 68. Esai. 62. John. 1.
Ephe. 1.
I shall register him for the child of God, and the heir of life everlasting.
For in him alone must ye be accepted, saved, and glorified.

15 Of this no man is certain, but he that is taught of the spirit of God.
Romans 8. 1. Cor. 12. Galla. 4. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 1.
No man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but in the holy ghost. By the spirit of
adoption ye cry Abba father. The only spirit of the Lord ascertaineth your
spirit that ye are the sons of God.

THE TEXT.
1. And unto the Angel of the congregation of Thiatyra, write. 2. This says
the son of God, which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, 3. whose
feet are like brass. 4. I know thy works, and thy love, and thy service,
and thy faith, and thy patience, and thy deeds, 5. which are mo at the last
then at the first. 6. Notvvithstanding, I have a fevv things against thee, 7.
that thou suffrest that woman Iesabell (which calls her self a
Prophetisse.) 8. To teach and to deceive my servants* to make them commytte
fornication and to eat meats offered up unto Idols. 9. And I gave her space
to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. 10. Behold I will cast
her into a bed. 11. And them that commit fornication with her. 12. Into great
adversity, except they turn from their deeds. 13. And I will kill her
children with death. 14. And all the congregations shall know that I am he
which sercheth the reins and hearts. 15. And I will give unto every one of
you according to your works.

THE PARAPHRASE.
Thiatira. Luce. 1. Romans 12. Ephe. 4.
1 Delay not consequently my loving friend John (says the Lord) expressly to
manifest with pen, unto the pastor of the elect congregation of Thiatyra,
which is from these low parts here a sweet smellyng sacrifice unto God of
labor and contrytion in the old aged man and body of death. Eccle. 2. Gal.
5. 1. Joan. 2. Colo 3. Romans 12. Treno. 2.
For she detesteth the vanities of this world, she forsakes the fruits of
the flesh, she renounceth the co^cupisce^ce of ye eyes, she mortifieth her
mortal members, she slays her sensual affects, and renders up her self
unto her Lord God as a lylyuing, holy and acceptable offering.

2 Give unto that contrite and fervent congregation this comfort. Tell her that
this says the dearly beloved and natural son of god, Cantic. 7. Apoc. 19.
1. Cor. 2. Hier. 17. 1. John. 4.
which has his eyes of godly wisdom and knowledge so lively and effectual,
as a flame of fire, yt he sees all things and nothing can pass from his
righteousness in judgment.

3 Whose feet or charitable affections toward man, Hebr. 7. Esai. 53. Hebre.
4. Psalm. 181.
are like unto Brass brent in a furnace. For his most innocent manhood by his
own agreement suffered here for his sake manyfolde affllictions and pains.

4 For so much as all things are open to mine eyes, and nothing can be hid
from me (says that lord) I perceue thy fruitful works, I see thy
neighbourly christen love, Prou. 31. Act. 14. Jacob. 1. Luc. 6. Gala. 6.
I consider thy liberal heart and hand to the poor, thy faithful
exhortacions, thy fervent spirit in the Lord, thy pacient sufferaunce in
adversity for the truethes sake, and thy other godly deeds beside.

5 I mark it also that thou shrinkest not in them, but rather go forward
with increase. For now at the last are they more effectual and ple^teous then
they were at the first, which greatly delights me.

Phil. 1. 2. Cor. 8. Act. 11. Ose^. 6.
6 Nevertheless yet, I have somewhat to say against thee. For though I judge
thee much to be commended, yet find I thee not without fault.

7 Thou peaceably permittest without resistance that cruel woman and
abominable stru^pet Iesabel, Mar. 10. Mat. 5. ^. Reg. 16. Apoc. 2. 4. Reg. 9.
Apoc. 18. Dan. 8. 1. Tim. 4. 2. These. 2.
which is the malignaunt church and Sinagoge of Satan, which is not ashamed to
boast her self a prophetisse, a publisher of the truth, and maynteiner of Gods
service, yea and the mother of holy church her self.

8 Under that pretense to set forth diuilish doctrine, to advance pernicious
errors, 2. Pet. 3. 1. Tim. 3. Hier. 3. Jude. 1. Esai. 10.
and color false lies in hypocrisy. To the intent she might therewith not
only deceive my faithful seruau^ts, but also bring them into such trade of
wyckednes, that they should not force to commit whoredom in the spirit by
falling unto strange worshippings, and to eat of Idol offerings in
consenting to wicked laws and blaspheemous tradytions of old dotyng
Hypocrytes.

9 I have given to that wicked congregation many wholesome premonishments and
warnings with convenient respyte to remember her folly, Baruc. 6. Mat. 23.
Job. 24. Treno 2.
and repent her detestable ways of living, least she should perish, but she
will in no wise be sorry, repent, nor forsake her accustomed Idolatry.

10 Be in certainty therefore I will cast her into a bed or couch of carnal
quietness. Ezech. 16. Ephe. 2. 2. Reg. 24. John. 3. Apoc. 18. Dan. 8. Apoc.
13. Apoc. 17.
She shall in this life have peace in the flesh, liberty in ungodliness,
obedyence of the world, and power in darkness, that she shall swim in wanton
pleasures, and bath her self in innocent blood, and to assist her in the same,
she shall have subject unto her the scepter, sweard, authority, and power of
Princes, Lords, rulers, and Magystrates, that none so hardy under pain of
death to check her, rebuke her, nor ones say against her. 3 Reg. 12. 2. Pa. 21.
4. Reg. 24. Nahum. 3. Franciscus Lambertus 2. These. 2. Math. 25.
This pleasant sleeping bed had the ten trybes of Israel under king
Hieroboam, Achas, Sedechias, and the other two under Iora^ Ochosias, and such
like till they were raised of their rest and led captive into Babylon. Such a
delectable resting cowch has also the greater part of the world under Mahomet
and the Romish Pope, and shall have still til God root them out, destroy them
with the breath of his mouth, and throw them into the fire everlasting.

Apoc. 17. Esai. 1. Apoc. 18. Hier. 7. Amos. 5. Mich. 6.
11 Let them beware therefore that as her lovers has to do with that execrable
whore, co^senting to her pestylent laws and tradicions, defending as godly
ordinances, laudable rytes, decent orders, civil pollycies, honest vsages,
comely fashions, holy ceremonies, necessary customs, and such like, boinge in
very deed most damnable supersticions.

12 For them doubtless will I throw into the anguish of a desperate conscience
here, Esai. 48. Esai. 66.
and after this life into the unquietness of eternal dampnacio^. The wicked
shall have peace neither here nor there. Neither shall their worm dye, nor
their fire go out, unless they decline from that wickedness, Mar. 9. Luc. 13.
Ezech. 18. Apoc. 9. Baruc. 6.
renounce their abhominacions and convert to the truth, whiles they are yet
here living.

13 And as touching her supersticious children, which from their beginning has
evermore sucked out of her venomous breasts all poison and ungodliness,
forsaking, Hier. 2. John. 4. Math. 25.
yea and abhorring the sweet vein of the living waters, then will I slay
with death and condempnacion everlasting prepared for the devil and his angels.

14 Yea, and it shall then be evident and clear to all co^gregacions in heaven
and under heaven, Osee. 10. Luc. 21. Esai. 2. Sapi. 1. Hier. 17. Romans 8.
which has been from ye beginning, to their utter shame and confusion, yt I am
he from whom nothing can be hyd. They shall perceue also that I go so nigh
them, that I search out the ground of the heart, and try the very reins or
inward affectes, so that I know all their privy sleightes and practices be
they never so secret.

15 And ground you upon this surely, I shall give unto every one of you,
Deuteronomy. 5. Hier. 51. Mat. 16. John* 2. Osee. 4.
true and false, good and badde, rightuous and unrighteous, according to your
doings. Rewardyng them with life everlasting that has done the true works of
faith, and them with eternal dampnatio^ that has left them undone, to follow
their own inventions.

THE TEXT.
1. Unto you I say, and unto other of Thyatira, as many as have not this
lerning, and which have not known the deepnesse of Satan (as they say.) 2. I
will put upon you none other burden, 3. but that which ye have already. 4.
Hold fast till I come. 5. And whosoever overcomes, and keeps my works unto
the end, 6. to him will I give power over nations, 7. and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron, 8. and as the vessels of a potter shall he break them to
shiuers.

9. Even as I received of my father, 10. so will I give him the morning star.

11. Let him that has ears, hear, what the spirit says to the
congregations.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 And take this of my mouth (says the Lord) aforehande, 2. These. 1.
both unto you which has the doctrine of the spyrite, John. 7. Thiatyra
macedonu^ cyuitas.
and unto other also of them that remain at Thyatira that notable city of ye
Macedonians, so many as has not grounded in them that godly learning of ye
truth, Prou. 16. 1. Cor. 2. Dan. 2. 1. Pet. 5. Romans 1.
but a trifling doctrine of their own imaginations contrary unto it, whereby
they have not perceived the more then subtle crafts of that deceyuable satan
which evermore craftily co^passeth to deuower, what though their fantastical
brayns has given them so to think, standing much in their own conceit.

2 My mind is to yoke you with none other law, nor to burden you with none
other traditions the^ I have already given you. Neither with ceremonies, Math.
11. Mar. 7. Col. 2. Gala. 4. Luc. 27. Hebr. 10. John. 15. Luc. 10.
rytes, nor ancient customs in the obseruacio^ of days, months, times, nor
years, in holy days, fastings, vigiles, nor sabbates, for they were but
shadows of things to come.

3 Regard only that sweet yoke and that light burden which ye have receued of
me. Hold ye fast to the gospel of the kingdom of God, so long as ye shall
continue here. And let the Pharysees leven, with old wives fables, and
hipocrits dreams pass by.

Mat. 4. Mar. 8. ^. Tim. 4. Deuteronomy. 12. Act. 3. Deuteronomy. 4. Osee. 12.
4 Let my godly ordinance suffice you. Ad nothing unto my words of your own
brains, least I find you false liars when I shall come again to my latter
judgment, and according to righteousness so condemn you.

5 And whosoever is so earnestly faithful in the word of God, 1. Ioh. 5. Mat.
10. Deuteronomy. 12. John. 11.
that he overcomes there by his own lusts, and perfourmeth to the latter end
of his life the works that are there commanded to be done, and none other.

6 To him will I give power as to the son and heir of god, Hebr. 1. Psalm.
90. Mich. 7. Psalm. 2.
over nations or sects of the world diverse in opinion and faith, as over
serpents, scorpions, adders and lions.

7 That he shall not only overcome them with the mighty iron rod of the
invincible verity. Hier. 13. Sapi. 4.


8 But also as the weak vessels of a potter, or as most vain fantasies, Mat.
15. Romans 14. John. 6. Mar. 16. 1. John. 4.
confou^d their dreams, destroy their imaginacions, and bring their practices
to naught, proving their tradicions to be most vile draffe, and most stinking
dregs of sin, for so much as yt which is not of faith, is sin.

9 And this power he shall have in no less efficacy and strength, then I
receued it of my heavenly father.

10 And besides all this I will freely give him my self to reward which am the
clear morning star, Apoc. 22. Luc. 12. John. 17. 1. Cor. 1.
and shyninge lantern of life. So that all shall be his that is mine. My birth,
my labors, my life, my passion, and death, my resurreccion and ascencio^, with
all their fruits, shall be his own proper good.

11 Let him that has reason and discretion, 1. John. 2. Mat. 17. Romans 8. 2.
Tim. 4.
set beastly fantasies apart, and diligently note what the holy Ghost says
here in this dangerous time, to the dear congregations of God.

The third Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And write unto the Angel of the congregation of Sardis. 2. This says he
that has the seven spirits of God, 3. and the seven stars. 4. I know thy
works.

5. Thou have a name that thou lyuest, and thou art dead, 6. Wake, and
strength the things which remain, 7. that are ready to dye. 8. For I have
not found thy works perfect before God. 9. Remember therefore how thou have
received and heard, 10. and hold fast, and repent. 11. If thou shall not
vvatch, 12. I vvil come on thee as a thief, 13. and thou shall not know
what hour I will come upon thee. 14. Thou have a fevv names in Sardis, 15.
which have not defiled their garments, 16. and they shall walk with me in
white, for they are vvorthie. 17. He that overcomes shall be clothed in
white array, 18. and I will not put out his name out of the book of life, 19.
and I will confess his name before my father, and before his Angels. 20.
Let him that has ears, hear, what the spirit says unto the co^gregations.

THE PARAPHRASE. 1
^Hou shalt also so shortly as may conuenyently be (says the Lord to his
peculyar servant saint John) take pains by an Epistle to admonish the watch
man or Curate of the chosen congregation of Sardis, John. 21. Apoc. 1. 1. Tim.
3. Sardis. 1. Cor. 1. Mat. 10. 1. Cor. 6. 1. John. 1. 1. Pet. 1. Phil. 2.
which though it be of very slender reputation before the eyes of the wise,
rich, and strong men of this world, yet is it precious in the sight of God,
for so much as it was prysed, bought, and redeemed, by the greatest payment yt
ever was, eue^ by the precious blood of ye undefiled lamb and immaculate son
of God Jesus Christ. Luc. 18. Mat. 20. John. 19. Hebr. 9. Mar. 16. Romans 1. 1.
Pet. 4. Apoc. 1. Esai. 11.^
He it was yt labored, hungered, thursted, and faynted, according to the
weakness of ye humayne nature, and finally suffered blasphemies, curses,
scorns, lies, persecutions, and rebukes with ye most paynful death of his body
at the latter, to deliver her, make her atonement, and restore her again to
the favor of God.

2 Find the means that she may know (says the Lord Jesus) yt this is to her
ye message of admonishment or warning from him, which has in his power to
distribute at his pleasure the seven spirits of God, or the the universal
gifts of the holy ghost.

3 And has also in his right hand ye vii. stars, Apoc. 1. Mat. 28. Luc. 14.
Mar. 9. Apoc. 22. 2. Pet. 2.
which are the bishops, or preachers of all congregacions, with full
authority and power to hold them still or to throw them forth, to glorify
them if they be faithful ministers of his word, or to damn the^ for ever if
they be deceiuable hipocrites, and for lucre prefer their own crooked
inuencions.

4 Thou workest not so secretlye (says yt Lord) but I know thy deeds and
perceive where about thou go. Exodus 2. 2. Reg. 12. Hebr. 4.
For unto me all secrets are open, clear and manifest. When thou think I
do not perceue, than see I thee most of all.

5 Thou have a name of life, an outward show of virtue and of goodness, Zacha.
11. Math. 7. 1. John. 4. Mat. 23. Act. 13. 1. Pet. 5. John. 4. 2. Tim. 4. Esai.
55.
and a shyning pretense of much holiness, yet art thou before God a dead
rotten Idol, full of hypocrisy, and falsehood. Men think thee a godly
creature, yet art thou nothing less.

6 Awake therefore quickly from thy more then idle imaginacio^s and fickle
sophismes, and take unto thee faith, and spirit. Watch upon thy cure and see to
their profit.

7 Considre yt thy ways in the outward letter has made my people weak,
faint, and feeble, Ephe. 6. Hebr. 1. Jacob. 1. Apoc. 18.
and left them at the very point of death. Strengthen the^ now a new with yt
which is effectual, strong, sure, lively, true, and necessary, which is the
sincere verity and faith, least thou peryshe with the wicked.

8 For though thou have the godly gift of prophecy with the grace of
understanding and judgment, 1. Cor. 13. Luc. 8. Jude. 8. Esai 64. Rom 1. Number.
25.
yet have I found thy works ungodly, and thy doings vile and abominable
before God my celestial father. For thou haste been inwardly corrupt with
auaryce and ambition like as was Balaam the deceiptful Prophet and wicked
soothsayer.

9 It becomes the judge to know before what he shall judge, which has caused
me to search out thy carnal and miserable ways. Job. 10. 2. Cor. 6. Jacob.
2. Mat. 7. Psalm. 18. Jacob. 1. Psalm. 49.
Call therefore unto thy remembrance, how thou by ye singular gift of God
haste received his word, and heard his Gospel which is the kingdom of health,
at the very mouth of his Apostles.

10 And for so much as thou haste not esteemed it according to the worthiness
thereof, nor yet been thankful unto God for such an heavenly gift, but rather
swynishly trodden it under thy feet, and currishly persecuted his faithful
servants for it, have remorse in thy conscience, Mat. 7. Luc. 13.
and once again set sure hands upon it, embrace it, hold it fast, and
faithfully believe it, repent, from the heart thy ungodly vsages past, and from
he^cefoorth live according unto it.

11 If thou will not do so, taking of me this gentle warning, Mar. 1. Act. 16.
Mat. 24. 1. These. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Apoc. 16.
and watch as one uncertain of the hour of death, living as thou would dye
by and by.

12 I shall (as does the thief in the night) come upon thee unlooked for,
Luc. 21. Psalm. 48. Mat. 25. Mar. 13.
with death shall I distroy thee vnbewares, so shall hell and damnation swalow
thee up for ever.

13 And thou shall neither know the day nor the hour, the time nor the mynute,
yt I will thus fiercely come upon thee, and justly suppress thee according to
thy ungodly deseruings.

14 And in spite of thy cruel heart, yet are there a few new brethren, and
lovers of the truth in the city of Sardis, though their number be but small,
which are so dear unto god, yt he has regestred their names in the book of
life.

15 These has for no painted speech, glosing promise, Luc. 13. Prou. 10. Luc.
12. Mat. 10. Dan. 12. 2. Pet. 3. Mat. 15. Gal. 4. Phil 2. Ezech. 3.
suggestio^, nor threatening, ones soyled their garments with thy dyrtie
ceremonies, nor defiled their co^uersacion with thy beggarly tradytions. In the
myddest of ye wicked and froward generation, their hearts are toward me and my
word.

16 Wherefore by promise they shall walk with me in white, Apoc. 7. Psalm. 31.
their faults shall never be imputed unto the^, their sins shall be wyped
clean away, I will clear them and restore them to parpetual innocence, and
make them partakers with me in everlasting felicity and glory. For doubtless
they are worthy, for my will forsaking their own will, John. 12 Luc. 10 Mat.
19 Hebr. 11
and leauinge the corrupt ways of men to follow my sincere word.

Mat. 10. Apoc. 14. 1. Cor 15. Deuteronomy. 25. Apoc 2^. Ephesians. 1.
17 He that after this sort overcomes perseuering in the faith thereof to the
latter end of his life shall be sure of these three benefits. He shall be
clothed with me in white apparel made innocent and pure, incorruptible,
impassible, and immortal.

18 I will in no wise put his name out of the book of life, nor separate him
from the predestinate number of them which shall be saved, but associate him
with the rightuous*

19 And besides all this I will earnestly witness him, confess him, Luc. 1^.
Mat. 10. Romans 8.
and allow him by name, before my heavenly father and all his company of
Angels, for one of mine, to have the inheritance with me.

20 Let him that has ears in no case be dull or slack in hearing, Mar. 4*
Dan. 9. Eph^. 1*
but diligently attend, and mark what the spirit of God does here utter
before the congregations to their singular warning and comfort.

THE TEXT.
1. And write unto the Angel of the congregation of Philadelphia. 2. This
says he that is holy and true, 3. which has the keye of David, 4. which
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. 5. I know thy
works. 6. Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut
it. 7. For thou have ^ little strength, and have kept my word, 8. and have not
denied my name. 9. Behold I shall give some of the congregation of Satan,
which call them selves Jews, and are not, but do lie. 10. Behold I will make
them that they shall come and worship before thy feet, 11. and shall know
that I have loved thee. 12. Because thou have kept the words of my pacyence,
therefore will I keep thee from the hour of temptacion, 13. which will come
upon all the world, to tempte them that dwell upon the earth 14. Behold I come
shortly. 15. Hold that which thou have, that no man take away thy crown.
16. Him that overcomes will I make a pyller in the temple of my God, 17. and
he shall go no more out. 18. And I will write upon him, the name of my God,
and the name of the city of my God, nevve Jerusalem, 19. which comes
down out of heaven fro my God. 20. And I will write upon him my new name.
21. Let him that has ears hear, what the spirit says unto the
congregacions.

THE PARAPHRASE.
John. 19. 2. Cor. 10.
1 Moreover, differ in no wise my trusty discyple John (says the Lord Jesus)
by writing to signifye or make mention, to the tidings brynger, bishop, Act.
10. Philadelphia. Ephesians. 5. 1. John. 4.
or ouerseer of the dearly beloved Church of Phyladelphya, which as beseems
a Christian congregation in this life, is never without brotherly charity and
love, but always has a sweet compassion upon the poor, the needy, Esai.
58. Ezech. 18. Prou. 21. Mat. 5. Luc. 6.
the simple, the desolate, the forsaken, the disdayned and miserable people of
this world. She has also in her heart a woeful pity, and a lamentable
dolor, when she sees men wicked, vain, blaspheemous, hateful, beastly,
idle, covetous, supersticious, and full of other ungodliness.

2 Let this be known to her first of all, Leuit. 20. 1. Reg. 2. John. 14. Romans
3. Esai. 22. Luc. 1.
that these are the favorable sayings of him which is holy of himself, and
alone makes other holy, which is only true and the verity it self, without
who^ no truth can be had.

3 Which has also in his hand and power, the keye of the house of David, which
is the faithful kingdom or congregation of God.

4 Where as he opens to the John. 10. Math. 16. John. 16. Sap. 14.
faithful beleuers by the gospel preaching, no man can spear them out of the
kingdom of God by no excommunication nor curse. Where as he does losen from
the bands of sin by the holy Ghost, no man can bind to dampnation by no
interdictio^ nor sentence, have he never so great power given him. And again,
if he shuts up the kingdom from the unfaithful hypocrites, Job. 12. Mala.
2. Romans 1. 2. These. 2.
no man can admit them to it, by blessings, remissions, nor a thousand years
of their pardon. If he seclude them from it, no man can able them to it again
by no authority nor power.

Mat. 6. Psalm. 72. Esai. 26. Hebr. 11. Mat. 1^.
5 I know (says that Lord) thy doings from the very root, and from whence
thy works does spring, even from a sincere faith in my word, wherefore they
are to my mind and pleasure.

6 For so much therefore as I find thee thus grounded in faith, be thou
certain and sure of it, I have set before thee an open door, I have
illumyned thy senses, and cleared thy understanding, to know the holy
scriptures and perceive the high mysteries therein written, Luc. 24. Psalm. 118.
Mar. 4. Ephe. 1. John. 16.
so admittyng thee to my kingdom. And this door can no man shut up again.
Neither shall the power of this world, nor yet the gates of hell be able to
prevail against this opening.

7 And this have thou of me, partly for thy meekness. Mat. 16. Apoc. 12.
Jacob. 4. Mat. 23. Apoc. 28.
For where as the wicked does seem to them selves beautiful, strong, learned,
rich, righteous, religious, and holy spiritual fathers, thou esteemest thy
self but an abiecte of the world, wretched, weak, blind, poor, sinful,
and a miserable dooer, as concerning the flesh.

8 But thou art she that has kept my sayings, Psalm. 83. Mat. 5. John. 14.
Apoc. 2. Ephesians. 5. Luc. 12. Act. 4. John. ^.
and by such strength as I have given thee, observed also my laws and
commandments. It is thou that have stand by my truth steadfastly, and not
denied my name in the time of troublous persecution. Wherefore thou can in no
wise perish before me.

Gala. 4. Apoc. 2. Apoc. 18. ^. These. 4. Apoc. 2.
9 And as concerning the wicked, behold how I shall order them. I shall not only
set thee clear from the filthy traditions of that false congregation or
sinagoge of Satan, but I will also take a certain from thence of the best
learned, converting them from their errors and giving them unto thee. Which
before time called them selves Jews or the chosen children of Abraham, and were
not so in deed. John. 8. Romans 9. Gala. 4. John. 14.
They boasted them selves very much to be the anointed Israelytes, the
consecrate sons of promise, and the holy spiritual people of God, like as
the residue does yet still to this hour, but they lied full falsely. They were
for that time false dissembling hypocrites, Mat. 7. Mar. 14.
and cruel adversaries to the truth, as their companions are still.

10 Be sure that these will I so inwardly move and effectuallye provoke, Psalm.
56. Romans 11. Esai. 60. Apoc. 21. Man. 15. John. 4. Act. 2.
that they shall come unto thee, to be of thy congregation. They shall gladly
submit them selves to thy doctrine, they shall worship God not in outward
shadows with bondage, but in spirit and truth with liberty. At thy feet,
after thy wholesome instructions and godly admonicions.

11 And where as they have thought thee before time of me to be hated, when
thou have been in persecution, they shall now well perceive and know (my
spirit speaking in thee, and such heavenly secrets coming from thee) that
thou stand much in my love, and art greatly in my favor. Psalm. 70. Sapi. 5.
Act. 2. Iohell. 2.


12 And for so much as thou haste constantly holden and manfully stand by that
word for the which I have suffered much not only in mine own flesh, Hier. 31.
Jacob. 1. John. 19. Luc. 23. 1. Cor. 12. Luc. 21.
but also in thee and in other my servants, for no adversity falling from
it, I will preserve thee in the hour of temptation. Thou shall for no violence
decline from ye truth, thou shall for no torment forsake the verity. So
mighty a stomach and so strong an heart shall I give thee for the time of thy
temptations, Hier. 5. Apoc. 11. Psalm. 1.
that thou shall not be once moved.

13 For no doubt of it, this fierce temptation and cruel handeling of the
boystuous Antichrists, Mat. 12. 1. John. 2. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Tim. 4.
Mahomet standing in the way of sinners, and the Romish Pope sitting in the
most pestilent seat of errors, will come upon all the world by execrable
sects of false Prophets, liars, hypocrytes, blasphemers and teachers of
diuilish doctrine, to tempt and allure them, which dwell here upon earth,
sometime by flattering promotio^s, Act. 20. Jude 1. Romans 3. ^. Pet. 5. Apoc. 22.
sometime by threatenings and penalties, to renounce that verity, and deny
that word, to the utter dampnation of their souls.

14 But in any wise take heed and watch in prayer, Job. 14. Mat. 5. 1. Cor.
16. Luc. 6.
for I come shortly as a righteous judge giving to every one according to
their hearts inuencions. Consider the life but short in this world, and the
reward great, if thou persevere in thy Christen profession. Hold fast that
godly faith which thou have taken, with her wholesome fruits.

15 Stick sure to that heavenly word which thou have received, least thou
falling from it loose the crown prepared for thee. Jacob. 1.
I have done my part. John. 17. Romans 8. 2. Pet. 2. Mat. 21. Romans 8.
I have chosen thee to eternal life, and promised thee, inheritance thereof
without thy deseruinges, beware now least thou loose it by apostasy, and least
an other take it from thee by doing the fruits thereof.

16 Desire my spirit to strengthen thee that thou may persevere, Ephesians. 9.
Mat. 10. Act. 6. Hiere 1. Ephesians. 2.
and stand fast. For that faithful servant and mighty soldier, which
continues in that verity to the end, will I set up for a strong pillar and
sure butteras in the temple of my God, which is the church or faithful
congregation of my heavenly father, prefigured by the temple of Solomon at
Jerusalem.

17 And so strongly will I buyld him upon the hard rock, that he shall
stand always and neuermore be removed. 3. Reg. ^. Mar. 16. Mat. 7. Ephesians. 2.
John. 15. 1. Cor. 3. Ecclesi. 3. John. 20.
No more shall he be aforener nor a stranger, but a cytizen with the saints,
and of the household of God most surely grounded upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets.

18 And I shall write upon him to his singular commodity, the name of my God
and father almighty, and the name of the beautiful city of my God also, Apoc.
21.
called new Jerusalem, renewed in the spirit. Evermore shall he be called a
servant of the Lord, Romans 1. Math. 25. John. 15. ^. Cor. 6. Ephe. 2. Jacob. 1.
Tit. 3. John. 3. Romans 8.
an Apostle or witness of God, a lamb of Christ's fold, a sheep of his
pasture, a branch of his vine, a member of his church, and impe of his
kingdom, a citizen of heaven, and an inheritour of everlasting life.

19 And all this comes not from beneth, it rises not of his good works,
merits, nor deseruings, but it comes out of heaven from my god. It is only
his goodness, grace, lyberalitie, forgiveness, pity, and mercy.

20 I will also garnish him, and beautify him with my new name. He shall
evermore for his faythes sake be called the son of God, and rise at the
latter day in full glory incorruptible, immortal and clear, in perpetual
peace and concord.

21 He that has by the gift of God an ear, John. 1. 1. Cor. 15. Apoc. 2^.
Mar. 4. Apoc. 2. Romans 8.
let him consider wherefore he has it, and apply it to the right use,
discreetly waying what the holy Ghosts mind is to the christian congregations
in these heavenly premonishments.

THE TEXT.
1 And unto the Angel of the congregation, which is in Laodicia, write. 2.
This says Amen, the faithful and true witness, 3. the beginning of the
creatures of God. 4. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot.
5. I would thou were cold or hot. 6. But because thou art betvveene both,
and neither cold nor hot, 7. I will spevve thee out of my mouth. 8. Because
thou say thou art rych and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not how thou art vvretched and miserable, poor, blind,
and naked. 10. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, 11. that
thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, 12. that
thy filthy nakedness do not appear. 13. Anoint thine eyes with eye salve,
14. that thou may see.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 And now last of all my dear friend John (says the Lord Jesus) forget not
to admonish by the hand writing also, John. 19. 2. These. 2. Laodicia ciuitas
Asie Romans 4. Mat. 6. Luc. 11. Esai. 1.
the elder of the Christen congregation which is in Laodicia, a notable City
of the Asianes, which pretends to be a just people or a company to whom
faith is rekened for righteousness, and are nothing less. In the sight of men
they appear good, and their works seem glorious, yet are they before God no
sincere Christians, but dissemblyng hypocrites in deed.

2 Cause them to know certainly that this is the charytable warnyng of him,
1. Tim. 2. Psalm. 144. John. 14. Apoc. 19. Apoc. 21. Eccle. 1. John. 1. Jacob.
1. Phil. 2.
which coueteth all things to be well, perfect and good, and is in very deed
a witness faithful and true, yea, the eternaall verity it self, for that
they should give the more creadite to his sayings.

3 Moreover he is the oryginall beginning, not only of the creatures for so
much as he was that word by whom God created all things in the beginning,
but also of the creatures of God, for so much as he becommyng flesh in this
latter age restored them again to the peace and favor of God, for y^ they
should evermore seek unto him in their need as to the very fountain or well
spring of all goodness.

4 Thy works are evidently open before me (says that Lord) and I know them
in their kind. Mat. 11. John. 4. Hebr. 4. Prou. 24. 2. Pet. 2. Gala. 3. Romans 2.
1. Cor. 13.
I see thou art neither cold nor hot. Thou art neither a full infydell, nor a
full believer, neither a perfect pagane, nor a perfect Christian. Thou art
neither constant in the faith, nor yet all without faith. Outwardly thou art
hot, but within thou art cold as yse. Inwardly thou abhorrest ye word of
God, yet do thou not outwardly condemn it.

5 I would thou were either cold or hot, Phil. 3. 1. Tim. 1. Gala. 2. Act.
20. Jude 1. 2. Pet. 2. Esai. 5. 1. Tim. 4*
either a Christian or none at all, either a perfect lover of the verity, or
else a full hater of it, and not a dissembling hypocrite as thou art, judging
evil good, and good evil, calling darkness light, and light darkness,
making sower sweet, and sweet sower, allowing fables and lies, and
contempning the wisdom of God. None is so far from the kingdom of heaven as
is a false Christian. Much sooner is he converted to the truth that is all
cold or all without faith then he that under the color and pretense of Gods
laws mayntayneth errors and lies.

6 For so much therefore as I find thee between both, Mat. 3. Luc. 3. 2. Tim.
4. John. 16. Luc. 18. Gala. 4.
and neither of both, half cold, half hot, and neither fully cold nor hot,
neither faithfully given to Gods word nor all whole without it, but a false
glosing hypocrite.

7 I will begin to vomet thee as a morsel out of season, Apoc. 2. Mat 25. Romans
1.
and spewe thee out of my mouth as a thing out of kind. Thou shalt not be
disgested. Neither shall my word allow thee, nor my promise admit thee to
rest with Abraham Isaac, John. 18. Mar. 8. John. 12. Mar. 22. Mich 3. Luc. 9.
Hebr. 6.
and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But thou shall be thrown forth into
exterior darkness, where as shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. I will
cast thee out, detest thee, and abhor thee. For much worse are they that
abuse or dispyse the gift of God, Luc. 18 Eccle. 7 Apoc. 18.
then they which never received it.

8 Thou pratest very sore of thy riches, thy merytes, good deeds, and
deseruings. Thou boastest thy self much of thy increase in goodness by deeds
of supererogation and works more then need. Yea, thou art not ashamed to
think thy self so greatly to abound in learning, wisdom, Math. 2^ Luc. 11
John. 2 Soph. ^ Apoc. 1^ Amos. 5 Eccle. 1.
righteousness, and holiness, that all has need of thee, and thou of none,
sellyng to the wretched Idiotes of the world, thy masses, thy dyryges, thy
fastings, thy memories, thy kneelings, thy crouchings, with other idle
observations.

9 But thou remembrest not that thou art wretched of thy self, Psalm. 143.
Prou. 14 Romans 5. Ephe. 4 Apoc. 1^.
and wicked of thine own nature. Thou considrest not y^ thou art miserable and
sinful in thy life, poor without understanding and knowledge, feeble without
the strength of Gods spirit, blind without judgment and faith, and naked
without verity and all good Christen works.

10 I charitably therefore admonish thee to remember thy self. I counsel thee
also as one mynding thee good, to bye of me gold tried in the fire. Come unto
me with faith, and ask in the feruentnesse of soul. Psalm. 55. Mat. 7. Luc.
17. John. 19. Psalm. 18. Eccle. 23. Mala. 3. Esai. 52. Prou. 23. 1. Cor. 4.
If thou be feeble hearted, say: Lord increase my faith. Desire my heavenly
word to thy comfort, with understanding to perceive it and know it. It is
treasure much more precious then gold, it is sweetness more dulcet the^
honey. And tried it is most pure and clean by the holy Ghost. Thou shall have
it without payment. Thy good heart shall only suffyse me.

11 Diligently procure it that thou may be rich in faith and
righteousness, in ye merits of Jesus Christ, and in the favor of God by them,
and that thou may be clothed in white raiment of innocence and cleanness,
Apoc. 7. 2. Pet. 3. Romans 12.
not only before men, but also before God.

12 Be never without verity, faith, righteousness and charity, with other
gifts of the holy Ghost, least the filthy nakedness of hypocrisy, and sin,
Gala. 5. 2. Cor. 5. Apoc. 17. Esai. 64. 1. Pet. 1. Psalm. 31. Romans 8.
for all thy painted colors appear to thy confusion. Let thine own dyrtie
merits alone, and deck thee with the precious deseruings of the son of God,
that thou may have thy sins wyped away, clearly forgiven, covered, and
never more imputed unto thee by him.

13 And to avoid the blyndenesse, see thou anoint thine eyes, thy mind or
affection, thy judgment or knowledge, with the eye salve of clerenes which is
Jesus Christ, the sweet smelling ointment of health.

14 Consider yt he alone was borne for thee, and dyed for thee. And take him
for thy only wisdom, Psalm. 18. John. 8. Cant. 1. Esai. 63. Act. 4. 1. Cor. 1.
1. John. ^^*
satisfaction, holiness, and redemption yt thou may hereafter see. Let this
precious lycour take from thine eyes all filthy corruption: and whatsoever
thou shall hereafter do in word or in deed, do all in the name of that Lord,
gyuyng thanks unto God the father by him. For he is the salve that shall heal
thee, Ephe. 1. Coloss. 3. Hiere. 17.
and the light that shall clear thee.

THE TEXT.
1 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, 2. Be fervent therefore and
repent. 3. Behold I stand at the door and knock, 4. If any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in unto him, 5. and vvil suppe with him, and
he with me, 6. To him that overcomes will I grant, to sit on my seat, 7.
even as I overcame and have sitten with my father on his seat, 8. Let him
that has ears, hear what the spirit says unto the congregations.

THE PARAPHRASE.
Prou. ^. Gene. 18. Hebre. 12. 1. Cor. 11. Esai. 5. Luc. 6. Romans 1.
1 So many as I love, I rebuke earnestly, least they should perish with the
wicked. And those that I favor I chaste^ in this life, least they should be
dampened for ever. Woe is ye man that has of me here neither chastisement nor
rebuke, but is left without restraynte, wallowyng in the concupiscence and
desires of his flesh. A great sign it is of the indignation of God, where as
the other is an evident token of love.

2 From henceforth therefore be fervent in the truth. Jacob. 1. Ephe. 4. Apoc.
2. Cant. 5. Romans 8.
Earnestly embrace it, keep it, and follow it. Abhor thy old superstitions,
and repent from the heart that thou haste been so long neither whotte nor
cold.

3 Behold I stand at the door of thy heart as one ready to help thy
weakness. 2. These. 2. Psalm. 106.
And I knock at ye portall of thy conscience as one yt would gladly comfort
thee, I send forth my heavenly word to succoure thee, lighten thee, raise
thee up, and save thee.

4 If any man with a glad heart will hear my voice, or the true preaching of my
word, John. 10. Mar. 16. John. 14. Gala. ^. Luc. ^.
and open the door of his faith, thankefully to receive it, I will come in unto
him, enduing with all spiritual delights, as righteousness, peace, love, and
joy in the holy Ghost.

5 Yea to him shall I make manifest as to my friend the hidden misteryes of the
scripture, John. 15. Luc. 14. Math. 8. ^. Cor. 2.
and secret counsels of my father. And he shall finally suppe with me and with
him in the eternal habitacle of God, where no heart can esteem what he has
prepared for them, that love him.

6 That man which through ye earnest zeal of Gods truth distroyeth
hypocrisy, and overcomes sin, will I admit to reign with me in the kingdom
of my father, and grant him to sit with me in the seat of everlasting
peace, 1. John. 5. Dani. 2. Apoc. 21. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. ^5. Romans 8.
as a dear member of mine own body, declaring him a tryumphaunt conqueror in
me, over dampnation, hell, death, and the diuill, in a glorified nature.

Ephesians. 1. John. 12. Apoc. 21. Math. 13. Phil 3. Ephesians. 1.
7 Even as my self was before, sitting with my celestial father in the seat
of his eternity. And to have with me that health, that blessyng, that joy,
that victory, that honor, power, and glory, that I have.

8 Let him that God has given eare^ unto, apply them to his mind, and mark
what the spirit has here spoken to the Christen co^gregatio^s, for thereupon
rests his life, or his death, his salvation or his dampnation.

The fourth Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 After this I looked, and behold a door was open in heaven, 2. and the first
voice which I heard was as it were of a Trumpet, talking with me, which
said. 3. Come up hither, and I will show thee things, which must be
fulfilled hereafter. 4. And immediately I was in the spirit, 5. and behold a
seat was set in heaven, and one sat on the seat, 6. And he that sat, was
to look upon like unto a Jasper stone, and a Sardine stone. 7. And there was
a reyne bow about the seat in sight like a Smaragde. 8. And about the seat
were.xxiiij. seats. 9. And upon the seats.xxiiij. elders sitting, 10.
clothed in white raiment, 11. and had on their heads crowns of gold. 12.
And out of the seat proceeded lyghtnings, and thundrings, and voices. 13. And
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the seat, which are the seven
spirits of God, 14. And before the seat there was a sea of glass like unto
Crystal. 15. And in the midst of the seat and round about the seat,
were four beasts, 16. full of eyes before and behind..

THE PARAPHRASE. 1
After this special iniunction of my Lord and master Jesus Christ (says
saint John) I did cast up mine eyes toward the sky lifting up my heart to give
thanks unto God. Apoc. 1. John. 13. Psalm. 120. 1. These. 7. Eccle. 43. Ezech.
1. Act. 14. Luc. 24.
And anon as I seriously beheld the face of the fyrmament or majesty of Gods
works, I saw a door open in heaven. Which was a signification to me, that God
minded to open certain high mysteries of the scripture, and hidden secrets
concerning his kingdom or church unto me his simple servant.

Ezech. 3.
2 And the first thing that ascertained me of the same from thence, was a
mighty great voice as it had been the stout noise of a Trompe, Psalm. 28.
Esai. 18. John. 6. Mat. 6. Hier. 31.
or the vehement blaste of an horn. The which voice though it were fearful
unto my flesh (as commonly ye commandment of God is) yet was it solatious
unto my spirit, for so much as it familiarly talked with me, and said these
words.

3 Come thou up hither. Suspende thine own will, wit, study, practice, Ephe.
5. Col. 3. Phil. 3. Gala. 5. 1. Cor. 12. Apoc. 1.
and judgment. Condemn yt thou have of nature. Lift up thy self above thy
self, ascend in soul by the spirit and power of God, and I will show unto
thee things wonderful, and such as must without fail be fulfilled in every
point hereafter by the unvariable ordinance of God.

4 And as it had been in a thought, I was suddenly by the Lords power taken up.
I was in the spirit in deed, secluded from all carnal imaginatio^s.

5 And anon I was ware of a beautiful seat prepared in heaven, Romans 8. 2. Cor.
^^. Psalm. 44.
which moved me to consider that before the constitution of the world
almighty God had appointed by his spirit to raygne in his faithful church.
Sapi. 9. Ephesians. 1. John. 14. Psalm. 77. Act. 7. 2. Reg. 7. Luc. 7. 1. Cor. 6.
For I saw that one sat upon yt seat, as upon the beautiful throne of his
glory. No where else reigns God but among his chosen people. He dwells not
in Temples made by hand, he rests not in houses of ma^s preparation. Is the
kingdom of God any where else the^ within man? Has God any Temple that he more
favors then man's faithful heart?

6 And he that gloriously sat upon that comely seat, was like by all
similitude to a Jasper stone, and resembled also a precious stone called a
Sardine. Betokening that his reign is durable and strong, Esai. 54. Ezech. 28.
Dan. 7. Psalm. 44. Dan. 4. Abacuc. 3.
his power firm and invariable, his glory clear and precious, and that he
him self is as the red Jasper beautiful and orient, and as the green
Sardine, fresh, fair, and never fading, that man should ever be desirous of
him. Whose will to consider is our felicity, and whose pleasure to follow is
our perfectness.

7 And there was a fair raynbow about that glorious seat, Psalm. 16. Sapi. 15.
Luc. 6. The rainebow is the covenant. Zacha. 2. Prou. 8. 1. Reg. 3. Ezech 28.
John. 16. 2. Cor. 13. Phil. 4.
in sight like a smaragde or an Amarald stone. Which signifies his perpetual
covenant of peace and love to all them that have faith, which are so dear
unto him as is the apple of his own eye, or as that thing which he desires
most. And no less precious the said covenant is, then the fresh Ameralde
with his amorous hew and beautiful show of love, that we should the rather
couette it. For nothing is more auydyously to be desired, then is the sweet
peace of God.

8 And about that exceedyng fair seat or empire of the Lord, The.xxiiij
seats are virtues. Gala. 5. Esai. 11.
were xxiiij. other mean seats appointed, which put me anon in remembrance
of charity, patience, steadfastness, love, joy, peace, temperance, justice,
knowledge of god, meekness, and other fruits of faith, with innumerable
gifts of the holy ghost, wherein the servants of God has before time and
still does continually rest.

Apoc. 5. Mat. 19. Hebr 11. Eccle. 45. Ephesians 4. Mat. 19.
elders, or notable ancient men sitting. Which seems unto me to be Abell, and
Noe, Abraham and David, Moses and Helyas, Joseph and John Baptist, the
Prophets and Apostles, the Preachers and Martyrs, with such other like. To whom
Christ promised in the regeneration to sit with him upon xij. seats, judging
the xij. tribes of Israel. Numbers in the scriptures. Dan. 7. Apoc. 7.
These set numbers in ye scripturs of xxiiij. or of.xij. and such like, notes
certainty in ye promise of God toward them which are in themselves without
number.

10 And the foresaid elders or men of ripe discretion, were clothed in white
raiment or apparel of innocence according to the commandment of the holy
Ghost. For their works were pure and clean before God, Hebre. 11. Apoc. 14.
rising only of faith, and were never defiled with the filthy traditions of
men.

11 They had also upon their heads as myghtie rulers, What are me^t by the
crowns.
and governors, crowns of fine gold, in token that they had here the
governance in his word, and shall hereafter be partakers with Christ in his
heavenly kingdom and glory.

12 Great is the majesty of ye trone of God, and the power much. Ezech. ^
Psalm. 96. Apoc. 16. Zacha. 6. Act. 2. John. 16.
For from his heavenly seat into the universal world proceeded lightnings,
and thunderings, and voices, which are the manyfolde and diverse respects of
his word. For a fearful lightenyng it is when it rebukes, throws down,
and condempneth the sinner. It is a terrible thundering, when it fears,
threateneth, and commands things contrary to the flesh. Psalm. 118. Romans
16. John. 6. Esai. 2. Iohel. 2.
And it is a solacious voice again when it rayseth, releeueth, and quickens
the desolace conscience with comfortable promises. And full is all the
scripture of these, which comes from Syon, and the sweet word of God which
comes from Jerusalem.

13 And there were seven lamps of flaming fire burning before the said trone
of God, Cant. ^. Esai. 11. Zacha. 4.
which are the seven spirits of God, or the universal gifts of the holy
ghost, Zacha. 3. Apoc. 5. John. 15.
prefigured in the scriptures by the seven lights of one Candelsticke, the
vij. eyes of one stone, and by vij. horns and eyes also of the lamb. These
show light evermore before Gods sight. The church without them in no wise can
be the trone of God.

14 And before the said seat, there was as it had been a sea of glass,
Ezech. 47. Apoc. 1. John. 14. Psalm. 11. Mala. ^.
a plentiful understanding of the verity, first given unto Christ by the
father, and then unto the church or congregation by the spirit of Christ. And
this sea was like unto a Crystal clear, beautiful and pure, without any
corruption of human fantasies.

15 In the midst of that heavenly seat, Mala. 3. Ezech. 1. Ioannes
ba^othorpe. Albertus and alii. Ezech. 10. Dani. 3.
and in the circuit of the same, were iiij. beasts seen, of diverse nature
and shape, not signifying the iiij. greater Prophets, nor yet the iiij.
Evangelists (as no small number of doctors has fantasied) but rather ye
universal number of all faithful believers, and earnest setters forth of the
verity in the four quarters of the whole world. And this may be gathered by
the noise of their wings in Ezechiel by their crying of sanctus sanctus,
sanctus, Ezech. ^. Esai. 6. Apoc. 5. Franciscus Lambertu^
and by their showing of mysteries of the opened seals of the book, as
hereafter follows. By whom are to be understand the sincere openings of Gods
word, and the continual praising of his glorious name. These beasts are in
the midst of the seat or congregation of God, Georgius aemilius. 1. Pet. 5.
Ezech. 5. 1. Tim. 4.
when they teach them and exhort them to persist in the truth. They are also
in the circuit of the same, when they diligently labor to defend them from
the doctrine of diuils, and errors of hypocrites.

16 These beasts were full of fair eyes before and behind. Ezec. 1.1^* John.
15. Math. 13. Luc. 8. John. 8. Haymo. 1. Cor. 2. John. 6. John. 16.
Which is a clear knowledge in the mysteryes of Gods word. The sincere
favorers of Gods heavenly truth does see many wonderful things, and know many
secret maruels, not only concerning matters past, but also of judgments to
come. So many eyes have they, as they have perceived veryties. For they once
made spiritual by faith, discern all things. They are taught of God. And ye
holy ghost does lead them into all truth.

THE TEXT.
1. And the first beast was like a Lion. 2. The second beast like a Calfe, 3.
and the third beast had a face like a man, 4. and the fourth beast was like a
flying Egle. 5. And the four beasts had each one of them six vvings. 6. And
round about without and within they were full of eyes. 7. And they had no
rest neither day nor night, saying: Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God
almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. 8. And when those beasts gave
glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the seat, which lives
for ever and ever. 9. The xxiiij. elders fell down before him that sat on
the trone, and worshipped him that lives for ever, 10. and cast their
crowns before the trone, saying. 11. Thou art vvorthie Lord to receive glory
and honor, and power. 12. For thou have created all things, and for thy
vvilles sake they are and were created.

THE PARAPHRASE.
1 These iiij. beasts has iiij. diverse exterior similitudes, Ambrostus
Ansbertus. Romans 3. Gala. 5. Prou. 30. Prou. 28. Col. 3. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 3.
Apoc. 5.
which are not else but the outward tokens, testimonies, and signs of faith, or
the fruitful works thereof only proceeding. For faith is never without her
wholesome fruits. The first beast was in similitude like unto a Lion, strong
and mighty in power. And that are they which has laid aside the old man of
sin with his feeble faynte works, and converted them selves into ye ghostly
image of Christ, which is the mighty strong Lion of the Trybe of Judah, for
that they might have the victory over sin.

2 The second beast was fashyoned like unto a Calfe, Esai. 11. Exodus 2^. Gala.
5. Col. 3. Romans 6. Romans 12. 2. Tim. ^.
much used in the old law to be offered up in sacryfice. And such are they,
which forsaking them selves and mortifying the corrupt lusts of their flesh,
does walk in a new Christian life, and offer up them selves unto God as a
living sacrifice, ready to suffer all kinds of persecution and death for his
names sake.

Eccle. 8. Hebr. 12. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 10.
3 The third beast had a face in favor like a man, having reason, wit, and
discrecion. And those are they which through policy of faith and prudencie in
the spirit, so wisely and discretely order them selves in that they go about,
that nothing is against ye glory of God, but al things works for the best in
them.

4 The fourth beast was like unto a flying Egle, Job. 9. Hiere. 49. Romans 6.
Phil. 3. Col. 3. Hebre. 10. 1. Cor. 10.
which buyldeth her neast very high in the hard rock stone. Which are those
godly persons that living here in this mortal body, by the counsel of the
holy Ghost have their conversation in heaven. They seek for those things
which are above, where as Christ is sitting on the right hand of God. In whom
only as in the sure rock they build all their whole hope and trust. Ansbertus
and Haymo. Apoc. 2.
By these four similitudes is the true congregation of God known from the
painted sinagoge and cou^terfaict church of Satan glorifiyng her self in
vain glory, pomp, cruelty, rape, Apoc. 1^. Gala. 5. Phil. ^.
simonie, lies, hatred, sects, murder, Idolatry, sedition, and tirannie,
with other fruits of the flesh, whose God is their belly, and their end
dampnation. And though these iiij. simylitudes be diverse, yet do they respect
one congregation after Ezech. which ever more applies all.iiij. unto one
beast. And every one of the said iiij. beasts had.vj. wings about him.
Lambertus Ezech. 1. Ezech. 10. Esaias. 6. Esaias. 4^. Hebr. 11. Gala. 5.


5 The wings whereby Gods people are raised up unto him, is faith, hope,
charity, justice, mercy, and verity, with such other virtues as ever more
accompanyeth them. Ephe. 1. John. 15. Romans 2. Tit. 2. Ezech. 1^.
By these are they lifted up unto heavenly things. By these avoid they the
common mischieues of the world. By these obtain they a plentuous quietness in
God, abiding their savior and redeemer Jesus Christ. And where as in Ezechiell
the said wings appearing but iiij. are here found six, we may gather this.
That the gospel now published, the gifts of the holy ghost are more high,
plentiful, and open under christ, then before time under Moses.

6 Round about them without and within the said beasts were full of eyes.
Romans 8. John. 1. Ezech. 10. Psalm. 4. 1. ^or 2. Apoc. 21. 3. Reg 3. Eccle* 1.
The servants of the Lord has Godly wisdom and knowledge every where inwardly
to consider heavenly things durable, sure, and perfect, and never to perish.
Outwardly again to judge earthly things corruptible, wretched, and vain, and
shortly to be ended.

7 Neither day nor night could the said beasts cease from the praise of their
Lord God, Psalm. 33. Esaias. 6. Athanas^us Augustinus Fulgencius, Apoca. 1. Esaias.
44.
saying: Holy, holy, holy. Or blessed art thou almightye father, blessed art
thou almighty son, blessed art thou almighty holy ghost, distinct three
persons in trinity, and in substance one Lord God almighty, which was
without beginning, and is of him self only, and shall be for ever, and ever,
everlasting. And what is this else but yt the righteous fervently eprayinge,
gives continnuall thanks unto GOD reioysinge among them selves in psalms,
in hymns, Primasius Aph^^. Colo. 3.
and in spiritusonges, praysinge him evermore in their hearts.

8 And when those.iiij. beasts, Robertus Tuitiensis. Esaias. 11. Psalm. 118,
or faithful, fervent, sincere, and pure beleuers here believing in the
flesh, gave glory, honor, and thanks from the, iiij. quartes of the earth, in
professing the verity, in teaching it unto other, and in living according to
the same. Esa. 6. Exodus 15. Luc. 1.
And that unto him which sat on the seat, which is god almighty reigning over
that congregation, which lives for ever and ever and has of his kingdom none
end.

9 Anon stepped forth the.xxiiij. elders, or the whole, perfect, Apoca. 5.
Albertus Magnus.
and universal number of them which has rested in the Lord, and they with
all meekenes fell down before him which sat on the throne. They submitted
themselves unto him, Psalm. 82.
ackowleginge him for their only Lord. They worshipped him also with dew
reuerance, and gave high thanks unto him, as unto their eternal liui^g god.

Gregorius magnus. 1. Cor. 1. Tit. 3.
10 Yea, finally they threw down their crowns before the throne of his eternal
majesty. They confessed their own good works, merits, and deseruinges to be
nothing at all. But their whole health, wisdom, knowledge, virtue, holiness,
righteousness, and redemption to be only of his lyberall gift and undeserved
goodness.

11 And as men most highly rejoicing they cried unto him, saying thus: It is
thou (O Lord God, and most mighty creator) that is alone worthy to receive
all glory, all honor, and all thanks for that has been wrought, Psalm. 85. 2.
Match. 1. Romans 11. Hest. 13.
in heaven, and in earth, and none other else but thou.

Jude 9. Psalm. 103. Genesis 12. Hest. 13. Eccle. 3. Ion. 1. Ephe. ^.
12 For thou have alone by thy unsearchable wisdom created all things, and
brought them forth out of nothing. And for the only pleasure of thy will they
are now at this present time in substance and fashyon, and were created of thee
at the beginning, not only to be at thy commau^deme^t, but also to be evermore
tha^kefull unto thee, and to laud thee, and praise thee for ever.

The fifth Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a book 2,
written with in, and on the back side. 3. sealed with seven seals, 4. and I
saw a strong Angel preaching with a loud voice. 5. Who is worthy to open
the book, and loose the seals thereof? 6. And no man in heaven nor in earth,
neither under the earth was able to open the book, neither to look thereon.
7. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the
book, neither to look thereon. 8. And one of the elders said unto me: Weep
not. 9. Behold, the Lion which is of the trybe of Judah, 10, the root of
David, has obtained to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.
11. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the seat, and of the iiij. beasts,
and in the midst of the elders, 12. stood a Lamb as though he had been
killed, 13, which had seven horns, 14, and seven eyes, which are the seven
spirits of God, sent unto all the world. 15. And he came and took the book
out of the right hand of him that sat upon the seat.

The Paraphrase.
AFter the forsayde vysion I saw (says saint John) in the right hand, Apoca.
4. 1. Pet. 5. Esa. 6. ^. Peter. 1, Exodus 32. Esa. 8. Colo. 1. Apoca. 10. Romans
1. Psalm. 117
or mighty power and will, of him that sat on the throne with majesty, a
wonderful Book, in the which both man and Angel were desirous to look.

This book is Gods heavenly ordinance, containing not only all, that has
been created of God visible and invisible, but also the universal contents of
the holy scripture. This book has the merciful Lord provided, that men
should know him, partly by his creatures, partly by his Scriptures. This book
he has in his right hand. For heaven he measures with his spanne, and the
whole world he comprehends under his three ^ingers. Esa. 48, Esa. 40. Psalm.
4^ Io^. 32. Psalm. 118*
In his hand or power is the universal earth; both hills and valleys. At his
only will and pleasure is the sincere understanding of the scriptures, and true
interpretacion of the same.

2 This book is written within and without. Colo. 1. Romans 1. Math. 10. Psalm.
99, 2. Tim 3. Luke. 8, Rom 13, John. 6. Gala. 4. John, 1.
The world co^tayneth creatures visible and invisible, powers open and hidden,
that men in the^ should read and understand that there is a living God, and
that they should acknowledge him and worship him as the Lord and creator of
all. The holy scripture has her figure and history, her mystery and verity,
her parable and plain doctrine, her night and day, her letter and sense, her
voice and word, her flesh and spirit, her shadow and clear light, her death
and life, her law and gospel, her Moses and Christ, to bring all men also
unto the knowledge of God. Esa. 29. 1. Cor. 2. Roma. 8. 1. Cor. 1. Ioannes
Baca^thorp. Nicolaus Lyranus. Albertus.


3 But that Book is surely sealed with seven strong seals from the fleshlye
understanding of man, not having the spirit of Christ, that he can neither
use the creatures of God a right, nor yet perceive the Scriptures according to
their true meanning. Much has the doctors fantasied of these seven claspes
or spearynges of this book, without the authority of Gods word, Liranus.
Albertus.
calling the^ all manner of obscurities and darkenesses. Where as in very deed
they are nothing else but the strong and unvariable decree, Psalm. 118. Prou. 8.
Mat. 11. Romans 8. Jacob. 1. Luke. 10. Mat. 13. Sapi. 1.
or set diffinition of God, before the constitucion of the world, that none
should be able to read rightly therein, nor know the just meaning thereof without
the spirit of his son, and unless it be meekly asked in faith. And this one
decree of god, so often locketh up these heavenly secrets from man, as it finds
him carnal, covetous, wilful, blind, malicious, proud, and false, with such
other like. The number of seven does only respect the opening of the seals
in all ages. Ioachim. Abbas. Genesis 4. Genesis 12. 1. Reg. 16. Luke 3. Mala. 2. 1.
Cor. 9. Act. 4. Mala. 2. Mat. 5. Luke 6.
For in every age has God opened ye truth unto some Godly men by his spirit,
with Abell and Enoch, with Noe and Sem, with Abraham and Job, with Moses and
Samuel, with David and Helias, with Hieremie and Daniel, with John Baptist and
Peter.

4 And I saw (says S. John) a strong Angel, which betokens every
faithful minister of gods word, coveting all men to be taught of god, and
sending them only unto Christ, for they are the Angels of the Lord of hosts.
Which Angel cried with a loud voice, with an earnest zeal of the glory of
God, and with a fervent desire of his neighbors health.

5 Who is worthy to open this book, and to undo the claspes thereof? Psalm.
1^. Psalm. 68. Mat. 15. Ioh. 9. 1. Cor. 3. Hier. 10.
As though he should say, None but he alone. Seek him therefore that he may
open it unto you, else are ye like always to be blind, foolish, and
unlearned liars before the Lord, seem ye never so wise, eloquent, and well
learned in the sight of men.

6 And in deed no man was found able to do it, neither in heaven, nor in
earth, nor under the earth, 1. Esd. 4. Genesis 1^. Esaias. 14. 2. Pet. 2. Act. 17.
John, 1. Act. 4. 2. Pet. 2.
yet was there a diligent search made, and many did attempt it. The Angels that
by apostasy fell from God, when they were in heaven wrought maistryes about
it. And in the earth here, the Philosophers among the Gentiles, the religious
fathers among ye Jews, the Pharisees and Scribes, the lawyers and priests, and
among the Christians, ye false Apostles and Antichrists, the Sophisters and
Papists, ye sects, and scoole doctors with all the worldly wise has craftily
compassed the thing. Yea the messe^gers of Satan (whose dampnation is
certain) subtily to persuade, and fraudelently to deceive the innocent souls,
1. John. 4* Romans 3. Psalm. 63, Hiere. 2^. Esa. 29. Prou. 25. 1. Cor. 1. Colo.
4. Romans 11. Sapi. 9.
have also done their part. But what has followed? After their vain
enterprise, they have been so astonyed at the majesty or sight of ye book,
that neither were they able to open it, nor yet to look thereupon. So high were
the mysteries thereof, so unsearchable the judgments, and so inuestigable the
ways thereunto.

Math. 5. Esa. 63. Apoca. 1^* Eccle. 8. John. 14.
7 And I fell in sore weeping (says Saint John) much dolor was it to my
heart to see that none was found worthy, no creature able, neither Angel nor
man, good spirit, nor diuil, to open, and to read the book, which is clearly
to know the will of God therein, nor yet once to look thereupon, that is
sincerely to perceive the least verity contained therein. No creature
understanding could attayn unto it. All were ignorant, all dark, all blind.

8 And as I was thus mournyng one of ye elders, even Jacob by name, Ose. 4.
Sapi. 9. Isaie. 56, Genesis 49. Esa. 32. Mich. 5, 3. Esdre. 3.
comforted me with his prophecy of Judah, Esaias, Micheas, and Esdras, bearing
witness to the same.

9 These with other ascertained me, that he was the Lion of the Trybe of Judah,
Osee. 13, John. 8. Heb. 11 John. 12. Luke. 11. Esa. 11. Apoca. 22. Luke. 1.
which should overcome the world, and have the victory over death, and hell,
for in deed they with Abraham saw it a far of, and much reioysed. He is the
strong and invincible Lion that subdued the prince of this world, took from
him the pray, and has divided the spoil.

10 He is the very root of David, the ground and original cause of all godly
promises made unto him of deliverance, victory, and raygne, and alone in him
are they fulfilled. Only has he obtained by his death, Colo. 2. Matthew. 28.
Ma^ci. 16,
resurrection, and ascension, to make open the hydden mysteries of this book,
or whole ordinance of God, and to loose the seven seals thereof, Luc. 24 2.
Cor. 3. John. 12. Ephe. 5. ^. Tim. 4. Ezech. 36. Io^el. 2,
or to take away the universal impediments whereby the said book could in no
case be seen, as is carnalitie, ignorance, darkness, blindness,
wilfulness, covetousness, malice, hypocrisy, lies, with such like. So was it
before speared by the decree of God, that none could read in it till he removed
the untowardness from their hearts.

11 All this I beheld (says S. John) and as I looked further, Esa. 12. Psalm.
21. Apoca. 4. 1. Cor. 4. Psalm. 106 Eccle. 8. Esa. 53. Hiere. 11 Esaie. 53.
John. 1. Exodus 12. Esa. 16.
I saw yt in the midst of the seat (which is ye universal congregation of
God) and of the four beasts (which are the constaunt ministers of his word)
and also in the midst of ye ancient elders) which has been ye sincere
witnesses of his verity since the beginning.)

12 There stood a fair, meek, and most innocent Lamb, as though he had been
newly slain. I knew that Christ was this Lamb, for he was wounded for our
offenses, and took away the sins of ye world. He was that meek Lamb
prefigured in the law whom the faithful fathers so earnestly desired. He was
that gentle Lamb that was carried away to be slain, and that opened not his
mouth before the shearer. Acto. 8. 1. John. 2. 1. Timo. ^. Heb. 9. Math. 2^.
Daniel. 7. Psalm. 74
This Lamb stands up evermore for us before God, as our only medyator,
advocate, peace maker, Savior, helper, counselor, defender and teacher

13 This Lamb had seven horns, which betokens his strong and infinite
power, virtue, victory, kingdom, glory, bounteousnesse, and majesty, with such
like, and in the whole his universal reign.

14 He had also seven eyes, Zacha. ^. Esa. 11. Apoca. 1. 1. Cor. 12. Ma^ci.
^6, Ephe. 4. Matthew. 28. Esa. 11. Apoca. 22. Gala. 5. Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 1.
John. 4.
which are all the powers, graces, and fruits of the holy ghost, called here
the seven spirits of God, For so much as they are the singular gifts of him
which is his essenciall spirit. And them he has sent by his apostles, and
other godly preachers into ye seven climates of the earth or universal world, ye
people with them to be replenished. These are wisdom, understanding, counsel,
strength, knowledge, pity, and the fear of god. These are also love, joy,
peace, patience, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, long suffering,
cleannes, and temperance, with diversity of tongues, interpretacion,
prophecy, cures, healings, miracles, and judgment of spirits.

15 And the said Lamb came forth as one through meekness, Phil. 2, Ose, 13,
Luke, 10, Esa, 6, Math, 1^,
having victory over sin, death, and hell, and he reverently took the said
book from the right hand of him that sat upon the throne. Which made me anon
to consider that the heavenly father had given up unto him the whole
admynistration of his spiritual kingdom, with all authority and power in
heaven and earth, John, 5, Math, 28, John, 17, Phil, 2, Math. 25, Luke. 24,
John, 14, John, 16, Act, 2. Mat. 25, Hebr, 10,
to open or to spear, to choose or to reject, to take or to refuse, to save or
to loose, to reward or to dampne. For he it was that first opened the
understanding of men, that they might perceive the scriptures. He it was that
sent the holy spirit of God to deduce them into all verity, and gave them
grace to instruct all people. He it is also yt shall through them into
everlasting fire, with the diuil and his Angels that resist ye same.

THE TEXT.
1 And when he had taken the book, the liij. beasts and the.xxiiij. elders,
2. fell down before the Lamb, having harpes, 3. and golden vialles full of
odours (which are the prayers of the Saints) 4. and they sung a new song
saying, 5 Thou art vvorthie to take the book, 6. and to open the seals
thereof, 7. For thou were killed, 8. and have redeemed us by thy blood, out of
all kinreds and tongs, and people, and nations, 9. and have made us unto our
God, Kings, and priests, 10. and we shall reign on the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 And when he had received ye said book of the hand of God, with full
authority and power, the iiij. beasts, or the present protestours of the
verity, here living in the world, John, ^, Luk, 10, Heb, 11, Sapi, 5, John, 8,
Ephe, ^. John, 8, Heb, 11*
and the xxiiij. Elders or ancient witnesses of the same, departed clean from
this world, as were the old fathers, the Patryarkes, Prophets, and Apostles,
Act. ^. Apoca. 22.
meekly submitted them selves before the Lamb, much reioysinge in his
triumphant victory for them.

2 They fell down before him, they praised him, Act^. 3. Apoca. 2^
they worshipped him, they gave thanks and recognized him for their merciful
Lord and Savior, having in their hands harmonious harpes, Apoca. 15. Psalm.
150 Esaie. 66. Prou. 23 Luck. 10. 1. Cor. 10. Esaie. 53. John. 8. John. ^.
which there represented the melody of their faithful souls, or the inward
rejoice, that they had in faith of the eternal verytie of god. For that is the
agreeable concord and sweet harmony yt he most delights in. And as well had
they harpes that were long before Christ, as had they that followed him, the
effect of his death being equal to them both. So well reioysed Abraham, which
saw him a far of, as did John Baptist, which showed him persent.

3 Each one of them had also in his hand a golden vial full of sweet odours,
which is a faithful heart to God, Zach. 14. Daniel. 9.
full of sweet desires and wholesome prayers, whiles they lived here. And these
vessels of prayer, or hearts of the faithful believers, couetinge mercy to
themselves and all other, were very precious, pleasant, Psalm. 61. Math. 5.
Prou. 17. Psalm. 140* Prou. 23. Apoca. 14.
and beautiful in the sight of the Lord, which only desires the heart.

4 They sang also with their instruments a new song of rejoice recording the
great benefit of God. Marci. 16 Aggei. 2. John, 1. Marci. 1. 1. Cor. 1. Romans 1.
1. Cor. 5. Colos. 3. Ephe. 4.
They uttered the glad tidinges of peace. They published the Gospel of Christ.
They told of his coming. They declared him present and past. This song was
ever new unto flesh and blood. It seemed very strange, yea and folish to the
children of this world, yet is it the power of God unto salvation for every
one that believes. Now it is also for so much as it nothing allows in our
aged man of sin, but always calls upon renouation in the spirit.

5 This was the conclusion of that song. Thou alone sweet Lord (said they)
art found worthy to take the Book to receive power and administration of the
kingdom of God. John. 17. Apoca. 3. Luck. 24.


Esa. 42. Io^^. 16. Esa 53. ^. Cor. 15*
6 Thou only art able to open ye seale^ thereof, to take from us all impediments
of darkness, hypocrisy, lies, ignorance, wilfulness, blindness, and sin,
and to deduce us into all godly knowledge.

7 For thou were not only despised and wounded, but most cruelly slain for our
offenses, whereby thou have obtained our perpetual peace, and atonement with
god.

1. John. 2, Titum. ^, 1. Petri. 1. Esa. 56, Psalm. 105 Iohel..
8 Thou have clearly redeemed us out all spiritual bondage by ye price of thy
blood, and by the virtue of thy passion and death, thou have gathered us
together into one kingdom of God from all the nations of the world, and have
chosen us out of all kinreds, languages, and peoples of the universal earth.
1. Peter. 2. Psalm 44. Acto. 11. Apoca 1, 1. John. 5^,
Thou have made us also pertakers with thee in thy peculyer unction, that we
are now called Christians.

9 Thou have anointed us Kings by the gift of true faith, to have victory
over sin, death and the devil, and consecrate us priests by ye grace of thy
holy spirit, Hebr. 9. Romans 12. Exodus 19, Deuteronomy. 17 Esa. 40 1. Pet. 2.
to offer up our selves and undefiled sacrifice unto our everlasting God. So
that we are now the chosen kindred, the kingely pristhoode, the holy generation,
the peculyer people, that should manifest the works of thee, which have called
us out of darkness into the merueilous light.

10 And by the benifit of thy only grace and goodness we shall reign
prosperously on the earth, Apoca. 22, 1. John, 2, 1. Cor. 15 Psalm. 141. Apoca.
21.
not here where as is sorrow, care, penury, scarsnesse, and death, but our
portion shall be in the pleasant land of the living, where as is the peace, joy,
tranquillity, comfort, and life everlasting.

THE TEXT.
1 And I beheld, 2. And herd the voice of many angels about the throne, and
about the beasts, and the elders. 3. And I hard thousand thousands, saying
with a loud voice. 4. Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power,
and riches and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessinge,
5. And all creatures, which are in Heaven, 6. And on the earth, 7, And under
the earth, 8, And in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, 9.
Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the seat, 10.
And unto the Lamb for euee more. 11. And the four beasts said amen. 12. And
the.xiiii. elders fell upon their faces, 13. and worshipped him that lives
for ever more.

The Paraphrase.
1 Furthermore says Saint John, I saw an infinite host of Angels beholding the
face of the heavenly father. Daniel. 7, Math. 18. Psalm. 102. Luke. 2,


2 I heard also the voice of a great number of them about the throne of God,
giving laud and praise unto him, Hebr. 1, Apoca. 19 Romans 8. Tobie. 5. Judith.
13* Psalm. 90 Daniel. 7, Hebre. 12*
and about the beasts and ancient elders. For they are not only the
immediate ministers of God, but also the servants of those men, which shall be
the heirs of salvation. Where should they be else than? but about them that
fear the Lord, to see to them and preserve them in all their ways, like as he
has given them in commandment.

3 And the number of them was a thousand thousands, or a number beyond our
estimation. And they cried with a loud voice, signifiyng in their sort no
corporal noise, but for so much as they are but spirits, but a vehement zeal
of most perfect love and rejoice for the glory of God, Psalm. 103. Luke. 2,
John. 20. Luke. 15. Daniel. ^, Math. 18. Esaie. 53, 1. Cor. 15. John. 17,
Apoca. 1 1. Tim. 6, Sap. 3, Apoca. 3. Psalm. 23. Math. 28, Ephe. 1*
the victory of Christ, the redemption, delyuerance, and health of man. It
betokens also their exceedinge gladness in the openinge of the verity and
conuertion of the sinner.

4 Worthy is the most meek Lamb (said they) which was cruelly done unto death,
and by his death overcame the world, hell, death, and the devil, to take upon
him the title of all power, heritage, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and
blessing, and to be called of all creatures most mighty, most rich, most wise,
most valiant, most worshipful, most glorious, and most blessed, conueniente
names for the king over al. Yea finally to have ^he universal aucthorytie in
heaven and in the earth, to govern every where, and al to be subject unto him.

Gene. ^ Psalm. 8, Psalm. 148, Ba^^ch 3. Daniel. 3, Gene. 1, Psalm. 148. Deuteronomy.
14 Hester. 1^.
5 I hard also (says saint John) all the creatures that God ever created as the
angeles in heaven, the sun, the Moon, the planites, the stars, the
fyrmament, the fire, the water, the air.

6 And all that was upon the earth, as man, beast, foul, fish, mountains,
valleys, welsprings, floudes, winds, wethers, times, trees, herbs fruits.

7 And all that was under or within the earth, as roots, worms, serpents,
vermin.

8 And all that was in the sea, or that moved in the waters, with all that are
contained in these, each one in his kind saying.

Esa. 6. 1. Timo. 1 Apoca. 14. 1 Timothy 6. Apoca. 1.
9 The everlasting God, which sytteth upon the eternal throne, with power
and majesty, be evermore blessed, worshiptfull, glorious, and almighty.

Romans 8. 2. Cor. 5. Apoca. 21
10 And unto the Lamb (which is his only son Jesus christ) be blessing,
honor, glory, and power from him for evermore. And in this al creatures
desires no longer to be subdued unto the vanity of the wicked, nor yet to
serve the same. But to be wholly delivered from the bondage of corruption, and
in liberty to serve the children of God, to the glory of of him that made
them.

11 To this the four beasts or all the true servants of God here living
answered Amen, Hebre. 1.
or so might it be in effect, as ye have desired.

12 And the.xxiiij. elders, as, Psalm. 134* Ne^e. 8. Hebr. 11. Ephe 2. Apoca. ^.
the patriarks, the Prophets, the Apostles, with other that has passed this
life, fell down flat upon their faces, they submitted them selves.

13 They worshipped, lauded, Apoca. 4* Math* 3. 1. John. 5, Esa. 65,
and gloryfied him that lives for ever and ever, one God in three persons, the
father, the son, and the holy ghost. This signified the Angels and Saints
evermore to be joyous as any thing is done in the creatures to the manifest
glory of God.

The sixth Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, 2, and I heard one of
the iiij. beasts say as it were the noise of thunder. 3. Come, and see. 4. And
I savve and behold, there was a white horse, 5, and he that sat on him had a
bow, 6. and a crown was given unto him, 7. and he went forth co^quering,
and for to overcome.

The Paraphrase. 1
COnsequently (says saint John) as I was beholding these wonders, I saw
that the Lamb (which is the son of God) opened the first of the seven
seals, John. 1, Apoca. 15, Luke. 4, Primacius Apher Ioachim Abbas
declaring the first mystery of the book. These openings betokens not only
the manifestation of Gods truth for seven ages of the world, but also for
the.vij. several times, and after vij. diverse sorts from Christ's death to
the latter end of the world. The first seal was removed, and the mystery
there under contained, made open, when the Apostles and disciples of Christ
abou^da^tly replenished with the holy Ghost, La^bertu^ Act. 2.
did constantly preach the gospel over the universal world.



2 And at the openyng of the said seal (says he) I heard one of the
beasts in shape like a Lion, Marci. 16 Psalm. 18. Apoca. 4. Ezech. 1.
by whom are signified the strong witnesses of Gods verity, by constancy of
faith resembling Christ the very Lion of the stock of Judah, whose voice was
mighty and strong as it had been the noise of a thundering, Hiere. 1, Gene.
49, Psalm. 28. Acto. 2, John. 1. Psalm. 33, Zachar. 6
and vehemently it said unto me.

3 Come hither and see, draw nigh and be taught, believe and thou shall
understand.

4 And anon I saw evidently that there was a white horse, which signifies the
Apostles and first disciples of Christ, for why the scripture does so call
the^. Zach. 10, Apoca. 1. Psalm. 50. Romans 10. Act. 9. Gala. 1.
These horses were white, they were made pure, rightuous, and clean by Jesus
Christ, and bare him by their preaching the world over. Such a white horse to
the glory of God was Paul, when he bear the name of Christ before the
Gentiles, the Kings, and the children of Israel

Math. 2^. Act. 15. Luck. 21. Amos. 9. Eccle. 10. Zach. 9. Psalm. 44 John. 15,
5 He that sat upon this white horse (which was Christ him self) had in his
hand a bow, which figured the hearts of the foresaid Apostles and disciples,
out of whom he fiercely sent forth the arrows of his word into his chosen
people. Their hearts were in his hand, for yt his verities might the more
effectually pass forth, and the more surely light upon his elects. For
without his spirit nothing could they do.

6 From God the father unto him was given a crown of magnificence, honor,
worthiness, and victory, in his resurrection and ascension.

7 And when he had stomaked them by the holy Ghost, Phil. 2. Ephe. 4. Act. 2,
Act. 5, John, 16. 1. John. 5.
to shoot forth his word without fear, he went forward with them by his
grace, conqueryng in them the prince of this world, in process of time by
their doctrine so to overcome him and all his wicked army. Were the
Antichrists never so mad, John. 16. Math. 10. Acto. 4. Act. 5. Acto. 12. 1.
Cor. 15. Sap. 5, John. 9. Act. 5. 1. Cor. ^. Gala. 1. John. 15 John. 8.
torment they never so sore, slay they never so fast, Christ will overcome them.
Let them inhibit his truth, and forbid his Gospel, take, spoil, imprison,
exyle, murder, ha^g, head, drown, and burn, yet will Christ have the victory
over them, though it otherwise seem to the fleshly children of darkness. In
many countries, Cities, and towns, has Gods word been taught, where as it is
now forbidden under the pain of death. Is Christ therefore the weaker? which
chose the weak to confound the strong? No truly.

It has wrought in the^ who^ he has called, and ro^ted in them whom he has
sought. So that the faithful children of Abraham and true Isralites in no wise
can perish nor be taken from Christ.

THE TEXT.
1 And when he opened the second seal, 2. I hard the second beast say, 3.
Come and see, 4, And there went out an other horse that was red. 5. And
power was given to him that sat thereon, 6. to take peace from the earth, 7,
and that they should kill one an other. 8. And there was given unto him a great
svvord,

The Paraphrase.
1 What the estate of the Christian churh was immediately after the Apostels
time, it is under mystery declared in the openinge of the second seal.
Franciscus La^bertus. Luke. 21, 1. John. 2. Act. 20. 2. Pet. 2. Gala. 5,
For so soon as the said Apostles and first Disciples of Christ were taken
from the world, yea and partly in their time also, many pernicious errors did
spring and increase by crafty teachers and subtle seducers in diverse
quarters. Some coupled the law with the gospel, and circumcision with baptime,
to bring Christian liberty into bondage. Some said the general resurrection
was past, to subvert ye ways of the Lord. Some denied him to come in the
flesh. Some brought in ceremonies and beggarly shadows to yoke us with
Iewishe supersticions. 2. Tim. 2. 1. John. 4, 2. John. 1. Gala. 4. 1. Timo. 4
Jude. 1. Gene. 9.
Some forbad marriage as an unclean thing, to bring in all abominations and
filthiness. Some did inhibite meats sanctified of God, under color of
abstinence to set up hypocrisy. Some called Saint Paul an Apostata from the
law. Some taught the Gospel carnally, denying Matthew and John, and fantasied
gospels upon their own brain under the names of Peter, Andrew, Thomas, and
Barthelmew, Mathias, Hebion Cerinthus, Basilides, Ex Eusebio cesari. ^^las^us
Philastri. Guido et Lutzenburgus*
Thadeus, and Barnabas. And of this sort in the Apostles time, was Nicolas of
Antioche, Hermogenes, Hymeneus, Philetus, Alexander, Elymas, Carpocras,
Cerinthus, Hebion, Helion, with their affinytie. And after their time
Basilides, Ualentinus, Heracleon, Cerdon, Mercio^, Apelles, Tacianus, Menander,
Montanus, and other.

1 In signification of this, the Lamb opened this second seal of the book.
Apoca. 5 Ephe. 5. Eccli. 50 Act. 13.
He removed once again the dark clouds of ignorance, he replenyshed with his
grace, and strengthened with his spirit certain of the Greeks and Gentiles
which believed, Histo. ecl. li. 3. ca. 30. Eusibus Cesarien. Hioronimus.
Tritemius.
to confute the errors, and condemn the lies of those false teachers and
deceiuable Antichrists. Of this number was Ignacius, Policarpus, Theophilus,
Antiochenus, Justinius Martyr, Agrippa, Castorius, Aristides, Quadratus,
Meliton, Apollenaris, Theodocion, Hyrenius, Appollonius, Melcyades, Rhodon, and
diverse other. These boldly confessed Christ, Heb. 1^. Actu. 9 John. 1 John. 15*
they taught his verity, they put aside the darkness, they ministered the light,
they confounded the adversaries both with tongue and pen.

Apoc. 4. Exo, 29 Rom, 12
2 And when the Lamb had thus opened this second seal declaryng the mystery
thereof, I heard the second beast (says S. John) which was to my sight a
calfe, signifiyng those ministers which had mortified and wholly given up them
selves as a sacrifice for the preaching of the same, saying also unto me.

3 Approach nigher, and look, perceive, John, 1* Psalm. 44* Zacha. 1* Actu. 20,
Mat. 16* 1, John. 2, John, 16 Math. 23 Act. 16* Mat. 10 John. 16 2, Pet. ^ 2,
Cor. ^^, John, 10* Au^^ 20,
and take heed, mark and bear it away.

4 And sodeinly I saw yt there went forth an other horse all diverse from the
first, for he was outwardly read. This horse resembles the said false
teachers, borne and brought up in flesh and blood taught of the same. Such went
from the Apostles and were not of them, they cursed ye true preachers out of
their sinagogs, they persecuted them from city to city, they accused them as
ye sturrers up of sedicio^, they caused ye rulers to impriso^ the^, scorge
the^, and flea them, thinking thereby they did God high service. They turned ye
grace of god into beastlines, and brought in lying sects. These were those
false brethren and deceitful masters whom ye scripture calls strangers,
hirelings, thieves, scorners, and ravening wolves, not sparing the flock. These
were those blood thirsty doctors and puffed up prelates, which are partakers
with their fathers in the blood of the Prophets, whose succession for a token
of the same is clothed in read scarlet to this day. John. 11. Math. 25. Apoca.
18 Acto. 13. 2. Tim. 4, 1. Tim. 1. Act. 19. Act. 23.
Such a red horse was Barichu, which resisted Paul and Barnabas at Paphos. So
was Alexander ye copper smith which did Paul much displeasure. So was
Demetrius which moved sedicion against him, so was Ananias the high priest that
commanded him to be smitten, so was Tertullus the Orator that accused him to
the debitie, Act. 24. 1. John, 1,
so was Diotrephes that sought the preeminence, and reproved John.

5 And power was given to him that sat upon this horse* By the sufferance of
God to try his electes, the wicked rulers and Princes of this world persuaded,
and set forward by these bloody beasts, Ezech. 23 Sapi. 3. 3. Reg. 22,
Eusebius ce^ar^en. Philip. 4.
has exercysed all cruelty, fircenesse, and tyranny.

6 To take from the earth the sweet peace of God and Christian unity, which
made of the Jews and Gentiles one people, Ephe. 2. Ephe. 4. Romans 12, 1. John.
2. John. 18, Romans 13. 2. Pete. 2.
and knit us altogether through faith and baptime, as members of one body in
Christ Jesus. This peace have they broken, this unity of faith have they torn,
this coat of Christ without seame have those soldiers divided, and abusing
the power (which is the high ordinance of God) they have mayntayned the
manifold sects of division.

7 Of whom one has killed an other, Josephus Platina. Baptista. Panecius
as in the destruction of Jerusalem the unchristian gentile slew the
unfaithful Jew. And now in ye church of Antichrist one Bishop poysoneth an
other, one priest an other, one religious as other.

8 And unto this terrible horse man was there given a great swerd. Job. 34.
Exo. 14. Eusebius cesarien. Hermauns contract^^
Long has the Lord suffered those tyrants to raygne, much mischief to work,
great cruelty to use. Much was the persecution, tyranny, and murder, under
Nero, Domicianus, Traianus, Aurelius, Seuerus, Maximinus, Decius, Ualerianus,
Aurelianus, Dioclecianus, Maxencius, Iulianus, and such like, and much
christian blood in their time was shed.

THE TEXT.
1 And when he opened the third seal, 2. I heard the third beast say. 3. Come,
and see. 4. And I beheld, and lo a black horse. 5. And he that sat on him, had
a pair of Balaunces in his hand. 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of
the.iiij. beasts say. 7. A measure of wheat for a penny, 8. and three measures
of barley for a penny. 6. And oil and wine see thou hurt not.

The Paraphrase.
1 Under trope or secret mystery of the third seal opening, Albertus Magnus.
Math. 10, Luck. 6. Regino ^rumiensis. ^arolus ^ouillus
is specyfied the estate general of the chrystian church, after the time of
the martirs and strong witnesses of Jesus, which were most cruelly afflicted and
slain for confessing his name and truth. Not that the Martyrs were only and
that time, and not before and after, but for so much as they did than most
abound.

For in the Rome church besides other, were slain all the mynisters of the
word or Bishops as they call them, from the time of Peter unto the days of
Siluester, to the number of xxxij. not one of them escaped. After their time as
the tyranny of rulers was stilled, Lambertus Shafnaburgensis. Carolus Bouillus.
and their gagyng crueltye pacyfyed, there arose an other fashioned sort all
diverse from the other, given to bodily ease and delights of the world. More
desirous, Sigebertus Gemblacensis.
were they to rest then to labor, to sleep then to work, to take then to
give, to bankette, then to preach, to dally then to dye. Benno Cardinalis.
Then strove they among them selves for the premacy, them sought they
ambiciously to reign over all. VVernerus Carthusiensis.
Not one Martyr was then among them, unless he were a stynkyng Martyr made
among themselves.

But all were confessors. For preaching was laid a part, and pride had take up
his room. Yet were they not long without contradiction. For then arose
heresies and scismes, sects, and deuisions, and were spread the world over,
like as ye histories mencioneth. The Sabellians, A do vien nensis, et Beda.
Cirillus Augustinus Ciprianus Hieronimus. Sigebertus Gemblace^sis. Vincencius
Antonius
Arrianes, Eunomyanes, Macedonianes, Priscillyanes, Nestoryanes, and
Euticyanes, then diversely erred in faith and opynion of the Godhead. The
Manichees dispysed the old Testament. The Donatistes held it necessary to
be rebaptised. The Pelagianes taught that men might merit heaven without
grace, with such like. Then Scismes were plentuous among bishops every where.
In the church of Rome were many alterations about the election, much strife,
and division was for the Papacy, betwixt Liberius and Felix, Damasus, and
Urcisinus, Bonifacius and Eulalius, Simachus and Laurencius, Bonifacius and
Dyoscorus, Platina. Nauclerus et alii.
Constantine and Philip, Eugenius and Sisinius, Formosus and Stephanus, Sergius
and Christophorus, Benedicte and Leo, Gregory, and Johan, with diverse more.

In the which some were noted of heresy, some accused of incontinency, some
called insolent, some Rustical, Abbas vrspergen sis. Iacobus bergomensis.
Hermannu^ s^edel.
some rude. Some were accurssed, some deposed, some slaundered, some exiled,
some poisoned, some stra^geled. Some had their eyes thrust out, some were most
spitefully murdered. No color, cautel, craft, subtlety, nor vyolence
unsought to fulfill their mischievous purpose.

1 The Lamb therefore opening the third seal, disclosed the mystery thereof
unto John.

2 Which heard the third beast in simylitude of a man, Apoc^. 4. Romans 8.
Ambrosius Ansbertus Zacha. 6. Math. 24. 2. Peter. 2,
betokenyng such preachers as has wisdom in the spyrite saying unto him.

3 Draw nygh and perceive, consider and way.

4 And anon he was ware and beheld a black horse, in figure representyng the
aforesaid heretics, and vnpure mynisters, ambicious Prelates, and false
teachers, full of errors, lies, pride, and uncleanness. Upon these and
such other rydeth Satan the world over, for he is their master, Job. 41.
John. 8 Hiere. 29 John. 18.
Lord, King, and father. Such Christophers of the diuill were Phassur and
Semeias in ye old law, Annas and Cayphas in the new law, Mahomet and the
Pope in our time, with all such prelates, priests, Moonks, doctors, and other
spiritual dowsipers, Marsilius Patauinus Ioannes Hus in Apoca.
as sets forth themselves with arrogancy, pride, pomp, glory, and
magnificence of this world, not sincerely preaching Gods word.

John, 14 Osee. 12. Prove. 11, 1. Tim. 4. ^, John. 4.
5 He which sat upon that horse, or that reygneth in this congregation has in
his hand a deceiptfull pair of Balaunces of abominable judgments, waying
all things according to the doctrine of error and lies of hypocrites, not
proving the spirits whether they be of God or no

6 And after this vision (I heard says saint Johan) a voice among the iiij.
beasts. Apoca. 4 Math. 28 Acto. 1
No time has there been, wherein the faithful believers and constant
witnesses of the verity in this life, has not resisted the masters of lies,
and confounded their errors, preserving the undefiled scriptures. 2, Pet. 2 1.
Cor. 2.
In those days were among the Greeks, Origin, Eusebius, Eusebius
Cesariensis Cassiodorus. Hieronimus Benadius Isidorus Tritemius
Athanasius, Didimus, Gregorius, Nazianzenus, Cirillus Basilius, Ioa^nes
Chrisostomus, Hisichius, Euagrius, Ioa^nes Damascenus, and Theophilactus. And
among the Latins were Tertulyane, Cypriane, Lactancius, Hilarious, Prudencius,
Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Augustinus, Orosius, Sedulius, Prosper, and Beda, with
such like. Psalm. 6^ Esaie. 53 1. Tim. 6
What though all they in many points have erred to declare them selves men,
and least their authority should be taken among the people, above ye
authority of gods word.

7 This is the voice which come from those holy beasts, Esaie. 52 Hiere. 2^
Ezech. 4 Eutherius Lugdunensis VVestmerus.
or faithful servants of the Lord. A measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny also. The wheat is the new Testament,
fair, pleasant, and sweet in the eating.

8 The barley is the old, more gross, heavy, and heard of digestion, yet is
their price all one. So much in value is the one as the other. So precious are
the scriptures of the old law for the Christian erudicion as of the new,
Psalm. 18, 2. Tim. 3. Psalm. 118, Esa. 40. Gala. 3 Marci. 16 Romans 3.
for both they are the word, verity, spyrite, and promise of God. So perfect
also is the one as the other, (each grain in his kind considered) as the law
to co^dempne, and the Gospel to save. So necessary is it to the sinner to
know his fall, as to see his raise. In that the barley is.iij. measures, and
ye wheat but one, is signyfied that the old Testament contains the law,
Psalms and prophecies, Origines Hieronimus Romans 1. 1. John. 4. 1. Tim. 4. 1.
John, 5. 2. Tim. 2, Math. 4. 1. Tim. 4.
and the new the only doctrine of Christ, confessyng altogether.iij. distinct
persons in one Godheade against the aforesaid heretics and erroneous prelates.
Whenever therefore the dyuill goes forth with his black horse or deceiptfull
doctors, to subuerte the ways of the Lord with his untrue balaunces of crafty
interpretacio^s and false judgments in the scriptures, attend you to this
voice of the faithful fathers, Psalm. 118, John. 8.
and stand by the truth, which is the only price of both testaments, with
Christ which fulfilled the law, and commanded us to search the Scriptures, and
with his Apostles, John. 5. Act. 2. Hebr. 9. Psalm. 4.
which alleged the same. When the figure troubles you, confer it with the
verytie, and the shadow with the light.

9 The dulcet wine and the fragrant oil see thou hurt not, says the said
voice, Deuteronomy. 12 Eccle. 4^ Esa, 61, Luk, 10, Franciscus Lambertus in libro de
prophecia Apoca. 22,
hinder not the word of God, which is the sweet wine that replenished the
heart with gladness, and the wholesome oil that comfort the soul in
trouble. Delicious it is in aduersytie, and solacious in all weakness.
Corrupt not the text with false gloses, take not from us the sweetness
thereof, defraud, us not of the fruitful Savor. Let the text be whole, the
sense vncorrupt, and the judgment right. And that shall well be if nothing be
added unto it, nor nothing taken from it.

THE TEXT.
1 An when he opened the fourth seal. 2* I hard the voice of the fourth beast
say. 3. Come and see, 4, And I looked, and behold a pale horse. 5. And his name
that sat on him was death. 6. And hell follovved after him. 7. And power
was given anto them over the fourth part of the earth. 8. To kill with svvord
and with hunger. 9* And with death of the beasts of the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 In the fowrth Seal opening is under secret figure mentioned the universal
estate of the christen Church after the increase of the aforesaid heretykes,
Ioannes Hus in aliquot loca Apoca. VVernesus carthusian^s in fa^ciculo.
and the raise of the ambicious Prelates. And though the Arryanes and
Eutycianes with such like Heretyks were than put to silence, and all things
pacyfyed, partlye by the publyke power, and partlye by the continual
disputations and writings of the faithful Doctors, and catholyke Fathers,
yet continued the Bishops still in their vanyties, and the Prelates in their
pride, Ioannes de molinis in speculo ca. 6.

Carolus bouillus de septem etatibus mu^di. ca. 67.


whereby the truth was blemished and the light had a sore Eclips. Daily they
sought for new promotions. Evermore they compassed to augment their dignyties.
Continual was their study to get prehemine^ce, to win honor, and to obtain
superiorytie, not without the destruction of kingdoms, the utter decay of
communalties, and unspeakable murder of peoples.

John the Archebyshoppe of Constantinople contended to be the vniue^sal
Patriarch, Antonius sabellicus Raphael. Volatera. Paulus Diaconus Bibliande^*


Boniface the third of that name Bishop of Rome, took upon him to be the
head Bishop of all the world, and Gods only Uicar in earth,

Mahomet boasted him self to be the great Prophet and messenger of GOD.

John. 18. 2 John. 1. Ioannes Aunius Ioannes Nauclerus
Thus was Christ's coat without seame among them divided, and his church most
rufully dispersed. Thus out of ye corrupted and depraved scriptures took ye
Jews their Talmud, ye Saracens their Alchorane, and the Bishops their popish
laws and decrees. Then followed innumerable sects of perdicion under the
romish pope, in Europa, under Mahomet the false Prophet in Afryca, and under
prester John in Asia, which with their execrable tradicions and rules banished
Christ and his pure doctrine for ever. Martinus Lutherus Sigebertus, Platina.
Gregorius Odilocluniacensis Martinus Carsulanus
Than set they up song in the church with Latin service, bell ringing, and
Organ playinge. Than builded they monasteries, auaunced Images, invented
purgatory, not without many strange reuelacions. Than came in that ceremony,
and that, as sensing of Images, Procession, and holy water, with candles,
ashes, and palms. Than were shaven crowns commanded, holy ornaments devised,
marriage and meats inhibited, and hallowing of churches practiced. At the last
crepte in the worshipping of relics and shrines, Ranulphus Cestrensis Ioannes
Stella. Odilo clun^ Paulus Diaconus.
with holy oil and cream, with the paschall and paxe, with feasts and
dedications, with latins, masses and dirges for the dead, and many great
miracles followed. Tha^ were kings deposed and made Moonkes, Emperors put
down and parrish priests set up. Robertus gaguinus.
No gospel might then be taught, but to maintain this ware for advantage.
Uniuersities were then builded and general studies founded the world over,
with all kinds of crafty learning to uphold this new Christen relygyon or
prestish supersticion. Hector Boethius Martinus Lut^erus Genesis 1. Luke. 12*
The Antichrists thus spread and their kingdom well set forward, the light
was clearly extincted, and darkness over went the whole world.

1 Much meruayled always the poor chosen flock of christ, and were greatly
troubled in their minds, Apoc^. ^. Daniel. 1^*
to behold this great confusion, till the Lord opened unto them the fourth
seal of his book, in the which all was written from the beginning. Albertus
Magnus. Zach. 6. Math. 6. Esa. 1.
In that Seal openinge, the Lord showed what the head rulers of his Church
were, even very hypocrites, rightly compared unto a pale Horse. For after their
dissembling manner they showed sad countinaunces outwardlye to appear
fasting, and babled very much to seem deuonte men.

2 And as the Lamb had opened the fowrth Seal (says Saint John) I hard
the voice of the fowrth beast, Apoc. 4. Daniel. 7. Math. 4 John, 1, Apoca. 1.
which seemed unto me an Egle representing those godly believers that are most
highly desirous of the glory of GOD.

3 Come hither said that voice. Note what thou shall see here, and enprent it
well in thy mind.

4 And sa I looked forth, I beheld a pale Horse, Apoca. 6. Apoca. 2 Math. 6.
1. John. 3.
whom I took for the universal Synagoge of hypocrites or dissembling church
of Antichriste, pale as men without health, and bleyk as men without that
fresh life which is in Christ Jesus.

5 The name of him which sat upon this pale Horse was death, for their
doctrine is death and dampnation. Rom, 8 Luke. 12. Math. 6 Math. 23.
What brings hypocrisye with him, but destruction of health? What carries
dissimulation, but the utter decay of life? Are their last fruits any other
then confusion and dyspayre.

6 For why hell comes after them to swallowe in those that are taught by
them. Esaie. 5. Prove. 1. Luke. 20 Apoca. 17. Roma. 3* Hebre. 10.
Eternal dampnation does follow them to eat them up for ever, whom they shall
deceive. Such is the final reward of those cursed hypocrites that treads
down Gods truth, and destroys his word under a feigned pretense of the
contrary, Luke. 11 Prove. 1^.
God grant them therefore once to open their eyes, and to consider it, that
they are the Horses of death, least Hell here after devour them.

7 Unto these gaudish hypocrites and beastly Antichrists whith are Psalm. ^^.
the horse of death and carries all to darkness, John Hus in sermonibus de
antichristo. Apoca. 9.
and dampnation, power is given (which is the sufferaunce of God) upon the
fourth part of the earth. A great part of the world shall they destroy, much
people by the^ shall perish and be lost.

8 After diverse sorts shall they deprive them of the life everlasting. Some
shall they slay with the sword of their false doctrine, Apoc. 13. Chrisostomus
Colos. 2. Amos. 8. Math. 15. John. 6. Luke, 12. Math, 16, Luke, 3, Math, 23,
Wicleus Psalm. 13. 2. Peter. 2, Math. 7 Psalm. 73,
having a glorious shine of wisdom in supersticion and deuilishnesse Some
shall they famishe for want of GODS true word, which is the bread of
Children, and the lyuinge food of the soul.

9 Some will they also poison with the contagious leaven of their pestilent
laws and tradicions, which are daily ministered and taught by the vile vermin
of the earth, their suffraganes, Archedecons, officials, doctors, ministers,
false preachers, curates, persons, parrish priests, and religions, very
beastly both of life and study. Lord ones deliver from these deceiptfull and
ravenous wolves, which are never satisfied, thy poor servants that confess
thy holy name. Amen.

THE TEXT.
1 And when he opened the fifth seal, 2, I saw under the altar, 3. The souls
of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
had,

4. And they cried with a loud voice, saying 5. How long taryest thou, 6,
Lord, holy and true, to judge* 7. And to avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth? 8. And long white garments were given unto every one of the^. 9.
And it was said unto the^. 10. That they should rest for a little season. 11.
until the number of their fellows and brethren, 12. And of them that should
be killed (as they were) were fulfilled,

The Paraphrase.
1 Evident it is by that has been seen and said before in these four horses,
what the estate of the christen church was, and is now in these latter days.
Zacha. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Jude. 1. Math. 15. 2. Tim. 6, Apoca. 8. Genesis 6, Esa. 1.
Math, 23,
Such horrible confusion has the Antichrists made with their wicked laws and
decrees, and with their deceiptfull doctrine of errors and lies to uphold
their filthy kingdom of pride, sloth, hypocrisy, and beastlynes, that
scarcely is any thing clean, pure, and godly. Now do they nothing but slay.
None other study have they in these days, but to persecut, emprison, and
famish, to burn, head and hang. Now have they obtained to enter the judgment
hall, John. 18, Act. 5. (...) 19. Isa. 10. (...) 5, Act 20. Apoca. 18
and to sit upon life and death, without defiling of themselves. Now may they
both a accuse and judge, both indite and condemn, and yet not soil their
consecrate hands. If any control their customs, or say against their
witchcraftes, they are ready to run over him with death, whom they carye to
slay both soul and body.

Never was this more evident, then after the time of Berengarius in the
Waldeanes, Bernardus^ Lurzenburgensis.
Publicans, and Albygeanes, of whom an hundred thowsande were slain, an
hundredth and four score br^nt for that they would not abjure, besides that is
seen now in this age, so many poor innocents murdered. For no where is it
lawful rightly without supersticion to confess the name and verytie of
Christ, a few Cities except, 2. Tim 3. 2. Pete. 3. John, 12 Sopho. 3 Apoca. 11.
Daniel. 11.
unless men will ve torn of these wolves. And thus is it like still to
continue to ye end of ye world, both by this prophecy, and also by the
prophecye of Daniell.

1 This has the Lord showed in mystery unto John in the fifth seal openinge,
Sebastianus meyer in apocalipsi^^
by whom are meant the true Christen believers at this time so well as at al
other times sense Christ's assension.

John, ^, Math, 13, John, 15, Psalm. 50, Heb, 9,
2 And when the Lamb opened the fifth seal, or declared in figure what should
be ye estate of that time to assertaine his chosen friends thereof, I saw
(says Saint John) under the Altar of God, which is Christ (upon whom the
whole sacrifice of our redemption was offered.)

3 The souls or spirits of those constant believers, which through the
violent handlynge of the before said false prelates and Antichrists were
cruelly put to death by diverse manner of torments, John, 16, Math. 23, Sapi, 3,
Psalm. 118, Apoca. 1, John. 14, 1. These. 4 Act, 7. Acto. 17 Psalm. 5^. Matthew. 23.
1. Cor. 1 Phil, 1,
not only for ye undefiled word of god, but also for ye sincere testimonye of
Jesus, which they had by the gift of his only spirit. Under this Altar remain
all they which have bin killed for that witness of truth. In his faith they
slept and still rest now in his hope. In him now they live for whom they once
dyed. Under his shadow they dwell. Under his wings they flock, under his
couerte they cloister. He is their comfort, keeper and defender. With him are
they now, whose presence they evermore coueted.

4 In that they cried with a loud voice, Math, 2^, Apoca. 19 Sapi. 3. Gen, 4,
Leuit. 20. Psalm. 10, Prou. 6.
is signified that their innocent death fercely asks and requires the great
indignation, vengance, and terrible judgment of GOD, upon those tirauntes,
like as did the blood of Abell upon that murder Cayne.

5 And this is their daily cry. O Lord God almighty, 2. Peter. 2. Psalm. 25.
Hiere. 17. Iohel. 2
so holy thou art that thou hate all evil, so true and so just that thou
abhorrest al lies and perverse doctrine, so manifest is the filthy life of the
spiritual antichrists that thou see it, so euidente is their unshamefast
cruelty upon thy servants, that thou know it. Yet do you leave them
unpunished, and suffer them uncorrected. How long time will it be ere thou
judge them to dampnation? What years will thou take ere thou revenge our blood?

Math. 25. 4. (...). 15. Psalm. 18, Math. 12, Apoca. 11.
6 Sure it is that thy laws are holy, and thy words are faithful and true.
Why do thou then permit these proud homicides and spightfull murderers to
defyle them with their errors, and blaspheme them with their lies: Kyllyng up
thy servants without pity, 1. Tim. 4. Luke. 11, ^ These. 2. Apoca. 17 Phili. 3.
for holding with them, and reigning here as Gods upon earth in
ambiciousnesse, vain glory, pomp, glotony, and le^herye, with other
abhomynable vices. Thus these beastly bellye Gods does daily despise thee. They
tread down thy testimonies and shed innocent Christen blood in despite of
thee.

Iohel. 3. Daniel. 1^ Deuteronomy 32 Psalm. 78, Ezech. 5 Romans 2.
7 Look once upon them therefore according to thy promise, and see thou
reward them according to their wickedness. This reuengement do we not ask
for our scath, but for the contempt of thy truethe. Not for our harm, but for
the blasphemy of thy name.

8 And long white garments (says Saint John) very large and comely were
given unto every one of them. A full innocencye, Eccle. 45, Apoca. 4. Apoca.
22, Apoca. 1. Hebr. 1. John. 12, Eccle. 5.
perfectness, and cleerenesse was powered over them, and abundantly spread upon
them. Endued they were with an inestimable pureness by Christ, for whose
veryties sake they dyed.

With him they are now in peace, joy, and sweetness. But whether they be in
full glory before God or no, that will we not temerously define. Sure we are
that they be delivered from all pain, sorrow, and care, Apoca. 7^ 1. Cor. 15.
Romans 8. Sap. 3. Psalm. 15. Isaie. 64.
and that they clearly be assertayned so have that glory complet both in body
and soul at the latter day. More sweet is their estate for ye time, yea more
delycious and pleasant, then all the delights, prosperytye, and wealth that
ever was yet in this world.

9 And as they were in this sweet solace, much desirous of their bodies
delyueraunce from corruption, Romans 8. Ephe. 3
they were requyr^d by these secret heavenly mocyon of Christ (as we are in
this life by the outward word. Act. 13 Psalm. 4. 1. These. 4,
)

Titum. 2. John, 17, Luke. 21. Apoca. 20
10 Patiently to pause for a while and quietously to rest for a season.

11 Until such time as the complet number of their constant fellows and
faithful brethren.

12 Yea and of all those poor creatures that should be killed by these
vnsaciat blud suckers for his truths sake, like as they were before should be
fulfilled and wholly accomplished according to the eternal prediffinition of
God. Act. 13, Psalm. 15,
And so much the rather to content themselves with their peaceable and quietous
estate for their brethrens sake, that it should not belong ere their death
were revenged, Esa. 61 Iaco. 5 Apoca. 21 Roma. 8. ^, John. 3
and they restored to a full tranquillity. For nothing in comparison are the
sufferinges of this time, to that glory which shall be showed unto the chosen
sort in that day. Let no man think where as Christ has willed those souls to
rest, that they sleep in death, Psalm. ^^. John. 14, Ezech. 43, John. 8. Phil.
3, 1. John, 2 Apoca. 1. 1. Timo. 2, 1. John. 2* John. 15, 2. Match. 1^ Romans 8.
Hebr. ^. John. 5,
for they rest in him which is life. Out of him they are not, he is their
Altar, he is their covert. They live, they decerne, and in sweetness they
abide the latter day, and all under him. Their white garment of innocence they
have only by him. Worship him then and not them. Pray and call upon him and
not upon them. For he is the only meditour, and general advocate to God the
father, so well for them as for you. Nothing can they do but by him. Their
office is not to hear suitors causes, nor to go to and fro, but still to rest
abiding the glad day of their deliverance. It is Christ's only office to
receive all complayntes to pleate them, and to judge them.

THE TEXT.
1 And I beheld when he opened the six^ seal, 2. and lo, there was a great
earth quake, 3. and the sun was as black as a sack cloth made of hear. 4.
And the moon waxed even as blood. 5. And the stars of heaven fell unto the
earth, 6. even as a fig tree casts from her her figs, when it is shaken
of a mighty wind. 7. And heaven vanyshed away, as a scroull when it is
rolled together. 8. And all mountains and yles, were moved out of their
places. 9. And the kings of the earth, and the great men and the rich men, 10.
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every
free man, 11. hid themselves in dens, and in rocks of the hills, 12. and
said to the hills and rocks, 13. Fall on us, 14. and hyde us from the
presence of him that sits on the seat, 15. and from the wrath of the
Lamb. 16. for the great day of his wrath is come. 17. And vvho^ can endure it.

The Paraphrase.
1 Not yet is the pale horse down nor his iniquity ended, but still he he
rages the world over. John Hus in aliqnot loca apocalipseos.

Wicleus de sermon domini in monte. li. ^ Daniel. 8, ^* These. 2.


Still raygneth the Antichrists, with their hypocrisy and false doctrine, the
Pope here in Europa, and other not all unlike unto him in Asia and Africa. But
for that Europe is only known unto us, of that will we only dyffyne. In
naming the Pope we mean not his person, but the proud degree or abhominacion
of the papacy. The great Antychriste of Europa is the king of faces, the
Prince of hipocrysie, the man of sin, the father of errors, and the master
of lies, the Romish Pope. He is the head of the said pale horse, VVicle^s in
supplemento trialogi.

Franciscus Lambertus in comme^ta rijs regul^ minori carum.


whose body are his Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archebishops, Bishops, fat
prebends, doctors, priests, Abbottes, Pryors, Moonks, Chanons, Friars,
Nuns, Pardoners, and Proctours, with all the sects and and shorn swarm of
perdicion, and with all those that consent with them in the Romish faith,
obeying their wicked laws, decrees, bulls, pryuileges, decretales, rules,
tradicions, tytles, pompes, degrees, blessings, counsayles, and constitucions,
contrary to Gods truth. The wickedness of these has so darkened the blind
world, Sebastianus Franctertia part chro^icarum.
that scarce was left one sparkle of the verity, or of the true Christian
faith. No where can men dwell to greater loss of their souls health, the^
under their abhominacions.

1 This know they well whom the lamb has delivered from their dark sinagoge,
^. Cor. 6. Act. 2, Apoca. 4, 2. Cor. 4. Apoca. 18, Luke. 1. Psalm. 106
and to whom he has in these days opened the sixte seal of the book,
raising up the spirits of many to detect by his holy word their shameful
abominations. Blessed be the name of that Lord, which has now so mercifully
vysited his poor people from above, sending his word under ye tipe or figure
of this Lamb, to open unto them at this sixth time of darkness, the vj. seal
of the hydden mysteries of the book. I looked yet farther (says saint John)
and as the Lamb Christ disclosed the sixte seal to manifest the cleernesse of
his truth, Apoca. 5, Ephe. 4, John. 1, Luke. 12, ^. These. 2
to show the estate of his church, anon I beheld a merueylous earthquake
arise. Most lively was this fulfilled such time, as William Courteney the
Archbishop of Caunterburie with Antichrists sinagoge of sorcerers sat in
co^sistorie against Christ's doctrine in John Wycleue. VValde^ Polidor^^ lib.
20.
Mark the year, day, and hour, and ye shall wonder at it.

2 The Gospel once preached, and the verity sincerely opened, Math. 24, 1.
These. 2. Luke. 12, Act. 4. John. 16. Apoca. 2,
(whose nature is to condemn their supersticions) the earthly and carnal
Antychristes swell, fret, and wax mad, they threaten, curse, and blaspheme,
they run upon the faithful mynisters with terror, cruelty, and fiercens,
having at their hand the aid of wicked princes and blind governors. Aenas
Silnius.
Such a terrible earth quake was the general counsel of Constance against John
Hus and Hierome of Prage, and here in England against the King (when he set
forth the Gospel) the sedicious rising of Lincolneshere, and the traitorous
uproar of Yorkshiere, in their pylgrimage without grace, where as neither
wanted the false counsel of Bishops, the riches of Abbeyes, An experyment
of our time in England. Aduersus has sunt scripta Morisoni
and benifices, nor yet ye cruel hearts of priests. A thousand bows and as
many bills, beside other weapons were there among priests and religious to
one poor Testament of Christ to subdue the verity. Yet has the Lamb
ouercomen them, Apoca. 17. 2, Cor. 1, Sebastianus meyer. VVicleuus Psalm. 2,
Act. 4, Luke, 2. ^. Peter. 2,
and declared their great wisdom in that enterpryce foolishness, like as he
did also in Germany among them, which maintained the same spiritual quarrel.
Yet is not this earth quake pacifyed, but still they rise up against Christ and
his word, and daily they counsel together to condemn his truth, that we
should know him to be the sign of contradiction, the stumbling stone, and the
rock of reproach.

Mala. 4 Hebre. 1. ^. John. 1. Eccle. 42 2. Cor. 4. Iohel. 2. ^. Match. 1 Ephe.
4.
3 The Sun appeared so black as a sack cloth made of heaire. What though
Christ being the clear son of ryghtuousnesse, and the shynyng Image of God,
can not be dark in him self, no more then can the material son in his own
nature, yet may his clerenesse beholde^ from us by the mystes of false
doctrine, like as is the suns brightness by the shadow of the clouds. For
the more men delight in ceremonial tradicions, the blynder they are, and the
less knowledge they have of God. To them seems not Christ the fairest among
men, well colored and beutifull, Psalm. 44. Canti. 5. 1. Cor. 1. Hiere. 44.
Baruch. 6 John. 4. 1. John, 3. Mich. ^.
and gentle as a Lamb, but ill favored, black, and stubborn. And therefore
they have no mind to him. They rather seek help, health, and light of other
then of him. They think it much better to pray to dead Saints, and offer to
Idolles, then to call upon God ^n spirit and verity, and to help their ^oore
neighbor at his need. More ^leasure they have to follow men's ^reames, the^
the verity of God. For that is to the^ black as ye heiry sack does. It is
dark, Esa. ^. 1. Cor. 1. Iohel. 2. Cant, 6.
rough and foolish unto them, they can perceive no beutie in (...).

^ The Moon became altogether as ^lud. Apoca. 1^. Math. 16 John, 16. 2. Tim. 4.
The church being sometime fair ^s ye Moan, and taking her light of christ,
(...) now waxed all carnal. Now is she taught only of flesh and blood,
refusing the doctrine of God and his spirit. Now reigns every where the
corrupt fantasies of men, a few places except. And sure we are that neither
flesh nor blood shall obtain the kingdom of God. Nevertheless yet all the
world has not peryshed in this bloody church. ^. Cor. 15.
2. Reg. ^^. Romans 11, Gala. 4. Psalm. 61. Polidorus Virgilius
Always has there been some that has had the spirit of the children of God,
what though they have erred sore in many things. Though Benedict, Bernarde,
and Bruno, Alberte, Francis, and Dominicke, with many such other, were far
out of square from the rule of Christ's Gospel, yet doubt I it not, but the
mercy of God has saved the^ through faith for Jesus Christ's sake. In the
midst of false doctrine and diuilishe tradicions he has preserved them
like as he preserved the three children, Ephe. 2. Romans 8, John. 18, Daniel, 3.
Franciscus La^bertus, li. 2. in Apocalipsim.
in Daniell from the heat of the burning furnace. Though all at that time were
blood through cruel decrees, yet were not all men so taken before God, for then
should none have been saved, none should have possessed his heavenly kingdom.

5 And the stars from heaven fell down upon the earth. Math, 24, 1. Cor. 4.
Matthew. 5. Daniel, 12 1. Timo. 4 Romans 1.
The ministers of Gods word which should declare his righteousness, and be the
lights of the world, were fallen from ye heavenly doctrine of Christ, and from
the sincere scriptures, to worldly learning and earthly fantasies. Nothing can
be more evident then this, 1. Timo. 6 2. Tim. 2,
specially to them that has read the tryfling works of the Sophisters,
sentencyoners, school doctors, Canonistes, and summystes. As are Dons,
Dorbell, and Durande, Thomas of Aquine, Gerarde, and Gyles of Rome,
Bonauenture, Baco^thorpe, and Guido, Caldrinus, Bobius, and Baldus, Panormius,
Rosellus and Roxius, Ioannes Tritemi^s Arnoldus Bostius Iacobus Bergome^
Agrippa*
with an infinite rabble of such dyrtie dottages, and filthy dregs. Besides
the great heap of the foolish sermons of Barnardyne and Uincent, Pomerij and
Soccij, Mallyard and Barlet, De voragine and de Hungaria, Discipuli and Dormi
secure, Uade mecunt, and Rapiunt hinc inde, with all such beastly beggerie and
lousie learning.

1. John, 2. Esa. 34. Ose. 2, Luke, 8. Primasius Ansbertus Haymo. 2* Tim. 4.
6 These stars has thus myserably of a long time fallen, like as does the
infected figs when the fig tree is shaken of a mighty strong wynd. Found
fickle vanities, desire of worldly promotions, fear to have displeasure of
friends, adversity, vexation, and trouble, with such other blastes here, has
caused the unprofitable instructers of the people to fall from Gods heavenly
verity unto fables, lies, tryfles, and most pestilent wicked errors.

7 So that heaven has vanished away from them, Esa. 34, Amos. 8, Psalm. 49,
Romans 1. 2. These. 2. Psalm. 11,
as does a scroule when it is rolled up together. True preaching of the word
which is very heaven, has been withdrawn, the verity has been closed up.
Christ has take his leave, the spirit of God has forsaken them, the sincere
faith has failed, Christian works has decayed, when their dark divinity,
dead ceremonies, and crooked customs of their fathers has been in place.
Nothing has remained spiritual, Franciscus Lambertus Sebastianus meyer. John
Hus.
Godly, heavenly, holy, rightuous, wholesome, nor worthy our christian vocacion
among their solemn shadows and sacred sorceryes. If it has, it was never
yet seen. And that know they full well, which has unfeignedly received
Christ's Gospel.

8 All mountains and yles were removed from their places. Abacuc. 3 3. John.
1, Math. 12, Wicleus in lib. de ecclesia et membris.
Not only the high minded Antichrists, but also the dyssembling hypocrites
are enforced many times and against their wills, compelled by the open verity
and evident scriptures; to deny that before they highlye affyrmed, and to grant
that before they highly denied. The Bishop of Room was before. Gods vicar and
head of the church, he is now neither of both. They had sometime a purgatory,
Martinus Lutherus de tradicionibus sugiendis. Daniel. 8, Ioannes Gocchius*
and now they have none. Pardons are forgotten, pylgrimage is not spoken of,
Faith in Christ now justifies without their vain will works. They have put
man to death for that they now affirm, yet are they not ashamed of that cruel
murder. I hope in a while they shall out of more places, and grant will they
nill they, to more christian veryties, though their selves be never the nigher
salvation, for that they do it not of good will, but compelled.

9 The Kings of the earth, more looking for their own prehemynence then for
the glory of God, Psalm. 2, Esa. 1, Ioannes VVicleuus in suotria logo Joan.
Hus.
the great men more seeking their own pleasures, then the common wealth of the
people, the rich men oppressing the poor.

10 The Captains deceyuing the commons, the strong men overthrowing the weak,
every bond servant doing untrue service, and every free master ungodly
occupying his faculty.

11 Has hid them selves in dens of the said rocks and hills. Haymo:
VVesselus grouinge^sis in opusculis
When they have done all mischief and wrought all wickedness, tyranny,
manslaughter, rape, adultery, lechery, extorcion, Idolatry, sacrylege, with all
other abhominacions, and can do no more, the^ run they to those hipocrites,
Apoca. 81,
the^ seek they up those Antichrists. There must they be confessed, Martinus
Lutherus in annotationibus. Mathei.
there must they hide their sins. They must be covered with his dyrty merits,
and with his holy whordome. And to be prayed for, that monastery must be
builded, and that prebe^dary or chauntery must be founded. There must be
Masses and dyrges, there must be anuaries and bead me^. Ioannes Paleonidorus in
cronicis.

Erasmus in suis colloquijs.


He must be buried in S. Frauncis gray coat, and he in our Ladies holy habit.
He must have S. Dominikes hoode, and he saint Augustines girdle.

12 And thus they cry to those earthly hills and rocks, to those filthy dunge
heaps, or dens of wild beasts with a fearful desperate conscience.

13 Fall upon us with such stuff as ye have. Esa. 1,
Cover us with your works more than need. Pray, pray, pray, sing, sing, sing,
say, say, say, ring, ring, ring. Math, 25, Luke. 20, Racio^ale diuinorum.
Give us of your oil, for our lamps are out. Help us with your latyne
Psalms. Relieve us with your lip labor though all be but dunge and earth.
Comfort us with Placebo. Odilo cluniacensis
Help us with Requiem eternam. Power out your Trentall masses, spew out your
Commendacio^s. Sing us out of that hot fiery Purgatory before we come there.

Esa. 2, Osee. 10 2, Cor. 1, 2. Pete. 3. Ephe. 4.
14 Hyde us from the fearful presence of him that sits on ye thorn, whom
we never knew to be a merciful father in all our romish medita^ns, and the
scriptures we abhorred that so would have taught us.

15 Convey us clean from the wrath of the ungentle Lamb, whose doctrine we
never favored, nor whose goodness we never yet trusted.

Iohel. 2, Esa. 13 Math. 25. Mala. 3, Gala. 5 Apoca. 17.
16 For the great day of his wrath is come. So certain we are of his terrible
judgment, as it were now in doing. So sure we be to feel him a rightuous
judge, as we are sure he lives.

17 And who can be able to endure it: who can abide it doing so much
cruelty, rape, murder, briberie, with all other abhominacions, as we have
done, Lutherus and Erasmus de confessione.
leaving wicked laws behind us still to continue the same? Well, with you we
have left our whole rockening, ye know our deeds. Answer you for us then, for
we dare not be seen. If your idle merits help us not, we look for no grace
at his hand. If your souls be not for ours at that day, we perish for ever and
ever. For we have not relieved him a hungered, Esa. 58. Ezech. 18 Eccle. 7 Math.
5. Luke. 6 Act. 8. John. 15, Math, 2, Apoca. 18. Luke. 21 Hebr. 10.
a thirst, harbourlesse, naked, sick, and imprisoned, in his poor brethren,
confessing his name and verity.

But rather we have abhorred, reviled, blaspheamed, spoiled, imprisoned,
shamed, and persecuted him unto death in them, deuysing most terrible torments
for them. Thus is there among the wicked sort, princes and other (where as the
word of God is published) not only a doubt of their ruinous fall or decay, but
also a fearful expectation of the terrible judgments of God for contempt of
ye same.

The.vij. Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And after that savve I four Angels, 2. stand on the four corners of the
earth, 3. holding the four wyndes of the earth. 4. that the winds should
not blow on the earth, 5. neither on the sea, 6. neither on any tree. 7. And I
savv another Angel, 8. ascend from the rising of the sun, 9. which had the
seal of the living God. 10. And he cried with a loud voice, 11. to the four
Angels (to vvho^ power was given to hurt the earth and the sea) 12. saying
Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, 13. till we have
sealed the seruau^ts of our God in their foreheades.

The Paraphrase.
MOre manifestly yet are descrybed hereafter, Apoca. 6, 2. Peter. 2, Acto. 4.
^. Cor. 2.
still under ye mystery of the sixte seal opening, the Hypocrytes,
Antychrystes, Tyrants, and cruel magistrates, forbidding the truth and
condempning the word of God. After this (says Saint John) I saw four
Angels of darkness suffered but not sent of God. These are the aforesaid
hypocrites with their false doctrine, Luke. 22. Jude. 1. 1. Tim. 4, Colos. 2.
the Antichrists with their pestilent decrees and traditions, the cruel
princes with their tirannous laws, and the ungodly Maiestrates with their
ignorance and blindness.

2 These stand upon the four corners of the earth, Esa. 10*
they reign in the four quarters of the world, Esaie. 1^, 1. Tim. 4. Exodus
1, 1. Para. 9. 1. Cor. 2,
with lies in hypocrysie, errorus, in superstition, with tyrrany in power, and
cruelty* in executinge humayne laws.

3 They witholde the four winds of the earth. Marci. 16 Act. 4.
The doctrine of the spyrite, which GOD has sent to be blown the world over,
they withstand, resist, stop, vex, and evermore persecute.

4 least it should blow upon the earth, Gene. ^ Ihon. 16 Iaco. 1, Hebr. 13
Mark. 8, Luke. 6,
which is the garden of God, dryuinge away from thence all filth and corrupcion.

5 Or on the sea, which is the waueryng conscience, bringing men to a quietous
hold and sure stay in the Lord.

6 Or upon any tree that is growing here, which are men whom GOD has planted
on earth to fructify in Christ to the comfort of other. Wind can be here no
fickle vanity as the wind of this world is, Psalm. 134, Jacob. 1. Apoca. 12
Act. 5. John. 16 Sebastianus Meyer.
for so much as it comes from above. These furious Angels care not what
cruelty they exercise to drive away this heavenly blast. They lay about them
like Termagauntes, they inhibit, sequestre, banish, emprison, sley, hang, head
burn, and drown the poor preachers of the verytie, the vessels of the
election, and organes of the holy Ghost, and their fierceness has none end.
Act. 9. Prou. 27 Hiere. 12 Math, 23, Apoca. 6. Apoca. 20,
Their power in darkness prospers upon earth, and shall do till they have
fulfilled the whole measuere of their wicked fathers, and made up the number of
Gods chosen flock under the altar.

7 And whiles these execrable angels were yet stopping this wind, or lettinge
the free passage of the Gospel preaching, I beheld (says Saint John)
another Angel of a diverse nature from them, Albertus Mala. 3, Math. 11.
VVestmeri collectanea. John, 6
for he was the true messenger of God, betokeninge the Prophets, Apostles, and
all just preachers.

8 He came forth from the rising of the sun, Mar. 16 Luke, 6
or as one taught of God in the sincere doctrine of Christ, he has stepped
forward to publish the same, ascending upward from ye low spirit of meeknes to
do ye godly office.

9 He had the seal of ye living God in his hand, Ezech. 9 1. Cor. 1. Psalm. 4.
which is the effectual word of truth in his mouth, to execute it. The true
ministers of Gods verity have power to mark his faithful servants unto
salvation. Ephesians. 1, Psalm. 44. 2. Cor. 3.
Their tongs ar^ ye writing pens of the holy ghost, by who^ ye word of god is
registered in ye hearts of them ye believe. For faith is the very sign, whereby
Gods servants are known to be the children of adoption, or of the
inherytaunce promised by grace.

Gala. 4. Ephe. 2. Hiere. 1. Math, 10, Lutherus Erasmus Occolampadius. Zuinglius
10 And the said Angel cried with a loud voice, he bouldlye and with an
earnest spirit uttered the verytie, fearing no worldy displeasure. This voice
against the unbelieving Antichrists was never more earnest than now in our
time, as well in wrightings, as in preachinges. And further has it gone by
books written, then by words spoken, and much more people converted.

11 An earnest message from God was this voice to the said four Angels of his
wrath, which were by his sufferaunce permitted cruelly to handle and to hurt
his people to their salvation and their own damnation, Daniel. 7, Sebastianus
Meyer. Sapi, 3, Franciscus Lombertus
which people dwelled as well upon the sea, as upon the land, as well in the
close Islands as in the open country.

12 And the voice was this. Sequestre your fiercenes for a time, Apoca. 9,
and in no case presume after any cruel sort to harm neither the earth,
Robertus tuitiensis, Math. 24, Hiere. 31 Canti. 4, Psalm. 38, Hiere. 22,
nor the sea, nor the growing trees. Suffer the Gospel to have his free
course, stop not the passage of Gods word, let the wind of his verytie blow
without impediment.

Though some hearts be worldly, some conscinces wavering, and some minds
barren and unfruitful, yet may they repent and come to goodness. When the seed
is sown, some falls upon the good earth, Luke, 8 Math. 13, Luke. 19. Math.
9, Act. 9, Canti. 4 Roma. 8. Ezcch. 9, 2. Cor. 1. Hebr, 11*
and brings forth fruit in abundaunce. Zacheus of a great extorcioner
became a rightuous man, Matthew of a Publycan a true Apostle, and Paul of a
fierce persecuter a gentle preacher.

13 Cease therefore from with holding the sweet blast of the Scriptures till we
have sealed up the chosen servants of our eternal God in their foreheades, or
emprinted faith in their hearts by his spirit, which is the mark of
salvation, and till we have tokened up the whole number of them. ^
Thus to be marked up for the servants of God, is not only to believe after
the mind of Ezechiel, Ezech. 9 Romans 9. Math. 5. Luke. 23 Apoca. 5
but also to lament the abhominatio^, and bewail the wickedness that is done
here. None are of that sort unless they sorrowfully mourn to se god
blasphemed, ye name of Christ disdayned, the truth trodden under foot, and the
perfect Christen church despoyled. By the aforesaid Angel is not meant one
Christen preacher alone but many, Strabus Haymo. Albertus Magnus Hier. 26. 1.
Tim. 3. Actu. 4.
for so much as it is here said. Till we have sealed the servants, etc. For
after that one has begun, many does continue it. In that has been spoken
before is it manifest that wexe the tirants never so mad and persecute they
never so sore to stop Gods word of his course, yet can they not so
prevail against it, but it comes to them whom God has appointed to be
marked up for his. They with all the devils in hell cannot withholde it from
them, Romans 8. Math. 16 (...)
whom God has prefixed to make up his number. And though that the Antichrists
and murderers thinks them to be very few, by reason of their wicked laws,
Actu. 70 Sap. 3,
cruel constitucions, threatenings, and terrible torments, yet is their number
infinite like as here does follow.

THE TEXT.
1 And I heard the number of them which were sealed. 2. And there were sealed
an hundredth and xliiii, M. of all the tribes of the Children of Israel. 3. Of
the tribe of Judah were sealed, xii. M. 4. Of the tribe of Ruben were
sealed.xii. M. 5. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed.xii. M. 6. Of the tribe of
Asser were sealed.xii. M. 7. Of the tribe of Neptalim were sealed.xii. M. 8. Of
the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve M. 9. Of the tribe of Symeon were
sealed xii. M. 10 Of the tribe of Leuy were sealed.xii. M. 11. Of the tribe of
Isachar were sealed.xii. M. 12 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve
thousand. 13. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. 14. Of the
tried of Benjamin were sealead.xii. M.

The Paraphrase.
Apoca. 6 John. 6. Romans 8* John, 17, Deuteronomy. 7, 14 and, 26 Exodus 4
1 And I heard (says Saint John) the number of them rehearsed, which were
sealed with the sure token of faith, and marked up for the heavenly inheritours
with Christ, not for one country, but for the whole world. First were the
Israelites named, for so much as they were the peculiar nation, whom God first
chose for his own people. Israel is mine eldest son, says the Lord.
After them followed in course the Gentiles as the younger Son, that we should
thereby know that all people, Esa. 60, Act, 10.
which fears god, and works righteousness, is accepted unto him.

2 And there were sealed unto the Lord an hundred and xliij. thousands of all
the tribes of the children of Israel, Numerus signatorum
to have the life everlasting, Hebr. ^, Gene, 20 Hebr. 7.
of every tribe twelve thousand persons.

3 Of the chosen tribe of Judah the fourth son of Jacob, of who^ christ
descended, were sealed unto God.xii. thousand.

4 Of the mighty stock of Ruben the first son of Jacob by Lia, 1. Para. 5^
Genesis 19.
were marked unto the Lord.xij. thousand.

5 Of the happy kindred of Gad the vij. son of Jacob by Zepha, Genesis 30, Nume.
^. Gene. 30, Iosue. 18,
were tokened unto life.xii. thousand.

6 Of the blessed tribe of Asser the eight son of Jacob by Zepha were sealed
unto the heavenly fellowship xii. thousand. Gene. 30, Deu. 33.


7 Of the plentuous offspring of Neptalim the vi. son of Jacob by Bala, Gene.
4^ Number. 32 Iudie. 18, Gene. 2^,
were signed to be pertakers of joy with christ.xii. thousand.

8 Of the notable parage of Manasses the eldest son of Joseph in the stead of
Dan, because of ye ydolatrie, were noted for the friends of God twelve thousand

9 Of the humble tribe of Symeon the second son of Jacob by Lia, were sealed
to the heavens felicity xii. thousand.

10 Of the sanctified success of Leuy the third son of Jacob by Lia, Deuteronomy. 10
Gene, 29
were marked unto salvation twelve thousand.

Mala 3 Genesis 30, ^. Cor. 2, Gene. 30.
11 Of the pleasant posterytie of Isachar the.ix. son of Jacob by Lya, were
tokened to ye joys everlasting xii. thousand.

2 These. 1. Gene. 30 Hebr. 9,
12 Of the famous tribe of Zabulon the.x. son of Jacob by Lya, were sealed to
the kingdom heavenly.xii. thousand.

13 Of the rightuous stock of Iospeh the.xi. son of Jacob by Rachell, were
sanctified to Christ's inheritance.xii.M.

Gene. 35 1. Peter. 3, Collectanea West meri. Otho brunfel^ius de tropis
scripturarum.
14 Of the godly kindred of Benjamin the twelf son of Jacob by Rachel, were
elected unto the eternal heritage twelve thousand. This set number of twelve
thousand for every tribe of the Israelits, betokens a notable multitude in
ever kindred of them, certainly appointed of God unto salvation. And it is not
to be understood upon them that are past, but rather upon them, whom it shall
please God to call in this latter age under the vi. seal opening. Whom Paul
calls the remnant which shall be saved, Romans 11. Amos. 9
according to the election of grace. For like as by the fall of the Jews
Synagoge for vnthankfullye receauinge the verity, salvation then hapened unto
the Heathen, Math, 21, ^see. 3, Apoca. 17, Romans 11, Math. 10, Psalm. 85*
so shall it now again from their carnal church to the Jews for the same. god
has not thrust out his people, but their conversion shall be as is life from
the dead. This shall the carnal synagoge of Antychristes, hypocrites,
tyrauntes, and cruel maiestrates, no more perceive at that day then they now
decerne those poor creatures whom they spightfully persecute and kill, to be
the true Church of CHRIST. When Helias thought no more true believers but him
self left alive, Sapi^, 5, John. 16. 3. Reg. 19. Roma. 13 Jude. 1, Apoca. 13.
John, 19.
almighty God showed him of vij. thousand more whom he knew not. If he were
then ignorant, much more these four Angels of darkness, which now sleyeth
up God servants as the Jews did Christ. Not for nothing has god given so much
knowledge in the Hebrew tongue. The Jews must be sealed with the word of
verity. Franciscus Lambertus in Apocal. li. 2. part. 3 Roma. 11 Apoca. 9.
They must have the sure sign of faith. They must know and confess Christ,
whom god before promised by the Prophets, that twelve thousand of every tribe
may be sealed unto salvation. For that time must the Antichrists cease. Their
false interpretations of scripture, Marci. 7, 1. Tim. 4, 2. Pet. 2 Math. 8*
their wicked traditions, their doctrine of deuilles, their lies in hypocresie,
their errors, their stinking chastity (whom God and his angels abhors and
the devil most highly allows) with all their other filthynesse they must lay
aside. Where as before time they have immagined other ways of the health and
righteousness then by Christ, Gala 3, Romans 10. 2 Peter. 2 Apoca. 18. Ioannes
^ecolampadius in Dani^le^.
as by infinite sects of perdition, Idol worshipping, pardons, and other
abominations without number, they must now be compelled against their will to
resign them, not only by the manifest truth, but also by those which as yet
are enemies both to them and also to the said verity. I can not see it but it
works even now as it did in the primative church. When the Hethen perceived
the Apostles and Disciples expulsed out of Iewry for the Gospel preachinge,
Eusebius Acto. 13 Romans 11 Esa. 49 Franciscus Lambertus li 2. part. 3 in
apocalipsim.
for the hate they had to the Jews they gladly received them, which was unto
their salvation, though they thought nothing less.

Not unlike is it in this age, but that the true prechers and learned men,
compelled also by tiraunts to decline to the Saracens and Turks, may in like
manner be accepted of them in spite of the Romish devil and his Church, and
so convert them to the true Christen faith, which they before abhorred. Gene.
41. Daniel. 2. Hester. ^. Tobie. 1. Math. 24* Luke. 19. Gala. 4. Apoca. ^^
Such favor may they find among them now, as did Joseph, Daniel, Hester,
Mardocheus, Zorababel, Nehemias, Es^ras, Tobias and other among the infidels
then. And like as the Jewish sinagoge did at that time wholly perish for
rejecting Gods word, and never could recover since, so may that false
counterfayte church of Antychrist come to destruction for contempnynge the
same and never rise up again.

Much is it to be feared, if they stop GODS word as they have begun,
Act. 4* Josephus Egesippus Mantuanus The sweet wyndes may not blow for these
angels of darkness.
least that plague fall on them that lyghted upon the JEWS at the Siege of
Jerusalem, by the TURK now, or by some other worse then he.

For though they suffer the Bible to be abroad in the mother tongue in
BRABAND, HOLLANDE, FLAUNDERS, FRANCE, SPAIN, ITALYE, and other places, yet
are they still as they were Angels of darkness, Tyrauntes, Persecuters,
Antichrists, and Hypocrites forbiddinge the right course of it. And not
withstandinge their violence, yet breaks it forth so, that innumerable
people are daily sealed unto GOD.

THE TEXT.
1 After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which no man could
number) 2. Of all nations, and people, and tongues, 3. Stood before the seat.
4. And before the Lamb, clothed with long white garments, 5. And palms in
their hands, 6. And cried with aloude voice, saying, 7. Salvation be ascribed
to him, that sytteth upon the seat of our GOD, 8. And unto the Lamb, 9, And
all the Aungelles stood in the compass of the Seat, 10 And of the Elders,
and of the four Beasts, 11, And fell before the Seat on their faces, 12.
And worshipped* GOD, saying, Amen.

13, Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
power, and might be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

The Paraphrase.
1 After this (says saint John) I beheld an exceeding multitude of the
Gentiles or Heathen, Psalm. 1^8 Marci. 16. Osee. 1. Gene. 18,
marked into the fellowship of Christ, whom no man was able to number.



2 These were of all nations of the earth, Phil, 2 Rom, 14, Acto. 2,
of al peoples of the world, and of all languages under heaven, Greeks,
Latins, Hebrews, Caldeans, Parthyans, Medes, Elamites, Capadocians, Asianes,
Phrigian, Egiptianes, Arabianes, Syrians, Affricanes and Indians.

3 They stood all before ye imperyall seat of God. Psalm. 9. Luck. 8* Math.
16 John, 20* Esa. 5^
It was given them by the holy ghost to see him in faith reigning in his true
church, and to take him for their merciful Lord and father.

4 They stood also in the presence of the poor Lamb, Apoc. 6. Ephe. 1. Romans
5, Psalm. 8^, Esa. 45. John, 1, 1. Cor. ^
beutifully clothed with long white garments. They believed Christ to be
their only savior and redeemer, and were most highly accepted before him for
that believes sake. They lived purely according to his word, and did all
things of a sincere conscience, taking him for their only health and comfort.

By him only they trusted to have their sins forgiven, wherefore they were by
him justified and restored to perfect innocence.

5 Palms had they in their hands large and beutifull, Eucheriu^ 1. John. 5.
1. Cor. 15, Hebre. 11. Psalm. 113,
in token of victory over sin, hell, death, and the diuill, which they have
through Christ.

6 And they cried all with a loud voice. In an earnest faith they made this
strong protestacion, saying.

Eph^. 2, ^. Cor. 4. Psalm. 3 Daniel. 7.
7 No merit, health, nor goodness be attributed unto us, nor yet unto any
creature in heaven nor in earth for us. But all our whole salvation, life, and
deliverance, be only ascrybed unto him that sits upon the throne of our
God, reigning by his spirit not in the false counterfayte church, but in the
true christian congregation.

8 And unto the sweet Lamb Jesus Christ, Apoca. 5, Hiere. 11. Psalm. 3. Romans
9. Isaie. 64 Apoca. 5,
which alone dyed for the same. For health is only the Lords, so is the
eternal blessyng, and neither of our works, nor yet of our good deeds, for the
best of them are defiled.

9 And all the Angels or ministers of heaven, Daniel. 7. Esai. 9, Apoca. 4
Math, 1^
compassed the throne according to their office. They assisted the true
faithful church which is the seat of God.

10 The xxiiij. elders they compassed also, so did they the.iiij. beasts. For
ministers they are to the saints departed, and servant to them that be yet
alive.

11 They fell down flat on their faces before the throne. They meekely
acknowledged them selves the creatures of God, Phili. 2 Apoca. 5
and servant to his congregation.

12 And they worshipped not y^ seat, but God which sat on the seat. Psalm. ^0.
Lambertus Luke. ^. Colos. 1. Daniel. 7 Apoca. 5
Most highly they magnified him and praised him for restoring their lost number
saying: So be it evermore as we shall now desire.

13 Everlasting praise and glory, perpetual wisdom and thanks, 1. Timo. 6
Nehe. 8, 3. Esd. 9
continual honor and pour with might which can not be measured, be referred
unto our eternal God of all his creatures for ever and ever, yea for all that
he has wrought in them, Amen.

THE TEXT.
1 And one of the elders answered, saying unto me* 2. What are these which are
arrayed in long white garments, and whence came they. 3* and I said unto hi^, 4.
Lord thou vvottest. 5. And he said unto me. 6 these are they which out of
great tribulacion, 7. and made their garments large, 8. and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb. 9. Therefore are they in the presence of the seat of
God, 10. and serve him day and night in his Temple. 11. And he that sits in
the seat, will dvvell among them. 12. They shall hunger no more, neither
thurst, 13. Neither shall the sun light on them, 14. neither any heat. 15.
For the Lamb which is in the mids of the seat shall feed them, 16. and
shall lead them unto fountaynes of living water. 17. And God shall vvype away
all tears from their eyes.

The Paraphrase.
Haymo Ansbertus. Sebastianus meyer. Apoca. 6 Esa. 30 Math. 20, Luke. 9, ^cm. 8
1 And one of the ancient elders (says saint Johan) made answer unto that,
which I was inwardlye most desirous to know concerning this innumerable
multitude, saying unto me by manner of question.

2 What are these comely persons, which are thus beutifully apparelled in long
white garments, large and fair? And from whence came they as thou supposest.

3 And I as one ignorant of the mysteries of God, of mine own nature without
the special gift of him, answered after this sort.

4 Sir, thou wottest what they are and from whence they come, by such knowledge
as the Lord has given thee.

5 And he said again unto me thus. John. 1^* 1. Cor. 14, Hebre. 11 Acto.
14* 1. Peter. 3. John. 6.


6 These are they which come unto Christ by faith, out of the great trybulacion
of worldly wickedness, fleshly cares, and disquieted consciences.

7 Abhorring the doctrine of men's inuencions, they set sure hold upon the
living word of the Lord. There fette they out forgiveness of their sins,
Acto* 10 Psalm. 3^
and made their garments large to cover their old deformities.

8 They washed their lives in the sorrows of repentance, Act. 19, Psalm. 113
Daniel. 12 1. Peter. 1. Apoca. 22, Acto. 10 Ephe. 2. Daniel. ^*
and fashyoned their deeds to his sweet laws and commandments. They made
their garments white in the precious blood of the Lamb, believing to be
purified by the merit of his death.

9 And therefore are they at this time in the presence of his majesty,
accepted, taken, and allowed for the citizens of heaven.

10 They serve him day and night in the Temple of their souls, and they praise
his glorious name in spirit for ever more.

Apoca. 4 Exodus 29 Iohel. 2. Esa. 49,
11 The Lord that sits on ye throne will always dwell among them, as their
most mighty defendor, their solace, and their comfort.

Iaco. 1, Esa. 49, Psalm. 120
12 The spirit shall so refresh them, they shall no more hunger nor thirst.
Though concupiscence dwell in them they shall desire none evil.

Deuteronomy. 4. Hiere. 17.
13 Neither shall the sun so light on them, which is this worlds prosperity,
that they shall forget their Lord God at any season.

14 No heat shall hurt them, nor adversity of this world overcome the^, John.
15, Romans 8. Apoca. 5.
but in yt they suffer or do, all things shall work to the best.

Math. 18. John, 14, ^ggei. 2. Acto, 4. Esa. 60.
15 For the innocent Lamb Christ which is in the midst of the seat, or the
congregation of God by his word, shall norish, feed, and releue the^ with his
promise, shall preserve, comfort and lead them by his spirit. Yea he shall so
order them, they shall have need of nothing. And if he be their light,
health, and strength, of whom should they be afraid

16 He shall bring them unto the fou^taynes of the living waters, Psalm. 5^,
John. 4 Eccle 1. John. 14 Apoca. 2^ John. 16, Acto, 5. 1. John. 4 Romans ^, Math.
5,
and make them such well springs as shall flow up into the life everlasting.
His doctrine must do it and none other, for none comes to ye father but by
him.

17 And God shall wype away all tears from their eyes. Adversity shall be
unto them a very consolacion. No sorows shall they care for, no torments shall
they regard, no troubles nor yet death shall they fear, but think in their
hearts always, yt the sufferings of this life are nothing to the glory to
come. Gene. 4^ Psalm. 21 Esaie. 63, Apoca. 1^.
The aforesaid elder might seem to be Jacob, whose prophecy might tell John,
that Christ should wash his garment in wine, and his mantel in ye blud of
grapes. So might it be David or Esaias, which also confirms the same.

In this as in a glass may be seen what they are before god yt at this present
age, or under this six seal opening unfeignedly cleueth to his word, Mark
this sixth seal opening.
follows it in effect, and lives according unto it. First they are clear
before God, Romans 8. Psalm. 31. Sapi. 17. Hebr. 9, Gala. 4, John. 4. Math. 5,
Luke. 6 Colo. 3. Hebre. 11. Psalm. 118 2. Corin. 1.
and no sin shall be imputed unto them for their faithes sake. Consequently,
they are delivered of a troublous conscience. The Lamb has restored them to
innocence, and God accepts them for his children. These seek no doctrine but
the scripture. They serve God in spirit and in no dead things. They hunger
not for men's tradycions, they thirst not for hipocrites good works, they are
well, and fully contented with the Lamb. They seek no prosperity, neither
care they for adversity. The word of God is their gyde, and therein they mind
to depart. None other but such are sealed unto god, nor none else walk before
him in white garments.

The viij. Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, 2. there was silence in heaven
about the space of half an hour. 3, And I savv seven Angels, 4. standing
before God. 5. And to them were given seven Trompettes. 6. And an other Angel
came, 7. and stood before the altar, 8. having a golden censer* 9. And much of
odours was given unto him. 10. that he should offer of the prayers of all
saynctes upon the golden altar, 11. which was before the seat. 12. And the
smoke of the odours which came of the prayers of the Saints ascended up
before God out of the Angels hand. 13. And the Angel took the censer, and
filled it with fire of the altar, 14. and cast it into the earth, 15. And
voices were made, and thunderings, and lightnings, 16. and great earthquake.
17, And the seven Angels which had the seven trumpets, 18, prepared them
selves to blovv.

The Paraphrase. 1
IN the seventh seal openyng (which is the next and the last) there was
silence in heaven (says Saint John) by the space of half an hour. Esa. 32,
1. John. 2. Augustinus, Luke. 2, John. 14 Hiere. 51, Apoca 17. 2. These. 2.
Apoca. 20 Esa. 32, Mich. 4
This signifies that there shall be in that age, that peace in the Christian
church, which Christ brought with him from heaven, and left here with his
discyples. Then shall wretched Babylon fall, then shall the bloody beast full
of blasphemous names perish, then shall ye great Antichrist with his whole
generacio^ com all together, to naught, then shall the fierce Dragon be tied
up for a M. years. The^ shall reign peace and concord, ye truth shall be beloved,
gods word shall be had in estimacion, and his servants shall live without check.
Happy are they that shall see those days.

2 This silence shall endure but half an hour space, Psalm. 125 Bedas. Apoca.
20, 1. John. 2, 2. ^ara. ^. Psalm. 89, Romans 11, Hiere. 23 Luke. 15 John. 10
which may be the thousand years that are spoken of here before,
considering that all the age after Christ is but the last hour, and a thousand
years before God is but as the day that is paste. In the time of this sweet
silence shall Israel be reuyued, the Jews shall be converted, the Heathen
shall come in again. Christ will seek up his lost sheep and bring him again
to his fold, that they may appear one flock, like as they have one
shepeherde.

3 And I saw (says saint John) seven Angels standing before the majesty of
God, Apoca. 1. Mala. 2 Albertus Magnus Franciscus Lambertus Esa. 27, Ose. 8,
Hiere. 16*
which signifies ye preachers of his word for the seven several times of the
vij. seals opening, to every seal corresponding an Angel. For all that the
preachers has done from the beginning of the Gospel, to the time of this last
seal opening, shall then appear at once.

In that day (says Esaias (the Trumpet shall be blown, they that were lost
shall come from the Ascirians, the scattered flock shall come from Egypt, and
worship ye Lord in Jerusalem.

Daniel. 7, Hebr, 1, Esa. 58. Eucherius
4 These Angels stood before ye presence of God, as mynisters of acceptacion,
ready to execute his heavenly will and commandment.

5 And to them was given vij. hollow trumpettes, Hiere. 23 Iohel. 2. Apoc. 6.
1. Cor. 4
the ministracion of his word was unto them committed. They ran not forth
unsent, they spoke not vncommau^ded. They blew their trumpettes one after an
other. As the seals were opened, the misteryes they declared as came to their
course.

6 And another Angel (says saint John) of a much higher nature then these,
Mala. 3. Esa. 64, Nume. 4 Phil. 2.
came forth, yea even the Angel of the covenant that was so sore longed for,
came to his holy Temple.

7 He stood before the altar, he humbled him self, he became man, he took
the shape of a servant.

8 He had in his hand a golden censer. Hebre. 9. John. 4. 1. Tim. 2, 1. John.
2. Psalm. 140, Gene. 15,
This Lord Jesus Christ the soueraygne messenger of our salvation took it
upon him alone to be our mediator our advocate before God, and the only
attonemente for our sins.

9 And much incense of odours was given unto him by the great faith of Abraham,
John Baptist, Hebre. 11.
and of all the sanctified number.

10 That he should offer up unto God so much of the prayers of all the
faithful believers upon the golden altar or in his glorified nature, Hebre.
13 Ephe. 1. Apoca. 12
as was right before him.

11 Which altar is now before the throne of God. Hebr. 7 Iohh. 14, Acto. 7. 1.
John. 2 Act. 4,
He has an everlasting priesthood, he is able to save them that come unto God
by him, and lives ^mmortal, standing on his right hand as one ever ready to
make interpel^acion for us. All they consented in ^ne that he should be their
general ^ttourney, considering he was their ^nely savior and redeemer.

12 And the sweet smoke of the odorous incense, which came of ye wholesome and
fe^uent desires of them that had faith, Psalm. 140, Prove. 11. Hebre. 1 Romans 8.
Hebre, 9 John. 14
ascended up before God out of ye Angels hand. By his only merit was their
faith accepted, and for his deaths sake their works pleased God.

13 The said Angel took the censer, he prepared his godly spirit. Hiere, 31
Luke. ^2 Act, 2. John. 1,
He filled it with fire of the altar, which was his eternal charity.

14 And he cast it into the earth, with pour he sent it down in cloven fyerie
tounges upon his Apostles, of whose plentuous aboundau^ce all we have received.

15 And as it was come down, there were noyses, Apoca. 4, John* 16, Marci. 16
John. 3, Esa* 1, Math. 15. 1. Tim. 6 Apoca 6, Nath. 2, Acto 4, John. 11
thunderings, and fearful lightnynges, for it rebuked the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. It reproved the world of unfaithfulness,
for contempnyng the light of Gods verity. It threatened it for supersticions,
hypocrisy, and outward obseruacions. And utterly it condemned it for
obstinacy of corrupt interpretacions.

^6 There was also a terrible earthquake as it was comen into ye world. The
ungodly rulers were moved, the ambicious prelates were vexed, ^he covetous
lawyers fretted, the hypocrites and priests waxed mad, yea they are not yet
quyeted to this day. They still lie and prate, they blaspheme and accuse, Math,
5 John. 15 Psalm. 73
they persecute and kill, they hang, burn, and drown, their malice has none
end.

^7 And the said vij. Angels (says John) which are the universal preachers
of Gods verity, Luke. 9 Esa. 58
having their vij. trumpettes or full authority given them of the Lord.

^8 Prepared them selves by power of the holy Ghost, John. 15, Marci. 16
to execute their offices, and to blow each one in his course.

THE TEXT.
1 The first Angel blew, 2. And there was made hayle and fire, which were
mingled with blood, 4. and they were cast into the earth. 5. And the third
part of the trees was brent, 6. and all green grass was brent.

The Paraphrase.
1 The first Angel first stood forth, and blewe his Trumpet. The first
angel. Acto. 2. Romans 10. John. 12 Act. 13. Hebr. 3. Apoca. 22,
The Apostles after ye first seal opening (which was at the coming of the
holy ghost) went forward with the gospel, and taught it the world over. And
when they had believed and thoroughly received the word which were predestinate
of God to be partakers of the glory with Christ, the residewe still blind and
obstinate, perseuered in their infidelity, and so perished.

2 For upon them came hayle and fire, which were myngeled with blood. Their
wickedness over went them, their stubborn stomakes sturred up their fury,
Exo. 9. Eccle. 9 Romans 1. Sapi. 2.
their fierceness kindled ever more and more, and their madness made them
blind.

John, 16, Acto. 4 Iudie. 1, 2. Cor. 4. Act. 7, 8.12 14.19.
3 And these they coupled alwais with cruelty and murder. For when Christ's
disciples had preached the Gospel, the wicked sort of the Jews and Gentiles
in no case would believe it, but their obstinacy so blinded them, and their
malice so inflamed them, that they sought their death and procured the effusion
of their blood. Over all the Acts of the Apostles this is evident.

4 And they were cast into the earth. So occuppied their earthly hearts this
wilfulness and anger with thirstynge of innocent blood, Ezcch. 14, Math. 23,
Osee. 4, Jude. 1. Luke. 13.
that all grace in them was extinguished, and all goodness clean consumed.

5 The third part of the trees was brent, and all the green grass came to
naught. Though the chosen people were ever the lesser number, and the wicked
the much greater (as in Zachary) yet are they not here so noted, Math. 7
Zacha. 13
Psalm. 33, Luke. 12.
for so much as in the sight of the Lord the infinite rabble of infidels are
nothing to the small flock of faith.

Consider also that in Zacharias time, the Jews were the people of God, which
were nothing in comparison to the Gentiles. But now are the Gentiles his
people, which ever exceeded them in number. The thride part of the Trees
wythered in their wickedness were found without fruit in the Gentiles. Osee.
11, Romans 9. Esa. 54, 1. John. 2 Act. 1^, Hiere. 2, John. 4, Math 21, Luke. 11
Primas. 1, Haymo. Franciscus Lambertus


6 All the Jews which sometime were the green grass by the manyfolde gifts of
God, and by Christ's coming of them, were then brent up clean. True faith
went from them, and their own malice blinded them.

Though this were veryfied of them only, which were at the first Seal
openinge, and the first Trumpet blowinge, yet does it touch the bloodye
Antechristes, Hypocrites, and ungodly rulers, withstanding Gods word to this
present day, the poor Christians being green, and bringinge forth fruit in
pacient sufferaunce.

THE TEXT.
1 And the second Angel blevv, 2, And as it were a great mountain burning
with fire, 3, Was cast into the sea. And the third part of the sea turned to
blood. 5, And the third part of the creatures which had life, dyed, 6. And
the third part of the ships were destroyed.

The Paraphrase.
1 The second Angel blew his Trumpet at the second Seal opening, which
signifies the preachers, The second angel. Mala. 2, Apoca. 2, Eusebius
cesariens^s
declaringe the secret mysteries of Gods verytie immediately after the Apostles
time.

2 And as they were at the pleasure of the Lord so doing, a monstrous thing
in manner of a great mountain burninge with fire was cast into the sea.

A cruel sort of false disciples and wicked brethren arose up from among
them, Zacha. 4* 1. John* 2 1. Tim. 3.
all earthly minded to couetusnesse, puffed up with pride and ambicion, 2. Tim.
3. Act. 20 2* Peter. 3, Esa. 17, Ezech. 6 Luke, 18
inflamed also with anger, spite and vengeance, they boysterously entered in
among the people, so mutable and fickle as the sea, which changes with every
wind. These are the mountains that swell up thinkinge much of themselves.
These are the rising hills that boast so much of their good works, of whose
overthrow by Gods word both Esaias and John Baptist did prophecy. Such fyery
mountains were Ia^nes and Iambres, Esa. 40 Luke. 3 2. Tim. 3, Hiere, 20 John,
18. 3. John. 1, Act. 19, Act. 13, 2. Tim. 4.
that maliciously resisted Moses, so were Phassur and Semeias, which vexed the
Hrophet Hieremy.

Such burning hills were Cayphas and Annas against Christ, Diotrephes,
Herpocras, Hebion, and Cerinthus against John the Evangelist, Demetrius,
Bariehu, Himenius, and Alexander against Paul, with such like moody prelates
resistinge the truth to this present day. Such smocky mountains of
contradiction both daily withstand Christ in the edifying of his Christen
Church, Hebre. 12 Zacha. 4 Esa. 17 Rom, 16. Apoca. 20.
as rebuked Zorababel in ye building of the Jews temple.

3 They stir up the sea, they move the weak people, and make them blind as
Asses. In their hate they provoke the Princes to cruelty and malice. They cause
them to punish the poor Preachers, Acto. 16 Luck. 11.
and put aside the truth least they should fall unto it.

4 By reason of this burning hill falling into ye sea, the third part of ye
water turned into blood, Exodus 7 Apoca. 17 Act. 6 Math. 10, Joan* 16 Math. 5.
1. Joan. 3
ye third part of ye people seduced by them became hateful murderers. Not
only they accused GODS servants, but as blood thirsty beasts they consented
to their deaths, not considering that he which does but only hate his
brother is an homicide.

5 The third part of the creatures, which had life dyed. Of those which
seemed to be faithful among them, Acto. 1^. Apoca. 3. 2. Tim. 3.
a great number were worse then naught. Dissembling with faith they betrayed
the truth, and wrought much wickedness. Eusebius cesariensis Eucherius
Many martirs were then every where.

6 So that the third part of the ships were destroyed also. Many Churches or
pryuate congregations called parrishes, for fear of loosinge their goods, and
for doubt of imprisonment and death, refused the faith and fell clean from the
truth, 1. Tim. 6.
and so were perished and lost. For Ships in the scriptures betokneth them.
Luke. 8, Act. 5^


THE TEXT.
1 And the third Angel blevv, 2. And there fell a great Star from Heaven, 3.
Burning as it were a Creshet. 4. And it fell into the third part of the
Rivers, and into fountains of waters. 5. And the name of the Sarres is called
vvormvvode, 6. And the thitd part of the waters was turned to wormevvod. 7.
And many men dyed for the waters, because the were made bitter.

The Paraphrase.
1 When the third Angel blew his Trumpet at the third scale openinge, The
third angel. Daniel. 12 Jude. ^
there fell from heaven a great mighty Star, burning like a Creshet,

2 As the preachers of that time opened the truth of god, 2. Tim. 4
Philastrius Brixiensis Argustinus
many great doctors and excellent learned men, as Arius, Macedonius, Cutices,
Ualens, and such other, declined from the sincere faith, and fell to
blasphemous opinions concerning the Godhead.

3 These seemed glorious to the earthly minded people, Luke. 16 Osee. ^, 2,
Tim. 4* John. 6. Apoca. 2* 1. John. 2. 1. Tim, 4.
they appeared notable and famous to the blind forsaken sort, yet was their
learning madness, and their doctrine fables and lies. But this is here to be
noted, that they which are true techers remain still in heaven, they persevere
in the christen church, where as the other are fallen clean from the^c^ by
apostasy, and errors, so that they are none of Christ's.

2. Corin. 4. Esa. 55 2. Tim. 2 Luke. 12, 1, Cor. 2, Amos. 5.
4 This star fell into the third part of the ryuers, which are the
scriptures perverted, and into the fountaynes of waters, which are Gods own
very words depraved. These have the false doctors, yea pernicious heritikes
infected with their errors, corrupted with their lies, and with their false
interpretations made them bitter and unsavory. Hiere. 9


Gene. 26. Primasius Bedas, Here. 2, 1. Cor. 5 Psalm. 18, Math. 15, 2. These. 2.
5 For the name of the star was wormewoode, whose nature is to withdraw all
sweetness. These with their bitter heresies and their noisome doctrine
destroyed the pits of Abraham, they troubled the Text, they mixed the truth with
falshod, they poisoned the waters, they took away the louesomnesse of them,
they left them vnpure and imperfect (not that they can be so of the^ selves,
but of their false workinge) they made them unpleasant, unprofitable, yea and
most perylous unto many.

Hiere. 23. 2* ^or. 2 2. ^ete. 2. Tren. 3,
6 For it follows, When the third part of the waters (which are the
scriptures corrupted by them) was turned into woormwoode, or bitterness of
errors.

7 Many men dyed of them. They perished by those doctrines, because they were
made bitter. Yet were not all men cast away, for two parts were left undefiled,
and many that drunk the poisoned waters, Haymo. Ambrosius Ansber^u^ Hiere. 2.
Psalm. 18. 1. Tim. ^.
enometed them again. Only were they lost that retained the^ still. The pure
waters are here doubled unto the waters infected. For double in value is the
verytie before GOD, and the true minister thereof worthy double honor, where as
the other are nothing at all.

THE TEXT.
1 And the fourth Angel blew, 2. And the third part of the Sun was smitten,
and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars. 3* So
that the third part of them was darkened. 4. And the day was smitten. 5. That
the third part of it should not shine, and likewise the night. 6. And I
beheld and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven. 7. And saying
with aloude voice. 8. Woe, woe, woe, to the dwellers of the earth, 9. Because of
the voices to come of the Trompetes of the three Angels, which were yet to blow.

The Paraphrase.
1 At the fourth Seal opening the fourth Angel stood forth and blew his
Trumpet. The fourth angel. ^ath. 20, Luck. 20 Marci. 12 Math. 28 Hieronimus*
Rufinus. Cassianus Heraclides.
Never was the time yet so perylous but some true preachers has bin in it.
Were there never so many herisies abroad, yet have there reigned some godly
ministers, what though they were unknown to the world. Many sincere fathers
were in the desert wilderness when most mischief was in doing among the cruel
tiraunts which priuyly resortinge to Cities, taught them whom God had appointed
to be saved.

Of this number was Paulus Antonius, Hilarion, Macharius, Pambo, Theonas,
Baptista Mantuanus Ioannes tritemius Franciscus. Lambertus
Effrem, and such like. And long since their time Anastasius, Persa,
Theophilactus, Fulgencius, Beda, Alcuinus, Strabus, and such other many.

Not with standinge all that they taught and wrote was not gospel. All was not
without superstition though they lived in much pureness of life.

1 These blew the Trumpet as they had received that time. Ioannes Oeclampadius
in Da^n elem. Ioannes VViclenus de antichristo ^t members.
But the false Hipocrites and the Antichrists so prevailed more and more under
Mahomet and the romish pope that (...) Christianity and spiritual holiness
was turned into supersticious sects. None was well christened that had not a
moonkish disguising. None was thought spiritual, unless he were shaven on the
crown. Then brought they in many new ways of salvation, to prove Christ but a
second Savior, as pardons, pilgrimages, Masses and friday fastings. Then was
god able to help no disease, but images were sought up every where, saint
Job for the pox, Platina Nancleru^ Otho. Brunfelsi^us. Erasmus. Lutheru^. ^
Saint Roke for the pestilence, saint Germine for the ague, saint Appolyne for
the tooth ache, saint Graciane for thrift losinge, and saint Barbara for
gonnshote.

That Lady in that place, and that Lady in that. Ioannes Olneye C^rthusianus.
Vincencius
This Roode here, and that Roode there. And he that did miracles here, could
do nothing there. Thus was all changed into diuilishnesse, and their
preachers for lucre confyrmed always the same, 2. Timo. 3 3. Reg. 18, 2. Tim.
4,
which were many more in number then were the true messengers of God,

2 In this most corrupted and dolorus age, John. 15, Luke. 21. Esa. 13, 2. Cor.
2. 1. Tim* 4 Treno. 4 Acto, 8.
the fourth Angel blowinge his trumpet, the poor forsaken disciples showing
the truth, the third part of the sun was smitten, so was the third part
of the Moon, and also the third part of ye stars. Good creatures they found
ye third part of Gods heavenly word sore blemished by the hypocrites, the
Christen Church piteously disfigured by the antichrists and the inferioure
ministers thereof, darkened by Tyraunts and cruel magistrates.

John, 12, Osee. 4
3 By their wicked strocke the light of GODS verytie was hydden, and appeared
less by ye third part then it was before.

Less was Christ the son of rightuousenesse known, Mala. 4 Apoca. 2 Esa*
56. 2. Pet* 3. Romans 1.
less was the Christen Church faithful, and less were the preachers godly.
More ignorant was at ye time then before, more supersticion, hypocrisy, and
falshod, wherefore the third part of them all was darkened.

4 At that time also by reason of them, the day was so smitten, that the third
part thereof showed no clearenesse, Hiere. 6. Albertus Magnus, Ioannes
VVicleus in supplimento ^^ialogi*
and so was the night likewise.

5 In no case might Christ shine in the Curates and religious, which ^ooke
themselves for the day, nor yet Christen fruits in the common people which
were esteemed the night, Only were their will works allowed, and their dyrty
traditions thought godly.

The true trumpet blowers or ministers of the word, VValdenus in fasculo
zizanio^u^, Bedas Haymo
were then compelled by cruel co^mau^dements, and the ^o^mons by cruel laws
enforced in ^o case to meddle with ye truth, least their ^bhominable doings were
espied. In this therefore mark, what a detestable thing false doctrine of
hypocrites is, Sebastianus Meyer.
for it brings in all darkness an ignorant blindness, and it shadoweth
under pretense of virtue, all wickedness, and sin.

6 And then (says saint John) I beheld an Angel, Apoca. 7 Osee. 8, Mala. ^.
flyinge through the mids of heaven, as it had bin an Eagle, which betokens
certain peculiar servants of GOD, illumined with some knowledge, and lea^ing
an high conversation in the church. Such were Ioachim Abbas, Cirillus of Carme,
Angelus of Jerusalem, Phil. ^. Bapt. ^^ Mantuanus Ioannes (...) Nauc^^rus
Theolespherus of Cusencia, Raynhardus, and other. And since their time Petrus
Iohannis, Robertus de vsecio, Iohannis de rupescissa, Arnoldus de villa noua,
Hieronimus Sauonarola, with such like.

7 These perceiving the light of Gods verity, Ioachim (...). ^uper oracu^o
ciril. li. Baptista Mantuanus
and the true teachers thereof daily deminishinge, considering also the mighty
increase of darkness with a loud voice they cried earnest writings they sent
the world over, under the title of revelation and prophecy.

8 Saying by the threatninges of scripture, woe, woe, woe, Zacha. 12 Ephe. 4 Apoc.
22. 2. Tim. 3, Jude. 1. 3. Reg. 10
to the inhabitours of the earth. More wickedness is coming, more blindness
and more darkness to the ungodly infydels and earthly minded people. It will
stylll be worse and worse to the foolish ignorant sort, through the errors,
lies, and abominable superstitions of the false Antychristes and cruel
Chaplaynes of Baal.

9 And this rebuking cry, Franciscus Lambertus
was because of the voices of the other three Angels were yet to blow with
the Trumpet, whose blastes they should also more deeply contemn. By
prophesies and scriptures, waldensis 1. Tim. 4. Acto. 20. 2. Tim. 3, VVicleus
Math. 22 Apoca. 20.
has many godly men perceived before hand with Paul, the fall of faith, the
increase of errors, and that diverse should decline from the truth, and
earnestly they have premonished the governors of it.

Yet have they neglected the warning, and utterly despised them for it,
leadinge the People into the depth of all errors and filthy abominations.

The.ix. Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And the fifte Angel blew. 2. And I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the
earth. 3. And to him was given the key of the bottomless pit, 4. And he
opened the bottomless pity. 5. And there arose a smoke of the pytte, as it
were the smoke of a furnace. 6 And the sun and the Air were darkened, by
the reason of the smoke of the pyt. 7. And there came out of the smoke Locustes
upon the earth. 8 And unto them was given power. 9. As the Scorpions of the
earth have power.

The Paraphrase.
THe fifth Angel which blew his trumpet under the fifth seal openyng of the
Lamb, The fyft angel. Albertus Magnus Luke. 12 Math, 20, Act. 5.
were they which had the word of God for that age of Christ's Church, and that
published it to his electes. And these does not only seem to be few in
number, but also they appear to have taught privily in private congregacions
and houses.



2 For when this trumpet was blown, Esa. 14, Psalm. 13 Hiere. 6 Isaie. 24
John beheld a star fallen down clean from heaven into the earth, no part
thereof reserved, neither of the star in heaven, representing the spiritual
church, nor yet of the earth from the star, betokening ye worldly people.
Neither were the spirituality of Christ's church, Ose. 4. Baruch. 6
nor yet the laytie clear from their poisons any where. This glittering
star or shyning multitude of prelates, Hiere ^, 1. Cor. 2, 2. Peter. 3, Math.
^5. Gala 4, ^. Tim. 4.
pastors, and religious fathers, were fallen away from the doctrine of the
spyrite, from the living word of the Lord, and from the right conuersacio^ of
Christ, into the earth of their own decrees and laws, nothing sauouring but
carnal tradicions, dumme dark ceremonies, and doctrine of diuilles, fashioning
their lives all after the same. Then sought they up Plato, Aueroys, Agrippa.
de vanitate ^cientiarum
and Auicenne. Then was Aristotle thought necessary to interpret the
scriptures. Then was there an infinite rabble of Sophisters and school doctors
of reals and nominalles, of sentencioners and summistes of collyginers and
Canonystes, of Scotistes, Thomistes, Olcamystes, Alberstystes, Baconystes,
Anconistes. And every man thought his own wisdom best, Erasmus sarcerius,
de scolasti^ce theology vanit^^te*

Oecolampadius in epistolis


which God has proved stark foolishenesse, all and most ydiotishe dottage.
When the blind world supposed they had the truth by this fallen star, they
had nothing less. Under the fifte seal openyng this darkness was not seen,
but the sixte now discloseth all. Franciscus Lambertus li. 3. in Apocalipsim
Apoca. 6. Apoca. 20
Only ye slain sort complained that time desiryng their blood to be revenged,
where as an answer was made them, that many more yet should be killed to
fulfill their number. And it was proved true. For none in those days once
hyssed against them, but suffered death for it. Yea of Emperors and kings that
offended them, some were accurssed, some deposed, some slain, some poisoned.

Neither spared they power nor yet noble blud. Ioannes Ca^ion in cronicis.
Ranulphuus cestrensis.
In England here they slew King Herolde, poisoned King John, and famished King
Richard the ij. by their own historyes, they burned sir Roger Acto^ knight, sir
John Oldecastel, the Lord Cobham, and sir Raynolde pecock bishop of Chychester
they imprisoned to death, Fabianus Ioannes mayor. Polidorus. Agrippa contra
Louanienses. Zacha. 9, Prou. 1. Math. 16 Romans 1,
besides an infinite number of poor simple souls, no lawful cause known, but
lies of their own forging. Yea and the articles that they dyed for than, they
affirm now to be good. But no maruayle though they did such myschiefe in
those days.

3 For to the star was given the key of the bottomless pit. After they
were fallen from the wisdom of God to the corrupt dreams of men, following
rather the creatures then the maker of them, he gave them over unto their own
imaginacions and fantasies.

4 The^ had they pour in darkness, by their carnal, Luke. 22 Hebre. 13.
Luke. 11 Romans 8 Gala. 5 Apoca. 13. Daniel. 7 Job. 1. Psalm. 106 Iaco. 5.
beastly, and diuilishe divinity to open the well of dampnacion. For what is
the wisdom of the flesh else but death? What are their practices but fighting
weapons against life? They had license to deceive, and leisure to do mischief
in outward things, as had Satan upon the body of Job. But no doubt ye
goodness of God yet preserved ye inward souls of many simple Iobbes for time
of that dangerous world.

5 And when they had opened ye bottomless pit with ye key of their false
doctrine, Luke, 11. Apoca. 14* Apoca. 19. 1. Tim. 4 Gala. 5, Apoca. 18 Apoca.
20 Esa. 1,
there went up a black filthy air as it had been ye smoke of a great furnace.
There arose all errors, lies, heresies, supersticions, idolatry,
covetousness, pride, incontinencie, falsehood, hypocrisy, with all other
filthiness, which are the fruits of hell, and they went abroad ye world over.
Thus has these cursed Apostates ye pope and his Chaplaynes the keys in deed,
not of heaven but of hell. They may open but they can not spear again, Math.
16. Luke. 11, Math. 23, Luke. 10 John. 10 2, Pet. 2 Math. 15. 2, Tim. 3, I^on.
14* Apoca. ^. Esa. 63.
unless they spear from heaven, as they do always. They may hurt, but they
can not heal, they may distroy, but they can not help, they may well dampne,
but they can not save. For the nature of their keye is only to make blind,
obstinate, foolyshe, hard hearted, and ever more worse and worse. He only
gives light, grace, faith, and health. He takes away all darkness and
sin, which has the keye of David. Ab^cuc. 3. 8. Cor. 15.
For he alone has trode^ down the wine press, having the whole victory over
death, sin, hell, and the diuill. He has power only to spear up both death
and hell. The fire of Gods wrath, they be not able to quench. The smoke of the
dyuils malice and continual wickedness, Apoc. 6. Sapi. 2. Gene. 3. 2 Cor. 11.
Romans 5. 2. ^essa. 2. Math. 24. 1. Tim. 4. Gala. 5. Luce. 12.
they be not able to keep down. Eua could not wtsta^d one simple suggestio^
of Satan. A small taste of this smoke lost Adam with his whole posterity. And
now these Antichrists has filled the world with it. For what is it else but
wicked persuasions? a learning of diuilles, and a doctrine contrary to y^
doctrine of God? poisoning all, destroying all, and leading unto hell.

6 The sun by this smoke was darkened, 2. Cor. 2. Apoc. 19.
so was the wholesome air. The Gospel they defiled with their false
interpretacions. Gods word they corrupted with their gloses, commentaries, and
postilles. They myngled the scriptures with the dirtie dregs of their own
laws, Lutheras aduersus.
tradicions, and old rotten customs of their popish fathers. Catherin^^*
Esa. 3. 2. cor. 2 Johannes. agricola super luca^*
So that in the church no good air could be had, no sweet smell of the truth
could be found. There was much ydoll worshipping, strange crying, and lip
laboring, sensing, fooling, and charming, crossing, mowyng, and iugling,
gasing, kneeling, and knockyng, but no true Gospel preaching.

7 Out of this pestilent smoke came innumerable locustes, Apoca. 19 Nahum. 3.
Amos. 7. VVicleus in speculo militantis ecclesie.
a very monstrous vermyne and horrible to behold, creeping over all ye earth.
These were the disguised swarm of Cardynalles, mytred Bishops, doctors,
shaven priests, Abbottes, Moonkes, Chanons, Friars, Nuns, sisters, and
heremites, in read, white russet, graie, black, blewe, and all other colors.
Of these were ye Benedictines, Sabellicus. Mantuanus Egid^us Father.
Paleonid^rus.
the Bernardines, Gerondines, Gilbertines, Celestines, Scopetines,
Gra^dimontensers, Camaldulensers, Cruniacensers, Premonstratensers,
Carthusianes, Carmelitanes, Ambrosianes, Rhodianes, Gregorianes, Purgatoryanes,
Guilhelmytes, Jesuits, Iohannites, Hieronimites, Niniuits, Polidorus
Franciscus Lambertus in regulam minoritaru^ et alij. 2. Peter. 2, Math. 24
Acto. 20 2. John, 1. Jude. 1. Esa 1, Romans 2.
Cellites, Thaborits. Templars, Hospitelers, Crucigers, Augustinianes,
Dominicianes, Franciscanes, Brygydanes, Basilianes, of Iosaphats valley, and of
the dark alley, and such other, with innumerable swarms of them every where.
Peter prophesied before of this smokie multitude, when he gave warnyng that
there should come into the Christen church false teachers, which privily should
bring in damnable sects, denying the Lord that bought them, and many should
follow their damnable ways, thorough whom the truth should have ill report.
But few has marked that warning.

8 And unto these noisome locustes was pour given, Exodus 10. Ezech. 2, Haymo.
Albertus. Job. 34. Math. 7 Hebr. 2^
but yet none other pour, then have the scorpyons of the earth, whose crafty
nature is first to creep softely, then greeuouslye to sting, and last of all
to venim. This pestilent vermin, God has suffered for the wickedness of his
people, first flatteringly to creep, to dissemble, gloss, gloss, and speak
fair, Sebastianu^ meyer, in Apocal. Gregorius in li. e^alogorum. Odilo
cluniacensis abbas.
promising prosperity, victory, long life, and heaven, after this departing.
And by such means got they under them Emperors, Kings, governors, and all
the world besides.

9 Then did they sting their consciences with terrible dreams and visions, and
with fearful reuelacions of purgatory and of hell, to build them up fair
houses, and to live in wealth and pleasure. Finally, they venimed their faith
with their poisoned counsayles and promyses, 2. Pet. 2 Apoca. 18 Exodus 10.
Deute. 28, Sebastianus ^ranck in 2. part chronicoru^
and so took they from them the true hope in Christ, making merchandise of
them through covetousness and fair words. Thus cloistering together like
locusts they have left nothing green, but all they have withered and
distroyed. No works might then be used of Gods prescription, but such as were
fantasied by them for advantage, as mass founding, chaunteries building,
priest singing, Image gilding, kissing of relyques, prayinge to death men, and
such like.

And when they were once frank and fat, Hiere. 5, Psalm. 2
they stood up together proudly against the Lord and his word.

THE TEXT.
1 And it was said unto them that they should not hurt the grass of the
earth neither any green thing, neither any tree, 2. but only those men which
have not the seal in their foreheades 3.

And to them was it commanded, that they should not kill them, 4. but that they
should be vexed five months. 5. And their pain was as the pain that comes
of a Scorpion, when he has stung a man. 6. And in those days shall men seek
death, and shall not find it, 7. and shall desire to dye, and death shall fly
from them.

The Paraphrase.
1 Yet were they commanded that they should in no case hurt the grass of the
earth, Apoca* 7* Prou. 11 John. 6. Nume. 24. Acto. 20. John. 17,
neither any green thing, nor tree. Though they were permytted by the
sufferaunce of God to do much mischief, yet could they harm none but such as
wanted faith.

He ordained from the beginning always to save his. Never could Satan hinder
the soul of Job, only did he vex the outward carcass and goods. Where as
faith is growing, true hope in Christ springing, Job. 2. Collo. 1. Romans 8.
Gala. 5 John. 18 Hiere. 15 Marci. 16
and works of charity fructifying, they shall do no hurt by the promise of
God. Where the gift of the spirit abounds, they can in no wise prevail. If
any hinderaunce does fall, it is where faith is wanting.

2 For only had they power upon those men which had not the seal of God in
their foreheades. Apoc. 7. Apoca. 19. Ephe. 5. Franciscus. Lambertus li. 3 in
Apocalipsum.
They only are in peril that have not the sure faith. And the more want they
have thereof, the more is their seathe when it comes.

3 Yet had those locusts in commandment, that in no wise they should kill
them whom they had noyed. For the will of God is that no wicked person should
perish, unless he resisted the holy ghost, but rather to turn from sin and
to live.

4 Only was it permytted that they should be vexed v. months. Ezech. 18
Ambrosius Ansbertus Math. 23, Gala. 4, Osee. 11 John. 9, Ioannes Eskius,
Only for their life time were they suffered to over load their poor
consciences with their beggarly tradicions, to trouble them with their
trumperie, to grieve them with their curses, and to torment the^ with their
threatenings of their purgatory and their hell. Though they blinded for want
of the scripture, erred in all popish diuilrie, and for lack of true
knowledge had not the token of faith, yet perished they not wholly, Apoca. 7
Joan. 3, Act. 5, Franciscus Lambertus Eccle. 39,
no more the^ did Nicodemus and Gamaliell which were but carnal men. But their
ends the Lord reserved to his own merciful goodness, for confessing ye name
of Jesus Christ.

5 Yet were they sore vexed for the time, and their pain was as the stinging
of a Scorpion, when he has hurt a man. A prickyng of a more then half
desperate mind, Ephe. 4 Sapi. 17. Sapi. 17 Sebastianus Meyer in Apocalip^^^.
a fear of a wonderfully troubled conscience, yea and a great doubt of
salvation ha^ they, till God showed his mercy upon them, opening their faint
hearts and stre^gthning the^ with his inward power.

6 And in those days shall men seek death, and yet shall not find it. Sapi.
16, Osee. 10 2, Tim. 3, Osee. 4,
For the grief of their loaded consciences they shall in confessyons take
counsel of them, which is very poison and death, yet shall God so preserve
them, it shall be no death unto them. For no dampnacion can be unto them which
are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8 Gene. 19, Luke. 17
Loath dwelled in Sodom, yet peryshed he not with Sodom.

7 They shall desire to dye, and yet death shall flee from them. Apoca. 6.
Marci. 9, VVicleuus in libro de confessione Hiere. 2
When they feel the terrible gnawing of inward fearfulness, they shall seek
up their stinking remedies, and require their dyrtie merytes, which is clean
to dye from Christ, and to forsake his living waters for their filthy puddels
of hypocrisy and diuilishnesse. Yet by the singular grace and unspeakable
mercy of God, Hiere. 31. Ioannes Hus de antichristo. 1* Pet. 1.
that they seek shall flee clean from them, and that they have not sought
for, shall save them, which is the only blood and death of Jesus Christ. Thus
shall they have life unlooked for, Titum. 3. Gene. 5. Psalm. 85.
and be taken up with Enoch from the wickedness of this world, and see the God
of Gods in Sion without their deserving.

THE TEXT.
1 And the similitude of the locustes, was like unto horses prepared unto
battle. 2, And on their heads were as it were crowns like unto gold. 3.
And their faces were as it had been the faces of men. 4. And they had hair as
the hair of women. 5. And their teeth were as the teeth of Lions. 6 And they
had habbergyons, as it were habbergions of iron. 7. And the sound of their
wings was as the sound of charettes, 8. when many horses run together
to battayl. 9. And they had tails like unto Scorpions, 10. and there were
stings in their tayls. 11. And their power was to hurt men five months.
12. And they had a King over them which is the Angel of the bottomless
pit, 13. whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abadon, but in the Greek tongue
Appollyon. 14. One vvo is past, and behold two vvoes come yet after this.

The Paraphrase.
1 And the locusts in similitude were like unto horses prepared unto battle
full of stomach, strife, Sapi. 16* Ro^^ ^^ VValdem^^ in (...).
contencion, anger, and hate, rygorous in examinacions, fierce in
excommunicacyons, moodie in disputacions, mad, hasty, and cruel against the
verity, and evermore grudging among them selves one sect against another.

2 Upon their heads they had counterfect crowns in manner of gold. Esa. 28.
Math. 23. Jacob. 3. Luce. 22. 3. John. 1. Math. 23. Luce. 20. Marci. 12. Luce.
18.
Glorious names of dignity had they, and shynyng tytles of high prehemynence
undeserved. Most holy fathers, most gracious Lords, and most reverend
masters commonly were they called. They made large their phylacteries, and set
abroad their skirts, they sought the highest places in the sinagoges, and
salutacions of reverence in the streets.

They were not as other men be. The simplest holy water priest among them was
sir at the least, which is no less than Lord. 2. Tim. 3, 2. These. 2, Psalm. 36
Esa. 14, Abdie. 1 Esaie. 28 Phil. 3 Psalm. 1,
By presumption, pride, and ambicion, they exalted them selves aloft as the
Ceader trees of Lybanus, above Emperors, Kings and Princes. Yea they set their
seats in heaven, and became Gods vicars to dampne and save at their pleasure.
But w^ be to the proud crown of this dronken generation, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is but duste, and shall be their shame and confusion.

3 Their faces were not unlike to the faces of men. Colo. 2, Apoca. 3. Josephus
Math. 6 Luke, 11. Math, 23 Marci. 12,
And outward pretense they had of wisdom, grace, and godliness, yet was there
nothing less with in them. Uerie prudent, wise, and learned they seemed in
their commoning, discreet in behauour, and sober in their living, yet were they
but painted combs full of all sin and filthiness. The counterfeit goodness
they showed outwardely, was only to be seen of the world.

Haymo ^span 3
4 Hair they had on their heads most like to the hair of women. All wavering
were their minds, inconstaunt fickle and foolyshe. Their hearts were given to
uncleanness, Jude. 1. 2. Peter. 2, Romans 1* Ezech. 4 Eccle. 2^, 2. Timo. 3 Act.
20.
their flesh to voluptuous desires and pleasures, so that in them rayned all
beastly abominations. All execrable lusts flowed in them as the water of the
Occean sea.

5 Their teeth were as the teeth of Lions. For they were wholly given to
greediness, rauine, fierceness, and cruelty, not sparing, but devouring the
flock, not saving, but loosinge, not helpinge, but destroyinge. These were
those wild beasts that trod down the viniarde of the Lord, Canti. 2, Psalm.
79 Math. 10. Hiere. 23. Haymo. Albertus Luke. 22 1. Tim. 1. Math. 12. Hebre. 6.
those unreasonable Bores, that has rooted up all, and those blood thirstye
woulues that has rent the poor Lambs in pieces.

6 Habbergyons had they upon them like Iackes of Iron mayle, which signifies
their obstinate malice, their hard froward stubborn hearts against the
verytie of God. For wilfully they resisted it, blaspheminge the holy ghost with
the Pharisees and Scribes, whose sin shall never be remitted in this world nor
in none other.

7 And the sound of their wings was as the stout noise of charrettes, Joan
Husde Anatomia antichristi. VVicle^^s li. 2. de sermon do^i in monte.
when many horses bus^le together toward a battle. The wings of these
abominable locustes, that set them aloft so far above them selves, are their
dignities, offices, riches, liberties, Priueleges, Laws, and such like, which
boldeneth them in all things, be it never so unjust.

8 The noise of these is great, the note, the rumoure, the fame is mighty the
world over, as well in Cromeles and writings as in the speech of the people.
Yea under the title of God they bolster their wickedness to make it the
stronger. All must be Gods dignities, Sebastianus meyer in Apocalipsim. Apoc.
18. Esa. 10. Miche 3. Romans 16. Joan. 16.
Gods service, Gods laws, Gods religions, when it is stark deuillishnes. They
make what laws they list, they command and forbid, they set up and pluck
down, they both curse and bless, yea they do all mischief and all in his
name. Be it never so ungodly, cruel, and false, yet must it forth in ye name
of god. Thus mightier wings they have then had the great Eagle in Ezechiel.
Neither could Pharo in Egypt, Ezech. 17. Exodus 5. Daniell. 3 1. Macha. 1. Deuteronomy.
8. Hiere. 51. Esa. ^. VVicleuus li. 2. de sermon domini in monte.
nor Nabuchodonosor in Babylon, nor Antiochus in Jury do that they might do
here in christendom.

9 For they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were sharp stinges in
their tails. Their study, labor, and practices was ever for a false
conclusion. The end of their fair compassed crafts, was always to maintain
their errors and lies.

10 And this had a very sharp sting. For death was toward them that
withstoode their ginnes. Destruction of body and goods was evermore at hand

11 Yet was their power only to hurt men for v. months space, Primasius li. 3.
in apo. Job. 2. Math. 17. Joan Hu^ de regno Antichristi. Luce. 12. Sapi. ^.
to harm them in this sencible life, divided in five parts. No power had they
upon ye souls hence departed. Then could they not hinder with all their
censures, black curses, suspencions, disgradings, interdictions,
excommunications, and all such terrible thunderbolts, with Book, Bell, and
Candle. Farther extended not their violence, then upon the poor bodies. The
souls were in Gods hands, whose mercy is never far of.

12 A King they had over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit,
Sapi. 1. Apoca. 20 Job* 41. John. 8. Luke. 11, 2 Thessalonians. 2 1. Tim. 3. Psalm.
17, Math. 15, Hiere. 2.
for he is the head captain of all the children of pride, the master of
errors, and the father of lies. Needs must the devil be their king whiles
his smoky doctrine has nourished them, fed them, and set them forth in their
colors.

Sure we are that they are strangers to God, for the heavenly father never
planted them. Well, such people, such governor, such swarm, such stinking
leader.

13 The name of this their captain in the Hebrew tongue is Abadon, Hieronimus
Erasmus. Math. 4. Gene 3 Luke. 11, Math. 12
and in the Greek tongue Apollyon, and both signifies a spightfull destroyer.
His nature is to persuade all evil, to infect the mind, to corrupt the heart,
to pluck away faith, to make the soul blind, Franciscus Lambertus
to rob man of all goodness, to separate him from God, and to dampne him
with him self for ever. Woe is that wretched army that has such a Captain,
and that forsaken multitude, which has such a king.

14 One woe is past. One cursed season of execrable blasphemy, Bedas. Haymo.
Albertus Magnus
darkness and deuilishnesse, under the fifth seal opening, and the fyft
trumpet blowing is at an end. But look to it well, for two other woes, yet
shall come after this under the sixth and vii. as here after will appear.

THE TEXT.
1 And the sixth Angel blewe. 2, And I heard a voice from the. 3. Four
corners of the golden Altar, which is before God, 4* Saying to the sixth
Angel, which had the Trumpet. 5. Lose the four Angels, which are bound in
the great river Euphrates, 6. And the four Angels were losed. 7. Which were
prepared for an hour, for a day, for a month, and for a year, 8. For to slay
the third part of men. 9. And the number of horsemen of war were twenty
times ten thousand. 10. And I heard the number of them. 11. And thus I savv
the horses in a vison. 12. And them that sat on them, having fyerye
habbergions of a yalovv and brimstonie color.

The Paraphrase.
1 Consequently the sixth Angel stood forth and triumphantly blewe his
Trumpet. The sixth Angel. Bedas anglus in apocalips. Sebastianus meyer.
Constantly the sincere preachers of this present age has taught Christ and
his verity, under this sixth seal openinge, wherein they have disclosed the
detestable errors and shameful abhomynacion of the other age before.

2 And as this Trumpet was blown I hard (says saint John) a sweet voice
from the four corners of the golden Alter which is before the eyes of God. 3.
Reg. 7. Apoca. 8. Matthew. 17. Johan. 1 Hebr. 9. Johan. 1.


The Alter which is most precious, most dear, and most acceptable unto GOD the
Father, is Jesus Christ full of grace and verytie. Upon him was offered one
pleasant offeringe, whose aboundaunt sweetness has releued all faithful
believers. Colo. 2* Roma. 5. 2. Cor. 5.
And nothing is accepted before GOD to this present day, unless it be offered
upon him. None Alter else allows he for the sacrifice of peace, neither Mary,
nor John, Peter nor James.

Upon him we offer when we trust only in him, Hebre. 9* Romans 12 Colo. 3. 1.
Pet. 2, Math. 28.
and also when we live according to true faith in him restraining our old
Adam, with his fleshly desires.

3 The four corners of this alter is the Gospel, Marci. 16. Romans 10 Math. 16
Gala. 4. Romans 8.
which he has left by his Apostles in the four quarters of the universal
world. The voice is the joyful tidings or message thereof. And this signifies
Christ not only to have his church within the dominion of Rome under bondage,
but also in all other parts of the world in liberty

All these four corners has but one voice. The Gospel every where taught
has but one heavenly message of mercy and peace from God the father, Ephe. 1,
John. 16 Romans 1 1. Cor. 15. Ihon. 14
one glad tiding of health, and salvation from Jesus Christ, and one sweet
smell of the grace of God and of victory in Christ from the holy ghost.

4 And this one voice commanded the sixth Angel which had the Trumpet or the
true faithful preachers under the sixth seal openinge, which had the
administration of the word at the only gift of God.

5 To go forth and to lose the four Angels which are bound in the great
river of Euphrates. Many has the Lord anointed with his spirit in this age to
preach delyueraunce to the captive, to open the prison to the^ that were in
bondage, Luke. 4, Esa. 61, Amos. 9, Hiere. 31, John, 5, Psalm. 1^^ 2. Para. 7
Baruch. 6, Math. 2^
and to declare the acceptable year of health. By whose preaching he has now
vntha^^led the children of the dead and set them at liberty to preach his
name in Syon, and to worship him in Jerusalem. Many that before were
fettered with fantasies, yoked with unadvised vows, and ouercharged with
intolerable burdens among Bishops, Priests, Monks, Chanons, Friars, and
Noones, are now graciously delivered, Hebre, 9 Lutherus aduersus presendo
episcopos. Franciscus Lambertus in Apoca*
and with a free conscience confesses the verytie of God,

6 So that many among the four Angels, or a great number of them that were
sometime Antichrists, Hypocrites, Tyrauntes, and murders, are now losened
from Euphrates the great flood of wavering fantasies, and of the sickle
pleasures of this world.

For though they were sore bound in their conscience and life, yet wanted they
there no wanton delights, to nourish and feederal fleshlinesse. Ide^ Lambertus
de caulis excecacionis multorum seculorum. Acto, 4. John. 8.
They lacked nothing that might maintain their pomp, vain glory,
covetousness, pride, glottony, and lechery, but they had it in abundance. And
though the nature of Gods word be as of a key to open unto them that believe,
and to spear unto them that believe not, yet is it fayde here to open unto
both. But yet in diverse respects. For in the chosen sort it opens to love, in
ye other it opens to hate. The one brings forth honey by it with the Be, ye
other venim with the spyder. The one is made more meek and gentle, the other
wareth more cruel and mad. Acto. 10. John, 7, 2. Cor. 2. Luke. 2. (...). 6, 2*
These. 2. Mala. 3, Apoca. 7.
As Paul says unto some it is the sauer of life unto life, and some again it
is that sauer of death unto death. For hard is that word to the execrable
Angels (...) children of Satan, calling them from Euphrates.

They can in no wise abide it. Yet were the four Angels loosoned from thence,
and has lost a great part of their pleasures. Since the Gospel came in, the
Antichrists has lost the prophets of their Bulls, pardons, Ioannes vvicleuus
in sua confessione. et in libello ad parliamentum regis.
confessions, pryuy tithes, ydol offerings, purgatory, masses, bell
christenings, church hallowings with other loose ends. The Hypocrites has lost
their more then princely habitations, their monasteries, couents, hospitalles,
preben^^^ies and chaunteries, with their fat feeding and warm couches, for ill
gotten good will home again. The tiraunts and murtherrers have not now their
pleasures in all points as they had before time, what though their cru^ltie be
still as much as it was and rather more. For the people is not now to their
mind as then. Franciscus. Lambertus li. 3 in Apocalipsum. Otho bru^felsius et
alij.


And as these Angels are losoned in this quarter of ye world, so shall they be
in all then other quarters, the Lord appoyntinge their times. One corner of
the altar has given his voice I doubt it not but the other three will shortly
do the same.

7 The four ill Angels were prepared (says saint John) for an hour, for a
dae, Daniel. 12 John. 7.
for a month, and for a year. At no time are the Antichrists unready to do
mischief, the hypocrites to deceive, the tiraunts to persecute and kill. Since
Christ's time to this day never ceased they, Ioachim Abbas in apocalip.
Eusebius cesarienfis
but still evermore they have been doing. Yet has their fierceness been more
and longer at one time then at an other, more vehement in some places then in
some. And at this time, their continuance is some where long, some where
short. Some where is their cruelty more, Johannes Nauclerus Iacobus bergome^sis
some where less. Their days are not always alike, nor their lives of one
length.

8 Notwithstanding for their time they shrink not, but still (...) go
forward to slay the third part of men. None other can the tyrant be but a
Tyrant, nor the Antichriste but an Antichriste. None other part can the
hypocrite play but his own, Joan Hus de Anatomia antichristi.
nor yet the spightfull murderer. Ever seek they to kill the innocent people.
Evermore practice they to bring out of the way, Math. 23 John. 16 Sebastianus
meyer. Apoca. 8, Ticonius Apher. ex primasi^ and Ansberto.
the rightuous servants of God, taken here for the third part of men or in the
smaller number, for so much as here is neither blood, nor fire, wormwoode, nor
smoke.

9 And the number of their horsemen, like unto ye horsemen of arms in war,
was twenty times ten thousand, or ten score thousand. An innumerable
multitude have they sent forth the world over, to deceive and blind, to
destroy and kill. Ioannes brencius. Act. 8. 2. Peter. 2 Math. 10 Daniel. 12
Horsed they are with their beastly laws and decrees, and armed with their
fierce authority and cruel power. And who is not now an horseman of theirs,
and a cruel Saul, making hauock of Christ's poor congregation? Every where
they by them and sell them, betray them and accuse them, persecute and emprison
them, indite them, and burn them.

10 And I heard the number of them (says saint John) or knew certainly
asorehand that ye truth in those days should have many such enemies I
understood it in spirit, Ambrosius Ansbertus li. 4. super apocalipsim. Haymo
Apoca. 9.
I believed it and surely marked it up for a warninge to them that should come
after.

11 Consequently I saw the setting forth of them. I beheld in a vision the
horses, frank, fat, and fearce, which were none other then the aforsayd
locustes that crept out of the smoke from the bottomless pytt^.

In the fifth opening or blast of the Trumpet, Thomas Naogeorgus in pa^machio.
Ioannes vvicleuus li. 2. de sermon domini in monte
which was the rank time of their going forth they were but locustes, lean,
bare and needy. In their beginning the Antichrists and hypocrites, as
Bishops, Priests, Monks, Chanons and Friars, were poor, abiecte and
vntydy. But under the sixth they grew unto great horses. They were so pampered
with possessions, fatted with pleasures, and boldened with aucthorytie.

And when they were once come^ into the estimacion of the world, then waxed
they high, heady, fierce, proud, and cruel. Then were they horses of pleasure
for Princes, and worldly magistrates, to carye them at their own lusts, for
they were vnbrideded. No laws had they for them. Be^no cardinalis. Ioannes
Carrion. Thomas vvaldenus Fabianus Polidorus li. 22. Chro.
The scepture, Crown, sword and power, might then pass none otherwise in
Emperors and kings then they had fantasied.

A faut then done against them, could be no less then both heresy and treason.
If they said but burn, then must they be both drawn, hanged, and burned, no
remedy. For that that touches the^, touches the princes honor also, to make
the matter more greuouse. They should not else be both partners in ye vengeance
of God for innocent blood shedding. Yet hurt they not the righteousness in all
their mischief, Math. 23. Luke. 1^ Sapi. ^, Psalm. 115 Apoca. 6 Ephe. 2.
though ^t so appears unto the^, for so much as their death is precious in ye
sight of ye Lord, and their dwelling place ye alter of god, Christ full of rest
and peace.

12 And the men that sat on these horses had fyerye Habbergions of a yalow and
brimstone color. The Princes and Rulers provoked by the crafts of these
false Prophets and deceiuable teachers to rise against Christ and his word,
Exodus 7, 3. Reg. 22, Psalm. 2 2. Tim. 3 Colo. 2. vvaldenus in fasciculo
Zizanioru^
are armed with cruelty in unrighteousness, with a false charity, and with a
counterfeit wisdom. In the examination of causes they will often times seem
favorable, louinge and wise, when in effect they are nothing less. For move
them once with the truth, or the quick learning of the spirit, and then will
they do as does the Brimstone that is touched with fire. They flame out their
malice, Sebastianus meyer, in Apoca. Sabellicus Platina. Blondus Carsulanus
they spit forth their wickedness, and their filthye judgments stinketh the
world over.

Many such sweet sauers of their politic wisdom or rather fleshly
foolishnesie, have they left behind them in the chronicles and histories that
vnwholso^ly sauoreth yet to this day. And this have they of their unbridled
horses, their ghostly fathers, vvernerus. Cornelius Agripda
confessors, and cou^sellers, over who^ their selves have neither power nor
authority but as they list.

THE TEXT.
1 And the heads of the horses were as the heads of Lions. 2. And out of
their mouths went forth fire and smoke, and brymstone, 3. And of these three
was the third part of men killed. 4. That is to say, of fire, smoke, and
brimstone, which proceeded out of the mouths of them. 5. For their power was in
their mouths, 6. and in their tails. 7. For their tails were like unto
Serpents, 8. and had heads, and with them they did hurt. 9. And the remnaunt
of men, which were not killed by these plages, 10. repented not of the deeds
of their hands, 11. that they should not worship diuilles. 12. and Images of
gold and silver, and brass and stone, and of wood, 13. which neither can
see, neither hear, neither go. 14. Also they repented not of their murder,
and of their vvitchcrafte, 15. neither their whoredom, neither of their
theft.

The Paraphrase
1 The heads of these horses were in similitude as the heads of Lions, Haymo.
li. 2. in apocalipsi.
which betokens their proud, bold, and mighty malice against gods verity.
In the other age when they were but locustes, Joan Hus de regno antichristi.
they had the faces of men, for some reason yet appeared in their laws and
doings, though they stood not all with Gods word. But since they grew up in
courage, and becam furious horses, vvicleuus li. 2. de sermon domini in monte.
they have laid away those faces and now taken to them fierce Lions heads.
Now is there nothing in them but open malice, cruelty, and spite. Now are
they termagauntes all together, Lambertus Shafnaburgensis

Sigebertus gemblacensis.

Otho phrisingensis.


and very diuilles incarnate, where their dyrtie tradicions be not kept. So
eger they are, their horse men can not restrain them, their princes can not
rule them in such a matter, unless they will be torn in pieces, as many of
their predecessors have been before time both Emperors, Kings, and other
governors.

2 For out of their mouths goes fire, smoke, and brimstone, Isaie. 56, Math.
24 2. Peter. 2, 12. Peter. 5* Ephe. 6,
Gods word they preach not, for they are become horses. Their office is now to
carry whither it shall please them, and to lead the princes at their lust.
Now roar they like Lions with their great grandsyr Satan, seeking whom they
may devour. Now breath they forth of their execrable mouths the hot fire of
their threatenings and curses. John. 16 Acto 9, Luck. 21 2. Tim. 3. 1, Tim. 4,
Now vomet they abroad the filthy smoke of their vanities and fables. Now spew
they out the stinking brimstone of their lies and errors.

3 So that they have killed with these three plages the third part of men.
Ioannes Hussius de regno, vita, et moribus antichristi.
But yet none other else than those which has given creadence to their errors,
believed their fables and feared their curses.

4 For none other were slain, but they only which tasted of the fire, smoke,
and brimstone, that went out of their mouths. None other else were lost and
deprived of the life which is in Christ Jesus, but such devout dottrels, Collo.
3. 1. Cor. 1. Baruca. 6
and worldly wise people as they taught and brought up in false worshippinges.

5 No doubt of it but the power of these cruel beasts was most in their
mouths. Sebastianus meyer in Apoca.
The strength of the deceyuable teachers to begile the wretched Idiothes and
blind asses of ye world, is evermore in their speech, in their sermons,
confessions, and privy counsayles. There with do they infatuate them, blind
them, and kill them.

6 Much power have they also in their tails behind, Iohans VVicleus de
confessione Latinorum.
which is not only their hypocritish life, but also their pestilent
traditions, laws, and customs, with these do they sore infecte and
grievously poison.

7 Let no man think their noyance to be light nor their greeuance small,
Franciscus Lambertus li. 3. in opocalipsim. Otho bru^felsius in loc^s
communibus.
considering that their tails are like unto serpents, and have heads wherewith
they hurt. Not only does their doctrine for their life times styng, venim and
corrupt the silly souls, but also their examples, constitucyons, and vsages,
left behind them to be performed of other which follows, Math. 25. 2. Tim.
3 Marci. ^
to the ouerlading of their conscience also, does poison them unto death. They
infect their belief, and provoke them to trust in vain things, and are
ieoperdous every where.

8 Oh horrible beasts, and most cruel monsters. Noyfull are they both in the
head and in the tail, Ioannes Hus in queda^ loca Apocalipseos.
before and behind, coming in and going out. No where are they good, if they
once appear. Let him that will not perish shurne their company, considering
that no man dwell with them without great peril. In their mouths is venime,
in their tails is poison. Sebastianus Meyer in Apoca.
Both their laws and their lives, their counsayles and their ceremonies, their
holiness and blessings, are all hypocrisy, sin, and pestilent doctrine of
diuilles. Only are the laws of the Lord holy, true, and perfect, 1, Tim. 4.
Psalm. 18 Math. 5, 1. John. 2. Hiere, 13 Apoca. 16 Luke. 21
converting the poor in spirit, and gyuing wisdom unto children. The
Antichrists and the hypocrites thus put from their sweet Euphrates, wherein
they swimmed in all pleasure, wealth, and ease, what is more in this age to be
looked for the terrible war? Consider that here in this prophecy they are no
less the^ cruel horses and vengeable beasts, Primasius ^pher. li. 3. in
apocal. Franciscus Lambertus li. 3. in opocalipsim.
having before them Lions heads with fire, smoke, and brimstone, and behynd
them serpents heads to sting, venim, and kill. Ponder this also, that they have
power to carry the Princes and magistrates at their pleasure, for they are
vnmoseled. Yea, what though some notable governors has gotten victoriously of
them, ye prymacie of their own realms, to be the supreme, highest, and
immediate heads of their clergy here in earth under God (which is a wonder)
yet are they scarce able to put aside one corrupt custom or dirtie ceremony
of theirs. Let open experience be herein an able witness. Bedas. Albertus
Magnus visione. 3.
But all their diuilishnesse must needs stand still under ye color of laudable
rites, decent vsages, and polytique orders. For why, they are perilous
beasts, and their mouths yet open, wherein they have both fire, smoke, and
brimstone, which are most terryble things, and in their tails poison, which
is most dangerous. What a fearful blast is this to them, which more fears
men then God? If your grace do suffer this new trade still to go forward,
Eccli. 16 Daniell. 6 Cornelius Agripda in querela super calumpnia.
ye shall procure yea the malice of all reygons, the hate of all Princes, and
the cruelty of all peoples. They shall invade your realm, consume your
substance, and distroy your commons, with such like. Where as if ye take an
other way, ye shall have their benevolence, love, and favor. Thus dally they
with their head rulers, and neither make them faithful, David's, Esa. 55, 3.
Reg. 4, 2 Para. 4. Eccli. 4^ Gene. 4
wise, Salomons manfull Iosaphats, valiant Iehues, godly Iosiases, nor holy
Ezochiases, but very fearful and faint bartod Caines, thinking yt every man,
which comes by ye way will kill the^. This will be the rule of this present
age no doubt of it. For unto kings has not. Apoca. 6. Esa. 11 2. These. 2.
Math, 22 Luc^. 12.
God given it to subdue these beasts. Only is it reserved to ye victory of
his living word. Only shall ye breath of his mouth distroy them, Franciscus
Lambertus li. 2. in Apocalipsim
grind them to dust, and throw them into hell fire. Let the faithful believer
therefore considering ye mischief of this time wherein nothing is like to be
certain and sure, in land, shiere, city, town, no, nor yet house, appointe
him self to persecution, loss of goods, exyle, prison, sorrow, and death, of
body for the truths sake, thinking that his porcyon is in the land of the
living. For now are the perilous days under ye voice of ye sixth trompe,
Psalm. 141 Daniell. 12 VVicleuus and Ioannes Hussius. Gala. 6. Apoca. 7 Act. 1,
Iaco. 5.
these mad, fierce, ragyng beasts being abroad. Where as under ye seventh,
the carnal church rejected, and the Antichrists overthrow, ye right Israel
of the Jews and Gentyles tokened with faith, shall be pacyable restored into
the possession of God. In the mean season let them that live now pray, and
have their whole hope and comfort in the Lord.

9 And the remnaunt of men (says Saint John) that were not killed with these
plagues, Sebastianus Meyer in commentario super Apocalipsim.
which are they whom God has called in this age by the true preachers, from
their detetestable doctrine and erroneous ways, unto the sure knowledge of his
godly verity and Gospel. 1. Peter. ^, Roma. 1. Heb. 2 2. Tim. 4,
These remember not the singular benifite of God, they magnify not his holy
name for their deliverance from these most dangerous plages of no less the^
dampnacion in them selves, but remain altogether unthankful.

10 They repent not from the heart the deeds of their hands. Apoca. 2,
Hebr. 12 Franciscus Lambertus in Apoca. Romans 14. 1. Cor. ^*
They have no remorse in conscience of their old wicked works. No, they
amend not their lives, nor yet fashyon them selves to the true trade of the
Gospel. But rather they are slanderous unto it, by indiscreetly using the
liberties thereof, ministering occasions of falling unto the weak.

11 They see the people in diverse points of Idolatry run headlings to the
diuill, Theodorus bibliander in consualtatione*
yet do they not brotherly admonish them by the scriptures of the dangers
thereof. They show the^ not yt the worshipping of Images.

12 Which are made of dead things, Baru^^.
as gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood, is the very worshipping of diuils.
Psalm. 95 Sapi. 15. Psalm. 113. Math. 5, Romans 15 1. Joan. 3, Luke. 10


13 They tell them not that they be sinful men's works, and can neither see
nor hear, speak nor go. They will be called Christian brethren, yet is it no
dolor unto them to see their brethren perish, for who^ they ought to ieoperde
their lives. They must seem Samaritanes, yet will they not heal the wounds
of them that are more then half dead, yea, is not to be feared that for
doubt of punishment and loss of their goods, they look back again toward
Sodom with Lots wife, Math. 13. Gene. 19, Luke. 17. Apoc. 18. Chrisostomus.
Cirillus.
consenting to their abominations? Let them not think that so does, but a
double plague follows them. More worthy is he to perish ye throws him self
willingly into a perell knowing it before, Romans 1. Apoca. 22,
the^ he which never knew it.

14 Neither repented they (says Saint John) of their murder, their
witchcraft, their whordom, nor their ^^eft. They see of their own congregation
in poverty, penury, prison, and exile, and they know it is for none other
then the testimony of Jesus. Yet have they no mind to help them. Hiere ^^.
Apoca. 1. 1 Timothy 5. John. 12 Luke. 8, Act. 5, 2 Thessalonians. ^ Math. 13.
No courage have they to comfort the^. They dare not be acknowne to favor that
sort. When any trouble comes, they are none of them. They are well contented
to have Christ in daliau^ce, but if he put them once to pain, or ask ought of
them, the^ bid they him adue, they can no skill of him, they know him not, the
farther of the better. Thus are they become neither hot nor cold, Apoca. 3, 1.
John. 3. Jacob. 2, 1. T^m. 5. Daniel. 14* Bar^^a. 6 Apoca. 17 Sebastianus Meyer
ready to be spewed out of the mouth of God None other are they then murderers
that succoure not their brethren. Worse are they then infidels that helps not
ye household of faith. The witchcrafts of ye hipocrits they know by ye evident
scriptures, yet will they not flee from the^.

15 They know the open whordom of the babilonicall stru^pet, they know her
theft and robbery, evermore spoiling God of his honor, yet will they r^nne to
it, seek it, and take part of it with the unfaithful. What is he ^ls that
runs with a thief, Psalm. 4*
but a thief also. Hebr. 6. Math. 2^ Luke. 19 2. Peter. 2. 2. Cor. 1. Romans 1.
2 These. 2. Luke. 12, Iaco. 4. Math. 12
Alack they tread under their feet the precious gift of God. Like
unprofitable servants, they hyde his godly treasure underneath the ground.
And like unreasonable dogs they turn again to their vomete. The heavenly
father of his eternal mercy, grant such to amend* For a much greater plague
abides them than the other, thought it be not here named. For many stripes are
due to that servant which knows his Lords will, and does it not, yea, to
sin against knowledge, is against the holy ghost and irremissible.

The tenth Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And I saw an other mighty Angel, 2. come down from heaven, 3. clothed
with a cloud, 4. and the Raynbovv upon his head. 5. And his face, as it were
the sun, 6. and his feet as it were pillars of fire 7. And he had in his
hand a little book open. 8. And he put his right foot upon the Sea, and his
left foot on the earth. 9. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion
roareth. 10. And when he had cried, seven thunders spoke their uoyces. And
when the vij. thu^ders had spoken their voices, 12. I was about to wright.
And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me. 13. Seal up these things,
which the seven thunders spoke. 14. And write them not.

The Paraphrase. 1
IN the midst of this most vengeable time, Joan Hu^ de regno antichristi.
Apoca. 9. Bedas. Franciscus Lambertus in apocal.
wherein the Antichrists and hipocrites most fiercely sturreth about them,
(...) vex all the world with their ^erie blastes, their filthy smoke, and
their stinking brymstone, to restore again their pleasant Euphrates, the Lord
has sent to the comfort of his certain peculiar and chosen learned men, most
constantlye to defend his verity. And then, this present revelation compares
to a strong Angel.

1 I saw (says saint John) an other mighty strong Angel come down from
heaven. Cobanus Hessus* Ioannes Hilten.
With a stout power came this Angel from God to withstand the furious
beasts in this sixth age of Christ's church, wherein they rage so sore. God
has raised some godly persons now, Melanchto^ VValdenus, Hiere. 1. Acto 9. 3.
Esdre. 3,
by whom many things are opened that before time were hid, accept it were to
a few poor souls in corners. Constant are these and earnest, yea invincible
warriors by the word of God. For who can be more strong then they which fi^ht
with an invincible weapon? Which is the verity of God. That valiant
co^querour has victory in them, which promised to give them such mouth and
wisdom as all enimyes should not be able to resist,

2 This Angel, or ministers signified by him, Math. 10. Luke. 21 Franciscus
Lambertus John 20 Apoca. 8. Esa. 14. Math. 15*
descend down from heaven with Christ their master, as messengers sent of
God. The Apostates and Antichrists falls down from heaven with their
Captain Lucifer, like stars of darkness. And as wicked seed not planted
of God they rise up in the world.

3 This Angel was clothed with a cloud, Petru^ Berthori* John. 15.
betokening these godly supporters of the Lords truth to be compassed with many
hard showers and troublous crosses of opprobrious rebukes, scorns, slanders,
lies, and open blasphemies, to the vttermoste trial of their weak flesh. And
this cloud hides from the world all that is in them spiritual and godly,
Math. 5* Luke. 6* Mala. 2. Phil. 2, Acto. 20. John. 9. John. 12. John. 19
like as it did in Christ, that to many they seem not yt they are in deed.
Because they are dispysed of the crafty generation, and evil spoken of by the
hypocrites, ye simple Idiotes and deceived multitude does judge them ill doers,
yea, they suppose them very heretics, and so does spyghtfullye call them.
Where as in very deed they are the Angels of God, and most high chosen
messengers. Mala. 2, Acto, 4. Esa. 60. Augustinus et Bedas. Eccli. 39 1. (...).
3. John. 15
The Apostles thus used also of ye world, were named clouds of Esaias the
Prophet very long before they preached the Gospel. What are these (says he)
that flies like clouds. These were and are they that every where pours
down the sweet dew and rain of the mysteries of God, and seasonably
moysteneth the ground of faithful hearts, causing them to bring forth their
fruits in due season.

4 Upon the head of this Angel was the Rainebow. Eccli. 4^ Psalm. 102 Esa. ^3,
Gene. 9.
And in this are they noted to be the Angels of the covenant, and the
messengers of peace* For so much as the Raynebow was the sign of Gods
covenant concerning the flood. Their message is that Christ is the only
savior of ye world, Act. 4. Heb 7. Roma. 8. Gala. 4.
and that none can perish believing in him. No dampnation is there to them
which are in Christ Jesus. No though they never know one ceremony or popish
constitution of theirs.

Though they never hear Mass nor go procession, Titu^. 3. Esa. 1. vvicleuus
Ephe. 2. Collo. 1. Ioannes Oecolam padius in Esaia^. Romans 4* Luce. 18.
though they never be greased, shaven, nor disguised, though they never have
Beads, Latin Primers, portifolyomes, nor other signs of hypocrisy, yet are
they promised to have attonemente with God.

Most rightly has this Angel the raynebow on his head, for all the study,
practice and diligence of the faithful ministers, is to declare the free
mercy of God, and most friendly benevolence in Christ without any point or
jot of men's deseruinges, least they should perish with the Pharysy for
trustinge in their own works.

5 The face of this Angel was as the bright sun. Phil 2. Mala, 3, John, 12,
Romans 2. Henricus Bullingerus
Their outward show is altogether Christ, which is the son of
ryghtuousnesse. None other light show they but his. None other doctrine declare
they but his holy Gospel, neither decrees, nor decretals, fathers
constitutions nor Sinodals. But them they leave to the dark bloddy stars
which are fallen from heaven. Apoca. 9 ^. John. 4
Only teach they the shining charytie of God, the fervent zeal, and burninge
desire toward man's salvation. Neither advance they ceremonies nor rytes, holy
days nor offeringes, dirges nor masses, Martinus Lutherus de tradicionibus
humanis. Math. 5. Esa. 1. VVicleuus in trialogo 1. These. 4. 1, Tim. 5,
purgatory nor relics.

And as concerning their lives, more GOD desires not of the Christian
minister, then to expende his whole study, labor, and time to the lyghtening
of other. He neither commands them to be shaven, nor disguised, to be
popish Priest nor Monk, to say mattens nor Euensong, to fast friday nor
vigill, to abhor marriage nor meats. Only he wylleth them to edyfye his
flock, with none other learning then his Godly truth. This is their only
office.

6 The feet of this Angel were in similitude as pillars of fire. Apoca. ^
Gala. 2. 1. Tim. 3 Hiere. 1.
Strong sustentacles and sure stays has god made ye vpholders of his true
church. Fervent affections has he given them, constant stomaks, Luke. 2^ 3.
Esd. 3. Psalm. 2^ Esa. 52 Nahum. 8 Romans 10
and so invincible a power as no violence can resist. Douty and strong is the
administration, where the verytie remains, for it brings with it the
magestie of God O how bewtifull (says Esaias) are the feet of the Ambassadors
of the Lord, which brings ye message of peace, and the tidinges of health
unto Syon?

7 He had in his hand a little book open. 1. Cor. 12 Apoca. 4. Luke, 24. Esa.
35. Math. 11. Psalm. 118 Iaco. 1. Math. 7 John. 14*
In their administration are ye scriptures euydent and clear, opened by the
Lamb, and much godly knowledge is received of other by them. Blessed be the
Lord which has opened ye book. Now may the creple stand up, ye blind see
their way, ye poor feed and be satified. Desire therefore with faithful David
from ye very heart, to have understanding and to know ye testimonies of god. Are
meekely and have, seek wisely and find, knock gently and the door will be
opened. Uery like is it that the Lord God does mind plentuouslye to spread
the doctrine of his spirit in this sixth age of his church, Act. ^^ Apoca. 4.
this book being thus opened.

And that all the world shall receive it, rebel the hypocrites never so sore.
Math 24 Apoca. 7 Math. 15 Eusebius cesarien. Franciscus. Lambertus in Apoca.
When the Gospel appeared in Christ's time, the Jews were the first that
received it, after the Greks, and last of all the Latins. Now in this later
time it opens to the Latins by the administration of this mighty Angel and
his affinity, and from them is going to the Greeks, for many of them now of
late has graciouslye received it, as we have hard. And last of all it shall
return again to the Jews, Martinus Lutherus. Br^^felsius. Luke. 11 Math. 20
Hiere. 31 Aggei. 2
as now very apt also to receive it. That Christ's prophecye may be found
true. The last to be the first, and the first the last. For he that has
dispersed Israel, shall bring him again to his fold, as Heiremy records.
Thus shall the glory of God be within few years seen the world over, to the
comfort of many.

8 This Angel set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the
earth. Ambrosius Ansbertus Hiere. 31 Esai. 61. Marci. 16* Ihon. 6,
As well shall the weak people receive this verytie as the strong, the poor
as the rich, the low as the high, the sick as the whole, the sinner as the
rightuous, the beggar, as the king, the unlearned as the learned, the laboring
man as the priest, and much rather. 1. Cor. ^
For the right foot is toward them. The I Will that is speared up with the
maine sea, yea, Franciscus Lambertus in Apoca. Math. 24 Hiere. 31 Sebastianus
meyer. in Apoca. 6*
and they also which be upon the sea, shall so well have it as the open wide
country, or as they, which dwell upon the most pleasant land. From none shall
the Book be speared. Every where shall the truth be open, as well by writings
as words, and as well by books as preachinges. Upon both shall this Angel
tread. Both sorts of people shall be subjects to that verytie, which those
Godly messengers shall bring, submitting themselves as foo^s^ooles unto it.
Psalm. 9^* Ioannes (...).
Some ungodly rulers there be both by sea and land, both in the Isles and the
open country, Otho bru^felsius in annotacio^ibus ^na^geliorum.
that will none of this Angel with this open Book. In no wise will they
suffer him to set footeinge within their regions, but commands under pain
of death, that no man teach his doctrine nor hear it, that no man prynte his
books, bye them, sell them, read them, hold them, favor them, nor bear
them upon him. But al is in vain. Let the^ wax mad, swell, and fret themselves
to death, yet will he tread upon their ground. Let them persecute, fetter,
stock, famish, slay, hang, head, burn, Ioa^him Abbas in Hieremi. Lutherus
aduersus pseudo Episcopos.
drown, yea, and bu^y quick with all other mischife and tyranny, yet will the
truth abroad.

9 For the Angel cries with so loud a voice, as the Lion when he roareth.
Apoca. 19. Herb 4* Apoca. 5 Gene. 1. Math. 16. Hebr. 4. Ephe. 6 (...). 21. 1.
Cor. ^.
So mighty and strong is the word yt they preach, and the verytie that they
show, as was the sharp lyuinge word, that Christ spoke, which was the
invincible Lion of Judah. And so mighty is that as made both heaven and earth,
so strong as destroys the power of hell, so sharp as deuideth the soul from
the spirit, and the joints from the marye, and so weighty as when it falls,
grindeth to powder all pride, power, magnificence, wisdom, riches, and vain
pollycye of this world, none shall be able to abide it.

10 And when the Angel had cried, and uttered this terryble noise, Hiymo. lib,
3. in Apoca. Franciscus Lambertus P^alm. 9 Romans 1. Apoca. 7
seven thounders spoke their voices.

The fearful judgments of the wrath of GOD, which are infinite, and can
neither be numbered nor yet measured of the creatures, opened their terrible
mysteries, which shall at their times appointed of him, light upon the
children of vnbeleeue.

The tyrauntes, Hebr. 10 2. Para. 32 Esai. 36.
which has resisted the heavenly verytie of the Lord, will once be punished
as was the ^ost of Senacherih king of Assure. Once will he fearfully visit
their multitude in the thunder of his ire. Once shall the terrible sound of hy^
crack stryk the earth smothe, Iohel. 2. Soph. 2. Sebastianus Meyer in Apocalip.
Math. 23. Luck. 11 Franciscus Lambertus
revenging the contempt of his word. In Italye, Spain, France, Germany, and
other christian regions, the Angel has showed the book open, and roared out
the voice of the Gospel with stomach as does the Lion, yet will it not be
taken, but some they have beaten for it, and some most spightfully murdered.

Let them not think but after the lightning ye thunderclap will follow. The
verytie opened, and thus despised, most grievous plagues of derth, war, or
pestilence will shortly fall by the great vengeance of God. Principles has
been seen in some quarters, Math. 24. Luce. 21. Otho bru^felsius
of the world, let them not think but much more is coming, and will not
cease till Christ has made of his enemies his foote^ stool.

11 And when the seven thonders had spoken their voices, Psalm. 109 Albertus
Magnus in Apoca. 7
or showed their certentie that they should so surely as God lives come to
pass at their time appointed.

12 I was about (says Saint John) to take pen and ink in hand, Robar^^^
Tuitiensis in apoca, Bedas Haymo. Franciscus Lutherus
and to write them I thought to register them in a book to the admonishme^t
and warning of them that should follow. And anon I heard a very earnest voice
from heaven, saying unto me in this manner.

13 Seal up those things which the seven thunder spoke, and in no wise write
them. Register the thunders, but not the voices. Note the figures, but utter
not the mysteries till God appoint it. It is not for all men to know the times
which God has in his power.

Many secret things heard Paul, Acts. 1. Math. 24. 2. Cor. 12. Chrisostomus.
Augustinus* John. 16. Math. 13. Luke. ^.
which was lawful for no man to utter. The outward sound of Gods secrets may
be heard of all men but the inward workinge is reserved to the spirit. The
Lord always with the holy ghost so informs them inwardly, that they
perceive the effect of many things, the other hears but a noise. For so much
as the voice of gods thundrings is unsearchable, Romans 1^ Psalm. 35. Esa. 6.
and his secret judgments the most mighty depth, they are not open but to
such as he electeth.

14 Therefore was John commanded in no case to writ them, or to open ye secret
meaning of them. That point the Lord reserueth peculyerly to him self, Haymo
in Apoca. Psalm. 67. Luke. 24. Otho Bru^felsius in Euangelia
to open to whom, what, or how much him lusts. Much wide ar th^^ which
thinks that they can of their own wit, and industry declare such causes,
unless God opens them by his word or some evident sign, as he has done in
this age most plentuously to many. Less can we not gather of these thunders,
John Hus in quedam loca Apoc. Franciscus Lambertus Mala. 2.
when the message of God is despised, abused, forsaken, neclected, trodden under
foot, (...) damnable lies preferred unto it, tha^ yt his wrath must follow.
Somewhat has been seen already, much more will appear when they give full
(...)*

THE TEXT.
1 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea. and upon the earth. 2. Lift up
his hand to heaven. 3. And swore by him that lives for evermore. 4. Which
created heaven and the things that therein are. 5. And the earth, and the
things that are in it (...), And the sea, and the things which are therein. 7.
That there shall be no more time, but in the days of the voice of the seventh
Angel. 8. When he shall begin to blow. 9. Even the mystery of God shall be
finished. 10. As he preached by his servants the Prophets.

The Paraphrase.
1 And the Angel (says Saint John) whom I saw in this wonderful
revelation, thus standing with one foot upon the sea, an other upon the
land, after the sort before named.

2 Lift up his hand toward heaven, Ioachim Abbas in Apoca. Sebastianus meyer.
in Apoca*
so strongly to affirm his message to be true as the Lord lives, and to
promise it so in fallibly just as god siteth in heaven.

3 What do the true preachers else in this age, but maintain their doctrine by
the mighty word of God, Luke, 24. Acts ^
after the example of Christ and his Apostles which alleged the law,
prophecies and Psalms, to confirm their sayings with They neither allege
decree, Martinus Lutherus in postilla. 1. Tessa. 5. 1. John. 4 Psalm. 115
Psalm. 13 Hebr. 1. Gene. 1.
nor decretall, constitution, nor Synodall, Legende nor fable, monks rule nor
saints life, doctors nor fathers, Gregory nor Anselme, Thomas nor Dons, Plato
nor Arystotle, nor such like filthy dregs. But they come to the very true
touchestoane with John, they prove the spirits whether they be of God or no,
considering that all men are liars, and have erred, one except.

4 He swear by him that lives in himself with incomprehencible magesty, power
and glory for evermore, which in the beginning created the heaven above with the
invisible things that are therein contained.

5 Which formed the po^derous earth beneth and the visible creatures that are
therein remaining. Esai. 45. Amos. 4 Eccli. 18. Psalm. 135


6 Which fashioned the flowing seas and the corruptible things that are there
in continuinge. Franciscus Lambertus in Apoca.


7 With an earnest constant spirit he protested, and by the strong word of
God he affirmed, so taking him to witness, that there shall be no more time,
no more leisure, no more sinful occuping here from henceforth, but in the
days of the voice of the seventh Angel. This oath is none other than a sure
assercion, Ioachim abbas.
that all shall be finished in this seventh age of the church. This would not
be hidden from the congregations. Sebastianus Meyer Marci. 16. Math. 13. Luke.
21. 2. Pet. 2 Apoca. 2.
Necessary it is that both good and badde knew it. The faithful to be
assartened that their final redemption is at hand, to their consolation. The
unfaithful to have knowledge that their judgment is not far of, that they
may repent and be saved. Not unlike is this oath to the oath in Daniell of
time, times, and half a time, whereof the time was from him to Christ.
Daniel. 12 Apoca. 12. Johannes baco^thorp in Daniel.
The times were the ages from Christ to the seventh seal opening, or the
seventh trumpet blowing. The half time from thence forth, Math. 24 Apoca. 8.
Apoca. 12
wherein the days shall be shortened for the chosen sake. So much mischief shall
not ye enemies d^ tha^. Their tyranny shall be as waged.

8 For when the vii. Angel shall begin to blow, or the ministers of that age
sincerely declare the word.

9 Even the mystery of God shall be finished, John. 4* 1. Cor. 13. Daniell. 11.
Hiere. 31
and the full meaning thereof fulfilled.

10 Like as he before time both taught and promised, Franciscus Lambertus in
Apoca. Psalm. 32. Act..
by his peculyer chosen servants the prophets. No time shall be after this but
that, which will be of all times the end. But when that time shall begin, we
know not till God shall open it by his seventh angel. Of the thing we are
certain and sure, but the time of it is evermore in gods hand. That is sealed
up in ye book til he shall please to open it, the rightuous shall not see til
it comes, but rest still in their lot we Daniell. And the ungodly shall have no
understanding then. Marci. 13, Daniel. 12 Luce. 17. Gene* 7. Gene. 19.
They shall build and plant, bye and sell, riot and banquet as in ye days of
Noe and Loath, yea they shall give themselves to al filthy lusts and
couetuousnes, 1. These 5. Math. 25. John. 5. Apoca. 12* Daniel. 12.
And vnbewares shall death come upon them, the terrible judge shall call them to
accoumpt, and to ye everlasting fire condemn them, thus shall their days also
be shortened, when they think nothing less for ye time shall be but half after
Daniell.

THE TEXT.
1 And the voice which I hard from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said. 2.
go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel. 3. which
stands upon the sea and upon the earth. 4. And I went unto the Angel and
said unto him. 5. Give me the little book. And he said unto me. 6. Take it and
eat it up, 7. And it shall make thy belly bitter. But it shall be in thy mouth
as svveet as honey. 11. And I took the little book out of his hand, and did
eat it up. 10. And it was in my mouth as svveete as honey. 11. And as soon as
I had eaten it, my belley was bitter 12. And he said unto me, 13, Thou must
prophecy again unto the people. 14. And to the Heathen, and Tunges, and to
many Kings.

The Paraphrase.
Mala* 2 John. 16 Romans 8. Apoca. 1. Bedas et Haymo in apocal.
1 And the voice (says saint John) which I hard before from heaven, spoke
unto me again. Gods holy spirit touched me, moved me and compelled me. It
graciously admonished me, taught me, and said thus unto me.

2 Go thy ways forth John, and take the little book which is now open in the
hand of the Angel. Ioannes 5 Acto* 17 Math. 13


Every man having grace with John is here commanded to have Gods word.
Christ wylled all faithful believers to search the Scriptures to understand
the prophecies, and to perceive the mysteries of the^. And for the performance
of his will therein, he has sent in this age this peculyer Angel, Franciscus
Lambertus in Apocal^ Luc. 10* Apoca. 9 Otho bru^felsius.
beside the common preachers, betokning those singular learned me^, who^ now he
has endue^ with most high knowledge. Of their hands he m^ndeth us to receive
the scriptures, and not of the blasing star, nor yet of the smoky Locustes.
Their faithful, sincere, and godly interpretacions, he wills us to take,
Henricu^ Bulling^ru^.
specially in books, for so much as in person they can in no wise be every
where present, and for that it is a book here named. For by them in these
days does he make open his saving health, and in the sight of all people
declares his righteousness. Let the^ therefore (whose hearts God moves to
instruct other in the ways of the Lord) diligently peruse the labors of
such, Luc. ^. Esa. 40. Joel. 2 Psalm. 118 Franciscus Lambartus* Ioannes. 5. 1.
Joan. 4 Math. 15.
whom he has so plentuously replenished with his spirit. But in thus doing
let them not to much depend upon no man's person, but prove all things by ye
scriptures, least they fall into errors as other has done before for so
dooyng. Uerye lightly is he deceived that measures the verity by man's
judgments. In ye search therefore of godly mysteries, not the wit nor the
learning of the man is to be sought, but rather the right meaning of God
working in the man. Ioannes Chrisosto. Augustinus


3 This Angel stands upon ye sea, and upon the land. As well is ye true
messenger of God for the weak as for the strong, Cyrillus. Albertus Magnus Esa.
61. Math. 11 2. Tim. 4* Gala. 6.
for the low as for ye high, for the poor as for the rich, for the simple as
for the learned, for ye sick as for ye whole, and for the foul as for the
fair. Yea, and rather for them than the other, having his right foot upon the
water.

4 And I (says S. John) obeying the voice of the Lord, Iosue. 1^. Rom* 6,
Psalm. 118
or the heavenly mocion of his spirit went unto the Angel, and instantly
desired him to give me that little sweet book.

5 None other is this book the^ the holy scripture, Eucherius Iugduneas.
Ioannes Hus in aliquot loca Apocalip. Franciscus. Lambertus
whose opening is a pure and right interpretation thereof. This he receives
open at his hand, which diligently reads or hears any sincere declaration
of it by any faithful minister. None other is this book fit for, nor none
other retayneth it in this age, but meek John's, or men of a gentile spirit
having the grace of God, and obeying his heavenly voice. For the wicked must
ever be blind. Hiere. 35. Ephe. 4. Sapi. 1.
Wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul, nor dwell in the body yt is given
to sin. Hiere. 4 Math. ^* 4. Esdr. Ezech. 3* Haymo.
John went to the Angel, and received the book, for he yt will seek shall
find.

6 For ye Angel said unto him: Take it unto thee, and eat it up clean. The
belly shall it make very bitter, but it will be in the mouth so sweet as honey.
With good heart ought ye scriptures to be received of all men, Iaco. ^ John, 8,
Psalm. 118. Ephe. 4 2. Peter. 1* VVicleuus de ecclesia Romans 16 Math. 6. Hebr.
11* John. 6. Psalm. 118
in faith devoured, and in a pure love disgested. In continual study and
meditacion thereof, ought each man after his calling to persevere, the King in his
reign, the Judge in his office, the merchaunt in his occupying, the labourer in
his work, the maryner upon the sea, and the bishop in his cure. Nothing but
idelnesse works ye man, which has it not grafted within him, though he both
fast and pray. Uayne are all polycies, acts, constitucions and laws without it.
For it is ye life of our souls, the lantern of our feet, the light of our
passage, and rule our works.

7 Bitter it is in the belly, and sweet in the mouth. Luke. 8. Apoca. ^*
When the knowledge of truth is is once received, and surely setteled in the
heart, 3. Reg* 1^ Hire. 9. Ezch. 34. Exodus 32 Psalm. ^3. Treno. 1 Luc. 19.
it engenders a spiritie of indignation, and a zeal of God, very bitter
against all wickedness. It makes us with Jeremy to detest all vice, and with
Ezechiell to abhor all sin. It provoke us also with Moses, Helias,
David, and the Prophets grievously to complain of the worlds abominations,
and with Christ and his Apostles dolorously to lament the sore decay of the
wicked.

Act. 9.
8 Yet is nothing so sweet in ye mouth as it is. Nothing was to Paul so
delicious, Psalm. 18* 1, Tim. 1, Gala* 4. Math. 12, Hiere. 7 2. Cor. 11 Romans 1.
Act. 9, Gala. 2.
when he once sauored it. No, nothing so pleasant. Neither colors of
rhetorike, paintings of poets, wisdom of Philosophers, nor holy tradicions of
fathers could then delight him. All were but darnal, tares, stubble, chafe,
filth, rust, dreams, lies, and unprofitable vanities. Nothing was in his mouth
than, but that delectable verity, and that sweet Gospel of God. That took
he with him as the vessel of election in many an hard journey, and bear it
forth before the gentiles, the kings, and the children of Israel, yea and for
yt to dye he thought it than advantage. Phili. ^ Ezech, 3. 4. Esd. 14 Acto* 1^
Psalm. 18 Psalm. 11^ Canti ^


9 And I took the little book (says saint John) out of the Angels hand,
with meekness I received the scriptures of God. I did eat it up clean, I
dygested them in faith.

10 And it was in my mouth so sweet as honey* Oh how delicious (says David) are
thy sayings unto my throat? More dulcet then honye are thy words Lord to my
mouth.

11 So soon as I had eaten it (says Saint John) so soon as I had
incorporate it in my mind, VVestmerus de tropis scriptu. Luc. 6 Roma. 9* Dani.
1^
and rooted it in my soul, my bellye was bitter, my heart was grieved much to
see ye evils of the world, my spirit was troubled to see the abusions of men,
and much I pitied the loss of their souls.

12 Yet did not the Angel so leave me, but he said thus unto me: Thou must
prophecy again among ye people.

13 As thou have received, 2. Cor. ^ John. 2^
thou must render, as thou have been taught, thou must teach again, least thou
hyding the treasure of thy Lord, Math, 25 ^. Tim. 4.
become an unprofitable servant.

Math. 2^. Marci. 1^ Acto. 9. Sapi. 6. Esa. 38
14 Thou must publish the truth to the unbelievers, thou must open it to people
of diverse nations and languages, and finally manifest it to Kings of many
regions, that they see their people instructed in ye same. As a trumpet
therefore exalt thy voice, show freely the joyful message of salvation.
Refuse none that will come unto it, poor nor blind, Luck. 14 Math. 5. Luke.
11 Romans 10. Esa. 5^. Apoca. 7 Hebr. 1. ^. Thessa. 2.
halte nor lame. Consider that no man lights a candle to hyde it, but to set
it up that men may see by it. None other are fit to prophecy, but they which
have devoured the book. They must now declare the gospel in this latter age
of ye church by the appointment of the Lord. For necessary it is that by the
strength thereof, all pride of this world and blasphemy against God be
distroyed.

In the next volume shall follow the rest.
The second part of the Image of both Churches, after the most wonderful and
heavenly revelation of Saint John the Evangelist. etc.

Compiled by John Bale.



The same Disciple whom Jesus loved has witnessed and written these things,
and we know that his testimony is true. Ioannes.xxj.

A small Preface unto the Christian Reader.
IN the first part or volume of this work (which co^tayneth the first.x.
Chapters) are all these godly ma^ters of Saint John's Revelation in course
comprehended. First of all is the high legacy and message of the said Saint
John unto the.vij. congregacions of A^ta, in the first Chapter mencyoned.
Wherein they are also unto vij. golden Candelstickes compared, and their
preachers unto vij. shyning stars in the right hand of Christ.

In the second and third Chapters are the said vij. congregacions severally
each one by it self discribed and warned, to the universal premonishment of
the whole Christian Church in the vij. parts or clymates of the world. Mark
those three Chapters diligently, and ye shall perceive that the true Christian
church is alone go^uerned by ye preaching of gods word, an only office of
Christ commanded, and not by dead ceremonies co^maun^ by the Pope, of whom
there is no specialtie.

Consider how those preachers throughout all this book, are compared unto
stars and Angels, their co^gregacions called the right spouse of Christ. The
other be assembled unto most filthy locustes, breeding of the smoke of ye pit
bottomless, unto hateful birds, foul spirits and diuils, their church called
the proud Sinagoge of Satan, and the most execrable whore of Babylon.

In the iiij. Chapter is heaven made open, and the secrets thereof manifested
unto ye christian believer, whom John also represents this whole book over.
For not only are the mysteries thereof in the universal church performed, but
also in the particular churches of nations, and in the pryuate consciences of
men.

In the.v.vj. and vij. Chapters, the Lamb Christ opens the vij. seals of
the book of the most hidden mysteries of God, for the vij. ages of ye
christian church. In the mean season are the true servants of God sealed unto
salvation, solaced in their troubles, and relieved in their sorrows,
notwithstanding, the great violence of the truths adversaries.

In the viij. and ix. Chapters, the vij. Angels blow their trumpettes.
Signifying the preachers to show forth their messages appointed of God for
the vij. ages of the church, many wonderful plages following in the people for
their vnbeleeues sake, they obstinately resisting it, or else unthankfully
receiving it.

In the tenth Chapter comes the mighty Angel from heaven with a book in
his hand all open, and John deuoureth the same. Which betokens the earnest
preachers of this latter age of the church, wherein the true servants of God
shall greedily receive and also digest the scriptures. Take this for a brief
sum of all yt is spoken in the other volum, the residue shall follow hereafter
in course.

In the mergent of that first part or volume, put I many allegacions both of
the scriptures and doctors* And there unto was I first provoked by this saying
of Saint Hierome in a certain Epistle of his, ad Paulinum monachum. The
Apocalips of Saint John (says he) has so many mysteries as it has words,
or for every word a mystery whither ye will.

I minded also thereby, my labors to ease the readers for search of the
places, and to signify unto them that I did nothing therein without authority.
And undoubtedly the gatheryng of those places was so laborious unto me, as the
making of the commentary, which nevertheless I thought well bestowed for the
comfort of my brethren.

But two cruel enimyes have my just labors had in that behalf, of whom the
one has them falsified, the other blaspheemed. Which has caused me to leave
the^ out in all that here follows. The Printers are the first, whose headie
have, negligence, and covetousness commonly corrupts all books. These have
both dysplased them and also changed their numbers to the truths derogacion,
what though they had at their hands ij. learned correctours which took all
pains possible to preserve them.

The other is Momus or Zoylus, yea rather one which plays both parts under
the cloak of a Christian. This cruel carper and malicious quarreller leaves
no man's work unrebuked, minister it never so much godliness. But like as
rust, mothes, maggottes, cankers, catterpyllers, with other vile vermyne
corrupts all that is to the use of man, so does this enemy, to distroy both
name and work, only for the auauncement of his own precious person.

His working tools are such unsavory sophismes, problemes, ele^ches,
corolaries, quydities, subtylties, second intentions, intrincycall moods, with
other prodygious sorceryes, whom he sometime sucked out of his mothers breasts
ye university. These has he not yet all, as unsavory morselles euometed for
Christ, diffyning rather with Aristotle than with Paul in his daily
disputations.

Of this ryall Rabi is Peter judged a fool, and John an unlearned Idiote. Yet
shall his reader find small learning at his hand, unless he take an heap of
barbarous terms, and unsown together sentences for matters of excelent
learning. But surely John will one day come from Ephesus to visit this proud
Diotrephes, and show him of his arrogant brags to his dyspleasure, unless he
leave of in time. All Aristotle's provision shall not help him.

Satan upon the pynnacle of the Temple never bestowed his alleged scripture
more peruersely, than this Momus interpreted certain of my allegacio^s, nor
yet farther from their right understanding: But I forgive it him with this
forewarning for this time, though it be not the first lewd point that he
has played, in case that ^e so leave his quareling. My second allegation upon
the Preface.1. Cor. 6 is not set there to authorize the Apocalips, as he most
falsely and all contrary to my meaning has interpreted it, but affirms that
the Christian believers are Christ's members which ought of necessity by the
holy ghostes appointment to hear and to read the words of the said Book.
For I know that the epistle unto ye Corinthians was written of Paul ten years
at the least before Saint John's Apocalips. No less is he than a false Prophet
that resists Jeremy rebuking Babylon for her wickedness,

To much it were to answer his other quarellings, and to tedious unto ye
christian readers, and therefore I pass them over least I should be to
plenteous in aunsweringe a fool according to his foolishness. Thus by these
cruel handelynges of these two ungracious enemies, have I just occasion to
leave out the allegations in the margent, observing this wholesome counsel of
Christ concerning such as they be. Give not that is holy unto Dogs, nor yet
that is precious unto swine. For the one of his churlish nature teareth and
deuoureth, the other like a swine treads it under his filthy feet. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with thee evermore (good christian Reader) and
with all the^ that seeks of the scriptures the saving health in them
contained without quarelling. Amen.

The second part of the Image of both Churches, after the most wonderful and
heavenly revelation of Saint John ye Evangelist. etc. Compiled by John Bale.
The.xi. Chapter.
Unto John was delivered after that he had thus devoured ye book, a reed, not
unlike to the mete wande of sixth cubits long and a spanne, which was given unto
Ezechiell, nor very far different from ye measuring line in Zachary. And what
is this else? but that the administration of Gods heavenly verytie is secretly
of him committed unto them which has before received it, and in faith digested
it, that they should therewith rightly measure, disterne and judge all things.
None other is it to prophesi again in this sixth age, but thus is to mete the
Temple, the altar, and the worshippers therein, and to prove them in length,
breadth, height and depth,

THE TEXT.
ANd than was given me a reed, a Like unto a rod. 3. And it was said unto me.
4. Arise and mete the Temple of God. 5. And the Altar. 6. And them that
worship therein. 7. And the Quire, which is within the Temple, cast out. 8.
And mete it not* 9. For it is given unto the Gentiles. 10. And the holy city
shall they tread under foot xlii. months.

The Paraphrase.
1 And there was given me (says saint John) a Reed. Both received I the
wisdom of God, and also a mouth to utter it. So yt my tongue became the pen of
a ready writer. For so much as I abhorred iniquity, the Lord anointed me
inwardlye with the oil of gladness, and gave me stomach to utter his word.

2 The reed which god delivered me was like unto a rod. For his word is the
rod, of right order, and ye scepture of his kingdom. With this rod sprede he
out the heavens, and laid forth the first foundation of the earth.

This rod of his power has the Lord now graciously sent us out of Sion by me^
having his special grace as by John, to have dominion here in the midst of his
enemies.

3 For unto John it was said for this age. Arise, from vain studi, from cares
of the body, from consideration of earthly causes.

4 And mete the holy Temple of God, which is his congregation or Church: Prove
all believes whether they be right or no. Examine their works, whether they
spring of Gods commandments or of men's tradicions. And in so doing try by
the scriptures the corn from the chafe,

Mark out the people of God from ye synagoge of satan, and delay not to
nourish them with the sweet fruits of the spirit,

5 Measure the Altar also, which is Jesus Christ, upon whom the full sacrifice
of redemption was offered. For many false Christ's are abroad in the world, to
seduce the people, The Pope bosteth himself for Gods own vicar. Machomet
calls himself ye great Prophet of ye Lord. And both they to subdue the
Gospel has set up new laws. The Pope his detestable decrees, and Mahomet his
abominable Alchoran. Both they have wrought such wounders and such signs in
supersticion, as might deduce into error (if God were not merciful) the very
elect persons. The monks says that Christ is in the desert, the pristes
says he is in the box, but admonish my people, that in no case they believe
it. The Chanons says he is here, the Friars says he is there, but counsel
my flock that they go not forth. For God dwells in nothing that is made
with hand. In the faithful heart is Christ only found. There remains he.
That is his dwellinge place.

6 Therefore now last of al, measure them also that worship in the Temple.
Consider them only to be his people, which seek him in spirit and in verytie,
and that worship not in outward shadows, nor in the elements of this world,
nor yet with observation of days and times. They are not his sons, that for
the leven of Pharisees which is the doctrine of Hipocrits, forsakes the bread
of children, which is his living word, They are not his Lambs but vile gotes,
that rather attends to the voice of strangers, than to the true shepherd
Christ.

7 And therefore the quier which is within the Temple cast out. The prelates,
priests and religions, which are not of the common sort, seclude from Christ,
from his Church, and from the company of true worshippers. Throw forth the
bond woman and her son, the Rome church with the her children, and Mahomet
with his rabble. For the bond shall not inherit with the free.

8 Measure not out that chaunsell of charmers, that college of Balams brethren,
those marked Madianits and cursed Ismaelits. Allow the^ not by the scriptures,
commend not their counterfaict righteousness. Admit them not for the members of
CHRIST, but judge them to be the synagog of satan. And spear them out of the
kingdom of God, with the key of David. For they are those swine, that tread
pearls under their feet and those cruel dogs that turn again to devour
men. Meddle not with that quier, have not to do with that wicked generation.

9 For it is given unto the Gentiles, Wholly are those Antichrists addict to
the superstitious rytes of the Heathen in their sacrifices, their ceremonies,
their observations, their holy days, their vigils, fastings, prayings,
kneelings, and all other vsages, contrary to the admonishment of Christ. That
they should in no wise enter into the ways of the Gentiles. Wherefore God has
detested them with his own mouth, and clean given them over unto their own
fylthy lusts. Mow reign they al in their own wisdom, thinking evermore their
own fleshly fantasies best, wholly they are become gentiles.

10 And the holy city (of whom glorious things are spoken) they shall tread
under foot the space of xlij. months. Not the earthly Jerusalem is this
city, builded of men, and made holy by ye outward obseruacions and ceremonies
of ye Jews as many expositours has fantasied. For of yt (like as Christ
prophesied) is not left one stoane standing upon an other. But this city is
the sure bulding of God, grounded upon the strong foundation of the Apostles
and prophets, even upon the hard rock stone Jesus Christ. This is the pleasant
possession, the wholesome household, the sure hold, and the delectable viniarde
of the Lord of hosts. This is the living generation of them which fears,
loves, and seeks their Lord God in faith, spirit and verytie, and not in
outward shadows. These are the children of promis, the true offspring of
Abraham, the chosen house of Israel, and the kingdom of the holy ghost. Pure,
clean, and holy has Christ made this city by none other thing but ye only
shedding of his precious blood.

11 This city tread they under foot, that keeps down the truth of the
gospel, yt persecuteth and sleath gods people for it, ye defeateth his word for
their own traditions, that brings in the Jewish ceremonies, the Gentiles
supersticions, pagans customs, and hethe^ vsages, yoking men with imp^rtable
burthe^s of false worshippings for their own filthy (...) and advantage.
Notwtstandinge thus must they do still by the sufferance of God, till the lxij.
months be finished, which is not else but the time, ye times, and the half
time, or the thousand, two hundred and lx. days, in yt God shall shorten the
time for his chosen sake. Thus after S. Paul also before the Lords coming.
There must be a departing. The quier or chauncell must be cast out, yt the man
of sin, the sun of perdition, and the adversary exaltinge himself above God,
may be known in his colors. It may not be mote^, or allowed by gods word, but
rejected as that plant which ye heavenly father has not planted, yt the
mystery of iniqutye may be uttered and perceived of the^ which shall be saved.
It must be given to ye gentiles, or addict to their supersticions, with al lying
power, signs and wonders, in all deceiuable doctrine, by ye subtle working of
satan. They must also be permitted to do al mischif in unrighteous, upon ye
citizens of God, til he utterly consu^e the^ with the mighty breath of his mouth.

THE TEXT.
1 And I will give power. 2. Unto my two witnesses. 3. And they shall prophecy
a thousand, two hundred and threescore days. 4. Clothed in sack clothe. 5.
These are two olive Trees. 6. And two Candlestickes. 7. Standing before the God
of the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 And I will give power says the Lord unto my faithful witnesses, and they
shall prophesye a thousand two hundred and lx. days against those enemies to
the comfort of my people. So that though my city be trodden down by their
cruel laws of persecution to death, yet shall it not be forsaken. And though
my people be over loaded with their heathen supersticions and blasphemous
worshippinges, yet shall they not be lost nor left all without succor.

2 They shall have my two witnesses with the^ to solace the^ in their troubles,
and to comfort them in their cares. Both Moses and Christ, both the law and
the Gospel, both the Prophets and the Apostles shall stand upon their side
and be upon their part: yea, for so much time as their enemies shall vex
them, and for so much space as their adversaries sholl trouble them Even a
thousand two hundred and threeskore days, which makes three years and an
half, and is more the^ the two and forty months by iiii. skore days and
four. Which signifies yt the enemies shall not evermore keep down his word,
but their days shall be shortened for his elect sake. The school Doctors
with their sophestry has fantasied the said two witnesses to be Enoch and
Helyas, and that they should come then from Paradise terrestre for the same
purpose, because that Enoch was taken away of God, and Helias was carried hence
in a fyery Charet, neither understanding what Paradise is, nor yet knowing what
it is to be taken from hence. Paradise is the sweet rest of God appointed unto
them that depart hence in faith. The peculier translations of Enoch and Helias
were not only for a confirmation or strenthning of the faith of the fathers for
their times, but also yt they should be figuers of Christ's assention. And what
godly wise man can give more to the figuer than to the verytie? More were not
they privileged from death then was Christ, though God would not then have it
so openly known, to declare his wonderful power. Unlike is it yt god should
call witnesses from the dead, not promising it by his word, having power also
from stones to raise up Abraha^s children, and to give ye spirit of Helias to
who^ he pleases, like as he did to John Baptist, and as he does now to many
other more in our age, as all the world may see and hear. These witnesses are
two, for so much as the truth of the Lord in the mouth of two or three godly
persons ought to stand.

3 These two witnesses or faithfuli protestours of the aforsayde two testaments
has continued with the people of god since ye death of Steeue^, for ye more
part secretly and unknown to ye world. But now they are come abroad by the
appointment of God, to the utter confusion of the great adversary and man of
sin, as Paul does call him. And unto them in this sixth age of the church, the
Lord has given the great power of his living word, or the spirit of his
invincible verytie in much more ample wise then aforetime, for the abatement of
the said enemies or synagoge of perdition.

4 Clothed they shall be in sackcloth (says the Lord) No pomp shall appear in
their apparel, no glory of the world in their behavior. Neither shall they
be accompanied with a guard of ruffelynge rutters. Neither shall they with
Annas and Caiphas sit upon life and death. Neither shall they bless in the
streate with miter, cross and cope. Neither claim the higher seats, in side
gowns, shaven crowns, and tippetes. Neither shall their be sack Friars, nor
Franciscans, monks, Chanons, nor Hypocrites.

They shall not disfigure themselves to seem religious, nor say long prayers
to appear holy, but in a sober conversation, avoiding superfluity, they shall
constantly witness the truth of god to the universal world, to his glory and
their edification. For sackcloth in the scriptures is a sign of sobriety,
sadness and temperaunce, as in Helias and John Baptist.

5 These witnesses are two sweet olive trees, shedding forth the fatnes of the
scriptures, and dulset sanour of the spirit. God has so blessed them that
their lyps are full of grace. He has anointed them with the oil of gladness
above their fellows, of Myrre, Bawme and Aloes, they delectably smell. None
other things utter they but his infallible verities.

6 They are also two shininge Candlesticks, setting forth the light, or clearly
opening of the hidden mysteries of the scriptures, to the comfort of the
gentiles and glory of the Israelits. They are not the light it self but only
instruments ordained to bear witness of ye light. For there is but one light
for all. Only are they the vessels of election, as was Paul, to carry that
light the world over.

7 They stand in the presence of the God of the earth, or the Lord of all, as
men of most high acceptacion before him, ready to do his will and to fulfill
his commandment and pleasure, having the oil of his spirit, and the light
of his eternal verity.

THE TEXT.
1 And if any man will hurt them. 2. Fire shall proceed out of their mouths.
3. and consume their enemies. 4. And if any man will hurt them, this wise
must he be killed. 5. These have power to shut heaven. 6 that it rain not in
the days of their prophesying, 7. and have power over waters to turn them to
blood 8. and to smite the earth. 9. with all manner plagues, as often as they
will.

The Paraphrase.
1 If any man will attempt to do them scathe, or presumptuouslie seeks by
crafty colors, subtle reasons, and deceiptful arguments, upon dangers,
doubts, doctors, old customs, and authority of fathers to hinder their
office, blemishe their message, and darken their light, such fire shall
proceed out of their mouths as shall consume their enemies.

2 The eternal word of the Lord that they shall declare (which is the
consuming fire) shall utterly distroye them. So that nothing shall be seen of
that they were before. Neither cut shoe, nor cord, coule, nor gray cote,
boot, nor black hood, rochet, nor scapler, myter, nor crosier, sandale, nor
frocke, shaven crown, nor anointing. For all these are their enemies.

3 Consumed are they to their salvation that with Mathewe become of Publicans
true Apostles, and with Paul of fierce persecutors, charitable teachers.
Contrariwise are they consumed to their dampnatio^, which being overcome by the
manifest verity, wilfully persist in their diuilish errors with Antiochus and
Pharao, with the Scribes and Pharisees.

4 For it follows. And if any man will hurt them, this wise must he be
killed. Either must he be mortifyed from the old Adam, and changed into a new
man in Christ, or else by the said word must he both be judged and condemned
for the utter adversary of God, with Satan his ancient captayn. So must he
be killed. And no death will be found like unto that death come they once to
the feeling of it, though they account it now very light.

5 For these witnesses have power as had Helias, to shut up heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their prophesying, but yet none other wise then by
the aforesaid word. For the word of God is the very key of David, which
opens the kingdom of god to them that faithfully believes, and that
speareth it up also from the^ which dwellith in unfaithfulness. For it is said,
in the days of their prophesying. This power therefore is of the word, and not
of the men. The word speareth and opens, losoneth and binds, saves, and
dampneth.

He that believes says Christ shall be saved, he yt believes not is judged
already. No moisture of grace nor godly wisedo^ can light where sturdie
frowardness is rooted. The days of their prophesying in figure is non other
the^ ye aforesaid time, times, and half time, or the three years and vj.
months of Helias.

6 In those days shall it not rain upon the wicked, they shall have no grace
to receive the verity. In parables and figures shall that be hidden from them,
that shall be euydent enough unto the faithful. With ears shall they hear
and not understand, with eyes shall they see, and not deserne. So blind will
their hearts be. For such speak the Prophets in fygures. Christ in parables,
and the Apostles in mysteries. The open truth of this revelation shall not the
wicked perceive, till they taste the plages thereof. Such is the nature of Gods
wisdom that though it be not in glorious words, fine painted terms, nor in
perswasible reasons of man's wit, but in plain simple speaking, yet can it
not be known of the worldly wise. The sweet dew thereof will not be received
of them, in the aforesaid days of prophecy, but he that is blind shall be
blind still.

7 These witnesses have also power over waters, to turn the^ into blood. When
they interpret and sincerely declare ye pure verities of God, which are those
wholesome waters that restrains the dampnable dryness of the soul, that
refreshes the conscience, and cleanses the heart of the sinner, they can not
choose but earnestly condemn the perverse judgments, the covetous laws and
hipocrityshe works of the ungodly. And then is all unclean unto them, then is
all bloody. The Gospel which was a stumbling stone to the Jews, and made
foolishness unto the Gentiles, is also now unto them naughty new learning,
seditious doctrine, and abhomynable heresy. Yea, and they judge them worthy
to be burned that does teach it. Thus is it abhorred of them that shall
perish, and nevertheless to them that believe, it is the power of God unto
salvation.

8 Finally, they have power to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, as
often as they will. Uery earth are they that regard not Gods truth, as the Lord
said unto Adam after his offense. Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou
return. Nothing they esteem, but that which is earthly. Nothing they desire,
but that is carnal. The froward creature will in no case know that is of the
spirit. The light is hateful unto sore eyes. Uery painful is bread to the
mouth that is not whole. A great mote was Christ to the Jews, as his true
preachers are unto the blind world yet to this day. For they smite the earth.

9 They touch their living, they rebuke their falshoode, they condemn their
wickedness. They reprove the^ of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.

They force not to tell to him of their unfaithfulness, fraud, and hipocrisiie
of their Philosophers, prelates, and religious. No greater plague is it unto ye
ungodly the^ to hear of their evil doings. No greater pain, nor yet greater
punishment, then to have their faults opened, and their clonyng colors
condemned. That fretteth them at the very heart. Death must be sought out for
such preachers. No wonder is it though this be here written for this age of the
church. For never were more earnest witnesses then are now, and more are like
hereafter to follow, till the man of sin be fully known, and his kingdom
clearly overthrown.

THE TEXT.
1 And when they have fynished their testimony, 2. the beast that came out of
the bottomless pit, 3. shall make war against them, 4. and shall over come
them. 5. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, 6.
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, 7. where our Lord is crucified.

The Paraphrase.
1 And when they have once finished their testimony (says the Lord) the
beast that came out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them. No
sooner shall the witnesses of gods verity in all ages be taken from the
world, then he has prefixed. After none other sort shall they be sent
hence, then he has appointed by his eternal decree. John Baptist was not
imprisoned, nor beheaded, till he had done his office. Christ was not taken,
condemned, and crucified till his hour was come. Paul was not put unto
death, til he had fulfilled his course.

2 The beast of the bottomless pit is the cruel, crafty, and curssed
generation of Antichriste, the Pope with his Bishops, prelates, priests, and
religious in Europa, Mahomite with his dotyng doucipers in Africa, and so
forth in Asia and Iudia, all beastly, carnal, and wicked in their doings.

3 These makes war against Gods witnesses, when they hate them, curse them,
blaspheme them, and persecute them. When they withstand them with their
crafts, impugn them with their lies, and vex them with their diuilishnesse,
as necessary it is they should do. For if they have troubled the head, they
must vex also the members. If the householder be called Beelzebub, the hosholde
must suffer the same. No better is the servant then his Lord, nor the
messenger, then he that sent him.

4 They shall also overcome them, not with ye scriptures, but with their
beggarly customs, co^stitutio^s, laws, decrees, and traditions. They shall
shall scourge them or disgarde them in their Sinagoges. They shall deliver them
up to Justices, debites, and rulars, making them their bochers and slaves, so
washing their own holy hands from the sheading of innocents blood.

5 They shall kill them also by their counsel, to fulfill the measure of their
fathers, that all rightuous blood may light upon them which has been shed upon
earth. Yet shall they not hurt their souls, but through faith they shall have
victory both over the^ and the diuill.

6 And their bodies shall lie in the streets of ye great city. In this world
shall their carcasses remain, where as they have rule and dominion. Here shall
they be judged and condemned. At their pleasure shall it be to hang them, head
them, or burn them. And though they lay no hands upon them for soyling their
consecrate fingers, yet must it be done by their ghostly counsel, and ordered
also after their spiritual appointment. None other is it to lie in the streets
of their great city, then after such laws as they have practysed to be
brought unto death.

7 For spiritually is their city called. A glorious name usurp they as though
they were none of the world. They will be called the holy church, good ghostly
fathers, godly dyuines, and spiritual men, not considering of what spirit
they are spiritual. They are those into whom the unclean spirit has entered
with vij. other spirits worse than him self. With the spirit of falsehood,
the spirit of witchcraft, the spirit of cruelty. And of these only with such
like are they spiritual, and of no godly spirit as their fruits declares.
And therefore the spirit of God does judge here this great city not to be
called Jerusalem, but stinking Sodom, and most miserable Egypt the prophecies
and other scriptures agreeing to ye same. For look what filthiness and
abomination was in Sodom, what Idolatry and diuilishnesse was in Egypt, ye
same is now reigning in this painted spirituality, and is accounted their great
holiness.

8 Among this consecrate multitude or smered sort is Christ yet crucified, as
he was among the Jews which knew him not, and yet boasted them selves
outwardly for the peculiar chosen people of God. Not only is Christ among them
persecuted, scourged, punyshed, and put unto death in his members, but also he
is proved of the^ an vnsuffitient Savior without their daily doings. Their
masses must be satisfactorie sacrifices, profyting both the quick and the
dead. And that must men believe under pain of death and dampnatio^. Thus
crucify they Christ again, and make a mock of him as witnessed Paul, and yet
do they call him their Lord, not unlike to ye tormentours, which crowned him
with thorn, and saluted him with Aue rex Iudeorum.

THE TEXT.
1 And some of the people, and kinreds, and tongues, and of the nations, 2.
shall see their bodies iij. days and an half, 3. and shall not suffer their
bodies to be put in graves. 4. And they that dwell upon the earth, 5. shall
rejoice over them and be glad, 6. and shall send gifts one to an other, 7. for
these two Ptophetes vexed them that dwelte on the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 And as they lie thus dead in the streets, or are contempned as heretics,
and despised as wicked dooers, some of ye people perverted by these enemies,
some of the kinreds or sects of division, some of ye tongues or blasphemous
bablers, and some of the nations of all wicked workers shall be hold their
bodies three days and an half.

2 They shall from all ages abhor them, hate them, reuyle them, and
spightfully report them. In their cronicles shall they write them for seducers
of the people, and in their stories regester them for damnable heretics. For
the iij. days and an half divided into vij. values, betokens the vij. ages
of the church wherein they have and shall still both persecute and blaspheme.

3 And these wicked sorts of people, kinreds, tongues, and nations, or of false
Justices, priests, Lawyers, and religious shall not suffer their bodies to be
put in graves. But be these witnesses once judged heretics by the clargie, and
so condemned by the laity, either shall their bodies be resolved into ashes
by fire, or else consumed by the fowls of the air. Seldom shall ye see a
known heretic buried among them, but most commonly burned. Examples of this
has been lately seen here in England by Thomas Hitton. Thomas Bilney; John
Frith, George Bainham, William Tindale, John Lambert, Roberte Barnes, William
Hierome, Thomas Garade, Richard Spenser, and in Partrick Hamilton of Scotland,
with many other more. And long before our time in sir John old Castle, the Lord
Cobham, sir Roger Acton knighte, sir Reynold Pecoke Bishop of Chichester,
master John Ashton, sir William Thorpe, sir Willyam Sawtre, sir Richard With,
sir John Bale, sir William Taylour, and sir William white, priests with diverse
other. The body of Form^sus was first taken up by Steue^ ye vj. bishop of Rome
and disgraded. After was it beheade^, mangled, and thrown into the flood of
Tyber by Sergius the third. Saint Herman after.xx. years from his burial was
taken up and burned at Ferraria in Italy by Boniface the eight. The bones of
master John (...) were taken up and burned, also the.xl. year after his death,
as Walden witnesses in his book de Sacramentalibus. Li. ix. Capi. lxxxix. So
was of late years in Worcester dyoces ye body of master William Trace
esquier, and in London ye body of Richard Honne merchau^t tailour. Moreover,
John Colet deane of Poules in London also was not far from ye same for reading
of Paul's Epistls by his life, had not other weighty matters been in the way.
Such heretics shall not rest in their city, they shall not be buried among
them. They shall not be shrined, cannonised, nor allowed for Saints, for they
builded no monasteries, they set up no chaunteries, they subdued no Princes,
nor yet dyed for the liberties of holy church. They stood not in defense that
priests doing Idolatry, theft, murder, witchcrafte, whoredom, buggerie,
with other abominations should remain unpunished. But rather to the contrary
and that they should worship but one God, live by their labors, take wives of
their own, and teach nothing but Gods laws.

4 And they that dwell upon the earth (says the Lord) or have their felicity
here with the rich glutton, shall rejoice over them and be glad.

5 They shall clappe their hands when they see godly witnesses be brought
out of the way, They shall common, ryote and bancket, having among them selves
joy without measure that the heretics be gone, so hateful is the light to
their eyes, and the verity to their wicked hearts.

6 And they shall send gifts or presents one to an other for gladness, as
for example. My Lord bishop has had a sum of monye of the priests for doing
his part so well. My Abbot and master doctor have had phesan^es, plouers, and
part riches, pigges, geese, and capons, for disputing their matters so
valyauntly. Master parson has been commended for scoldinge, and set Saunder
smell smock our parish priest for bearing false witness. Master Friar has
had a trentall, and father Lymitour a bushel of malt, or a cheese for playing
the knaves also, and hardly my L^rde chief justice has not been without his
reward, nor yet master Chauncelour, neither master scribe. What made T. More
for his time with so prodigious tirannie to persecute the truth, and since,
Godsalue of Norwiche. Warto^ of Bongay Hales and Baker of Kent, with such other
like? but Aury sacra fames, as Uirgil does call it. Thus do they laugh and
triumph when they have wrought mischief, and much it delights them when they
have done ungodly things.

7 For these two Prophets (says the Lord) vexed them that dwell on the
earth. A great trouble it is to them to have their faults seen, a sore
vexation to have their crafts known, and an exceedinge displeasure to be put
from their pleasant Euphrates by the preaching of such busye herytickes. Much
was Herod offended with John, the bishops with Christ, the prelates and
religious with Paul, and a sore grief it was to their hearts, when they were
rebuked their vices.

THE TEXT.
1 And after three days and an half. 2. The spirit of life from God, entered
into the^. 3. And they stood up upon their feet. 4. And great fear came
upon them which savv them. 5. And they heard a great voice from heaven,
saying unto the^ come up hethere. 6. And they asscended up into heaven in a
cloud. 7. And their enemies savve the^. 8. And the same hour was there a
great earthquake. 9 And the tenth part of the city fell. 10. And in the
earthquake were slain names of men, seven thousand. 11, And the remnant
were feared. 12. And gave glory to God of heaven. 13. The second woe is past.
14. And behold the third woe will come anon.

The Paraphrase.
1 And after three days and an half (says saint John) did the spirit of life
by ye power of God enter into them. In the midest of their joy and triumph when
they think themselves well quieted, the heryticks thus taken away, an other
storm falls upon them much worse then the other. Many more arises out of
their ashes to their confusion and to the chosens comfort. And the same
witnesses they are again, giving the same testimony, though they be not the
same persons.

2 The same lyuinge spirit have they, confessing the same verity, that had the
other. No long time can christ's congregation be without faithful testes, he
promysing to be with them to the end of the world.

3 These witnesses stood up, upon their feet. In the time full past is this
spoken for the certenty of ye thing though much of it be to come. For so certain
is it as it were al finished, an earnest stomach shall they have, and with much
bouldnes shall they speak. The rightuous shall stand by (says the book of
wisdom) in great feruentnesse of spirit against them that has extremely
handled them, and taken a way their labors, persecuted them, and blemished
their doctrine.

4 And great fear came upon them which saw them. When the Antichrists see
they cannot prevail, much are they inwardly anguished; vexed, and tormented.
Then doubt they their fall, than fear they their utter destruction. They
tremble and quake when they see their laws will no longer stand, nor their
insurrections no longer help them, lokyng for a terrible day. With horrible
fear shall they wonder (says the aforsaid book of wisdom) at the coming
of the sudden health, groninge for sorrow, and mourninge for very anguish of
mind, and saying within themselves. These be they whom we sometime had in
derision. Unwisely, we thought their lives to be madness, and their ends to be
without honor. And now they are reckoned among ye children of god and their
porcio^ is among ye Saints. Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and
the light of righteousness has not shined unto us. We have weryed our selves,
in the paths of wickedness but the way of the living Lord have we not
known.

5 And they hard a great voice from heaven, saying unto the^. Come up hither.
The Antichrist shall hear this noise, they shall know them to be in the favor
of god, and great heuines it shall be unto them. For this voice is the free
election of god according unto grace and not after man's deeruing. And it
comes from heaven as does all other good gifts, from the father of light. It
calls up them that before walked so^what after the flesh, and durst not for
fear of punishment witness the verytie. It commands them to arise unto
God, to be more perfect, more spiritual, more godly, and to have their
conversation in heaven. They attend unto the voice, they obey it, and do after
it. For it follows.

6 And they ascended up into heaven in a cloud. By the power of God they are
taken up. From worldly affects are they changed to the pure love of God, and
from carnal prudence to the wisdom of the spirit. In a cloud are they rapt.
Compassed are they with this flesh, the ill desires taken from them. Every
where resemble they Christ, and are daily better and better. They cease not of
their progress, no pain can separate them from ye love of Christ, til they
perfectly come to ye sight of the God of Gods in the supercelestiall Sion.

7 And their enemies saw them. The Antichrists knows yt they are gods
servants, the hipocrits perceive they have heavenly knowledge, yea, many times
they so report them both in their words and writings. In many of their
Chronicles they affirm, ye Bere^garius, Iohnnes Scotus the elder, John
wicleue, John Husse. Hierom of Prage. Thomas Thedonensis a white friar of
Bryttaine burned in Rome, Hieronimus Sa^o^^rola a black friar burned in
Florence, and diverse other more were men of most excellent wits, of most high
learning, of most godly conversation, of a most perfect life, fervent,
constant, and immovable in ye time of their death. Bylney, Baynha^, Beyfeeld,
Frith, Tindale, Barnes, and other, are yet reported (yea of some which to this
hour hates their opinions) to have dyed charitably and godly. Yet believe
they never ye better, they come never the sooner to god. Their malice has so
blinded them, and ye cloud of ignorance so darkened their knowledge, yt still
they blasphem and most cruelly persecute.

8 And in ye same hour (says S. Ihon) there hapened a great earthquake. A
terrible contradiction arises ever from the carnal synagoge, and from among
the earthly minded hypocrites, when the verity is taught as it was before time
in Christ, and in his Apostels, sepcially in Paul, and now of late days in
many other poor preachers. When new witnesses arise, then wax they more mad,
fierce and fell, then they were before. Then imprison they, then punish they,
then make they acts and command in pain of death no more to speak in that
name. Yet do they rather lose than win, fall then rise, disprophet, then
profit.

9 For the tenth part of the city fell to the ground. Their buildinge upon
sand will in no case endure. That God has not planted must up by the roots.
Their holy whoryshe church (which is here called Sodom and Egypt) is ruinously
decayed, their monasteries of monks, their houses of friars, their coleges of
idle priests, with their Nuns, Chanons, and chantryes in many places are down.
Tithes are not as they have been, nor Trentals, nor other deuocions. Images are
not sought, nor pardons in confession. The people inclines to new learning,
and goes from their old believe of holy church. They y^ were mo^ks, priests,
and friars are now become gospel teachers. Such as before were dead, stands
up now against them boldly. This fallen part is hear the tenth, for it is the
Lords by the law. It is the same sheep that before was lost, and now is
brought to Christ's fold. These were called away from thence by the witnesses,
the other stand yet still, and are every day worse and worse,

10 In the earthquake were slain names of men, to the number of seven
thousand. An innumerable multitude has been sent out of the way by these
Antichrists in their fury, but yet nothing have they slain but their names.
Only have they hurt their bodies, upon their souls have they had no power, no
more than had Satan upon the soul of Job. Yet have their not names perished
before god, for of him are they written in ye book of life. In no case are the
wicked of the godly here put to death, though some do so understand it, but
rather of the wicked the godly. For they never retaile their wrongs, but
rather pray for their enemies.

11 And the remnaunt or residue were feared (says saint John) and gave glory
to God of heaven. Of such as were left in their earthquakes or terrible
persecutions, some remained in prison: Some were beggered, some were exiled,
some fled, some lost their estimacion and friends, and yet gave praise unto God.

12 In all their adversities they gloryfied the name of their heavenly father,
and Lord. Thus have we here what is done already, and what is it to come
under this sixth trompet blowyng (where under we are now) which al belongs to
the second woe.

13 And these things once accomplished the second woe will be past. And then
look by and by for the third woe, for it will follow anon after without fail,
yea, so soon as this second woe is done.

14 In the later age of all shall this third woe reign, such time as Gog and
Magog most extremly shall rage. And the vninuersall judgment shall finishe
that woe, as here after more evidently will appear. But consider yt these
woes are to the infideles. The faithful fears them not, but receiuinge the
word in a pure heart they bring forth fruit in pacient sufferaunce.

The xij. Chapter.
NNw follows in order the seventh trumpet blowinge or the pure declaration of
Christ's joyful tidings for the last age of the Church under the seventh
seal opening, with the wounders and maruayles that there after ensues.

THE TEXT.
1 And the seventh Angel blew. 2. And there were made great voices in heaven.
3. Saying. The kindomes of this world are our Lords and his Christ's. 4. And
he shall rain for evermore. 5. And the xxiiii. elders which sat before God
on their seats, 6. Fell upon their faces, and worshipped God* saying, 7. We
give thee thanks, Lord God almighty, which art and waste, and art to come.
8. For thou have received thy great might, and have reigned. 9. And the
nation^ were angry. 10. And thy wrath is to come. 11. And the time of the dead
that they should be judged. 12. And that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets and saints 13. And to them that fear thy name, small
and great. 14. And should distroy them which destroy the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 And the seventh Angel blewe (says Saint John.)

The seventh sort of sincere prechers shall utter their message according to
the will of God, they shall declare his pleasure as he has appointed them. For
though it be spoken hear as past and done, for the certentie of the thing, yet
is it not fulfilled in effect.

The word of God was without beginning, and his promise everlasting, yet is it
not all performed in his creatures but many things are yet to come.

2 After this blaste of the Angel were made great voices in heaven. Many (the
congregation or kingdom of God his Gospel once purely publyshed by the
preachers) shall speak godly things to the edification of other. The simple
poor weaklings, idotes, and infants shall utter ye hydden wisdom of god to
the confusion of the great wise men, and sage seniours of this world. Yea, the
stones in the streat, the outcastes of the world, the forsaken people, shall
wonderfully praise the Lord.

3 And these shall be their sayings, when they shall see the Antichrists
co^fused and not able to speak again. The kingdoms of this world, that were
sometime wicked, cruel, and unfaithful, are now become the Lords, and his
Christ's, of his only grace and goodness. Now fall they to the word that
before thought it foolishness. Now cleave they to the truth that sometime did
abhor it. Now have they in hand the Gospel, yt before did persecute it as
sedicious learning and heresy.

4 And in this congregation shall he reign evermore. Continually is he with
them, that in faith retains his verytie. All this shall they utter with no
small rejoice. For doubtless after the seventh seal opening, and the gospel
preaching, then a peaceable time shall be, and figured it is by the half hour
spoken of before. For it shall not continue to the end. Long may not the church
of Christ be vnpersecuted* But yet this peace for the time shall ^ot only be
an inward peace in the conscience (as is always among the faithful) but an
outward quiet also, or a season wtou^ persecution abroad.

5 And the xxiiij. elders (says S. John) or the great number of saints
departed, which sits before God on their seats, or rests in his sweet
peace, in such graces of the spirit as he gave them by their life time, as
charity, steadfastness, love, joy, peace, meekness, righteousness, and such
other like, fell down flat upon their faces.

6 Most humblye have they ever submitted themselves, referryng unto god the
father the benfite of their creation, and unto Jesus Christ his son the free
gift of their redemption. Yea, sepcialli at this time, being under the Antler
of God, and knowing by his mere goodness the number of their brethe^ shortly
to be fulfilled, and them selves with the^ to be at a glorious liberty, after
their gostly sort they laud him saying.

7 From the very depth of our spiritual hearts, we render unto thee most high
thanks Lord god almighty, eternal Father, son and holy ghost, which art
one essenciall God, and wast without beginning, and shall be without ending.

8 For thou have taken upon thee thy great might. Now haste thou showed thy
wonderful power. Ever have thou raygned among thy people, but never so
graciously, so plentuouslye, and so gloryouslye for our behoue.

9 The Heathen evermore were angry when thy truth appeared. Mad were the wicked
Antichrists when thy glory shyned, and their pride deminished. They freted for
anger, they swelled for woodnesse, yea, they slew thy servants and burned up
thy people.

10 But now is thy wrath toward them. Now will thy anger break out, now will
thy vengaunce appear. Now shall thy terrible judgment without mercy be
declared from heaven upon all ungodliness of those cruel enimyes that
withhelde thy truth in unrighteousness.

11 Now shortly ensues the time of the dead, wherein they shall be judged
some to joy, some to heaviness, some to glory, some to pain.

12 Now approaches the glad season wherein thou haste appointed to reward the
true servants, the Prophets, and the faithful believers, made Saynctes by
the only death of thy son, and all them that yet fears thy name, with
eternal felicity.

13 None will thou seclude from this thy liberal goodness, for no weakness
nor poverty. But so well the small as the great, the low as the high, the
poor as the rich, the sick as the whole, the unlearned as learned shall taste
of thy inestimable cleernesse.

14 Only shalt thou distroye them that distroyed the earth, compellyng both
it and all that therein is, not to serve thee their heavenly creator, but their
own stinking desires, lusts, and corrupt affections, thy glory not once
esteemed nor regarded. Herein may we conjecture, that the seventh seal once
opened and the vij. trumpet blown, the last judgment day is not far of.
Blessed is he that watches for the Lords coming.

THE TEXT.
1 And the temple of God was opened in heaven, 2. and there was seen in his
temple, the Arc of his Testament. 3. And there followed lightnings, and
voices, and thunderinges, and earthquake, 4. and much hayle.

The Paraphrase.
1 And the Temple of God (says S. John) was opened in heaven. Evident will
the godly and spiritual estate of ye true christian church seem in those
days, the Gospel sincerely preached. In faith shall me^ seek their living
father, and not in dead Images, nor other corruptible things. In spyrite and
verity shall they worship him, and not in dumme ceremonies, nor outward
shadows. Speared is Gods temple, when his true worshipping is hid. And opened
it is again, when yt is clearly seen. Till Christ's coming in the flesh
nothing thereof appeared. With the key of David opened he ye mysteries thereof.
Whereby through faith the conversation of many is now and has been ever since in
heaven.

2 This temple thus open, anon the Arc of Gods holy Testament was seen
therein. Christ shows him self in his own colors, when the Gospel is truly
received, which is that Arc, wherein all the riches of Gods couenauntes and the
precious treasure of his promise is reposed to ma^s behoue. And specially those
by whom we are reconciled and saved. By him are we only brought to Gods favor
again, and graciously redeemed. Yea, all the sort of us have received of his
abundant and ouerflowyng fullness. The sight of this Ark in this temple is
none other, the^ a clear knowledge of him in his congregation. So often are his
misteryes euydent, as this temple is opened. So many times are they known as
his word is truly taught.

3 And no small fruit is to be thought to come thereof. For there followe^
lightnings, voices, thunderings, and earthquakes, Diverse respects has the
verity of God, according to diverse audie^ces. In manner of lightning it moves
some making of earth, heaven, and of sinners godly people. A sound or a noise
only it is to some men, not regarding the fruits thereof. To some it is an
occasion of anger, spite, and madness, and to some of open blasphemy against
the holy ghost. For what else does the clergy, maliciously withstanding it,
but wilfully work against knowledge? And what does the indiscreet laite,
blinded by them, but babble they wot not what?

4 And a great hayle also followed, which betokens the vehement and sharp
judgments of God toward such enemies of his verity. The most terrible
tempests of his Ire abides them. The Lord shall break into the land (says
the Prophet Esaias) like a sore tempest of hail that breaks down strong
holds or castles. And the proud crown of the drunken Ephraemites shall be
trodden under foot. Not only is the last age appointed to these thunderings,
and earthquakes, but they began also so soon as Christ appeared in the flesh.
No sooner was the young babe borne, but Herod for madness sought to slay him
in his very infancy. The Pharisees and Scribes, the bishops, priests and
Lawyers swelled at his preaching, and never left till they had slain him. And
this rule with the prelates and hipocrites has continued ever since, and still
shall do til the latter day. Only is there and shall be a moderation, that
some time it is not so extreme as at some. For if it were always alike, there
should none be left.

THE TEXT.
1 And there appeared a great wonder in heaven. 2. A woman clothed with the
Sun, 3. and the Moon under her feet, 4. and (...) on her head, a crown of
xij. stars. 5. And she was with child, 6. and cried, trauelyng in birth,
7. And payned, ready to be delivered.

The Paraphrase.
1 And there appeared (says Saint John) a great token in heaven. For no
wonder is this token here to be taken, as in other places of the scripture,
but for a type or figure, containing under mystery great things.

A woman was seen clothed with the son, yea of John. For to Gods only
electes is the verity showed to advantage. Not Marie Christ's mother is this
woman, though many has so fantasied in their commentaryes. But it is the true
christian church of whom Marye is a most notable member.

3 This woman the church (as Salomo^s canticles specify, is fair, lovely,
pleasant, sweet, wholesome, delectable, undefiled as the M^ne, excelent in
clearness as the sun, and glorious as an army of men with their banners and
stremers. This woman is bewtifully decked with ye shining sun of
righteousness. None is of her that has not don on Jesus Christ, being renewed
in their hearts by faith. They are not her children yt persecute gods word, no
more tha^ was Annas and Caiphas, Ioannes and Alexander.

4 This woman seemed to have the moon under her feet. To the church or
congregation of God are all other creatures subject. All moouable things has
the Lord subdued unto her. She is the right heir and inheritor of the^
through Christ, they with her to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and
to serve in liberty.

4 Upon her head was also a crown of twelve stars, which betokens not
only the twelve Apostles declaring the glory of Christ's kingdom immediately
after his death, but all other godly ministers of the word also, which have don
ye same ever since. Only reygneth the true Christian church by the word of
God, by the sincere scriptures, by the doctrine of the Apostles, and neither
supersticions nor ceremonies, neither by councelles or customs, by doctors,
nor fathers, by miters nor rochetes, by tippets, nor hoods, by shaue^ crowns,
nor side gowns, by crosses nor copes, by belles nor torches, by shrines, nor
gilte Images, nor yet by xij. couples in a liuerie with golden chains and
guarded coats. Her beauty consists only in faith, and in the observation of
Gods holy commandments. Her true ministers or preachers as very chosen stars,
shows forth his glory to the edification of other, and not their own Pomp
and magnificence.

5 And she was as is the woman with child. She cried traueyling in birth,
and was payned as one ready to be delivered. With Christ is the church big,
when her members are in full faith. In the heart is he evermore conceived, and
delivered forth such time as he is declared unto other. For this cause Christ
called them his mother which ha^ faith, and thereupon did the will of his
father. Of faith in the first promise yt Christ should distroy the serpent, was
he first conceived in Adam and Eua* and so grew forth in rightuous Abell, in
Seth, Enos, Enoche, Noe, Sem, Their, Melchisedech, Abraham, and Loath. And as ye
promises waxed stronger (as in Abraham, Moses, David, and the Prophets) and
the people of God more in number, so waxed ye woman bigger and bigger, til ye
fullness of her time was come yt she should be delivered. Which was such time
as Christ appeared to the world, taught and was co^uersaunt here among me^. And
this course has she kept ever since, and shall do to ye latter day in the^
(...) believe. Thus has she had Christ in her womb since the beginning.

6 And being full of his heavenly spirit, she has cried in ye Patriarks, and
Prophets, in the Apostles and faithful ministers, as one traueiling in byr^h.
Her cry was the mighty and strong declaration of Christ's doctrine, the
fervent zeal and desire of the glory of God, and of all men's health in
Christ. She traueileth ever more a new like as did Paul, till Christ be
fashioned in her christian members. With all her strength she labors that
the promised seed may increase in the faith of all men.

7 Finally, she is payned with labors, dolors, blasphemies, troubles, and
terrible persecutions, and never is delivered without them: Never is Christ
earnestly received, til some of her members does suffer. The constant spirit
and invincible standing by the truth in them, has converted many.

And like as the payned woman in all her agonies, is much comforted by the
hope of a child, so are Gods faithful witnesses trustyng that by their
pacient and glad sufferaunce, Christ should be received and rightly fashioned
in many. Yea, this causes them to rejoice in all adversity, and little to
esteem their pains.

THE TEXT.
1 And there appeared an other vvonder in heaven, 2. for behold a greater red
Dragon. 3. having seven heads, 4. and ten horns, 5. and seven crowns upon his
head. 6. and his tail drue the third part of the stars, 7. and cast them to
the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 After this (says Saint John) appeared in heaven an other token or marvel
all diverse from the first. The true church (which is gods kingdom) was never
yet without contradiction, nor without the crafty assaults of enemies. Adam
was not so soon created, but he was immediately assaulted of Satan. Christ
entered not so soon the world, but he was by and by persecuted. The diuill
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

2 For behold there was seen a great red Dragon, betokening the said diuill,
with his whole retinue, full of deceit, craft, malice, poison, pride, and
fierceness, to enforce the poor weaklings to consent unto his falsehood. All
red his body seemed, in toke^ that they which are of him, are all full of
cruelty, spite, and blood sheading, afflicting the constant believers for
withstanding his assaults. Seldom is he out of the earth, as winesseth Job,
but commonly in the company of men, impugnyng the faithful. And no power is
able to match him, unless it comes from above.

3 The said Dragon had vij. heads, signifying all the crafty wyles, and
subtle suggestions, that he has practiced and used against Christ and his
word under all ye vij. seals opening, and the vij. trumpettes blowing. Uerie
easy it is to conjecture what manner of heads they were, marking other places
of the scripture. A serpe^ts head should seem to be the first, considering
that in the Serpent he deceived our first parents with his venymed crafts.
This head so maliciously poisoned man, that God repented him of his creation,
and distroied his whole kind in the flood.viij. persons only reserved. After
the flood had he the head of a calfe for the second, in signification of the
shameful Idolatry, and wicked worshippyng that then begone in Nemroth, and so
continued in the Heathen. The third was the head of a Lion, full of pride and
oppression, expressed first in the cruel reign of the Assirians and
Caldeanes, and after in the proud Bishops and priests. The fourth, was a
Bears head, full of rauine and cruelnesse, betokenig the fierce kingdom of
Meades and Persianes. Co^seque^tly, his fifth head was like a Leopards head of
many colors, full of fickleness and chaungeablenesse. And that was the
vnco^stant reign of ye Greeks. His sixth was the head of a beast, far unlike
all other beasts, which signifies the kingdom of the Romans, with their
monstrous laws more then needs. The seventh is not unlike to a man's head,
including all carnal wisdom, with all diuilyshe polices and crafts, and
this is ye very papacy here in Europa, which is ye general Antichrist of all
ye whole world almost, which has already subdued and distroyed the Empire of
Rome. For he is called the Apostata and man of sin. By this only head, is ye
Dragon named ye envious man. The whole body follows ye heads. As the diuill
is malicious, wicked, fierce, cruel, tyrannical, false, execrable, and
deceitful, so are all his members. In ye prudence of ye flesh after him they
walk in Idolatry, hypocrisy, and all other filthiness. And like as before
Christ's coming, these heads were in ye serpent, in the golden calves, in ye
kingdom of Babylon, in Nemroth, in Pharao, in Antiochus, and in ye Pharisees
and scribes, bishops, Lawyers, and priests, so have they been since his time
under ye vij. seals opening, and the vij. trumpets blowing, after the same
sort. Under the first, he had a serpe^ts head in the Jews, most maliciously
and subtly withstanding Christ and his Apostles, prete^ding ye zeal of God
and his laws. Under ye second, he had a calves head in ye Idolators, which
slew ye constant witnesses of Christ's verity. Under the third, ye head of a
proud Lion in the bold rabble of heretics, presuming against gods word to
affirm ungodly things. Under ye fourth, the head of a Bear, in ye greedy
multitude of holy hipocrites and spiritual Antichrists, which have ravished
up ye substance of this world, usurping ye empire of the same. For then begone
the papacy with Mahomets mischief. Under the ^ift the head of a Leopard, in ye
diversity of pestilent sects or execrable locustes, of whom every one
rejoices in his own color and invention. For then did they sore increase.
Under the sixth, the head of a best unlike to all other, in the tyranny of
wicked governors blinded and persuaded by the priests to slay Gods servant
for the upholding of their stinking generation. For then was and is yet done
much murder* upon such as confess the truth. Under the seventh or last seal
opening, shall he have yet still the head of a man, in fleshly polices and
falshoode of the Pope and his prelates, in the doctors and priests till God
utterly shall distroy them with the breath of his mouth.

4 The said dragon had also x. horns or al subtle ways wherewith to impugn the
feeble weak nature of man, or to provoke him ever more to rebel against gods
commandments.

5 Upon his vij. heads he had vij. crou^es signifying thereby yt both he and his
members has not only possessed ye before named vices, but also they have over
the world reigned in them, and yet do to this day. In pride, falsehood, malice,
craft, cruelty, wickedness, and all other mischies triumph they yet.

6 And his tail drew toward him the third part of the stars, and
inconclusion threw them down to the earth. By worldly promocio^s, lucre,
favor, and other flatteryng fantasies, has he tangled many learned men, and
plucked them clean from Christ's true Church, and from the life of the
Gospel, so prouokinge them, wholly to give themselves to the study of erronius
doctrine and lying prophesies, to seduce the wordly multitude and keep them in
perpetual blindness.

7 So that they are now cast into the earth. They are become all carnal,
fylthy and ungodly in all their wisdom, study, and works, in all their
counsels, preachinges, and teachynges. Now are they the wicked Apostelles of
Satan, no longer may they shine in the firmament.

THE TEXT.
1 And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered. 2.
for to devour her child as soon as it were borne 3. and she brought forth a
manchild. 4. which should rule all nations with a rod of Iron.

5 And her son was taken up unto God, and to his seat.6. And the woman
fled into the wilderness.7. Where she had a place prepared of God, 8. That they
should feed her there.9. A thousand, two hundred, and threescore days.

The Paraphrase.
1 Before the aforesaid trauailyng woman stood this Dragon, ready to devour
her child, so soon as it were borne. Evermore is the devil waiting his pray,
where as the Gospel is sincerely taught, least any thereby should become the
children of God.

2 He seeks all crafts, polyces, and ingins, to take the word from the heart,
least they believing it should be saved. Thus sought he to devour christ after
the letter, appoynting Herod to slay him soon after his birth. And when he
see that way would not take, yet left he not of till the Jews had slain him.
Not thus yet satisfied, he labored by ye bishops to extinguish the faith of his
resurrection, least yt should profit unto life. Moreover where as the Apostles
and other godly men, have given Christ unto other in manner as they receued him,
he has left no cautels unsought by his malignant members, ever since to
deprive Gods people thereof.

3 Such a man child (says S. John) brought this woman forth, as with an iron
rod should rule all nations. Never is ye true church idle, but conceiueth
christ at ye gospel preching, retains him in faith and bri^geth him forth in
teaching other ye same. No woman child is he, impotent, weak and feeble, but a
manchilde, bringing with him always a strong, mighty and invincible spirit,
where as he is unfeignedly receued. For he is the mighty Lord that is valiant
in battle.

4 With the iron wand of his word invincible shall he govern his meek sprited
flock, yt none other laws shall they require, with the same also shall he subdue
all powers which are not of him, and drive them down to the bottom of hell.
For by faith only in him is ye victory gotten over ye world.

5 This child was also taken up to God and unto his throne. Where as the
devil thought to devour him, and to wrap him up for ever under death, he put
him beside his purpose. Uictoryously he arose up from death to life, he
ascended unto heaven, and now sits upon the right hand of God the father
almightye. And where as he is now, there shall his faithful folowers, and
ministers be hereafter, for yt is his, is also theirs, birth, life, death,
resurrection and ascension.

6 The woman fled after this into the wilderness. What else does the just
people of God? but fly the contagiousnes, vanytie, tumult, fornication,
idolatry, and filthynes of this world? seeking God in the solytarie heart, and
not in outward fantasies. I got me away far of (says David) and remained
in the deserte, monks, nuns, channons, and friars, has fled into
monasteris, coue^tes, and houses, but nothing after this sort. For in all
voluptuous pleasures have they there lived. The unfeigned solytary man after
Hieremy, continues peaceably with himself, and has his heart above.

7 In the said wilderness had she a place prepared of God. Which is none
other but Gods protection, defense, and sauegard promised in the scriptures.
That the Lord should pieserue us as he did his chosen people of Israel, when
he went before them in a cloud upon the day, and in the night in a pillar of
fire. David boasted himself that God was his refuge, and that he dwelled under
the defense and shadow of the highest. So long as the Lord is my governor
(says he) I can want nothing. He fedeth me, he sustaineth me I doubt no
danger, for he is with me. His staff stays me, his word and promise is my
whole comfort.

8 And there will the Lord feed her says S. John) for the space of a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. None other are fed with the
scriptures and promises of God, (which is the bread of children not to be given
to dogs) but they which flies into the desert from the dragon, forsaking both
head and tail, both suggestions and laws, both customs and constitutions.
For all are deuillish. None other escaped the plague of Sodom, but they which
fled clean from thence. Lots wife but looking back only toward it again was
turned into a salt stoane.

9 The numbered days here are none other but the before written time of the two
witnesses, the time of Helias preachinge, the time of John's preachinge, the
time of Christ's preaching, or the time of the gospel preaching from Christ's
assencion to the latter end of the world. That is ye very time of the feeding
of his Church. And not open is this feeding here, but* in secret in the
wilderness, among a sort unknown to the world, having the poverty of the
spirit, without sha^ing, anointing, or hypocrites apparel. And not only has
the Lord thus nourished his people in this spiritual respect, but also in
body. When they have been grievously handled, spoiled of their goods,
imprisoned, and exiled, graciously has he relieved them, and provided for them
both solace and comeforte at the hands of them whom they never saw before. So
that the just has not felt himself forsaken, nor his children seeking bread.

THE TEXT.
1 And there was a great battle in heaven. 2. Michaell and his Angels. 3,
Fought with the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. 4. And prevailed
not. 5. Nether was their place found any more in heaven. 6. And the great
Dragon, that old serpent, called the devil and Sathanas* 7. was cast out. 8.
Which deceived all the world. 9. And he was cast into the earth, and his
Angels were cast out with him also.

The Paraphrase.
1 And there happened at that time (says saint John) a great battle in
Heaven. In the Church is evermore variaunce and strife without ceasinge betwixt
the spirit and the flesh, the good and the bad, the faithful and the
unfaithful. None other is this battle but a very contradiction, a diversity
in faith, study, opinion, will, and work, about the laws or commandments
of God, and also about the laws and tradycions of men. This battle is
weighty in cause, multitude and continuance. The cause thereof is Christ, the
Gospel, faith, righteousness, man's health, Gods high honor, and such other
like on the one party. Upon the other party the cause is, error, hypocrisy,
lies, Idolatrye, avarice, pride, cruelty, fylthynesse, with all such other. So
great is the multitude, that none is found out of it. None is there but are in
this army. Either they are good or bad, faithful or unfaithful, rightuous or
unrighteous. The rightuous are of the host of Michaell, the unrighteous are
upon the dragons side. Continued has this battle from the first
beginning, and so shall still to the latter end. Yea, though the dragon be
bound or tied up under the seventh seal opening, that he rage not then as he
has done before. Yet shall the spirit of wickedness, and a mind to do mischief,
reign inwardly still in his members, for Satan can be but a Satan, and a
Diuill a Diuill.

2 Michaell and his Angels fought valyauntly with the dragon. Spiritual are
they which has done on Christ after the mind of Paul, and spiritual is
their armoure. Their gyrding is verytie, their breast plate righteousness,
their shield a sure faith, their wepon the word of God, their helmet the hope
of health, and for steadfastness of their feet, their shooinge the gospel. By
interpretation is Michaell to say, who is as God? or who is like unto god? And
he betokneth the constant minister and sincere teachers of the Gospel. The
Angels of Michael are al they that in a sure faith confesses the eternal
magnifice^ce of God, and that none is like unto him. Contrariwise the Dragons
Angels are the hipocrits, lying prophets, and erronius teachers.

3 These fight with the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels with them. For
he that is not with Christ, is against him. With the rituous is Michael. For
ministering spirits are ye Angels ordained for ye comfort of the^ which shall be
saved. And commanded they are to wait upon the faithful, to preserve and
defend the^. The wicked sort have the Diuil and his chaplains to fight for
them, the rightuous have Michael and his Angels. The wicked fights with errors
and lies, the rightuous with the only verity of God.

4 As vengeable and as fierce as they are, yet prevail they not, neither is
their place found any more in heaven. Faith has the victory by the promise of
god, though ye blind world sees it not. Ouercome^ ar ye wicked when their
enterprises takes not, and clean overthrown when their beggary is conte^ned.
And never is ye full victory gotten, no more the^ it was in christ til ye
tabernacle of this body be laid aside. At yt day is ye crown gotten whom the
Lord has laid up for ye rightuous. And like as there is daily fighting, so is
therein some, daily victory. Daily ar ye angels of darkness ouerthrown, daily are
they cast out of heaven, which is the true church. Daily are they condemned by
the word of God and judged for rebels against the holy ghost, whose sin is
never forgeuen.

5 No place have they any more with ye chosen, no election, nor acceptance before
god. The more light they have had and ye more they have tasted of the truth now
forsaking it, and rebelling against it with ye diuill, ye farther they are from
god, and ye more nigh unto damnation. Never believed he truly, that so had
received the word. Let none think to be saved, unless he perseuereth to the
end.

6 And the great Dragon, or cap^tayne of all the unfaithful sort, that old
crooked Serpent which deceived Adam, and is called ye diuill or malycious
accuser, yea, and also Satan the most cruel aduersarye with all his clyentes
and spiritual adherentes, are certain and sure to be cast out.

7 With the rightuous they shall have no portion for all their glorious tytles.
With the godly shall not their names be registered for all their holy vnccions.
But with the prince of this world they shall be thrown forth.

8 For he by them, and they by him has deceived all the world, in lying tokens
and wonders, and in the operation of errors, to the utter dampnation of all
them that consents to their wickedness.

9 And he was cast into the earth, and his Angels also were cast out with him,
which is not else but that they are reserved to eternal damnation. For serving
the creature rather than the Lord that made all, God has forsaken them, and
given them, over to their own shameful lusts. All grace and goodness has
he taken from them, and in all darkness has he left them. Nothing is now
behind but hell fire, prepared for the diuill and his Angels. The church
thus first bringinge forth Christ among the Jews, and so by their cruelty
driven out into the wild deserte of the Gentiles, has been there fed of God
in percecution ever since, and shall be still till the term come out of the
aforesaid thousand, two hundredth, and three score days, whose end is in ye
Lords hands

THE TEXT.
1 And I heard a loud voice which said. 2. In heaven is now made salvation,
and strength. 3. And the kingdom become our Gods. 4. And the power his
Christ's. 5. For he is cast down which accused them before God day and night.
6. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb. 7 And by the word of their
testimony. 8. And they loved not their lives unto the death. 9, Therefore
rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dvvell in them. 10. Woe to the inhabiters of the
earth, and of the sea. 11. For the diuill is come down unto you. 12. Which
has great wrath. 13. Because he knovveth that he has but a short time.

The Paraphrase.
1 And I hard a mighty great voice (says saint John) which is ye whole
agreement of all the sacred scriptures. And the voice said thus unto me.

2 Now is there in heaven salvation, in the church is the health of soul now
that the idolatry with other abhominatio^s is thrown forth, and she clean
delivered from their beggary. Now appears the power of ye Lord, that his
Gospel is truly preached.

3 Now is it become our Gods kingdom, that their doctrine is not of men.

4 Now has it the whole strength of his anointed. Al Christ's labors, merits,
and deseruinges, his nativity, passion, resurrection, and ascencion, is now
her own good, Christ's victory is theirs, his crown, his scepter, his seat
and kingdom is theirs, Yea, the possession of his fathers right hand is theirs.

5 For the enemy of our brethren is thrown down, which cruelly accused them
before god day and night. The aduersarye Sathen which quarelled before the
Lord against pacient Job, and vexed him sore in his substance and flesh,
never ceasinge to this day to trouble the rightuous with Antichrists and
Tyrauntes, is now overcome by the victory of faith, and his power greatly
deminished in his members. Now is the kingdom of God increased, much people
being vnfainedli converted unto christ.

6 Conquered him they have by no Power of their own, neither merits nor works,
but through ye inestimable strength which is in ye blood of ye immaculate lamb
Jesus Christ, and through ye inui^cible word of his verity which they to ye
world have testified.

7 In the witness thereof have they constantly suffered, and through faith in
them, have they with him obtained victory over the world, sin, hell, death,
and the diuill. Not their own bodies have they spared to win this conquest.

8 But much more have they loved Christ and his truth than themselves,
accounting it auantage to give their lives for him.

9 Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and al you that in them in does dwell. Ye
Angels above ordained for man's comfort, ye saints departed from the miseries
of this world, ye faithful believers remanyng in this life, and ye feruente
favorers of the Lords verytie be glade that your brethren has gotten the
victory of the diuill and his Angels to the glory of Christ.

10 But woe unto ye wretched inahbitants of ye earth, and of ye sea. No small
danger is toward the^ yt has heard ye voice of ye Lord, and still yet will
follow ye course of this world, no light peril ha^geth over their heads, yt are
inco^sta^t, fickle, and wauerin, giving back with every blast for ye pleasure of
their flesh.

11 Take heed of it therefore, for unto you that are such, the diuill is come
down with his subtle suggestions and crafts, with his wyly cauteles and
ingines. Among you does he remain watchyng to have his pray, as he did among
the children of Israel, when they were become unfaithful.

12 Tares will he sow to distroy the good seed, for his wrath is great to see
him self thus dejected, and his hate is exceeding beholding his kingdom
decayed. Among you must he wreak his anger, for he can not harm the faithful.
Through his envy came death first into the world. If ye will escape his
snares, look ye give no place unto him, but in faith resist him manfully.

13 He waxes now mad, and fretteth with him self. He myndeth to make hauoke
and to do much mischief, because he knows yt his time is short. No long
season shall he have from henceforth to deceive. The latter day he perceives
not to be far of wherein great torments, abides both him and his. And yt
makes him so wood. That makes him so insaciably desirous to noye, not caring
what spyght he works against God. And no wicked will leaves he unsought, to
perform his cruel intent. Woe unto them therefore that in these days takes
no heed. Woe unto them that stumbreth in wanton pleasures, when most danger
is, and the diuill most busy, not attending to the call and warnyng of God.

THE TEXT.
1 And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, 2. he pursued the
woman, which brought forth the man child, 3. And to the woman were given ij.
wings of a great Egle, 4. that she might fly into the wilderness, 5. into
her place, where she is norished for a time, times, and half a time, 6. from
the presence of the Serpent. 7. And the Dragon cast out of his mouth water
after the woman, as it had been a river, 8. that he might cause her to be
caught of the flood. 9. And the earth help the woman, 10. and ^he earth
opened her mouth, 11. and svvalovved up the river, which the dragon cast out
of his mouth. 12. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, 13. and went
and made war with the remnau^t of her seed, 14. which keep the
commandments of God. 15. and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, 16. and he
stood on the sea sand.

The Paraphrase.
1 And when the Dragon or most furious serpent the diuil, the head master of
pride, and father of lies, saw that he was thrown down unto ye earth by the
valiant host of God. Or such time as he perceyueth the Idolatry,
superstition, pomp, hypocrisy, and other abominable filthiness, distroied
by the word of God in his malignau^t Sinagoge of proud painted prelates.

2 Then persecuteth he the poor woman which brought forth the man child.
Then vexes he the true congregation that teaches none other but Christ, and
confesses none other savior, health, and redeemer. Them does he torment and
punish by his mytred Mahounds and his shaue^ Sodomytes, subduyng unto them for
that purpose the power of Kings, and might of magistrates. Then sits Annas
in consistory, and Cayphas in sessions upon life and death. The^ brings the
woman her child forth in pain. By the martirdom or death of godly witnesses
is Christ delivered and left here behind in the hearts of many.

3 And unto the woman were given two wings of a great Egle, or the two
testaments of God, containing the Prophecy and Gospel, with ye love of God and
our neighbor. And these mighty wings were given her that she might fly
with them into ye wilderness. Evermore when dangerous persecution is, ye
members of Christ's congregation (which are left here behind) has authority
of ye old law to flee from it with Jacob, Moses, David, and Helias, of the
new law also with Christ and his Apostles. If they pursue you in one city
(says the Lord) flee you into an other. Not only to save your bodies, but to
fructify in the people. Get ye into the deserte. Teach them that were not
taught a fore. If ye can not be suffered openly to preach, instruct men
privately in houses. Play not ye sluggardes in the Lords vineyard. Be not
niggards over his free treasure. But as ye have plentuously received it, so
liberallye distribute it again.

4 From the face of the Dragon has the woman thus power to fly into the
wilderness by the scriptures, when her child is delivered and taken up to the
throne of God for the unthankfulness of the people that they have not in faith
received him. And in much danger are they left having the diuill and his
Angels thrown down among them with their wyles and crafty snares. In much more
peril are they, then they were before.

5 A place has she in this desert appointed of God, wherein she is nourished
for a time for times, and for the half time, which is not else but his special
protection, among them that be poor in spirit, and are judged outcastes of the
world. There is the true church nourished with the pure word, not mixed with the
leven of Phari^ies. There is ye faithful congregation at all times fed,
without the traditions of hipocrites. Only are they relieved with the verity,
and satisfied with the living promises, and have been since ye time of Christ.
Yea, since the time of Daniell and before. And this feeding time of ye Lord in
secretnesse has been sometime shorter, sometime longer, and sometime shortest
of all, according to the times of persecution, and of blindness in the enemies.

6 To flee from the presence of the serpent, have they evermore had
commandments of the Lord, and to shun the suggestions of his Angels. Warned
they have been in no wise to go forth, when they say, Christ is here and
there, for so much as their crafts are such as would (if it were possible)
deceive the very electes.

7 And the Dragon (says saint John) did cast out of his mouth water after the
woman. A doctrine of hypocrisy, errors, and lies, has always passed from
the sinagoge of Satan. None other fruits has gone from them, the^ wavering
superstitions, Idolatry, and Heathen ceremonies. These has flowed forth like
a great river. Daily have they augmented, and tontinually increased.
Innumerable are ye comberous and unprofitable burdens of their fantasies and
dreams, wherewith they noy men's co^scie^ces, drown their small faith, and
ouerload their souls.

8 This stinking water did the Serpent vomete out by his ravenous Antichrists,
which are his insaciable mouth, to stop the passage of ye woman. He poured
it forth in abundance that he might cause her to be caught of the flood. Such
is always the mischievous nature of the diuill and his Angels. Ue^geable
assaults have they, and innumerable crafts to deceive the innocent not knowing
them. Our first mother Eua was thus trapped in the beginning, and so had been
drowned with Adam her husband, had they not had faith in the promised seed. An
innumerable multitude has been and ar yet to this day, swalowed up of this
flood, and without great dyffycultie none escapes it. Exceeding is the
compass, study, and practice of this false generation. Evermore power they
out their poiso^, they dispute their matters with errors and lies, with
counsels and customs, having upon their side the darkened powers.

9 Yet is the Lord merciful to his poor congregation, that they are not
drowned with all this filthy floude. None of it once touches their hearts. No
part of their faith does all this riff raff hinder. This durtie baggage
accombreth not their souls. Only are they satisfied with ye wholesome
doctrine of Christ's spirit. And ye earth did help the woman (says S. John)
The carnal multitude, the wise men of this world, the very reprobates from
God, all dry without the true faith, drank up this filthy water.

10 They opened their mouths wide, and swalowed up ye great river clean, which
the Dragon cast out of his mouth. This erroneous doctrine was evermore
pleasant unto them. Much more have they always delighted in lies, and old
wives dreams than in Gods truth. Thereto have they given their ears, with
all auidious greediness and supersticious devotion have they embrased them.
But the living waters of the Lord sauoreth not in their mouths, their own
broken ceysternes does please them best. Better is to a swyne a filthy puddle,
than a sweet runnyng water. No where will he drink, but where he may wallow
his carcass. No doctrine pleases them, unless ^ mayntayneth their sin.

11 In drinking up this floude, yet ease they this woman. In such multitude is
Christ's small flock not myssed, not looked for, nor yet many times in their
abominations perceived to be absent. So gracious to them is the Lord, that in
no wise are they harmed with those unwholesome waters. They are not caught of
that pestilent flood. It ouerwhelmeth not their faith.

12 And the Dragon was wroth with the woman (says saint John) frantic
mad is the Sinagoge of Satan, when their wanto^ ware is forsaken, abhorred
and despised. Than frette they for anger, than swell they for woodnesse. Than
whet they their teeth upon the innocent souls, and would tear them in pieces
for very spite. Than imagine they new cauteles and wyles, and thereupon
procure they new laws to be made, to trappe them in snares that they escape no
way.

13 For the Dragon in his wrath, made war with the remnaunt of her seed,
which kept the commandments of God. All manner of ways has this Serpent
assayed to distroy Christ's true church. The Apostles he vexed with ye
Pharisees and priests, for the first age. With false brethren and Tyrauntes
troubled he their successors for the second age. For the third, with
innumerable Heresies did he accomber them. For ye fourth, with dampnable sects
of Hypocrisy did he oppress them. For the fifte, brought he ye world into a
damnable peace of Idolatry and superstition. And for the sixth (seeing he can
not yet prevail) he makes open war upon the remnaunt of her seed.

14 Now does his Sinagoge of Prelates, Priests, Hypocrites, and tyrauntes,
make wicked laws against them. Now do they persecute them for keeping the
commandments of God, in marriage, in receiving meats with thanks gyuing, and
in not going out to seek Christ here and there in their Masses and
mutterynges, in their outward colors and shadows.

15 Now put they them to death, which have the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
preaching him for an only teacher necessary, for an only mediator and
advocate, for an only savior and redeemer, for our only righteousness,
wisdom, and health. For their war is only against the^ yt keep Gods
co^mau^dements, and that have the witness of Jesus. Neither is it against
bands nor whores, against murderers nor thieves, against Idolators nor
Hypocrites, Sorcerers nor Sodomites, adulterers, nor glutto^s, Idyotes nor
liars, idle priests nor vagaboundes, Scismatikes nor traitors. None of these
seek they out, non of these accuse they at their Sessio^s, but the only
readers of the Gospel, and poor favorers of Gods truth.

16 Upon the sea sand stand they ever more with their grande Captain, to
fight this battle. None other laws have they to ground the^ selves upon, but
their own tradytions and customs, with such fantastical acts as they daily
make, or procure to be made of Princes for their own wicked purpose. And as
their laws are beggarly and weak, so is their usurped authority, so are
their proud titles also, so are their myters, their anointings, and pompous
functions. All are sand, dust, and rotten powder before God, not grounded upon
his word. All are unprofitable chafe. Yea, their selves are a ground
unfruitful, sandy, and unsure, fit for the Dragon to stand upon to fight
against Christ's members. For they are ye very seat of Satan, and his
continual dwelling place. And that he can not do by him self, he brings
evermore to pass by them. Innumerable also are their diuilishe practices,
their wyles, and their subtilties to uphold their master, as are ye sands of
ye sea.

The xiij. Chapter..
BY the monstrous, ugly, and most odious beast rising out of the sea, with
seven heads and ten horns, is meant the universal or whole Antychrist,
comprehending in him all the wickedness, fury, falshead, frowardness,
deceit, lies, crafts, slaightes, subtilties, hypocrisy, tyranny,
myschiefes, pride, and all other diuillyshnesse, of all his malicious members
which has been sense ye beginning. The exceeding presumption of them that hate
the blessed Lord (says David) aryseth day by day. Continually thine enemies
grow, always they increase, and evermore they prosper in this world. Not from
ye steadfast or sure ground (which are ye Lords people) arises this beast, but
out of the wavering sea, or from ye fickle fellowship and moveable multitude of
ye ungodly. For the wicked sort after Esaias, are ye raging sea yt can not rest,
whose water fometh with ye mire and grauel. No peace is among ye ungodly (says
ye Lord) no unity, no charity, nor mutual christian love. It pleased
therefore the holy Ghost to provoke John after his secret vision, to discribe
this mighty Antichrist thus in his right colors, according to that he had
seen, to the forewarning of Christ's people.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savve a beast rise out of the sea, 2. having seven heads and ten
horns, 3. and upon his horns.x. crounes, 4. and upon his head the names of
blasphemy. 5. And the beast which I savv was like a cat of the mou^tain, 6.
and his feet were as the feet of a Bear, 7. and his mouth as the mouth of a
Lio^. 8. And the Dragon gave him, 9. his power, 10. and seat, 11. and great
authority.

The Paraphrase.
1 I beheld (says saint John) an execrable beast, very odious and hateful to
look upon, rising out of ye ravenous roaring sea. For ye wicked auance the^
selves as the green baye tree in ungodliness, and the sinagoge of proud
hypocrites rises up a lofte, setting up their Christ's, as does the fat Cedar
trees of Libanus. All beastly are they as was Elimas ye sorcerer, full of
filthiness, gile, and falshead, yea, the very whelps of ye diuil, subuerting
ye ways of God. None other is this beast here discribed, the^ was ye pale
horse in the fourth age, ye cruel multitude of locustes in ye fifth age, and the
horses of incomparable woodnesse for the sixth.

2 Seven heads and x. horns had this cruel beast not unlike therein, to ye
aforesaid red Dragon or Serpent. For look what pestilent suggestions in errors
and lies, and what deceiuable power in signs and wonders has reigned in the
diuil for all ages, ye same also has reigned in ye wicked members of his
beastial body, in the furious bishops, lawyers, doctors, priests, hipocrytes,
and false magistrates, for their heads are their universal crafts, and their
horns their tirannous aucthhrities, usurped primacies, or malignau^t
magistrates. Thy strong mighty power Lord (says David) has broken ye drago^s
heads in ye raging waters. Thou have smite^ in pieces ye heads of ye great
Leuiathan. Inhaunce not your horns so hye ye stifnecked Antichrists, for ye
horns of the ungodly will ye Lord pluck down, and exalt ye horns of ye
rightuous, in ye house of David his servant. More are ye horns here in number
tha^ are ye heds. For greater is ye power tha^ is ye suggestio^, ye usurped
authority than the craft, the Majesty than ye error, and much more mischief
may work.

3 This beast had upon his.x. horns x. crowns, signifying his victory,
dominion, and primacie over the universal world, and that he through the
wickedness of the people, is the unworthy captain and prince thereof. In this
only point differs the dragon from the beast, the devil from his me^bres,
or satan from his carnal sinagoge. He had vii. crowns upon his.vi^ heads. They
have.x. crowns here upon their.x. horns. For that he has but in simple
suggestion, they have in double power of coactio^. Where as he does but
dallyingly persuade, they may enforce and compel. Where as he does but easily
move, they may by rigorous authority co^strain. When he has propounded an
error, they may by their power establish it for an infallible truth, and make
of it a necessary article of the christian believe, as they have done of
purgatory, pardons, confession, saints worshipping, latin service hearing, and
such like. Wha^ he has once made a lie (as he is the father of all lies) they
may authorize it for an vnwritte^ verity, like as they have don many. Much
more mischif^ may they do, being his spiritual instruments than he can do
alone, as largely appears by their works. Never could satan tha^ have put
Christ unto death, had he not entered into Judas and so betrayed him, had he not
entered into ye bishops and lawiers, and so condemned hi^. Never had ye
apostles, nor al other godly prechers sens their time, been sent out of ye
way, had not those mytred Mahomets and priests wrought still their old feats.

4 Upon this beasts head was written the names of blasphemy against the Lord
and his Christ. Which are none other than the proud glittering tytles,
wherewith they garnish their usurped authority, to make it seem glorious to
the world, having within them contained, the great mystery of iniquity.

What other else is Pope, Cardinal, Patriarch, Legate, Metropolytane, Primate,
Archebyshop, Diocesane, Prothonotary, Archdeakon, Official, Chau^celler,
co^missary, Dean, prebe^d, Person, Uicar, my lord Abbot, master Doctor, and
such like, but very nams of blasphem? For offices they are not appointed by
the holy ghost, nor yet once mentioned in the scripturs. What other is it but
abhominaton, the Pope to write him self the most holy father, the general
vicar of Christ, the supreme head of the christian church, and the only
distributer of ye treasures of god? The bishops and priests also to call them
selves their churches bridgromes, sitters in gods sted, forgeuers of sin, and
our Ladies chaste knights? None other are they so abusing their flock in leaving
the just office of sincere preaching under such vain titels, after the mind of
Zacharye, but very shamful Idols in deed. Their decres, decretals
co^stitucions canons, rules, statutes provincial and sinodall, traditions,
laws, fatherly customs, and vsages, not grounded upon gods co^mau^deme^ts,
are very diuelishnes and hipocris^, blasphemi^g ye name of god. For why, to
have ye name of blasphemy upon their heads, is none other tha^ under a glorious
title to mai^tain that thing which is blasphemous, glorifying themselves in the
same. The ungodly (says David) with mocks has disdained the Lord, and with
open mouth has uttered wickedness against God.

5 And the strange fashioned beast (says S. John) whom I saw in this vision,
was like in similitude to a cat of the mountain, full of many coulored spots
in token of inconstancy, variety, and fickleness.

6 His feet were as ye feet of a bear, fierce, rough, and ill favored, in
signification of cruelty, stubburnnesse, and uncleanness.

7 And his mouth seemed as ye mouth of a Lion, declaring him to be full of
pride, rauin and excess. To such beasts as here are mentioned, co^parith
Daniell under hidden mystery, certain mighty kingdoms of the world. As to
the Lions (which here is caleld a Lion for the more cruelty now used tha^ was
in those days) ye proud kingdoms of the Assirians and Caldeans. To the bear
the cruel kingedomes of the Medes and Parthianes. And unto the Cat of the
mountain, the unsteadfast kingedome of the Greeks. Of pride, spoil, and
rgbbery, are the Assirians and Caldeans condemned by Esaye, Nahum, and Abacuck
the prophets. The Medes and Parthians held captive ye people of god, as
witnesses Hester, Paralipomeno^, and Esaias. The Greeks most spightfully were
bent against them under ye cruel king Antiochus, as in the Machabes is
evident. No abomination nor mystery of iniquity, as Paul calls it, was
ever found in these kingdoms, but now reigns manifould in the detestable
papacy or monstrous kingedome of Antichrist, as all the world may see. No
where was ever more pride, vanity, and cruelnesse, Idolatry, horedome, and
filthiness, hypocrisy, falsehoode, and fickleness, extorcion, vaineglory,
and covetousness, sorcery, supersticion, and unfaithfulness. More than all
the unfaithful kingdoms under heaven, have this sodomiticall spirituality
defiled with their witchery ye holy temple of God, which is ye Christen church.
They have most shamefully abused gods chosen people, which are the vessels
ordained to his glory. They have holden his free servants most miserable
captive, under their wicked decrees and tradicions. The cruelty of Pharao
Antiochus, and Caiphas, compared to their tyranny, is but as it were a play,
dalliance, or shadow. In them is all lechery and uncleanness, all raginge
lusts and wantonness, all fleshly abuses and beastliness, no natural order
observed. Nothing in a manner are the cruel constitutions, made against the
Jews by the suggestions, of Aman, and by Antiochus to their wicked laws and
ordinances. For they were only against the body, theirs are against men's
souls. So that the papistical kingedome of antichrist are to be seen both the
Lion, the Bear, and the cat of the mountain, they not only participatinge
with all unfaithful regions, but also doubling with the^ in all abhominatio^s
under ye Sky. The mouth they have of a Lion, roaring out evermore blasphemies,
curses and bytternesse. The feet of a bear, signifies their ravenous
affections, running unto all pernicious evils, very swift also to ye sheddi^g
of blood. As Cats of ye mou^tain they are spottid with diverse fickle fa^tasies,
in sects, observations, ceremonies, ryts, laws, and customs, no where steadfast
and uniform, but every where variant and foolish. And worthy they are to be
forsaken of god, and to be left to ye spirit of errors and lies to their
damnation, that so conte^neth the verity of god.

8 More over ye dragon (says s. John) which is satan ye devil, gave over unto
this beast, or curssed generation of antichrist, being his bestial body, al his
whole power, his blasphemous seat, and his mighty authority. To give the^ his
power, is no more but to fyl the^ with crafts, subtilties, wiles, malice, fraud
and deceit, and to make them apt to seduce ye simple, or to able them to all
falsehood and witty gile. To admit the^ his seat is to leave them here a
kingdom of vain glory, hypocrisy, and abominable Idolatry.

To grant the^ his full authority, is to work in the^ all lying singes and
wonders through deceiuable doctrine, strongly to delud ye vnbeluers to their
greater damnacion.

9 To this power of the dragon, is no power comperable upon earih. No power is
able to suppress it, unless it co^mith from above, and is given unto us from
ye father of light; as is ye strong gift of faith. Thus is this great
antichrist a king with satan, over all the children of pride. With Lucifer he
usurps the seat of God, sitting in the consciences of men, evermore boasting
himself to be in gods stead, seducing the people of the world, and finally
ouercomming them by bringing them into all kinds of error.

10 And as concerning the seat, like as Christ our lord sits in ye throne of
God, reigninge with his eternal father in meekness, so sits he in the
throne of satan with his father the devil, in all pride and blasphemy. As
touching ye power, like as Christ had his power of God, so has he his power of
the devil. Like as Christ is full of grace and verity, and of his fulness all
they have received that truly have believed in him, so is this antichrist full
of hate, falsehed, and all other iniquite, of whose errors and lies ye
unbelievers have tasted. Like as ye holy spirit of Christ has wrought in his
lovers the mystery of truth and goodness, so has the erronius and vnclen
spirit of this antichrist wrought ye mystery of his wickedness* in chrstes
enemies, since his death and asscencion.

11 And finally as conserning authority like as Christ being man took power
of God to do such mirakles as none else could do, so did he of the devil, being
his wretched body to work prodigiuos maruels and wonders in hipocrisy among the
unfaithful multitude, by the secret fufferance of god. So that in all
perverting power supremite and authoryty, he follows his father satan, yea,
in every point. For like as he deprived simple Job, a man that feared god, of
his substance cattle, chilldren, and servants, and vexed him in his flesh
with most greuouse botches, so does this gredy Leuiathan, this malicious
murderer, the man of sin, and body of the devil, with his deuourig
locoustes, rob ye poor people of their sweat, labors, travail, and nessary
living, sparing neither sick nor succourlesse, poor widow nor fatherles, no
goods gotten by theft, man's slaughter, extorcion, bribery, pollage, idolatry,
bandry, and al other ungodliness coming to the^ amiss in their private
confessions. And (that is most to be lamented) they defile their souls with all
supersticions, falls believe, and deuilishnesse, leaving their conciences all
doutfull, desperate and comfortles. Finanally to conclude, like as, in ye body
of Christ dwelth ye whole fullness of the godhed corporally, so dwells their
in this body of Satan ye whole fullness of falshoode, craft, sutiltye,
malice, with power to work al manner of mischife, effectually, really,
substancially, and corporally.

THE TEXT.
1 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death. 2. and his deadly
wound was healed. 3. and all the world wondered at the beast. 4. And they
worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the beast 5. and they worshipped
the beast. 6. saying. 7. Who is like unto the beast? 8. Who is able to war
with him?

The Paraphrase.
1 And one of his heads (says Saint John) seemed unto me, as it had been
wounded unto death. And it was not so indeed, for his dedly wou^d was healed
again. Evident it is that in John's time, Rome the mother of all whordome
had, subject unto her the.vij. clymates or universal parts of the world,
with all their powers, governors, kings, possessions, po^pes, false
worshippinges, and such like. Whom some writers suppose meet to be taken here
for ye.vii. heads of this beast. But I find an other thing in it, the body of
these.vii heads being but one, and still continuing so. For though all were at
yt time under her, yet is it not so now, and yet still remains this beast.
Therefore I do take it for one universal Antichrist (as I did before)
co^prehe^ding in him so well Mahomet as the Pope, so well the raging tyrant as
ye still hipocrite, and all ye wickedly works ar of ye same body. The.vii.
heads of ye beast, may so well be his presumptuous doings for ye.vij ages of the
church, as any thing else, and yet no prejudice done to that has been said before
What should ayle this wounded head here, not to signify his supremite
suppressed, his usurped authority and power diminished, and his whole
prodigious occupying condemned in this latter age of the church? I suppose
nothing more manifest, unless we have eyes and will not see. Are not now in
may parts of Germany, and in England also the Popes pardons laid aside? His
power put down, his name abolished, his Purgatory, pilgrimages, and other
peltries utterly exiled? and so like to be within short space in other regions
also. If this be not a deadly wounding of one of the beasts heads, I think
there is none. If this be not an apparent likelihood of his fall, there is none
to be looked for.

2 But the healing again of this mortal wound is like to mar all, and make
the last error worse than ye first. In many places where as the Gospel has
been preached, the bishop of Rome deposed, sects, shrynes, and sanctuaries
destroyed, monasteries, priories and friars turned over, remains still their
poison with those same instruments wherewith they have wrought all mischief.
Still continues their more then Jewish ceremonies, their priestybulous
priesthood, their vowing to have no wives, and their sodomitical chastity.
Still remineth their sale masses, of all abominations the principal, their
prodigious sacrifices, their sensing of of Idols, their boyesh processions,
thieir vnco^maunded worshippings, and their confessio^s in the ear, of all
trayterie the fountain, with many other strange obseruatio^s whom ye scripture
of God knows not. Nothing is brought as yet to Christ's institucio^ and
sincere ordinance, but all remains still as ye Antichrists left it. Nothing
is tried by gods word but by ye ancient auctority of fathers. Now passes all
under their title. Though the old bishops of Rome were of late years proved
Antichrists, and their names raced out of our books, yet must they thus
properly for old acquaintance be called still our Fathers. If it were naught
before I thinck it is now much worse, for now are they become laudable
ceremonies whereas before time they were but ceremonies alone. Now are they
become necessary rites, godly co^stitucio^s, seemly vsages, and civil
ordinances, where as before they had no such names. And he that disobeieth them
shall not only be judged a fellon and worthy to be hanged by their new forged
laws, but also condemned for a traitor against his king, though he never in
his life hindered, but rather to his power has furthered the common wealth. To
see this also with such like put in execucion, the Bishops have authority
every month in the year if they list, to call a cession, to hang and burn
at their pleasure. And this is ratyfied and confirmed by act of Parliament to
stand the more in effect. If this be no healing of Antichrists wounded head,
never is like to be any. When men shall defend free will, and allow their
popish mass to be a sacrifice satisffactory for the quick and the dead, labor
they any other (thincks you) than the healing of this wound? He likewise that
in an open audience mayntayneth our own works to justify, by Dimitte nobis,
and other not rightly understood scriptures, does he any other than prepare a
salve for the same? Nay surely. No less also does he that sets men to open
penance at Paul's cross, for holy water making, for processio^ and sensing, with
other Popetish gauds, constrayning them to promise the anauncement of the old
faith of holy church by such fantastical fopperyes, as Bonner bishop of
London did now of late, to the lawhinge game and wonderment of all the world.
Alas how is the people abused? None other do they but mock Christen Princes
with flattery, that give them old popish titles and blasphemous names of
antichrist. As to call the^ most christen kings and defenders of ye catholic
faith, meaning the Popes old tradicions, to heal the head of ye beast. This
is surely none other, but with the said beast to receive authority, seat and
power of satan. Let them therefore take heed least they be found the same
antichrists that they have condemned, and so throw themselves double under ye
same plage. Necessary it is they beware what they drink, or what titles they
take upon them at their appointment, least they forgetting them selves be
found dronken by taking excess of the Babilonish cup, and so perish with the
wicked. Mark here diligently this word head, and ye shall well perceive how
wonderfully the story agrees with the mystery.

3 And all the world (says Saint John) wondered at the beast. All foolish,
carnal, and worldly people, not understanding the wisdom of Gods holy spirit,
depends all upon their beastly baggage, thinking all yt they do to be godly,
meritorious, and spiritual. They magnify it, praise it, and have it in most
high estimation, yea, they have it in much more price than any thing that is of
God. In no wise will they from their old frenzy, such is their exceeding
blyndenesse. For when they hear tell their customs shall continue, their
governors agreeing to the same, they clap their hands for joy, and sing
Gaudeamus with the priests.

4 Yea, they worship the Dragon which gave such power to the beast. With their
hearts they rejoice trusting upon longer continuance, when they see his head
restored again in their rulers, the godly teachers burned, and the preachers
put to silence.

5 They worship also the beast, so many as worshipped the Dragon. For as they
which worship Christ, worship his father also, so they ye worship Antichrist,
agreeing to his laws and decrees, does also worship the diuil, of whom he
received his pride. They wonder with ye Jews yt seeks cauilations to
co^te^pne Christ's doctrine, as does ye filthy family of the dotyng
dodipolles, priests, and unlearned lawyers. They worship with the Heathen that
admits their power and allows their faces, as does the foolysh multitude,
that never will be godly wise. None other judgment remains in these days to
these wonderers and worshippers of the newlye restored head of ye beast, then
did unto them, yt with double devotion agreed to ye abhominatio^s of Mahomet
and ye pope.

6 And this will be their saying as follows in the text, spoken in ye time
past for ye certainty of the thing, as the manner of the scripture is.

7 Who is like unto the beast, in outward glittering works, or in the externo
observations of counterfayt religion.

8 Who is able to war with her the worldly powers now so deeply maintaini^g her
quarrel? All seeks ye papists that they can in ye world imagine, to uphold the
glory, magnificence, and beauty of their holy whorish church, or malignau^t
muster. No cautels nor crafts leave they unsought nor unsearched out, to cause
the people to esteem her of incomparable power. No small labor took
standyshe in hand in Whittington College, when he made his more the^ foolish
book of reproach against Barnes being dead. Nor no lesse^ diligence ye wise
poet John Hu^ti^gto^ when he registered in his genealogy of heritikes, with out
grace, wit, learning ye names only of such godly men as were the Popes
enimyes, no heretic against God once mentioned. No more did Thomas Smith,
Richard Dallison, William Stawne, Steue^ Prowet, Friar Adria^, Quarrie the
Pardoner, with such other blind Popish Poets, and dyrtye metristes, when
they uttered their shitton rymes and poesies. And sure I am that many more be
yet abroad of the same wicked zeal and spirit, to the great blasphemy both
of God and his truth, now that the beasts wound is made whole again, by so
many new acts, so many new titled Bishops, so fresh sale of benifices,
maisterships, and dignities, spiritual offices, degrees, and aucthorities, as
ple^tuous as ever was in Rome. And least we should be depryued of our new
pleasant Euphrates, and so be compelled by the word of God to follow the
Monks, Chanons, Nuns, and Friars, in their banyshments.

We have procured certain acts to be made for our commodity, and those only
to be published among the people once in a quarter, or so often as shall please
us to blemishe all Godly preachings of the scriptures. Thus seek we our selves
and not God, our own strength and not his, our own glory and not Jesus
Christ's. But let us not think that he sleeps with Baall the false God,
knowing the most hydden thoughts of the heart, but that he will within short
space send forth his lightnyngs and scater us, brynging our heathenishe
devises to naught. For the kingdom of one faith in us, and the Pope thus
manifestly in certain points divided, must surely decay.

THE TEXT.
1 And there was given unto him a mouth, 2. to speak great things and
blasphemies. 3. And power was given unto him to do, xlij. months. 4. And he
opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his
Tabernacle, and them that dvvell in heaven, 5. And it was given unto him to
make war with the Saints, 6. and to ouercom them. 7. And power was
given him over all kinreds, tongue, and nation. 8. And all that dwelled upon the
earth worshipped him, 9. whose names are not vvritte^ in the book of life,
10. of the lamb, 11. which was killed from the beginning of the world. 18.
If any man have an ear, let him hear, 13. he that leads into captivity,
shall go into captivity, 14. He that kills with a svvearde, must be
killed with a svvearde. 15. Here is the patience and the faith of the
saints.

The Paraphrase.
1 To this beast (says saint John) was given a mouth, not of God, but of
Satan, to speak great mighty things and blasphemies. So well is this spoken
of the one as the other, so many as has done upon the Antichrst^s livery,
title, power, authority or name. When the verity of the Lord was opened
before them, they gave no thanks for it, but became vain in their thoughts,
wherefore god gave them over into a leude mind, darkening their hearts. So that
now thinking them selves wise, they appear more foolish then before.

2 Now speak they great things in their conuocations, seanes, and sermons, and
all are sore blasphemies against God and his Christ. Now must they serve God by
most strait commandment with old Romish beggerry, though he most highly
abhors it, and no scriptures may be read in ye time thereof. For the
scriptures must only pass as we will have the^. How should ye beasts head else be
healed again? or how should our church be known else to be his own Image? Oh
beastly abhominatio^, and most hellish decree. Now must Christ be taken for no
savior at all without our deserui^gs. The supper of ye lord yt was sometime a
mutual perticipatio^ of Christ's body and blood, must now be a new crucifying
of him, one traitor playing al parts, Judas, Annas, Caiphas, Herod, Pylate,
and the Jews. Matrimony must be judged uncleanness though it be ye earnest
institution of god. No popish vow may be dissolved, though it be well known a
matter so diuilish, as has made an hundredth thousand Sodmites. The Eucharisti
may not be received in both kinds, though it be ye express commandment of
Christ so to be used. Without the blind bussings of a Papist, may no sin be
soluted, for that is the vpholdyng of their kingdom, with many other like
blasphemies. Certain other great things are uttered by this mouth, which now
I pass over, least I should be tedious to the reader. How be it, this one
great blasphemy that is spoken, I can not leave untouched.

Where as they boast them selves yet still alone to be the holy church, by the
only virtue of their unctions and shauings received first of ye Pope, the
laity secluded. And under this most falsely usurped title, they will still be
taken for the redeemers of men's souls. For they say that their masses are
satisfactorie sacrifices for the quick and the dead, justifying, releeuing,
and saving them both from dampnation, ex opere operato. And over that
abominable swarm of Antichrists, filthy ministers, make they now their
Kings the heads most blasphemouslye, only to be by them vpholden now in all
their mischiues. Truth it is that a king is the politic head, supreme
governor, and great stay under God, of the people to his charge committed, and
after that sort, their mighty monarke also by ye scriptures, which they have
before this time denied, worshippinge them for most holy saints, which have most
presumptuously rebelled in that behalf. But over ye whorish church of theirs
(whom Christ never planted) is satan the only head, by ye holy ghosts fore
judgments here. For to that beastly brood gave the dragon his power, his
seat, and his mighty aucthorytie. God forbid therefore that any christian
prince should at their false suggestions, admit so blasphemous a title. The
devil (says Job) is ye only head over all the children of pride. That voice
therefore may be blasphemous, as coming from the mouth of the serpent, if it be
not taken good heed to.

3 And power was given to ye beast to do these things for the space of xli^
months, which is the three years, and an half of Hilias, the time, times,
and half time of Daniell, and the M. two hundred and lx. days of John. Not
only for this age of the church, but also for all other ages, and by other
heads also, has the mouth of this beast uttered great things in blasphemy,
lies in hypocrisy, and wonders under a deceitful power. But as concerning this
latter healed head of the beast, the time thereof will be short, as herafter
shall appear in ye xvii chap.

4 He opened his mouth (says the text) in reproues against god, speking evil
of his name, of his tabernacle, and of them that dwell in heaven. This is in a
manner all one with yt was spoken before in the xi. chapter of the temple, the
altar, and of them that worship in the temple, save only that his name is
here for his temple. In token yt when his temple is blasphemed (which is his
congregation) his name is blasphemed by ye same, so is his tabernacle Jesus, in
whom bodyly dwells the fulness of ye Godhed, so ar also they that dwell in
heaven, whereby is me^t the true church, from whom the angels are not secluded,
being their fellow servants. These dwellers be they that have their
conversation in heaven under an undefiled faith, that seek those things,
which are above and not upon earth, that worship the father in spirit and
verity, and ye perseuereth true christians to the end. Many enters this
heaven of the Lord, but all continues not in it to the end of their lives,
the more is the pity.

5 Power was also given unto this beastly antichrist, to make battle with the
saints, and to overcome them. Continually do they with violence vex by their
carnal policies, auctority, and laws the sincere witnesses or preachers of
the Lord, sanctified of him throw faith in his holy word as were his apostles,
like as did the malitius clergy of ye jews, yea, they did resist the^ with their
more the^ tira^ous proclamatio^s, co^missio^s* and co^mandeme^ts with cruel
Pharao, Aman, and Antiochus to prove Christ in them the sign of co^tradiction
and stone of reproach. They seek here, the hunt there, and never leave raging
til they have closed the^ up in prisons.

6 Yet are they not so contented till they have overcome them in the sight of ye
blind world, though not before God. Either shall they be compelled shamefully
to recant, or if they persist in the veryty, to suffer most painful death. By
one way or other they must be overcome, to hold the people in error. The
gardener of winchester was not ashamed now of late (as I hard it credibly
reported) to say unto one that was accused of his malignant multitude, when he
was no le^ger able to withstand the manifest truth. Master Seito^ we know ye
are learned, and plentuously endued with knowledge in the scriptures, yet think
not that ye shall overcome us. No, no set your heart at rest, and look never to
have it said that ye have ouercom ye bishops, for it shall not be so. In deed it
is truth. For neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever yet overcome you.
Their victory over you is not in this world, your ki^gdom being here. But be ye
certain and sure of it, ye shall be ouerco^ to your much more rebuke at ye latter
day when al wro^gs and injuries shall be reue^ged, which is not far of. Your
lordly estimation (which may not be hindered here) will apeare there not very
precious. Yet do ye well to hold up a proud pecoks head as long as ye may.
Lose not an inche of your height hardly, but with your gogle eyes look up like
a man with a guard at your tail, like a sort of tormentours in a play. And with
your lyinge judgments overcome these beggarly vagabonds, and burn them also
rather then fail, to fulfill the mesure of your holy fathers.

7 And authority was given to this beast upon every kindred, people, tongue and
nation. For none these antchristes spare, neither high, nor low, rich nor
poor, sick nor whole, learned nor unlearned. But a jurisdiction they must have
over them, though it be usurped. Once in the year must they have them in
confession, to know which way they are bente. That salve have they gotten in
again, to heal up their wounded head. Be he native or be he stranger, be he
ruler or be he a commoner, he must obey the^ no remedy, or else stand forth at
the sessions with Christ among thieves. Not in on regio^, or where as one manner
of langage is used, have they this auctority, but in every land, in every
shire, in every town, and in every famyly must they have to do, corrupti^g
every man's faith.

8 For all that dwell upon earth must worship this beast. They must agree to the
great things, no remedy. They must blaspheme god as they do. But blessed be the
Lord none does y^ in their hearts but they only that dwell upon the earth, that
have their felicity here, yt seeks ye prosperity of this world, and
regards no^e other life the^ therein is. The la^bs of christ's fold gives heed
to his voice, they regard his call, they follow his word, they wal^e in his
light. They seek for no holiness but only in hi^, neither in water nor bread,
ashes nor palms, robes nor relics, masses nor anointings. He is their only
sufficient wisdom, righteousness, holiness and rede^ptio^. His word is their
living water, ye fode of their souls, the lantarne yt shall gyde the^, and the
life that will not fail them. None other doctrine do they covet nor yet other
precepts of living. Though they be here in the earth, yet dwell they not upon
it. No continuing city have they here, but they seek unto another of much
more beauty and pleasure, not builded of me^. And for that they are ready
rather to render up their lives, then to renounce ye verity, only they which
dwell here does worship the beast, loving themselves better then god, and their
flesh better then his truth, having their whole trust in the mangye merits and
dirty deseruings of these beastly hipocrites, and nothing at all in his sweet
promises.

9 And therefore are not their names written of ye lamb in the book of life,
which lamb was slain from the beginning of the world. Christ has not allowed
them by his word and promise. With the rightuous are they not regestred, as
members of one mystical body in him. In the similitude of his death are they
not grafted unto him as the branches unto the vine, to be partners of his
resurrection. Their portion is not in the land of the living with him. They
are none of those, whom the father has given him, to participate with him in
one spirit. Predestinate they are not unto life by him, nor so written up in
the foreknowledge of God. Chosen they were not of the lord before ye worlds
constitution, to be his undefiled children in Christ.

10 He is the meek lamb that was slain. He alone takes away ye sins of the
world. In him only is the life, for he is the life it self. Yet is he the life
of none other, but of those yt only believe in him.

11 In that he was killed from the worlds beginning, is signified, that he dyed
for all them which were create to be saved, and that his only death is all
their health, raise and remedy by the promise of God. For all they have eaten
of one spiritual meat and drunk of one spiritual rock, though it came in the
flesh long after them. He only trod down the head of the serpent. Since
the beginning has he been slain in his members also, as manifest it is in
rightuous Abell, Hieremy, John Baptist, and such other like. They yt are not
written of the lamb in the book of life for the children of God are registered
in the book of death for the children of perdicio^, reserved to eternal death
for their infidelytie, with the devil and his Angels.

12 He that has an ear (says the text) let him take good heed. He that
has an understanding, let him be admonished, by that which follows here. Or
he that has received the wisdom of the spirit, let him judge hereof according
unto it. Thus does the holy ghost advertise the faithful to consider that
whatsoever things are written, they are written unto our learning.

13 He yt leads into captivity shall go into captiuyty. And he that kills
with a sword, must with a sword be slain. This warning gives ye lord, take it
if they list. For he will have his right judgments known. He that vexes or
aflicteth the just believers in body by outward punishments, he shall be
aflicted in the spirit with an inward darkness or blindness of the soul, that
he may be the more captive to sin and to satan. God will deliver him up unto
a lewd mind, and will give him strong delusion, to believe all manner of lies,
that he might be damned.

14 He that kills the poor innocent for his faith with the iron sword, or
slaieth him with any other torment, with the sword of the spirit (which is the
Lords word) shall he be both judged and condemned. The word that I have spoken
(says Christ) shall judge them at the latter day. And this is in manner all
one with that was said in ye xi. chapter before. If any man will hurt them, fire
shall proceed out of their mouths, and consume their enemies.

15 Nevertheless to the christian is persecution necessary. For here in this
life is the patience of the saints proved, and their faith required. Here was
Abraham tempted and Job sore vexed, and both they were found Gods true
faithful servants. Here were the apostles contemned reioysinge yt they were
found worthy for christ's sake to suffer rebuke. The rightuous the lord tries
as gold in ye furnace. He chasteneth every servant that he loves, and
scourges every son that he receives. Only is it faith that all the evils of
this world by patience overcomes, and so obtains ye victory. The fruit
which rises to eternal life, is peaceable sufferance in faith. And that must
be hear in this life, where as we are imperfect, to make us perfect.

THE TEXT.
1 And I beheld an other beast. 2. coming up out of the earth. 3. and he had
two horns like a lamb. 4. and he spoke as did the Dragon. 5. and he did all
that the first beast could do. 6. in his presence. 7. And he caused the
earth, and them which dwell therein. 8. To worship the first beast, whose
deadly wound was healed. 9. And he did great wonders. 10. So that he made
fire come down from heaven. 11. In the sight of me^. 12. And deceived them
that dwelt on the earth by the means of those signs which he had power to
do in the sight of the beast. 13. Saying to them that dwelled on the earth,
that they should make an image. 14. Unto the beast, which had the wound of a
svvord and did live.

The Paraphrase.
1 And I beheld (says S. John in this secret revelation of my Lord, an other
beast arising out of the earth. A figure is this of al false prophets and
vngoly preachers. Beastly are they evermore, vain, carnal, and corrupt in
their studies, abominable in the practisings of their wicked hearts, not
seeking God but their belleyes, not Christ's glory but their own pride and
vain glory.

2 From the earth they arise, all given to erthly wisdom. The only affectes of
this world does move them to teach, and no good zeal of ye truth. Either are
they tickled with ambition, pricked with avarice, or else stirred with malice
to inuei. These are the common affects of the wicked. This goinge up have they
from wickedness to wickedness, and shall have still till the Lord destroy
them, like as have the just believers from virtue to virtue in the spirit, till
such time as they see him face unto face in the everlasting Syon. From the
worlds beginning has this beast risen up in Cayne the first murderer in the
fleshlye Children of men, in Cham the shameless child of Noe, in Ismael and
Esau, in Iannes and Iambres, in Balaham and Baals prophets, in the Beniamits
and Bells chaplains, in Phasur and Semeias, in Judas, Annas and Caiphas, in
Bariehu and Di^trephes. And now se^s their time most of all in Mahometes
doctoures and the popes queristers. Yea still they are aloft in their beastly
beggerye, and will be till their mischif be finished. Who sees not now a days
yt has light in ye spirit, ye malignite, hipocrisy, fraud, craft, and deceit,
in certain falls prophets at paul's cross in London, and in other places else.

3 This beast had ii horns like the lamb at a blush, but all counterfeit ^
falls in very deed, for he spoke as did the dragon, the horns of Christ, are
his high kingdom in the world. Only arises his Church by faith in the glad
tidinges and promises of god. That word is ye scepture of Christ's power and ye
rod of right order whereas he reigns. None other strange sceptures are there,
neither tradicions nor customs. Seven horns had Christ, for in him was the
fullness of ye verity. This beast has but ii. and yet they are but false and
cou^terfet. They seem to be Christ's and are not. These are the corrupted letter
of ye ii. testaments, falsely interpreted, and for a carnal purpose alleged.
And therefore it is but apparent, hipocritishe, and deceitful, yea, and clean
repugnant to the Lords meaning, not having ye judgment of his spirit. This
letter without the holy ghost is death, and nothing pertains unto Christ. He
is the verytie and life, this is but a fable or ficcion. His word is spirit and
life, this is but a brass pot sounding, or a latte^ ca^delsticke tinkling,
fantastical and faint, sophistical and slaightye. Though these seem like
Christ's, yet are they none of his, but y^ very horns of ye beast. For they
uphold antichrists kingdom and not his, a worldly glory and not his, for his
ki^gdo^ is not of this world, no longer ar they his words, his laws, nor his
testimonies tha^ they maintain his right honor. No newly practiced
worshipinges aloweth he for his, but utterly abhorrith the^ al as things raw
and unsavory.

4 And therefore it folowith, yt this spoke as did ye dragon. The doctrines and
teachings of these false Apostles and deceitefull masters, are lies in
hipocrisye, and the very doctrine of devils, under title of the veriti
repugnaunt to the same. Not unlike to y^ the serpent said unto the woman, ye
shall not dye if you eat of the forbidden fruit, but ye shall be surely as
Gods, knowing both good and evil. They do as did satan in the desar^. Always
they persuade us either of stones to make bread, or else to throw our selves
downward, or else to worship the devil. That is, to change the good creatures
of God from their right use, as trees into idols, silks, velvets, cloth,
gold, and silver into supersticious ornaments, chaste marriage into stinking
whoredom and sodomie with such like. To decline from the duties commanded of
God to their idle obseruacio^s, so making his commandments of none effect for
the vain traditions of men. And finally to fall unto forbidden worshippings or
abhominatio^s of Idolatry, of who^ they are full. And for these they have with
Satan also their mangled scriptures to lay for the^, to prove that the help of
dead saints is necessary, their masses, merytes, and works more than need,
expedient, and the fire of Purgatory a fearful thing, with ye diuil and all
of such fantasies. These are the prelates of Antichrists church, ye two horned
mo^sters or great bellyed Bishops, rightly discribed here of ye holy ghost in
this two horned beast. These beastly buszards are not ashamed both to say and
write, yt in their miters they bear the figure of both Testaments, whose
verity they impugn with tooth nail. Uery truly they say, that they carry the
figure, for in deed it is but a shadow they bear. Not to glorify God, but
their own beastly bodies with gold, pearl, and stone, like Mahou^ds in a play,
for his truth they most cruelly persecute. These are ye very false Prophets,
ye instruments of satan, ye deceivers, wolves, wagelings, Iudasses, dremers,
liers, Idols, adversaries, adders whelps, foxes distroying the Lords vineyard,
deceitful workme^, desperate shephards, blind watchmen, dum dogs, diuils
incarnate, wicked seed, vnsaciate beasts, whose God is their belly, and glory
their confusion. To al these and to many other such does the holy ghost compare
them for that they have with their errors and lies turned ye sweetness of ye
scriptures into bitterness, scarsly leaving one place thereof undefiled with
their filthy dregs.

5 This beast (says S. John) did all things yt the first beast could do, even
before his own face. The same lying power to deceive in hypocrisy has this
beastly brood yt ye great Antichrist has, y^ same wily crafts, and the same
beastly kinds of idolatry, and so does use them. The same abominations
maintain they y^ world over, yt ye pope maintains at Rome, and Mahomet in
Barbary, of Turkye. Yea, ye same superstitions and sorceries, ye same execrable
traditions and beggeries. The same ceremonies have they, that he has, ye same
unctions, ye same orders, and the same masses. The same idle obseruatio^s with
unknown cloyning, clattering, and wauling, are still used in England, like as
they were used before and with no less blasphemy unto God.

6 To do such things in the first beasts presence, is to do them where his
power and authority is reigning, or where as is the seat of Satan, which is
every place that admits strange worshipping.

7 Both the earth and them that dwell in the earth, compel they to worship
this first Beast. Not only enforce they them to wicked Idolatry, that never
would know ye truth, but also many of those which have great knowledge in the
same. Oh how many are in England, and in other regio^s also that in these days
works against faith, knowledge, and the holy Ghost admitting the priests
abominations? Rather had they to dwell still in the earthly beggerie with the
blasphemy of God, than either to be out of favor, or to loose their offices
to have their goods hindered, or to hazard their lives, so sweet ar these
wa^to^ worldly plesurs. Rather had they to perish with the sons of Hely and
Samuel, for abusing the ordinances of ye Lord, and with Core Datha^, and Abiro^
for rebelling against them to sink unto hell, then with Christ to take pains in
poverty. But let not the^ think to be worthy of Christ, that better love their
own carnal commodity, tha^ his heavenly verity.

8 Well, the beast must they worship whose wou^d is made whole. His old rustie
rules new burnished, and his old Romish rags new patched by a newly
confyrmed authority, must they embrase in pain of death. The Lamb shall not
yet be suffered to appear. Still for a time must these terrible termagaunts have
more worship tha^ God, their traditions preferred to his most pure word. And
why should it not be so? have they not now a new reformed church, in whom ye
beasts wounded head is newly restored? So long as it is like the popes church,
it must follow his rules, and cleave to his ordinances. It shall not follow
Christ in ^aith and in doctrine, til it appear like ye church which he left
here behynd him when he ascended. And that is not like to be yet.

9 First must there be wrought great wonders. Fire must be compelled to come
down from heaven in the sight of men, by this two horned beast. The disciples
of Antichrist with their by furked ordinaries must violently pluck from the
true Christian church (whose reign is not of this world) the eternal word of
the Lord.

10 Then must they take from them the consuming fire that Christ sent down
into ye earth of men's hearts, to dry up all malice and sin. Yea, they must
depryue them of the cloue^ fiery tongues, which ye holy ghost poured upon the
Apostles, to the comfort of all ye world. The tresure yt Christ has left here
to socour us, they must hyde under ye ground, and ye candle that he light us to
see over the house, convey underneath the bushel.

11 And these wonders shall they work in the presence of men. Already have they
taken in England, from ye Bibles, the annotacions, tables, and prefaces, to
perform this their da^pnable enterprise. They have straitely forbidden ye
reading thereof, for time of their Romish service. Some have they burned, and
some put to silence, and all in the face of the people. Yea, they raised the
maids of Ipswhich and of Kent to work wonders and maruels, and now of late ye
folish Northe^ men to fight for their Church. What practices they have had in
yt ear, and yt ear to fetch away ye true favorers and preachers of the
Gospel at diverse times, he yt well co^sidereth, may say yt ye holy ghost has
here rightly described them calling the^ workers of wonders. The discreet
cittize^ of London master Packyngton was slain with a gun at saint Thomas of
Acres (as they call it) not without their privy legerdemaine. But this with other
of their miracles I intend to declare more at large, in an other tretise the
Lord lending me life. It is not long ago also, since Alexander Seyton an
excelent learned man, with poor master Tolwin recanted at Paul's cross. Nor yet
long a fore sens good doctor Crome was complleed to do the same. And now last
of all, to take the scripture clean away, they have sought out great faults
in the translation of it, and there upon taken them away from ye common
peoples reading. Great pains they take to put it down, but they never swet yet
in ye setti^g up of it. Thus mind they to work their wonders, till they have
buried it all in ye earth. They lack now but iiii. knights to hier, to keep it
down still, yt it rise no more up. O very imps of hell, and lims of ye diuil, how
vain are your studies, and how wicked are your practices? I have no doubt, but
wtin short space God will distroy ye counsels, and dissipate ye strength of
them yt please men. Yet let no man meruail though they do these feats for the
time. For if the Gospel were taught without check, in a while should nothing
remain of yt generation, neither myter nor rochet, shaue^ croun nor anointi^g,
and yt know they well inogh. For ye word of ye lord is ye breath of his mouth yt
shall distroy them, and the devouring fire yt shall consume them.

12 By ye means of these signs (says the text) which this beast had power to
do in ye sight of the other beast, or where his abusio^s does reign without
check, he deceived them yt dwelt on the earth. Many in this age are
wonderfully abused, through ye deceiptful werking of Satan in these horned
whoremo^gers, but yet non other tha^ are earthly minded. Of some men in deed
the eyes are bleared with their crafts, of some me^ ye weak judgments
blemyshed with their subtilties, for want of discerning ye scriptures. Some men
are tangled with doubts, some trobled with terror, some tormented with fear,
considering yt for this new learning (as they will have it called) some have been
hanged as were ye three poor young men of Southfolke for the rotten roode of
Douercourt. Some burned, some be headed for things of naught, as is known to
all ye world. These things daseth their wits, and amaseth their minds.

And earth is ye cause of all this, were it not that they much more loved this
worlds pleasures than God, it should never be so.

13 All the persuasions of Antichrists prelates and preachers has evermore
ben, and are now still unto such earthlye inhabitants, that they should make
an Image like unto this beast, which is always to chose such an Emperor with
other worldly governors as shall be for their commodytie. He must by ye worldly
people be compelled to take aucthorytie, sceptur, and crown at their hands, so
sworn to maintain their fleshly lyberties. He must also be fashioned by their
wicked doctrines and false counsels in confessions, like them in all
sustersticious lyuinge, and in the tirra^nous murder of innocent Christen men.
Where such an head ruler is appointed, there is his own figure made, and where
such a Governor is constitute, there is his own Image set up. For we must
consider that this revelation is in all poi^ts no story, specially here, as
many writers have thought it to be, in supposing an Antichrist to be borne at
the latter end of the world. But it is a mystery co^prehi^ding in it but one
general Antichrist for all, which has reigned in the church in a manner since
the Ascencion of Christ. And in this one point are al ye commentours that I
have seen, most fowly deceived, yea, the best learned of them. I know well if
there be any yet to come, he shall be but a member of this. Again to our purpose.

14 Specially must they make a right Image of that beast, which had the
wound of a sword and did live. This betokens that in these days they shall
stir about them, and leave no cautels unsought, nether any falls counsels
vnfet from other realms, to do their feats with, and to fashion the Christen
Governors to their minds. As Winchester did the last time he was in France.
After whose coming home, many great wonders were wrought in England, and fire
was made to come down from heaven. Consider the story before, for the storye
declares the mystery. That wounded head now healed, must be vpholden.

15 He had a grievous wype with the sword (which is the living word of the
Lord) when he lost his Monks, chanons, and friars, his purgatory, pilgrimages,
and shrynes. Yet was he not all dead. For though their coules, cootes, and
rochetes were of, yet had they still the same popish hearts, and the same
supersticious frowardnes, that they were wont to have. This might have bin
found true, if it had bin searched, when certain popish priests of master
Whartons retinue not far from Bongay in Souffolke did calk for Cromwell, and for
other else, if the world had not changed to their minds.

I write not this, thinking they can harm by their calkinge where as faith is
resydent, but only to show, that their hearts are yet alive, and how
virtuously they are occupied. Many things I consider at this instant point,
concerning Prince Edward, who^ I dout not but the lord has sent for the
singular comfort of England. Not that I temerouslye diffine any thing to come
concerning him, considering it only in the Lords power. But I desire the said
Lord to preserve his bringing up from the contagious drinks of these false
Phisicians. And this is to be prayed for of all men, if ye ponder well the text
and mark their wonderful workings, where the beasts head is restored.

THE TEXT.
1 And he had power to give spirit unto the Image of the beast. 2. And to make
that the image of the beast should speak, 3. And should cause that as many as
would not worship the Image of the beast should be killed. 4. And he made
all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond. 5. To receive a mark
in their right hands, 6. Or in their foreheads. 7. And that no man might bye
and sell. 8. Save he that had the mark. 9. Or the name of the beast. 10. Either
the number of his name.

The Paraphrase.
1 For power they have to give spirit to the Image of the beast. It is surely
given them of the devil, wha^ they have once fashioned out ye beasts right
image, or made of an emperor a tiraunt, or set in the place of godly governor,
a cruel murderer up of gods people, by flattering praises to encourage them
to al mischief, and by wicked counsel to prick the^ forward to make cruel
acts of murder for vpholdinge their beastly generation. The spirit that they
do minister unto Princes evermore, is not the correction of sin, the amendment
of life, redress of the common wealth, provision for the poor, nor the
seeking of Gods glory. But by flatteringe praises to uphold the^ in their
evils, much after this sort of speakinge. Your majesty's or graces are called
most virtuous, most valiant, most worthy, most wise most mighty, and best
learned among al christen pote^tates. They are al but a^es, in co^pariso^ to
your worthinesses. If it be your maiests pleasure to do this or yt within your
own dominion, who shall be so bold to withstand you? No, though Gods holy
laws be an hundred times against it. Sopport ye old religion of holy church
against the heriticks, and ye cannot choose but prosper in all your affairs.
Let it be treason against your own persons, according to the acts of the
Emperor Sigismundus and of King Henry the fifth, if they do but once speak
against her corrupt customs. Make cruel constitutions a pace, and proclaim
them abroad to show your selves the popes lively Images.

2 Our office it is to cause ye beasts Image to speak. Let therefore your
voices be heard. Be no domb idols, but speak with bold stomaks. In his spirit
make utterance without gods word of his old romish rules. Send forth your
proclamacio^ to be published eueri where, co^cerni^g his masses, his
confessions, his ceremonies and his whorish chastity. Let al things be blown
forth under your titles, names, and auctoryties, to be observed under pain of
death. If other relmes report that ye abuse the duty of emperors or kings
(which is the office of god) esteem not their sayings, but stand well in your
own co^ceits, Interpret ye scriptures at your own lust and pleasures as your
law master of Rome has done before your time.

3 Cause so many to be killed, as will not worship the Image of ye beast, or
obey such wicked laws against the verity of god, as has bin made by those
Emperors that were ye pops eldest sons, by the kings of France, which were
his younger sons, or by other princes else which were ye defenders of his church,
let none escap your hands yt inueieth against our ki^gdo^e, but make hauok of
the^ on every side as of heriticks and traitors, to prove the holy ghost true
here in his foreiudgeme^ts. For yt is your office, not appointed of god but of
satan. And in our commission from him also we have it to be no slake mouers of
you thereunto. So has Christ told before in this revelation unto S. John the
Evangelist. This is the Ghoostelye councsell yt we ye horned beasts have in
commission to give unto you from the mouth of the Dragon. When such an Image or
Idoluse prince is thus up set or constituted by authoryty (his oath once mad
that he shall al ways defend the^) he may in no wise speak, but out of that
spirit* yt their co^iurers, confessors, I should say, have put into him. He
may make no lauws but at their spiritual appointment, like as ye Emperor
Carolus does now in these days. Much after this sort, became ye emperor Nero,
this beasts image immediately after Christ's ascension by the subtle flaights
of that spiritual sorcerer Simon Magus, at Rome to withstand ye Christen
preachers Peter and Paul, as largely witnesses Egisippus in his third book
de Hierosolimoru^ excidio, the ii. chap. This Simon Magus by flateringe praises
crepte first into his fauer, promising him health, long life, increace of
power, and enlargeme^t of his empire, with continual victory over his enemies,
in case he would follow his counsel, upon this became he, not only his chief
counselor, but also ye high bishop of his soul, and conseruatour of his body,
the preseruacion of his whole health and life to him committed only. All
things after that was done by his counsel to stop the Apostles preaching, he
taken for the emperors most familiar friend, and a man most profitable to the
common wealth of the Romans, and they soon after supprssed and put unto most
cruel death.

4 And he made all (says saint John) both great and small, rich and poor,
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hands, or in their foreheds.
When this new raised Image of ye beast, or sworn power to Antichrist, is once
raised up or admitted by their authority, be he King or Keyser, Prince, or
other Potentate, he must stronglye defend that sinagoge of the devil, with
whole majesty, crown, and scepture. By their only counsel must he the^ make
laws (for they must give him spirit) and send his commandments abroad yt
their holy decrees be observed. Co^misioners and visitours must out under ye
auctorytie, as well to the clergy as laite. The^ must al be sworn to it and so
obey it, both high and low, both gentleman and yeoman, both owner and farmar,
both citizen and townsman, both merchant and plowman, both master and servant,
both native dweller, and denison. Yea, both priests in their colleges, monks
in their abbayes, chanons in their couents, and friars in their cloisters must
after their sort do the same. This rule has bin always for the commodity of
that kingdom, where as ye powers have bin thus by the^ perverted. Much were it
to show the manifold examples in that behalf. Charles ye v. now Emperor, to
make this good, and to show him self to be the said beasts Image, caused such
acts to be publyshed throughout his whole dominion against ye christen
doctrine, wherein al they are declared heritiks, scismatiques, and exco^municats,
which takes not ye pope for S. Peter's only vicare and head of the christen
church, none excepted, neither king nor coruester, as there are now diverse of
ye contrary opinion. The articles of ye Louanians under his privilege, and the
acts of the Parisians under the French kings auctoryty, proclaimed in this
present year of our lord a M. D. xlv. will make all this matter good.

5 And what is this else both in their clergy and commons, but to receive a
mark in their right hands or foreheads, for in admitting those articles and
acts, they grant to obey those blasphemous doctrines yt shall both corrupt
their life and faith, both their works and conscience. For in consentinge unto
errors in their faith, they spot their forheads, having so their consciences
marked with an hot iron. In full granting also to do them in effect, they defile
their hands perfourming such works as are vnpure before God. If they were gone
quite from Christ that wrapped themselves again in the works of the law,
appointed of god before his coming, much more are they gone from him that
tangle themselves with such works of bondage as he never knew, as are al their
idle observations, having no express commandments of the word of God. Only
look we (says Paul) in spirit to be justified through faith, which by love
is mighty in operation.

6 And for them that so believes is this disiu^ctiue, or, put between their
hands and foreheades. For all they that outwardly keep these heathenish
observations, have not their consciences defiled with them, for their inward
faiths sake, though they perform their outward works doubting the terror of
the laws. Yet would I counsel them not therein to trust, but at the word of
ye lord to go from it. For though Loath dwelt in Sodom, yet at the Lords
voice he departed from thence.

7 This image made also yt no man might bye or sell, save he only yt had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or at ye least the number of his name. The
acts of Justinian ye emperor, shall make this good, so shall ye constitutions
of Adelstane and Edgare, and many other kings here in england which for ye
order and commodity of ye clergy made many politic laws. Specialy king Inas,
governor of the west Saxons, which first gave the Peter pence unto Rome, and
made him self a monk there. But in this spiritual generation among
themselves, is none allowed for a merchant unless he come in by simony. None
was made bishop, pastor nor curat, but paid for it their taxed su^ms, bishops
to the pope, and the priests to the bishops, besides Item in bribes.

None might else be allowed to utter to advantage the wares of the beast, or
distribute the rytes of that holy whorish church.

8 Neither were any made free of that mart, unless they had the mark of
the beast, which is not only the outward sign of their head, shauing and
anointing of their fingers, but also the inward prynte of their consciences,
received by profession made to that wicked monster. For like as true faith in
Jesus Christ is the mark of a perfect christian, so is a false believe in
popish traditions a token of Antichrists member By their fruits (says christ)
shall ye know the^. For the one follows ye rule of gods word, the other has
counterfeit works of men's prescription.

9 Else must they have the name of the beast to be called spiritual men, or the
holy consecrat number, as his holy fatherhod is called.

10 Or at the least they must have ye number of his name, which is a note of
magnificence and worthiness. Less can they not be called then Lords, so many as
are sworn to that spiritual market. The most ragged ronnagat, and idle idoit
among them, is no less then a sire, which is a lord in ye latin as sir John,
sir Thomas, sir William. In the Latin only hangs their great Lordships.
Among their unknown latin hours, their masses, and their diriges, lies
their plentuous patrimony in their portasses and mass books. Not he that
leaves all with poor Peter, may be called from fishing, nor with Matthew from
the custom house, to do these offices. But he that catches all with Judas and
Simon Magus must come from Symony to do them. Not he yt is called of God as
was Aaron shall have cure of soul, but he that offreth to Corba^ with Annas and
Cayphas. Such a world has it bin and is yet still in the world abroad among
them.

THE TEXT.
1 Here is vvisdome. 2. Let him that has wit. 3. Count the number of the
beast. 4. For it is the number of man. 5. And his number is six hundred, sixty,
and six.

The Paraphrase.
1 Here is wisdom to be had (says saint John) Let him that has wit, count
the number of ye beast, for it is the number of man. And his number is six
hundred, sixty and six.

2 For so much as Christ has willed us dilligentlye to search the scriptures,
and the holy ghost here does commit the judgment of this secreat to the wit of
man, some writers have deducted this number out of certain greek words,
betokning this great antichrist, because this present revelation was first
written in ye greek language. As out of Antemos, which signifies one contrary
to Gods honor, out of Arnume, which signifies a denier of God, and out of
Teita^, which betokneth the sun. All these 3. vocables, though they seem
diverse, yet contain they after the greek rules, neither more nor less, than
this set number. And all this may stand both with Scripture and reason.

For he that is not with Christ, is against him, calling that is good evil,
and that is evil good, ministering darkness for light. Such lying masters as
has brought in sects of perdition, has denied the Lord that bought them.
They are not the light as they boast them selves to be (for all they look to
be called spiritual) but they are the fallen stars and very Apostataes from
God, and Satan's transfourmyng them selves into the Angels of light, by diverse
kinds of Hypocrisy.

3 Some expositors leaving ye Greek, has practiced the same thing by these two
latin words. Dic lux, co^taining innumerable letters ye same set number.
Which signified that they call them selves the light or men of a spiritual
sort, being nothing less. For they in deed are the same self darkness, that
will in no wise receive light, but rather persecuteth it with most spite and
cruelty. After this sort might I bring in Diabolus incarnatus, or filius
perditionis, the diuil incarnate or ye son of perdition, for both they are
the names of this beastly Antichrist by the scriptures, the one wanting in the
numeral letters but.iiij. of ye number, and the other but vj. which might be
supplied in ye other letters. But among all these this word Arnume most nighly
touches ye mystery, which is as much to say, as I deny. Evidently seems he
to have the mark of ye beast, or to be sealed with the numbed of his name,
that says when he hears ye manifest verity, I will never admit it while I
have a day to live, it is against good order, it stands not with laudable
custom, our doctors agree not thereunto, our holy canons allows it not, it
has not ye holy fathers consent, with such like. What are these else but the
voices of an Antichrist? full of such voices was ye Popes legate Gaspar
Contarene at ye last counsel of Rainsburgh, so was ye frantike papist John
Eckius, and our winchester ye winker of wiles, largely declaring themselves, to
be deeply of ye same profession and mark.

4 But I find yet an other thing in it. For it is called here the number of
man, whose number lies all in vj. God created all things for ma^s commodity
in vj. days, and in ye seventh rested. After this creation continued man the
space of.vj. ages til the coming of Christ, which brought with him the sabbath
of the spirit. And this is signified by the greater number, which is ye vj.
hundred. For not unlike is it to the time, times, and half time of Danyel and
John, and to ye years, months, and days of Helyas and John also, as we had
before. Since Christ's ascension has the church continued by vj. other ages of
much less time comprehended in the.vj. seals, in the latter end of whom we
are now. And this shall conclude with such a sabbath of peace in the freedom
of Gods word, as has not been since the beginning. Satan shall be tied up,
and the true believers shall occupye in much quietness, ye beast condemned
with all his false Prophets. And this is the n^mber of the sixth.

But this peace shall not thus in quietness long continue. For long can not
Christ's church be without persecution. Satan shall be loosed again, and the
beleauings of the beast shall set up their bristles, and persecute the Saints
a fresh. Again shall they plant and build, ravish and keep whores, riot and
ruffle, as though they should long continue. But suddenly shall the latter
judgment day of ye Lord light upon them vnbewares, the perpetual Sabbath of
joy shyning to the elect flock of Christ. And this is the least number of
all, compared here unto six. And may well be signified by the xlij. months
before, which is ryghtly vj. seuenthes, in the which they shall tread down the
holy city or congregation of the Lord once again. This latter accounte was
found out by a certain unnamed disciple of John Wycleue, and I suppose it
most agreeing to the truth. The second sabbath here, or liberty of Gods truth,
has had his show in England already, if ye mark it well. And whither it will
yet appear more open or nay, it is in the Lords hands, let us pray and hope,
for it has great lykelihoode of a much farther appearaunce.

5 Since the worlds beginning has the mystery of iniquity wrought in Caine
and in his posterity, and so continued in the beastly members of Antichrist,
and so shall do still to ye latter day. Therefore is it no less than the
number of men, six hundred sixty and six. Thus is he tokened with all
wickedness, that admits the false faith of this beast, and folowith the
same in his living by the subtle persuasions of the bishops and their lying
Prophets, and is sealed up to eternal dampnacion, unless the Lord call him in
time. Not only in England is healed the beasts wounded head, but also in
ohter certain regions. But for so much as it is most lively don there, and this
book written in that language, I have only brought forth here examples
thereof in that purpose.

The xiiij. Chapter..
IN this present chapter declares the Lord unto John, and unto his faithful
servants by him, the degree, estate, and co^dicio^ of his true believing
church, now after he has before lively described the beastiall church of
Antichrist and of his horned spiritualitye by ye before named ii. monstrous
beasts. And this is that his lovers should know what they be which are of his
household, and what an helper they have of him in the midst of their
adversities, to the comfort of their souls. And though they be here among
those raging tirantes in tirrible agonies and pains, persecutions and
troubles, he is never absent from the^, nor will not be till he has rewarded
them with unspeakable Joys.

THE TEXT.
1 And I looked and lo, a Lamb stood in the mount Sion, 2. and with him an C.
and xliiij. thousand, 3. having his fathers name written in their foreheads. 4.
And I heard a voice from heaven, 5. as the sound of many waters, 6. and as the
voice of a great thu^der. 7. And the voice that I heard, was 8. as the harpers
that play upon their harpes. 9. And they sang as it were a nevve song, 10.
before the seat, 11. and before the four beasts, 12. and the Elders, 13. And
no man could learn that song, 14. but the hundereth and xliiij. thousand, 15.
which were redeemed from the earth. 16. These are they which were not
defiled with women, 17. for they are Virgynes. 18. These follow the Lamb
vvhither so ever he goes.

19. These were redeemed from men, 20. being the first fruits unto God and to
the Lamb, 21. and in their mouths was found no guile, 22. for they are
without spotte before the trone of God.

The Paraphrase.
1 I looked (says Saint John) on the other side, and in a thought as it were,
I beheld that a Lamb stood upon mount Sion. Even ye Lamb of God Jesus
Christ, that alone took away the sins of the world. Alone does he govern
his faithful church, as the only and immediate head thereof, having none other
to assist him in that office. For who is the King over Sio^ but he? Who shall
reduce Israel again to his fold but he? Only is he with his congregation, to
aid them with his word, to bolden them with his spirit, and to strengthen
them with his grace.

2 And with him were present an hundredth and.xliiij. thousand, having his
fathers name written in their foreheads. So many as have in heart received his
word, and in faith digested his verity, are ye very children of Abraham, and
are marked up for the sons of god by the seal of the holy Ghost.

3 For power have they given the^ to be Gods children yt believe in his name.
And this is it to have his name written in their foreheads. For their faith
declares the^ Gods sons. Let this set number be none impediment to the
reader, to be taken here for ye universal multitude of the faithful, as well
of ye gentiles as of ye Jews that believes, though it otherwise appears in
the viii. Chapter of this book. For so well is the gentle that has faith, a
perfect Israeltie, as is the Christen Jew. Yea, much rather was Zachius for
his faith judged Abraham's child, tha^ was Simon for fulfilling the works of
ye law. For God is not parciall. Whatsoever he be y^ fears him and works
rightuousenesse, is accepted with him. And so is it meant hear. And therefore is
not the difference written here as in ye other place, but al is joined in one,
to comprehend all under one. And as touching ye equal certainty in number
both here and there. Like as it is there certainly known unto God, even so is
it here though it be unto us both innumerable and uncertain. Not as
concerning the number it self, but ye common understanding thereof in ye
scriptures. For if ye number of one seventh be an infinite number there, much
more of many seuenthes.

4 And I hard a voice from heaven (says S. John) which is all one with the
aforesaid Sion, and is the universal congregation of Christ, all clear from ^
supersticions of men. For, from Sion commith the law of the Lord after Esaias,
and the word of God from Jerusalem.

5 This word is as the noise of many waters, when it is in ye mouths of many
diverse peoples, of diverse nations and la^guages, one not understanding an
other, and yet knowing it each people among them selves.

6 Uery like is it also to a great thu^der crack, mighty, fearful, and
terrible to the flesh. Uery hard is thy word Lord (said Christ's disciples)
who is able to abide it.

7 And ye voice yt I hard (says John) was much after ye noise yt ye harpers
make when they play upon their harps. Full of agreement are ye holy scriptures,
yea, full of sweet hermony and concord, more precious are ye verities of the
Lord than is gold, and their melody more sweet than honey.

8 With the^ reioysed David before the ark of the Lord. In them took Paul a
stomach, and confounded the Jews at Damascus.

9 And sweetly they uttered with their voices a song that seemed all new, before
ye seat of ye Lord, before ye four beasts, and before the ancient elders.
This song is the word of the Lord, all new both to the good and to the il. The
faithful it renueth in the spirit of their mynds, provoking them to do on a
new man in Christ. The hearts of ye unfaithful is so hardened yt they in
disdayn and spite does call it new learning, as did ye ignorant multitude at
Caparnaum, and the worldly wise men of Athens.

10 Before ye seat of the Lord was this song uttered, which is the godly
disposed multitude. For like as ye heart of an hipocrite is the very seat of
satan, so is ye heart of a faithful man the seat of god and habytacle of the
holy ghost.

11 Before the iiii. beasts was it opened also by this number of godly
teachers, which beasts ar ye private co^gregatio^s of ye Lord, remaining here
yet in ye flesh, in ye iiii. quarters of ye world

12 Finally before the elders was it song also. For none other doctrine is it,
nor Gospel of glad tidinges, than has bin since ye beginning, nor than has
been thankfully received of our old auncitors Patriarchs, ye Prophets, ye
Apostles, and ye faithful fathers.

13 And no man could learn ye new song, but the aforesaid hundred and xliiij.
thousand, which were redeemed from ye earth. Oh mighty, wonderful, yea and
tirrible sentence of the Lord. None that take them selves for the people of
God, can be accepted before him for the true feed of Abraham, nor for ye just
ministers of his word, unless they be tokened before with the holy spirit of
his promise, and so predestinate to the life everlasting.

14 None can sincerely do that godly office to the profit of other, unless he
be wholly taken from all fleshlye and worldly affects. No man ca^ come unto me
(says Christ) unless it be given him of my father.

15 The wilful Jews believed not because they were not the sheep of his
mark. Neither is it of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of the
only mercy of the Lord. Necessary is it therefore yt his spirit draws,
moves, and inclines the heart. Else ca^ not ye so^g be sweet, neither in him ye
sings, nor yet in ye herer. The notes of this new so^g are gods heavenly
verities, registered in the faithful hearts.

16 And they that did sign them to the praise of the Lord, were not defiled
with women. With no strange doctrines, nor yet profane worshippings is their
faith co^taminate, that unfeignedly have don on Jesus Christ. Not the spousage
of their souls have they broken by no filthy traditions of men. Only have
they with Dauyd sought the testimonies of God, and thought none like unto them.
Only did they cleave to his precious laws, esteeming all other but chafe,
and very whoredom in the spirit.

17 Therefore are they vyrgines married unto Christ in faith, as were the
Corinthians by Paul's preachinge, who^ he wished to continue a chaste virgin
unto Christ. Never is ye maydenhead of ye soul lost, till erroneous doctrine
be received from ye messengers of Antichrist, ye Bishops and Hipocrites.

18 The virgins, or uncorrupted beleuers does follow ye lamb whersoeuer he
becomes. They go after Christ, ye believing his word, does fashion their lives
unto it. Like as they follow Antichrist, ye fashion their works to his
doctrine. They walk in his steps, that forsake the^ selves with him, yt bears
the cross of persecutions with him, or ye suffers death for ye truth with him. And
not they yt seek them selves, living here in all pomp, voluptuousness, and
Tyranny. From this place fetch the blind papists, a great argument for their
wiuelesse castity, and yt none follows christ but they in this muster, because
they are unmarried. Neither may, Abraham, Moises, nor David, Zachary, Peter, nor
Philip, walk in this number because they had wives. So perilous a thing it is
to have a wife. It is great marvel they admit Mary Christ's mother to it,
because she had a husband. Oh ignorant asses, and very beastly Idiotes. I think
you follow Judas which had neither wife nor child, unless he had the^ sitting
by other men's fyers, as many of you have yet at this same day. What is
vyrginitie before god more tha^ is marriage? No more tha^ is circumcision in
comparison to uncircumcision. And yt is nothing. No more makes ye one tha^ the
other, to a Christian life. Only is it ^aith effectually working by love, yt
the Lord requires of us.

Only respected he the faith of Mary, and not her virginity. They which live in
matrimony after the word of god, ar accepted before hi^ for virgins, and so are
named of S. Paul. An other cauillatio^ they have, that none which has
offended before, can be of this number. But they consider not what is spoken
here before, yt they were redeemed from the earth, and that ye spirit of ye lord
has purified their hearts through faith. Neither have they grace to remember
ye Christ's innocence is reckened for an whole and perfect righteousness unto
them yt believe in him, but they must bring in such trifles, as are their own
beggarly merits.

19 And therefore it follows also. These faithful believers (says saint
John) were redeemed from men, being the first fruits to God and to ye lamb.
By none other were they redeemed, than by Christ. For of all ye elect number, he
is ye only righteousness, wisdom, holiness, and redemption. From ye corrupt,
blind, and froward multitude has he called them, taken them, and cleared
them. And of deformed sinners, has he made the^, fair, of vile pure, of
wretched, glorious, of blind perfectly seeing, of liars, true sayers, of
obstinate, gentle, of ill good, and of unfruitful, profitable. For he it is
that takes away the stony heart, and gives a soft heart for it, so making us
Abraham's children. Thus are we redeemed from men, when we are taken by his
goodness from such corrupt vsages as man's nature is inclined unto.

20 And for none other purpose but to be ye first fruits unto god, as were the
altar offerings in the old law, in the hands of the high priests. For so much
as ye elect number ar but a few or a certain taken out from the universal
multitude, and are ye portion of the Lord (as were the said offerings)
perteyning unto Christ ye only bishop of our souls, they are his first fruits.
Yea, and his own very mistical members, and al but one offering unto God ye
father by him. For he is ye only lamb that died for them, his own body,
being the only oblacion and sacrefice.

21 And in their mouths was found no gile. For none other words uttered they
but his p^er testimonies. None other taught they but his undefiled laws. None
other persuaded they to be observed of other, but his immaculate Gospel or easy
burden of Christ. No importable yokes laid they upon men's shoulders* neither
of ceremonies, fasti^gs nor mass hearings.

22 For they are without spot before the throne of god. Both before them yt are
faithful and have right judgment in the spyrite (which are the very seats of
God) apereth their doctrine pure, and also their life innocent before god
himself. Neither are they spotted with filthy tradicions nor yet with vncu^ly
examples, and as concerning their former sins, they shall not be imputed unto
them. They are remitted in Christ, and so forgotten before god. Though this that
here has bin spoken be concerning ye whole christen multitude and her
preachers, yet does it most specially touch the Jews or Israelyts that shall
in this latter age be converted unto Christ. And so do I counsel the reader
to understand it. For the mount Syon after the flesh was theirs. Not defiled
are they with unmarried women, which are the whorishe laws and unclean
supersticions of the Gentiles, upon none other harp have they commonly harped
but upon ye scriptures, though it has not bin to the pleasure of God, till
now in this latter age, wherein they shall wholye turn unto Christ.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savv an Angel, 2. Fly in the midst of heaven. 3. Having an
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that sit and dvvell on the earth. 4.
And to all nations, kinreds and ^ongs, and people* 5. saying with a loud
voice. 6. Fear God. 7. And give honor to him. 8. For the hour of his
judgment is come. 9. and worship him that made heaven and earth. 10. And the
sea and the fountains of water.

The Paraphrase.
1 An other Angel saw I (says saint John) fly in the midst of heaven. For
Christ was the first angel or messenger of the everlasting covenant of the
father. This angel here mentioned is none other than he that had ye seal of
the living god in the.vii. Chapter, and he that was clothed with a cloud in
the tenth chap. And he betokneth those fervent ministers who^ god has sent in
this latter time to admonish his people to fly from the errors of
antichrist, and return to his heavenly verities.

2 He flies in the midst of heaven. An earnest, fervent, and faithful course
take they in the midst of gods congregation (which is his heavenly kingedom
here, to whom this revelation is written) like as did Paulus, Sylas, and
Barnabas, Timotheus, Titus, and Clemens, with other of the Apostles sincerely
to declare his word. Mighty stomaked are they in gods cause, both in their
words and wrytings.

3 An everlasting Gospel had this Angel to preach unto them that sit, and
dwell upon the earth, and to al nations, kynreds and people. His eternal
testament and covenant of peace has the Lord given unto them, to preach
deliverance to the captive, health to the wounded, life to the dead, and
remission to ye sinful. Yea, to utter that word that is stronger tha^ is
heaven, or earth, and that shall never fail him that truly believes.

4 The sound of this gospel must go the world over, as in the apostles time.
Eueri where must it be spread to ye increase of faith. Among al nations of ye
earth, among al kinreds of the Isralyts, among all languages of the world, and
among all kinds of people, of what sort so ever they be, whether they sit upon
the earth or dwell upon the earth, whether they be high or low, governors or
subjects, masters or servants, owners or fermers. So that they sit not nor
dwell not within the earth, or have their felicity here. For that is holy
should not be given unto dogs, nor yet pearels laid before swyne.

5 And he cried with a loud voice, with a mighty fervent spirit do they beat
it into the heads of men, both by words, writings, and al they can make to
have the fear of God, and to give him his due honor. And this is the doctrine
they teach and the counsel they give.

6 Fear ye God in all that ye do, for the first point of godly wisdom* is to
dread least we offend him. Be constant in the word, and fear no displeasure
of men. For no more can they do in their anger but slay ye body, and bring it
to the rest of god. No power have they over the soul, fear him only therefore,
yt when he has destroyed both, may throw the^ into* he^.

7 Give honor unto hi^, worship him and serve him alone, praise him, and
glorify him above al. But yet after (...) other sort tha^ he has apoi^ted,
which is in faith, spirit, and verity, and not (...) outward shadows with
observation of times. He truly honors him that trusts in him, ye believes
his word, and yt in spite of all antichrists* confesses it before al men,
after this sort therefore fear him, and worship him nothing douting ye assalts
of enemies.

8 For the hour of his judgment is come. At hand is it that all the
antichrists and hipocrits shall by the invincible word of god be judged,
condemned, and destroyed. From heaven shall his wrath be declared upon al their
ungodliness. With the spirit of his mouth shall the lord consume them, and not
long after will the great day of his indignation toward them light suddenly
upon them.

9 With all faithful obsequi worship him therefore that created heaven and earth
in wonderful strength and beuty.

10 That made the sea and the fountains of water with all that in the^ does
anon, whose power is eternal, knowledge none other god but him. None other
helper, redemer, nor savior but christ: for all other christ's not sent of hi^,
ar but antichrists, only bow your knees unto him, for only is his strength
everlasting, only obey his laws, for only are his laws clean.

THE TEXT.
1 And there followed an other Angel saying. 2. She is fallen, she is fallen,
even Babylon that great city. 3. For she made al nations drink of the wine of
her vvhordome.

The Paraphrase.
1 And there followed an other Angel (says S. John) which betokneth an other
sort of preachers, whose office is here appointed them of the holy Ghost to
declare unto the people ye certenty of the fall of the aduoutrus, cursed and
malignant church of hipocrits, here figured by wretched Babilo^. For though all the true prophets and preachers have but one word of God in their mouth, yet
passes it diversely from them. Unto each of the^ is given a diverse vtteraunce
of the spirit to edify. One is soft, meek and gentle, as was David, John and
Peter an other is boysteous, hard and vehement as was Helias, Esaias and Paul,
And all this works the self same one spirit. This diversity of techers was
never more plentuous in the world than now in our time, figured here by these
two angels. Praised be the Lord therefore.

2 And the tenor or ground of this latter sort of preachers is this. She is
fallen, she is fallen, even miserable Babylon ye great city of whoredom,
because she made all nations to drink of the wrathful wine of her fornication.
So sure is it that the execrable church of Antichrist shall be overthrown, and
utterly destroyed, as it were now performed in deed. Nothing shall be vnrooted
out that the heavenly father has not planted. Sooner shall heaven and earth
perish, than this promise be unfulfilled.

3 For with the stinking whorishnes of her supersticious worshippinges, has
she poisoned all nations and peoples, under heaven. The great governors, and
learned lawiers of ye world, has she made in manner of beastly dronkerds,
wytlesse, faythlesse, and graceless, by their prostibulous doctrine. And this
shall be declared more at large in ye.xvij. cha. following. whereas she is more
ple^tuously described.

The text.
1 And the third Angel followed them. 2. saying with a loud voice. 3. If any
worship the beast and his Image. 4. and receive his mark in his forehead or on
his hand. 5. the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of god. 6. which
is povvred in the cup of his wrath. 7 and he shall be punished in fire and
brimstone. 8. before the holy Angels. 9. and before the Lamb.

The Paraphrase.
1 The third Angel also (says saint John) followed the^ in ye third kind of
preaching of ye same self message, that in ye mouth of two or three faithful
witnesses all verity might stand.

2 And by this Angel are they signified that by the word of God stiffly impugn
their wicked laws and ungodly ordinances, whose manner of earnest preaching is
this.

3 If any man worship ye beast, which is ye great antichrist. And his Image
which are those governors that takes upon them his blasphemous titles, names,
authority, or defense. If any man also receive his mark in his forehead,
believing their laws to be a christen doctrine, or have the print of his seal
upon his right hand which is to fashion his outward works after the same. The
same man shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, which are the dregs of ye pure
wine poured in the cup of his high displeasure. He shall taste of the
everlasting damnation, that is reserved in the latter curse or fearful
sentence of their most terrible judge. To worship the beast and his Image, is
to accept them in conscience, and in the outward obedience, with full consent of
the heart. For that they blasphemously pretend, without Gods authority. As the
Pope for Gods vicar or forgeuer of sins. Mahomet for the great Prophet of
the Lord, the rulers of the earth, for the Popes elder or younger sons, for
most christian Kings, and defenders of the faith of that holy church.

4 To receive the beasts mark in their forheads and hands, is to agree to
such decrees, traditious, laws, constitucions, acts, and proclamations, as
they under those titles have made only for their own covetousness and pomp,
and neither for the glory of god nor yet for the right maintenance of the
christen common wealth, as I have declared before. And also to be sworn to the
same, to subscribe to it, to give counsel or aid to it, to maintayn it by
learning, to minister in it, to execute under it, to accuse, punish, and put to
death for it, or to think it lawful and godly, with such like.

5 These marked worshippers that taste of the cup of gods indignation, of
calamity, sorrow, and wretchedness in the days of their fall here, and after
the last judgment of unspeakable pains and most grievous torments, in
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

6 The dregs that the Lord has powered out (says David) shall the wicked of
the earth drink. Clean contrary are these Angels to ye horned ministers of
antichrist. For they maintain ye Popes errors, these ye only verities of
christ. They labor for the glory of their pope, these seeks ye only honor of
god. They prate yt their holy Church shall continue, th^se say it shall down
with shame. They require worship to the beast and his Image, these will report
it blasphemous, and ye reward thereof damnation. Mark in these two sorts the
preachers of our time, and judge which are of god. Against both beasts in
Christ's quarrel shall these Angels contend. Against the Pope and his bishops,
Mahomet and his doctors, will these godly ministers replye (whom the Lord
has sent in this latter age for yt purpose) condemni^g by the scriptures their
auctoryty, jurisdiction, and power declaring also the plagues that will fall
upon them for witholding the truth of God in unrighteous.

7 For these Antichrists and their worshippers with so many as bears their
token shall be punished in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and
before the Lamb. Fire shall be kindled (says Moses) in the anger of the Lord,
and shall burn unto the bottom of Hell. Upon the ungodly (says David) shall
he rain snares. Fire, brimstone, storm, and tempest shall be their porcyon to
drink. The vehement indignation and mighty judgment of God, shall light upon
them, as upon Sodom and Egypt, and shall both devour them and consume them.

8 And this shall be in the sight of Angels, which are not only the spirits
of heaven, but also the church of the faithful. Yea, the righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the destruction, and shall wash his hands it the blood
of the wicked.

9 In the presence of the lamb shall it be also. For he is evermore with his
flock, and shall be unto the end of the world, wherein he shall sit and co^dem the^

The Text.
1 And the smoke of their torment ascends up evermore. 2. And they have no
rest day nor night. 3. which worship the beast and his Image. 4. and
whosoever receives the prynt of his name 5. here is the patience of saints.
6. Here are they that keep the commandments. 7. and the faith of Jesus

The Paraprhase.
1 And the smoke of their torment ascends up evermore, as the flame of a
furnace with most horible stink for a perpetual sign of their punishment,
like as it did from Sodom and Gomor, when the Lord overthrew them.

2 So yt they have no rest neither day nor night, so mani as worship ye beast
and his image, receui^g ye pri^t of his nam

3 Both in this life are they cruciate with a troublous and doubtful
conscience, and also after this life with unspeakable pains. For neither shall
their worm dye, nor yet their fire be quenched, all flesh abhorring the^.

4 Thus shall they be with the beast tormented, which have the spirit of ye
beast. For like as al ye faithful (which has been from the beginning) belongs
to one mystical body in Christ, and shall be preserved by him so does the
wicked perteine to one mystical Antichrist, having al one spirit with him, and
so shall with him perish.

5 Here is the patience of the saints. In this life ar their troubles no
pleasure is for them in this world, but hate, rebukes, slanders, lies,
persecutions, and death of their bodies. Their life upon earth is continual
affliction, but glorious is the fruit of their labors. Manifold are the
misfortunes of the rightuous, but the Lord clears them of all.

6 Here are they vexed that keep the commandments and the faith of Jesus. Here
are they had in derision, yt behave themselves as ye ministrs of god in much
patience, afflictions, need, anguish, labor, stryps, imprisonment, and such
like..

7 Here are they chastened of the LORD with many sore storms, that they should
not be damned with this world. Much have they here to suffer of enemies, that
only cleueth to ye word of god in life and doctrine.

THE TEXT.
1. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me. 2. Write. 3. Blessed are
the dead, which hereafter dye in the Lord, 4 (even so says the spirit) that
they may rest from their labors. 5. But their works shall follow them.

The Paraphrase.
1 And I heard a voice from heaven (says S. John) saying unto me.

2 Write with pen, or mark suerly this sentence following for them that here
suffer in the truths quarrel.

3 Blessed are ye dead, or they which are already departed, and yt also shall
hereafter depart in ye Lord. This voice from heaven are the infallible
scriptures* ascertaining the faith of John, of the sweet rest of the saints
in the hands of God. And that their end is not without honor, as the vain
sort supposes, but they are counted among the dear children of God. Let the^
therefore yt suffer in this age be earnestly sprited, and not fear ye torments
of ye enemies in Christ's cause.

4 For from hence forth (the spirit says) that they rest from their labors.
In a wonderful quietness dwell they, by the very sentence of ye holy Ghost,
and shall never more feel of any woo. God has clean wiped away al tears from
their eyes, all sorrows and pains from their bodies, the first dangers being
^ast. Happy are they therefore and most godly fortunate, that are slain for
Christ, because they will not worship the beast and his Image, nor corrupt their
faith with their wicked laws, but in a pure christian believe departs from
hence to ye Lord. Their portion is in ye land of the living, and their lot
among the holy ones.

5 For certainly their works does follow them. The promised reward of God for
constantly standing by ye verity, for the fruits of their christian patience,
and for other exercise of their faith, is evermore to their glory present with
the^. Not as deserved of the^, but of Christ, in whose faith they wrought
here, and for the promise sake, that they should be gods heirs together with
Christ. The lively word also which they earnestly received here and so rooted
in their faith, will never suffer them to perish, nor to be hurt of the second
death.

THE TEXT.
1 And I looked, and behold, 2. a white cloud, 3. and upon the cloud one
sitting, like unto the son of man, 4. having on his head a golden crown, 5.
and in his hand a sharp sickle.

The Paraphrase.
1 I looked yet further (says S. John) and evidently before me appeared a
white cloud, which betokens the true ministers of Gods word. Whom the holy
ghost calls clouds by Esaias, David, Peter, and Judas. For from the^ falls
upon the people the sweet drops of his verities.

2 White they are as milk for their faith in the word, and for their christian
conversation not blotted with hypocrisy of men's corrupted customs.

3 Upon this cloud was one sittyng like unto ye son of man, which is verily
Christ, in his glorified ma^hood. For evermore is he among his true preachers,
gyuyng them such vtteraunce and wisdom, as all their enymies are not able to
withstand. Always walks he among the vij. candelstickes, which are his
congregations as we had before.

4 He had upon his head a golden crown, in token of his eternal and
incorrupt kingdom, and in his hand a sharp sickle, which is ye sharp
judgment or righteousness of his word, for there with shall he reap his
latter harvest. According to his word and promise shall he judge good and
evil.

5 This sickle received he of his everlasting father, such time as he gave
over unto him his universal judgments. By the order of this vision should ye
preachers seem in the last age of the church, much to admonish the people of
the latter day, with the coming of Christ again to judge both the quick and
the dead as is in their creed, or believe.

THE TEXT.
1 And an other Angel came out of the temple, 2. crying with a loud voice to
him that satte on the cloud. 3. Thrust in thy sikle, and reap, 4. for the
time is come to reap. 5. For the corn of the earth is ripe. 6. And he that
satte on the cloud, 7. thrust in his sickle on the earth, 8. and the earth
was reaped.

The Paraphrase.
1 And an other Angel (says saint John) came out of the temple, which is the
congregation of faith, consecrated as an holy temple unto God in the blood of
the undefiled Lamb Jesus. This Angel betokens those just men, that with
Symeon and Anna the daughter of Phanuell, in this latter age are desirous of
the glory of God, and of the final redemption of man from bodily corruption.

2 These shall cry with a loud voice, with a fervent spirit shall they call
unto Christ, which sits upon the cloud.

3 And this shall be their saying. Thrust in the sickle and reap. Send forth
thy living word. And like as it has created all things, so let it now try and
judge all things.

4 For the time is at hand to reap. For we are those upon who^ the ends of the
world are come.

5 And doutlesse the corn of the earth is ripe, the world is at the best that
it will be. As it has been ever, so is it still, altogether set upon mischief.
Let thy word therefore finish all, as it has begone all. With ye breath of thy
mouth, consume ye great Antichriste, the man of sin, the son of perdicion,
and the aduersarye yt has exalted him self above God. Power out thy
indignation upon ye kingdoms that will neither know thee, worship thee, nor
alone call upon thy name. Thou haste called thy harvest the end of ye world,
let it now finish al in deed. Divide ye chafe from the corn, ye wicked from
the rightuous. Gather ye wheat into thy garner, and burn the chafe in
unquenchable fire.

6 And he that sat on ye cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and anon the
earth was reaped.

7 He has sent his mighty word, so quick in operation as fire. Which shall not
only consume ye wicked generation of ye beast, but also reserve the^ to
eternal dampnation.

8 The earth shall be cleared of them as of all other filthy corruptions, and
hell replenished with them, to their perpetual care.

THE TEXT.
1 And an other Angel came out of the temple, 2. which is in heaven, 3.
having also a sharp sickle.

The Paraphrase.
1 And an other Angel (says S. John) came out of the temple which is in
heaven, or from the great number of Angels, having also a sharp sickle in his
hand.

2 This Angel betokens those heavenly spirits that the Lord shall send forth
to gather together his chosen from the iiij. wyndes when his toke^ shall
appear in heaven. These are the reapers of the Lords harueste. These are they
that shall go forth too gather all nations, and to separate the goats from
the Lambs, the il from the good, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire,
where as shall be waylyng and gnashing of teeth.

3 And therefore is their sickle here named sharp. None other is their
sickle, but this appointed office. None other is their harvest, but this
gathering together. But these messengers shall not forth til they have
commandment. And therefore says Saynct John consequently.

THE TEXT.
1 And an other Angel came out from the altar, 2. which had power over
fire, 3. and cried with a loud cry unto him that had the sharp sickle, and
said. 4. Thrust in thy sharp sickle, 5. and gather the clusters of the earth,
6. for her grapes are ripe. 7. And the Angel thrust in his sickle on the earth,
8. and cut down the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, 9. and cast them into
the great vvynefat of the wrath of God. 10. And the vvynefat was trodden
without the city, 11, and blood came out of the fat, 12. even unto the
horse bridles, 13. by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

The Paraphrase.
1 And an other Angel came out from the altar which had power over fire. This
is the Lord Jesus Christ, who^ Malachias calls the Angel of the covenant
that was longed for. He is the altar of the rightuous, and by him are they a
sweet sacrifice unto God. Else could they be but very abomination. Till the
judgment day shall he be an Altar of means making to God the father for us.
But that day once come, no longer shall he be an altar or an advocate, but go
clean from it. He shall then become a judge over al ye world, rewardyng every
one according to their works. Hitherto has he meekly sitten upon the cloud,
and not cut with his sickle. He has had in his hand the judgment, and not
judged.

2 But now has he power over fire. By fire (which is under his obedience, as
are all other creatures else) shall he at that day judge the universal world.
And more sharp, vehement, quick, fierce, mighty, and tirrible shall his
sentence be to ye wicked, tha^ is any fearful, flaming, or consuming wild fire.

3 For with a loud voice shall he cry unto him yt has the sharp sickle. An
earnest charge and commandment shall he give at ye day to ye ministers of his
ire, for to cast the^ into exterior darkness, after this sort here uttered in
mystery.

4 Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the cluster of the earthli vinyard,
for the grapes thereof are ripe.

5 Execute the vengeance committed unto you, and root out this rank riotous
generation of ye ravenous epicures*

6 For now are their mischiefs at the full. Now are they most curious in
their facions and feadinges, most covetous in their co^passings, most vain in
their studies, and most cruel in their do^inges. For with the^ shall it be
(says Christ) as it was in the days of Noe and Loath. They shall build and
ba^ket, ruffle and riote, bye and sell, and plant for their pleasures. And
suddenly as a snare shall that terrible day light upon the^ vnbewares, as did
death on the covetous iourer.

7 And the Angel (says S. John) thrust in his sickle on ye earth, he cut
down the grapes of ye vineyard of the earth, and so did cast them into ye
great wine fat of the wrath of God.

8 According to their commission they shall plage ye earthly minded, for here
is ye time past for ye time coming used, for the certainty of it. With
sudden death shall they perce the^ in this world that co^temning Christ's
doctrine have followed ye corse thereof in all co^cupice^ce.

9 And finally they shall throw them into ye lake of misery, ye pit without
water, into the stinking dregs of hell, where as fire and brimstone shall be
rewarded to drink. For ye vineyarde of the earth is the carnal sinagoge of
hypocrites, and the grapes thereof are ye glorious glottons, and frank fed
porkelinges of ye gredy gulf, eue^ ye enemies of Christ's cross, whose God is
their beally, whose glory is their confusion, and whose end is their da^natio^
for they are earthly minded. This winefat of the wrath of God is none other
then his great vengaunce, to be powered upon the unfaithful. Or else hell
prepared for ye devil and his angels. Great, not only for ye innumerable
multitud yt it has and shall reciue but also in yt it is insaciable.

10 And this winefat was trode^ without ye city. Nothing perteyneth it to ye
city (of who^ famous thing are spoken) which is ye congregation of god, nor
yet to ye good creatures of god. No, not unto this world, which shall at that
day^ be tried and purged by fire. But under the earth shall it be, and far
without this world, secluded from the face of heaven in filthy and unspeakable
darkness.

11 For blood will come out of this fate, even unto ye horse bridles. Wherein is
expressed not only the terror of the place, but also of ye pains therein
contained. For blood shedding and murder are things very horrible and fearful
to behold, containing in them depriuatio^ of life, which is most terrible of
all. The abundance thereof betokens the greatness of the grief in the
sufferance of them. The treading down also signifies, that no raise toward
any relief is to be looked for of them yt be there. Unto them which at that
day shall be in the city, will be that sits in ye thron make all things
now. All dolor, affliction, sorrow, pain, penury, wrath, co^dempnatio^, and
death, shall be past with them. Only shall they be trode^ down in this winefat of
gods wrath, that lived here like beasts without reason, and that wandered
here like horses and mules in their own filthy lusts.

12 All shall be punished there, yt was here unbridled, vnordred, and ungoverned
after the word and pleasure of God And therefore it is here said, unto the
horse bridles. Every man shall receive in body according to that he has don.
whether it be good or evil. They that have wrought ye work of God in faith,
shall reap according unto it. The bridles also betokens ye mesure of gods
judgment, not as concerning ye time which is everlasting, but concerning ye
pain rightly mesured according to ye iniquity. For ye lord has set his
judgments over the wicked in weight and mesure, ye stripes agreing in qua^titi
to ye exces of sin, so much torment to have as their rejoice has been in
wikednes

13 The space of these terible torments or punishments of hell, is a M. and.vj.
hundred furlongs. A furlong of ye Greeks is called the run of Hercules, and
it is in length an C. and.xxv. paces or steps. And commonly they used
according to ye length to measure their playing places. Of whom Paul makes
mention to ye Corinthia^s being Greeks, by the^ yt runs in a course, and yt
proves masteries. In this thousand and vi. hundred furlonges here, is
comprehended the whole and universal course of ye wicked for ye iiii. quartars
of ye world. The number of an hundred is evermore an whole complete and perfect
number. And ^iij. hundred.iiij. times nu^bred is.xvj. hundred which makes this
number of a thousand and vj. hundred, ye number of iiij. respecting always ye
iiij. clymates of the world, which are ye common habitacio^s of sinners. In
the^ course they, in all wantan kinds of living. In the^ work they their
masteris of all ungodly obseruacio^s and false worshippinges, walking in ye
large or open way which leads unto death. According to ye number and mesure
of this course, has God here measured the place and punishment.
Notwithstanding never is he without mercy. Marvelous he is in his works and
judgments, which are unsearchable. Blessed is he yt shall have his part in the
city or congregation of the rightuous, and that shall see ye peace upon Israel,
when the Lord shall lead forth them with the evil doers, yt has (...) them
selves with their laws. The Lord grant us once to taste the prosperitye of
Jerusalem. Amen.

The xv. Chapter.
NOt only for the common sins of the world does ye Lord plague, but most of
al for unthankfulness of al blasphemies the greatest. From that spurneth against
knowledge and directly works against ye holy ghost. A double destruction or
decay both of soul and body by ye righteousness of god must needs follow
the wilful contempt of his verity manifestly showed and openly taught. Yet is
ye Lord so merciful, yt he wills not ye damnation of a sinner. Such
co^passio^ has he ever our manifold weakness, yt he premonisheth us of his
most terrible plagues, to call us back by fear, if love will not do it. As
here consequently in the first vysion of this present revelation to John, which
follows after this sort in this xv. and xvj. Chapters.

THE TEXT.
1 And I saw an other sign in heaven, great and merueilous, 2. seven Angels
having the seven last plagues, 3. for in them is fulfilled the wrath of God.
4. And I savve as it were a glassy sea, 5. mingled with fire, 6. and the^
that had gotten the victory of the beast, and of his Image, 7. and of his mark,
and of the number of his name, 8. stand on the glassy sea, 9 having the harps
of God, 10. And they sang the song of Moses the servant of God, 11. and the
song of the Lamb, saying. 12. Great and merueilous are thy works, Lord God
almighty, 13. just and true are thy vvayes, thou king of Saints. 14. Who
shall not fear (O Lord) and glorify thy name? 15. For thou only art holy,
16. and all gentiles shall come and worship before thee, 17. for thy judgments
are made manifest.

The Paraphrase.
1 And I saw (says saint John) by the secret goodness of my Lord God, yet an
other toke^ in heaven, great and merueilous, strange and wonderful, For in
the churches or congregation of God, are evermore uttered his wonderful and
deep judgments, unto them only whom his grace appoynteth, as unto John. And
this is the token in mystery.

2 Seven Angels had in their hands the seven last plagues. Some expositors
have taken these Angels for the right ministers in the.vii. ages of the
christian church. Some have thought them to be the perverse prechers and
ungodly ministers of all the said ages suffered of God strongly to delude the
unbelievers, that he which hurts should hurt still, and that he wkich is in
fylthines, should still be filthy. Unto every age corresponding an Angel, to
declare the nature of those deceitefull hyrelings and lying masters. And this
makes them so to understand the text. They are here expressly noted to be in
heaven. Among the congregation of God are the false Prophets, and discembling
Hipocrits evermore, as the chafe among the corn, the tears among the wheat,
and the filthy dregs, among the pure wine. For that kingdom is as a net
thrown into the sea and gatheringe all manner of fishes both good and bad. In
all ages has the wicked generacio^ increased, to impugn the truth, and stiffly
s^ to stand up against God and his Christ, which is none other after their
minds, than to minister the.vii. last plagues here. For no poison is to the
soul so pestilent, nor yet venim so noyfull, as is false doctrine. No plage
can be thought more deadly nor violent, than to deprive us of that faith, of
that verity, and of that life which is in Christ Jesus, or to bring us out of
ye way which he has appointed. And all this seems no small likelihood of the
just understanding of ye text here. Yet Frances Lambert geuith a far better
judgment, calling the^ ye set sentences or unvariable decrees of god, difining
his judgments against the wicked in his latter age of ye world, at their
appointed times to be vtterred. For all these things are iontely to be
considered.

These Angles came not only from heaven, which is the congregation (as they
have mentioned) but also out of the celestial temple of the tabernacle of
testimony, which is ye omnypotente God and his Christ, as the xxi. chap.
hereof declares.

They are also clothed with pure whit linen, gyrded with golden girdles, they
have golden vials delivered unto them by one of the iiii. beasts, and one of
them commoneth with John, declarynge unto him the judgment and fall of the
great whore. Which ar no arguments that they are here to be taken for ill
preachers, though they here minister ye last vii. plagues. Therefore shall we
judge them here to be Gods appointed purposes or eternally decreed pleasures,
against the wilful obstinates and indurat rebellions to the end of the world.

These are called the last plagues, because they fall in ye last age of ye
world who^ Esaias, Hieremy, Oseas and Micheas calls ye last days, Iho^ ye last
hour^ and Paul ye ends of ye world. Seven are they named here in a universal
respect both of the times, parsons, places and perverse doctrins of the whole
world. And also because of the.vii. seals, and the.viii. trompets, to whose
judgments they jointly agree, as in the next Chapter following will appear
more largely.

3 For in them (says the text) is fulfilled the wrath of God. The indignation
of the Lord is in them wholly declared. For what hate can he show more unto a
man, than to withdraw him from him his grace, to leave him to himself, to
suffer him in his own blind judgments, to give him over to his own fylthy
lusts, and to send him the operation of error to his double damnation. A
very fulfilling of Gods anger is it also to appoynte us a false Prophet or
deceiuable curate a wanton Prince, or ungodly governor. These therefore with
such like are those plagues, in whom is deeply accomplished the displeasure
of God And they are here named the last plagues, for after them shall none
other be seen, the latter day finishing and clearin all.

4 And I beheald (says John) in the same said vision, as it were a glassy
sea, or a great fllowing water in similitude of glass, all myngled with fire.
None other is this sea, but the precious verity of the Lord, so clear as
glass and so pure as crystal. This sea gushed out of the hard rock of
stone, that was cloven a sonder in the desarte. When he sent forth his
spirit, these waters flowed forth in abundaunce.

5 Most effectual and quick is this sea And therefore it is here noted and
myngled with fire, which signifies the holy ghost. For never is the verity
without Gods spirit. A fierce fiery stream calls Danyell this sea all fiery
is the word Lord (says Dauyd also) and therefore thy servant loves it. This
is the fountain of living water springing up into the life everlasting. Unto
this water should all they resort that are thirsty, thereof to take refreshing*

6 Upon this glassy sea were they seen of saint John, that had obtained
victory of the beast, of his Image, of his mark, and of the number of his name.
By whom are meant those constaunt christians, which has for all ages firmly
affirmed the truth. For none adversity declining from it. Strongly have these
since the Apostles time resisted the adversaries of God by his only word,
persisting therein unto the death as did Steeuen, James, and Antipas with such
other his faithful witnesses. Uictory have they gotten by faith both of the
beast and his Image, both of the great Antichrist and his supporters, of the
pope and of Mahomet, with their maintainers Emperors, Kings, and maigistrates,
and of al the^ that usurp their title, name, seat, aucthorytie, pomp or
power.

7 They have blemished likewise by the said word not only the mark of the beast,
which is corrupted faith, but also the number of his name, which is the denial
of God. Them have they to their rebuke uttered, and to their confusion declared.

They have proved their orders ^amnable, their doctrine deuilish, their
religion, hypocrisy, and their spiritualty, plain wickedness, condemning them
by the scriptures, as ungodly dissemblers denying the Lord which bought them.
These are they whom the lord tenderlye nourished, and graciouslye brought
forth upon the refreshing waters co^uerting their souls to his godly fear and
love.

8 These stand evermore on ye glassy sea, they set sure footing upon ye rock
stone. Unmouably they persevere in ^ truth, never deniyng it before men.

9 And they have in their hands the harps of god, which are devout mind^ given
all unto godliness, and rejoicing in spiritual things.

10 Harmoniously they sing the tune^able song of Moses the faithful servant
of god, and the melodious sweet^ song of the lamb Jesus Christ.

11 Of both testaments they make utterance, declaring ye wonderful works and
terrible judgments ^ute of the old law, and ^ute of the Gospel of
gladness the most sweet^ mercy of the Lord. Without ceasing open they the
the scriptures unto other inwardly rejoicing in spiritual Himnes, and Psalms,
having this evermore for the standing tenor of the song.

12 Inestimably great is thy goodness and wonderfully marvelous are thy works
Lord God almighty.

13 Just are thy promyses, and most perfitely sure thy ways, thou glorious
King of saints, and gracious g^ydt of the Godly believers.

14 Who shall not evermore fear thee, a mighty Lord, who shall not always in
heart glorifye thy blessed name.

15 Thou alone art holy, just, and perfect, for none is there good but thy
self only. Thou art our our only maker, redeemer, and comforter. None other
have we for our God but thee.

16 No doubt of it but the time will be that al kinds of people, both Jews and
gentiles, faithful, and Heaten, shall seek unto thee, and shall faithfully in
verity and spirit worship before thee, acknowleging thee for their only Lord
God.

17 Because thy wonderful judgments that sometime were secret, are now to the
world made openly known and manifest. Though this song be little and small,
yet is there in contained all veritye, that both Moses and Christ confesses
at large. Moreover whatsoever ye scriptures co^prehe^deth, either of the great
omnipotency of god or of his most wonderful works, either of his loving mercy,
or of his benign pity toward man, of his glorious name or mighty power, or
that he is to be magnified and feared, or how that the faithful pertains
only to his kingdom, or how that al people shall finally be converted unto
him. Al is compendiously in this brief song here contained, what though it be
not so word by word expressed. And as concerning yt is here last spoken, that
his judgments are made manifest, it is to be understood of those faithful
creatures whom he calls, clears and justifies, and of none other. For unto
them only are his heavenly veryties known, to whom he witsaueth to open them.
Though the other outwardely see the judgments of God, yet do they not inwardly
perceive the^, though the b^st it never so much. For it is given them so to
do. They must have eyes and not see, ears and not understand.

The Text.
1. And after that I looked 2. And behold the temple of the tabernacle of
testimony 3. Was open in heaven. 4 and the vii. Angels. 5. came out of the
temple. 6. which had the.7. plagues. 7. Clothed in pure and bright linen. 8,
And having their breasts girded with golden girdles, 9. And one of the four
Beasts gave unto the seven Angels. 10. Seven golden vials. 11. full of the
wrath of god, which lives for evermore 12 and the temple was full of smoke.
13. For the glory of God, and for his power. 14. And no man was able to enter
into the temple. 15. Till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were
fulfilled.

The Paraphrase.
1 And anon after that (says S. John) I looked yet more ad^^sedly. And suddenly
as it were, ye everlasting temple of ye tabernacle of witness was open in heaven.

2 A mystery this is very earnestlye to be marked, as a thing of great weight.
The Lord almightye is this eternal temple, he is ye temple not made with
hands, uncreated, glorious and full of majesty, co^prehending in him al things
and he within none again comprehended. He is ye Lord of all. He measures
heaven with his span, he over reaches all the world with his iii. fingers. In
him we live, we move, and have our being. The tabernacle of witness is the lamb
Jesus Christ. He is that very tabernacle of God that was here among men,
bearing yt faithful witness which gives wisdom to babes. He is the propiciatory
or mercy seat, wherein we are hard and forgeuen. Neither was this tabernacle of
this manner building, but much more perfect and greater. This holy tabernacle
is with in ye aforesaid temple, for Christ dwells in ye father, and the
father in him.

3 Open is this temple in heaven, and the tabernacle seen, when god is known
by true preaching and christ's doctrine believed. For he came into the world,
and for yt purpose was borne, to bear witness unto ye truth, who^ the father
willed only to be hard concerning faith.

4 This temple and tabernacle open, or god and his word once known in this
latter age, the seven Angels comes forth. The eternal decrees of gods
secret iudgemets apeereth, and are fulfilled in their times. As Angels or
messe^gers of god they have in his eternity their just plagues in their season
appointed to be exhibited.

5 And therefore are they said to come out from the temple which is God.
Nothing has he purposed to ye world, but he has decreed it before ye worlds
constitution. For his purpose, mind, and pleasure, is as he is, everlasting.
And as it falls to the world by his assignement, it becomes a messenger,
going out of the temple. So many has he sent out of such messe^gers, as he
has fulfilled decreed purposes. And marueil not though they be here called
angels, considering that it is the common manner of the holy scriptures,
evermore to call them Angels which utters the will, pleasure, and
commandment of God, as they do here. After this sort are the priests called
Angels, so is Aggeus the prophet, so is S. John Baptist, so are Christ's
disciples, and also ye public preachers.

9 What the plagues are that they shall shed out of their vials, will be showed
clearly in ye next chap. folowi^g one after an other.

7 These Angels are apparelled in pure whit linen, bright shininge as crystal
and girdels about their breasts with girded of fine gold, which betokneth
their sincere cleannes, and their glorious perfitnesse. For what can be more
pure and precious, than the eternal decrees of the lord. What can be more
perfect and glorious than his prediffined purposes? The laws of God are
undefiled, the testimonies are true the statuts are right, the ways are suer,
the commandments are clear, ye judgments are godly, the words are pure and
precious. Yea, the gifts that come from the father of light are ever more
perfect and good.

8 The gyrding of their breasts, is the straight spearing up of the secret
meaning of Gods judgments from our carnal understanding, till such time as
he opens the^ unto us by his spirit: for it belongs not unto us to deserve
such secrets as the father reserueth to his own power.

9 And one of the four beasts or congregations (says S. John) delivered unto
the aforesaid.vii. Angels.vii. golden vials replenished with the wrath full
displeasure of God which lives for evermore. Though the congregations be in
the first chapter.vii. and in ye fourth.iiii. understood by the four
beasts, yet are they here in this place brought all unto one, and called one
of the iiii. or else of the four made one, for so much as the universal
christian church is of one consent, one faith, one baptim, one god, and
pertayneth to one Christ. For so much also as it confesses, believes and
teaches one doctrine of health. One is my dove says the holy ghost, one is
my dearelye beloved darlyng. A beast is it here noted, as living in the flesh,
and not yet mortified by death.

10 The vials of Gods wrath are the ungodly reprobates, fit only for
destruction. Golden are they here named, because they appear glorious in the
worldly judgments of men. Uerye painted tombs are the dissembling hipocrits,
within full of stinking bones. A shining name of life have they and yet are
they inwardly dead. For all that they do is to be seen of men.

11 Full of wrath are they, whereby is meant a sinful understanding, with damnable
doctrins. For very swift ar they to al ungodliness. The.vi. properties have
they which the Lord hates, and ye seventh which he utterly abhoreth. A proud
look, a dissembling tongue, bloody hands, a wicked heart, feet ready unto
mischife, ways to practice lies, and sowings of dissencio^ among brethren.
These are given of the true christen congregation to the vii* Angels, or
decreed purposes of God to be judged as they have eternally diffined. For none
other is their continual prayer, but yt his will be fulfilled, and that his
predifined intentes against the perverse multitude be finished at their
convenient times. None other is it to put into the Angels hands, the vials of
gods displeasure, than thus to commit them by faithful prayer to his purposed
decrees or fore set ordinances.

12 B^t because that commonly when gods judgments begin to wax known all
things are commoned and troubled, therefore is it said here conseqently that
the temple was full of smoke, by reason of the majesty of God, and of his
glorious power. This smoke are certain mysteries, representing unto us the
hidden majesty of gods eternal presence. Whose brightness can no frail
understanding abide. Not all the world could not sustain it if all things were
open and plain co^cerninge it. In no wise could Moses presently see ye face
of God, only might he be suffered to see his back parts, for no man can se
God and live. Only is he seen here in this life as in a glass, or under a dark
speking. He appears unto us here in a mistical smoke, like as he did to the
patriarck Jacob in sleep, to Moises in ye flaming bush, to Helias in ye horle
wind, to the Apostles in fyery to^gs, and unto Ananias in a secret vision.

13 Under ye shadow of figurate locucio^ is his glory for the elect persons,
and faithful believers known. The unfaithful reprobats beholds ye smoke, but
neither perceive they in it the glory of god, nor ye majesty of his presence.
They neither con^eiue his wonderful works, nor yet his Godly judgments.
Their folish hearts are so darkened, that though they know God, yet glorifye they
him not.

They see ye smoke and perceive ye world troubled (as it is always when ye
verity appears) but never ye more faith nor godly knowledge have they. But ye
which is unto the faithful a raise is unto the^ a ruin. That is unto ye
other ye power of God unto health, is unto them slander and folishnesse. And
that is unto ye other a sauoure of life unto life, is unto them a savor of
death unto death. They remember not yt the Lord came down in fire unto Moises
upon Mount Synay when it smoked altogyther like a burning furnace, and therefore
bear they away no glorified faces, or conciences depured by a true perfect
faith.

14 And no man was able (says ye text) to enter into the temple, til ye vii.
deadly plages of ye.vii. Angels were wholly fulfilled. For though ye true
believers perceive in ye mysteries of ye scriptures, the present majesty and
mighty power of GOD, yet enter they not into full knowledge of him, being as
yet subject unto vanity. For here is there knowledge imperfect, and their
prophesying also. And therefore acknowledging their imbesilitie, and also
waiting for ye revelation of the children of God, they say with Saint Paul.
O the wonderful deepenesse of the wisdom and knowledge of God. How
incomprehe^sible are his judgments, and how unsearchable his ways.

15 And at this point shall they still be till the last judgment day finish all.
For the full entering into the temple is none other then a whole perfect or
consummate knowledge of God and his mysteries. Which can not fully be had, till
that which is imperfect be done away, the creature delivered from bondage of
corruption. And til death be swalowed up, ye vessel of corruption becommyng
incorruptible, and the mortal body beco^ming spiritual. The rightuous shall
tha^ shine as does ye sun in ye kingdom of their father, and glister as does
the bright stars world without end. What ye vij. plagues are, and what is their
fulfilling, will in this Chapter following appear.

The xvj. Chapter.
THE TEXT.
1 And I hard a great voice out of the temple, 2. saying to the seven Angels,
3. Go your ways, 4. power out your vials of wrath upon the earth, 5. And the
first went, and povvred out his vial upon the earth, 6. and there fell a
noisome and a sore botch upon the me^ which had the mark of the beast, 7. and
upon them that worshipped his Image.

The Paraphrase.
AN other great voice hard John out of ye temple. A perfect, strong, and
earnest assurance had he of the Lord by a spiritual premonishment, that ye
unvariable decrees of his set judgments should be fulfilled at their times of
him appointed. Yea, ascertained he was infallibly that they should in their due
seasons come to pass. For unto his friends opens he his secret counsels
always, as he did in old time unto his well beloved Israel, unto Moses,
Zachary, Ezechiell, and Daniel, with such other.

2 And the voice was unto the seven Angels under ye vij. seals opening, and
the vij. trumpettes blowyng after this sort. Go your ways forth fulfilling
the purpose ye be ordained unto. Power out your vyalles of wrath upon the earth.

3 Declare them first of all to ye world, to be the reprobate vessels of
dishonor, which of wilfulness co^temneth my eternal verity. Consequently
send them into most deep error, that they may wax worse and worse, and not
only to err in them selves, but also to bring other into error, that they
may receive the double reward thereof, abiding my most fearful judgment.

4 And in such time as the Lord appointed, the first Angel went forth under
the first seal opening, and poured out his vial upon ye earth. For in the
first age of the church, to try her as gold in the furnace, permitted ye Lord
by his eternal decree, the malicious Sinagoge of the Jews to rage, and to do
their ungodly feats. In the which their furious madness, not only did they
persecute the Apostles and first preachers of Christ from city to city, but
also perverted the earthly minded multitude, by many and diverse ungodly kinds
of false doctrine in hypocrisy. Of this sort was Himineus and Philetus,
becommyng of Saduces, false Christians, and denying the latter resurrection,
whom Paul did excommunicate. So were also Phigellus and Hermogenes, bringing in
again circumcision with certain ceremonial obseruacions to bleamishe the
Gospel of Christ. These with such like, subverted whole houses (says Paul)
teaching things yt they ought not to have taught for filthy lukers sake.

6 And when they were thus by the dec^^ed purpose of God shead upon the earth,
or ^e^te unto their own earthly ^^astlin^sse, all destitute of his grace for
co^tempning his word so graciously (...), there lighted a noisome and (...)
botch upon those men which (...) mark of ye beast, or an (...) through their
perswasio^s.

7 (...) upon them also that worshipped his Image, or accepted them for godly
that made laws repugnaunt to his laws. For the great headed Rabines of ye
Jews did not only spot ye consciences of the Israelites their own native
co^trie men, but also of ye Greeks and Latins, the Asians and Romans,
compelling them for their own tradytions to make Gods commaundeme^ts of none
effect. These having a pretense of godly living, denied the power thereof. Of
this sort were they which entered into houses and brought into bondage
supersticious women laden with sin. For a more deep understanding hereof,
co^fer this with ye first seal opening, and ye first trumpet blowing, and
likewise the other vj. following.

THE TEXT.
1 And the second Angel shead out his vyall, 2. upon the sea, 3. and it turned
as it were into the blood, 4. of a dead man. 5. And every living thing dyed in
the sea.

The Pharaphrase.
1 After this went forth the second Angel of the second seal opening,
effunding his vyall upon the sea. According to the decree of God almighty for
the second age of the Christian church, reigned among the Christians,
deceytfull brethren, and perverse teachers, betraying ye true ministers and
deliueri^g the^ unto death for Jesus Christ's sake, yt his life might be seen in
their mortal flesh. For in this life he proves his electes with Abraham and
Job to save them, and to make the^ just folowers of Christ, whom it behoo^ed to
suffer ere he entered into h^s glory.

2 Upon ye sea or wavering multitude was this ^^al^shed. Only are the false
Prophets received and taken of ye folishe fantastic^ll, and ^^ipper witted
sort, as a reed shaken of every wind Non regards them which has set sure
footing upon the hard rock Christ. Such a vial or vessel of Gods Ire was Mair
ye Idon^^t which made ye Talmud of the Iwes, a book more tha^.x. Bibles after
Nauelerus and other Historians, full of blasphemies and lies condemning ye
doctrine of Christ. So was Rabby, Moses ye Egiptian, Rabina, and Rabasses with
such other co^firming ye same.

3 All bloody was this sea, ye vial once shed thereupon. Al fleshely were the
people in their judgments, their hearts fulfilled with cruelty and murder
against christ's true witnesses, through their perverse prechings. Yea, in ye
furious rage they thought they did God great good service when they put his
servants unto death.

4 This blood was also in a manner as the blood of a dead man. For dead was the
doctrine that they taught, even the sleaing letter it self. Dead were also
their ceremonies, their rites, and their idle observations.

So that every living thing died in that bloody sea. All they which seemed
thorough glittering hypocrisy to live, wa^ted ye very life which is hid in
Christ, and that ryseth of faith in his living word. So did they also which
depended all upon the vain pleasures of this life, exercising here tyranny
both in words and doings. Neither were they out of the same danger, that fell
from the verity once known, nor yet they which durst not receive it for fear
of persecution, but both perished in this sea.

THE TEXT.
1 And the third Angel shead out his vial, 2, upon the ryuers and fountaynes
of waters, 3. and they turned to blood. 4. And I heard an Angel say, 5. Lord
which art and waste, 6. thou art rightuous and holy, 7. because thou have
given such judgments, 8. For they shed the blood of saints and prophets, 9.
and therefore have thou given them blud to drink, for they are worthy, 10. and
I hard an other Angel out of the altar, 11. say, 12. Even so Lord God
almighty, 13. true and rightuous are thy judgments.

The Paraphrase.
1 Next in his course went out ye third Angel, under ye third seal opening,
and he powered out his vyal upon the watery floudes and fountains, and al they
became very blud. By his set decree for ye third age of the church, suffered ye
Lord false heretyques to rage in all kinds of error, strongly to delude ye
unbelievers.

2 These lighted upon the sweet waters, by whom ar meant ye sacred scriptures
refreshing the dry souls. Who soever drinks (says Christ) of ye waters yt
I give, he shall never be more a thirst.

3 Of these waters have they defiled both the rivers and welspringes with blood.
Both ye law and gospel, ye figure and verity, ye commandment and promise, the
doctrine of prophets and Apostles have they corrupted with their false
interpretacions and gloses, with froward driftes and opinions, with vain
tradicions and worshippings, and with carnal wisdom and murtherings. Of this
sort were Eutices and Arrius with such other like, as in the.vii. chapter before.

4 And I hard (says saint John) an Angel, betokning those sincere witnesses,
to whom God had opened for that age his secret judgments. And this Angel said.

5 Omnipotent creator and Lord which art not only of thy self at this present
instant, but wart also essencially in thy self without beginning.

6 Thou heavenly Lord art faithful in thy words and holy in thy works.

7 For as it appears before our eyes, ye decrees and foreiudgeme^ts yt thou
made before, are now fulfilled in effect.

8 For the religious murderers yt of cruelnesse caused the blood of thy holy
saints and Prophets, Apostles and preachers to be shed, have now by thy just
appointment very blood to drink as they are most worthy.

9 For sleying of them whose message they contempned, they had their just
plague. Not only became they vain in their thoughts, their folish hearts
darkened (not unlike to the^ yt has ears and hear not, eyes and see not, but
also there remained unto them after this life a perpetual vengeance without
mercy for their cruel oppressio^s as a due reward of their error.

10 Yet an other angel hard I (says S. Iho^) eue^ out of ye alter which is
christ. This angel signifies those witnesses that sometime confessed ye truth
here, and now rests from their labors in ye Lord. These though they be
departed, affirm that the other has said before, in token yt now being departed
they forget not that truth which they before confessed, living still yet in ye
same, he yt holds my word (says Christ) shall never taste of death.

11 And this is their saying in mystery or words comprehe^ding their secret
confession.

12 Even so Lord God almighty* As ye living beleuers says of thee by mouth, so
say we now in the spirit.

13 That thy decreed judgments are ever more true, and thy merueilous workings
rightuous. The first is called in some translatio^s the Angel of waters, the
other here reported to come from the altar, to signify both sorts.

THE TEXT.
1 And the fourth Angel poured out his vyall, 2. on the sun. 3. And power
was given unto him to vex men with heat of fire, 4. And the men raged in
great heat, and spoke evil of the name of God. 5. which had power over those
plagues, 6. and they repented not to give him glory.

The Paraphrase.
1 Consequently, by the appointment of God, the fourth Angel in the fourth
seal opening, powered out his vyall of Gods wrath on the sun. As ye Lord had
eternally prefixed in ye fourth age of the Christian church. For the whole
worlds punishment, was Christ sore bleamished which is ye clear son of
righteousness. Sore did ye dissembling Antichrists in those days darke^ ye
true glory of God with their manifold sects of hypocrisy. The Pope had for his
part an innumerable swarm of shorn smered Sodomites, and Mahomete a foul
flock of frantike fabillers, which with their newlye painted religions and
prodigious observations, made first all the world to wonder and tha^ to worship
Belial for Christ, taking darkness for light, and sin for righteousness.

2 These being very adversaries unto Christ, took upon them his authority and
seat, ye one boasting him self for his general vicar in earth, ye other for the
great prophet of ye Lord, and so were received of ye execrate world. Needs
would they seem to be ye sun, being the very shadows of death.

3 Permitted was this hearsackye sun to vex me^ with heat of fire. Sitting in
the temple of God which is with in man, with such wicked laws as they made under
the name of God and of Christ, they tirribly vexed, tormented, and cruciated
the weak consciences of men, leaving them commonly in most painful desperation.

4 So yt the men raged in great heat, speaking evil of ye name of God, which
had power over those plages. At their abominable perswasio^s was Christ of
the^ not taken for a merciful savior and gentil redemer, but for a froward
chourle and intractable tyrant, unless he were molified by the merits and
callings upon of other, and that could not be had without money.

5 Power has the Lord over plages, to hold the^ or remove the^. By his
rightful judgment, at his only pleasure he hardens. As the potter may he
break the^, or make them vessels of dishonor.

6 In no wise did this perverted multitude repent their wicked blasphemies to
give him glory, for all their co^fessyons, mass hearings, pilgrimages and.
satisfactions without number. For they were not according to his prescription.

7 After none other sort will he be plea- and glorified, than he has by his
scriptures appointed. Nothing less ar their fantasies than true repentance.

THE TEXT.
1 And the fifte Angel powered out his vyall, 2. upon the seat of the beast, 3.
and his kingdom waxed dark. 4. And they gnevve their tongues for sorrovve,
5. and blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow, and pain of their sores, 6. and
repented not of their deeds.

The Pharaphrase.
1 In order succeeds by ye divine ordinance the fifte Angel under the fifte
seal opening, pouring out his vyal of Gods indignation upon the seat of the
beast. After none other sort than the Lord had before prediffined for man's
unfaithfulness sake, was the proud beastly kingdom of the papacy, and the
execrable reign of Mahomet replenished with all filthy abominations under the
sun. For in the other age before they did but creep into the hearts of men
through the glitterings of hypocrisy and dissimulate sanctity.

2 But here have they obtained ye power, seat, and authority of the beast,
and so gotten unto them the myghtie Monarchies of the universal world. Here
reigned they without check in all vain glory, hautinesse, malice, pride,
murder, hypocrisy, superstition, Idolatry: and blasphemy of Gods name.

3 And therefore their kingdoms as all one in diuillishenesse, became all
dark, without the light of Gods verity, full of the stinking smoke of ye
bottomless pit. Than went the locusts abroad, and filled the world with
ignorance and blyndnesse.

4 Every where gnewe they their to^ges for very sorrow. In detracting the
verity, much grief they suffered in their desperate hearts, their worms not
dying, nor their fire quenched, the scorpio^s of ye earth stinging them also.

5 Spitefully they blasphemed ye omnipotent Lord of heaven for very anguish and
dolor of their sores and wounds. For none other are the fruits of a desperate
conscience tha^ blasphemies of God, as in Cain, Judas, and such other like.
None other are the vtterances of an unpenitent heart, but heavy hateful
murmurings.

6 And therefore it follows yt they repented them not of their deeds. For in
a cruciate or fearfully vexed conscience can never dwell true repentance. So
vnquietous always is the foolish desperate mind, as is the troubled raging
sea. A wicked heart is laden with sorrows heaping sin upon sin, the Sinagoge
of proud hipocrites having no health. In the fifte seal opening and trumpet
blowing, is more of this mystery declared, which agrees much with this vyall
of God, like as does the other with the other in their numbers, though not in
their figures.

The text.
1. And the sixth Angel poured out his vial. 2. Upon the great river of
Euphrates. 3. And the water dried up. 4. That the way of the Kings. 5. Of the
east should be prepared. 6. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs. 7.
Come out of the mouth of the dragon. 8. and out of the mouth of the beast. 9.
And out of the mouth of the false prophet. 10. For they are the spirits of
deuilles. 11. Workinge miracles to go out. 12, Unto the kings of the earth,
and of the whole world. 13. to gather the^ to the battle. 14. Of the great day
of god almighty. 15. Behold I come as a thief. 16. Happy is he that
watches. 17. And keeps his garments. 18. Least he be found naked. 19 And men
see his filthynesse. 20. And he gathered them together into a place 12 called
in the Hebrew tongue, Armagedon.

The Paraphrase.
1 In course now follows the sixte Angel of gods appointment, under the sixth
seal opening, shedding out his ireful vial upon ye great river Euphrats, a
flood of the Assirians or of Babylon, betokening in misterye the pleasant
possessions and wavering delights of the Papisticall cleargye, with such like.

2 Into all filthy desires of carnal and worldly lusts gave the Lord their
hearts over in the sixth age of the christian church for their vnbeleeues sake
to do those things which are vncumly and beastly. So that all their study,
travail, and labor, sought to none other end, but only to abound in them.
Wholly were they given thereunto, and nothing to the glory of God in all their
practiced observations.

3 Yet were the waters thereof in process of time dried up. Their wealthy
pompes, possessions, and pleasures (their false feats once known) are and shall
be clearly taken away from them. For after Jesus Sirach, the plant of sin
shall be rooted out in the proud Sinagog of the wicked.

4 And all this shall be to prepare the way of the kings, from the spring of
the sun.

Never shall the gouerners walk in the ways of the Lord, nor rule according
to Christ's doctrine, nor yet that doctrine be apert and open, til the waters
be dried up, not one drop remaining. So long as the priests dwell in wanton
delights and vain pleasures, either are the princes childishe or else
tyrannous, according as their deeds require.

5 Never are they kings from the spring of the sun, or according to Christ's
rule, seeking Gods honor with David and Josias. In England by the Gospel
preaching have many of these waters been dried up in the suppression of
monasteries, priories, couents, and friars houses, yet are not all things
brought unto Christ's clear institution. A sincere christian order can not yet
beseene there, And a great cause why. For all is not yet dried up there. The
bishops reign still in as much vain glorious pomp, and with as many
Heithenish obseruacions as ever they did. As cruelly hearted, and as bloudye
minded are they yet as ever they were before, no mischief unsought to hold in
the waters. Mark how Winchester, Durham, York, London, and Lincoln woorketh,
with such other pleasantly disposed Euphratines. But be of good comfort and pray
in the mean time. For the holy ghost promises here they shall wither away,
with all that ye heavenly father has not planted. All that generation will the
Lords breath consume. Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree, to hew
down the unfruitful branches, the withered reserved to unquenchable fire.

God grant the Princes at that day more christenly, to bestow the waters of
Euphrates than they have yet been bestowed, noe provision made for the poor,
nor yet order set for the gospel preaching. For great part of it is now turned
to the vpholdings of dise playing, maskinge, and bankatinge, yea I would I
could not by just occasions speak it, bribing, whoring, and swearing, the
towns, peoples, and housshouldes, miserablye decayed, which will not one day
be vnplaged, unless they repent.

6 Furthermore I saw (says saint John) in the same self vision, three
unclean spirits one coming out of the Dragons mouth, which signifies satan
the devil, an other out of the beasts mouth, betokeninge the universal
Antichrist, and the third out of the false prophets mouth compared before to the
two horned beast. And all they seemed in manner as frogs both in their colors
and fashions.

7 Idolatry was that ill spirit, which first went out from the serpent, and
has continued ever since in the world under the color of good works, as
pilgrimage, devotion and labor.

8 Error in abominable filthynesse was the spirit which came from the
beastly Antichrist defilinge the whole christianity with innumerable
superstitions under the color of chaste living, in pristhod, sacrifices and
ceremonies.

9 Hypocrisy was the foul spirit which issued from the false preachers,
poisoning the catholyque faith with false doctrine under the color of
religion, pretending abstinence, prayer, and clennesse. These three wicked
spirits are not all unlike to the wild fire, smoke, and brimstone, which the
terrible fierce horses euometed in the ix. chapter of this present prophecye.
For cursed, false, and vnpure they are. Their doctrine is wickedness, lies,
and deuilishnesse, and the execrable wisdom of the flesh. In manner of frogs
are they here described for their diversity of colors in ceremonies,
doctrine, and sects, for their filthy dwelling in the dyrty tradicions of men,
and for crookelyng of their unknown Psalmodye and service, disquietynge with
their idle customs the consciences of the simple multitude.

10 These are the very spirits of deuyls, the ympes of satan, workinge such
signs and myracels as would deceive the very chosen persons, and bring them
into error if it were so possible. But the Lord evermore defends his.

11 A strong power have they by the workynge of satan to show lyinge wonders
and deceyuable signs among them that shall perish for detesting the truth.

12 These shall by the permission of god be suffered to go at large, they shall
strongly delude the kings of the earth, and blind the gouernoures of the
universal world, making them dronken with ye cup of all abhominatio^s.

13 And all this shall they do to gather them to gether by their wicked
counsayles, and to bring them in to one cruel consent of battailing against
Christ and his members, to receive the penalty thereof in ye great day of ye
lord almighty

14 Most busely they gather them to battle, when they move them to persecute
the just believers with full ungodly acts, as now most of all in our age, which
god has promised in short space to revenge.

Of this will more be spoken in ye xix. chapter following. Least any man knowinge
the truth should tangle his own conscience with their spiritual sorceryes
for fear of princes laws, under the vain hope of repentance, in the end of
their lives, it follows in plain sentence.

15 Behold (says the Lord Jesus Christ) or earnestly take heed unto it,
for I come dangerously unlooked for, as commonly does ye thief, to thy
hinderaunce if thou watch not in faith, but live in superstition.

Though this, not without reasonable cause may be taken in a generaliti for ye
last judgment dai, yet is it here spoken particularly of every ma^s departing.
As a premonishment, he gives this here of love least any man should perish
without warning.

16 Blessed is he (says that Lord) which watches in the true christian
believe, and lives not in the vain but in the sure hope of life, sealed with
the just promises of god. For all that he does shall prosper, and turn him to
great advantage in the concluston.

17 Happy is he allo that holds fast unto him his garments, or works of Gods
prescription (which are ye fruits of the spirit) or that has done on the Lord
Jesus Christ, gyrdinge him suer unto himself by faith.

18 Least he be found a naked hypocrit witout faith, veritye, justice,
charity, with such like, or least the rightuous number at the latter day see
his filthiness uncovered, and rejoice at his condemnation.

19 He is blessed which at that day shall be covered with the white garment of
the Lamb, not having his sins imputed unto him.

20 To show the certainty of the aforesaid battle. Saint John says that
the devil gathered together those wicked rulers into a certain place, called
in ye Hebrew tongue Armagedon. The unclean spirits that before are named three
of their diverse workinge in the Dragon, beast, and false prophet are here
brought into one, as all of one lying spirit, whom Christ calls the father
devil. This one lyinge spirit which has been a murderer from the beginning,
comprehendinge in him all unclean spirits, like as does the beast all
Antichrists, has combined together into one execrable zeal of fatherly
tradicions, all vaineglorious and ungodly minded governors against God and his
Christ. And this has not been without the secret permission of God, willing
to prove his elects by strong suffering, that they might receive at his hand
the reward of strong victory or of his abundant riches.

21 This place here called in the Hebrew Armagedon, betokneth in mystery an
hill of delectable fruits, interpreted of some for the hill of the gospel,
and is commonly taken of ye Hebreues for that is sweet or of value. And this
without fail is the church, which* ^ft times in the Scriptures is called the
plentuous hill of God, the hill of Gods house, the hill of mirth, the hill of
olives, the hill of Sion, Carmelus, and Libanus, with such other like. In this
mount evermore are they been ^o battle. There slay the^ innocent Lambs of
Christ. All their power, malice, and tirannye, is there extremely uttered at
the Antichrists labor and desire, which are exceedingly drunken in the blood
of holy martires, which has been shed upon the earth from the rightuous Abel
unto this day. But when the almighty sets kings upon the earth, it shall be
clear even in the darkness, that the hill of Basan is Gods hill.

The text.
1 And the seventh Angel poured out his vial. 2. Into the air, 3. And there
came a great voice out of heaven from the sat saying. 4. It is done. 5. And
there followed voices, thunderings, and lightninges. 6, And there was a great
earthquake. 7. Such as was not since me^ were upon earth. 8. So mighty an
earthquake and so great. 9. And the great city was divided into three parts.
10. And the cities of the nations fell* 11. And great Babtlon came in
remembrance before God. 12. To give unto her the cup of Wine of the
fierceness of his wrath. 13. And every I Will fled away. 14. And the mountains
were not found. 15. And there fell a great hail. 16. As it had been talents.
17. Out of heaven. 18. Upon the men. 19. And the men blasphemed God, beause of
the plague of the hayle. 20. For it was great, and the plague thereof was sore.

The Paraphrase.
1 Finally the seventh Angel went forth under the seventh seal, opening as
God had eternali determined, throwing out the content of his vial into the
air. For the seventh age of the christen church by the very set purpose of
God, are many converted to the truth, and become with Paul the vessels of
election, that before were with Judas the vessels of wrath under the great
adversary of God. Neither is it any blemishe unto them to be called here, that
they were before, vials of wrath, considering that SIMON Leprosus, being once
healed of his leprosy was ever after called a leper. In case like Paul, after
his conversion was not ashamed to report himself both a Pharisie and also the
son of a Pharasie.

2 These, by the mighty determination of Gods strong judgment, are sent into
the air. Most effectually are they lightened with the spirit of god, and
provoked stiffly to stand up against the aereall powers regning in the fickle
fantastical Antichriste and hypocrites, condempninge by Gods word their
universal doctrines and deuillishnes. These powers are no less than diuilles,
whom Christ calls fowls of the air, Peter and John man's adversaries, and
saint Paul the gouerners of these darknesses in spiritual wickedness.

3 Whiles these things are in doing, out of heaven, which is the universal
congregation, yea, from the very throne of god which is the elect faithful
number (for they are ye only seat of God) came a voice of reioysinge, saying
after this sort.

4 It is done. All things are finished. Christ's glory once manifestly known
the world is at an end. The wicked has done all their mischies, and the
number of our brethren is fulfilled. Thus shall they preach a full
deliverance of the captives, and ye peaceable year of ye Lord. This is ye
silence of an half hour space, mentioned before in ye viii. chapter, and the
return of this world unto Christ in the.xii. chapter. Not that there shall in
those days be no enemies (for the remnaunte shall still remain) but that they
shall not then openly dare rage, persecute, and kill, the world being at such a
universal quiet.

5 Yet shall there happen in those days, voices, thunderings, and lightnings.
Uoyces of sweet blessings and delectable promises to ye faithful congregation.
Thunderings of terror to the unfaithful multitud commanding things contrary to
ye flesh. And fearful lightnings of condemnation to there probate hipocrits
and desperate obstinats.

6 And al from one word of the Lord, or one gospel preaching in diverse
respects, no small earthquake following upon the same. What commocions, heuye
complayn tes, fearful tremblynges, sorrows, cries, griefs, sighynges,
waylynges, grudginges, gruntynges, gronynges, wepynges, and hands wryngyng will
be among ye earthly minded Antichrists and hypocrites, bishops, priests,
prelates, holy watter mongers, and parrish clerks, lawiers, whores, caruers,
paynters, and wax sellers, when their whoryshe church shall be turnedouer by
judgment of the said word is easy to conjecture.

7 Such a one will this earthquake be (says the text) so mighty and so strong,
as never was yet since men were upon the earth, or since that earthly
generation first began. Than shall be clean taken away the carnal church of
Antichrist or the smered Sinagoge of shauelings. Neither shall the Pope with
his disgysed rabble any more be seen here, nor yet Mahomet with his monstrous
muster.

8 In such wise shall their laws, sects and ceremones be destroyed in those
days that no man shall be found so bold as once to allow one of the^ openly.
Than shall ye glory of Christ's name shine the world over, he making of his
enemies his footestoole.

9 Moreover in this terrible earthquake the great spiritual city called Sodom
and Egypt, or the holy whorish mother the church shall be diss^uered into three
parts, of the which two shall still be wicked, the third converted unto
godliness. Two parts shall be dispersed (says Zachary) the third shall
remain to the Lord. Of them which have and shall go out of minsters and
monasteries, colleges and couentes, churches and cloisters, parrishes, and
nunneries, one sort shall inwardlye be given to Antichrists superstitiousnes and
hypocrisy. An other sort upon diverse fleshly consideracions, shall faynedly
fall to the Gospel. The third sort only of love toward God and zeal of
health in their neighbors, shall unfeignedly cleave to the scriptures.

Thus shall ye ungodly sort be coupled still with ye godly in eueri land and
province and be ye much greater number, yet shall they for ye time attempt
nothing against them, the truth so strongly regning. Nevertheless yet is it to
be thought yt they shall then have nothing to suffer, considering yt it is a
kingdom of sufferance. Christ to be head of that congregation suffered once
incommoditie or other always, so long as he was here living. It shall therefore
behoue them which are his mystical members, always to suffer. For the servant
is no better then his Lord, nor the soldiour then his head captain. And to
make this good, the lord says in Zachary. The same third part will I lead
through fire, and purge it as silver or gold in the furnace. Then shall every
godly creature follow Christ in bearinge his cross. They shall mortyfie their
fl^shly members, sleyng al fornication, filthynes, ^dolatry, covetousness, pride
anger, and malice.

They shall help, suffer, and forbear one an other, having pitiful
compassion upon the weak, sick, and needy. No duty beseeminge a christian
shall they leave undone.

10 Therefore this great or general city thus divided, al other particular or
national cities must also fall. The blasphemous Pantheo^ of Rome once
perishing, all other churches of ye unfaithful must needs follow soon after
in their course. For the foundation taken away, yt buildyng cannot endure. So
yt from thenceforth shall be no Popish sects, no supersticious ceremonies, no
Hethenish obseruatio^s, nor open Idolatry in all the world* But when ye remna^t
of the wicked shall attempt afresh to raise up again such abhominatio^s, the
Lord shall suddenly without warning fall upon them with his most fearful and
tirrible last judgment.

11 Great Babilo^ the aforsaid mother of all whordom and filthiness, shall than
come in remembrance before god. He shall than consider her abominable
blasphemye, her pride, crueltye, murder, and sins without number, waying
them in right balance according unto justice.

12 He shall also reward her to drink the fierce cup of his wrath or wine of
his great indignacion, which is ye perpetual death of soul. The very dregs
of his Ire shall she taste, yea unspeakable sorrows and pains without end.
For none other is it to come in remembrance before him at yt day, but to be
condemned, and receive punishment according to her deeds.

13 Then shall every I Will (which is a place of refuge within ye sea) flee away
and not tarry. The mountains that are wont to give succor unto them that be
on the land, shall not at ye day be found. No comfort shall she the^ have nor
sure help any where.

14 No remedy will be at that day to flee from the fearful face of the Judge.
Then will neither merits nor yet soul masses help, neither blessings nor
kneelings, sacrifices nor sensings, wawlings, nor ringings, bussings nor
singings, but will she nyll she, needs must she abide his heavy and tirrible
sentence.

15 And there fell great hayle (says the text) as it had been weighty
talents. Always must it be remembered that commonly the time paste is used in
this hrophecie for the time to come, for the certayntie of the things here
spoken. This hail is none other the^ the heavy tempest or plague of ye said
fearful and tirrible judgments of ye Lord, which shall on yt woeful day fall
suddenly as a thick hayle upon the miserable multitude of them yt boasted the^
selves to be ye holy church and upon their wicked folowers, compared here unto
Babylon.

16 This plague is here also for none other cause lykened unto talents, but for
yt it is in wayght and measure to be ministered unto them by the preordination
of God. So much pain and sorrow is due unto that whorish generation, as she
has glorified her self in filthy delights, and so many punishments to be
rewarded her. Yea, double must she have according to her works.

17 Out of heaven shall this vehement hayle fall, from the fearful sentence of
the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall than sit as a Judge in the myddest of his
faithful congregation; they fitting with him as the body with the head in
condempnation of the wicked.

18 And upon ye men shall it light. For the great whore or ye city called here
Babilo^, is in this place to be taken for that it comprehends, even for men,
in whom also are included women by the common usage of the scriptures.

19 These men shall spightfully blaspheme God because of ye hayle, plague, or
terror of their torments. They shall cry out of him, wishing that he had no
such power so to torment them.

20 For the tempest is great, and the sufferaunce thereof exceeding painful.
As the Lord is mighty, so are his judgments when they fall. Ueheme^t, fierce,
and strong is the Lord (says Esaias) as is the tempest of hayle breaking out
on every side, and bearing down strong holds.

The xvij. Chapter.
Often has occasions been given me in this book to speak of great Babylon
and of the execrable beast, but here is place offered to discribe them more at
large.

THE TEXT.
1 And there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vyalles, 2.
and talked with me, 3. saying unto me. 4. Come I will shevve the judgment,
5. of the great whore, 6. that sits upon many waters, 7. with vvho^ the
Kings of the earth have committed whoredom, 8, and the inhabiters of the
earth are dronken with the wine of her fornication. 9. And he carried me away,
10. into the wilderness in the spirit.

The Paraphrase.
1 After this came (says Saint John) one of the vij. Angels or unvariable
decrees of the Lords eternal judgments, which had the vij. vyals of his
wrath as before has been declared.

2 And this Angel or set purpose of God as an heavenly messenger talked with
me in mystery.

3 Of favorable goodness in secreat manner, he ascertayned me thereby of this
wonderful judgment here following, to be fulfilled at the latter end of the
world. And thus it said unto me.

4 Come hither friend John. I will show thee in secretnesse ye tirrible
judgment of the great whore or cou^terfaite church of hypocrites, as God has
appointed it. Needs must this whore be Rome, for that which is hereafter
spoken, yt she is the great city which reigns over ye kings of the earth.
Evident it is both by ye scriptures and Cronicles, that in John's days Rome had
her dominion over all the whole world. And being infected with the
abhominatio^s of all lands, rightly is she called Babylon or city of
confusion, not only in this revelation but also in the first Epistle of Peter.
And like as in ye scriptures often times under ye name of Jerusalem is meant the
whole kingom of Judah, so under the name of Rome here may be understood the
universal world with all their abominations and diuillishnesses, their
Idolatryes, witchcraftes, sects, superstitions, papacyes, priesthoodes,
relygions, shauings, anointings, blessings, sensings, processio^s, and the
diuil and all of such beggeryes. For all ye people since Christ's asse^cion
has this Rome infected with her pestilent poiso^s gathered from al Idolatrous
nations such time as she held over them ye monarchial suppremit. And like as
Babylon had ye Israelites captive under a bodily tribute, so has this Rome had
ye Christians both in their bodies and souls. At ye writing of this prophecy
felt John of their cruelty being exiled into Pathmos an I Will of Licia, for the
faithful testimony of Jesus. And so did I poor creature with my poor wife and
children at the gatheringe of this present commentary flyinge into Germamye for
the same.

5 No maruail though she be here called a great whore. For no where were ever
yet seen so many Idol worshipinges, so many vain obseruatio^s, so many
supersticious sects, so many errors in hypocrisy, so many false prophets, and
so many prodigious kinds of filthynes, no, not in Sodom it self, nor yet in
miserable Egypt.

6 This Babilonysh whore or disguised sinagoge of shorelings, sits upon many
waters or peoples yt are fantastical, fickle or folish.

For none are in conscience subject unto her, that are constantly grounded in
the sure doctrine of faith, only allows, her traditions the wavering witted
multitude, the slipper and unsteadfast number, obeying them in their hearts, of
fear and not of love, so throwing them selves into a most confuse Chaos or
vawte of double dotage.

7 With this stinking strompet have the mighty potentates of the universal
earth, ye Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other notable governors committed
most shameful whoredom in the spirit by many strange worshippings, agreeing
among them selves to her wickedly decreed laws and customs. To long should we
stand here in this place, if we should discribe them all severally in their
colors at large as they be.

8 Through the crafty legerdimaine of the priests on ye one side, and ye cruel
co^stitutio^s of Princes on ye other side, the dwellers of ye earth or worldly
minded multitude are dronken with the wine of her fornication spiritual, or
practiced worshippings besides the prescript rules of Gods word. Not only they
which have been covetous, carnal, leude, and wreched has followed their
abhominacio^s, but also an innumerable sort of ye elect number has believed
their lies and errors. Yea, they have been so dazed with their dotages, and so
tangeled with their customs, that as men losing their wits without all godly
remembrance, reason, wisdom, discressio^, understanding, judgment, and grace,
the laws of God laid apart, the commandementes neclected and the scriptures
despised, they have not only kneeled, crossed, kissed, set up lights, and
holde^ up their hands before rotten posts, but also called the^ their fathers
in heaven. Yea (I axe God mercy a thousand times) I have been one of the^ my
self. And this is to this day a principal religion of ye whorish Church, called
devout pilgrymage or holy stations of prayer, many great pardons granted and
many false promises made to alure the people thereunto.

9 But blessed be ye Lord, whose word in this age both admonished many as ye
Angel did John, and brought, them also clean from her abhominatio^s, into a
secret consideration of ye spirit, unknown to ye world, there both to see her
pride and also to understand her judgment. For it follows in ye text, yt the
Angel conveyed John away into ye wilderness in the spirit.

10 In mystery here the holy Ghost declared before what the Lord should work
in men having his grace at the latter days of the world. Into ye wilderness
flee they with David, which leaving the customed ways of me^, after ye course
of the scriptures seek up their Lord God in faith, worshippyng him only in
spirit and in verity.

THE TEXT.
1 And I saw a woman sit upon, 2. a rose colored beast, 3. full of names of
blasphemy, 4. which had seven heads and ten horns. 5. And the woman was
arrayed, 6. in purple and rose eolour, 7. and decked with gold, precious stone
and pearls, 8. and had a cup of gold in her hand, 9. full of abhominatio^s, 10.
and filthiness of her vvhordom. 11. And in her fotehead was a name vvritte^.
12. A mystery, 13. Great Babilo^ the mother of whoredom and abominations of
the earth, 14. And I savv the wife dronken with the blood of saints, and
with the blood of the vvitnesses of Jesus. 15. And when I savv her, 16. I
vvondred with great marvel.

The Pharaphrase.
1 And I saw (says Saint John) in mystery a woman (for an whore at ye first
bloush seems only a woman) sitting upon a rose colored beast. This beast is
ye great Antichrist that was spoken of before, or the beastly body of ye diuil,
comprehending in him Popes, Patriarchs, Cardinals, Lega^es, Bishops,
Doctors, Abbotes, Priors, Pristes and Pardoners, monks, Chanons, Fri^rs, Nuns,
and so forth. Temporal governors also, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, dukes,
Earls, Lords, Justices, Deputies, Judges, Lawyers, Maiers, Bayliues Cunstables,
and so forth, leaving their own dutied offices as to minister rightly, to
serve their abhominacions.

2 All rose colored is this beast, in token of tirannous murder and
blodshedding over those that will not agree to their diuillishnesse.

3 Full of blasphemous names is this beast also, as your holiness, your grace,
your Lordeshippe, your fatherhoode, your mastership, your reverence, honor,
highness, worship, magnificence, goodness, Gods vicar, spiritual sir,
ghostly father, physician of souls, defender of faith, head of the holy
church, and so forth, besides the names of their properties, feats, and
pagents, as procession, bishopping, anelyng, purgatory, pylgrimage, pardon,
mass, mattens, euensong, placebo, Candelmasse day, Palm sunday, Ash wednesday,
holy roode day, S. Thomas day, and so forth.

4 This beast had vij. heads and ten horns, signifying his universal crafts
and suggestions to distroy the graces and gifts of the holy Ghost, and also
his falsely borrowed primacies and tyrannous aucthorities to withstand the
commandments of God.

5 Upon this beast sits a woman. For what else auau^ceth or bears out this
malignant muster in their copes, crosses, oils, myters, robes, relickes,
ceremonies, vygiles, holy days, blessings, sensings, and foolings, but a
wa^ton foolish and fantastical religion, a vain glorious pomp, and a shinyng
pretense of holiness in superstition, (calling it their holy church). She is
said here to sit upon this bloody beast, as to be stayed, quieted, and settled
by them. Mark what labors and pains that crafty and wyly Winchester takes
with Bonner, Tonstall and other of his fashion, as her own sworn souldyours to
hold up this glorious whore in her old estate of romish religion. Oh he
grunteth and groneth, he sweateth and swells, he fretteth and belleth, he
blows and pants, calketh and canteth, he sturreth and never cease, to
bring his matters to pass.

6 In token that this hypocryticall church stands in the murder of
innocents, this woman is here gloriously apparelled in purple, as guilty of
their deaths which has been slain, and also in fresh scarlet as evermore
fresh and ready to continue in ye same bloudshedding. For if such tirrible
slaughter were not, ye true christian faith should increase, to ye great
diminishme^t of her glory.

7 She is in like case florishingly decked with gold, precious stone, and
pearls, not only in her manyfolde kynds of ornaments, as in her copes,
corporasses, chesibles, tunicles, stools, fannous and myters, but also in
mystery of counterfeite godliness. Many outward bragges makes this painted
church of Christ of his Gospel, and of his Apostles, signified by ye gold,
precious stone, and pearls, which is but a glittering color. For nothing
myndeth she less than to follow them in conversation of living.

8 Moreover in her hand which is her exterior ministration, she has a golden
cup, full of abominations and filthiness of her execrable whoredom. This cup
is the false religion that she daily ministereth, besides the chalice who^ her
marchaunts most dampnably abuses. And it contains all doctrine of diuils,
all beastly errors and lies, all deceiptfull power, all glytteryng works of
hipocrites, all crafty wisdom of the flesh, and subtle practices of man's
wit, besides philosophy, logic, rhetoric, and sophistry, Yea, all
prodigious kynds of Idolatry, fornication, sodometrie, and wickedness.
Outwardely it seems gold, pretending the glory of God, ^he holy name of
Christ, ye sacred scryptures of the Bible, perpetual virginity of life, and al
are but counterfeit colors and shadows of hipocrisy in the outward letter and
name.

9 Full of abhominacions is the drink of the excreable faith of that Romish
religion received of other, and full of filthynes also, for both retains ye
people thereof innumerable kinds of Idol worsippinges under the title of Gods
service, and also their shauelinges of prodigeous beastlynes in lecherouse
living under ye color of chastity. Here were much to be spoken of Sayncte
Germayns evil, saint Sithes key, saint Uncombers otes, master John shornes
bote, saint Gertrudes rattes, saint Iobe for ye pox, saint Fyacre for ague,
saint apoline for toth ache, saint Graciane for lost thrift, saint Walsto^ for
good harvest, S. Cornelis for the foul evil and al other saints else almost.

10 Of the buggery boys also among prelates and pristes, Gohstly fathers and
religious, might much be said here, were it not for infecting men's eyes, ears
and understandings. For all these noiful nocuments are ye holy fruits of ye
whordom of ye holy whorish Chuche.

11 In the forehead of this glittering whore, which is her outward show, is
written a name, expreslye declaring what she is. By her ungodly fruits is she
known to ye elect servants of god, having the light of the scriptures. In
their consiences appears she none other than a pestiferous whore, by the
judgments of the same.

12 A very mystery is this show to the infidels, an hidden secret, an unknown
wonder. For they are so blinded with her foppryes and tangled with her toies,
that they judge all that she does, holy, religeous, and perfect. And all this
suffers God for their vnbeleues sake, destroyinge nevertheless the wisdom
of the wise and prudence of the prudent in his.

13 Her very name agreeing to her fruits, is this. Great Babilo^, in mischief
far above ye city of ye Chaldea^s, and much more full of confusion. For she
is the original mother, the cause, the bginnyng, the root, ye spryng, and the
fountain of all spiritual fornications, and in a manner of all fleshly
abominations also done upon the earth. This is to the faithful sort, as a
written name of her, evident, clear, open, and manifest. But to the
unfaithful it is only as a mystery, hidden, dark, obscure, and neclect. For
so are the secrets that God opens to babes, and hydeth from the wise.

14 And I (says John) perceived it euidentlye in my fore understanding, that
this woman the very wife of the devil and of his beastly body (for the
byssh^ps are the husbands of their romyshe churches) was all dronken in ye
bloody slaughter of ye Saints, or ernest christian believers and in the
exceedinge tyrannous murder of the faithful witnesses of Jesus, or sincere
preachers of his word. For neither of both she spares. Besides all Godly
wisdom is she, and forgetful of her self, through this same blouddye
dronknes, so great exces has she taken.

15 And when I perceived and saw her with all her adders whelps so beastyshe
(says saint John) with exceading wonder I marueyled. Not only that she was
thus ouerset with blood, drinking, or outrageous murdering of inocentes, but
also of her exceeding great abhominacions.

16 And most of all I wondered that the almighty God could with so much
paci^nce suffer her in such mischief.

The text.
1 And the Angel said unto me. 2. Wherefore merueilest thou?. 3. I will show
thee, the misterye of the woman, and of the beast that bears her, which has
seven heads and ten horns. 4. The beast that thou seeste, was 5. And is not.
6. And shall ascend out of the bottomless pit. 7. And shall go into
perdicion. 8. And they that dwell on the earth shall vvo^der 9 (whose names are
not vvritte^ in the book of life from the beginning of the world). 10. when
they behold the beast that was, and is not.

The Paraphrase.
1 And as I was thus with my self marueilynge, the Angel or before named
decree of the Lord said unto me these words.

2 Wherefore do thou thus marvel, thou mortal man?

3 For thy gentle and meek expectation I shall show unto thee, the mystery of
this wretched woman, and of the cruel beast that bears her, which has
seven heads and ten horns.

By this shall you know ye true church from the ^alse, ye just preachers from
the hipocrites, ye sincere doctrine from their subtle sophismes, and their
lawful authority from their cruelly usurped presumcions. For that shows ye
Lord unto his electes, that he will not have known of all men.

4 The execrable beast or carnal ki^gdom of Antichrist which thou have seen
here in mystery, was as concerninng his beginning in Caine first of al, and so
continue forth in the fleshly children of men, in ye chaplains of Pharao,
Hieroboam, Baal and Bell, in the cruel bishopes, pristes, and lawiers with such
other like til the death of Christ and so forth.

5 And now ye said beast is not in power and authority as he has been. For in
John's time, certain years before the writing of this reuelacion, was ye proud
clergy of the Jews utterly destroyed by Titus and Uespasian, in ye terrible
siege of Jerusalem.

Notwithstanding, yet shall this beast rise again in the Romish Pope and
Mahomet and in their false prelates and doctors.

6 He shall assend out of the bottomless pit from the stinking den of satan,
exalting him self in worship above all that is called God. But in ye conclsiuon
he shall have an end.

7 Into perdicion shall he go without fail. The Lord shall first utter his
wickedness (as now in this age) and than with the spirit of his mouth consume
him and destroy him. So that his high climing up, shall at the last be the
chief cause of his fall. Yet shall his wicked re^nau^t once again set up their
Christ's, and persecute a fresh, but that shall be no full raise unto him.

8 And the rabble of reprobates, which dwell on the earth, or for earthly
commodities conte^neth Gods truth, shall wonder once again not without much
inward rejoice, that their Church rises again out of the old hipocrisyes.

9 Whose names are not registered in Christ, which is the large book of life,
and has been both ye life and the light of men since the first constitucion of
the mouable world.

No, they are not numbered among those rightuous that shall reign with him in
glory.

10 These adversaries of God and his word shall have much gladness in their
wicked hearts, when they behold the beast thus coming up again that was of
such magnificence, and now is but a thing of naught, that was esteemed above
GOD, and now is proved dampnacion. So long is this beastly Antichriste, as he
works the mystery of iniquity in the reprobate vessels, and when he
leaves that workinge than is he no longer. Mark in this process past the
nature of GODS eternal decree for this age of his Church. First it shows and
than it condempneth the curssed Sinagog of the devil. In signification whereof
the true preachers of our time have manife^^ly opened her wickedness unto all
the world, whereupon her utter destruction must shortly follow. Watch good
Christian Reader, and pray earnestly.

THE TEXT.
1 And here is a mind that has vvisdome 2. The seven heads are seven
mountains. 3. Whereon the woman sits. 4. They are also seven kings 5 Five
are fallen. 6, And one is. 7. And the other is not come. 8. When he comes, he
must continue a space. 9. And the beast that was and is not, is even the
eight. 10. And is one of the seven. 11. And shall go into destruction.

The Paraphrase.
1 Here is a meaning which comprehends wisdom. A sincere understanding shall
herein be requisite. Necessary it is therefore to take heed, lest you hold the
harlot and beast for that they boast them selves, to be, to thy dampnacion.

2 The seven heads of the beast aforemencioned, by ye plain diffinicion of
the holy ghost are here to be taken for seven mountains, or ye universal
princly monarchies of ye.vij. climates of the world.

3 Upon these the woman yt Babilonish harlot Rome (from whom has issued all
spiritual whordome) in most proud manner sits, having over them a
universal domynyon. For in John's time, to Rome was all the world subject.
Onder whose cruel reign was Christ done to death, so has his faithful
members been ever since by a new raised kingdom in the same.

4 These heads are also, vii, kings or governors of the aforesaid monarchies
sedused by a kynds of crafty errors and dyuelysh suggestions of that beast. So
that if ye mark well this place, the head with the tail and the cause with
his effect, in these present significacions shall no prejudice be found to
that has been said in the other, though they seem very diverse. For both the
governors and also the lands, or the peoples subject unto them have
universally been blinded by their wylye wichcrafts. And so have the worldly
potentates with the spiritual Antichrists agreede that both they have usurped
one malignant medlynge over the souls of men to corrupt their faith, the
princes applyinge their powers unto the same.

And that causes the holy ghost here to call them the beasts heads under the
title of mountains and kings. For under their princely authorities have al
their mischiefs been fulfilled to uphold this whore against Christ and his
word.

5 Fy^e of these heads are fallen from ye universal monarchy of Rome. All the
dominions of Africa and Asia has renounced the obedience of her Empire. Only
cleaves Europa unto her which is the least of the three, and yet not all
thereof. When the Papacy grew, the whole Empire of the Greeks called
Constantinople, fell clean from the Latins, and became with other diverse
Monarchies, the possession of Mahomets sect, or of the Agarenes and Turks. Of
the other Empires may a like conjecture be had. Thus have they declined from
her, not so going forth nor yet risinge up unto Christ, for only is it said
here, yt they were fallen.

6 And one head is (says the text) at this present time remaining, the other
head is not come as yet, but will come hereafter.

This head remaining is the sixth, and it is that feeble Empire that Rome now
holds and have holden since John's time. The power of this Empire is ^uenously
deminished, and the notable fame thereof decayed betwixt the Popish prelates
and the Frenchmen, a great part of the lands becoming saint Peter's patrimonye.
To make it a fit head of the beast to the up holding of this whorishe church
(the authorytie thereof maintaining her laws) Gregory the fifth pope committed
ye emperors chosing unto vi. princes of Germany three of them being
Archbishops. He appointed also the King of Bohem for the seventh, then being
tributarye unto him and his own feed man as an odd person to way upon their
sides if need, place, and time should require it. Provided always that he
should take his oath and receive his crown Imperial at Rome. So that now
though it still be the same in title that it was in John's days, yet is it so
diverse from it through diminishme^t of power, and so unlike in outward
magnificence, as it never had been the same.

7 The seventh head that is not yet come, is the papistical kingdom of our
romish spiritualti, for therefore apeered nothing in John's time, nor yet more
then v. hundred years after it. The Bishops of Rome (as they call them) from
Peeter to Siluester, were very poor souls, simple creatures, and men not
regarded but despised of ye world. They were no new law makers for the more
part, but rather they gave their whole dillige^ce to see those laws observed
who^ the holy ghost had made to their hands. Neither were they any mass
saiers, soul singers, or procession goers, but as was S. Paul with the other
Apostles, simple preachers only, and for their sincere preaching, they
suffered the death of their bodies. But after the donation of Constantine and
other plentuous almses committed unto their hands for the soccoure of the
poor, they became al confessers, and took them to their ease at home. Then was
labor very tedious unto them preaching very troublous and painful. Then
studied they all to please the powers peacablye to hold s^yll their pleasant
possessions, and by spiritual policies to increase the^ more and more, the
poor in a manner forgotten. Then came in that holy ceremony, and that with
latin hours, serving of saints, and praying for the dead, to provoke men to
offer to Corban. Thus crepte they up in hypocrysie day by day, till such time
as John of Constantinople contended with Gregory of Rome for the supre^^^e. In
the which contencion though Gregory laid for himself saint. Peeters keys
with many other sore arguments, and reasons, yet was he commanded by Maurcius
the Emperor after the general Synod to obey the said Ihon, as the
universal head bishop of the whole world. Then were these holy fathers
compelled to tarry a laisure, and under crafty colors to wait their pray. In
process of time when Phocas was Emperor.

Bonifacius the iii, a man of will practice, perceiving him much to be given to
vain glory and couetuousnes, greatly also to dissalow the acts of Mauricius
his predecessor, thorugh flattery and mede obtained of him that ye church of
Rome should be holden from thence forth for the head church of ye world, and he
for the head bishop. When this was once gotten, than rose they up so high that
the Emperor became their foot stool, and all other christian princes their
waiting slaves, to ride and run, make and mar strive and fight, slay and
kill, at their commandment and pleasure. Thus became the Romish Pope the
seventh King, that was in John's time yet to come. If ye mark in the
Cronicles (good Reader) thou shall find that Phocas the first Pope maker slew
his master the Emperor Mauricius, signifiyng in mysterye the said Pope making
to be an utter destruction to the Empire. The Popes name was also at that time
Bonifacius, which is as much to say as Bonafacies, a good face. Which
betokens that this new raised kingdom should show a fair face evermore, or
a shining pretense of holiness, what mischief so ever it wroughte, either
against God or man in abominable supersticion.

8 And when this seventh King comes (says the text) he must continue a
space, or abide a little season. He must have a time by the permission of God,
strongly to delude the unbelievers, which will neither see nor hear, read nor
yet thankfullye receive his word of salvation, so graciously offered them. So
corrupt are the fleshly affects of men, that much more prone they are to lies
and superstitions, than to the verytie of the Lord, which is to be lamented.

Christ came first in the name of his heavenly father, but him will they nor
receive. The Pope comes in his own wicked name and to him run they by
heaps. Whose continuance here has been but a time. For yet is it not a
thousand years since the Papacy first began under Phocas, which is but as a
day before God, and that day will he shorten by his own promise for his elects
sake, which to remember is their great comfort. And a great cause why. For
soon after that, shall they be fully restored into the persight number of the
children of God.

9 And the execrable beast (says the text) that of late days was in auhoritie
over all the world, yea sitting above God in the consiences of men, and now is
become of no reputacion among men (God openinge his mischiefs) is even the
eyghte in number. And yet nevertheless is one of the vii. heads. For both is he
the beastly body it self comprehending in him the universal abominations of
all the earthlye kingdoms. And in that point diverse from the seven heads and
so the.viii. in number.

10 And also he is one of the.vii. heads and the seventh in number, in
vsurpyng this proud worldly kingdom, thus after a vain temporal sort. Over
and besides all this may he also be called the eight in the curssed remnant
which after the peaceable silence of christen liberty (satan loosoned) shall
most cruelly persecute Christ's congregation a fresh, as in the xx. chapter
here following will appear.

11 This beast with his carriage, the Antichrist with his church, or satan
wish his sinagog, shall not only go into destruction here by the mighty breath
of Gods mouth, or the true preaching of his Gospel, but also into dampnation
everlasting in the end of the world with the devil and his Angels.

THE TEXT.
1 And the ten horns which thou savvest are ten Kings 2. Which have not yet
received the kingdom. 3. But shall receive power 4. As Kings. 5. At one hour
with the Beast. 6. These have one mind. 7. And shall, give their power and
strength unto the beast 8. These shall fight with the lamb. 9. And the Lamb
shall overcome them. 10. For he is Lord of all Lords. 11. And King of all
Kings. 12. And they that are on his side. 13. Are called, the chosen, and
faithful.

The Paraphrase.
1 And the ten horns (says ye Angel unto John) which thou saw here up on
the heads of this rose colored beast, are in signification x. Kings. Some
has taken these ten Kings for all those Emperors of ye Latins since
Charlemayn, which have sworn them selves obediente to the Bishop of Rome.
Some have thought them to be those Princes which here in Europa have aforetime
been subject to the Empire of Rome. As the Kings of England, France, Spain,
Portingale, Castele, Denmark, Scotland, Ungary, Boheme and Naples. But these
consider not yt they be yet more in number, as Aragone, Nauerre, Cicile,
Cypres, Sardine, Swethe^, Pole, and such other, and are all included in the
seven heads as members of the before rehearsed Empires.

Neither mark they that they are above the heads, as horns, and more in
number then the heads, betokening a rygorus authorytie and fierce power,
which they proudlye usurp over them every where. Before they were but
suggestions, but here are they earnest doers. For in every region has the
beastly Antichriste of Rome his Metropolitanes and Primats* As in England are
Caunterbury an^ York, in France, Thuronensis, and Remensis, in Spain,
Tholetanus and Terraconensis, in Portingale Hispalensis and Bracarensis, in
Irelande Armachanus and Dubliniensis, in Denmark Lundensis and Upsalensis, in
Germany Coloniensis and Maguntinus, in Hungary Strigoniensis and Colocensis, in
Italye Pisanus and Rauennas, in Sicyle Panormitanus and Messanences, with an
infinite number of bishops, prelates, pristes, and religions, besides the
fighting orders of ye Rhodes, ye Prussianes, ye Redemers of captives, ye
Aragondes, ye Georgianes caled de Alga, ye Monteseanes, ye Castilianes, ye
Lusitaneanes, the Calatraneanes, and S. James warriors.

2 These had not yet at y^ time received the diuillish kingdom of pestilnce
usurpation over the souls of men.

For though in John's days arose certain Antichrists, as Hebion, Cerinthius,
Diotrephes, Carpocras, and such like, yet were they nothing to these.

3 But now in deed they have received the self same authority and power
with the beast, that he took before of the Dragon, in manner of kings to rule
in the hearts and consciences of men to his behoue.

4 For so much as their authority, is not of God like as is the authority of
Kings, it is said here as kings, or as men counterfeyting them, in usurping a
governance not freely given them of God, but of the Diuill.

5 All at one hour received they this authority with the beast. And that (I
suppose) was in the great general counsel of Laterane at Rome, gathered under
the title to recover Jerusalem again. Where as confession in ye ear was
cruelly extorted of christian people under the pain of death and dampnation by
the whole consent both of the princes, and bishops, at ye former suggestio^ of
Innocent ye third, besides other wicked things. As to hear latin service, to
go on processio^ on sundays, to pray unto dead saints, to ^orship Images, to
buy masses for ye dead, to ^ast the fridays, with purgatory, pardons, merits, and
friars orders. In ye said cou^sail became the metropolitanes as kings, and by
ye authority threof appointed they their Stuards, Baliues, and other officers,
as bishopes, curates, and parish pristes to have ever and charge of souls, and
in the said ear confession to receive their accountes.

6 These counterfeit kings are al of on devilish mind, practice, and purpose
against God and his veritye.

7 And fully they are fixed to give their whole power, their study, and their
strength unto ye behoof of ye beast. Not acording to Gods mind will they rule,
but al after his will and pleasur, agreing always unto him as members to their
head, to serve wickedness after wickedness in Babylon. His Popish decres will
they seek, his devilish decretales will they follow, his ceremonials will they
observe, and nothing of ye sacred scriptures. What learning so ever they have?
what gifts of nature, fortune, or grace, al must be to ye maintenance of his
fa^tastical fopperis. To him ar they sworn to do him homage, to obey his laws,
to kiss his feet, and for his glorious sake to persecute his gospel.

8 And in so doing they shall fight with the lamb, which is Jesus Christ. They
shall impunge his truth when they think to do him service. For that mischief
they do to one of his, they do to his own person.

9 But be they never so dogged, yet ^hal the Lamb overcome them in his
faithful members, yea, by pacient sufferaunce only. The victory (says S.
John) which overcomes the world, is a sure christian faith. Upon their ^ide
fights he which is most myghtie and strong, yea, the Lord that is valiant in
battle. And he shall first overcome them in this life with the mighty breath
of his mouth, scattering the^ away as dust from the earth. And after this shall
his tirrible judgment for ever condemn them.

10 For he is by the authority given him of his father, ye Lord of all Lords,
and by his own eternal Godhead the King of all Kings, having all power in
heaven and in earth. He is co^stitute Judge of the quick and the dead, having
alone the everlasting Em^yre with his father and the holy Ghost, and of his
kingdom shall never be an end.

11 By his permission does all kings reign, he has their hearts in his hand
and judges their thoughts. Both may he give them his spirit, and also take it
from them, and of his enimyes he shall make his footestoole. He is ye same
^^one after Daniell that without any hands was cut out of the mount, which
breaks the Iron, the copper, the earth, the silver, and the Gold in pieces.
By whom are meant ye universal kingdoms of this world.

12 Of this his victory are all they parteners with him, which are upon his
side by faith. Most specially those true servant of his, which after they are
called by grace and chosen by faith, persevere still constant, fervent,
faithful, and sure in his verity to ye latter end of their lives.

13 Not only the Lamb therefore shall ^uercome the beast, but they also after
the doctrine of Paul that are called and chosen in him not falling from his
truth for any temptation or grief, but standing fast by it unto the very death.
For those that the Lord has prefixed before he has called, justified, and
allowed. These auanceth not them selves with the proud, but meekly they submit
their crowns, referring all victory to ye Lamb, as men yt could have done
nothing in y^ behalf without him.

THE TEXT.
1 And he said unto me. 2. The waters which thou savvest, where the whore
sits, 3. are people and folk, and nations, and tongues. 4. And the ten
horns, which thou savvest upon the beast, 5. are they which shall hate the
whore, 6. and shall make her desolate, and naked, 7. and shall eat her flesh,
8. and burn her with fire. 9. For God has put in their hearts, to fulfill his
will, 10. and to do with one consent, 11. for to give her kingdom unto the
beast, 12. until the words of God be fulfilled. 13. And the vvoma^ which thou
savvest, is the great city, 14. which reigns over the king^ of the earth.

The Paraphrase.
1 And after this long communicatio^ (says Saint John) the before said Angel
said thus unto me, to make up his tale with.

2 The wavering waters which thou saw here now of late in misterye, where
as the Babilonish whore sits upon ye rose colored beast, are in
signification all manner of peoples of the carnal nations, and the
supersticious folk of many sundry tongues.

3 Not only in one place of ye world rules this wanton religion of
Antychrist, but in every land, in every dominion, in every company, among all
occupacions and languages. The foolysh multitude every where, being blinded by
their subtle sorceryes, and neither having faith nor yet the fear of God
before their eyes, as a raging flood (the banckes broken down) runs
headlings into all blasphemy and diuillishnesse.

4 Moreover the a fore named, ten horns (says the Angel) which thou by the
will of God beholdest here in spirit, upon ye said beast of distructio^, are
those very persons which also shall hate the whore. Her abominations once
known by the Gospel preaching, they shall abhor her laws, despise her
authority, and co^tempne her customs. They shall defeat her of those lands and
possessions which now she unjustly holds.

5 They yt before were her friends shall than be her mortal enymies, denying her
both tribute, obedience, and service, so leaving her without all comfort. Not
only are these ye temporal governors, as the King of England, the King of
Denmark, ye Duke of Saxon, ye La^dgraue of Hesse, and other Princes of
Germany, with such other as will here after follow the same principles, but
also the Metropolitanes and bishops, the Doctors and Prelates. As are already
Thomas Cranmere the Archbishop of Caunterbury, Hermanus de Weda the Archbishop
of Coleyn, Godrick the Bishop of Hely, Barlow the bishop of Saint David's,
Bird the Bishop of Chester. Thurleby bishop of Westminster, Hugh Latimer and
Nicolas Shaxton of late years Bishop of Worcester and Salisbury, with such
other like as will here after follow their trade.

Though they were before the horns of the beast for defense of the whore, yet
are they now fallen from him, and more shall every day to make her desolate of
honor, and naked of rentes and possessions.

6 So shall they chase that Babilonish harlot Rome with their prechers, yt
neither shall they leave her color nor yet bewty. Consider what John Reuclin,
Martin Luther, Erasmus, Ocolampadious, Zwinglius, Pomeran, Bucer, Capito,
Melanthon, Grineus, Caluinous, Brencius, Frances Lamberte, Bullinger and such
other has don against her already. Likewise here in Eingla^d, Bilnee, Tindale,
Frith, Barnes, Cromwell, Couerdale, Turner, Gorge Joy, Rose, Ridley, Ward,
Becon, and other else leaving her neither Relics nor Robes, sects nor
Shrynes, Abbeyes nor Priores, many more coming after them of the same sort.
These shall make her so desolat yt no man shall in proses of time regard her.
They shall leave her so naked, yt all the world shall abhor her that shall
look upon her. Yea, in the conclusion they shall eat her flesh.

7 Besides ye taking away of her carnal prophites and plesuers, they shall
confound her fleshly understanding of the scriptuers, and utterly consume the
superfluous obseruacions of her whorishe ceremonies.

8 Finally with fire shall they burn her, in bringing unto naught al her
abhomynable rules, customs, and kinds of idolatry. All these once plucked
away by the evident word of God, no longer shall this harlot appear.

For no longer continues the whore, then the whoredom is in price. Take away
the rites and ceremonies, the Jewels and ornaments, the Images and lights, the
Lordeshippes and fatherhodes, the aulters and masses, with the Bishops and
Priests, and what is their holy whorishe church any more? Not only is this
flesh eating and bur^ing declared now a days in outward experimentes, as in
the rebellious Monks and Priests of England, and in the^ that arose there in
the North, specially in friar Forest and Margarete Cheny, which were for their
church consumed, like as were Baales chaplayns at the broke of Cison by Helyas,
but also mistically in that is spoken of her before.

9 For God has (says the Angel) al blindness secluded, put it into the
hearts of those and such other godly me^ by ye infusio^ of his spirit, to
fulfill his decreed will and pleasure in this behalf, as utterly to distroy ye
popish religion or filthy abominations of Antichrist.

10 He has given it the^ moreover to do these things to his glory, through ye
agreement of faith yt they have in ye unity of his godly truth, to ye
abolishment of all sects, false prophets, and co^iurers of egypt.

11 Finally by his grace he has moved them through knowledge of his word to
render up her blasphemous kingdom (whom sometime of ignorance they usurped)
unto ye malignaunt beast again, as ye horns of his pestilent heads. After this
sort did good Latimer and Shaxton give over their bishoppricks, and so have
diverse other godly men their promocions and livings, as many more yet here
after will do.

12 For as they have begone so shall they continue in diminishyng the
abominations of this whorish church, till the words and promises of God by his
Apostles and Prophets, which can never fail, be wholly fulfilled in effect,
and till his last judgment do finish all. But thus do not all they which
have done of the yoke of the Popes obedyence* or blotted out his name. For the
greater number of them retains still the blasphemous obseruacions and
ceremonies of his Romish relygyon, some making new laws of death for ye
establishme^t of ye same, as is in England ye act of the.vj. Articles with
diverse other more. And for this remains here still ye beast as receiving the
rendered kingdom of ye whore. In whom is also comprehended the wicked remnant
that shall work ye last mischief, whom the Lord shall end with his said
judgment. This beast is not without his lively Image still working ye same
feetes yt him self wrought before, though his head be greuouslye wounded in
diverse quarters of the world. Neither is he without craftye physicians, to
minister life to the same. Who ever forswore the Pope more ernestly, than did
Stokislye and Samson, Gardyner and Tunstall, Wylson and friar Wattes, with such
other holy prelates, yet labor they toth and nail to have Babilo^ still
Babilo^, Sodom Sodom, and Egypt Egypt. But maruail not of ye ordinance of the
Lord, which all at on time provided Moses to guide his people and yet hardened
Pharao against the^ which sent his son Jesus Christ to save them, and yet
suffered ye pristes to murder him, considering he is ye potter which makes
both ye vessels of honouer and dishonor.

31 Brifly to conclud ye whole of this matter (says ye angel) ye gorious
aparreled woman, or glittering church of Antichrist, which thou saw here of
late in mystery, is also in rece^blance ye great city Babilo^, the mother of
al ye spiritual abhominacions and Idolatries don upon ye earth. For like as
from Sion has ye laue common forth and the word of god from Hierusele^, so
has issw^d forth from this Babilonish Rome such a false religion into
Emperors, princes, and peoples, as with filthy superstitions has poisoned all
the world.

14 For a kingdom she has over ye kings or noble governors of ye earth, a
false power, a usurped authority and a seat of very pestelence. Alas for pity
that so worthy potentates should be in subjection to so stinking an whore, to
so vile an harlot, being so ye servant of sin and captive slaves to all
wickedness, from the which the Lord once deliver them. Amen.

Thus ends ye second part.
The Contents of the second part.
THe xj. Chap. begins wherein John measures the Temple, the Altar, and them
that worship therein. The.ij. witnesses do their appointed offices, the beast
making war against them and sleying them. A great Earthquake follows, and
the second woe is past. The xij. Chapter begins wherein the seventh Angel
blows his trompet. In heaven appears a woman all clothed with ye sun, whom
the Dragon diversely vexes. Mychaell fights with the Dragon and overcomes
him. The woman flies into the wilderness and there is preserved. The xiij.
Chapter begins wherein a beast ryseth out of the sea with seven heads and
ten horns, receiving authority of the Dragon. One of his heads is wounded and
healed again. An other beast comes out of the earth with.ii. horns, which
deceives the earthly dwellers, and raises up an Image like unto ye beast. In
the end is counted the number of ye beast. The.xiiij. Chapter begins wherein
the Lamb stands upon ye mount Sion, and the undefiled congregation with him.
An Angel shows ye everlasting Gospel, an other declares ye fall of the great
whore. An other is commanded with his sikle to cut down ye grapes of the
vineyard. The.xv. Chap. begins, wherein John sees ye seven Angels, having
the seven last plages of the wrath of God. On the glassy sea stands men
having the harpes of God, and they sing the song of Moses, and the song of ye
lamb. The tabernacle of testymony is seen in heaven. The.xvi. Chapter
begins, where in the seven Angels power out their vials of gods wrath. The
first upon ye earth. The second upon ye sea. The third upon ye rivers. The
fourth upon ye su^n. The fifth upon the seat of ye beast. The vj. upon ye great
flood Euphrates. And the seventh into the air. The xvij. Chapter begins,
wherein an Angel shows unto John the judgment of the great whore, which
sits upon the beast. He discrybeth both her and the beast at large. Finally
he shows the meaning both of his heads and horns, with other great
mysteries more.
The poor persecuted church of christ, or immaculate spouse of the Lamb.



Apoca. 12. The Dragon was wroth with ye woman which fled into the wilderness,
and went and made war with the remnaunt of her seed, which kept the
commandment of god and have the testimone of Jesus Christ.

The proud painted Church of the Pope, or sinful Sinagoge of Satan.



Apoca. 17. I saw woman sit upon a Rose colored beast, full of names of
blasphemye, decked with gold, precious stone, and pearls, with whom the
Kings of the earth committed whordome, and the inhabiters of the earth are
dronken with the wine of her fornication.

THE THIRD part of the Image of both churches, after the most wonderful and
heavenly revelation of saint Iehn the Evangelist. etc.

Compiled by John Bale.



Apoca 1. I Ihon your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom of patience which is in Christ Jesus, was in the I Will of Pathmos for
the word of God.

A small Preface unto the Christen Reader.
FOr so much as this Image of both churchs, or exposition upon S. John's
Apocalipsis, seemed unto me (as it came unto the printing) to be far to much
for one volume. I thought to divide it by equal porcions into three small
books, as I have now done in deed. Of whom the first contains x. Chapter,
the second vii. and the third v. only, which makes out the whole number of
the xxii. Some peradventure will marvel, that the smaller number of ye chapters
should comprehend so much of that comme^tarie as the greater number. But if
they mark in the text, the aboundinge of mysteries evermore as the matter
thereof abounds, they will soon leave their marueiling. The nature of this
revelation is, the further it goes, the more wonders it shows and opens
unto him that after prayer shall in faith read it and deserne it. Never therein
are the principles well perceived, till the conclusion thereupon folowinge does
plainly with the other scriptures conferred, declare them.

In these v. last chapters are the two churches (whereupon rests the whole
argument of this book) fully by all dew circumstaunces described, the^ turned
over into a most fearful and terrible destruction, under title of the old
whorish Babylon, the other obtaining a most glorious raise, under the name of
the holy new Jerusalem.

In the xvij^ Chapter is that execrable church of antichrist with her filthye
wares and occupings painted out hereof the holy Ghost, and with her most
horrible fall in ye end, her worldly favors showing great heanies, and the
servants of God an excedyng reyse. In the.xix. Chapter is that reyoice of elect
number over the tirryble judgments of that whore much more highly discribed,
the death of Christ's holy witnesses most plentyously revenged, and how the
Angel in no case will of John be worshipped.

In the.xx. Chapter is ye dragon tied up for a thousand years, the chosen sort
reigning with Christ. Gog and Magog gather the^ to battle, and are ouerco^men.
The dead after that arises and receives judgment.

In the xxi. Chapter is the church of the chosen or the new Jerusalem prepared
to to her spouse. That city comes down from heaven, and is of the holy
ghost here, after most wonderful circumstaunces in her right proportion
described.

In the xxii. Chapter, the river of lyuinge waters proceeds from the throne
of God.

John seals up the sayings of this prophecy. Christ concludes what his
kingdom is, and who shall be thereunto received, admonishyng that unto his
word nothing be added of men in pain of dampnation.

Some hateful and ungodly blasphemers there are and ever has been, which
will in no wise this Book to be of equal authorytie with the other scriptures
of christ's testament. But damnably wretched (...) are they, in the vain
imaginations of their sinful h^rts. The most high Theologye and secret wisdom
of God the eternal father, is the blessed doctrine there of, given unto his
only son in our humanytie and after that of him so co^mited unto John by ye
holy ghost to be distributed and taught by him to ye universal christen
congregation, which is a most sufficient argument of the authority thereof,
what so ever mad Momus shall quarrel to the contrary. James Faber Stapulensis
in his preface prefixed to the works of Dionise the Ariopagyt, doubted never
a deal to prefer this heavenly prophecy to all ye other writings of the other
Apostles, confessing that in worthiness, it far passed them all ye due
circumstances there of considered. The more nigher (says he) the light be to
the sun, the more strength it has, and the more clernesse it ministers unto
men. But Momus has not yet done away the mad mistes of his monkery, nor yet
the dark dregs of his sophistry, which both are great blemyshing vneo his
eye sight. The wisdom of Plato, Homerus, and Cicero, avails nothing in this.
Aristotle and Uirgil if they were alive, could herein do little or nothing. In
estimably more makes the poor fishers, learning to the understanding of these
misteryes, the^ the proud painted eloquence or far set reso^s of ye
philosophers. The Lord give us grace from the barn of his most plentuous
scriptures to fetch the fat feedyng of our feeble and hungry souls, that we
may by the^ obtain his strength into the life everlasting.

The third part of the Image of both chruches, after the most wonderful and
heavenly reuelacion of saint John the Euangeliste.
Compiled by Ihhn Bale.
The xviij. Chapter.
Under the title of Babylon is here in this chapter following described the
fearful judgment of ye malignant church, with the ruinous fall of Antichrist
and his kingdom, prefigured before in Esaias and Hiremye.

THE TEXT.
1 And after that I savve an other angel. 2 Com down from heaven. 3. having
great power. 4. And the earth was lightened with his brightness. 5, And he
cried mightily with a strong voice, saying. 6. She is falen she is fallen. 7
Even great Babylon. 8. And is become the habitacion of Devils, 9. And the
hold of al foul spirits. 10. And a cage of all unclean and hateful birds.
11. For all nations have dronk of the wine. 12. of the wrath of her vvhordom.
13. And the kings of the earth have committed fornicacio^ with her. 14. And
her merchants are vvaxen rich. 15. of the abundance of her pleasurs.

The Commentary.
1 After these manifold visions (says S. John) was I yet ware of an other
aungel or heavenly messenger* of the Lord, coming down from heaven, whnch is
the habitacle of God. For from above al goodenesse comes. This Angel
betokens the faithful preachers of our age, and is all one wiih the Angel
that had the seal of the living God in the vii. Chapter, with him that was
clothed with a cloud in the x Chapter, and with him thai procllamed the fall of
Babylon in the.xiiii. chapter.

2 In that he is said here to come down from heaven, is signified that they
are sent (...) God having great power, with constaunt feruentnesse of spyrit,
strongelye to declare his will, to the utter destruction of the whore For like
as the father has life in him self, so has his son Jesus, and ^o has in
him his Godly ministers.

3 His power is an everlasting power, retayninge both life and death.

4 With the brightness, not of this angel which was but a messe^ger, but of the
power that was given unto him, was the universal earth abundantlye lightened.
Full is all ye world of ye glory of God, where as his word (...) his verity is
once spread by y^ true Godly prechers.

5 In this strong power cr^ed he might^ly and in this clear light was his
earnest voice herd, uttering this sentence to the world.

6 She is falen clean down that was so proud, she is turned over that was so
glorious an whore, yea, even the great Babilo^ her self, or blasphemous church
of the Hipocrites.

7 By the judgment of God is ^he brought to utter confusion. First ha^ she a
^al by the death of Christ, when the prince of this world was throwe^ forth
Mark the destruction of Jerusalem, where the church of ye Jews did cease, the
material temple of Salamo^, and clearelye overthrown, not one stone upon an
other, remaining. Now shall*she have an other much worse by the plain
^^nifestation of his word, to the comfort of all his elects. And both are of
one certenty though the one he pa^te and the other yet to come.

Confer with this place ye overthrow of the monasteries in England, Denmark,
the free cities of Germany, and certain other regions, and think that more
sorrows are yet coming.

8 These are ye causes of her fall and occasions of her ruin before the Lord.

She is become the filthy habitacion of devils much more than before her first
fa^l, for now they enter in by heaps, yea, seven for ^n before.

9 Now is she the stinking hold of all unclean spirits. For there have all the
kinds of Idolatry their earnest maintenance, by her spiritual occupiers the
bishops, priests and religious. There regneth Simony, Sacrilege, Usury, fraud,
ambition, malice, glotony, auaryce, pride, filthynes, and all mischiefs
beysde.

10 Now is she the corrupt cage of all unclean fowls, and ^atefull birds. For
in her dwells the aduouterous Cardinals, the buggery bishops, the
prostibulous prelates and pristes, the Gomorreane monks, chanons, friars, and
nonnes, an innumerable smarme of Sodomits. These does Esaias in similitude
compare unto wild beasts, Dragons, Estriches, dansing Apes, Howlets,
Meremaides, and other odible monsters. For there is mockinge and mowynge,
criyng, and yellynge crossynge, and gapynge, congerynge and cloynynge, whyth
many other feats.

Here could I show wonderfullye much by the hystoryes of the stews of both
kynds at Rome, of the profits received thereof, that occupiyng of Winchesters
rentes in England, of saint Jews mantil in the graye friars of Paris, of the
hollow pillar of our Lords length in Lions, of the good Godly father that
cons^uprated two hundred Nuns in his time, of the burying of infants in their
^akes, and of many other strange mysteries else, were it not for losinge of
the time and hinderinge men's consiences.

11 She is fallen, she is fallen (sayt^ the Angel) and therefore be glad of
(...). For all nations of the world, a small simple number except (whom God
has preserved of his goodness) has dronken of the wine of her whoredom. For
not geuinge thanks unto God when causes has been offered, they have fallen
into most deep error. They have sought her sorceries with deuocio^, believed
her doctrines, and so followed them in effect.

12 And therefore they shall taste of the wrath of God, or penalties due to
that aduoutry of the spirit or vice of Idolatri ministered by her. I shall have
no pity (says the Lord) upon her children, for they are the children of
fornication.

13 The mighty kings and Potentates of the earth, not having afor^ their eyes
the love and fear of god, have committed with this whore most vile
filthynesse, abusinge them selves by many strange or uncommanded
worshippings, and bynding themselves by oath to observe her laws and customs.
At the examples, doctrines, counsels, and persuasions of her holy whoremongers
have they broken the couenaunts of peace, battailed, oppressed, spoiled,
ravished, tyrannously murdered innocents, yea, for vain foolish causes, and
more vain titles, neither godliness nor honesty regarded, as though there
were neither heaven nor hell, God nor accou^ts to be made.

14 And her mitred marchantes, her shorn soldiers, her mass mongers, her
soul sellers, and her mart brokers waxed very rich through the sale of her
oils, creme, salt, water, bread, orders, hallowings, houselinges, ashes,
palm, wax, frankensence, beads, crosses, candlesticks, copes, belles,
organes, Images, relics, and other pedlary wares.

15 And are become very wealthy in the habundaunce of her pleasuers. They have
gotten in unto them palaces and princely houses, fat pastors and parkes,
meadows and warrens, rivers and pondes, villages and towns, cities and whole
provinces, with the diuill and all else, besides other men's wives, daughters,
maid servants, and children whom they have abhominably corrupted. What
profits they have drawn unto them also by the sale of great bishoprics,
prelacies promocions, benefices, tot quoties, pardons, pilgrymages,
confessions, and purgatory, besides the yearly rents, of cathedral churches,
Abbayes, Colleges, Couents, for suits and such other, it were unreasonable to
tell. No pleasures are in the fardest part of the world, but they will have
plenty of them Yet can they for the time preach unto other men contempt of the
world, and commend both poverty and fasting.

THE TEXT
1 And I hard an other voiee from heaven, say. 2. Come away from her (my
people). 3. That ye be not pertakers in her sins. 4. Least ye receive of her
plagues. 5. For her sins are gone up to heaven. 6. And the Lord has remembered
her wickedness. 7. Revvard her even as she revvavded you, 8. and give her
double according to her works. 9. And power in double to her in the same
cup, vvhirhe she filled unto you. 10. And as much as she gloryfied her self*
and lived vvantonly. (...) so much pour ye in for her of punishment and
sorrovve.

The Commentary*
1 Besides all this (says saint John) yet heard I an other voice from above,
betokening an other moving of the spirit whereby the Godly ministers are taught
of the Lord. And this was thereof y^ sweet warning.

2 Come away my people from that wicked Babylon with Esd^as, and from that
stinkinge S^dome with Loath. Have no more to do with that whorish church.
Forsake her false religion and defiled Sacraments. Refuse her wanton
ceremonies, detest her supersticion, leave her beggarly baggage.

Meddle no more with those whoremongers, those Nicolaitanes, those Baalamits.
Abhore their abominable studies, manners and life, repenting in heart all
foolishness paste. Resort unto me (says the Lord) all you that labor and
are laden, and I shall ease you of your heavy burthe^s.

3 Submit your selves no longer to y^ yoke of the infidels, but set your selue^
at large, least ye be pertakers of her abominable sins, and to receive of her
plages, which is ye great vengeance of god. Let it suffice you that has been
don already at the plesur of the Heathen in the unlawful service of Idols. And
learn from henceforth to be more Godly wise, lest ye be damned with ye wicked.
I remember that John Hildeshe^ in his book in turpia pingentem, shows that
Tailarand^s Petragoric^^s a french cardinal, when question was moved at his
table of Apostates, commended the order of cardinals in that there was none
among them. Unto who^ Peter Thomas a Carmelyt* friar (which was
notwithstanding within a while after ye patriark of Constantinople) made this
true answer, what they be (says he) yt goth from other orders I cannot tell,
but sure I am that they which go fro^your order are saints. As by example, S
Hierome, Petrus Dami^^us, Petrus de Moroue, and such other.

4 Besides the wholesome admonishmentes of the scripture has many godly m^n
given warninges of these matters, both in the primative church and in every age
since. Many notab^^ Doctors and fathers, since ye popes (...) rayte, has in
their famous writings called upon the churches reformation. As Bertramus,
Herebaldus, Ioannes Scotus Menachus, Berengarius Thuronensis, Brun^,
Adegauensis* Petrus Damianus Wateramus, Medburgensis, Bernardus,
Cla^euallensis, Robertus Tuicie^sis, Ioachim Abbas, Cirillus Grecus, Ioannes
Salisburtensis, Gilbertus (...), Angelus Hierosolimitanus, Guilbe^^nus de
sancto amore, (...) ^onatus, Nicolaus Gallus, Hubertinus de Casan, Petrus
Ioannis, Mar^ilius Pataumus, Ioannes* Paris, Arnoldus de villa noua, Michael
Cesenus, Guil^e^mus (...), nicolaus d^ Luca, Marcus de Florencia, Ioannes
Wiccleus, Ioannes (...); Michael de Bononia, Ioannes Hildeshe^, Da^tes
Aligerius, Franciscus Petrarcha, Nicolaus Clemengis, Petrus de Aliaco, Ioannes
Gerson, Laurencius Ualla, Ludouicus Arelatensis, Johannes Segobius, Thomas
Redonesis Gallus, Matheus Parmarius, David Bois, Dionisius, Carthustanus,
Johannes Milnerton, Johannes* Go^chous, Johannes* de We^alya Wo^maciensis,
Ioha^nes G^yler, Ioha^nes Crutzer, Wessalus Groningensis* Eneas Syluius,
Rodericus, Samorensis, Iulianus Brixiensis* and Hieronimus Sauonarola, besides
those that has written in our days, as John Reuclin, Baptista Mantuanus*
Baptista Panecius, Johannes Crestonus, Erasmus, Luther, and such other* of whom
they have condemned ye more part for heretyques. To recyte their testimonies
and wrytings, it would r^quyre much time, and therefore I pass it over here*

Only have I rehearsed their names (as I could do yet many more) to put ^ee
in remembrance yt God* has always had some in the world, which has not in
all points* consented to their blasphemies, though they have not had the light
of this truth so open as we have it now.

Many godly Emperors and Cou^seil^ general have attemted this reformacion in
the church, but evermore* have they found ungodly princes against the^, to
houlde the Antichrists still in their wickedness. Yet doubt I not but Pharao
with his host shall perish in the sea, and the proud Iewishe priests in the
city, for their manyfolde blasphemies, at the time now appointed of the Lord.

5 For ye sins of this whore, or abhominacions without number of ye false
religion, her stinkeing Idolatry and slaughter of Innoce^ts are gone up unto
heaven against her, requiring the great vengeance of God. The filthiness of the^
has moved him to wrath, and kinled his displesure toward her, putting him in
rememberaunce of his eternal decree concerning her destructyon. The greatness of
her mischiefs has touched heaven, and has axed with Sodom and Gomor the
fearful plages threatened her.

6 And the merciful Lord beholding the affliction of his people, and pitying
their miserable thraldo^ in ye spiritual Egypt, has considered her ungodly
behavior, wayed her wilful wretchedness, and measured her unmerciful
murder, commanding his appointed ministers to execute upon her his judgments
without mercy.

7 Reward her now (says he) in every co^dicio^ as she has rewarded you
before* Measure again unto her, like as she has measured to you, now yt ye
have the judgment seats. Cry out upon her as she has cried out upon you*
Snare her as she has snared you. Destroy her as she has destroyed you. As she
has taken vengeance of you, so take you vengeance again^ of her. Like as she
has afflicted you, Iudge^ you, and condemned you by ye laws of me^, so scurge
you her again, judge her an harlot, and condemn her to hell by the mighty
word of God.

8 See that you give her two fold in punishment according to her wicked
deseruings. Where as she has taken from you no more but the life of the body,
take you away from her again the life both of body and soul.

9 Into ye same bitter cup of sorow^ that she has filled unto you in her
malice, power you in double again to her. Where as she has given you a
temporal death, give her the death everlasting, doubling unto her both ye
griefs and continuance of them.

10 Yea, consider how greatly she has glorified her self* against God in
blasphemous errors, in pride, in pleasures, and in wanton living.

11 And so much let her taste of most terrible punishments, sorrowful plages,
waylinges, and gnashinges of teeth. An holy priesthod has she pretended* a
regal dignity has she usurped, and both those powers most shamefully has
she so abused, therefore let her have the penalties dew unto such presumption.
Take from her, her plesau^t Euphrates with the spoils and profits, wherein
she has inordinatlye delighted, and throw her into most^ deep wretchedness
here, besides that shall follow in an other world.

THE TEXT.
1 For she says in her heart, 2. I sit, being a queen, 3. and am no widovv*
4. and shall see no sorrow, 5. Therefore shall her plages co^ at on day, 6. death,
and sorrow, and honger, 7. And she shall be brent with fire, 8. For stron^ is
the Lord God, 9. which shall judge her.

The commentary
1 For hyghlye she stands in her own conseit as yet, boasting her self to
be the great goodness of the earth.

2 I sit here in wealth, and pleasure (says she) being a glorious queen, yea
the holy church her self, having authoryty in heaven, in earth and in hell, with
power to lose and bynd, save and damn. With me is it not as with them that are
not of this world or have no dwelling place here, for all is at my will and
pleasure.

3 I am no desolate widow. The powers of this world stands by me. The mighty
princes and potentates defends me with the death of innocente people. Never
was Nero, Domicianus Traianus nor Marencius, with other cruel tirrauntes, more
sure upon my side in defense of supersticions, than they are yet still to this
hour.

4 Therefore I can take no seathe, nor yet feel of any sorrow, I shall be lady
for ever. Never shall my seat be removed. Never shall I fall, nor any m^shappe
light upon me. Such are ye bold bragges of the papists, that Peter's little
ship may well be moved with ye tempest of heretics, but never shall it be
overthrown, thynking thereby ye whorish church shall evermore continue, and
never come to naught.

5 They consider not how strong ye Lamb is, against who^ they daily fight. And
therefore shall ye terrible plages (which God has appointed her to suffer)
heavily light upon her, and all in one day.

6 At once shall he power upon that wicked congregation, death, sorrow and
hunger, like as he did fire and brimstone upon the sinful cities. Perpetually
shall they be deprived of ye life which is in Christ Jesus. Continual weeping
and teeth gnashing shall they have, their worm never dying. Still shall they
inwardly famish, and never with felicity be satisfied.

7 With unquenchable fire shall this whore be brent with her whole generation
of hypocrites, prepared for the diuil and his Angels.

8 Effectual and trwe is the sentence, for mighty is the Lord that shall
judge her, and condemn her by his word.

9 Just is he in his promise, true in his sayings, glorious in his works,
holy, terrible, and fearful in his judgments against the wicked. None shall
be found able at that day to restrain the least part of his purposed
vengeance, neither Mary throwyng in her beads into saint Michaels balaunce,
John Baptist with his Lamb, Peter with his key, nor yet Paul with his long
sword.

Though Moses and Samuel, the chosen Prophets of the Lord, yea, with Noe,
Daniell, and pacient Job, should stand before him at that day, yet should they
not be hand.

THE TEXT.
1 And the kings of the earth shall be vvepe her, 2. and vvayle over her, 3.
which have committed fornication, 4. and lived vvantonlye with her, 5. when
they shall see the smoke of her burning, 6. and shall stand a far of, 7. for
fear of her punishment saying. 8. Alas alas, that great city, 9. Babylon. 10.
that mighty city. 11. For at one hour comes thy judgment.

The Commentary.
1 Moreover ye carnally minded kings of the earth (says the aforesaid Angel)
which has for her pleasure abused their authority and power, shall take her,
sudden destruction in this life very heavily.

2 Yea, they shall most sorrowfully bewail them selves over her, as men very
ill contented with that ordinance of God.

They shall be sorry in their hearts that his word is become so strong
against her, that they can resist it with swerd, fire, and halters no longer.
They shall be pensive and heavy to see all go to wrack, they being no longer
able by the slaughter of innocents to uphold her glittering estate.

3 Specially shall they be sore disconte^ted with ye matter, which have with his
committed the whordom of the spyrite by many externe worshipings of dry waffer
cakes, oils roods, relyques, ladies, Images, sculles, bones, chippes, old
rags, shows, boots, spurs, hattes, breches, whodes, nightcapes, and such
like.

4 And they that have lived wanto^ly with her in following her idle obseruacions
in matte^ses, hours, and masses, in sensinges, halowings, and font halowing,
in going processions with canapye, cross, and pyx, with banneres, stremers,
and torchelight, with such other gaudes to folish for children, no godly
admonishment taken of ye scripturs. For under ye kings here are also to be
understood those peoples, who^ they have wickedly governed, and constrained
by their laws to such abominable vsages.

5 Dolorously shall these kings lament, when thy shall behold ye filthy smoke of
her burning, or when they perceive that she coming to the trial of the
scriptures, appears nothing but a vile stinking smoke noyful to the eyes,
choking to the throat, and evermore blemishing the comfortable light. The
church of the wicked (says David) is as the dust that is blown forth of the
wind, the shadow that passes away, the smoke that vanishes, and ye wax that
melts in the fire, yea, of al fantastical vanities the most.

6 A fare of shall they stand trembling at ye magesty of gods word, ^^aring to
be destroyed or to lose their worldly honors also by the same, as did the
duke of Bauery and Brunswick with other popish princes at the last counsel of
Rainsbrig. For the continual clamor of Eckius, Cochleus, Tregarius,
Sactzgerus, Pelargus, Herborne, Hos^^eister, Badia, Winchester, and such other
dirtye doctors of theirs is evermore, that the Gospellers would have all
things in common. And therefore do these persecut them, and would not have that
church to go down, thynkyng that if it should once fall, they should not long
after continue.

7 Thus does ye children of Cain which have murdered their poor innocent
brethern, fear that every man loking upon them would destroy them. As men
forsaken of God they dispaier in them selves, loking for non other but
dampnacion, now that they can have no more masses, holy prayers nor suffrages,
and complaining after this sort.

8 Alas alas that great cyty, that beutiful Babilo^, that blessed holy mother
ye church, which sometime had so many Popes pardons, so many bishops
blessings, so many holy stacions, so many clean remissions a Pena et culpa,
so many good ghostly fathers, so many religious orders, so much holy water for
spirits, and saint John's Gospels with ye.v. wounds and ye length of our Lord
for drowning, is now decayed for ever.

9 We sorrow, we sighe, we sobbe, we are sore disquieted, for pain we pante,
tremble, and quake to see our dearly beloved Babylon turned vpside down, whom
we took for a most wonderful miracle.

10 Oh, that cyty, that city, ye sumtime was so mighty and strong, so fair and
bewtiful, so glorious and holy, is now become wast and desolate.

11 At once is the terrible judgment of God common upon thee unlooked for.
Suddenly art thou destroyed with the spirit of his mouth unthought upon. Alas
who shall pray for us now? who shall ^inge Diriges and trentoles? who shall
assoile us of our sins? who shall give us ashes and palms? who shall bless us
with a spade, and sing us out of purgatory when we are dead? If we lack these
things, we are like to want heaven. These are ye desperate complaints of the
wicked.

THE TEXT.
1 And the merchants of the earth, 2. shall vvepe and vvaile in them selves,
3. because no man will by their vvares any more, 4. The vvares, 5. of gold,
6. and silver, 7. and of precious stons, 8. neither of pearl, 9. and silk, 10
and raines, 11. and purple and scarlet, 12. and all thin vvood, 13. and all
manner of vessels of luery, 14. and all manner vessels of most precious vvood,
15. and of brass, 16 and of iron 17. and of marbil, 18. and sinamon, 19. and
odours, 20. and oyntme^ts, 21. and frankensence, 22. and wine, 23. and oil,
24. and fine flower, 25. and wheat, 26. and cattle, 27. and sheep, 28. and
horses, 29. and charettes, 30. and bodies. 31. and souls of men.

The commentary
1 Now follows in course the merchauntes of the earth, the sellers of wares
in the temple, the marked muster of Mahomet and the Pope.

2 They shall weep and mourn, wayle and lament inwardly in them selves, both
wringing their hands for sorrow, and scratchyng their heads for very anguish.

3 Because they see all men go from them, and none in a manner are disposed to
buy their pedlary wares any more.

4 As these wares are specially, which follow here in course.

5 They will pay no more money for the housell sippings, bottom blessings, nor
for see me and see me not, above the head and under of their chalices,
which in many places be of fine gold. Neither regard they to kneel any more
down and to kiss their pontifical rings, which are of ye same metal.

6 They will be no more at cost to have ye air beaten and ye Idols perfumed
with their sensers at pryncipall feasts, to have their crucifixes laid upon
horses, or to have them solemply borne aloft in their gaddings abroad, with
the religious occupyings of their paxes, cruettes, and other Jewels which be of
silver.

7 Neither pass they greatly to behold precious stones any more in their ij.
horned miters, when they hallow their churches, give their whorishe orders, and
tryumphantly muster in processions.

8 Nor in costuous pearls in their copes perrours, and chysibilles, when they
be in their prelately pompous sacrifices.

9 Men knowing ye word of God supposes yt their ornaments of silk wherewith
they garnishe their temples and adorn their Idolles, is very blasphemous and
diuillish.

10 They think also that their fair white rochets of raynes or fine linen
cloth, their costly gray amices of calaber and cattes tails.

11 Their fresh Purple gowns wha^ they walk for their pleasures, and their
read scarlet frockes when they preach lies in the Pulpit, are very superfluous
and vain.

12 In their thynen wood (whom some men call Algume trees, some Basil, some
Coral) may be understand all their curious buildings of Temples, Abbeys,
Chapels, and Chambers. All shrines, Images, churchscooles, and pews that are
well paid for. All Banner staves, Pater noster scores, and pieces of the holy
cross.

13 The vessels of yuory comprehends all their maundye dyshes, their offering
platters, their relic chistes, their god boxes, their drinking horns, their
sipping cups for the hiccough, their tables whereupon are charmed their
chalices and vestiments, their standiches, their combs, their musk balls,
their pomaunder pottes, and their dust boxes with such other toys.

14 The vessels which after some interpretours are of precious stone, or after
some of most precious wood, betokens their costuous cups or cruses of
Jasper, Iacinct, Amel, and fine Beral, and their alabaster boxes wherewith they
annointe kings, confirm children, and minister their holy whorish orders.
Their pardon masers or drinking dishes, as saint Benits bole, saint Edmonds
bole, saint Giles bole, saint Blithes bole, and Westminster bole, with such
other holy relics.

15 Of Brass (which contains latten, copper, alcumine, and other hard
metals) are made all their great candlesticks, holy water kettles, lamps,
desks, pyllers, butterasses, bosses, bells and many other things more.

16 Of strong iron are the branches made that hold up the lights before
their false gods, the tacks that sustain them for fallinge, the locks that
save them from the robberye of thieves, their fire pans, bars and poolyes, with
many other strange ginnes besides.

7 With marble most commonly paue they their temples, and build strong p^llers
and arches in their great cathedral Churches and monasteries, they make
thereof also their superalities, their tumbs, and their solemn grave stones,
besides their other buildinges with free stone, flint, ragge, and brick,
comprehended in the same.

8 By the Sinamon is meant all manner of costly spyces wherewith they bury their
Bishops and founders, lest they should stink when they translate them again
to make them saints for advantage.

19 By the smelling odours, the sweet herbs that they strowe abroad at their
dedications and burials, besides the da^maske waters, bawmes, muskes,
pomau^nder, ciuet, and other curious confections they yt bestow upon their own
Precious bodies.

20 The oyntmentes are such oils as they mingle with rose water, aloes, and
spike with other merry conceits, where with they anoint their holy savors and
roods to make them to sweat and to smell sweet, when they are borne abrod in
procession upon their high feastfull days, like as doctor Read used his old
rotten Roode at Beckles in Southfolke upon the holy roode day.

21 Frankensence occupye they often as a necessary thing, in the sensyng, of
their Idols, hallowinge of their paschal, coniuringe of their ploughes, besides
the blessing of their palms, candles, ashes, and their dead men's graves with
Requiescant in peace.

22 With wine sing they their masses for money, they housell ye people at
Easter, they wash their altar stones upon maundy thursday, they fast the holy
Imber days, besides other banketinges all the whole year to keep their flesh
chaste.

23 With oil smere they young infantes at baptism and bishopping, they grease
their massemongers and give them the mark of madian, they ancle their cattle
that starueth, and do many other feats else.

24 Five sloure is such a merchandyse of theirs as far excedeth all other and
was first given them by pope Alexander the first, thinkinge Christ's
institution not sufficient nor coml^m using the common bread in that
ministry. For that ware has brought them in their plentiful possessions,
their Lordshippes, fat benifices, and prebendaries, with in nmerable plesures
else.

25 Wheat have they of their farms, whereof they make pardon bread and cakes
to draw people to devotion toward them.

26 Cattle receive they offered unto their Idols by the Idiots of the
countries for recover of sondrye diseases, besides that they have of their
tithes.

27 Sheep have they sometime of their own pastures, sometime of begginge,
sometime of bequestes for the dead, to cry them out of their fearful
purgatory, when they be a sleep at midnight.

28 Great horses have they for mortuaries, for offices, for fauers, gifts and
rewards, to be good Lords unto them that they may hold still their farms,
and to have saunder waspe their son and their heir a priest, or to admit
him unto a manerly benifice, that he may be called master person, and such
like.

29 Charets have they also or horselitters of al manner of sorts, specially at
Rome, with foot men runninge on both sides of them, to make room for the holy
fathers.

Of whom some carye their own precious bodies, some their treasure, some the
blessed sacrament, some holy relics and ornaments, some their whores, and
some their bastardes.

30 The bodies of men must needs be judged to be at their pleasure, so long as
christen provinces be tributaries unto them, princes obedie^te, peoples
subject, and their laws at their commandment to slay and to kill. And to
make this good, who has not in England paid his Peter penny sometime to
acknowledge himself a bond man of theirs at the receipt of his yearly howsell.

Furthermore yet, besides their market muster of monks, friars, and priests,
they have certain bondme^, of whom some they sell to the Uenicians, some to
the Genues, some to the Portingales, and some to ye Turks, to row in their
galleis.

31 And last of all to make up their market, least any thing should escape
their hands, these unmerciful bribers makes marchaundise of the souls of
men, to deprive Christ of his whole right, sending many unto hell, but not one
unto heaven (unless they maliciously murder the^ forth truths sake) and all
for money. After many other sorts else abuse they these good creatures of God
who^ the holy ghost here names by course as things comprehending al other,
besides, that Mahomits ministers in their sort in Barbary, Greece, and Egypt.
For nothing under the heavens leave they undefiled. Much were it to show here
by the cronicles severally, of what Pope they have reieiued authorytie, power,
and charge to utter these wares to advantage and how they came first from the
old Idolatrous by the large testimonies of Sapience, Esaias, Daniel, Baruch,
Os^as, and the other prophets. At one hour shall these merchants for their
abhom^nations be plaged, nothing that the vain lovers of this world have
tro^^ed in, anaylinge them nor yet healping them. For at all times in this last
age of the world (whom John caleth the last hour) are the wicked reprobats
condemned of God, and so reserved to ye latter sentence of ye judge. For it
follows in the text.

THE TEXT.
1 And the apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed rrom thee. 2. And
all things that which were dainty, and had price. 3. were departed from thee
4. And thou shall find the^ no more. 5. The marchaunts of these things. 6.
Which were waxed rich by her. 7. Shall stand a far of, from her, for
fear of the punishment of her. 8. Weping and vvayling, and saying. 9. Alas,
alas, that great city, that was clothed in raines and purple, and scarlet,
and decked with gold, and precious stone and pearl. 10. For at one hour so
great riches is come to naught.

The Commentary.
1 And the deliclous apples (says ye threatnyng voice of the holy ghost unto
this whore) that thy wreched heart has so sore lusted after by so mani
insatiable desires are now departed from thee. Men of ripe learning and
judgment, whom thou couetedst to have for defense of thy glorious whoredom,
thy abhominatio^s perceived, will no longer dwell with thee, but utterly leave
thee, detest thee, and abhore thee. Where as they have before auauanced thee to
the world, now will they by the scriptures reprove thee to the same.

2 In like manner al those things which were before time very precious and
dainty unto thee, and whom thou had for their goodness in much estimation,
are now for thy lewdenesse gone a way clean from thee, biddinge thee for ever
adue. Men of sober discretion and living, whom thou have before time pretended
much to fauer, as things commodious unto thee, to the clokyng of hypocrisy,
thy conditions now known, do daily more and more decline from thy dead
observations and most damnable supersticions. And where as they thought thee
before very holy and good, they suppose thee now both detestable and devilish.

3 So that from henceforth the verity open, none shall remain with thee, nor
defend thy known whoredom, but hipocrits, men's pleasures, flatterers,
bablyng sophisters, hauling canonistes, Epicures, and blasphemous Antichrists.
As for men that be godly wise, sober, virtuous, learned, well occupied, and
mynding the glory of God, will utterly refuse thee, and forsake thy pestiferous
ways.

4 Thou shalt find them no more upon thy side pleating. No more shall thou
have their sauer, nor yet their sweet smellinge. Neither shall their doctrine
maintain thy vain ceremonies, nor yet their conversation observe thy crooked
customs any more* Yea, be thou certain and sure of this, that be they once
gone from the clean, never shall they again return unto thee. Only shall thy
wicked remnant be beasts and bablers, fi^thy workers and drounkards, as in
Eckius which had three bastardes the same year yt he disputed at Lipsia
against the marriage of priests, Natalis Beda, C^lictoneus, Liset, Godet, Suitor,
Delphus, and de quercu at Paris. Bragging Winchester, the Popes paraclet in
England, that is master of the stews at London, and such other dirtie
doungels.

5 The busi merchants of these earthlye things before (says ye voice again
unto John) which were become very fat, welthy and rich through quick sale of
their wares of this whorish church, shall at the day of her destruction stand
a far of bewaylinge her fall. Far diverse are these in their markets from
the usage of other occupiers in the world. For whereas they sell their wares
but once, and look no more for them again, these sell them every day and yet
retain them still. And where as they sell the very wares in deed, these sell
no more but the sight, the sound, and the shadow. As the looking upon their
Images, ye noise of their bells, the spreading out of their ornaments, the show
of their Iewelles, the use and occupyinge of their instruments, the kissing of
their relics, the wind of their lips, the spatle of their tungs, their idle
pratlings, and ungodly merits. But still they keep to them selves the gold,
the silver, the precious stones, the pearls, and such like, though they never
cost them money. Yea, so would they do also the learning and good living if
they had them as they have not. For none would they have learned nor yet
virtuous in the sight of the world, but their own smered Sodomits.

6 How and wherein these marcha^ts are rich it is showed before, and besides yt
all the world does know it.

7 But now in the fall certainly of their whorish church, will they stand a
far of. They will be none of hirs, when they see her go down, lest they
should go down with her, and be punished with penury, or lest they should be
drawn, hanged and quartered, as many have been in England.

8 Rather will they hold a fair face outwardly for advantage, inwardlye it
their hearts bewailing her ruin, or secretly among them selves depl^ring her
decay, till such time as they may be bold to play ye knaves again, laying
after this weeping sort.

9 Alas, alas that notable city, ye Babilonyshe Rome that ruled all the world,
that holy church that was so beautyfully adorned with fine sylke, purple, and
scarlet in her copes, vestures and ornaments and was so preciously furnished
with gold, precious stone and pearels, in her chalices crosses and miters, and
in all other prodigious and pompous Jewels.

10 Alas for her, alas, for now at one hour in this latter age of the church
by the gospel preachinge is so exceeding great riches, glory magnificence and
honor of our holy mother come even unto naught. Yea, our manifold prelacies
are not regarded among them, but utterly contempned and despised.

THE TEXT.
1 And every ship gouernoure. 2. And all they that occupied ships. 3, And
ship me^ which work in the sea. 4. Stood a far of. 5. And cried. 6, when
they savv the smoke of her burning, saying. 7. What city is like unto this
great city? 8. And they cast duste on on their heads. 9. And cried
vveepinge, and vvaylinge, and said. 10. Alas, alas, that great city, wherein
were made rich. 11. All that had ships in the sea. 12. By the reason of her
costlines^e. 13, For at one hour^ is she made desolate.

The Commentary.
1 In like case every ship master, which betokneth diocesanes, bishops, and
ordinaries.

2 And al they that occupy boats, whiries, and scutes, or sail upon the sea,
as they which do among the wavering multitude are taken for parsons, vicars,
and curates.

3 Yea, and mariners also that work in the sea, by whom are signified soul
pristes, simple penitensers, and holy water mongers, daily peruertinge y^
ignorant heople.

4 All these (says the voice) will stand a far of when they see her
destruction. No longer will they stand by her, then they feel her profitable
and pleasant unto them. Decay once the sweet profits, and they are gone away.

5 Yet will they turn toward her again, and cry out when they shall behold
the filthye smoke that shall arise of her burning.

6 When her wisdom appears foolishness, her doctrine diuelishnesse, and her
sanctity wickedness by the word of God shall sorrowfullye lament for their
own bellyes sake, saying thus in their desperate hearts.

7 What city in the world can be thought like unto this mighty city, either
in magnificence, wealth, or power? No cilizens are more preciously apparelled,
more sumptuously fed, nor more delitiouslye diered, then is the shorn nation,
if ye mark well their favor and feeding, their sine disguysing and lodging,
their fat cheeks and great bellies with soche other lyklyhoodes else. Much
rather had they to have still the wanton commodities of this City, then the
perpetual pleasures of Heaven. So indiscreet, carnal, and beastlye are they in
their imaginations, cares, and studies.

8 So sorrowful will they be for this their general loss, that upon their
witless heads, they shall cast dust in token of their inward heuines. With
despair shall they darken their wits, and with dottage dull their
understanding. And as graciously will they repent as ever did Caine, Pharao,
Esau Antiochus, and Judas their predicessors

9 Dolorously shall they cry in their mutual murtherings, mourning for their
powches, and sorowyng for their bellyes, and this will be the tenor of their
woeful tragedy.

10 Alas, alas that worthy city, that royal Rome, that sweet Babylon, that
holy mother of ours, in whom we were left so rich, so mighty, and so strong
that all the world feared us, and we felt of no sorrows.

11 Specially all we that had ships in the sea, or that had Bishopprickes,
benefices, and other fat livings among the wavering wanderers of the light
laytie, inconstaunt, fyckle and foolysh, where as GODS word is not known.

12 We became wealthy in all manner of pleasures, by reason of her costly and
profitable wares that those our ships contained, which are to many to be now
rehearsed.

13 Full woe are we and heavy at the heart remembering that famous city, for at
one hour is she made desolat. In this last age of his Church will the Lord
consume her with his breath, not leaving in her one stone upon an other. Like
as ye shadow yt passes shall she vanish away, and like the dry thistle Flower,
or dust that is scatered with the wind. Such words (says the wise man
Philo) shall they speak in hell that have sinned, besides their desperate
complaynt in this life. Some expsitours have taken al these kings, merchants
vnd ship gouerners for one manner of people or generation of Antichrist. And it
may well be, for so much as they are all of ye earth. None of these are they
iustlye by the authorytie of God, but very tiraunts, thieves, and manquellers.

THE TEXT
1 Rejoice over her thou heaven. 2. And ye holy Apostles. 3. And Prophets. 4.
For God has given your judgment on her. 5. And a mighty Angel took up a
stone like a great millstone. 6. And cast it into the sea, saying. 7. With such
violence shall that great City Babylon be cast. 8. And shall be found no
more, 9. And the voice of harpers, and musitianes, 10. and of pipers, and
trumpeters, 11. shall be heard no more in thee. 12. And no crafts man (of
whatsoever craft he be) shall be found any more in thee, 13. And the sound
of a mill, shall be heard no more in thee, 14. And candell light, shall be^
no more burning in thee, 15. And the voice of the brydegrome, and of the bryde,
shall be heard no more in thee, 16. For thy merchau^ts were the Princes of the
earth, 17. and with thine inchauntments, were deceived all nations, 1^. And
in her was found the blood, 19. of the Prophets, 20. and of the saints, 21.
and of all that were slain upon the earth.

The Commentary.
1 With all mirth possible (says the text) rejoice thou heaven, or thou
faithful congregation of God, to see this aduoutrous church of Antichrist
overthrown. Be glad in thy heart, not that thy quarrel is revenged, but in yt
the righteousness of God is fulfilled, his people being at liberty.

2 Have mirth convenient ye holy Apostles or messengers of the Lord, with them
that the Gospel has called.

3 Joy with our brethren ye ancient Prophets, or godly teachers of the old
law.

4 For your merciful God has heard your pittious cry from under the altar,
and has performed upon ye blasphemous whore the same self judgment that you
desired. According to your own request has he revenged all your innocent
blood, which has been shed upon earth since Abell the ryghtuous. The same
dampnation have they now justly yt they ministered unto you unjustly. Yea
double, for so much as they have it both in their bodies and souls, where as
you had it but alone in your bodies.

5 And immediately (says S. John) an Angel of great power betokening the true
preachers of the latter age of the church, strongly endued from above, took up
a stone of exceeding weight, very like in simylitude unto a great millstone.
They shall gather up out of Esaias, Hieremy, Abacucke, and other Prophets, the
mighty, and tirrible judgments of ye Lord, which are the heavy stone that
shall grind his enemies into powder.

6 This stone shall they cast into ye sea. They shall publish, preach, and
declare unto the people of this world (which are as the mouable flood) those
heavy judgments which shall light upon that blasphemous church of theirs at
the time appointed, and thus shall they say unto them.

7 So vyolent and heavy shall be the destruction of that miserable city, that
mystical Babylon, that prostibulous church of Antichrist, with her shorn
citizens and smeared hipocrites, as is the weighty fall of an exceeding great
millstone in the bottom of the sea rising up no more again, yea, so tirrible
and fearful.

8 With shame and confusion shall that wicked generation come down, and never
more be found hereafter, neither in the earth nor yet in heaven. Though in
their painted stories they put popes, cardinals, and bishops, monks, chano^s,
and shaven priests, friars, nuns, and heremites, in heaven among the saints,
yet are there none such nor never shall be. Their resting place is the bottom
of the sea by the judgments of God, unless they renounce those vain
supersticions and cleave to the sincere verities of ye Lord. Much have they
boasted in their writings yt their holy mother of predigious orders and
disguised relygyons should evermore continue.

9 But be certain and sure thou miserable church (says the holy ghost) yt
thou shall no le^ger enjoy ye commodious pleasures of a free cittye, all
quietous without trubles. The merry noyes of them that play upon harpes, lutes
and fidels, the sweet voice of musicians yt sing with virginals, vials and
chimes, the armony of them that pipe in recorders, flutes, and drums, and the
shirle showt of trumpets, waits, and shawmes, shall no more be heard in thee to
ye delight of men.

10 Neither shall ye sweet Organs containing the melodious noise of all manner of
instruments and birds be played upon, nor ye great belles be rong after that,
nor yet ye fresh discant, prick song, counter point, and faburden be called for
in thee, which art the very sinagog of Satan.

11 Thy lascivious armonye and delectable music much provoking ye weak
hearts of men to meddle with thy abominable whordom by ye wantonness of Idolatry
in that kind, shall perish with thee for ever.

12 No cunning Artificer, Caruer, Paynter, nor Gilder, Embroderer, Goldsmith,
nor silk worker, with such other like of what occupacion so ever they be or
have been to thy commodity, shall never more be found so again. Copes,
cruettes, candelstickes, miters, crosses se^sers, crismatoris, corporasses, and
chalices, which for thy whorishe holiness might not sometime be touched, will
tha^ for thy sake be abhorred of all men. Never more shall be builded for
marcha^ts of thy livery and mark, palaces, temples, abbeys, collages, coue^ts,
chauntries, fair houses, and horcherds of pleasure

13 The clapping noise of neither wyndmil, horsemil, nor watermil, shall any
more be heard, to ye gluttenous feeding of thy puffed up porklings, for the
maintenance of thine idle obseruacions and ceremonies. No more shall those idle
belly gods swill up the sweat th^re, of the laboring man, nor devour the
poor widdowe and fathereesse for strayning out a gnat.

14 The continual light of lamps before the high altar, the burning
cressettes at triumphs in the night, ye torches at burials and solemn
processions tapers at high masses, and the candels at offeringes, shall
neuermore burn in thy sinful sinagog.

15 No more shall the bridgrome desire after thy folish ordena^ce to be Joined
to his wife, nor ye bride to her lawful husband. No more shall that free state
of living be bound under yoke of da^pnable dremes, neither for vows unadvised,
nor for popish orders, nor yet for any gossiprye, but be at full lyberty as the
Lord has ordained it. No commodities, prophets, nor pleasures shall thou have
any more of these nor yet of such like, as before time thou haste had of them in
habundance.

16 For thy mitred marchaunts were sumtime princes of ye earth when they
reigned in their roialty. Thy shorn shauelinges were Lords over ye multitude,
when they held their priestly authority over ye souls and bodies of men.

17 Yea, and with thy privy legardemaine, with thy iugling castes, with the
crafts, and inchauntmentes of thy subtle charms were all nations of the
world deceived.

With lies in hipocrisy were the great governors most miserably blinded, and
with errors in supersticion ye common people seduced. And all was to satisfye
thy voluptuous affectes. Only remains to thee now the dwe reward of thy
wickedness, which is an everlasting dampnacion.

18 All this is said here (says the holy Ghost) for that in this aduoutrous
church is found the great slaughter of innocents.

19 Gilty appears she before God of all the blod of the holy prophets of ye old
law. As were Esaye, Hieremy, Ezechiel, and Amos.

20 And of the sincere witnesses of the new law, as were Steven, James,
Antipas, and Paul.

21 Yea, and of all those Godly men yt were slain upon earth from rightuous
Abel unto the end of ye world for the faithful testimony of God. Among whom
may they also be numbered, which has in battayles, skirmyshes, and vprores at
the Popes appoinment in all Christian regions been unmercifully murdered, for
ye fulfilling of his insacyable purpose.

The xix. Chapter.
NOw follows in course the conuenyent praise of thanksgiving unto God, for
rightuously condempnyng the blasphemous church of Antichrist, and for
graciously auenging the innocent blood of his true servant. Here are two
manner of peoples to be considered, of whom the one is sorrowful, the other
reioyseth, and all about one matter. The fall of this malignau^t church, is to
the one sort a discomforte, to the other a heavenly comfort. The kings, the
merchaunts, and the ship governors of ye earth, most dolorously lamenteth ye
destruction of their mad vanities. The unregarded or forsaken number of those
simple souls y^ faithfully believes in Christ, ar highly glad of it, for his
gloryes sake. About this one decay cries the one sort, woe, woe, woe. The other
sort singing wyfully in their hearts unto God so often times. Alleluia. So much
dyffreth the one from the other, the children of darkness from the children of
light, they yt seek their own glory from them that seek the glory of god.
Not unlike is Johan unto Aggeus, Zacharias, and other holy prophets, which
both showed before of ye peoples return from ye miserable captivity of the
Babilonians, and also the reedyfying again of their new Jerusalem. For here
has he first showed the distructio^ and fall of ye damnable whore, the
spiritual Babylon, which many years has grievously vexed the people of God,
and now in this chapter their peaceable time in ye Lord. Now are ye precious
vessels of God like to be restored into the temple, the great Balthazar of Rome
once overthrown. Now shall the sweet peace grow, the plentuous quiet increase,
the pastures of the Lord wax fat, and the mighty verity of his word flow
like a sweet running flood.

THE TEXT.
1 And after that I heard the voice, 2. of much people in heaven, 3. sainge:
Alleluia, 4. Salvation, 5, and glory, 6, and honor, 7, and power, 8, be
ascribed unto the Lord our God, 9. For true and rightuous are his judgments,
10. because he has judged the great whore, 11. which did corrupt the earth
with her fornication, 12. and has avenged the blood of his servant of her
hand, 13. And again they said Alleluya.

The Commentary.
1 After the destruction of that whorish Babilo^ (which singnyfieth the wicked
church) I heard (says Saint John) in mystery, the reroysing voice of much
people in heaven, which is that congregation of faith wherein ye Lord rests.

2 Uerye many were there among them which ioyously gave thanks unto God.

3 Pronouncing this Hebrew sentence, Alleluia, which is so much to sai, as let
us together praise the Lords name.

4 Only is salvation, health, and deliverance of him. Unto none other it is to
be ascribed, neither in heaven nor in earth, be there never so godly doers.

5 Inestimable glory, vnspeakble honor, incomprehencyble power, belongs
unto that Lord our God, so does the dew commendacion thereof.

6 He it is that only ough^ of us to be praised, obeyed, and magnified.

7 For he alone has ouerthrown the dragon, the beast, and ye glittring whore
that deceived all the world, that proud church of stynkeynge Sodomytes.

8 And this has he done for our salvation. Refer all the praise unto him as
to your conqueror most worthy.

9 For verily most true and perfect is he in his merciful promises, most
rightuous and just in his godly judgments, which has been of late most
euydently seen.

10 Specially in that he has judged according to his former promis the
abominable harlot, the superstycyous church of Antichrist, the filthy famelye
of spiritual whoremongers, glutto^s, and hypocrytes, yea, the execrable
Sinnagog of Satan in deed.

11 Which has most miserably corrupted not ye true servants of God, but ye
very earth, or such men as were earthly minded, with her filthy fornycation of
Idolatry, superstition, and blasphemy.

12 That merciful Lord has most rightuously avenged ye innocent blood his
faithful servants and constant witnesses, of her wicked hand. From the
tirryble cruelty, spite, and vyolence of her unmercifully ministers has he
graciously delivered them.

13 Yet once again (says saint John) did this godly minded multitude break
forth into the praise of God, and cried with a most joyful shought. Alleluya,
or comme^dation without end be unto our most heavenly creator, redeemer and
comfortour. His laud be evermore in our mouth, for thus restoring his verity,
the enemies thereof deposed.

THE TEXT.
1 And smoke rose up for evermore, 2. And the xxiiij. elders, 3 and the four
beasts, 4. feldovvne, 5. and worshipped God that sat on the seat, 6. saying*
Amen.

7. Alleluya. 8. And a voice came out of the seat, 9. saying, 10. Praise our
Lord God, 11. all ye that are his servants, 12. and ye that fear him both
small and great.

The Commentary.
1 And the smoke (says saint John) of her abominations, very noyful unto ye
eyes of God, went up evermore into his sight provoking him to eternal
vengeance. A smoke ascended in his wrath (says David) and upon ye fire
proceeded from his mouth, which kindled the coals of her dampnation. This fire
will be the tirrible sentence given upon her in his latter judgment. For never
cease this blasphemous bloody church in requiring the vengeance of God.

2 And the xxiiij. Elders (says he) by whom are signified the saints
departed, as the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other godly
witnesses.

3 And the iiij. beasts also betokening the faithful multitude in the, iiij.
quarters of the world, yet living in this frail nature, fell down before the
face of the Lord.

4 In one godly spirit, faith, zeal, and fervent love, did both they in their
times, and these in this our age submit them selves unto God, referryng
alalwayes unto him all that they ever had either in faith or works, as unto
the special giver of them.

5 These worshipped in their ages and yet do to this day, not things fantasied
of men, but the only everlasting God that evermore has sit upon the eternal
seat of his omnipotency.

6 Continually saying: Amen* Or at his will be all things.

7 Saying also Alleluya, or everlasting praise be given to his name of the
universal Christian multitude, for rightuously judging the great whore to
drink the blood that she has shed of the holy witnesses of Jesus, or to
sustain for ever the just ve^geau^ce thereof.

8 Consequently came there out an, exceeding sweet voice from ye eternal
throne of God, which is Jesus Christ. This is that Gospel of glad tidings,
which he taught when he was here living among us, being the bodily habitacle of
his Godhead.

9 This voice evermore is moving us to the only faith, obedience, and fear of
the eternal father, comprehended in this clause following.

10 In all your sayings and dooyngs (says that voice) commend always that
Lord which is both my father, both my God, and your God.

11 Specially all you that are his faithful servant by earnestly loving and
following his word.

12 You also that unfeignedly fear to transgress his laws, and
commandments, whither ye be great or small, high or low, young or old, noble
or unnoble, rich or poor, strong or weak, whole or sick, beautiful or
deformed, wise or unwise, learned or unlearned, none to be excluded from his
praise, so that he be faithful, charitable, pacient, and godly. For in no
manner of nation is any of him forsaken that faithfully fears him and lives
according unto righteousness.

THE TEXT.
1 And I heard the voice of much people, 2. even as the voice of many waters,
3. and as the voice of strong thunderynges, 4. saying: Alleluya. 5. For God
omnipotente raygneth, 6. Let us be glad and rejoice, 7. and give honor to him,
8. For the marriage of the Lamb is come, 9. and his wife made her self
ready. 10. And to her was granted, that she should be araied with pure and
goodly silk, 11. As for the silk it is the righteousness of saints.

The Commentary.
1 After this (says saint John) I herd in mystery ye voice of very much
people, or of an innumerable multitude of men.

2 And it sounded unto me even as it had been the flushing noise of many
waters.

3 And in a manner as the fearful sound of great thunderings. For though the
praise of God be all one in the faithful nations, yet is the utterance thereof
diverse, like as the languages are also diverse. Uery strange and confuse are
the speches one to an other where they are not known. Tirrible also are they,
partly for that they comprehend such a magistie, as is the glory of God, and
partly because they are for the utter confusion of the wicked. None other was
this voice than were the voices before, nor to none other end.

4 For look in what faith the Patryarkes and the fathers, the prophets and
Apostles, the holy Martyrs and preachers, lauded God for victory over their
enemies, in the same does now the faithful multitude of all regions commend
him, saying: Alleluya, or praise be evermore in your mouths.

5 For our Lord God almightye is become a victorious conqueror, and now
reygneth over all. Not only has he ouercomen the devil by the doughtye death
of his son, but also his proud kingdom of hipocrysie by the power of his
mighty word.

6 Let us be glad (says this voice) and highly rejoice in our hearts for this
heuenlye alteration and profitable change.

7 Let us give thanks to his omnipotente name, that without our deseruinges
we are brought to so joyful a day.

8 For the glorious spousage of the Lamb Jesus Christ is come. Now that this
whore is ouerthrown, shall he be joined to his undefiled church, which was before
dispersed by diverse afflictions and punishementes.

9 His wife which is his congregation has made her self now ready to her
spouse. Not with copes and crosses, miters and relics, torches and holy
water. Not with chapels, and chauntries, hallowings, and sensinges, shauinges
and anointinges, with such other beggerye. No, neither with works of
supererogation, merits of masses, nor other dirtye deseruinges of our own
righteousness. But with a pure christian faith, and with the true righteousness
of god which she has of christ.

10 For it follows in the text, yt to her it was garnted by the singular
goodness of God yt she should be apparyled beautifully with pure whit silk, or
with most fine raines.

11 None other are these fair pleasant and godly raines after the clear
diffinition of the holy ghost here, but the pure iustificatio^s of the holy
saints which have been since the beginning, whereof they have been called
rightuous. Of their faith in Jesus Christ is this pure garment of innocence,
clernesse, and righteousness. Through faith was Abraham reputed for rightuous,
so was Abell, Enoche, and Noe, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, Moses, Iosue, and
Gedeon, Samuel, David, and Helias, with the universal number of the saints,
Prophets, and fathers. So was Zacharias, Simeon, Joseph, and John Baptist,
Peter, James, John, and Paul, Lazarus, Lucas, Agabus, and S^eeuen, with all
the Apostles, martirs, and other true believers. Through faith (says S. Paul)
have the saints ouerco^e kingdoms, wroght righteousness, obtained the promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the vyolence of fire, with such like.
Sense the beginning of ye world have the true and faithful prepared them
selves unto this heavenly marriage, and in the resurrection of the rightuous
shall it be perfectly solemnised, celebrated, and magnified, such time as they
shall appear in full glory with Christ.

In this latter time will the true christian church, when all the world shall
confess his name in peace, be of her full perfect age and apt unto this
spousage.

Now shall she in meeknes of spirit appoint her self to meet her bridgrome in
the air, for with a glad heart does she now here his voice. At that day shall
she appear as the beautiful bride prepared to the spouse, accompanied with the
wise maidens, the unwise neither having oil nor light for ever rejected.

THE TEXT.
1 And he said unto me. 2. Write. 3. Happy are they, which are called unto
the Lambs supper. 4. And he said unto me. 5. These are the true sayings of
God. 6. And I fell at his feet. 7. To worship him. 8. And he said unto me.
9. See thou do it not. 10. For I am thy fellovv servant. 11. And one of thy
brethren. 12. And of them that have the testimonye of Jesus. 13. Worship God.
14. For the testimony of Jesus. 15. is the spirit of prophecy.

The Commentarye.
1 And the Angel (says saint John) which showed unto me before, the fall of
the great whore, said at this present time unto me.

2 Seriouslye register this sentence followynge, that it may remain to their
comfort, which shall follow thee.

3 After a most happy and fortunable sort are they blessed, which having the
wedding garmente, the pure fine raines before named, are graciously prdestinate,
called, and accepted of the heavenly father, unto the everlasting supper of the
undefiled Lamb Jesus Christ, there to perticipat with him the eternal
refection both of soul and body. Satisfied shall I be (says David) without
end, when thy glory shall manyfestly appear. Not of corruptible meats and
drinks shall this supper be, but of incorruptible delights and of pleasures
that shall never fail. Nothing shall be there profane, void or uncomely, but
al things, pure, clean true, steadfast, godly, and perfect. The^ shall the
meetinges be heavenly, and the clippinges without deformity. The bride shall at
that day rejoice with her everlasting spouse, and the daughters of Sion shall
behold the true Solomon in full glory, accompained with his holy how should
of Angels and Saints.

4 And the aforesaid Angel (says S. John) said thus unto me.

5 These words which I last told thee (frinde John) are not mine, but they
are the true sayings of gods ow^ mouth. So much the rather they are to be
believed as most certain and sure, that they are of him whos^ universal
language is the ve^itie ^nfayned.

9 As I heard the Angel speak thus unto me (says saint John) I fell down by
and by at hi^ fete flat upon the ground, minding to have worshypped him. So
wonderful were the secret^^ of god whom he there declared unto me, and the
mysteries so joyful unto my soul, that in a manner I clearly forgote my self.

7 (...) hand I was at the point to have worshipped the messe^ger for the Lord,
and the Angel for the La^be, otherwise th^^ did Abraham, not of ignorance,
but of forgetful rejoicing.

8 But in no wise would the Angel suffer me so to do, but gently he said thus
unto me.

9 Se thou do no such homage unto me a creture, as peculiarly belongs unto
god the creator of all. So great is thy self, and such as thou art, I am, and
so excellent a creature of God. Truth it is that I am the aungel of the
Lord, and so are you also, so many as bear witness of the same verity.

10 And as concerning mine own person, I am but thy fellow servant. For, he
that is ^hy god, is also my god, and he that is thy Lord and master is also
mine. Indifferently are we both created for his servants, and admitted for
his messengers.

11 Of thy brethren am I one by creation.

12 So am I also both a brother and fellow of al them that have the faithful
testimony of Jesus. For like as they by his godly appointment are messengers
thereof to ye world, so am I now unto thee here for the same.

13 worship not me therefore, which am but a creature, but worship thy Lord
god, for sending by me this message of health unto thee. Though Loath Jacob,
Iosue, Gedion, Tobias, and other fathers of the old law, gave worship unto the
Angels whom God sent unto them in message, yet shalt thou not do so unto me
now, considering that at this time Gods son has taken the nature of man,
has raised it from death has set it upon the fathers right hand, and therein
has sent from thence the spirit of reconciliation unto men. By this are ye
become no longer in feriours unto us, but equal with us infauour and dignitye.
No longer are ye strangers and foreners, but citizens of heaven and the very
househould children of God.

14 And as for the testymony of Jesus Christ, which both I unto you, and you to
ye world have to utter, it is ye very sprit of prophisi, and on message of
health committed unto us both. The true spirit of god it is that bears witness
of Christ, both in the law and prophets (for none can say that Jesus is the
lord, but in the holy ghost) and in that spirit do we now make mention also of
him. This is the spirit of adoption whereby ye ackonwledge god for your dear
father. This spirit assertaineth your spirit that ye are become his children
believing in his name.

15 And in this spirit do I admonish thee John, by this present Revelation
which is a Prophicy, and in thee al them that have the same faith, to
acknowledge, worship and confess the said Jesus Christ, as we do now, for
the only Lord and savior of the world. Not only shall thou be by the plain
manifestation of this prophesye an Angel but also by an excellent prerogative
of singular grace above all thy fellows, a Ppophete. After the manner of this
Angel did Paul and Barnabas utterly refuse to have honor given them of the
people at Listra. Peter would in no case suffer Cornelius the noble Centurion
to worshype him. Contrariwise the Antichrist of Rome not only suffers but
also commands straightly such homage of honor evermore to be given to his
holy fatherhood. Yea, he is not ashamed to co^straine noble Emperors to k^sse
his filthy feet, kings with cappe and knee to hold his steroppes, and the
greatest princes of the world to wait upon his Mule.

Great pardons has he given to the worshyppinge of Idols and of old rotten
bones, threatening most terrible death unto them that would not at his
commandment do the same. At Geneua was honorablye worshypped an Asses tail,
and at Tholosa a young boys shoo, great in dulgences granted unto them both.
But let not him and his mitred Mahomets think easily to avoid the indignation
so God when he shall call them to accountes, with their craftye distincton of
Latria Dulia, and hyperdulia, whom ye scripture knows not. Notwythstanding in
this is not utterly inhibited mutual reverence betwixt man and man, for so much
as Paul wills the faithful to prevent each other in honor giving. Necessary
it is that they first honor God, and then for his sake that they procecute
their neighbors with such christen benevolence, as the comlines of humanity
requires. The gospel never forbids such politic manner as norisheth mutual
friendship, yet ^oth it not give them unto Idols.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savv heaven open. 2. And behold, a white horse. 3. And he that sat
upon him. 4. Was called faithful and true. 5. And in righteousness did he
judge. 6. And make battle. 7. His eyes were a flama of fire. 8. and on his
head were many cro^vnes, 9. And he had a name written. 10. That no man knevv
but him self. 11. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood. 12. And
his name is called the word of God.

The Commentarye.
1 After this (says Saint John) I saw heaven open. Uery evident were the
mysteries of the Lord unto me. I perceived that through faith and meekness,
great knowledge men might have of the secrets of God. Open is heaven evermore,
when gods word is freely taught. And closed up it is again when that is laid
aparte.

2 And behold a pure white horse appeared in this misterye, which betokneth
the true ministers or perfect preachers of the Apostles doctrine, as is
mentioned before in the sixth chapter hereof, ye godly nature of these is (as is
specified in Paul) to carry the glorious verity of the Lord the world over
and to publishe it before the governors and peoples of the nations.

3 He that sat upon this white horse, or assisted these preachers by his
spyrite, was the eternal son of God, which has evermore been called in the
scriptures faithful of his promise, and true of his word. Rightuous is Lord
(says David) in all his ways, sure of his sayings, and perfect in all his
works.

4 None other thing could he teach but the verity, which was the veryty it
self, nor yet they which had his godly spirit.

5 According to true equity has he judged, in utterly condemning by his word
ye proud sinagog of satan, and in exalting again his own meek spirited
church.

6 First in his own person, as a mighty warrior did he battle with the
Devil, and by his death o^ercame him. Now by his faithful preachers does he
rightuouslye ouerturne his kingdom by virtue of the same graciously sending
them forth in this latter age under the ^ipe of this white horse. For horses of
lustty courage are his faithful servants after Abacuk. Yea, and whiter are
they then either snow or milk, by their true belief after Jeremy. I (says the
Lord) which am the word of righteousness, do valianaly battle to save you.
For none other purpose fights he, but to the intent to preserve his elects.

7 The eyes of this horseman were as the pure flame of fire, effectual,
mighty, and clear. And these are not, only his godly understanding, and
knowledge, whereby he perceives, decerneth, and judges clearly al things, but
also the universal graces of the holy ghost. Upon one sure stone, says Zachary
(who^ Paul calls Christ) shall be seven eyes, which are the seven spirits
of god. With these eyes lightneth he the herts of godly men, and kindles their
minds to the true love of God. His word is a lantern to their feet, and a
light to their paths. Pure is his commandment, giving clearness to the
sight. Open you mine eyes lord (says David) and then shall I well perceive ye
wonderful mysteries of thy doctrine.

8 Upon his head (says S. John) were also many beautiful crowns, like as
were before in figure upon the head of Iosedech the high priest in token y^
christ is the high king over al worlds, regions and ages. For he is ye Lord of
hosts, and the eternal king of glory, he was constitute a principal
governor our Sion, ye holy hyl of the lord. He gives prosperity to kings,
and has their victori in his hands. In him as in their head, have all his
elect members their crowns. Both with mercy shall he crown them and also with
long kindness. For Peter, has he laid up a crown of incorruptible glory,
for John, a crown of lif, for Paul a crown of righteousness, and so forth. For
the whole conflict, victori, and triumph of the saints, is of him alone.

9 He had a special name written, or eternally of god his father appointed,
whose excellent majesty no creature understanding was able of his own
industry to comprehend. Omnipotent was this name, marvelous, honorable holy,
and terrible, Adonay, Emanuel, a name of salvation, and a name above al names.
Yea, ye Lord was his name, or ye Lord our rightuous maker.

10 No man knows this name, save he him self only, and they to whom he has
showed it. Neither flesh nor blo^d, gentill nor Jew, hipocryte nor false
christian, has rightl^ knowdn it. No, though they have said, lord, lord. For
none ca^ say jointly yt Jesus is the lord, but in ye holy ghost, which opens
al godly verity. In this name is registered ye elect number of gods adoptiue
children, who^ ye world, does not know for his, nor never will do.

11 And this lord was beutifully adorned with a vesture fair and comely, but it
was al dipped in blood, so^ have taken this garment for his righteousness wherein
has appeared all auengementes over his enemies, Some have supposed it to be his
church, all bloody in his martires and constant witnesses. But upon their side
am I which have taken it for his flesh, for that did he on as a vesture. So
sore has that vesture ben stryped, and so greeuo^slye-wounded, that from the
sole of the foot to the ouermost part of ye head, was no whole place in it.
This mighty captain is he which came from Edom and Bosra* his clothes be
sprinkled with red. His apparel is all spotted, much like unto his raiment
that treads in the wine press. For his mortal nature suffered most
paynefull death. Alone tr^de he down ye wine press in th^se days, and had no
man to help him. Alone was he wounded for our offenses, alone were our
punishments laid upon him, with whose strips we are now heled.

12 And his name (says s. John) besides yt is spoken before, is ye eternal word
of god. He is called ye word which was in ye beginning wc god, which furnished
ye heuens above, which ordered al things beneth and now last of al took flesh,
restoring, lightning, quickening, heling, and saving all them yt truly believes
in him,

THE TEXT.
1 And the warriors which were in heaven, 2. follovved him. 3. upon white
horses, 4. clothed with white and pure silk, 5. and out of his mouth went a
sharp svverd, 6. that with it he should smite the Heathen, 7. And he shall
rule them with a rod of iron, 8. and he trod the wine fat of the
fierceness, 9. of the wrath of almighty God, 10. And has on his vesture,
11. and on his thigh, a name written, 12. king of all kings, 13. and Lord of
all Lords.

The commentary
1 The valiant warryours or constant ministers which were in heaven or in the
holy household of faith, did follow him in a comely order upon fair white
horses.

2 According to his scriptures did they lead their conversation. After the
rules of his godly discipline did they live. They fashioned the^ selves to ye
example yt was showed the^ in ye mount.

3 None other are these horses, then their corruptible bodies prepared to
battle. They which are of Christ does mortify the vices and lusts of their
flesh, they tame their carnal affections. Like perfect men they bridle their
bodies to the obedience of ye spirit. So to become ye true servants of
righteousness and no more to do service unto sin. White are these horses for
ye pure word of ye Lord which governs the^ No marvel though these myghtie
souldyers follows ye Lord, considering he is so often in the scriptures called
the lord of hosts. A like similitude did the servant of Helizens ye Prophet
behold in a vision throug Gods permission in Dotham.

4 This army of the Lord here were appareled preciously with pure white silk or
fine raynes, betokening ye pure innocensy which they have in Christ their
general captain. Not carnal is this armor, but evermore spiritual after ye
doctrine of S. Paul. Though we walk in the flesh (says he) yet do we not
fight after a fleshly manner. For the weapons of our war are not carnal
things, but things mighty in God. Bewtifull and fair is my well-beloved (says
the eternal Solomon) for his soul pleases his Lord, and is loved again of
him. His favor and his mercy is upon his holy ones, he has a loving respect
unto his chosen number. A notable singe of victory in the faithful are also
these white horses and vestures, for before they are called iustificacions of the
saints.

5 And out of his Godly mouth (says the Text) proceeded forth a two edged
swerd, which is the fearce judgment of his mighty word. By this effectual
swerd are the faithful beleuers wounded unto life, and ye unbelievers to the
death of dampnacion. For unto some it is the savor of life, and unto some
again ye savor of death unto death. By this swerd also shall the dead
branches be cut from the vine, and the corrupted members from ye whole body.
The gotes shall be divided from the lambs, and the evil from ye rightuous Oh,
how sharp, fierce, and tirrible will this sentence of ye lords indignacio^ be at
that day? Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Yet shall it be unto
ye faithful a perpetual power, victory, and triumph over their enymies.

6 Over and besides all this, goes that swerd from his eternal mouth to ye
intent he should therwt correct their Heathen, or reform^ the^ of their
heathinish life. So that if they will not at ye wholesome admonishme^ts of his
word repent and amend their old conversation, yt than they should be condemned
by the same for their wilful contempt. If men will not turn (says David) he
shall whet his sword against them. He will sharpen it as the lightening and
aquite his enymies their wickedmes.

7 This mighty Lord shall rule them with a strong rod of iron, which is the
invincible verity. This is the rod of right order, the septure of the
kingdom, and the wand of power, whom the Lord sent from Sion to have sway
among our enymies. So strong is this septure, that it will not bow. No place
will it give to ye contrary part. If they will not therewith be ordered, he
shall break them in pieces as ye potter does his pot, in such manner as they
never shall recover again.

8 The winefat of ye great fierceness and sore displeasur of almighty God,
shall he tred down with power. More grievously shall they be opressed at this
latter coming by his set sentence, tha^ they were before at Jerusalem by
Uespasianus and Titus. The vineyarde of the Lord of hosts was the house of
Israel. This brought he out of Egypt by strong hand. Thereof looked he to
have had grapes, and it brought him forth briars and thistles. Their vines
were as the wild vines of Sodom. Bitter were their grapes as the poison of
Dragons, and as the cruel gaul of Adders. Therefore will he break the hedge, and
throw down the wall, that it may be trodden under foot.

9 Great anguishe shall be upon the earth in his fury, and wrath upon that
people in his anger. They shall fall on the edge of the swerd and be dispersed.
Both here shall they have grief, and also in the world to come.

10 This victorious horse man has upon his white vesture besprinckeled with
blood, which is his innocent ma^hood crucified.

11 And upon his tender thigh (whom some call his church, some his scriptures,
as flesh of his flesh, or spirit of his spirit) this name of magnificence
written.

12 In both of them is it manifestlye expressed yt he is both king of kings,
and also Lord of Lords, the great guide of right governors, and yt monarke
of godly magistrates. By kings is his generation discribed of Matthew in the
posterity of David, and of Luke by faithful fathers unto Adam which had the
first promise of health. Both does the godly acts of his natural ma^hood and
also the holy spirit whom he left here to the comfort of all true believers,
declare that he is the eternal attorney of God, his Apostles and true
servant affyrming ye same. And these are his garmente and thigh. By his death
is our nakedness covered, which are his mystical members. Of his spirit is
our strength, which are the generation seeking the Lord of Jacob.

13 Both has he given him of God the high seat of David his father, and also
the universal power in heaven and in earth, as he by whom all things were
first created. For his power is an everlasting power, and his kingdom such as
shall never perish. And all this is comprehended in yt he is called the son
of the highest, and in that he alone has immortality, inhabyting the light
that no man can attain, to whom be honor and everlasting empire, Amen. In
this vesture and thigh are his titles written as to his only behou e, that no
man should of presumption usurp them neither by supremite nor vycarage, his
church and posterity acknowledging ye same evermore.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savve an Angel, 2. stand in the sun, 3. and he cried with a loud
voice, 4. saying to all souls that fly by the midst under the heaven, 5.
Come and gather your selves together, 6. unto the supper of the great God, 7.
that ye may eat the flesh of kings, 8. and of high captain, 9. and the
flesh of mighty men, 10. and the flesh of horses, 11. and of them that sit on
them, 12. and the flesh of all free men and bondmen, 13. both of small and
great.

The Commentary.
1 After this revelation I saw (says saint John) a beautiful Angel,
betokening not only the Apostles but all other faithful ministers in the
word, else, having the Apostles spirit.

2 In the sun steadfastly stood this Angel which signifies Christ yt clear
sun of righteousness, ye bright morning star in the midst of the cloud,
the express Image of God and substance of his glory. In the strong faith of
his name and word stand these worthy witnesses against the whole swarm of
Antichrists, not once remouyng their foot from ye rock, which is Christ also,
for no persecution nor death.

3 These has cried and yet shall cry still to the worlds end, with a
mighty loud voice or a sure constant spyrite. Earnestly shall they protest
and publish unto the fethered fowls of the air, that fly by the midst of
heaven, by whom are understood the meek sprited multitude, made spiritual
by faith and by knowledge of heavenly mysteries.

4 These as flying birds are taken up from vnpure delights, leaving at their
tails all corruptible things. They lift up them selves above them selves, and
have their co^uersatio^ in heaven unfeignedly. Yea, these are those gentil
souls whom ye heavenly father abou^dantly feeds without their deseruings.
Such a soul was faithful Abraham in Mesopotamia, Moses in Synai, Helias in
Carme, Danyell among the Lions the children of Israel in the wilderness, Paul
in Damascus, John in Pathmos, and many other more which afterward became Angels
also in the sun, or teachers in Christ. And this not only has been, but
shall be also still to the worlds end the tenor of their cry.

5 Come you that have received the verity, from the heavy and careful cures
of this world and gather your selves together into the unity of one faith and
spirit. Knit your selves together in christian love which is the cheayne of
perfection, and let the peace of God which passes all wit keep your hearts
and vnderstandyngs in Christ Jesus, that ye may be counted worthy your
christien vocation.

6. And so prepare your selves as his louinge frindes unto the bounteous supper
of the almightye God (which is the eternal refection of soul) that ye may be
fed with his most precious delicates. Learn of the word of God what is his
heavenly will, and follow it in your works: Flee thereby from all worldly lusts,
live soberly, justly, and godly here, abiding his glorious apera^ce.

7 So order your selves in living and doctrine; yt ye may eat ye flesh of
kings, or take from ye worldly governors by your godly preaching al yt is
filthy and carnal.

8 Consume ye fierce flesh of ye captayns in plucking the^ from cruelty and
malice.

9 Denowre ye froward flesh of me^ that be mighty in power and possessions,
cause the^ to leave their superfluous vanities

10 Spare neither horses nor yet those that sit upon them, but byte both their
fleshes hard. Rebuke both the beastly Antichrist and ye prince yt is ruled by
him.

11 Pluck from those belly Gods, bishops and priests their pompes, and
lecherous pleasures, and from those yt follow them in superstitions, the cruel
persecuting of innocents.

12 See that no flesh be left untouched, neither of free men nor bond men,
rulers nor subjects, masters nor servants: Neither of small nor great, poor
nor rich, low nor high, but be doing with the^ all. Play as does the Egles and
other ravening fouls. Where as ye see a dead carcass, or body without faith and
spirit, thither resort ye apace.

Tell every man his right office. Exhort the king to be learned, and to live in
the fear of ye Lord. The prince to be wise, and the Judge to be godly. Bid the
graunde captains be faithful to their commons, and the great rich men more
merciful to the poor. Commau^de the carnal hypocrites no longer to
dissemble, and their vndiscreets clients no longer to follow the^ in darkness.
Require them no longer to ney after their neighbors wives like ^ancke stoned
horses, and the other no longer to pamper them up to all beastlye vices: Charge
the governors to rule faithfully, and the common people to obey louyngly. See
that the woman obey their husbands, the children their fathers, the servants
their masters. And again that the men be loving to their wives, gentyle to
their children, and favorable to their servants. Open the four cornerde
sheet as did Peter. Sley all manner of four footed beasts of the earth,
vermin, worms, and fowls of the air, and eat them. Rebuke them with patience
whatsoever they be, tyra^ts, persecutors, murderers, glottons, Antichrists,
extortioners, ribalds, Idolatours, thieves, and pluck from them their filthye
and carnal customs. Ye shall eat the flesh (says Ezechiell) of the
worthyes, and drink the blood of the princes of the land, of the wethers, of
the lambs, of the gotes, and of the oxen that be al slain at Basan.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savv the beast. 2. And the kings of the earth, and their warryers. 3.
Gathered together. 4* To make battle. 5. Against him that sat upon the
horse. 6. And against his soldiers. 7. And the beast was taken. 8. And with
him that falls prophet 9. That tought miracles before him. 10. With which he
deceived them that received the beasts mark. 11. And the^ that worshipped his
Image. 12. These both werre cast quick into a ponde 13. Of fire burning with
brimston. 14. And the remnaunt were slain with the svvord of him that sat
upon the horse 15. Which svvord proceeds out of his mouth. 16. And all the
souls were stuffed with their flesh.

The commentary
1 Anon after this I beheld (says S. John) the great horible beast that rose
out of the sea, that battailed with the Saints, and that bear the great
whore of Babylon which is the general Antichrist.

2 I saw also following him, the cruel kings of the earth and their host of
bloody warriors, the mitered bishops of his beastly kingdom with their great
bellied monks and priests, the malicious tirants of the world, with their mad
moodye magistrates and slaves.

3 These gather them selves together in one mind of mischief, and has done
since Christ's assencion. They muster in array as did Pharaoes host, they buskle
together as did Cayphas hyered knights in the dark with fire brands and weapons.

4 To make fierce war or very sharp battle against the most valiant captain
Jesus Christ, which sat upon the aforesaid whit horse, and against mighty
stomaked soldiers of his faithful army of true christians. Never was the holy
gospel yet sincerely taught, the glory of God proponed, and the inordinate
livings of men reprehended, but such uproar of hipocrits, and such tumulte of
tyrants has followed.

5 The word of the Lord is always of one nature, to be the mark of
contradiction and rock of reproach. Horsemen for the more part are these,
malicious warriors against Christ and his word, sturred, provoked, and set
foreward by ye beastly bishops. None other caused Herod and Pylate to put
Christ unto death but Annas and Caiphas. Non other moved Felix the president of
Jury to emprison Paul, but the puffed up prelate Ananias. Traianus ye Emperor
would never so extremely have persecuted ye Christian church, nor yet other
cruel tyrauntes ever since; had they not been propped forewarde by such
pampred palfraies of the diuil.

6 Not only against Christ do they move this bold battle, but also against
those that faithfully believe his word, which are the dear members of his
mitticall body. No blasphemies, false miracles, lies, nor obprobryous slanders
and rebukes spare they, to blemish thy opinion to the world, besides the most
cruel kinds of death. The captain of this wicked army is that tirrible beast
whom Danyell also beheld in a vysio^, with iron teeth devouring, and with
nails of brass distroying, and stamping the residue under his feet.

7 This horrible beast (says S. John) this filthy body of Antichrist,
comprehending all the great adversaries of the Lord was taken suddenly.

8 And with him the false Prophet, or beast rising out of the earth, betokening
his false preachers.

9 Which wrought vain miracles before him as did Iannes and Iambres the
sorcerers of Egypt before Pharao, in counterfaiting Moses and Aaron. Yea, by
their tra^substauntiacio^s, they can take from bread the substance, the
accydents still remaining. They can hold the shadow when ye body is gone,
besides that they can do in Purgatory and hell by their sacrifices of
satisfaction.

10 With such deceitful miracles and lying signs shall those be deceived by
them that has by a false believe received into their consciences the unwholesome
mark of ye beast, or such a corrupt faith as shall cause their damnacion.

11 And they in like case shall be seduced by the^, yt has worshipped ye beastly
Image of that great Antichriste, or inclyned to any worldly potentate in the
vpholdinge of his false religion. So sealed Cayphas the hearts of the wauerynge
multitude of the Jews with that markynge iron of Satan that they could be
but his ministers. In no case could they save Jesus, but Barrabas the
murderer. Though they received him joyfully not long before into the city with
Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini, yet could they at that time but cry,
Crucifige, Crucifige eum No they had power to do none other but to crucify
him in deed which is to worship the beasts Image or to follow ye wicked
intent of yt beastly generation, as their faithful clyants does yet still to
this day.

12 Both these twain (says the text) the head and the body, the beast with
his false prophet, were cast quick by the mighty judgment of god into a deep
lake of most terrible fire boylynge with stinkinge brimstone. For vnbewares
shall destruction light upon that cursed generation, according to the faithful
request of David, and suddenly shall they fall into their own mischief.

13 Without warning shall the great day of ye Lords indignation light upon
them, and bring the^ to naught for ever. Hastily shall death attache the^ for
their wickedness sake, and quick shall they drop into hell with Chore,
Dathan, and Abyron. As a waightye stone or lead shall they sink to ye
bottom, and the pit shall swallowe them up for their exceeding rebellion. For
like as they stood up against Moses. and Aaron, so has this beastely
generation against God and his Christ. Therefore are they here specifyed after a
most strange and terrible sort to be thrown forth. For three causes may it
be that they are called here quick. One is in yt their stinking remnaunt shall
at that dreadful day be a live after the doctrine of Paul. An other, in
that they have wilfully, upon a set mallyce resisted ye known verytie,
detortinge it to their own propre lust. If I had not (says Christ) done among
them such works as never man did, they should be fautelesse. But they have
certienly known the^, yet have they hated, both me and my father. The Paganes
not believing, are judged all ready, and go to hell dead, where as they knowing
the will of their Lord and not doing it, shall after an other sort be plaged.
Fire shall they have with heat, and brimstone with stink. The third is, in
that they shall have palpable darkness, with weping and gnashinge of teethe,
their worm neither dying nor yet their fire going out. And like as ye Devil
was thrown forth at the death of Christ, and soon after that the prelates and
Pharisees of the Jews, as the head with the body, so shall at that time
Antichrist with his church, the Pope with his clergy, and Mahomete with his
sects, as ye head with the body also.

14 The residue (says saint Johan) as Kings, captains, strong, weak, high,
low, great, and small, were slain with ye sharp two edged sword, of him
that yet to this hour sytteth upon ye horse, which is Christ Jesus in ye
gloryfied nature of his manhood.

15 This mighty sword proceeded out of his reverend mouth. For it is the
strong word of him that lives for ever, and has in it both sprit and life.
Necessary it is for the^ that has been either seduced by their crafts, or
coacted by their threateninges, to be towched with his sword. For he that is
not thereby slain from sin and the world, shall not rise up to the life which
is in Christ. He that is not with him dead from the ordinances of men, but
still is led with tradicions, can not be clear from the curse, nor yet be
the heir of promise. Therefore must they be slain dead with this sword, either
to repentance and amendment of life, or else by the hard judgments of the
same to eternal dampnation.

16 Which way so ever it be, all the aforesaid fowls, or peoples whom God
has raised from this worlds affections, shall be fulfilled with their flesh.
Whether they be saved or dampened they will most highly rejoice, co^sidringe it
is the pleasure of GOD. Both ways shall they be satisfied. I^ they be saved,
than must they be glad, for that their number is so much the more increased,
and for ye their selves has escaped like danger. If they be dampened, than
must they rejoice also to se the right justice of God. For the rightuous shall
make mirth beholding the vengeance, and shall wash their hands in the blood
of the wicked, all flesh abhorring to look upon them.

The xx. Chapter.
THe last enterprise of Satan the common adversary of man, does this chapter
following declare, fetching an original from the beeginning of Christ's
spiritull kingdom to conclude with the whole for our necessary instruction.
As a brief rehearsal of all that is in a manner spoken before was this unto
John, least he should of obliuiousnesse forget (as man's nature is
forgetful) these wonderful mysteries and singular premonishments of the Lord,
most expedient to be known of his church. That she might by them, s^
aforehande the wily crafts of the devil and his members, and to beware of
them. Besides that to take courage, patiently to suffer their cruel
persecucions. For a thing often rehearsed departs not so soon ye memory, as yt
is but once told. Which caused this Evangelist not only here in this place*
but also in his Gospel and first Epistle often to repeat the sayings, least
he should seem fayntely to pass them over, and because ye reader should the
more earnestly mark them.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savve an Angel 2. Come down from heaven 3. having the key of the
botto^lesse pyt. 4. And a great chain in his hand 5. And he took the Dragon,
the old serpent (which is the Devil and Sathanes), 6. And he bound him a
thousand years, 7. And cast him into the bottomless pit, 8. And he bound
him, 9. and set a seal on him, 10. that he should dis^eyue the people no
more, 11. till the thousand years. were fulfilled, 12. And after that must
he be losed 13. for a little season.



The Commentary.
1 IN the end of these revelations before rehearsed (says S. John) saw I in a
secret vysion an Angel of most singular bewtye; betokning Jesus Christ the
Angel of Gods eternal covenant.

2 From the high heaven above came this Angel down unto the earth, sent of
the everlasting father. For neither spared that loving father to send his most
dear and only son at the time appointed, nor yet the obedient son to
submit him self to the shape of a servant and so become manne. ^i^t^riously
did he overcome both death and the Devil, as appears by his great miracles,
resurrection and asce^cion. And like as he came down first of all with a
p^ssible meekness, so came he down ater yt with an impassyble and inuysible
mayiestie. Sodeine was this latter coming down and most marvelous to ye
world, such time as he by his heavenly spirit replenished his Apostles with
all necessary knowledge. And the noise thereof was heard the world over, tuche
time as they did preach it abroad. Si^sibly was this coming down expressed in
Saul, and olso the mighty power thereof, when he throw him to the ground,
and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

3. This Angel had the keye of the bottomless pet or power over hell, and a
great chain in his hand or full liberty to restrain the spiritual
adversary. For unto him was given all power in heaven and in earth.

4 Authority had he to destroy him that had rule over death, which was than
the Devil. Though I was dead (says Christ) yet am I now a live (...) ever and
ever, having the keys both of death and hell.

5 And according to his authoritys (says saint John) he took the fierce
Dragon in hand that was wont so maliciously to noy, that old wily serpent
that of so long time has with infinite crafts deceived, which is the very
devil himself or malicious accuser of man, and is called Satan, or the
cruel aduersarye as he is most worthy. For both is he a spightfull adversary
to God, evermore withstanding his will, and also unto man in plucking him back
from following ye same.

6 Like a most valiant captain fell he upon that strong armed house watcher,
and overcame him, depriving him both of weapon and spoil. He laid a snare for
the outrageous Behemoth, and caught him. He ringed the nose of the great
Leuiathan, and so brought him under. Yea, he bound that malicious satan and
made him sure for a thousand years space, to make of the vessels of wrath ye
vessels of mercy. This did he by his strong word of couenaunte, whom he made
for a thousand generations. And a full perfourmaunce it is of Gods first
promise for man's behoue, that Christ should tread down the head of the
serpent. For a thousand years was this restraynte. Mark besides the
mystery, the time from the ascension of Christ unto the days of Siluester the
second Bishop of Rome of that name, and ye shall all find that it was from
Christ's nativity a complete thousand, after all the Historiographers. By
such Nicromancy as he learned of a Sarazin in Spain obtained he the papacy,
and as witnesses John Wycleaue in his book De solutio^e sathane, in Christ's
vicarship he lowsoned that devil who^ Christ had before shut up, and set him
again at large to deceive a fresh. Consider for the time that he was thus
bound, the constaunt says of the christians, and the invincible hearts of
thyr martyrs, and ye shall find them far different from them which has been
since. He was then so weak, so infatuate and babysh, that not only wise men,
learned men, and strong men, did set him light, but also young maidens,
children, and tender infantes in a manner did laugh him to scorn, and set all
his subttle slaights at naught. Euidente will this be to all them that shall
read ye lives of ye holy martirs and saints of ye primative church. Like a
bird was that crooked Leuiathan in those days so tamed, that no man set by him
at all.

7 For not only was he then bound but also thrown down with violence into
the bottomless pytte. For that time might they go safe upon the adder and
scorpion, they might tread under their feet both the Lion and Dragon. Both the
Devil and his Angels might they then set at naught.

8 Yea, he was shut up, and so was double bound. So was his power taken from
him, that upon neither side could he harm. Neither was he able to pluck them
from Christ's fayeth by flatteringe prosperity, nor yet by urgent adversity.
Neither could tyra^nies nor herisies for that time preuail against the Gospel.

9 Finally he set a sure seal upon him which was his word, will, and
commau^deme^t, yt he should no more of his own presumption deceive ye people with
errors and Idol worshipings yt believed in him, or that were predestinat to be
saved, till such time as the before said thousand years were fully aco^plished,
or as he should permit him thereunto for their vnbeleues sake.

10 By this does the holy Ghost, here assartayne us that Christ has so
suspended the subtilties, and suppressed ye venemouse crafts of Satan for his
electes, that he can not hurt them in one heir of their head. For only is all
this spoken for the chosen number. No part has therein the reprobate vessels,
never was the Devil from the^ yet speared, bat has been in all ages with the^
famyliar. Only are the consciences of the rightuous by this freedom quieted,
all other still left in captivity. This revelation respects in this point
the inward kingedom of Christ, or the hidden congregation of the faithful,
whom the world beholds with froward eyes, and not the blasynge Sinagoge of
Antichrist whom it laugheth upon so freshly.

11 None otherwise were they for all those thousand years vexed of Satan and
his curssed members, but as was pacient Job, in their outward substance and
bodies. No power had he upon their souls all that long season.

12 And where as it is here said yt after these thousand years Satan must be
let lose again for a certain teme. Consider it to be the promise of God,
which must in effect be fulfilled. Not yt he shall again lose him which has
once bound him for ever, vut yt he shall permit other to do it according to
his threatening promise, ye unthankfulness and mallyce of wicked doers
requiring none other. In ye end of these thousand years reigned in ye papacy
at Rome the before named Necromanser Siluester, which was both a black Mouncke
and also a Frenchman borne. This beastly Antichriste boasting himself not
only to be Christ's vicar in earth, but also to be equal with him in majesty
and power, set f^rst the Devil at large by his Necromancy, which took from the
hearts of mem the living word of the Lord lest they should be saved. From
thence forth were not the holy scriptures regarded, but old wives tales and
Jewish fabels most highly reputed. Them came in Canno^s, Decrees, Sentences,
Sinodals, Decretals, Cleme^tines, Exextrauagauntes with other Popysh ^awes, the
gospel claene set apart. About this time ollo (as master John Carrion writes
in his cronicle) floryshed the Lordly order of cardinals, and grew into a
wonderful estimacion in ye world. The universities were the^ furnished with
learned me^, mightily to prove the Pope Christ's vicar in earth, and the only
husband and ouerseer of his church. General counsels were often gathered to
dyspute with all Christendom, that none might dispense in matters of conscience,
but he and they whom he should appoynte, and that he could in no wise err. No,
though when the candle were out, he went to bed with an other man's wife,
besides that I will not spaeke at this time. By this means got he an imperial
seat, and might make both Emperors and kings at his pleasure. And lykwyse
depose them when he lusted. He might distribute the kingdoms and give the
great possessions of this world to whom he lust^d, yea to his own bastardes
and chamberlynes as he did many times. For of the Devil he has received
them, where as Christ did vntterly forsake them. And for so much as he was the
high Priest after ye order of Satan, be might keep a general mart all his
life time, and sell all the Bishoprics, benefices, degrees, and offices of
his church. He might subject the gospel to his own interpretation, make new
constitutions, release sin for money, make every day new Gods, and do many
other things else. No end was then of their gaudyshe ceremonies, brawlynges in
the temple, Singings, bells, orgayns, Images, ornaments, lamps, candels, holy
days, shauings, surplesses, pater nosters, commanded (...), and such like,
that a man would have thought them Angels when they were very Devils in deed.
For the time that Satan was thus set at large by Christ's only vicar, was
there not one martyr allowed unless it were for deposinge of Princes, and
defending the liberties of holy churrh against them, lest their murderers and
thieves being within sacred orders, should be hanged with the secule^^, Mark
the condition of the time.

Before that Satan was thus at liberty, he remained secret in the hearts of
evil men. Now is he abroad in their outward ceremonies and rites, ready to be
seen of all the world, if pride, pomp, haughtiness, vain glory, may show
him, or if hypocrisy, error, supersticion, and all other diuellishnesse can
tell where he is. When Christ shut him up, he took Idolatry from the people,
the Pope has restored it unto the^ again in thus settinge him at large. In
this is he not denied to have been before this time abroad among ye wicked. For
little less then four hundred years before the end of this thousand, began ye
two Monarks of Antichrists kingedome the Pope in the West under Phocas the
Emperor, and great Mahomet in ye East under Heraclius, mark it in the
cronicles who so list. For before that time was not the Pope taken for the
universal head of the church, nor yet for Christ's vicar. And this could not
have been unless he had after some sort, been at liberty. Evermore has he
reigned without restraint among the ungodly.

But never so manifestly as then, his abhominacions accouonted for holiness in
the church. At this losinge of Satan or very defection as Paul calls it,
openly appeared the man of sin, the son of perdicion, and the aduersarye
which exaleth him self above all that bears the name of God. Faith wared so
fainte and charity so cold, ye scarce appeared one spark of ye truth. The
church beca^e a perverse generation, and her children were very unfaithful.
Before reigned be enermore in ye world, but never in Christ's congregation till
that time. Never was the universal church of Christ defiled with so many
abominable kinds of Idolatrye before.

13 But it so continued not long. For the text says, he was losed but for a
little season. Immediately after perceued Berengarius the Archedecon of Angoy in
France that all was well, and with Bruno the bishop impugned their realitie,
Ide^ptitie, and naturalitie in the sacrament, to bring it again to Christ's
clear institution. After him followed Waleranus ye bishop of Medeburge and did
the same in Germany, with many other prelates and doctors Consequently ensued
ye Waldeanes and Albigeanes pretending the Apostles life and doctrine, men
doubtless of a godly zeal and spirit, and of them the Antichrists slew more
then a hundredth thousand, besides an hundredth and four score whom they brent
because they would never abjure. What Guid^ Bonatus, Ioannes Semeca, Guilhelmus
de sancto amore, Marsilius Paduanus, Arnoldus de villa noua, Fra^ciscus
Petrarcha, and other learned men did against them after that, it were very long
to write. John Wicleaue in England, and John Husse in Boheme, men of excelent
life and learning, with diverse other more, replied earnestly against their
transubstanciacio^s and other sorceries. Laure^cius Ualla, denied the donation
of Constantyne. Iho^ Wassalus of Groaning in Friesland, called the light of the
world, condemned utterly their purgatory and pardons. Now last of all comes
Martyne Luther, Ioannes Oecola^padius, Huldricus Zwinglyus, Pomeranus,
Brencius, Mela^cthon, Bucer, Bullinger, with other sincere and godly deuynes,
and they turn over their universal kingdom. So merciful is the Lord to his
people in this latter end of the world, that by these and such other the
Antichrist is clearly uttered, and all his Hypocrisy disclosed. I doubt not but
within few days, the mighty breath of his mouth (which is his living
Gospel) shall utterly distroye him with his whole generation of shauelings, by
their faithful administration in the word.

THE TEXT.
1 And I saw seats, 2. and they satte upon them, 3. and the judgment was
given unto them. 4. And I saw the souls of them, 5. that were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, 6. and for the word of God. 7. which had not
vvorshiped the beast, 8. neither his Image, 9. neither had taken his mark upon
their foreheads, 10. or on their hands, 11. And they lived, 12. and reigned
with Christ, 13. a thousand years. 14. But the other of the dead men lived
not again, 15. till the thousand years were finished.

The Commentary.
1 Whiles the Dragon was thus tied up and thrown into the bottomless pit for a
^housand years space, a certain continuance of being, the elect had. Whose
peaceable estate and condition for that time the text here following declares,
by manner of recapitulation. After the before rehearsed vision of the serpent. I
beheld (says S. John) seats prepared without number. I saw the hearts of
faithful believers (which are the seats of wisdo^e after Stlomon) bewtifully
garnished with virtues by the preaching of you Apostles and other godly techers.
Uery peaceable and quietus were these seats. For though they had in the world
on every side tribulation, yet had they their contciences quieted in Christ.
They considered themselves partakers of the heavenly calling, and rejoiced in
hope of the glory of gods children.

2 Upon these seats sat they which are before called that people whom Satan
should no more deceine. They settled them selves in the wisdom ye god loves.
They grounded their dwelling with discreation in his understanding and knowledge.
Fast did they cleave to his louinge word. And for none adversity would they
move their foot from the hard rock which is Christ. Thus sat his people in
the beautiful seats of peace after Esaias in the tabernacles of trust, and in a
most plentuous rest, the deceuers and mockers put aparte.

3 And as they were thus quieted, the judgment or true understanding of the
Lords verytie was given unto them. Their senses were opened, and great
knowledge had they in the scriptures. The figures and prophesies that were hyd
to other, were manifest and open unto them. The Dark vale was removed from
Moses face, and the light of the laws appeared. They could then decerne good
from evil, light from darkness, and sweet from sower. The yoke was then
taken from them, and no longer were they subject to strangers. Dead men
perceived the secrets of the Book. The eyes of the blind might see without
mist of darkness.

They which before time were of an erroneous spirit, had than the right
understanding, and were learned in the law. In their inward parts was the
knowledge thereof planted of the Lord, and the truth written in their hearts,
he becoming their God and they his people. Because we should not separate the
dead from the quick, or the departed from the living, and so judge them
diverse, considering they both are of one God, and live by one spirit, being of
one hope and calling. The holy ghost does here couple them together, as sheep
of one pasture, feeding all of one spiritual meat, and drinkyng of one
spiritual rock accompanying the^, and as members of one mystical body of
Christ in this present revelation.

4 I also (says saint John) beheld in this secrets mystery of the spirit
the innocent souls of godly men and women, that were beheaded of cruel
tyrauntes for the faithful testimony of Jesus and the constante assercyon of
the true word of the Lord God. I perceived by the scriptures that his true
hearted witnesses remained not in death with the wicked, but passed through^ with
the rightuous from the death unto life, and had the life everlasting. They are
not forgotten with the ungodly, but they now follow the lamb, and dwell
where as he dwellethe. Else would Paul never so ernestlye have desired to be
dissolved from this flesh, and so to be with Christ.

5 Not only is this here spoken of them that were beheadded, and of none other
else, thought it seems so in the letter, but of all them that has dyed for
the verity. For than should Esaye, Ieremye, Ezechiell, Amos, Micheas,
Zacharye, Steven, and James the less, with all those that has been burned,
strangled, quartred, drowned, stoned, crucyfied, spytted, racked, ^layed,
boiled, stycked, shot through with arrows, and that has suffrid all other
terrible torments, be rekened to be none of that number. Beheaddyng is here
taken for depriuacion of life, like as the head is in scripture taken sometime
for the soul, sometime for the whole man.

6 For standing by Christ's verity, confessinge him God and man, did they
loose their lives, which was in the end no loss unto them but a profitable
winning. For unto such remains the crown of life, the delyghtes of Paradise,
and a seat with god.

7 These worshipped not the beastlye Antichrist, the very body of Satan. They
bowed not down, nor yet gave them selves to such wicked tradicions as that
carnal generation made for their beasty bellyes sake.

8 Neither reverenced they this prodigious Image, or such ungodly princes and
magistrates as (their true office set a part) did counterfeit him in cruelty
and diuelishnesse. But they rightlye considered with ye faithful Machabees and
apostles, that in such case it was much better to obey God than men.

9 Neither had they in their life time taken the printe of his filthy seal
upon their foreheades, professinge in their inward consciences those
diabolical rules.

10 Nor yet on their hands, agreeyng to use them in the outward conversation
of their bodies. No yoke would they draw with the infidels, thinking that
Christ could have no agreement with Beliall. For through faith they perceived
(as he that is of the spirit discerns all things) that though they seemed
glorious in the face of ye world, yet were they before God abominable
sacrilege. Diligently they searched the scriptures, and believed not all
spirits, but first proved them whither they were of God or nay. By that knew
they that the homage of soul ought to be given to none other than to one
living God alone, and that none other precepts of living were to be followed
of them, than Christ their savior had taught. All other traditions of me^
took they for strange doctrine, and for crafti colors of diuilish deceitfulnes

11 Therefore wha^ they were thought of the wicked to be dead, they lived in all
sweetness of ye spirit, in desire of his latter coming which shall be to their
double glory.

12 And they reigned with Christ the pastor and high bishop of their souls, not
only here were as they suffered with him for a thousand years space, but also
above where as he sits on the right hand of gods majesty seat, thousand
without end. Than reigns the godly number most of all, when they seem to ye
wicked least of all to reign, as when they suffer persecution and death for
Christ. For after none other sort reigns his church here, tha^ he reigned
before them, whose tryumphe was greatest upon the cross.

13 The thousand years of ye reign of the godly, stretches here no farther
than the thousand years of the fall of the ungodly, Christ's years also
deducted which is the head of his congregation. For as the one kingdom
decreased, the other always increased, very few Christian martyrs are
constaunt witnesses perceived, from thence forth. For as it appears by the
historye many were abiured and reca^ted (which was not seen in the former age)
and all in a manner, a small number of the poor, except, utterly renou^ced the
veritye, for the cruel behauior of the Antichrists. In these ii. sorts before
rehearsed, of them that sat upon the seats and of them that were beheadded for
the testymony of Jesus, is it to be marked, that all were not martyrs whom God
allowed for his in the prymatiue church, but that there were of both sorts. So
well was he accepted that mortyfied the desires of the flesh, and offered
himself a lyuinge sacryfyce unto God as he that gave his life for the verity.

14 But the residue (says saint John) or the other sort, called the dead men
for that they were not numbered with the ryghtuous, neither among them that sat
upon the seats, nor yet among them that were slain for the witness of Jesus,
lived not again after they were once dead, till the thousand years of their
death was thoroughly fulfilled. The time was when they which were dead through
sin, did hear the voice of the son of God. They fatihfuly believed ye word
thereof, and so it revived in him unto ye life everlasting, which was both ye
life and light of men. Where as ye froward con^e^ners of ye living word, having
their co^scie^ces sealed with ye beasts mark, remained still in their
infidelity, which is ye very death of ye soul, and so were by the right
judgment of God lost for ever. For the sin against ye holy ghost (which is a
resista^ce against ye manifest truth) shall neither be forgeuen in this world
nor yet in the world to come.

15 A time without end does this word till, cause this thousand here to be,
after the common usage of the scripture. Noe sent forth a Raven out of ye arc,
which returned not again till the waters were dried up, that is to say, he
never returned again. Joseph knew not Mary til she had brought forth her first
borne son. That is to say he never bodily knew her. Thou shalt not out of
prison till thou have paid ye uttermost mite.i. thou shalt never out. With an
hundredth of such places in the Bible.

THE TEXT
1. This is that first resurrection. 2. Blessed and holy is he, that has part
in the first resurrection. 3. For on such shall the second death have no
power, 4. But they shall be the prists of God and of Christ. 5. And shall reign
with him a thousand years.

The commentary
1 This is the first resurrection unto life, to rise from sin to repentance,
from ignorance to godly knowledge, and from darkness to faith. Through the
offense of one man entered sin into the world, and through sin death. Necessary
it is therefore, to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness. And so to
rise together with Christ, seeking the things which are above, and not upon
earth. For never shall they come to the second resurrection which is unto the
life everlasting, that will not rise by repentance unto a new life in him,
which is both resurrection and life.

2 Blessed is that man of ye Lord, yea, holy, just, and perfect may he be
reported also of all men, which has portion convenient in ye first
resurrection with David, Magdalene, Zacheus, and Peter. Happy are they which
hearing the word of God, retayneth it in their living. For they being renewed
with the glad tydinges of life, are depured by the spirit of Christ,
sanctified and so made the habitacles of ye holy Ghost.

3 Upon such Godly dysposed persons has the second death of the soul (which
is eternal dampnatio^) no manner of power nor effectual jurisdiction. For no
damnation can be unto them which are in Christ Jesus, not walking after ye
flesh. Though they have been great sinners, yet shall not their sins be to
them imputed, but in the resurrection of the wrightuous shall they rise to
immortalyte, and be as the very Angels in heaven. He yt has taken from the^
the poor of death, shall make the^ sure of eternal inheretau^ce with god.

4 They shall surely be the chosen priests of God the everlasting father and
of his eternal son Jesus Christ which are of the first resurrection.
Though they be here in the flesh, yet fight they not after the flesh, but they
shall follow ye governance of ye spirit, and give over their bodis for a living
sacryfice holy and acceptable unto God.

5 And thus shall they reign with christ their merciful savior and redemer for
ye space of ye thousand years before named. None other took they all yt long
season for their spiritual Messyas, their eternal King, their high Bishop for
all, their master, their Lord, their gyde, their light, and ye shepeherde of
their souls. None other would they acknowledge but him for their mediatoure and
atonement maker, neither Moses nor Samuel, Noe, Daniell, nor Job, Johan
Baptist, Mary, nor Peter. He only was unto them all wisdom, ryghtuousnesse,
holiness, and redemption. In none other name could they find health and
salvation but alone in his. Nothing pertayneth this unto the Popes mass
sayers, for they call upon many names with Ora pro nobis, and are of a far
other priesthode as we have declared before. In christ's kingdom is none
outward Priesthode, nor sacryfice to be made for sin. For he has with one
oblacio^ for all fully satysfied for ye sins of his elect number for ever. The
office of a Christian man now is only to offer up himself by ye denial of
himself, and by the mortificatio^ of his flesh. In the holy supper of the
Lord (which is a mutual participacio^ of his bodi and blood) is no new
sacrifice to be made, but only a faithful remembrance to be taught of that
full and perfect sacrifice that he made once for all, unless we will betray
him and crucify him again. The duty of a minister in Christ's congregation,
is with all study and diligence to labor in the holy word of God, be he
bishop, priest, Chaplayne, Pastor, or preacher. His ministration is great
labor and no dygnitie, pain and not pride or arrogancy. And having his food
and raiment, he ought to require no more.

THE TEXT.
1 And when the thousand years are expyred. 2. Satan shall be loosed out of
prison, 3. and shall go out, 4. to diseeiue the people, 5. which ar in the
four quarters of the earth. 6. Gog and Magog, 7. to gather them together to
battle 8 whose number is as the sand of the sea, 9. And they went upon the
plain of the earth, 10. and compassed the tents of the saints about, 11. and
the beloved City. 12. And fire came down from God out of heaven, 13. and
devoured them, 14. And the Devil that deceived them, 15. was cast into a lake
of fire and brymstone, 26. where the beast and the false Prophet were 17. and
shall be tormented day and night for evermore.

The Commentary.
1 After the plentnous description of the true church of Christ, which is
unknown to the world (for the glorious daughter of the eternal King, is
from within, says David, now follows in course the pernicious kingdom of
Antechrist, when it was in ye highest pride, so soon as the before rehearsed
thousand years (says saint John) are fully accomplished or brought to an
end.

2 Satan the common adversary of man shall be loosed out of his dark prison,
and so shall be set at large by the sufferance of God, man's wickedness deserving
none other. A full liberty shall he have to do all myschiefe upon earth, and
strongely to delude the unbelievers for their vnbeleues sake.

3 He shall go fourth with all deceytefull power whereof he is full,
transforming himself into a resemblaunce of the Angel of light, to deceive
the universal people of the world.

4 Through the operation of error he shall cause them to give credence unto
lies and false miracles, that they might be dampened for refusing ye truth and
consentinge to such wickedness. Uery crafty shall he compass the^ with gynnes
of hypocrisye too blind their unfaithful minds, least the light of the
gospel should be open unto the^. The abomination of desolacion shall he set
up in the holy place, to the utter destruction of their faith.

5 Yea, he shall seek out this people from each, iiii. quarters of the
universal earth, to corrupt their consciences with all manner of supersticions.

6 Which people of him thus perverted is called here in misteri, Gog and Magog
which is as much to say as covered, and of reuered. For both ye grau^d
capitains, and multitudes of the^ depending does these two words comprehend, ye
one covering ye devil with many false religions and the other in his sort
following ye same wicked consent. S. Augustine in his.xx. ^ooke, de ciuitate
dei, wills by Gog to be signified ye glorious hipocrites of the world, and by
Magog ye open enemies of righteousness prete^ding ye contrary as testifies
Berrosus the Caldeane in ye first book of his histories, and fyft chap. Gog
was a mighty governor in the lands of Sabea and Arabia the rich, under
Nemroth ye great King of Babylon and their ruled with Sabus his father in
the.xviii year of his reign. In the.xxxviii. chapter of Ezechiels Prophecy is
he called the chief prince of Mosoche and Turball, whom some expositours take
for Capadoce and Spain. But after the opinion of saint Hierom and Isidorus
which was a Spanayrde, the Hebreues does take this Thurball for Italye, which
is much more agreeable to this purpose. Magog was ye second son of Iaphet,
which was the third son unto Noe. This Magoge (as witnesses Josephus in the
first book of his antiquities the xj. Chapter) was the first beginner of the
Magogytes, whom ye Greeks called the Scitheanes, and we now the Tartareanes.
And al ye chief writers specyfieth the Turks of the^ to have taken their
first original. Now mark this wonderful misterye, and consider therein both
the time and story. So shall ye well perceive ye holy ghost to mean none other
hereby this Gog and Magoge, but the Romish Pope and Mahomete, with their
blasphemous and wicked generations. Search the Cronicles and ye shall find
that their beginninges were base, and their estate, simple before ye thousand
years were finished. But after that they grew up so high by their feigned
simplicity and simulate holiness, yt they became the.ii. chief Monarkes of
the earth, and so in process ruled the universal world. These are the.ij.
horns or beastly kingdoms of the great Antichrist or whole body of the
Devil, rysyng up by the earthly studyes and diuelysh devises of wicked men. By
ye doctrine of Aristotle, Plato, Porphirie Auicenne, Auerois, Auenzoar, and
such other, became the Romish Pope Christ's vycar, and head of the universal
church. Petrus Lombardus created him a new diuinitye, so did Gracianus
monachus a new Cannon law of decrees to establyshe the same besides that was
done tha^ by Petrus Conmestor the third brother. For all they three were the
children of one aduoutrous mother, as witnesses Antoninus, Hermannus Schedel,
Ioannes Textor, and diverse other Chronographers. By the crafti co^ueyaunce of
Sergius a false Monk of Constantinople, and of one Matthew the Archdeacon of
Antioche, was Mahomete taken for the Apostle of both testame^tes, for the great
Prophet of God, and for Messiah among the Tartareanes and Arabies, wtth other
peoples of ye East. To establish this by a pretensed religyon, and to bring it
to a mighty monarchy, by the aduisement of Phinees, Abdias, Cabalchabar,
Balteira, Merban, and Elgug, with other Jews, Iacobynes, Nestorianes, and
Arlyanes, they made the blasphemous law of their Alchorane, as testifyeth John
Cuspiniane in his book de Turcarum origin and other auctors else. Thus for the
wickedness and sins of the people suffered the Lord abominable hypocrites
to have the domynion over them. The two horns are like the Lambs horns at a
blushe. For boeth they pretend holiness in fastinges, in prayers, in alms
deeds, in washings, and in other holy rytes and ceremonies. That a man seeing
the^ (not having knoweledge of ye truth of god, which tries all) would think
nothing to be more pure, honest, godly, innocent, clean, holy, and angleycke,
than are their tradicions. Both they confess one God. Both they commend
christ. Both they allow the scriptures of both laws. Mahomete callerh Christ
the word of God, the spirit of God, and the soul of God, the most excellent
Prophet and the worthiest among creaturs. But in no case will he have him
taken for the son of GOD, no more than the Pope will have him taken for a
full savior without his masses and suffrages. And like as the Pope has risen
up by the wilye practyses of Philosophers, Sophysters, Sentencioners and
Canonystes, so has Mahomete commen up by the Sobellianes, Manyches,
Eunomyanes, Macedonianes, Nestoreanes, and Arryanes with other heretics. Out
of whose opinyons was contrived his Alchorane as a mean law betwyxt Moses
and Christ, because ye one (say they) was too full of hardness, the other too
full of liberty. And to call upon him both Jews and Christianes, he admytteth
after a sort both Circumcision and Baptyme granting them liberty to have many
wives with other voluptuous pleasures.

7 Thus under simulate religion or pretense of Gods law and service, these two
tyrauntes, Gog and Magog, the Romysh Pope and Mahomete with their whole
generatio^s of like spirit with the^, have gathered the^ selves together into
one wicked consent against god and his christ. For under Gog and Magog are al
they co^prehe^ded, who^ satan deceived after yt he was set at larg, though
these two have not accorded in other things, yet have they boeth agreed in this
one point by the Devils entycement, to battle against the lamb. To
withstand the verity, and impugn the truth of ye Gospel, they have been
ready every where, in every land, in every city, and in every town. Of one
cruel purpose and study to do mischyefe have these two enymies been in all
places of the world, to persecute Christ's poor congregation. This thing does
the daily practices of them both so manifestly declare, that all the world se
it* well enough. These does Esaias call that strong multitude, whose spoil
Christ shall deuyde, the smith that blows the colles in ye hot fire, and the
waster that destroys, Ezechiel does compare them to a raging tempest,
Daniell to the King of the North, and Zachary to the Princes of the earth.

8 Whose exceeding number (says saynct John) is as the dry sand that has
been bast up with the sea, which can in no wise be numbered. In this full well
may it be ^onsidred what a small thing Christ's flock was in comparison of
these soldiers of Gog and Magog, after satan's going forth, and for ye time
of their battle. Innumerable were the sects of the Pope with those that they
brought to that false faith and obedience. And so were the Prophets of
Mahomete with ye perverted mulytude. Their power was great for the time, and
their malice vengeable, yet were they as sand dry and unfruitful.

9 They rose up in pride, riches and ryalty, and always went over where as
they see the earth made plain and smoth, and that in every land compass.
Their general journey was all the world over toward them that were poor in
spirit, or whose l^stes were mortified from the worlde^ Consider them for an
example, whom they have cruelly burned and slain where as they perceived their
crooked custo^es thrown down, and the straight rule of Gods word faythfullye
received, there persecuted they most ^ier^^sy, there we^ed they furious and
maid, sparing neither sword, fire, gybbet, nor other torment.

(...) such heretykes as would not believe as holy church commanded. This has
been their order for the time of Satan's liberty. And this have they taken for
an high point of Christan religion. For this is that hour that Christ
prophesied of, wherein men should think to do unto god great good service wha^
they put one of his unto death.

11 Thus have they with all prodigious tyranny compassed the derely beloved
City of God, or the holy co^gregaton for whom Christ dyed, utterly to
overthrow it. By all manner of crafts and diuelyshe circumuentio^s have they
gone about at that time (as they would do yet still) to destroy that samll
remnaunte or church of ye Lord, builded without material stone and mortar, y^
sweet spouse of his with out spot or wrincle. Not only sought they in ye
enterprise to bring to naught the particular co^gregatio^s, but for as much as
lay in the^, ye universal church of god, tha^ living. Blessed be our lord god,
though it has been since ye loosing of satan but a pore wretched neglected
thing, and of no reputation before ye world, yet has it been always before
him a beloved City, and has defended it so mightily, that nothing has
peryshed of it. No not one heir of their heads. What the Turk with Mahomets
host has done for his part in Egypt, Greece, Palestyne, Jerusalem, Bulgary,
in ye borders of Italy and Spain, at ye Rhodes, in ye kingdom of Hu^garye,
Ludouirus ye king there rufully slain, and now last of all against ye city
of Uye^, I think it is known unto all me^. We may se by yt is here written of
these two enemies Gog and Magog, the daily experiments confirming the same,
that they are far above us in number and power being as the sa^des in the
sea. Most vainly are we occupied, if we assertaine our selves to have the
victory over them by any other way than the Lord has appointed. Let us pray
therefore unto the Lord for grace and than amend our lives, and the plage
shall cease. Only has he promised to destroy them all with the breath of his
mouth and with no bodily armoure nor strength of men, as here after follows.
Let us in the mean time give our selves unto fervent prayer, to compassion of
our brethern, to deeds of charytie and pity, to abstinence from sin, and to
the forsaking of our own desires. For sure we are, yt he shall shorten their
days of mischief for his electes sake.

12 In the process following must we take for the time past, ye time to come,
for the clear declaration of the mystery considering ever more the usage of ye
scriptures for times. When these enemies Gog and Magog, shall be at the highest
in their vengeable enterprises against the elect City or peaceable
congregation of Christ, a consumyng fire (says Saint John) which is the
eternal word of the Lord shall come down freelye out of heaven from the
mouth of the great omnipotent God.

13 As a fearful lyghtninge shall it fall upon the^, and as terrible fire
shall it devour them, like as the materyall fire, did eat up Sodom and
Gomorre, rebellions in ye desert, and the enimyes yt sought Helias. The fire yt
is kindled in the wrath of God, shall burn unto ye bottom of hell, and consume
up those terrible termagauntes.

14 That word of ye lords indignation shall with great violence throw the
devil that wi^y serpent, which deceived gog and Mogog with their innumerable
souldyours, into a foul stynking lake or boiling pit of wild fire and
brimsto^.

15 Upon the wicked (says David) shall ye lord rain snars. Wyld fire,
brimstone, with tirrible storm and te^peste, shall they have to reward, for
their etarnall punishment. Herein are to be marked and considered, both ye
intolerable greuousnesse of ye pains, and also the everlasting continuance
of them.

16 In the same place of intolerable torment, were the beastly generatio^s of
Antechrist and al their scholemaisters of hipocrites doctrine. Or eternallye of
god were they thereunto appointed as the ungodly communaltie with their
captain, and as the body and members with their wicked head (for all ready
is it done by his word, but tha^ shall it follow in effect) whereas they shall be
as ye Lord has appointed, most sharply afflicted with unspeakable torments
both day and night without pause or ceasing for ever and ever without end.

17 Never shall their fire be quenched (says Esaie) no^ yet their gnawinge
worm be taken from them. For all manner of griefs wherewith God vexed the
wicked, may this fire here be taken after the scriptures. For as witnesses
saint Augustine in his xx. book and xii. chapter De ciuitate Dei, not only is
this punishment to be referred to the latter judgment, but alo to the
extermination of Antichrists h^st by the word of God the world over. Be the
Gospel once purely taught among men, it will condemn all that they have done
upon their own presumption without the ground of Gods verity, be it ceremony
or Sacrament, priesthode or sacryfice, reseruinge the deceivers to his most
fearful judgment.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savve a great white seat, 2. and him that satte on it, 3. from
whose face fled away both the earth and heaven, 4. and their places was no
more found, 5. And I saw the dead, both great and small, 6. stand before God.
7. And the books were opened, 8. And an other book. was opened 9 which is
the book of life, 10. And the dead were judged of those things, 11. which
were vvrytten in the books, according to their deeds, 12. And the sea gave
up her dead, 13. which were in her, 14. And death* 15. and hell delivered up
the dead, 16. which were in them, 17. and they were judged every man
according to his deades* 18. And death, 19* and hell were cast, 20. into the
lake of fire* 21. This is the second death 22. And whosoever was not found
vvritte^ in the book of life, 23. was cast into the lake of fire.

The commentary
1 A none after this I beheld (says Saint Johan) in secret mysterye an
imperial throne or seat of estate, fair splendaunte, and bewtyfull. None
other is this than the judgment seat of the Lord.

2 Great it is, for the Majesty and power of him that shall sit therevpo^, is
of inestimable magnificence and greatness. Fair and white, both for the
celestyall cleerenesse that shall at that hour apere with him, and also for ye
pureness, equity, and right of his universal judgments.

3 From the aspect of whose fearful countenance shall both the earth beneath
and the other eleme^tes above flee away. All the creatures of his creacion
shall with reverence tremble and quake at his mighty aperaunce. The Su^ne shall
tha^ be darkened, ye Moan shall not give her light. The Stars shall fall
down from above, the powers of heaven shall be moved. The elements shall melte
with heat, and the whole earth shall tear in pieces like a ragge.

4 A terryble fire shall go before the judge, to burn up his enimyes on every
side. The places of them that lived here supersticiously and voluptuously,
shall no more after yt be found. Never shall they resort again hither to
their old wanto^ pleasurs. Of their bewtyfull Cities, shall not one stone be
left upon an other. Their proud painted Synagoges as duste in the wind
shall be scattred away from the earth. Neither shall the sky nor yet the ground
beneth be as it was, but both they shall be renewed and changed. They shall be
delivered from corruption, and so appear both a new heaven, and a new earth,
according to the expectation of the creatures.

5 Immediately after that (says saint John) ye judge thus sitting upon ye sca^e
of his eternal Majesty. I saw still in mysterye after the blast of the
trumpet, that all they which were dead, arose out of the earth. And that both
high and low, great and small, good and badde, King, and beggar, prelate and
plough man, tirant and perscecuted innocent. Yea, the sucking babe ye died in
ye cradell so well as ye aged man.

6 All they seemed unto me to stand before their general judge Jesus Christ,
to whom the everlasting father had given over his whole judgments, which
there appeared as he was in deed a very omnipotent god. All we shall appear
(says Paul) before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one of us may
receive according to yt he has done, be it good or ill.

7 And ye books of reckennings (which are the several consciences of men)
were open before ye judge. That before was hid, will tha^ be manifest, and
that was secret, will than come to light and be disclosed. Evident it will be
unto him who has fulfilled the commanded works of mercy and who has left
them undone, their own constences bearing witness to ye same. For what can be
hid from him which sees both ye inward reins and the secret thoughts of the
heart? In this general rekening yet, shall praise with ye eternal reward
redowne unto them from ye merciful Lord whose walking here has been
according unto faith. There shall they be reproved to have been pitiful to ye
poor, hongry, thursty, nedy, naked, sick, and in prison.

8 After this was an other book ope^ed of a far diverse nature from the
other books, for it was ye sweet book of life, wherein be regestred al yt were
predestinate to be saved, from ye worlds beginning. And this book is ye eternal
predestination of God. 9 Before ye worlds fou^datio^ (says s. Paul) ye lord
predestinate us into ye addoptio^ of his children, through Jesus Christ. Of
this book made Moses mention, when he said, Either pardon this people, or else
race me out of thy book which thou haste written. And Christ also to his
seventy disciples. Be glad (says he) that your names are written in heaven.
Moreover Iosue called this the book of the ryghtuous, and John here the book
with seven claspes. This sheweh the holy ghost here unto us, much after the
custom daily used among us. For of the most notable men and women our manner is
both long to remember the names, and also to speak of them as occasion
gives. So equal is this eternal judge, that no personage respects he in
judgment, neither of Emperors nor Pope, King nor Byshope, Lord nor priest.
But as he is ryghtuous of himself, so judges he rightuously.

10 For they that were dead (says saint Johan) or that had led their lives
here without faith and ye spirit of Christ, were judged of him there,
according to the things which were regestred in ye books of their co^scie^ces.

11 That is to say, according to ye fylthy works whereof their desperate
co^ciences accused them. Only are the wicked to be taken here for ye dead. For
the rightuous shall tha^ have nothing, whereof their conscience may accuse
them. Neither shall ye evil doers as witnesses David, be of counsel with
the^ at ye day. They having ye life everlasting, shall not than be judged,
though they than appear, but shall sit with Christ in judgment, and rejoice in
the condempnation of the ungodly blasphemers. The reward of their
unfaithfulness shall tha^ be powered upon the^, to their perpetual care. At
that day shall none be absent but all shall be seen, either to honor or else
to reprofe.

12 Neither shall the depth of the sea, nor the darkness of death, nor yet
hell that is bottomless, be able to hide any from the face of this judge.
For the sea (says saint John) that is mighty and great, shall at that day
deliver up clean her dead, or those whom the Lord suffered her to swallowe
in for their outrageous sins.

13 Like as were the giauntes in the floude of Noe, ye great host of Pharao in
the red sea, and such other more.

14 So shall greedy death do also, which after many strange sorts has
consumed the enemies of God. As for an example, Cain by a chance unsought,
Nadah and Abyn by fire, Achan by standing, Holofernes and Saull by the sword,
Naball by excess of wine, Iesabell by treading of horses, Daniels accusers by
the lions, Menelaus by breaking his neck, Judas by hanging himself Herod, by
worms, the children of Israel by swerd, fire, serpents, and soden death, and
such other like.

15 Hell which is insaciable, shall in like case render up the innumerable
swarm of the dead whom he with open mouth, has swallowed in quick for their
abominations.

16 Of whose number were Chore, Dathan and Abiron with their affinitye, the
Cytyes of Sodom and Gomorre, the uncircumcised gyauntes, the rich rourer and
the rich glotton in Luke, Simon Magus, with diverse other. Hell has gaped
meruelouslye wide (says Esaye) and has rauenouslye devoured the high minded,
sturdye, and dysobedyent nation.

The uncircumcised giauntes (says Ezechiell) with their weapons are gone down
to hell, whose swerdes are laid under their heads, their wickedness upon
their bones. Of the wicked only is all this spoken here, if ye mark well the
text, and in no wise of the Godly, what though many, of them has been drowned
in the sea, burned, beeheadded, and hanged upon the land, and buried quick in
the earth.

17 For it follows also, that they were judged of the judge and received every
one according to their deseruinges.

According to the fleshely fruits of their own inventions shall they be
rewarded, their unfaithfulness justly measured unto them.

Their bodies shall than take part with their wretched souls, in the
everlasting curse of dampdamnacion, ye elect number rewarded with perpetual
felicytye.

18 And as concerning death it self, which is the universal enimye of man, it
shall be destroyed for ever.

19 Hell also (which is here taken for sin) shall never more be seen among
the creatures of God.

20 For both shall be thrown into the great lake of boylinge fire and brymstone.
The victory of death shall be swallowed up, and his stinge done clean away,
which is sin. That is now corruptyble shall put on vncorruptio^, and that is
now mortal, immortality. Thus that the Lord at ye hour make of all his
enemies his fotestole according to his promise by Oseas the Prophet. O death I
will be thy death. O hell I will be thy destruction.

21 This tirrible appoyntme^t of the judge (says saint John) is the second
death, or perpetual deprivation of ye sight of God, yea, the utter fall from
his favor, grace, and mercy. This death is the whole vengeance of all
innocent blood which has been shed upon earth from just Abell to the last
faithful witness. Yea, this sentence is ye stone yt shall grind the enemies
to powder, the very eternal dampnation both of body and soul.

22 Now for a conclusion of ye whole matter, whatsoever he be king or Emperor,
Priest or prelate, lay or religious, that shall not be found written in the
book of life, which is ye eternal predestination of god, for that he has
worshipped the beast and his Image, he shall be cast by the irreuocable sentence
of the judge, into the stynking lake of fire, perpetully there to burn with
the Devil and his Angels. So that he which has had no part in the first
resurrection, shall be sure to taste of this second death which is dampnation.

23 He that believes not the gospel when it is faithfully taught him,
repenting his former life, but refuses the grace thereof, freely offered,
shall for ever be damned. Never shall his sin be remitted, neither in this
world nor in the world to come, that reststeth the holy ghost, withstanding
the open verytie. Only remains a fearful expectation of judgment unto the^
that here treads Christ under foot* not regarding his blood shedding, but
doing injury to the spirit of grace for their own invention.

The.xxj. Chapter.
In this last vision of Johan, is both discribed the prosperous estate of the
true church or kingdom of Christ here, and also the perpetual Sabbath of ye
children of God. All the other visions were mixte with labors, afflictions and
pains. This is full of peace, tranquillity, and joy, incorruption, glory,
and felycitie.

THE TEXT.
1 And I savve a nevve heaven, 2. and a nevve earth, 3. for the first heaven,
4. and the first earth were vanished away, 5. and there was no more sea,
6. And I Johan savve that, 7. holy City, 8. nevve, 9. Jerusalem, 10. come
down from God out of heaven, 11. prepared as a bryde, 12. garnished for her
husdande, 13. And I heard a great voice from the seat saying, 14, Behold the
tabernacle of God* 15. is with men, 16. and he will dvvell with them, 17. And
they shall be his people, 18. and God him self shall be with them, 19. and
shall be their God 20 And God shall vvype away, 21. all tears from their
eyes, 22. And there shall be no more death, 23. neither sorrow, 24. neither
shall there be any more pain, 25. for the old things are gone.

The Commentary.
1 Besides the before rehearsed revelations, I beheld now last of all (says
saint Johan) that heaven was clean altered from that it was before and became
all new, and so was the earth also and became the same.

Not only become they now spiritual by a true believe in the Gospel that
before were carnal, but also in the end of the world shall the whole bodies of
heaven and of earth as gold in the furnace be purged from fylthynesse by fire
going before the yudge, which both are now defiled with the wickedness of the
creatures.

2 After both sorts shall they be delivered from the corruption, here of
sin, and thereof death and dampnatyon, and so be restored unto the glorious
liberty of Gods children.

3 The first heaven defiled through y^ pride of Angel, and the first earth
also corrupted by the sinful usage of man, shall vanyshe clean away and
no more be seen. Not that the substance of them shall utterly perysh, but
that their nature, shape, and figure shall change into a much more pure and
perfect similytude. A custom it was among the prophets, when thy aduertysed
the afflycted Israelytes of prosperity, peace, or renouation of the glory of
God coming toward the^ to promis al things new.

4 Behold (says the Lord in Esaias) I make you new heavens, and a new earth,
and as for the old shall never more be though upon. New is ye true church of
Christ, so are the people pertaining to the same. In no point are they like to
the Popes holy orders, nor yet unto Mahometes religion. Clear are their hearts
which have rereceiued the verytie, from all supersticions, and their outward
lives from idell observations, perfect are their consciences, and their
conuersacions godly. And this in the regeneration shall be fully accomplished.
Not only shall that which is now mortal beco^ immortal and ye is now
corruptible, than incorrupted and as ye very Angels of the Lord, but also the
universal heaven shall be than renewed, so shall the whole face of the earth,
and appear more beutyfull than now.

5 And from that time fourth shall there be no more sea, which signifies
people unsteadfast, vain, and fickle. Whereas the peace of Christ is surely
grounded, no more is there any troubled conscience. No more is there any
diffydence, wan hope, or despair. Al bitterness, sorrow, and anguish is turned
into sweetness and joy in ye holy ghost. We know (says saint Paul) ye all
things are taken to the best in them that love God. From the Apostles (who^
Christ first also called from the Sea) vanished this waueringe Sea away, when
they went from the mallicious counsel of the Bishops reioysinge that they
were found worthy to suffer rebuke for his names sake. In like case all
impediments and needs, all dangers and doubts, all fearful mouings and
outragings that we now have of the sea, shall cease in that day of the Lord,
when we shall behold him face to face. No longer shall it be subdued unto
vanity, no more than the other creatures, but clearly depured from fylthy
corruption. No more shall it be the same to see, to being from thens forth so
claer^ as cristall, though it still be the same in substance.

6 Heaven, earth, and ye sea, with all other creatures in mystery thus renewed,
I Johan the son of Zebede and the same dysciple whom Christ loved, being here
in exyle for his word and testimony, perceived in the save mystery by the
singular gift of the spirit, ye ye self holy city or congregation of the
Lord which is worthily called the new Jerusalem of peace descended down out
of heaven from her omnipote^t creator and God eternal.

7 Holy is this cyty. For both is she here the undefiled spouse of the lamb
and shall be hereafter more perfectly in ye regeneracion. Here admytteth she
nothing in faith that is prohpane and carnal, but cleaneth to his only word.
There shall she follow his steps in a much more pure estate, clearly delivered
from all that is ill.

8 Here is she new, in that she has here by his godly spririte done of the
old man with his fylthy works. And there shall she also be new through his
gift, by throwinge away the body of sin with death and corrupcion.

9 Jerusalem is she called both here and there, or peceable city of the Lord,
in that all her cytizens are here of one faith, and there shall be of one glorious
unity and concord. Here are her dwellers citizens with ye saints, and ye
househould servants of god. There shall they be both his children and heirs
together with Christ.

10 From God came she down, and out of heaven first of all. Neither out of
flesh nor blood has spronge her Christen believe, but from the gracyous
openinge of the father which is in heaven. That Jerusalem (says Paul) which
is free and our mother is from above. She is yt City, whose builder and maker
is God. With none other laws is she governed, but with his eternal testament
and Gospel of peace. With the constitutions of men has she nothing to do, be
they never so holy and precious. For alone she depends on God and his spirit.

11 Of him is she prepared through ye gift of faith. She is cleansed with the
fountain of water in the word of life to seem a glorious congregation
without blemysh or wrincle. From her sins is she purely washed in his blood.

12 And so garnyshed as a beutifull bryde to her husband with love, joy,
peace, patience, meekness, long suffering, and other glorious fruits of ye
spirit. Upon thy right hand Lord (says David) stands a queen in a garment
of most fine gold compassed with diversity. But every man, shall not se this
her apparel, for it will be rather a raiment of the heart than of the outward
body. Figured was this decking of her at large, in the wonderful adourning of
the temple and tabernacle of God in the days of Moses and Solomon, whose
mystical meting also he describes in his cantycles. How marvelous this new
Jerusalem will be in the regeneration, when she meteth her spouse in the
air, and how glorious her countinaunce with him, it lies not in us to declare
in all points, considering that neither eye has seen, nor ear hard,
neither can the heart conjecture what God has there prepared for them that
love him, but of this are we sure, yt with the glory of him she shall be
replenished. Here is her estate imperfect, and there perfect, here mortal,
there immortal, here sower, there sweet, here hard, there pleasant, here
paynfull, there dilectable, here Godly, there inestimable glorious.

13 And as John had seen these wonderful things, and mused much upon them, a
great voice came unto him from the seat of God, declaring the mystery thereof.
I hard (says he) in the midst of this last revelation, as I was in doubt
what it meant, a mighty voice from the throne of my everlasting Lord, saying
thus unto me.

14 Behold Ihon behold, and mark it both for thine own erudicion, and also
for the instruction of others. The holy tabernacle or restyng place of ye
everlasting God of heaven, is with men in the world beneth. Not only in that
the eternal son of ye Lord took upon him the shape of a man, calling it the
temple of his body, but also in that the soul of every faithful man is become
the habitacle of ye holy ghost. He that loves me (says Christ) observes my
word. In him will both I and my father provide us a resting place. He that is
in love abides in god and God dwells in him.

15 This voice might John well hear from the mouth of God in Esechiell. I will
make (says he there) a perpetual covenant with man to dwell with him evermore.

My tabernacle shall be among them. So that I will be their God, and they shall be
my people.

16 For why, it follows here in this voice, that he has determined of
favorable love and mercy to dwell with them, assisting them here in this life
by his spirit, and in the life to come shall he satysfye them by his eternal
presence. For here do we see him in a similytude far of, there shall we
behold him like as he is in deed, and shall eternally rejoice therein.

17 Here are they his people through faith, for Israel is his heritage. There
shall they be his familiar household through love and he their Lord for ever.
Here shall they be his children, and he their eternal father. There shall they
be his heyers, Christ being the right heyer for them all.

18 Thus God his own self of his inestimable goodness being presently with
them, shall here by his grace, and thereby inestymable benefits, show him
self in all points to be their most merciful and loving God* Here does he
strongly assist the^ against all temptations of enimyes.

There shall be endue them with full perfection and clerenesse.

19 So shall he be their god, that neither here nor yet there shall they
knowledge any other but him alone. He shall so comfort them here by his
spirit, and there by his glorious presence, that neither shall they here
forsake him, nor there be divided from him.

20 And this everlasting god shall so wype away all tears from their eyes
here, that no vexacion shall make the^ sorrowful, nor yet adversity pensive.
But all manner of slanders and persecutions, shall they take for most suffren
consolations for his names sake. For if he be with them, who can prevail
against them?

21 And after that day can no wepings be, whereas shall be full joy with
immortality both of soul and body. Behold (says the Lord in Esayes
prophecye) I shall make a joyful Jerusalem, yea, and my self will rejoice
there with them. From thence forth shall neither waylyng nor weping be hard in
her any more.

22 In her moreover shall be no more death for it shallbe destroyed for ever.
No more shall men's consciences despair here, But have joy in the holy ghost.
No more shall they die through sin, but live unto God by faith. And there
shall no more the rose colored whore be dronken in the blood of martyrs. Her
tyrauntes shall be closed up in the stinking lake of fire from the slaughter of
them, they than becoming immortal and impossible

Moreover tha^ this, he that believes in christ shall never die nor yet come
into judgment, but pass clean from death unto life.

23 Neither shall there be any sorrow nor crying any more. For all manner of
displeasure of the body, as pouertye, sickness, losses, emnytie, vexacions,
and ill reports are here patiently borne of the faithful. And there shall be
found nothing to minister any such occasions. Here is neither age doubted,
nor yet persecution feared, in them that reckeneth death advantage, having in
desire with Paul to be hence and with Christ. Nor yet shall be there where all
is in joy and peace, durable for ever.

24 Neither shall there be felt any more pain. Such has been the constauncye
of the martirs here that little have the torments grieved them. Eleazarus
patiently suffered all punyshmente* Steven reyosed to see heaven open. Andrewe
would in no case be delivered from death. Laurentius offered his brent flesh
to be eaten. The burning coals were so sweet unto Tiburcius as the fragraunt
roses. So desirous were ye terryble torments unto Uincent, as a most pleasant
banquet. Angelus desired the people in Sicilia to esteem the tyrant his frynde.
What ye exceeding constauncy was of John Husse and Hieronime of Prage, diverse
Chronycles mencyoneth. And in our time, George Baynham in the fire did never
complain. Ihon Frith never showed him self once grieved in countenance. Barnes
never moved, as his enymyes does report. Peter Frank in Colchester sang
joyfully to the Lord. The three young men of Southfolk reioysed at ye death,
with such other many. And how far they shall be, from pains after this, the
great day of the Lord shall declare.

25 For the old things are paste, says the text. All that before was tedious,
heavy, and fearful to the flesh, is now become easy, light, and pleasant,
through that they have learned of Christ. His word refreshes them in spirit,
and is a sweet rest unto their souls. And in the regeneration shall hunger,
thirst, werinesse, labor, heat, cold, rain, wind, thunder, earthquakes,
with all other discommodities be taken clean from them. Neither shall they have
there, need of meat nor drink, food nor raiment, beds nor buildings,
feeldes nor meadows, welspringes nor rivers, gardens nor vineyardes.

The Text.
1 And he that sat upon the seat said, 2. Behold, I make all things nevve.
3. And he said unto me. 4 Write. 5. for these words are faithful and true.
6. And he said unto me. 7. it is done. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, 9. the
beginning and the end, 10. I will give to him that is a thirst, 11. of the
well of the water of life, free, 12. He that overcomes, shall inherit all
things, 13. I will be his God, and he shall be my son, 14, but the
fearful. 15. and unbelieving, 16. and the abominable, 17. and murderers, 18.
and whoremongers, 19. and sorcerets, 20. and Idolatrs, 21. and all liars, 22.
shall have their part in the lake, 23. that burns With fire and brimston, 24.
which is the, second beath.

The commentary
1 And the omnypotent Lord which sat upon the eternal throne concluded thus
with me. His holy spirit of promise assertayned my spyryte by his heavenly
word, that all these things should be true.

2 Behoulde (says he) I will make all things fresh and new. Heaven, earth,
the Sea, and the universal City of peace, I will deliver from all corrupcyon,
I make all pure, clean, holy, immortal, vncorrupt, impassible, clear,
heavenly, spiritual, and glorious. Never more shall, they be as they were
before when they were yet old. Never shall be more eating nor drinking, wyuing
nor ^anketing, traueling, nor sleeping ^or other such doeinges pertayninge to
the corruptible life. The rightuous shall than shine as the red fire sparks.
So bright as the sun shall they be in the kingdom of their father.

3 Thus has the Lord here midsts meruielously described unto John, and by him
unto us the mystical Sabbath of his people here, and ye eternal Saboth after
this life o^ma^ding him to (...) it, as follows. Much to and fro has been
among the (...) doctors and is (...) to th^^ day, whether the saved multi^^^^
shall reygne here upon earth (...) Christ, or above in heaven afte^ the
judgment day^. Which is easy to be percei^ed, if the scriptures he tru^^
conferred. Therefore ser^h d^lygently the scriptures, for they hear^ witness
of all truth. Christ has in Math. ye they shall be tha^ as ye Angels are now^ in
heaven, whose office is has to be h^re ^ there. And so much (...) ye they
shall be as tha^ all one. (...) w^ll shall ye earth be new as the heavens. And
needs it must be to some purpose. Never would Esaias and Pete^ have said, ye
rightuous^sse should dwelt in the^ if they should not occupy the^ both. It is
said here also ye the new Jerusalem shall come down from heaven. But not so
that it shall not up again. For Christ's electes shall be whereas he is. When
they shall be upon ye earth, no let nor impediment shall they have to be also in
heaven, both they being one. (...) agyltie and perfection shall be tha^ in
their bodies as is now in ye glorified body of Christ; or in the spiritual
nature of ye angels. Which are nowhere now the^ And whether they be here or
there* always they see God, ^ are (...) absent from him. Many scriptures might
be brought in to declare th^^ mat^er more at large, but it would (...) much
time. What mutual feloship heavenly amyte, and glorious pastyme will be
betwixt them and the angels at that day it fare passes al capacities to
diffine. I cou^sail (...) to be curious in ye search of high misteris ^s this
here is one, without the fear of God, least he ouerco^me^ of their exceeding
(...) (...) whoredom with many kings, by many false worshippinges. This for
her meekness is commended of God, the other proudely boasts her (...)
through holy tradicions, merits, and deseruinges to b^^ a rich qu^ene. With
many such other.

4 And the Lord (says saint John) which works all things by his only word
and commandment, (...) thus unto me. Emprente first in thy heart that I have
here shewe^ the^, and than leave it in writing to the (...) of those that than
follow the^*

5 And if thou will k^owe a reason why you shall thus do, take this (...)
sentence with thee. I assure the so (...) as I am God, y^ the words which I
have showed in this present Revelation are effectually most faithful and
ruste. In no manner of (...) break promise, nor go from ye (...) that I have
once spoken. Both heaven and earth shall pass over, but not (...) of my words
shall pass (...) at their times appointed. The word yt goes out of my mouth,
(...) not return home again (...) both accomplysh my will, and prosper ye
thing* I sent it for. Ned^full is it therefore that all men believe, that I shall
fulfill the couenauntes here promised.

6 Moreover than this, the said heavenly Lord said thus unto me, to put me
clearly out of doubt.

7 It is fintshed and done already. Be thou assertayned that my word is my
deed. In ye beginning I spoke but the word, and all things were created,
heaven, earth, ye light, the firmament, the Sun, the Moon the fowls, the
fishes, the beasts, and last of all man. Whatsoever I say therefore, ought to
be believed as now done in deed, be it to the rightuous or damned. For all
things are present before me. In toke^ whereof, ye prophets and fathers
uttered their prophesies of things to come, in the time past for ye more part,
for the sure certentie of them.

8 And take these my words so much to be the more certain, that I which have
made those promyses, have all things in my power. I am the first and the
last, fyguratly comprehended under Alpha and Omega ye first and the last Greek
letters, as a known (...) the Greeks, unto whom this (...) was first
written. (...) God was there before me, nor (...) after me, I am God from
everlasting and world without end.

9 I am he that has begone al things* I am he again that shall fynish them. I
am alone and there is none other God but I. I sley, I quick. I smi^e, I heal*
I set up, I put down. Through me does kings raygne and every man's (...) is in
my hand. Wherefore it is reason y^ they have recourse unto me.

10 I am that fresh fountain that ^say speaks of most hyghly necessary to
them that will live. Uery lyberall shall he find me, ye seeks me in faith.

11 To him yt is a thyrst or desierous of righteousness will I give to drink
of the plentuous welspring of the wholesome waters of life. And that will I do
freely without price or payment either of Mass or merits, dead su^frages or
deseruinges.

Lay out your money on more for ^he thing ye fedeth not, spend no more
travail about ye thing that helps not. Come unto me all you that labor and
are laden and I shall refresh you. So desirously seek unto me your God as ye
heart seeks to the brokes of water. For with me is the well of life
everlasting. With my pleasant rivers shall I content your good appetytes. The
water of this fountain is the verite and sweetness of Christ's spirit,
refreshing the soul here with hope, and there with the life everlasting. In
this life is felt but a taste of it, in ye world to come shall ye thirst be
satisfied. Here is it but in heart springing up toward life, there shall it be
in full course and never fail. Here are obtained but small drops of it, there
shall it be had in full ple^tuousnesse. The philosophers for their wisdom, ye
lawiers for their lerning, and ye phisicians for their co^ning looks for great
rewards. The biers and sellers in ye te^pl, set their wares at a great price,
yet are they but stynking waters, and not able to restrain ye thyrst. But this
is free with out paime^t through christ, and contains health in habou^dau^ce.
Not our good works (says s. Augustine) but his own fregifts does god croun in
us. This must be sought for. For only sha^ he obtai^ it, ye thirstith after it.
Only shall he have ye asks, and he find yt seeks.

12 He yt has done on a christian warrior to fight against the devil of these
darkenesses, and so manfully does his part, that by faith he overcomes him,
and has ye full victory over him in Christ, he shall be sure to posses al these
things, heaven, earth, ye new Jerusalem, the living waters, and to have his
full desire in the joys to come. Wonderful is this promis. No King nor
Emperor, priest nor prelate, Turk nor Souldane, can grant such wages. But
who shall obtain them? None other than fights lawfully, workinge, according
to the rules and examples of faith? Neither he that masseth nor senseth,
processioneth nor holy waters, nor yet he yt builds churches. For those
works the Scripture commands not.

13 Besides this promised reward, (says the lord here) I will be his god in
deed, according to my former covenant, and he shall be unto me as my natural
son. So loving will I be to him as the mother is to the babe borne of her
body, whom she can never forget. So merciful as the natural father, y^
pittieth his own children at the very heart. Example by the unworthy lost
child, whom I both lovingly received and sweetly enbraced in mine arms, Yea,
I both clothed him and fed him with the best, as a son full dear unto me. And
of this let him be sure which has me for his father, that I shall give him
Christ to be his brother and with him all things necessary, constituting him my
perpetual heir. This fatherly covenant was plain unto my servant David, for
whom I set up mercy (...) ever.

14 But far otherwise will I do by the other sort, which neither will seek ye
living waters or have desire to the scriptures, nor yet keep ye hold I have put
them to, which is their Christian profession, but cowardly leave it unto the
enemies, the serpent, the beast, and the false prophet. As are these which
follows here in their course. First of all the fearful cowardes or false
hearted Christians.

Whom the holy ghost calls here before neither whote nor cold. At a time they
believe, but when any trouble comes they go clean from it. These dou^ the
loss of their goods, the hinderau^ce of their names, and the harm of their
bodies, and so are they not worthy of Christ. Such were Ananyas and Saphira
with many other more sense their time. These trust not in the Lord as does
Sion, which never remoueth.

15 Next are the unfaithful hipoccits which neither believe the promises nor
yet fear the threatenings of the Lord. These make gods commandments of no
value for their own tradicious. With beggary ceremonies clogge they the
people, and as the blind they lead the blind into the ditch. Neither will
these enter into ye kingdom of god, nor yet suffer other to enter. Such were ye
pharisees and saduces with our monks, cha^ons, and friars, succeeding in their
wicked examples.

16 After them follows ye curssed obstinates or abominable blasphemers, which
knowinge the verite, does not only abhor it, but also with most spightfull
cruelnesse persecuteth it. These are the swine y^ ^redeth perles in the mire,
and the dogs that turn again to deuowre. Unpossible to be renewed to
repentance, thus casting at their tails the gra^es of the spirit so freely
offered them. Such were Annas ^ Caiphas with our execrated bishops,
suffraga^es, channons, (...), ^^cars, with all the priests of ye same wicked
zeal.

17 The vnpytefull murderers, are also the same blood thursty prelates* those
Caines, and these boisterous Nemrothes that never will b^e satisfied with the
slaughter of innoc^ntes. No cruel Antichrist after Ihon Wy^leues time did so
spyghtfully persecute the veryte of Christ in England, as did Philyp
Repyngedone, made than of a false brother or p^riuired christan, bishop of
Lincoln.

The graunde captain of this mad muster is the proud bishop of Rome the
preposterous vycar of ye Lamb, and the unworthy successor of Peter in that he
has not yet put up his sword. Of the same sort also are all those cruel
Princes, and unmercifully magistrates, that applies their auctorities, powers,
and offices unto ye same mescheife. Such deceytfull rauenours and abhomynable
blood sheders the merciful Lord abhors evermore. Of this number was
Pharao and herod, with innumerable tiranntes since, which to rehearse in order
were to long

18 The filt^^ whoremo^gers are those holy spiritual Ammorites which has
consecrate themselves unto Moloch in the fire of fleshly concupi^^ence. For
ever have they for sworn godly marryage, to make daily sacryfyce to the devil
in buggary and other carnal beastlynesse. The most highly esteemed virtue of
that generation, is to have no wives. Never commanded I such filthy vows
(says the Lord) neither came it ever in my thought, to make Judah sin with
such abhominacion. For ye often breaking of their oath, profession, and vow it
is no matter, so long as they make ye rekening among themselves. Innumerable
is the swarm of these lecherous locustes of Egipte, every where are their
fruits seen all (...) (...) after Christ's resurrection, to say that his
desciples had stolen him away by night.

22 All these with such other execrable ^^^tes (says the Lord unto John) shall
have their just portion in the foul stinking lake, y^ horrybly fometh upward
with fylthy fire and brymstone. With the devil and his angels shall they dwell
for ever.

23 Thus shall ye wicked (says David) for neglectinge their Lord God be turned
into hell, with perpetual confusion. The fiery flood that shall go before the
Judge, will swallow them up clean.

24 And this is without fail the second death, or damnacion both of soul and
body. The perpetual shame and reprofe, as Daniel calls it, that shall never
be recovered. Not only the abominable homicides, Idolatours, and whoremongers
shall have this stinking reward, but also the faint hearted hipocrits, the
unfaithful sorcerers, and the execrable liars with all their affinity.

THE TEXT.
1. And there came unto me, 2. one of the seven Angels. 3. Which has the
seven vyalles full of the seven last plagues. 4. And talked with me, saying.

5. Come hither, I will show thee the bryde, the Lambs wife, 6. And he carried
me away in the spirit to a great and an high mountain. 7. And he showed me the
great city. 8. holy Jerusalem. 9. defending out of heaven from GOD* 10.
having the brightness of GOD. 11. And (...) was like unto a (...) most (...)
(...) had wales (...) high (...) had.xii. gates* 15 and at the gates, xii.
Angels, 16. and names vvrytten. 17. which are the.xii. trybes of Israel. 18.
On the East part three gates. On the North side three gates. 19. And tovvard^
the (...) And on the West side three gates. 20. And the vvalle of the city
had.xii. foundacions. 21. and in them the names of the Lambs.xii. Apostles.

The Commentarye.
1 And as I was yet still ioyously marueiling (says saint John) at this most
friendlye communicatio^ and wonderful mystery of the Lord.

2 There resorted unto me very lovingly, one of the seven angels mentioned
here before, which angels has committed unto them at the Lords pleasure the
seven vials of his wrath containing the seven plagues of the world.

3 None other are these Angels, but the decreed purposes of God, uttering his
judgments against cursed Babylon at their times appointed, as we have
sufficiently declared in the xv. and xvi. chapters, before. One of the^ sent ye
lord unto John, to describe unto him at large ye glory of ye new Jerusalem,
like as he did before the confusion of Babylon. For only was this in spirit as
here after follows.

4 This angel (says he) familiarlye communed with me. This inspired purpose
of God moved my heart, my mind, my wit, reason, understanding, and
remembrance, with the other powers of soul to make me pryuy of this secret
mystery, necessary to be known of the faithful.

5 Come hither (says it spiritually unto me) leauinge at this time behind
thee all such considerations as thou have of nature. Certe^ly will I manifest
unto thee, to the singular comfort of many other, what the beutifull Bryde is,
which is the undefiled spouse of the Lamb Jesus Christ. Thou shall well
perceive her by the gift of faith, to be far different from the Rose colored
whore yt thou see before. Thou shall know here, her estate, beuty, behauer,
and aparell. For that makes God open to his lovers which he hides unto other
in parables.

6 Than took he me up in the spirit (says John) and so carried me clean away
into a mighty great and exceeding high mountain. The contemplation of this
heavenly misterye, so occupied my mind, that clearly was I taken from the
remembrance of all worldly fantasies, and thought my self rapt up with Paul
unto the third heaven. Sittinge solytarye alone (as did Hieremie) I was lift
up above my self. With Enoch and Helias I thought my self taken from the
world, so great was the mystery.

7 Anon this spiritual messenger showed me a great godly City I was in
remembrance of the true congregation of God compact together in the unity of
one perfect Christian faith. And this was not the old Hieru^alem, builded
long ago of Melchisadech as testifies Josephus. For that was full of sin,
ignorance, and blindness. She slew the Prophets, and stoned them unto death
that were sent unto her. She disdayned also to receive her own Lord, wha^ he
came to her of good love.

8 But this is al of an other sort, perfect, godly, and faithful. Yea, this is
above all estimation holy. Not for ye outward sacrifices, which were but
shadows of things to come, but for ye eternal rede^tio^ y^ came, through him
which offered him self unto God ye father without spot.

9 Not made by man's hand was this holy Jerusalem, nor yet after this manner
building. For it issued out of heaven and so came down from God the Father of
light, of whom only is all that is good and perfect. Great is this city, not
only in that it is the possession of the great king of all, but also in that
it is highest in dignity before him, and spread the world over.

10 Glorious is it also, blessed, spiritual, and heavenly, having the
inestimable brightness or wisdom of the omnipotent God, her light is ye lamb
Jesus Christ, and his word the lantarne to her very footesteps. Endued is she
here with ye graces of ye spirit, and after this shall possess these benifites
of immortality. Like shall she be to her spouse to his latter appearaunce, and
shall see God as he is in deed, when she is like fashioned to his glorious
similitude.

11 And this her shining light or wisdom in the spirit (says the Angel) was
like unto a stone, most orient and precious. For more precious is the verytie
than Gold in his most pureness.

12 And of all things in the world most rightly might it seem to be compared
to a fine Jasper, resemblinge a pure Cristall in clearenesse. For not only is
it here in faith clear as the cristall, high, incomperable, and inestimable.
But also in the regeneration it will be to the eyes of the gloryfied saints as
the green Iaspar, most amiable, fresh, and desirous. The doctrine of the Lord
is here all pure, expelling the darkness of errors and lies. He that follows
me (says Christ) wandereth not in the dark, but shall have the light of
life. And there shall neither their eyes be sore, nor yet their sight bleared
by any impediment, but they shall be made able to behold him face to face,
being of most inestimable brightness.

13 The walls of this city betokning the manifold strengthes of God, were
inestimable great and high, meruilous and glorious. Great is the Lord (says
David) and mighty is his power. He compasses his people round about from this
time forth and for ever. A wall of fire is he unto Jerusalem, and a defense of
steel unto Judah. Their keeper, protector, savior and defender is he, most
steadfast, perfect, constaunt, and sure. Strong is the City of Sion, for she
sauer is both her wall and Bulwark.

14 Twelve gates has this City to open and to spear. Yet is there but one
opening unto them, which is Christ. Diverse are they called, for the diversity
of nations, peoples, languages, and kindredes. From all quarters of the world
round about comes people to Christ's congregation, yet enter they not but
through him (no man says he) comes unto the father but by me. I am the door
into ye shepfolde. He y^ enters in by me shall be saved.

15 Twelve angels are set at ye ^ntes of this city (which are both ye Angels
in deed) and the godly preachers signified by them. The angels of y^ Lord
(says David) pitched their tents round about those y^ fears him, to preserve
them. Watchme^ has he s^t (says Esaias) upon the walls of Jerusalem to preach
his glorious name. So yt it is now become inexpugnable. The devil with his whole
army cannot prevail against it. None is he able to pluck out of his hand.

16 Names were gloryously written over the gates of this city. And none other
were they but the names of the xii. tribes of the children of Israel. As are
Judah, Ruben, Gad, Aser, Neptalim, Manasse, Simeon, Leuy, Isachar, Zabulon,
Joseph and Benjamin. For this consideration were their names there in sight,
and none other.

17 Only was the heritage promised unto Abraham's seed. Only comes
salvation from among y^ Jews. Christ was the only seed of Abraham, and we
are now become the children of promise in him. In the scripture are their names
registered. And not ye names of them alone, but of so many else as have brought
unto us the true worship of God. As were Moses, Samuel, David, and Helias,
Esaias, Hieremy Ezechiel, and Daniel, with ye xii. inferior prophets. John Baptist,
Iose^h, Simeon, and such other. For ye number of xi^. is a viniuersall number
comprehending all.

18 Upon the East part of this beautyfull city were three gates. So were three
gates, also upon the North side.

19 Toward the South were three gates. And on the West side iii gates, to
perform up the number of twelve. Such a City is the true Church of Christ,
as is spread the world over. What so ever they be that will approach unto this
City, which way so ever they come, necessary is it for the^, to enter into it
through an only faith in the father, in the son, and in the holy ghost.
Behouing is it (says Paul) for him that will resort unto god faithfully to
believe. Through faith have we entrance into his favor. Baptize them that
believe (says Christ) in the name of the father and the son, and the holy
ghost. Exceedinge great is the multitude of those just believers which has
come from these iiii. quarters of the world, and has entered into this city
through this faith. Uery many shall come (says the Lord) from the East and the
Weste, (which includes ye other two parts) and shall rest with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God. From the East come the Jews
inhabiting the mid part of the world. From the iii. out quarters else, as are
Asia, Aphrica, and Europa, came the Gentiles, and after this sort through one
faith in the trinity, became one city of ye Lord having.xii. fair gates.
Prefygured was this in the passage of the children of Israel out of Egypt. In
the wilderness of Sinay at the Lords commandment, were the tribes of Judah,
Isachar, Zabulon, with their hosts of a C.lxxx. and six thousand and four
hundred, upon the East side. Ruben, Simeon, and Gad with their armies of a
C.li. thousand four hundredth and fyftye, upon the South side, Ephraim,
Manasse, and Benjamin upon the West part, with their C. and eight thousand and
one hundredth. D^n, Asser, and Neptalim upon the north with their C. and lvii.
thousand and six hundred also. Where as the tribe of Leuy was only appointed
to minister in the tabernacle of witness in the midst of the hosts, and
therefore was not at that time nu^bered among the children of Israel.

20 Finally (says the Angel) the wall of this beautyfull City (which is the
power of God unto salvation for them that believes) has xii. strong
foundations surely couched upon the immovable and hard rock Christ. For upon
him was the Christian Church first grounded. Adam, Noe, Abraham, Moses,
David, Helias, and John Baptist, with all the other fathers and prophets
builded upon him, though they were long before him. For all they trusted
surely in the promises that God had made them in him. All they being under the
cloud did eat of one spirytuall meat, and dronk of one spiritual rock
following them in the flesh which was Jesus Christ. No man can lay any other
foundation than is laid already, which is Christ Jesus.

21 Upon this one foundation perpetually strong and durable, were laid these
twelve foundations agreeing to the same. And in them were ye names of the
Lambs.xii. Apostles or faithful messengers. As Peter, John, James, Andrew,
Philip, Bartilmew, Thomas, Mathewe, James the less, Simon, Thadeus, and
Mathyas. These are figured in the xii. stones yt Joshua raised up in Galgala for
a remembrance of the dry passage of the children of Israel through Iordane.
So are they signified also by the xii. other stones where with Helias in the
mount of Tarmo^us made an altar in the Lords name. The sure ground of these
foundations was, that Christ is the sone of the living God. Upon this builded
all they both in their preachyngs and writyngs. All one with this was the faith
of the Prophets, which believed that he was the Lamb that should take away
the sins of the world. For they inquired the way of salvation, they serched
for the sauinge health. Wherein thy prove themselves the living stones of this
spiritual building. Thus unto one sure ground of faith extended the belues
both of the Apostles and Prophets. Now are ye citizens with the saints (says
Paul to the Ephesians) builded upon the sure founda^ion of y^ Apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ being ye fast corner stone. For this cause are ye
apostles put here before ye prophets, yt we redi^g their profices should
understand the^ after y^ apostle doctrine, and so deduce the^ both unto christ
And for this consideration are they here called the Lambs Apostles, that they
have in all their instructions and writings uttered nothing but that they have
received of his wonderful, rich, and plentuous habundance. Besides all this,
not only are these twelve here named, to be taken for the xii. foundations and
none other. For than should Paul be excluded, which labored more then all the
rest. So should Barnabas, Silas, Lucas, Agabus, Judas the rightuous, John that
was called Marcus, with many other. But so many godly ministers are of ye sort
besides them, as has been of the same faith, spirit, and doctrine. For ye must
consider that twelve is here a universal number as in other places, and
betokneth all the whole felowshipp, they be holden for the principals for that
they were present with Christ.

The Text.
1 And he that talked with me. 2. Had a golden read. 3. To measure the City
with all 4. And the gates there of. 5. And the wall thereof. 6. And the city
was built fouresquare 7. And the length was as large as the bredthe of it 8.
And he measured the City with the reed xii. thousand furlongs 9. And the
length and the breadth 10. And the height of it were equal 11. And he measured
the wall thereof, an hundred and xliiii. cubits. 12. After the measure of man,
which the Angel had.

The Commentary.
1 And the Angel (says saint John) or set purpose of the Lord which
commoned thus with me in secret mystery, had a measure al of Gold in his
hand, in similitude of a Reed, not all unlike unto them that talked with
Ezechiel and Zachary, in misterye also.

2 And with this golden Reed, which is the pure word of God, did he take
measure both of the City it self, and of the twelve gates thereof, and also
of the great mighty wall of the same.

3 The determinate purpose of the everlasting builder, measures all things
concerning his church, according to his undefiled scriptures, which are the
right rule of faith and the rod of right order in his kingdom.

What so ever they be (says both Paul and David) that live according to this
rule, mercy, and peace be unto them, as upon the Israel of God. Not only is
this measuring Reed precious in it self, but also as gold in the furnace it
is daily tried a fresh, through many troubelous adversaries of them that has
unfeignedly set hands upon it. Diversely measures this Reed of the spirit in ye
city, in the gates, and in the wall. For diverse are the gifts of ye holy ghost
in one congregation of the Lord, unto every one is given a grace according to
the mesure of faith. Some has he constitute apostles, some prophets, some
evangelists, some pastors and teachers to the necessary edification of
Christ's mystical body. For here by the city is meant the whole congregation
of Gods elects, perfectly joined together in one true believe.

4 By the gates, the godly preachers and counselers, by whom Christ opens
unto his kingdom.

5 By the wall, the mighty power which he has committed to the Angels or
spirits of heaven to keep the^, to the godly princes and magistrates here to
defend them, and to other true ministers to hold them still in righteousness.
All these must be measured. They must be brought to the touchstone. The
scriptures must try of what spirit they are. If they agree not to this
measure, they pertain not to the city of god. But they are that salt unsavory
that is no better worth tha^ to be thrown forth of men and those unprofitable
servants whom the Lord shall cast into exterior darkness.

6 And as concerning the fashion of this city, builded all four square, all
four sides thereof being of like length and breadth.

7 No longer nor brother was it upon the east side than upon the north side, nor
upon the south part than toward the west. But equal it was every way toward
al quarters of the world And as it was in length and breadth, so was it in
height. Which signifies not only ye perpetual stabilitie or surenesse of ye
true christian faith, the Lord evermore preserving it, but also ye faithful
beleuers of on quarter of ye world, are so hyly accepted unto hi^, as of
another So largely does he reward them of y^ East that truly believes in
Christ, as of any other quarters else, and so highly does he esteem them. So
dear unto him are those good Christians that dwell among the Sarizens,
Turks, and Jews, as are they which dwell in the midst of Christendom. So
precious that lie sick in the spittle house, as they which pray in the temple.
Noe found grace in the sight of God, when all the world else were wicked. Loath
was judged rightuous in the midst of the filthy Sodomits. And so are many yet
to this day, among the Idolatrous and supersticyous papists. Still are there
Lambs among wolves, clean wheat among tares, and good fishes among evil.
Job was a companion with the Dragons, Estryches. Esaye dwelt among il tonged
people, Ezechiell in the midst of a froward household. Sayncte Paul
commended the Philipyans, in y^ they shone among the perverse generation, as
lights in the firmament. Never is God any parciall accepter of persons, but
among all peoples, he that in his fear works righteousness, is accepted
unto him, whatsoever he be. Thus are they in length, breadth, and heygth,
spiritual, godly and heavenly through his word.

8 Moreover this Angel measured ye city with the golden rode, and it was in
compass.xii. thousand furlonges. Which signifies Christ's kingdom to be so
large every way, that it reaches the whole earth over by his word and promis.
The sonde of the Apostels preaching has gone out into all lands, and their
doctrine into the ends of the world. For.xii. evermore in the scriptures is an
whole perfect number, and a thousand a universal sum, as we have here noted
before. No man ought in this heavenly work^ supersticiously to observe the
numbers but rather to seek dilygently to understand the Godly mysteries that
they comprehend.

9 The greatness of a city is to be considered to the multitude of ye
dwellers therein. Than who can thynk^ Christ's congregation small, measuringe
it by the scriptures from the first beginning of the world to ye latter
ending. A furlonge is the eyghte part of a mile and contains a hundredth and
twenty five paces, which is in length, vi. hundredth and xxv. foot and here it
betoke^oth the continual course of labor and paynefull sufferaunce in the
kingdom of Christ after saint Paul. They that run for the wager in this
course, labors not for a thing uncertain. But for an incorruptible crown,
they hold their bodies in subieccion to the spirit.

Such are the inhabitours of this city, whose number is great, whole, and
perfect, universally taken. O Israel (says Baruch) how great is the house
of God? and how large is the compass of his possession? Exceeding great is it
and has none end, highout of measure and can not be over reached.

10 The heyght of this City from the foundatyon, was all one in measure with
the length and breadth. For every way was it equal and square in compass.

Round about was it strong, mighty, and sure, the gates of hell in no wise
able to prevail against it. Upon every part faithful, perfect and godly,
seekynge those things only which are above where Christ is sittyng at the
rygyt hand of God. Yea, all spiritual, high, and heavenly are they, having
their daily conversation not here but in heaven, from whence they wait for
their savior Jesus Christ. So high also is the spirit that governs this
congregation in rewardynge as it is either large in geuinge, or long in
continual working. Never had John seen the heyghte, breadth and length of this
wonderful city for our universal comfort, had he not ben raised up by the
secret purpose of God into the mountain of this spirit, inestimable hight and
great.

11 After this measured the Angel the wall of the city, and it came fully to
an hundred and.xliiii. cubits, which is.xii. times.xii. in number, as we had
before here in the vii. and xiiii. Chapiters. And it co^prehendeth ye whole
number of ye elect multitude, only for ye universal perfectness thereof. A
cubytte after the common sort is in length but a foot and an half, but after
the course of Geometry it is six times so much, which comes too.ix. foot
justly. Now an hundredth and.xliiii. cubits wants after the first
rekening.CC. and.ix foot of a furlonge. And after the rules of Geometrye, it
passes not.xlvi. foot more than ii. furlonges, which stretches nothing
toward.xii. thousand furlonges. Therefore we may not here reken ye cubytes
with the furlonges after a worldly sort, but we must spiritually measure them
according to the scriptures. So that they may agree together after the
meaning of ye mystery, the course with the gift, and the workinge with the
power. The cubyte of a man is the fore part of his arm with the hand, and it
betokens here in mystery Jesus christ, which is the strong arm of ye father.
To whom is the arm of the Lord known (says Esaye and John) or who
perceyueth the power of his word? Such might (says Mary) shows he in his
arm, as will scatter abrod his obstinate, enemies. That hand is he, where with
god created al things, in the beginning. In this arm has he redeemed his
people, the posterity of Jacob and Joseph. With this hand preserves he them
in the life that can not fail, whom the enymies has marked out unto cruel
death. Through the mighty power of this arm shall most terrible fear and dred
light upon the wicked at the latter day. After this cubyte must they be
measured, which are of this spiritual building, specially they yt are the wall
thereof, as the Godly preachers, princes, maiestrates, and other lawefull
ministers. Agreeable to his doctrine ought their conuersatyon to be in all
points. As his true minysters should they show them selves in meekness,
konwledge, long sufferaunce, in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in ye
power of GOD, by the armoure of righteousness, and so forth. Necessary is it
for the^ to do on Jesus Christ, and to walk worthily in their vocacio^,
observing ye unity of ye spirit in ye yoke of peace. As the chose^ holy, and
well-beloved, of God to take upon them a tender pyttie, kyndnesse, lowlynesse,
softness, swifte forgiving, with other fruits of the spirit, acknowledging
always Christ's for their only wysdom, righteousness, and redemption, for
their keeper, sauer, and strong bulwark of defense. Thus in this spiritual
rekeninge is it to be considered, yt by the furlonges is the city measured,
and by the cubytes the wall, the furlonges comprehendyng them that have run
in the true course of a christian life, and the cubits them that have justly
ministered the power of Christ's word and doctrine. Some writers have taken the
one sort here for martiers, for valiauntlye performinge their most sharp
course, and the other for them that have peaceably rested in Christ. But I am
contented here with my conjecture, consideringe there have been martiers in
both the before named degrees. And as for the vnequalnesse of length in ye
furlonges and cubits, it only respects ye persons, or peoples among whom the
people, taught, have exceeded the teachers in number, y^ co^munalty, ye
governors, and the flock, the shepardes, or else the gentyls, the Jews. Yet
are they both twelve, both great, whole, perfect, and universal numbers, one
Jerusalem, or one perfect kingdom of Christ. Thus does also the xii. twelues
corresponde to ye xii. thousands, as ye Jews to ye ge^tyles in one faith
(though their limits were much larger, exte^ding to ye ends of ye world) and
are made one shepefolde or flock. Christ being one shepeherde of salvation to
the^ both.

12 Consequently the golden measure which ye Angel had, was much after ye
measure yt man customably uses. And this signifies yt the word of god which
measures all things perteyninge to his church, is given unto us under such
worldly similitudes and likilihodes, as we are best acquainted with, for our
weakness sake. Not only in this revelation, but also in all other books of
ye scriptures does ye holy ghost at his appoyctment, alure us to his kingdom
by the example and parables of such things as we have in daily custom. As of
mountains, gardens, welspringes, vyneyardes, fygge trees, tabernacles,
temples, buyldynges, maryages, stewards, vyrgyns, mercha^dise, tyllynge,
harvest, talentes, pearls, nets, suppers, sheep, lambs, light, wheat,
salt, gootes, doves, serpents, men, keys, lanternes, swerdes, rods,
trauelinge women, mustarde seed, beasts, and here of furlonges and cubytes,
with such other like, and all to make us to perceive them. Now see we only by
such dark simylitudes. But in the regeneratyon, when all things is clear,
shall we have need of no such night shadows, without veil or coueryng shall
we then see, and beeholde our Lord God as he is in deed. Than shall we
perfectly know like as we are now known of him. Tha^ shall our measure be in all points, as is the Angels measure. Equal shall we be unto them in full
perfectyon, understanding, and knowledge. For as the Angels of heaven shall we
than be, impassible, immortal, and glorious, and of equal number with the^.

The Text.
1 And the building of the wall of it, was of Jasper, 2. and the city was of
pure gold, 3. like unto clear glass, 4. And the foundacions of the wales
and of the city 5. were garnyshed with all manner of precious stones.

6 The first foundatyon was a Jasper, 7. the second a Saphyre, 8. the third
a Calcedonye, 9. the fourth a Smaragde, 10. the fifte a Sardonix, 11. the sixte
a Sardeos 12. the seventh a Chrysolyte, 13. the eyghte a Gerall, 14. the nynth
a Topas, 15. the tenth a Chrisoprasos, 16. the eleventh a Iacynte, 17. the
tvvelfte an Amatist.

The Commentarye.
1 The whole buyldyng, of the wall of this city was of Iaspar stone. Which
betokneth that in Christ it shall be most precious, pleasant, delectable, and
sure. For ever shall they be new and green, fresh, and lively, durable, and
beutyfull, that perfectly believe in him, and shall become sure stays or
pyllers in his holy temple. He that truly observes my word (says Christ)
shall never taste of death. Upon a living foundacyon shall they be couched,
and so grow up into an holy temple in the Lord, and so together into the
habytacle of God in the holy Ghost.

2 And this fair city it self was of most pure gold, so fine, beutifull and
clear as most pure glass possible. With out spot or deformite is ye true church
of god, having neither blemish nor yet wrincle, and tried it is thoroughly as
gold in the furnace. The clear light of this city is Christ, which never did
sin in word nor in deed. More precious have his death and bloudshedinge made
it than is the most pure fine gold that ever was yet seen.

3 A glorious congregation have he provided it to be, and that will appear in
ye day of his visitatio^. So far shall this excel the Jerusalem that Solomon
builded, as heaven exceleth ye earth. For yt was but gold within, this is all
gold thoroughly, both within and with out. That was builded by the hands of men,
this is of a much higher workemanshyppe.

An undefiled heritage is this, and shall be changed from clerenesse to
clerenesse, into the glory of the Lord.

4 The strong foundations of ye wall of this worthy city (which is ye firm
faith of ye Patriarchs and Prophets, the Appostles and other true teachers,
surely grounded upon Christ) were beutifully adorned with all manner of
precious stones, or gifts of the holy Ghost.

5 Diverse were ye graces which they had received, and the fruits out
springing from the^ were also diverse and glorious. As love, joy, peace,
patience, long suffering, gentelnesse, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
te^peraunce, and such other.

Nothing fair appeared these stones unto this world, when they were hewn,
squared, and made fyt foundatio^s, by the manyfolde persecutions of tyrauntes,
no more than was the great costly stone in the bottom of Syon, upon whom they
were builded, which seemed so deformed as a lypper.

Nevertheless, yet was their death precious in ye lords sight. These are they
(shall their adversaries say at ye day) whom we sometime thought fools and had
in much derision. But now they are counted among the children of god, and have
their porcio^ among ye saints. Here might much be spoken of faith, which
diversely wrought in Abel, Seth, and Enoch for the first age. In Noe, Abraham,
Moses, David, Helias, and other in their ages. In Peter, John, and James, with
all the other Apostles and sincere preachers since Christ's time. But let that
suffice in this behalf, that S. Paul has written in the.xi. Chap. to the
Hebrews, which is also here after comprehended under the mystery of the.xii.
precious stones whereof the foundacions are.

6 In that the first foundation is said here to be of a Iaspar or Dyamond,
(Whose color is grene) is signified that the faith of the first fathers is
not yet withered away. Still unto this present day is the example of Enos
oryent, fresh, and lively, which first called upon the name of God, and of
many such other more.

Still persevere they grene in the lively Scriptures and fades not.

I have earnestly prayed for thee Peter (says Christ) that thy faith should
not fail.

7 The second foundation was of a Sapphire, whose color is as the Air clear,
but not very precious in sight. This betokens those simple souls, which
though they were as Job and Joseph the carpentour, not precious to the world,
yet had they their daily conuersations in heaven.

8 The third was of a Calcedony, which is yet more course to look upon than
the Saphyre, but in nature precious, mighty, and strong.

Of this nature were Helias and John Baptiste, whose conversation was in the
wilderness, rough, hard, and unpleasant. Yet apeared they precious at their
times appointed, mightily rebuking sin, drawinge unto them the chafe as the
property is of the Calcedony (which are the common people) but utterly
throwing forth again or condemning the Idolatours and hipocrites.

The word of Helias brent like a cresset, and John was a shining lantern
before the Lord.

9 The fourth was of a Smaragde or an Emerald, which is not only gren^ of his
own nature, but he makes all the air about him to seem green also.

Of this condition was Hieremy and Paul, which having the doctrine of life,
spared not to minister it unto other for their eternal refreshing. These with
such other thrown into the foundation of the church, were very comfortable
unto other.

With the holy (says David) thou shall be holy* and with the pure innocent
thou shall be both innocent and pure.

10 The fyfte was of a Sardonix, which is compouned of a Sardeos and an Onice,
and is beneth black, in the midst white, and above read. Such were those
meek spirited that confesses themselves sinners with David and Magdalene,
being through faith both pure and orient before god.

Though I be black (says ye true congregation) yet am I fair and well favored
We faint not (says Paul) for though our outward man be corrupt yet is he
that is inward daily renewed.

11 The syxt is a Sardeos, which in simultitude is very like unto red earth.
And such are they, as notwithstanding the great benefits of God, thinking
themselves the unworthy children of Adam, whose interpretacio^ after Philo, is
red earth in deed. Mary Christ's mother was of this sort, confessing her self
after most high benefightes, to be but an hand maid, and her spirit only to
rejoice in god her savior. So was Abraham calling himself but dust and ashes
before the Lord.

12 The seventh foundation is of a Crisolite or Turcas, which shines as gold,
and seems as it should send forth sparks. Under this are they comprehended,
which having the wisdom of the spirit, inflameth other with it, prouokinge
them thereby to the love of god and their neighbor. Thus did Moses and Esaias,
Barnabas and Paul, in whom the glory of the Lord apeared plentiously.

13 The eight was of a Berall, which is of a pale grene color, betokening
those faithful persons which of christian compassion has dolorously lamented
the fall of their brethren. Of this godly nature was Steven which prayed for
them that stoned him to death. So was before his time Samuel which mourned for
Saul, when he see him cast out of the Lords favor.

14 The nynth was of a Topaze which has in him the colors of all other
stones. And this signifies the^, which are with all virtues adourned. Like as
was Daniell the man of desires, and John the Evangelist which wrote this
present prophecy, whom Christ much loved. The clear works of these and such
other would he to shine unto men, that by them the father might be glorified.

15 The tenth was of a Chrisoprasos, whose condition is to shine like gold, and
yet he is green in sight. Such are they which having godly wysdo^e, utters
it according to the tallent given them of the Lord, thereby renewing the dull
spirits of other unto heavenly things. Among this sort may Ezechiell be
numbered, which saw many wonderful visions, and so may Simeo^ and Anna in the
Gospel.

16 The eleue^th was of a Iacinct, which is in color like unto water, spread
over with bright son beams. And this betokens those that are baren from
the ^cience and learning of this world, and yet have knowledge from above.
Uery Idiots appear they in ye sight of men, and yet are they taught of God,
to disclose most wonderful secrets. Of this sort were Oseas, Iohel, and Amos,
wihch was but a poor shepard, with ye other inferior prophets: And so were
Andrew, Philip, and Thomas with the other Apostles and Disciples.

17 The twelft was an Amatist, purple, violet, and rose colored. And this
betokneth them that are fervent, meek, and constaunt in the Lords truth, and
that has been always ready to shed their blood for it. Such were the
vnbrethren in ye Machabees with their most faithful mother. So was also James
the more, and Antipas the faithful witness, with other disciples and martirs.
None can show a more token of love than he which gives up his life for his
friends. This sort did Christ proclaim altogether blessed, and said yt ye
kingdom of heaven was their own. Thus signifies these xii. foundatio^s, yt the
godly ministers of Christ's congregation, have builded upon him according to ye
diverse graces which god has given the^, some gold, some silver, some precious
stones. But they yt have brought unto this building, ti^ber, hay or stubble
which are customs, tradicions, and dum ceremonies, or else worldly honors,
riches, and voluptuous plesures, are not in this heavenly number admitted.
Figured are these foundatio^s in ye precious stones which were in the breast
flap of Aron yt hye priest, and in the preious decking of ye king of Tirus,
necessary shall it be for him yt will more largely know ye natural properties of
the^, to resort unto Plinius in ye xxxvii. Book of his natural historye, or
unto Bartilmew, de proprietatibus reru^, and for ye understanding of mysteries,
unto S. Hierom upon ye liiii. chap. of Esaias, or unto Beda, Haymo, Costasy,
Baco^^horpe, Elyne, Tilney, and such other as has written great works upon ye
apocalips. Enough is it for us to show you after ye mind of S. Augustine these
stones to signify ye diverse graces of ye holy ghost. For all these things
does one spirit of ye Lord work, dividing several gifts unto every man at his
pleasure which are not without their preciousnes, beuty, and excellent glory, as
will appear in ye glorius day of ye children of god.

The Text.
1 And the twelve gates were xii. pearls. 2. And every gate was of one
pearl. 3. And the streat of the city was pure gold. 4. As a thorough
shining glass. 5. And I savv no temple therein, 6, For the Lord God almighty
and the Lamb is the temple of it. 7. And the city has no need of the sun,
neither of the moon to lighten it. 8. For the brightness of God does lighten
it. 9, And the Lamb is the light of it. 10. And the people which are laued
shall walk in the light of it. 11. And the kings of the earth shall bring
their glory unto it. 12. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day. 13, For
there shall be no night there. 14. And there shall enter into it none unclean
thing. 15. Neither whatsoever works abhominatio^, or makes lies, 16 but
they which are written in the Lambs Book of life.

The Commentary.
1 Consequently (says the Angel unto John) the xii. gates or openinges into
this city, were twelve fair pearls, For dilectable and precious is the
doctrine of the gospel, whereby men do enter into the kingdom of God on
every side, or in every quarter and age of the world.

2 And every gate by him self was of one pearl, like as were the foundations
of one precious stone evermore in their kinds. In token that the verytie of
Christ, is whole perfect, and unbroken in it self, like as is his cote without
seame. A special commodyty is it in cities, to have their gates strong and
bewtifull. And so is it in the kingdom of God, that they which open unto
righteousness, be more fervent in the truth and of a more sincere life tha^
the residue. For they should be both the salt of the earth and light of the
world* Though these gates be many, yet have they but one entrance, for each
one of them is but of one pearl. But one mediator is there between God and
man, which is Jesus Christ* None may come unto the father but by him only.
Alone is he the door, the way, the verytie, light, and life.

3 And as concerning the city within the great street thereof was as of pure
gold, so fine, fair, and clear all the bright shining glass, yt may be
seen through without any manner of impediment or dymnesse.

This street is the large commynalty or the saints, whom the father of heaven
by his power made of froward stones, the perfect children of Abraham, when he
couched them here together in the verity of one christian faith, and shall here
after join in such perfection of love as possible can not be dissolved.

4 Precious are they here through faith in Christ's blood, and there shall they
be pure both in love and life incorruptible. Our rejoice (says saint Paul)
is not in carnal wisdom, but in the great grace of God, in singleness of
heart, and in a sincere faith. Your glory are we, even as you are ours also in
ye day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5 In this glorious city saw I no temple builded (says John) for ye Lord God
almighty, which is the eternal father, and the lamb Jesus Christ which is
his eternal son is the holy, full and perfect temple thereof. None outward
priesthood* ceremonye, nor sacrifyce for five commands Christ's doctrine to
his congregation. The golden measure of his word, which diffyneth and judges
all things necessary thereunto, appoints no such matter. For in no temples
made with stone dwells God, which will be all in all. Only is required of them a
sacrifice from the soul, which is the very temple of God. In his only name
should the faithful sort, there offer up themselves. And therefore Christ
appointed Uespasian and Titus, to turn over the great temple of Jerusalem,
and utterly to destroy that priesthood, because we should put no trust in
such things, nor yet be addict or bound to places. A damnable inuencion is it
of Antichrist that the suffragans halloweth the sinagogs, to bring them into
al kinds of superstition.

They constitute also a feastfull day to the honor and worshipe thereof,
called the dedication, which is most abominable wickedness. Truth it is yt
after ye Apostles time there were places appointod, where as the congregation
met together once in the weak, for ye hearing of Gods word and for ye holy
communion, and that was called the oratorie or house of prayer. But that house
was not exercysed nor coniured, crossed nor smered, blessed nor be sprinkled
with water. Neither was there at that time any altar set up in it, and
anointed with oil and creme, to offer any new sacrifice upon. Consider also
that ye appoinmente of this bare house without altar or images, was left to
man's ordinance without any expressed commandment of Christ, that it should be
thought of no reputacion. For in spirit and verity will god only be
worshipped. And for this cause after that Christ had driven the buyers and
sellers out of the temple, he commended none other temple unto us but his body,
which he raised up in the day of his resurection, to our behoue.

6 God therefore, is our temple and his Christ. In them ought we to do
sacryfice, and in none other. In their faith should our works, labors, and
studies be grounded only, if we covet them to profit us. John for his time
could see none other temple but this. The Lord of his tender mercy grant us
to be John's in this behalf. John beheld also at the Angels demonstration, that
this City had neither need of Sun nor Moon to minister light unto it, as
the old Jerusalem had. Neither has Christ's congregation need of man's
natural reason, nor yet of his worldly wisdom, conjectures, nor practices,
subtilties nor wiles, polices, nor wits, inuencions nor traditions. No,
neither of their philosophy nor sophystrie, the decrees nor sentences of the
great Lawyers and Schoolmen, which all is but darkness and blindness.

8 For the brightness of God shows the^ light sufficient. His shining
verytie, his pure gospel, and his undefiled laws, clears their
understandings. A lantern to their feet is his heavenly word. Only does that
clerenesse suffice them, which faith offers unto them.

9 Only are they contented with the light they have of the Lamb, which is the
bright Sun of righteousness. He is the Lamp, the Candle, and the flaming
Cresset of this city. None other admonisher have they need of, none other
counselor nor teacher. Accursed hold they him that brings any other
doctrine than his, though he were an Angel from heaven. For he is the only
light of the world ye brightness everlasting, the undefiled myrrour of the
majesty of God and the Image of his infinite goodness. Whosoever ever follows
him, can in no wise walk in the darkness. The days will come (says the
Lord in Hieremy) that a man shall not need to teach his neighbor or brother
for they shall know me from the highest to the lowest. I shall plant my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.

10 And the people of al manner of regions which are predestinate of God to be
saved, shall walk in the clearness of ye light. None other wisdom, health,
righteousness, and redemption shall they seek, than they find in him. Neither
shall they care for Mary nor Ihon, rodes nor relics, hedes, nor holy water,
masses, nor merits. For so shall he shine upon them, and his glory apere in
them that the clouds of Antichrist and his false prophits shall take no place.
So lively shall the rightuous wax in that faith of salvation, that they shall
become not only the children of clernesse, but also very lyghtes in the Lord,

11 Morouer unto this heavenly light shall the mighty kings of the earth
bring their glory, magnifycence, and honor, as did the wise men of ye East,
which offered rewards unto Christ. They shall be converted from their erroures,
to a sincer, believe in the Lord, as were in the Apostles time Abagarus,
Egippus, and Gundoforus. And since their days the mighty Emperor great
Constantine, Iouinian, Theodosius and diverse other. Yea, some were so fervent
in that faith, that gladly they suffered death for it. Of whose numher were here
in England, saint Edmound, Oswalde, Ethelbert, Edwyne and Fremonde, with a
great sort more in other Christian regions. All kings (says Deuid) shall
worshipe him and all paganes shall do him service. Among these are not they to
be rek^ned, which leaving their kingdoms, has made them selves monks and
friars, or has founded masses and monastaries to be prayed for. For they never
brought their glory to this light. No more have they done which has enriched
the cleargye, gluttinge them with possessions, and setting them up in a
glitteryng pomp. But rather have they sought darkness than light, blyndenesse
than to be taught of god. Some have thought them selves in our age clearly
converted to this light. But ryghtly has their iniquity lied unto them. For
nothing have they done less than brought unto Christ their glory. Truth
it is that they have discharged them selves of the Pope, and to some of his
sects.

They have plucked down shrynes and Images that received offeringes, and daily
worshippings, with a few superstitions besides, but still bringing up whelps
of the same false generation, both bishops and prists. Still have they to this
day, the same wicked rits and ceremonies that they had before. And when they
should bring any thing to a right christian order, according to Christ's first
institution, they cannot away with it. Great is the vengeance terrible heavy and
fearful the judgment that abides them.

12 And as concerning the great gates of this City, which are the true
understandings of the Lords verities, they shall not be shut up by day. Hidden
shall they not be to them ye walk in this light. All that Christ has received
of his heavenly father leaves he manifest and plain unto his faithful
leuers* Not only opens he their feeble understandings, but also sends them
his spirit to deduce them into al godly knowledge.

13 For in that city shall be no night. No doctrine of darkness, nor filthy
mist of men's imaginations, can have place where Christ is ever residente and
his verytie manifest. The night of infidelytie is clean gone from the^, which
has obtained the everlasting day. The clouds of filthy errors abides not,
where the true sun has always dominion. The strong powers of hell shall not
be able to prevail, where as faith is perfect and sure. So goes the Lord
before his true Israelits in this pillar of fire, that the night is unto them
all one with the day. That is unto other darkness in parables, is unto them
the clear light and the euidentlye known mysteries of Gods kingdom. In the
common translation (that is daily read in the Temple) it follows, that they
shall bring the glory and honor of the heithen into the same city, which is
not found in the Greek. And by this is it signyfyed that the apostles and
other godly preachers sins their time, converting the gentles, have not only
brought into the christian Church by their preachings many of their
philosophers whose glory has been their wisdom and learning, but also their
princely potentates, whose honor consisted in power, possessions, and
magnificence. Of this sort was the chamberlain of Queen Ca^dace, to whom
Philip declared ye prophecy. So was Cornelius the noble Centurion, which was
instructed and baptized of Peter. So were also Dionisius the Areopagite. Apollo
of Alexandria, and Aquila the Italiane, with diverse other whom Paul converted
in his progress. And after their days were of this company Justinius the
martyr, Quadratus, Aristides, Tertullyane, Origyne, Cyryll, Basyle, John
Crysostome, Augustyne, Hieronimie, with an infinite number else. So was Lucius
the first Christian King of this region, Philippus the Emperor, with many
other great governors, which both builded alms houses for the poor, and made
other godly provision else. This is the precious spoil they brought out of
Egypt, and the fruit they have planted in the Lords vyneyard. As Esaye
prophesied, they enjoyed the strength of the paganes and tryumphed in their
glory, but not in their superfluous toys and vanities as do the Papists.

14 For into this city (says the text) or congregation, which is from within
and unknown to the world, shall nothing enter that is unclean, or that after
any sort defyleth. No righteousness of men, which is before God, but as the
cloth stained with me^strue. No tradicions, merytes, nor masses, apere they
never so holy. For all that is done besides the prescriptes of his word, is
plain abomination and filthiness.

None that is gelded or ^oacted to chastity by papisticall vows. None that is
borne of a co^cubyne, or that makes a new supersticious profession. No
misbegotten Moabytes, and Ammonites betokening all sects of perdicion, are
allowed of the Lord unto this congregation. Only are they accepted for
Citizens thereof, which are renewed in faith by the spirit of Jesus Christ.

15 Whatsoever it be that works abhominacion in uncommanded worshippings, or
makes lies in Hypocrisy, is clearly sequestered from this undefiled city. The
constrained virginity of priests, which has made so many Sodomytes,
Confession under a stole that has bredde so many false traitors and thieves.
The two horned order of Bishops that has hatched so many proud glutto^s and
murderers. The anointed priesthood ye has so many Idolatours. The unholy
profession of monks that has brought forth so many stinking hypocrites, with
such other seeds of the devil, has here no place at al. For nether
whormongers, nor yet Ido^l worshipers, nor buggerers, nor Gomoreans, nor
extorcioners, nor couetuouse brybers, nor dronkardes, nor blasphemers of the
Lords word, nor cruel destroyers of innocents can in any wise inherit the
kingdom of God.

16 But they only shall possess that which are written in the Lambs book of
life, or that were predestinate there unto in Christ before the worlds
constitution, to be holy and unspotted in his sight. These are they who^ he
has a perpetual remembrance, whom he has ordained of goodness, chose^ of
mercy, called by the Gospel, justified thorough faith, and glorified in the
perfourmaunce of his commaundeme^ts, that they should be like fashioned to the
shape of his son. Though these of frailnesse offend many times (as the
flesh can do none other) yet deny they not the verytie, they abhor not ye
scriptures. But after they have fallen they repent from the heart, they seek
the remedies, they hate their own deeds, they call unto Christ, they lament
their chance, they honger and thyrst continually for the righteousness of
God, and such other like. Now as concerning this city in the regeneration or
Sabbath to come, all will be gold, precious stone, and pearl. Their glory
will be perfect, their knowledge whole, and their judgment in the spirit
full. All will be there square, even, and right, nothing shall be crooked, rough,
and froward. All will be new and precious, no manner of deformity appearing in
ye creaturs. The beauty of ye city will be wonderful, the light inestimable,
the dwelling most quietous and pleasant. There shall we clearly behold how
myghtie, marvelous, high, bewtyfull, glorious, perfect, strong, victoryous,
delectable, and sweet our redemer Jesus Christ is with his father and holy
Ghost. Here have we but a small taste thereof, but there, shall we be fully
replenyshed there with.

The xxii. Chapter.
Still does this Chapter following (which is the last of this Reuelacyon)
prosecute the spiritual and heavenly commodities of this City, concluding
with most excellent admonicions and Godly warninges.

The text.
1 And he shevved me a pure river. 2. of water of life. 3. clear as
crystal. 4. proceedynge out of the seat of God, and of the lamb. 5, in the
myddest of the streate of it. 6. and of either side of the tyuer. 7. was their
wood of life. 8. which bare twelve manner of fruits. 9. and gave fruit
every month. 10. and the leaves of the wood served. 11. to heal people
with all.

The Commentary.
1 And the Angel (says S. Johan) or gracious purpose of the Lord, which
co^moned with me all this time to bring me yet into a farther knowledge of his
mysteries showed unto me a most pure and commodious river, which was the
wholesome water of life. None other can I suppose this river to be by the
search of the scriptures, but the flowing verity, ye word of salvation, or
the effectual doctrine of Christ's holy spirit. That is the sweet flood of Eden
which pleasau^tly flows through Paradyse, and visits ye.iiii. quarters of
the world. This is ye wholesome and dilectable water, which daily comforts
and preserves ye spiritual Jerusalem from all contagious maladies. This
running flood with his ryuers on every side, reioyseth ye city of god which is
the habitation of ye highest.

2 All full of quyckenesse is it, springing into ye life everlasting. Here is
it the spiritual comfort of gods children, there shall it be ye enestimable
glory of ye saints. To who^ shall we go lord (says Peter) but unto thee? For
only haste thou the words of eternal life.

3 So clear is this water as ye pure cristall that is without spotte. Much
farther from corruption is the sincere word of God, than is the fine silver
that is vii. times tried in ye fire. The laws of the Lord are perfect and
quickneth the soul, his testimonies are true giving wiseome to babes. His
statutes are right rejoicing the heart. His precepts are pure giving sight to
the eyes. And his judgments are all together rightuous.

4 The nature of this water is none other but evermore to cle^se, evermore to
revive, and evermore to make whole and perfect. For only does it issewe from
the magistie of God, it proceeds out from the sempiternall throne of ye
father, and so flows forth in the ple^tuous haboundaunce of the lamb Jesus
Christ and of his Godly spirit. With him is the well of everlasting life.
They that walk in his light shall be free from darkness for ever. They shall
thoroughly enjoy the haboundaunce of those things that his house is full of,
and he shall give them drnicke out of the full flowing river of his eternal
pleasures. I will power clear water upon you (says the Lord in Ezechiell) and
ye shall be clean from all filthynesse. A new heart will I give you. A new spirit
will. I plant in you, and so cleanse you from all your idols. Rejoice with
Jerusalem all you that love her, for ye shall suck comfort out of her
breasts, and be satisfied. They that have sown in heaviness, shall reap in
perpetual gladness. From the father and the son proceeded the holy Ghost, as
a clear cristall river, neither created nor be gotten, to refreshe this chosen
city. So that much more understanding, light, and knoweledge it has, than had
the old Synagog of the Jews which was thereof but a shadow. Yet is it
incomparably far from that shall be in the durable life to come, being as
yet thereto but a figure. For as witnesses Paul, our knowledge is now
imperfect, and our prophesying imperfect But when that comes which is perfect,
then that which is imperfect shall be done away. Here is it also to be
co^sidred that the Lamb is equal with God, they both having but one seat.

5 Moreover in the mids of the golden stret of this beutifull city, which
comprehends the spiritual children of Abraham couched together in the unity
of one tried faith.

6 And upon either sides of the sweet river which are the.ii. Testamentes of
the Lord, was standing the most dilectable tree of life Jesus Christ, that
mediator and father which gives life ^o the world. Out of the stock of
Afbraham and David sprang this free a^er the flesh, conceived of the holy
Ghost, and borne of Marie the virgin, which was also a golden stone of this
street. Blessed art thou (says Elizabeth) for thy beleues sake. For in thee
is performed the full promise of the Lord. This is that tree which was planted
by the water side, and gave forth fruit at his time appointed. As the tree of
life was set in the mids of Paradyse at the beginning, so is he now
spiritually grounded in the midst of his church, which is his garden of
pleasure. Behold (says Christ) I am with you every day unto ye worlds end.

7 Maruayll not that the tree is here called wood, for it is the custom and
manner of the Hebrews to put the one for the other. Both is this tree in the
myddest of the street and also upon either sides of the river. For both is
Christ known of his faithful multitude, and comprehended in the scriptures.
David acknowledged himself to be a pure stone of this golden street, when he
said. My humble soul has cleaued or fastened to the pauemente, thou
quyckening me Lord according to thy word. So did King Ezechyas when he was
reuyued again. And so did Helias when he under the Juniper tree desired to
dye, with many other more. Between both testaments arose Christ, performing the
old, and beginning the new. He bordereth also to this present day upon them
both, for both they bear large and plentuous witness of him. Both the law
and the Gospel, the Prophets and Apostles, the Psalms and all other
scriptures, witnesses thoroughly that he is ye promised seed, the son of ye
living God, and the savior of ye world.

8 If that soil be fortunate which brings forth fruits twyse in the year,
most happy and blessed is the ground of this city. For the living tree thereof
is never barren, bare, nor idle.

9 Not only does it bear.xii. manner fruits of inestimable wholesomnesse,
betokening the universal graces and gifts of the holy Ghost, but also it
gives them forth every month in the year, or ever more with out ceasing.
Every month has there both his so^mer and his winter. Every life time of
them, which be of this congregation, has here both his sweet consolation in
the spirit and also his hard persecution in the flesh. Else is it not of
Christ's kingdom, which is the destroier of death, and ministers life at his
pleasure. In this tree is the original ground of life. He is the very life of
all them that lives unto God. In him only they consist, they move, and they
have their continual being. His branches are the holy Prophets and Apostles,
and the Euangilistes and Martyrs, with all other godly preachers and teachers,
evermore green and pleasant in their conuersa^io^ and doctrine. I am the true
vine (says he) and you are the branches. He that abides in me and I in him,
brings forth much fruit. Them sent Christ out as branches, and spread with
them the world over, too bring forth fruit yt should not perish. And that
every month, from age to age, and from time to time continually. For still are
the true beleuers fed with the Apostls fruitful doctrine, and shall be to the
end of the world. Therewith are their souls refreshed, in their great
manyfolde sorrows and labors. A singular comfort it is unto them to consider
Gods sweet promyses, and to remember what a louinge father they have of him
through Jesus christ their only mediator and savior. Most habou^d^untly
feel they themselves satysfied, when they are assertayned thoroughly by the
scriptures, yt they are predestinate, called, saved, sanctified, and shall be
here after gloryfied by him. Where as contrarywyse, the desperate infidels are
much discomforted, considring them selves blinded, condemned judged, and
reproved. Twelve are these fruits here called, which is a perfect and full
complete number, comprehending the universal graces of the spirit, contained
in all ye whole scriptures. As are ye fear of God ye poverty of soul, the
clennesse of heart, compassion upon ye nedy, desire of righteousness, mercy,
gentilnesse, quietness, sufferaunce, wysdom, understanding, counsayll,
perseueraunce, knowledge, prudence, force, justice, temperau^ce, with those yt
Paul numbreth too ye Galathians, and innumerable virtues besides some
expositours wills this twelve to signify ye none can be saved unless he be
of the xii. children of Israel in spirit, and so walk according to ye
docttrine of Christ's.xii. Apostles. But I am contented with that is said
before, being more agreeable to the text.

10 Such leaves had this wholesome tree as were for ye health of the people,
good necessary, and medicinable. Such profitable words and promyses has
Christ, as are spirit and life, power of salvation, and everlasting health.
These leaves of his can in no wise wyther away, and whatsoever he does by them,
it shall wonderfullly prosper. He sent forth his wholesome word (says David)
and so healed them. He delivered them from all euyls wherewyth they were
oppressed.

As these words are sincerely taught, the benefightes of our redemption are
brought into remembrance. So is the conscience quyeted, and ye heart made glad.

So reioyseth ye soul and gives perpetual thanks unto God the father. So
are the Gentyles throughlye made whole acknowledgynge Christ for their only
savior and redeemer.

11 Thus after Czechyell, are these fruits good to eat, and their leaves
profitable for medicynes.

As the leaves are the beauty of a tree, and preserves the fruit, so is the
true preachinge of the Lords verity, the comeliness of his church and
preseruacion of the same.

And not the oylynges, shauynges, and disguysynges, nor yet the Lordeshippes,
myters, and masses.

A light thing is the word of god written or spoken, as is the leaf also of
a tree. But if his spirit works in it, than is it a thing most precious,
effecttuall, and strong, compared of Christ to a mustarde seed, which gr^weth
into a great tree. Above all things (says Zorobabel) the verity, is most
strong. For that is the Lords eternal will, which never shall be altered.

The text.
1 And there shall be no more curse. 2. but the seat of God and the Lamb shall be
in it. 3. and his servants shall serve him. 4 And they shall see his face,.
5. and his name shall be in their foreheades. 6. And there shall be no night
there. 7. and they need no candell. 8. neither light of the Sun, 9. For the
Lord God gives them light. 10. and they shall reygne for evermore.

The Commentary.
1 And as concerning the before named city, or worthy congregation of the
Lord, the curse that the earth had in the work of Adam, shall clearly be
taken from it. Never more from henceforth shall therein be any thing that God
is not pleased with. For Christ has redeemed her from the curse of ye law,
sustaining thereof the penalty to make her innocent. So that now there is no
dampnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, following the doctrine of the
spirit, if painful adversity, loss of goods, detriment of fame,
syckenesse, persecution of body, or any other troublous cross happens, it is
evermore for the best to them that are faithful. Perfectlye shall these be
taken away with all the corrupt fruits of Adam in the regeneration, when to
their glory both heaven and earth shall be blessed, all that is cursed thrown
into the lake of everlasting fire.

2 And for a more sure token that this will be true, the high seat of God the
eternal father, and of the Lamb Jesus Christ with the holy Ghost, one Lord
almighty in three personages, shall be contynually there in. In the house of
Jacob shall he reygne evermore and of his kingdom shall be none end. Among
them will he fix his dwelling place here, which loves him and observes his
commandments, and there will he not be separated from them, but be still
their eternal God.

3 Moreover as his true servants, here shall they worship him in spirit and
in verity, and so serve him in a sincere faith perfourming such Godly works
as he has prescribed unto the^, and not such as men's fantasyes has dreamed.
They shall so mortyfie their old man, destroying the body of sin, that no
longer shall he obey the concupiscence, nor become a captyue servant unto
wickedness here. But now delivered from sin, they shall do on a new man
which is rightly fashyoned of God, and so become his servants in
righteousness. And in ye world to come they shall serve him according to the
knowledge that they shall have than, which now is incomprehensible and
unspeakable.

4 Having the spirit of Christ, they shall here see his face of salvation in
the myrroure of faith, which is to have knowledge of his Godhede. And after
this life they shall behold him in glory, like as he is in deed, much more
perfectly than did Jacob, which saw him face to face. Moreover so shall these
his servants respect his usage, that whatsoever they do here in word or in
deed, they shall do it with all godly fear, lowlynesse, and reverence,
always thinkyng him to behold their deeds.

5 They shall also perceive his glorious name to be written in their
foreheades, or regestred in their faith, feelyng the sweetness thereof to
their salvation. Besides y^ not only shall they confess God with their mouth,
but also in their outward co^uersacio^ shall they daily apere as his faithful
servants and children.

And as concerning the glorious day, by that name than shall one know an other
to be a free cytizen of heaven. Consider (says Saint John) how louyngly the
Father does use us. Not only here do we bear the name of his children, but
also there shall we be sure to be his sons in deed.

6 No manner of night or darcknesse of humayne doctrine, shall appear any more
in that city. But having Christ and his verity, all unprofitable doubts,
fantasies, errors, lies, and false miracles, shall these citizens detest here.
And after this life are no such matters to be looked for, all things the^ being
clear and perfect. Though they some time were darkness, yet are they now
light in the Lord, and will walk still therein as ye children thereof, till
they come to the God of Gods in the everlasting Syon.

7 There shall they have need of no candell or of wisdom borrowed of me^.

8 Nor yet of ye matteryall sun which mynistreth light to ye day, by whom is
meant ye high sience of philosophers conceived of ye creaturs above without faith.
Those fore^ lights may his ministeres well use, but truly his church needs
the^ not having much better than they are of christ and of his Aposils. Uery
dark lights are they, where his bright bea^es once apereth, which is ye clear
sun of righteousness. Abominable lies and errors did he prove ye high
learning of ye bishops and lawyers, as he does yet their decrees and laws,
their school, divinity and sentences, their ordinary questions and
quodlibetes.

9 All these stinking mistes set apart, the merciful Lord above, which is the
omnypotent God, gives them a light sufficient. His eternal son is unto them
such a clear shyning cresset, as no great blast can extinguishe, nor cloud
with dark shadow blemishe. Of most tender mercy sent he that day spring from
above, to dyrecte their feet here in the way of his peace.

10 And after this laborous pilgrymage, in the sabbath of perpetual quiet shall
he lyghten them throughlye with his most glorious presence, and with him shall
they reign for ever and ever in full felicity and glory continuing. In this
life begins ye kingdom through faith, but there shall it be performed in
the perfect sight of the godhead. The proud reign of tyrauntes is here but
for a time, the less it is to be feared. The meek reign of the rightuous
continues for ever, the more it is to be sought for and desired. The fruits
that are here very hard and sower unto them, shall there be inestimable
sweet, gentile, beautiful, perfect, and pleasant, having their full
rypenesse. No need shall it be tha^ to run by sea and land for the wisdom,
power, and glory of Christ, for in that day shall they be with every one
present. Here have they but little pretty beams of ye light, very small drops
of the water, and a smell of the fruits a far of. Likelihoodes, figures, and
mysteries have they only now of the beatitude to come. But there shall they be
sure to have them in full sight, taste, and sauer, and plentuously to be
satisfied with them. Scarce is it here in comparison to that it shall be there,
as one drop of water to the whole sea, or as an ha^dful of sa^d is to ye
whole earth.

The text.
1 And he said unto me. 2. These sayings are faithful and true. 3. And the
Lord God, 4. of the holy Prophets, 5. sen^ his Angel to shev^ unto his
servant, 6. the things which shortly must be fulfilled. 7. Behold, I come
shortly. 8. Happy is he that keeps the saying, 9. of the prophecy of this
book.

The Commentary.
1 In the conclusion of these most wonderful revelations (says saint John)
the Angel that communed with me all this time (which was the very spirit of
Christ) said thus unto me his poor exyled servant.

2 It shall become no man to despise these words, nor to reiecte these
sayings, whom thou have here seen and hard since the first beginning of this
revelation. For they are most faithful and true, sure and perfect, and shall
without fail at their appointed times in every jot be fulfilled, for the true
churches commodity and profit. This is here spoken for the conservation of the
high mysteries of this book, least any false Antichrist hereafter (as many
such has been in deed) should co^dempne them, deprave them, and as of none
authority report them. As the most dear treasures of God therefore, does the
holy Ghost here wrappe them up together, to preserve them under his power, and
sets unto them the seal of his own witness, yt they should evermore be
taken for his. After this sort did the Prophets use their prophecies,
concluding always, thus says the Lord of hosts. So did the Lord his self
when he said. Uerely verily I say unto you, we speak that we know. My
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Of my self I speak not the words
that I utter. The father dwelling in me, perfourmeth the works. I am not come
of my self, but he that sent me is true, with such other like. Paul does also
name him self the Apostle of Jesus Christ. Not I command this (says he) but
the Lord. The gospel that I preach, have I learned of no man, but by the
showing of Jesus Christ. The Lord that is blessed for ever knows that I lie
not, and such like. So is the end of this book as was the beginning, sealed
with many wonderful and strong sentences of the Lord, as his whole mind,
perfect will, and purposed decree, concerning his church here in earth.

3 And the same Lord God eternal (says Christ unto John) which has
diversely before time spoken in the holy Prophets and fathers, has now last of
all sent the Angel of his everlasting covenant, by him to utter the secrets of
his mind by whom he created the world. Him has he hither dyrected, in these
latter days of ye world to show clearly unto his true servants (of whom
thou art in these days princypall) those wonderful things in mystery, which
must within short space effectually come to pass and be fulfilled in deed.
As the manyfolde persecutions of his church, and the prosperous reign of the
beast and his shorlings, with the glorious raise of the one, and dampnable fall
of ye other. That when troublous crosses do come, they may be the more
joyfully taken, considering the time of them short, and the reward of their
sufferaunce everlasting.

4 For none other cause is God here called the Lord God of the Prophets, but
that they have through his spirit truly believed in him, and the same spirit
declared his mind and pleasure.

5 In the beginning of this revelation was this Angel sent unto John alone,
here is he sent also unto his other servants, in token that the Lord in John
respects his congregation.

6 The things that must shortly follow, are his judgments in rewarding the
rightuous and condempning ye reprobates. For a thousand years are but as a
day before him, and as the time that is in a manner past. Let every man take
heed (says the Lord) least I come upon him unlooked for. Let them watch in
faith, and pray in spirit and verity, having their weddyng garments, with the
oil of Christian love in their lamps.

7 For behold when I shall come either to the particular end of any man, or
to the latter iugdement, I will come sodainlye neither the day nor yet the hour
of my coming known before, least men (as they are ill of nature) should drive
of till that day to live according to faith. Of this admonition may the
faithful sort be glad, being here in adversity, considering their
deliverance is at hand, and their crown of immortality not far of.

8 Happy is that man whatsoever he be, high or low, rich or poor, learned or
unlearned, that observes in his conversation and life, the godly sayings
contained in the prophecy of this present book.

9 Yea, blessed is he that so receives the premonishments thereof, that
neither false prophet can deceive him, nor yet any cruel Antichrist with
terror drive him from the right understanding and followyng of Christ's pure
doctrine. For neither to dogs nor swine are they here left, to be neglected
or disdayned, but unto his faithful servants to be reverently followed and
had in remembrance.

The text.
1 I am John, 2. which saw these things, 3. and haerde them, 4. And when I
had heard and seen them, 5. I fell down to vvorshippe before the feet of
the Angel, 6. which shevved me these things. 7. And he said unto me. 8. See
thou do it not, 9. For I am thy fellovv servant, 10. and the fellow servant
of thy brethen the Prophets, 11. and of them which keep the sayings of this
book. 12. Worship God.

The Commentary.
1 Consequently, because ye shall not suppose this matter light (says saint
John) as many thinks that which has not the testimony of men, besides the
authority of God, I Johan Boanerges, an earnest thunderer out of the gospel,
and a stirrer up men's hearts to the study of heavenly things. Yea a man known,
not only to you Afianes, but also the whole Christianity, for that Apostle
whom Christ peculyarlye loved.

2 Even I am the same self Johan, which have both heard these wonderful
things with mine ears, and also have seen them through ye great goodness of
my lord God with mine eyes, for your singular commodity and profit.

3 None other matter do I here write unto you, at the commandment of Jesus
Christ for your health and salvation, but such as I have both heard and seen
for the same, believe them if ye will. In my other writings, as are my gospel
and my first Epistle, whereunto I never subscribed, ye have thoroughly believed
me. Give no less credence now than unto this, whereunto I subscribe my name.
For so have I done here, that ye should the rather believe it, and receive it as
most wholesome doctrine of salvation. After this sort did Paul add his name
to his sayings, that they should be the more earnestly received.

4 And as concerning my part, truly when I had thus hard them and seen them,
the wonderful mysteryes of them so rauyshed my spirits, that I in a manner
clearly forgate my self.

5 Yea, I was so far from my right remembrance for the vehemence of them,
that I fell down flat to the ground, prostrate before the feet of the
Angel, mynding to give unto him the whole homage of my soul, which is only
due unto God that created my soul.

6 And what though this Angel which had thus opened unto me all these
wonderful mys^eries before, where Jesus Christ him self (as I thought him no
less in deed) yet sought I not to have worshipped him in that similitude,
considering also ye God will have no part of his honor given to any other than
unto himself only.

7 Wherefore he charitably admonished me of it, and said thus unto me.

8 In any wise beware thou do no such homage unto me, which apere here to thee
but a creature, least thereby thou offend ye Lord god. For danger may be in
such case, though the intent be godly, if any part thereof should remayn to
the creature, as thou know well enough. Nothing may thou worship that
thy outward sight offreth unto thee, for in them has faith no place which is
a substance of things unseen. And God has taught thee to worshipe him in no
creatures, neither in bread nor wine, man nor angel, but in spirit and
verity only, much less than to worship the self creatures, or Idols in
their stead, which is much worse.

9 Though I be the son of God and savior of ye world, yet am I in this
office but a creature, and thy fellow servant. A sent messenger from God as
thou art, an opener of his godly mind and pleasure as thou art, to sygnifie y^
unto thee, which he would have thee again to signify unto his people.

10 And in this point am I not only thy companion, or in this message joined
fellow with thee (for so well is it my revelation as thine) but also I am a
like companion to thy former brethren Ezechiell, Daniell, Zacary, and such
other, which had the gift of prophecy and were prophets in deed, as thou art
now doing like office with them thus uttering gods mind in mysteries.

11 Yea, farthermore, I am a fellow servant likewise and a companion together
of all the^ y^ with reverence observe the faithful testymonies of this present
book or prophecy. In token whereof I took the shappe of a servant, I fulfilled
the law, and was conuersa^t among men.

12 So thou worship not me therefore, but worship thy only Lord god. For
alone should thou seek him and love him, honor him and serve him, praise
him, and glorify him. None other gods shall thou have in my sight, says the
eternal and omnipote^t Lord. Observe the same rule in worshipping that I
taught thee to observe in prayer. Remember I taught thee not to pray unto me
whom thou see, nor yet unto any dead saint whom thou see not, but unto
thy lord God whom thou have only in believe, saying our father which art in
heaven. I told thee also that God was a spirit, and that he would only be
sought in spirit, and in nothing that thou see with thine eyes. Therefore
worship God and not me. Consider here (good reader) ye ungodly vyolence of the
papists, enforcing the simple multitude to worship a dry wafer cake, to knele
unto it, to hold up their hands, to make their prayers to it, and to call it
their God, making them to believe that it is gods commandment they should so
do. Oh, abominable Antichrists, Oh, filthy Balaamites, seeking your own
bellyes and glory to your confusion. Way this place throughlye with the other
scriptures, and be once ashamed of your beastly and blasphemous madness. Ye
will peradventure say, it is Christ's body. But truly that is all false. For
thereof is no mutual perticipation, where one eats up all. No showing is
there of ye Lords death til he come, where all is done in a foren language and
nothing understood. Christ breathed not upon the bread with hoo, he, have at
all, as you do. He only took it in his holy hands, and gave thanks unto
God. The words of thankesgyuing he left not behind him for you to ^unger
with, for he knew ye before for subtle workers. He kept not that bread to him
self, nor yet closed it up in a box as you do. But he brake it and
distributed it unto other. In like case the disciples did neither worship it
nor him at that season. For if they had, he would have forbidden it them, and
have taught the same self doctrine that he shows here unto Johan. Only did
they take it and eat it in his remembrance, and that was his institution. And
where as it is this used, there is both his body and blood received. But
otherwise not. The bread that was left of this consecration or breaking,
which was so holy as the other, was neither housed nor churched, boxed nor
pixed, but remained there still to the householders, to be eaten of whom soever
lusted. Neither does the divinity of your sente^cioners as of Thomas of
Aquine, Dons, Dorbel, Guido, Baconthorp, and such other, appoint thereunto that
kind of honor that ye suffer the people to give unto it, but a far meaner
honor called Hiperdulia. But you can wynke at such matters and suffer both
them and your selves to go to the devil for worldly lucer. Nothing holds
long with you, neither christ's doctrine nor your own. But that ye make now,
ye mar to morrow. And that at one time is a law, at an other time shall be
none at al. Such are your wavering wonders.

The Text.
1 And he said unto me. 2. Seal not thy sayings of the prophecy of this
book. 3. For the time is at hand. 4. He that does evil, let him do evil
still. 5. and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still. 6, and he that is
rightuous let him be more rightuous 7. and he that is holy let him be more
holy. 8, And behold, I come shortly, 9, and my reward with me 10. to give
every man according as his deeds shall be 11* I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, 12. the first and the last.

The Commentary.
1 Consequently the Angel (says S. John) which was Jesus Christ, had these
same sayings unto me that here follows.

2 Seal not (says he) ye godly words contained in ye prophecy of this book.
Close the^ not up from the sight of other. Hide them not from those which are
desirous of knowledge. For profitable they are to the congregation of God, and
most highly necessary to them that shall be saved. For both show they thoroughly
the dampnation of the wicked with remedies to avoid it, and also the salvation
of ye rightuous with means to obtain it.

3 And this is the cause why thou shalt not close them up. The time is at
hand.

The fulfyllyng of the^ will shortelye apeare, and evidently declare what they
are in deed. In the mean season shall many of their mystieryes be open unto
them yt are taught of God, though the unfaithful sort knows nothing what
they mean. They yt have Christ's spirit, can in no necessary point be
ignorant. The cause why many writers has erred in expounding this
revelation, has been the ignorance of other scriptures, the pleasing of
prelates for dignity and lucre, and most of all the horrible blyndnesse of
soul, which long has continued in ye world among the fleshly Hypocrites.

4 And as concerning those beastlye belly gods, let them wallow in their
mischiefs. He that is evil among them, or froward and obstinate against the
verity of God, let him work evil upon evil, abomination upon abhomynation,
and murder upon murder, til he bring upon him self the vengeance of all
innocent blood which has been shead upon earth, to his more dampnation without
remedy.

5 Moreover he that is filthy in his conversation, be it in the spirit or
otherwise, I will take my grace from him, for ye utter contempt of my word, and
he shall be still from thence forth more execrable and filthy. He shall do^
wickedness upon wickedness, Idolatry, upon Idolatry, and whoredom upon
whoredom. Yea, where as he was before but an Idolatour in himself he shall
become after that an Idolatour also in other, by prouokyng the^ to the same, to
his double dampnatio^. And whereas he should paraduenture in ye world have been
but a single whoremonger, he shall be there an holy, spiritual, anointed,
shaven, shorn, priestly and mitered whoremonger, abusing every man's wife,
daughter, and servant. And to make up all to ye devil, become a consecrate
Sodomyte, offering himself up in dead sacrifices unto Belphegor, for fear of
breaking his vnuirgynall vow. Farther than all this, he shall enter into such
blindness of ye spirit, that he will think verily to do God an high
pleasure when he murthereth up without mercy, his innocent people which will
not obey their execrable laws, blessings, absolutio^s, and other sorceries,
for conscience sake. Consider in this the terrible and fearful hand of the
Lord toward them that withholde his truth in unrighteousness, specially
wha^ he has given the^ over and left the^ to themselves. For they work their
own dampnation, when they think nothing less.

6 Contrarywyse consider his exceeding great mercy toward them that are
godly, whom he dyuersly afflicts in his life, least they should peryshe with
the wicked. My pleasure is it (says he here) that the man which is faithful,
rightuous, and good, shall increase ever more therein, and so co^tynually be
ryghtuous. I shall so temper their hearts, that has love to my truth, that
they shall love it more and more. Yea, I shall so therein strengthen them, that
for no persecution of tyrau^tes shall they forsake it.

7 So will I order the matter among my electes, that he which is holy, pure,
and perfect, leading a life according to my word, he shall persevere in i^
still, and be perfect unto the end, that he may inioye the crown thereof.
Neither shall seducing hypocrite nor yet peruertinge Antichrist, with all their
subtle charms and ginnes, be able to bring them out of that way, which
leads unto life. By this we may se that the verity preached, christ is unto
some a falling, unto some again a rising up. Unto some is his godly doctrine a
sweet savor unto life, and unto some an ill savor unto death. The gospel is
folyshnesse to them that shall peryshe, but unto them that believe, it is such a
power of god as brings salvation with it. The faithful by hearing it, waxes
more godly. The indiscreet hypocrites, contemns the grace thereof. So that
the one sort is thereby made better and increased in virtue, the other is made
worse and follows all mischiefs. In him that has faith shall all other
graces of the spirit habounde, and in him that has it not, shall no gift of
virtue arise to his ^owles profit.

8 Let me^ take heed if they will, and give dilygent watch and atte^daunce, for
truly (says the Lord) I will come suddenly* and v^bewars upon ye unfaithful,
none other warning^ given but this and such other in ye scripturs, take the^ if
they lust*

9 Necessary it is ye every man walk according to his vocacyon, both prince
and preacher. Lord and commoner, merchande and artificer. For when I shall
resort, be certain and sure of it, my just reward shall come with me, which
is both life and death.

10 Let no man recke^ otherwise to find me tha^ a most rightuous judge,
rendering unto every one at ye day according as his works shall apeare and as
his deeds shall require of righteousness. Neither shall sufferages nor church
buylding, pigrimage, nor mass ri^gin, holy orders nor yet assoiling, stand in
any sted at ye day: only shall they find mercy which has been merciful, all
other perishing without mercy. No man shall there be rewarded for works of men's
preseciption, be they never so holy, but for that which has risen of faith in
Gods word only. Neither shall they have that of deseruinges, as work
preachers has taught, but only of grace and favor for Christ's blood sake.
For unprofitable servants are w^e of our selves, when we have done all that
has been commanded us* No better is our whole ryghtuousnesse, when it is at
the highest, than is the cloth that is stained with menstrue, nor more
pleasant unto God, were it not for him. Let no man think to be saved through
deserving, no more than he is justified of deserving. Only is it the merciful
favor and free goodness of him without our mangye merytes that shall save us.
Not our good works (says saint Augustyne) but his own mere gifts does the
Lord crown in us.

11 This has the Lord put here in ye end as a brief conclusion comprehe^dyng
his whole mind in this revelation, concerning the rightuous, and unrighteous.
Believe this necessary doctrine (says the Lord Jesus christ) for I which
have told it here unto you am under the mystery of Alpha and Omega the first
and the last Greek letters, the original beginning of all things, and perfct
end of the same. I am that mighty word of god though I apere now in this
nature, in whom he created all, and by who^ he shall perform and finish al
too ye end they were created for.

12 I am the first, in that I am in one godhede equal with the Father and with
the holy ghost. I am also the last in that I shall so continue world with out
end. I am he before whom there was never any god, neither shall there be any
after me. I am only the Lord, for I am from everlasting. In taken whereof I
have told you both things that are past and things yet to come. Under this
strange Trope or similytude of Alpha and Omega (which is a common Allegory
used of the Greeks) is always to be understood the eternal divinity in
Christ's manhood. Which is here (as are many other things else) often times
repeated, of none other purpose, but as a most necessary cause to be had in
remembrance.

The text.
1 Blessed are they that do. 2. his commandments. 3. that their power may
be in the tree of life. 4. and may enter in through the gates into the city.
5. For without are dogs 6. and inchaunters. 7. and whoremongers. 8. and
murderers. 9. and idolators, 10* and who soever loves or makes leasinges.

The Commentary.
1 From henceforth does the Lord change the manner of his speaking,
representyng again the personage of an Angel or messenger.

Blessed are they (says he) or happy before GOD, that of a sincere faith and
Godly mind do dylygentlye observe his most just commandments, which is a
very washyng of their defiled garments in the blood of the Lamb.

For perfectly, pure, innocent, and clean are they that walk faithfully
according to the precepts of his heavenly doctrine.

Yea, dooinge on the armoure of light they are very clearenesse in the Lord
and the shynynge bewty of the world.

2 And as concerning his co^maundeme^ts, grievous are they not, but sweet and
pleasant, he setting hand to ye fulfilling of the^, which has commanded
the^, he ministering his Godly spirit may make of him that was before
vnwylling, a very willing person, like as he did of Saul when he changed him
into a Paul. He laying before their eyes the inestymable profit of the good
things to come, will cause them to forget these corruptible pleasures, and
always to labor for them.

3 Happy are they before hand, that shall mind to do these things, that
their power through a true believe may be in the tree of life, whereby they may
work them and so have fruit of their labors. For without that tree (by whom
is meant the souiour of the world) they can do nothing thereunto. Without his
strength, grace, and spirit, doubtelesse they are al weak, wretched, and
unprofitable, have they never so many holy deseruings, which faithfully
desired, is never denied them as all the scriptures records.

4 This would be sought therefore, that they may thereby enter in peaceably,
without impediment through ye clear gates of pearl before me^cioned, in to ye
plesau^te city or ye newly prepared Jerusalem. By the which gates is none
other signified here, but he alone, diversely opened by the Apostles doctrine.
He is the only portall of righteousness, and the straight way unto life, by
whom they enter in from all quarters of the world. None other would David
acknowledge in all his godly praises, nor yet ye Apostle Paul in his manyfolde
exhortations. Whatsoever they be that enter in by him, be without peril
evermore, and shall have the life everlasting. Thus is a true believe in him and
his word with a just following of the same, a full doing of his
commandments without any other traditions, ordinances, or ceremonies.

5 And whilst this chosen flock are thus entering into this city, the cruel
dogs, which bark against the verity, and tear the true servants of God,
are still remaining without, appear they never so spiritual and holy.

6 So are the subtle sorcerers, which with their holy charms and
inchau^tments, with their prophecies, revelations, and false miracles, both
blind the unlearned governors and deceive the profane* Idiotish multitude,
leading them both to the diuill.

7 So are the consecrate whoremongers, the defilers of all honesty, and
breakers of all godly ordinances, as are in these days in the braggers out of
Romish chastity, ye bishops, priests, and religious, under the title of vows,
mayntaynig Sodom and Gomorre.

8 Likewise in the spightfull murderers, that of malice and mischief flea
the godly preachers, and other poor innocent* people for rebuking their
corrupt customs are sequestered from thence for ever.

9 The supersticious Idolatours of all generations the most execrable, as
mass mongers, head bablers, saint seekers, Image lighters, gadders to
Co^postell, Rome, Tryer, and Tholose, with all their strange worshippinges not
commanded of God, shall have no place there.

10 Brieflye to conclude the whole, what people so ever they are that
delights in fables, lies, and errors, not regarding ye right meaning of the
scriptures, or what holy hypocrites ^o ever they be that with famed sanctity,
deceyuable wonders, and false interpretations, blemisheth the verity of the
Lord* for the upholding of they^ p^yde, lechery, and lucre, shall enjoy no
freedom within this city. Be ye sure of this (says saint Paul in diverse
places) that no fornicatour, nor unclean person, no covetous cloyne^,
deceiptfull hypocrite, liar for advantage, filthy Idolatour, malicious
murderer, or such other like, can have any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and God. No portion can they have in the land of the living, that has
been partakers with aduouterers and thieves.

The Text.
1 Hesus have sent mine Angel. 2* to testify unto you these things in the
congregation, 3. I am the root and generation of David, 4. and the bright
morning star. 5. And the spirit and the bride say, 6. Comely. And let him
that hears say also, 8. Come 9. And let him that is a thyrst come, 10. And
let whosoever will take, 11. freely of the water of life.

The Commentary.
1 Consequently if ye cover (says the Lord) to know surely from whence this
doctrine does come, and who is ye chief authority thereof be you thoroughly
ascertayned, that I Jesus Christ ye son of the living God, have directed
forth mine Angel (which is the spirit of truth) or the holy ghost whom I
promised to witness here manifestly unto you, by my dear disciple John these
wonderful things hereafter to chance in the christian congregations.

2 Think not that the contents of this book are either of John, or yet of
any other man that ever was here living, for neither has he learned them of
Prophet nor holy father, but by my only revelation or showing (which am the
eternal spouse of the church) has he received them to their singular health
and comfort.

3 And as concerning me without fail I am the original root, or ground of
salvation in David after the word, and after the flesh I am of his stock or
generation. For in me are fulfilled all promises of health that ever god made
for that faithful household. By me had David his beginning for I made him,
and by me shall he and all other true Israelites in him, have for ever a
glorious continuance, for I saved them in that flesh.

4 To all them which walk after David's faith, am I ye bright morning star of
grace, remouyng the filthye clouds of error. The shyning clearenesse of godly
understanding, finishing the dark night of ignorance. I bring with me the day
of mercy, health, and righteousness, and the Sabbath of full reconciliation to
God. I give light unto them that sat in darkness, directing their feet in
ye path way of peace.

5 For my word is spirit and verity, resurrection and life. And where as it
shyneth in the hearts of mortal men, it makes them the children of light. To
seek unto this necessary light, the eternal spirit of God, the holy Ghost,
daily moves and provoke by many inward callings upon, saying always.

6 Come with a sincere faith. Draw nygh unto him, and be lightened, and your
frail consciences shall never be confounded. Resort unto him all you that are
laden, and he shall refreshe you. The bryde or congregation of the Lord thus
taught, sturred, and prycked forewarde of his spirit says also in her heart
evermore, with a fervent desire. Oh, come my most delectable spouse and lord
Jesus Christ, my health, joy, and sweetness. Apply that ye immortal glory of
the chosen children of God, may be seen of all creatures, iniquity condemned
for ever. Accomplish the marriage appointed from ye worlds beginning. Permit ye
prepared spouse with her appointed number to enter into thy eternal tabernacle
of rest.

7 Moreover (says the Lord) whatsoever they be that shall hear and believe
this prophecy, let them desire the consummation thereof, and so conform them
selves unto Christ and his church, saying also.

8 Come most merciful savior and redeemer and fulfill the godly promyses of
this book, to the eternal comfort of man. Make have to the judgment seat,
for a full deliverance of the whole chosen number, yt thy servant may be
where as thou art in perfect glory and joy.

9 Finally, let him (says the Lord) that in faith is a thirst, or that has
in him a desire to be saved, have him self forewarde, and come also. Let him
only believe. For the plentuous fountaynes of the living waters mentioned
before, are withholden from no servant of God. Nothing is denied unto him that
asks in faith. In prayer are all spiritual commodities granted.

10 Whosoever therefore has a will conformable unto Gods will, let him take
freely without price or payment, without satisfaction or merit, ye pleasant
water of the life for ever, refreshing his soul in the plentuousnesse thereof.

11 Of grace and favor is salvation in Christ laid forth. Only is here
required but a will to seek for it. Not that it shall so be deserved. For
neither is it of him yt wills, nor yet of him yt runs. But ye gracious
Lord which calls men to these waters, puts into the^ a stomach, thirst,
and desire to covet them. Yea, he mynistreth strength to ye seeking of the^,
least some of ye glory thereof should remayn unto their deseruings, and not all
to his mercy alone. Thus stands the doctrine of our work braggers void,
which neither feeds nor satisfies, considering that not for our rightuous
doings, but alone for his own mercyes sake has he saved us.

The text.
1 But I testify unto every man that hears the words of prophecy of this
book, 2. if any man shall add unto these things, 3. God shall add unto him
the plagues, 4. that are vvritte^ in this book, 5. And if any man shall mynish
of the words of the book of this prophecy, 6. God shall take away his
part out of the book of life, 7. and out of the holy city, 8. and from the
things which are written in this book, 9. He which testifies these things
says, 10. Yea, 11. I come quickly, 12. Amen, 13. Eue^ so, 14. come lord
Jesus, 15. The grace of our Lord Jesus, 16. be with you all 17. Amen.

The Commentary.
1 As my duty is (says saint John) to premonish before hand, I faithfully
proteste by this my present testimony, unto all those men that shall hereafter
receive the words of this wonderful prophecy here written in this book,
either by reading or hearing.

2 That if any of them shall presumptuously take upon him to add any thing
thereunto, in purpose to pervert the truth, or contrary to ye holy ghostes
meaning, as Carpocras, Hebion, Cerinthus, and other antichrists has done with
the other scriptures.

3 Be certain and sure of it, that the eternal god (from whom nothing can be
hid) shall add unto him for so doing, the most terrible and woeful plages
regestred before in this work.

4 That is to say, he shall suffer him to run in to most deep errors, and
give him over for ever into the sin against the holy ghost, whereupon all
other plages of dampnation depends. Ye shall put nothing (says the Lord)
unto the word that I have given you, neither shall ye take any thing from it.
Put thou nothing unto his sayings (says Salomo^) of thine own imaginytion
least he reprove thee for a da^pnable liar. Nothing is this against the^ which
by the other scriptures and histories does expound this reuelacyon, to make it
to their understanding more plain. For than should Saint Augustyne, saint
Hierome, Isydorus, Beda, Rabanus, and diverse other great pillars of the church
be under these plages, for doing that charitable office. So should also the
doctrine of this book be against it self in ye.xiii. chapter where as liberty
is given to him that has writ, to count the number of the beast, and in other
places else. But this is here spoken from them that corrupts the text to
mayntaine their blasphemous lies for advantage, or that seeks to blemish the
right sense thereof, least men should behold the^ in their right colors, as ye
wicked papists has don ever since their begi^ning, so drownning the authority
and majesty thereof.

5 Moreover (says saint John) if any mortal man shall presume to deminish the
words contained in the volume of this heavenly Prophecye, irreverently so
controuling the wisdom of God.

6 The said omnypotent god, and revenger of al ungodliness, shall clearly wype
away his portion out of ye book of life so that he shall be none of their
number, which are predestined to the glory of his children.

7 Neither shall such be allowed for cityzens with ye saints in the holy
congregation of his new Jerusalem, nor yet be accepted for his shousholde
servants enjoying ye sweet co^modyties mentioned in this book as pertaining
to his peculyar people.

8 Like as are the bewtyfull tree of life with his manyfolde fruits and leaves
of wholsomnesse, the sweet running river of the living waters, and the holy
city sufficiently discribed before with such other else. None that contendeth
for a mastry (says Paul) shall be crowned, unless he contend lawfully.
Arrius took away from the tenth of John this setence, I and ye father are one.
Photinus added this clause to ye gospel as a voice from the father, I give
unto Jesus his original of Mary And both their inte^tes were to destroy our
faith concerning christ's godhede, like as the papystes does also our
iustificacyon in his blood, unless we have their lousy masses and merits. A
like adiuratio^ to this, has Hireneus in the end of his octonarie, requiring
al them yt shall copy out yt book, to do it truly as they will aunswers it
before god their rightuous judge. In like case does saint Hierome before ye
abreuiacio^s of Eusebius chronicle co^mau^d, that in any wise the verity
thereof be dilygently reserved. So does also Cyrillus ye Greek in ye preface of
his prophecy unto Ioachim Abbas, desiring ye writings thereof in no case to be
corrupted of il writers, wc diverse other

9 In confirmation of ye I have said before (says S. John) the eternal son of
god which has ratified these former things with his mighty word, says here also
as one subscribing to it.

10 Yea, it is so, or else thus. Like as you have said (John) shall these
blasphemers here after find it, ye presumes either to add, or to deminish
from these scriptures for any carnal purpose.

11 And to perform ye promise of thine I will not long tarry. I come by and by,
to reward ye wicked wc swift dampnatio^, for not believing ye truth. For now
are ye last days, ye ends of ye world, yea, the very last hour.

Ready is the Lord (says saint Peter) to judge the quick and dead, and the
end of all things is at hand.

12 Saint John hearing this of his merciful Lord and savior lift up his
head and hands toward heaven, and as one desirous of the perfourmaunce of
Gods appointed will, and of the full deliverance of the faithful, he said,
Amen. Or be it fulfilled in effect. For that is the thing which my soul daily
desires and inwardly coueteth, to the full manifestation of thy glorious
kingdom.

13 Consequently, in the voice of the whole congregation cries John, as did
Symeon ye just. Yea, even so might it be, as thou have here promised, that thou
might come out of hand.

14 Oh, come most merciful redemer and gracious Lord Jesus Christ, to judge the
universal world. Come, come, or hie thee hither apace, to separate the wheat
from the chafe, and ye lambs from the Goats, so bringing them into thy
eternal tabernacle. Woe is me that my banishment endures so long, I dwelling
in the tabernacles of the sorrowful. My soul has a thurstie desire for God
the fountain of life. Oh, when shall I come and behold his face? Like are we
to those faithful servant, which wait for the return of their Lord from
the wedding, very ready to open at his knocking.

15 The grace of our merciful Lord Jesus Christ (says saynct John) whereby
comes salvation to them yt truly believes, be with you all, so many as are
of that godly expectation and desire.

16 Or the favor, mercy, and acceptance of God ye father, through his blessed
death, evermore preserve you in the unity of his godly spirit, that ye may
hereafter in this holy city, be partakers of his glorious heritage in the
world to come.

17 Let all them say Amen unto this, which myndeth the glory of the Lord
unfeignedly. So be it.

A conclusion of the whole work.
HEre have thou good christian reader, to thy souls consolation, from the
eternal Trinity, ye Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, three distinct
persons in one everlasting godhead, the universal estate of the church from
Christ's ascencion to the end of the world, in wonderful mysteries discrybed,
and directed unto thee of him, by the most holy Apostle and Evangelist Saint
John. Wherein it is fully by all due circumstances manifested of the said holy
Ghost, what the innocent Christian church is, with all her iustifications and
blessings, to the singular comfort of the Lords true electes, and what the
proud Synagoge of Antichrist is, with her filthy superstitions and plagues, to
their fore warning also. This is specially done here of the said holy ghost,
yt no true beleuer should profess him self a citizen of this wretched world
with Cain, Nemroth, and other reprobate vessels, at the execrable doctrine of
men, but at the pure voice of God with Abell and Abraham, to seek for that
heavenly heritage which is purchased for them in Christ's blood. Mark here
the condition of John being in most paynefull exile, for he in mystery through
all this book represents every godly beleuer. By this shall ye well know in
this revelation the one church from the other, for the one is mayntayned by the
only preaching of Gods pure word, the other by all kinds of Iewishe
ceremonies and heathenish superstitions. And by this they also differ, that
Christ would have all of love, Antichrist of tyrannous constraint, as evidently
appears in Mahomete and the Pope. For that only cause are many necessary
things here written in mystery, that they should be hid from the worldly
wise Hypocrites, and that ye just or Gods meek spirited seruau^ts, should ask
them of their Lord in faith and prayer. In the which daily prayer, is that
most worthy minister of God, King Henry the eight before all other to thee
remembered, which has so sore wounded the beast, that he may before his
departure, or Prince Edward after him, throw all his supersticions into the
bottomless lake again (from whence they have commen) to ye comfort of his
people. The grace and peace dyrected from God the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ, with the holy Ghost, in ye beginning of this reuelatyon be unto all
them which unfeignedly love his verity. Amen.

Printed at London by Thomas East.


