THE HISTORY OF S. ELIZABETH DAVGHTER OF THE KING OF HUNGARY. According to
sundry Authors who have authentically written her Life, distributed into three
Books. By H. A.

Permissu Superiorum.

M. DC. XXXII.

To the Right honorable the Lady MARY TENHAM.
MADAM,
You have here a kings Daughter, a chaste Wife, a holy Widow, a glorious Saint.
Great in birth, to illustrat virtue. A Mirror in wedlock, of conjugal
perfection. A President in Widowhood, for chaste retirement. And a Queen for
sanctity, now crowned in Heaven. You have also here a fair and goodly
Microcosme, with its four dimensions. Altitude in the height of the
extraction; Profundity in the depth of humility; Latitude in the capaciousnes
thereof; And Longitude, in a patient lo^ganimity. In the East, of this little
World, the Sun arising, displayes the beams of royalty and princely Majesty.
In the South, mounting the Meridian line of her life, ^t darts forth rays of
piety, with a heat, and fervor of devotion. In the North it endures an
Eclipse, as it were, ouercast with clouds, and storms of affliction. And
finally in the West, the Sun setts to a temporal life, to rise again with
radia^t beams, to an eternity of glory. Would you know the Spring, you find it
in her birth; virtue budding forth with innocence of life; if the Summer;) You
may behold her decked with her greener fruits. For the winter, the season if you
note it well; you shall perceive her covered all with frosts of sharp
adversities. But if you co^template, the Autumn of her Harvest, imagine you see
her now enjoying her hundred fold. Where, she in Heaven, amongst the rest, is
your Aduocat; you therefore in Earth (I hope), and Deigne, to patronize her
tablet here, this little book, an abstract of her life, a true Epitome of her
greatness, and some manner of testimony of his gratitude, ^o your Ladyship; who
must and uer shall demayne.

Your Honors faithful servant in our Lord. H. A.

TO THE READER.
GENTLE READER,
Having lately translated the life of S. Aldegond, with title of Princess and
Abbess, proposing her as a lively imitable pattern of Religious women to
either Sex: I thought good of my self, now to select likewise an other of the
blessed Saints of heaven, to exhibit, as an excellent Model, and ^dea, to
frame the life by, in all those honorable states of that Sex. Which I have done
with no little hazard, I fear me, of my own reputation to give satisfaction
to some friends, who^ sweetly I must confess, and powerfully, have extorted
it from me. Ther^ remaynes now ( Good courteous Reader* to give thee account
of the manne^ and method I use, the rather, because I seem not to track the
stepps, of the most Writers of the Lives of Saints.

Some there are so scrupulous in the matter of History, who as if they were to
make an Inuentory of goods, or to Copy out a Court Role of good importance;
will not have a word more or less, then they find auerred by Authors from
point to point.

Whereas this here is merely of an other kind, not copied forth, or literally
extracted from any Precedent of her Life, but drawn and derived from the
golden Mines of the approved Lives of Saints, as Surius, and John Basil Santor,
in his Book entitled Pratum Spirituale, who both, had borrowed the same from
Iacobus Montanus of the city of Spire in Germany, not well to be contradicted.

Behold the foundation of the History; as for the lineaments which are nothing
substantial to the matter, they stand rather as ornaments thereof, and
proceed from the liberty of him, who assumes so much upon himself, to
embellish and cover the nakedness of a bare Narration, which breeds but a
loathing and tedious fastidiousnes in the Reader: These I say are strokes of
my pencel to highten and adorn it or else borrowed from the rudiments of some
Masters of spirit; to edify withal; which, next to the lively example of the
Saint, is the secondary scope I aim at in this work: Being otherwise a pious
story, and of it self powerful to excite the will, and move devotion to the
Saint; On which (as I said) I have laid some colors, as a Limmer on a simple
cut of black and white.

This have I said to let thee see, freindly Reader, my sincerity in this point,
and to win a confidence in thee toward me. Whereas indeed, as it is not
the custom in the Exchequer to peize so scrupulously each light piece of
silver, to find whether it be weight or no; but to pass them together with
the other pieces of more weight, current with the rest. And as in traffic and
commerce it were too importune, to be still calling for scales for every single
penny; so is it likewise in handling the pen, to be put to the iustify^ng of
every little thing which makes not much to the purpose whether true or false. It
is only in dancing the cinque pace and measures, that men stand numbering their
paces, and not in performing of long voyages.

True resemblance as the Daughter of Truth, and conjecture the Daughter of true
resembla^ce, being al as Grandmother, Mother, and Daughter, have great
sympathyes and powerful correspondencyes with each other. So as if apparent
impossibility, absurdity, or extreme vnlikelyhoods cause not a breach, there
will appear a goodly harmony amongst them. And truly we should be too
precize, to set down a List here of all the scruples that might be made of
trifling exceptions in this kind, by such as are captious and curious censurers
of things indifferent; who have their eyes filled with a noxious humor, that
makes them behold al things of the color the defluxion is. Who should do
rather like those, that listen to a Lute, with a judicious ear, that meeting
by chance, with some light touch or other, scarce sensible, among a number of
better strokes, through the prompt volubility of the Lutenests hand in running
his divisions, dissemble the same and reflect on the rest, which loose not
their grace awhit for so light a fault, and hold such slurrs as ornaments,
rather to the rest, and as moles in a beautiful face, which grace the same.

Thus, gentle Reader, you have the full satisfaction I can give you heerin:
This only I must needs admonish you, that you be not troubled, when you meet
with another Treatise of this Saint, more curiously and elaboratly written by a
neater quill, but to account the same as it is; an Abstract rather of her Life
directed to a noble Lady, and consequently most apt for such, who likely
affoard not leisure to attend to treatises of greater bulk. Whereas this same
here is meant for all, and intended as I said, as a model and pattern of the
three states and conditions of Women living in the world: While here if they be
Virgins, they shall find very notable Examples in her life, being a Virgin: If
Wives, they may see how to carry themselves, and to lead a life meritoriously
with their husbands: if Widows they may learn by her to contemn the vanities
of the world, and if they be Ladies and Princesses, they may behold how great a
Lady she was, notwithstanding her so great annihilation of her self, as shall
appear in the Treatise. She being the Infanta of Hungary, a mighty Monarchy,
Duchess, and wife of the Lantgraue of Thuringia, and Princess of Hassia,
Protectresse, and Patroness of the Nuns and Religious of the third Order of
the Penitents of S. Frauncis. To whom I fly for succor and assistance in these
my labors in her service, and to your favorable acceptance of that little I am
able to perform to serve you with.

THE TABLE OF THE FIRST Book.
CHAP. I. THE Parents, Birth, Infancy, and Espousalles of Elizabeth. Chap. 1.
page 1. The Pretty sports and Entertainements of Elizabeth in her Chilhood: the
Death of the Prince her Father in Law, and the devotion she used. Chap. 2. p.
13. How Elizabeth was contemned by Sophia, and Agnes her Mother, and Sister in
Law; with the rest of the Court. Chap. 3. p. 3. How the young Prince, Jews
declared his affection to Elizabeth, notwithstanding the malignity of her
Adversaries. Chap. 4. p. 38. How Elizabeth being ma^ryed, remitted not her
devotions a whit; and how she carried her self in her Mortifications. Chap. 5.
p. 52, How Elizabeth submits her self to the Obedience of one Conrad, a
religious Priest: and what followed thereof. Chap. 6. p. 59. How Elizabeth
contemnes all bravery and vanity of Apparel, persuading other Ladies to do
the same. Chap. 7. p. 72. What Charity Elizabeth showed to her Neighbor: and
how she gave the Clothes from her back to the poor. Chap. 8. p. 85 Certain
admirable effests of Elizabeth's affection to voluntary Poverty: and the works
she wrought in that kind. Chap. 9. p. 99. The devout and pious exercises of
Elizabeth, at the Sacrifice of the Mass. Chap. 10. p. 113. Of the great
Charity of Elizabeth, to her neighbor, and her exceeding liberality to the
poor. Chap. 11. p. 125. Of a complaint made against Elizabeth, to her husband:
With some examples of his Noble disposition therein* Chapter 12. p. 140.
The second Book.
CHAP. I. THE publishing of the Croysado, and the manner how it first b^ganne.
p. 53. How the Croysado being published anew, the La^tgraue secretly received
the Cross, and went to mere with the Emperor in Sicily. Chapter 2. p. 163. The
arriual of the Lantgraue in Sicily, where the Emperor was: his Death, and the
Lamentation, made by Elizabeth for him. Chapter 3. p. 175 How Henry Brother to the
deceased Lantgraue usurped the Dukedom: and eiected Elizabeth and her Children
from al their righe. ^ Chap. 4. p. 185 Te especial favors, and sweet
consolations from God, which Elizabeth had in hearing of Mass, and otherwise.
Chap 5. p. 198. Elizabeth visits her Aunt an Abbess, and then her Vn^lo, the
Bishop of Bamberg: who plotted to have her married, but in vain. Chap. 6. p.
206 How the body of Prince Lewys was brought out of Sicily into Germany to be
buried. Chap. 7. p. 219. How the Noblemen expostulate with Prince Henry, what
obtain what they desire, and what Elizabeth did therevppon. Chapter 8. p. 363. How
the Pope took notice of Elizabeth's Sanctity, and received her into his
protection: and how she made her profession of the Third Order of Saint
Francis. Chap. 9. p. 231 How Elizabeth built her self a poor Cottage, while
her house was building in the City: and what a holy life she led afterward.
Chap. 10. p. 243. How Conrad dismissed two of Elizabeth chiefest Maids: and
how strict a life she led in extreme poverty. Chap. 11. p. 254. A certain
Nobleman of Hungary endeauours in vain to persuade Elizabeth to return* with
him to her Father, and what acts of humility she showed. Chap. 12. p. 276.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I. OF the exceeding Charity of S. Elizabeth toward her Neighbor,
especially the sick: With her great humility. p. 291. How Elizabeth delivers
the soul of the Queen her Mother from Purgatory, with her prayers: and
likewise procured the vocation of a certain libertine vnto-Religion. Chap. 2.
p. 301. The great liberality and mercy of Elizabeth, showed after she had
recovered her portion into her hands. Chap. 3. p. 211. Of a certain accident
which showed how Elizabeth had likewise the gift of Prophecy: With her
charitable acts in relief of the poor. Chap. 4. p. 322. The Charity of
Elizabeth to the Neighbor in spiritual mercyes: and particularly of her
singular gift of Prayer. Chap 5. p. 336. How Elizabeth fell sick, the manner of
her sickness: and of the happy end which she made. Chap. 6. p. 346. The
funeral Offices of the glorious Elizabeth, are piously performed: With a touch
only of her singular virtues. Chap. 7. p. 356. The canonization of Saint
Elizabeth: the Translation of her Body: and the relation of her miracles. Chapter
8. p. 365. A continuation of the Miracles wrought at the Shrine of S. Elizabeth
after the Translation of her Body. Chap. 9. p. 376. A Table collected of the
eminent virtues and perfections of S. Elizabeth, concluding with a Prayer to
the Saint. Chap. 10. p. 388.
FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF S. ELIZABETH INFANTA OF HUNGARY.
The Parents, Birth, Infancy, and Espousalls of Elizabeth. CHAP. I.
HUNGARY, the utmost Thuly of the Turkish Empire, or impetuous inundation of
the Ottom^ race, which now long ^ince tirannized upon Asia the greater and the
less, and of this side found its bar at least in the Danuby; has had Geyza,
the first Christian King of that Monarchy; who being once baptized, gave
seriously himself to propagate the Christian faith through his kingdom,
therein assisted by the Almans. Stephen his son, who is enrooled in the
number and Catalogue of the Saints, was King after him, in the year of Grace
997. He espoused the Sister of the Emperor S. Henry, called Gizele, and by her
amongst other Children, had S. Emerick, who dyed young before his Father. Peter
his Nephew of his Sisters side, succeeded him, who living luxuriously and
viciously, was by the Hungars thrust out of the kingdom, and Aba S. Stephens
brother in law put into his place. Who living worse then Peter* was hated for
his pride, and slain in the Wars, in the third year of his reign; and Peter
recalled again; who governing more like a Tirant then a King, exercising great
cruelty upon Priests, and profaning, and pillaging the Church, had his eyes at
last ph^kt out of his head, on the second year, after his recall: And Andrew
Cousin of S. Stephen advanced to the Throne after him, who reestablished the
Christian Religion in Hungary, and reedifyed the Temples which had been
demolished. After which, Andrew, by the interposition of thirteen kings
succeeding one an other in the same Monarchy, a second Andrew entered into the
Throne, not a whit inferior to the former; but in valor and fortitude
exceeding him far, according to the Etymology of his name in Greek, which
signifyes Manhood, Fortitude, and Valor.

This happy King, and Monarch of that ample state, as he was renowned for his
prouesse, and absolute authority, thereby gained and purchased upon that
Realm; so was he most conspicuous in the eyes of men; for governing that
kingdom with such equity, justice, and religion; as though his life,
otherwise, were full of many noble archieuments in wars, yet his wisdom and
prudence, in government, being the essential part of his royal dignity,
immortalized him more, then his martial exploits, which for personal
performance he recomme^ded to his Captains, Commanders, and Generals in the
field, willing rather to put his victorious sword, into their hands; who knew
how to brandish it abroad, then to be wanting to his scepter at home, which
none could wield or manadge like himself.

But that which made him more happy then the rest, was the worthy Choice he
made of a dear Consort and individual companion, of either fortunes, such as
that noble Princess was, the Lady Gertrude daughter of the Duke of Carinthia,
who being admired for her rare beauty, and Princely parentage, was yet more
amiable to the world for her sage prudence and fair demeanures, for which she
was more esteemed: then for the Lyllyes and Roses of her Cheeks, and greater
iustre of her family.

As well appeared, as often as occasion served, when her dear Lord, was forced
to absent himself from his royal seat, and she feign to supply his room,
which she did full loath, and most unwillingly, and yet so wisely that one
could hardly tell, which most excelled, a princely Modesty, or Prudence in her.
So discreet and practical she was in government, as if made for Scepters,
while she sat upon the Throne; and yet so ignorant again of such matters,
sitting in her Chamber with her Ladies, while her Husband swayd the scepter in
his person; as she seemed to know no more, then her needle, and how to set
forth her works in silks, which she did most curiously indeed.

In fine, they were both most happy, he in her, and she in him, and it were
hard to say, which the more, since the world afforded not a better pay --. Yea
happy Hungary the while, where reigned such a Sun and Moon by turns, in the
Hemispheare of that flourishing region. But yet more happy far, and more
illustrious they shine in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; for bringing forth into
the world such a Starr, as S. Elizabeth was. Thus far has she been borrowing
Light, and luster from them; but now like a Hesperus, she begins to arise, and
appear her self in this firmament of ours, to glad both the heavens and earth
with her presence, with such fair preparatio^s as these, making her royal
entry into the world. And that with reason, since in triu^phes, the ways where
Princes are to pass in their first entrances are strewen with flowers, and
adorned with tapestryes: and what better flowers, can we strew before our S.
then the virtues of her Stem, whence she is derived: what fayrer Tapestries
then the noble portraits of her most renowned Parents, to precede, as it were,
the procession of her life.

When Gertrude Queen of Hungary, was found to be with child, you may imagine,
what joy and iubily there was; Who joys not, at the chaunting of the Cock, as
being the sign, albeit remote, of the gladsome day at hand; but when as day
begins to break; and the Aurora appears; Men do begin to open their eyes, to
entertayne the wished star of the day, and by the Aurora, will the wiser of
them guess, at the future day. The Aurora now was come, while Gertrude, in the
hours of expectation, approached to her childbirth. When Elinsor, a famous
Astrologer of those days, devoted to the princely Couple desirous either to
satisfy his own curiosity, or to comply with that of others; gazing on the
stars, and observing their constellations, did calculate the Nativity of the
newborn child. And found after he had turned over the whole Ephemerides;
that a Damsel was then to be borne, of that royal lynage, whose name should
be Elizabeth, foretelling her good inclinations, virtues, and miracles, how
she was to be married, and what the name of her Spouse should be; that al
should hold her, for the joy and delight of the Church, and she prove very
singular in graces and spiritual endowments through the course of her whole
life. These were the sage, prognosticates of that Astrologer, by the help of
his Art: If art may be said to go so far as to derive, upon the operations of
the mind; which I list not here to examine. It suffices his conjecture at
least, was not amiss, and his creditt with men and authority so great, as to
breed an extraordinary expectation in them of some rare creature to be shorly
borne and come into the world.

And now behold the time was come, and Gertrude happily delivered, of a
daughter, and such a one, as bredd an universal joy in Court, and City, no
place that was not filled with signs of triumph, especially at her entrance
into the Church, by the lauer of Baptism, when she put on, the ca^did robe of
innocency, washed with the blood of the immaculate Lamb whereof she was never
dispoyled, to her dying day. A great confusion doubtless to us Mortals, who
not contented to break our first faith, in stayning this robe, but after so
many wholesome baths of Penance return to contaminate, the same again and
again, and I would to God, no more again.

Elizabeth, for so now she is enrolled in the book of life, to be cancelled
never, as yet hanging on her Mothers breast; (for she committs not that
treasure, to the trust of any) that she might truly be a Mother wholely, and
not to halues. Herman Lantgraue of Thuringia, having at that time likewise a
Son newly borne, called Jews, and hearing of the universal acclamation
made, at the double Birth of this rare a Phoenix, partly through the good Omen,
he conceived thereof, and partly to match in so royal a Family; dispatches
Ambassadors, with good expedition to Andrew King of Hungary, to demand
Elizabeth, for Spouse for his said Jews. Such it seems was the tenor of
those days, and is yet in practice now and then, among greatest Princes, for
reason of State, to unite their kingdoms stronger to each other, still leaving
the parties, to their full choice, when they come to the years of Election.

No marvel then, if Andrew, with his dearest Gertrude, after the matter had
been thoroughly debated by his prudent Counsel, gave so free and easy consent
thereto: for he sent away the Ambassadors well satisfied with his royal promise.

But the Lantgraue, now at last, the Infants being grown to be three or four
years of age, desirous to have such a jewel in his house, sent his Ambassadors
a new to fetch that precious treasure into his State, seeing no reason that
since she was to be inserted into the house of Thuringia, and was to flourish
in that garden; but she should take her greener sap from that soil, and
begin so young to frame herself, to the customs of that La^d, having other
reasons for the same besides: and so likewise had Andrew and Gertrude on their
parts important motives, to hold her still with them, and not so soon to enrich
Thuringia, with the impouerishing of Hungary, but least Nature, being but the
one, might be thought to be the whole impediment, being prudent as they were,
and not willing to take so weak an imputation on themselves, they gave order,
for her sending to Thuringia.

The Queen, sent with her a rich furniture for her Chamber, with a Cupbord of
plate, of gold and silver, and many precious jewels of inestimable value, also
diverse cabinets of pretti toys to enterteyne her infancy withal; and sundry
cheynes bracelets, earings, carkanets, Chests of the finest lynne^s, with other
things besides well befitting such a Princess. The King for his part, sent his
royal word, to allow her so much by the year, as should mainteyne her a
convenient Court, fit for such a Princess, until such time, as the Espousalls
were solemnized, when, he would send her portion agreed upon, at one entire
payment; and for the present sent her so attended, as became his Daughter.

In this equipage, after a million of kisses of the Child, by the tender
Parents, at its departure from the Court of Hungary, went the Ambassadors, of
each part, with the treasure of heaven, very charily and tenderly carrying the
same with easy iourneys, till they came to the Metropolis, where the Lantgraue
held his Court: Where being arrived (performing their Embassage to the Princely
Father and the Duchess), they presented the Spouse to the young Prince, who
with a gracious and smiling countenance received her, to the great satisfaction
and joy of all. I will not stand here, to number the shows and triumphs made
in that City, to welcome this great little Ghost, what fireworks were made,
what triumphall Arks set up, in fine, what not, that might any ways seem to
give forth pomp and magnifice^ce in a high measure. But that which passed all,
was, the chearefulnes, read in the countena^ces of al, but especially in the
Lantgraue, and his Duchess themselves, who as then presages in this happy
arriual, an unspeakable blessing to themselves, their family, and whole estate.

But o disastre, after a three years space, the news is brought to Court, how
that fair Gertrude mirror of Queens, the goodly Cinthia of the Hungarian
skies in the plenitude and fullnes of her temporal felicity, not without some
probable signs of her predestination, through a constant course at least, and
perseverance in a virtuous life, by some conjectures was cruelly thought to be
murdered by the treachery of the Nobles of that Land; to the great lamentation
of all the virtuous and good, as for the loss of a great stay and Pillar of
that State, the little Elizabeth now being seven years of age.

THE PRETTY SPORTS AND Entertaynements of Elizabeth in her Childhood: the Death
of the Prince her Father in Law, and the devotion she used. CHAP. II.
HEre now imagine Death to have been a sleep, the while this glorious Queen
Gertrude enjoyed the Sunshine of her Life; and that he now began to awake and
rouse himself to gather Roses, in their chiefest prime and fullest growth. Nor
does he always attend so long, but often takes them in the bud: Howbeit this
Rose was taken off by cruel Death, in her chiefest flourishing of all. God
bless the bud the while, the issue of this Rose, that now begins to peer
indeed in the garden of the world, and give forth shows ere she be aware of
her future sanctity. For lo by this time, knowing rather by instinct, and the
unction of the Holy Ghost* then any reading, or help of any other exterior
Master, besides her Paranimph, or Angel Guardian; of what importance was, the
singular and special devotion to the Saints of God, being of his proper family,
and dearest to him, and such as continually assist in his presence, and never
take off their eyes from beholding him face to face: And knowing yet besides,
that howbeyt, they are ever pressed and ready to attend to their deuotes at al
times, and places, where and whenever with true Devotion they are called
upon; Yet more particularly in places, where Temples, Chapells, Aultars, and
Oratoryes are peculiarly dedicated to their honor, being properly the House of
God, where he is pleased best to give audience, and receive the Memorials,
suits, and petitions of men. She therefore often resortes thither, and there,
before every Altar would sometimes kneel, and sometimes bow down her body
reuere^tly, in others presence doing what suited best with her dignity: but
alone she would prostrate her self on the floor, and steal some amourous
kisses from the ground, and most como^nly lift up her hands to her breast; and
likely always, cast up her eyes to heaven except sometimes when she closed
the^ to look into her self. O rare Bud of Sanctity and most angelical Infa^t,
not more of Hungary or of Thuringia, then of Paradise it self!

If in the Palace she had found the Chapel doors to be shut; she would not
wholly loose her labor, but reverently kneel at the threshold, and kiss them
devoutly; nor came she ever without some suit or petition in her mouth, or in
her heart at least. How many times, being in the heat of her sports, with the
rest of her companions, and equals in years, though in virtue and dignity,
not like to her, she would lay wagers, who in running should first arrive at
the Chapel door, to have occasion thereby to make frequent Visitts of the
venerable and most blessed Sacrament: So burning was the ardour of her Love to
her heavenly Spouse, whom she knew to sit within the Veyle or curtain of those
Species there. In the midst of her childish sports, she often took occasion to
perform some act of humiliation or other; and that so pretily, as seemed not
to be industriously done but merely unawares, when as in truth, she would do
it of set purpose. Sometimes moreover when she played at cards with her Ladies,
and happily had won any money of them she distributed the same among her Mayds
of the poorer sort, obliging them of duty, at least to say a Pater and Aue for
her.

She was now passing into the Ninth year of her age, when suddenly beyond all
expectation, the Lantgraue, Father to her Spouse Jews, departed this life, to
the great astonishment and dismay noe doubt of the whole state, finding it self
so untimely deprived, of its head, and the weight of so flourishing a
Dukedom, as Thuringia, now like to press, if not oppress the infant
shoulders of the new Prince. But necessity has no Law, and Death as lawless
as necessity makes but a sport of Chests, of the life of Man, and as soon
gives a check to a King or Queen, as to a Pawn, and the State the while must
be content, to take their chance or fortune as it is; and make their best of
their fickle and transitory game. by speedy substitutio^ of some Protector of
that Government and Prince, which here we intermedle not with, as hasting
rather to the tender Princess her self, the Argument in hand. Who, as the
dawning of the Day hitherto, now begins to appear more clear, then ever in
the Little World or Hemispheare of the Duchy of Thuringia to a perfect Day. For
look as her years increased, so the sparks of her childish and innocent
devotions, and virtues began more seriously to enkindle, and take fire in her
heart, which the more intensly burned and flamed within her as she wisely went
about to conceal them in her breast.

One of the things, which Saints and spiritual men do much recommend, is the
frequent memory of God. For besides the work in it self, most grateful and
pleasing to him, it includes an act of Religion and of Prayer, fulfilling Luc
ca. 18. 1.
the same of our Savior. We must always pray and never give over; and also
other acts besides, as Faith, Hope, and Charity, and the rest, and is most
profitable for all, to keep them from falling into Sin or defects. So live
thou with men as if God had his Eyes still cast upon thee: Said Seneca the
Heathen. This ground now of spiritual building, wheresoever the Infant had it;
she infallibly laid; while she took the resolution she made, to have
always God before her eyes, even in these tender years in all her actions
whatsoever.

Upon which foundation she built this Heroical purpose, for his sake to
abandon all the delights and pleasures of the world, al bravery in apparel
with their variety of fashions, in affection at least. And moreover to leave
the pa^pering and delicacyes of the flesh, yea more, all the vanities of the
world, not contented to refuse them only, but even with a holy Tira^ny from
that time forwards to trample the^ under foot.

And forasmuch as in her constant resolution, it was needful to beg divine
assistance, more then ordinary, she took up certain devotions, which she
likely omitted not upon any occasion; so as if she chanced at any time to
forget them by day, she faithfully supplied the^ in the night: applying her
self most devoutly to the Mother of God, the incomparable Virgin, to vouchsafe
to patronize and second her pious intentions, and to mediate her cause with her
Son, who^ she presumed could deny her nothing: then to her Angel Guardian,
who^ she coniured to look unto his charge, and not to suffer her to break
her new made purposes. She eue^ passed through the whole Hierarchy of Angels
and SS. of heaven from the highest Seraphin, to the Thief on the cross, to
make intercession for her.

But above al, she addicted her self to the glorious Apostle and Evangelist S.
John, calling him by all the amourous words she could devise, as to who^ she
had particular devotion, and whom freely and affectuously she had chosen above
the rest. According it should seem to the laudable practice now a days to
make choice of some singular Patron, to recurr to in all necessityes, and to
serve with infatigable constancy to the end. Him she coniured with a thousand
titles, as well general as proper to him: as Trumpe^t of Israel, Organ of the
Living God, Notary of Heaven, Secretary of the Estate of the Church, high
flying Eagle, especial Favorite of the Spouse, the dearly beloved of JESUS:
that he would help to establish and ratify her pious purpose of serving God his
Master and hers, in a more eminent manner, then hitherto she had don. To which
intent to engage him the more; though she had already so especially and
singularly chosen him before; she obtained of God, in the common suffrages or
Election of Saints, which according to custom was used there, that she might
^raw him and no other, which to her unspeakable joy and comfort she did, for
thrice together. And therefore in^eed so highly she honored this select
Patron of hers, the glorious Apostle and most illumined Evangelist S. John, so
leaning, as it were, on his Lords breast, as well now in heaven, as once he
did, at the last Supper, the figure of that divine Paschall. And further ever
after from that time forwards, she so highly reverenced and honored this Saint
and Patron of hers, as she verily thought she was not to deny any thing to
any who begged or craved in his name.

The Holy days she observed most punctually and religiously indeed, according
to her years and capacity: When she would lay aside some part of her dressings
and attires; esteeming on those days, quite contrary to the use of her Peers,
and the practice of those times; the best decking and ornament of all, to ^e
the Beauty of the Soul within, holding it to be a grateful to be devout and
reverent in his presence, without the glittering of these pearls and precious
Stones, then to prancke her self with all those toys, whereby the heart becomes
full of vanity and distraction; and therefore ordinarily she left off her
gloves, at least so long as the Service or Mass lasted, being desirous by
degrees to break her will, though in smaller things, that she might hereafter
arise to more noble reflections, and gain more noble conquests on her self.
Imagining, though the thing was but little in yt self, yet being done in
respect and memory of the Passion, represented there in the dreadful Mystery
of the present Sacrifice, it would doubtless be grateful and acceptable to God.

Many times she would say to her Ladies about her. Sisters, for the Love of
our Lord Jesus Christ, let us wear no gloves, nor put on any silk, gold, or
Jewels to day, nor eat but of one dish only, or abstain from such a dish, and
forbear at least to dance this day, or to play at cards, or the like. And
with these beginnings, abstayning merely for the Love of God, by little and
little she gathered, and they by her example, the celestial fruits of Virtue.
When she played at any time and won, so as fortune seemed to smile upon her;
she would say it was now time to give over; because she was flattered with
prosperity: reflecting the while, if men so rejoiced with a little breath of
prosperity or encouragement of so light a gain, what would they do when
occasion served, that the Holy Ghost were pleased to breath upon them, and they
to obtain the Margarits and Pearls of the joys of Heaven? In danceing
likewise which she could not eschew to satisfy the Nobles, she was content
with one grave and solemn measure only, saying; it was sufficient with one
stryene, to give satisfaction to the world and to please the Lovers thereof,
and the rest she would omit, and fairly interrupt for Christ's sake. And thus
with th^se exercizes of denying and barring her self voluntarily from the
pleasures of the flesh or vanities of the world; she marched forwards to a
higher degree of more eminent virtue and perfection.

HOW ELIZABETH WAS contemned by Sophia, and Agnes her Mother, and Sister in
Law; with the rest of the Court. CHAP. III.
BEhold our noble Princess now begins to mount the mystical Ladder of Jacob:
that is, to enter into the true Exercize of Piety, consisting of ten several
Stepps, still ascending higher. The first; a recesse from the Earth or affect
of Secular or terrene things, with a firm decree of the mind to follow Christ.
This stepp she has climed already, so as with the Apostles in affect at least
she might well vsurp that saying of theirs. Behold we have left all things.
The second; an Oblivion of worldly things: Whereto the amourous celestial Lover
exhorts his Spouse. O harken Daughter, forget thy people. The third, an hatred
and contempt thereof, as appears in her, who esteems the same as dung to
purchasse Christ. The fourth, a dispoyling and Euangelical hatred of al
superfluous and profane Love of Friends, citizens, and Parents. The fifth, a
hatred of her self for Christ, which she truly did, as shall appear. The sixth,
an abnegation of her self, and proper Love. The seventh, a daily carrying of
the Cross, or mortification of inordinat concupiscences. The eight the
Imitation or Following of Christ, inconstantly pursuing his virtues, and
especially these, Meeknes, and Humility. The Ninth, a love of the Neigbour, yea
of the Enemies themselves, through his example on the Cross, when he prayed
for his Persecutours. The tenth and last. An intimous union with God, that the
mind do wholely adhere to God, and as it were be made one spirit with him, and
may truly say, as she might well, that same of S. Paul: I live, not I now, but
rather Christ in me.

For lo, a fair occasion now begins to present it self to her, of arising
unto higher degrees of this exercise of Piety, or Patience I may say. Since
having such a Mother in law as Sophia, and such a Sister as her daughter Agnes,
by the death of her tender and dear father in law, now grown in great
authority in Court, her Spouse as yet but young. What can we look for, but
storms and tragedyes at their hands? Sophia indeed was a Woman, fair enough,
and gracious to behold, but of a violent and impetuous nature; and as she was
her self, so bred she up her child, as likly they are Birds of a feather. The
Mother though she were not young, yet was not ancient, and if those years she
had could have borne her out, her mind would have ranked her with the
youthfullest of her Dames; and what became not her self to do, she would be
doing in others by setting the^ on, in fashions, attires, in dancing, gaming,
and the like. She would be known to be Duchess of Thuringia, and have her
dues in points of honor, punctually observed; obsequiously attended at Table,
and abroad, by her Pages, and never without a Beuy of Courtly Ladies about her.
Her apparel not so rich as fashionable, relying more on the splendor of her
jewels to make her appear who she was, then the Gorgeousnes of attyres
otherwise: therein giving scope to her Ladies and Maids of honor, to vye with
one an other, wherein taking a complacence, she seemed to exceed in them, so
being guilty her self of their excess. And yet whatsoever her devotion was
inwardly, she would hold still a fair Decorum in her Chapel in the Pomp
thereof; retayning still a stately Majesty in the exterior ceremonies; With
this satisfying her self, that she complied sufficiently with her obligations
and her secular state, being the absolute Princess and Dowager of that land.

Her daughter Agnes seemed to be according to her heart, fair and bewtyful
indeed and as made for Courts; of a nature good enough and free of disposition;
and might no doubt have been more Religious and retired, had the Mother with
studious education trained her in it, as she left her too much to her own
inclinations; a fault too frequent every where, in the breeding up of
Damselles; though here no further hurt ensued, then certain antipathyes in
her, with our Princely Virgin, to exercise her virtues with. These two then,
being equals every way in that Court for years and respects, by the ordinance
of the Mother were suited both alike, adorned alike with glittering coronets of
gold and precious jewels on their heads, with bracelets, eare-rings, and
carkanets the same: in a word, exteriourly in the habit, no difference to be
seen, save only in the inward habit of the mind, in the sight of God, and
Angels. For they going once into the Temple on a solemn festiual day, (as
their custom was,) so crowned and richly attired, and passing immediately
before Sophia the lady Mother: Elizabeth presently at her entering into the
church, laid off her Coronet of gold, nor would she put it on again til the
Sacrifice was ended; and all that time most humbly and devoutly demeaned her
self, as she truly took it in the presence of her Savior, until at last she
was admonished to go home.

This fact of hers, now much displeased Sophia, as an act at least of
indiscretion, or at the best unadvisedly done. Whereupon in time and place
convenient she took her aside, and peaceably and fairly demanded of her, why
she did so, saying. Daughter, what meant you the other day entering into the
church to lay aside the Coronet you ware, was it a handsome sight trow you, in
such a presence of the Estates, Counts, and Barons of our land to undress you
in that manner in the view of all the people? To whom Elizabeth humbly made
answer. Madam, God forbid, I should be so irrreligious, if not impious, being
such a wretch as I am, to have my head adorned with the splendor of a Crown,
and to appear in so proud and haughty an equipage, even in the time and place,
where my Saviors head is so cruelly tormented and crowned with thorns. At
which words was Sophias mouth immediately stopped, what with the goodly reason she
saw she had to check her so; but happily carried it in mind, til an other time.

By which appeared what impression, even in her tender years, the Thorns of
her Saviors crown did make in her heart, deeply wounding her maiden breast,
through meditation of his Passion represented in the Sacrifice of the Mass.
This compassion is an affect of the Soul which she had, wherewith she jointly
suffered with him, who suffered so, and transferred his dolours to her self;
and to this end she helped her self with these two things: first considering
the quality of the person who endured: and secondly the greeuousnes of the
pains endured: which she did, pondering how Christ our Lord suffered them,
without any succor of the Eternal Father, or his Disciples, considering also
the delicacy of the complexion of his body; and how the interior pains of his
soul were yet more grievous then those of his sacred body* and these were the
thoughts that took up her mind, during the Sacrifice of the Mass: while
Sophia perhapps through disdain was biting the lipp, and other Courteours
whispering with themselves, as censuring hardly thereof, and murmuring against
her.

For that indeed, as Envy is the handmayd of virtue, and waiting at her heels,
with meagre looks: So was the innocent and douelike demeanure of this Virgin,
and her holy simplicity in contempt with the Courteours attending on her; who
began with bitter words, and secret taunts, yea most injurious and contumelious
speeches now and then, and that to her face also, to play upon her with
cauills, nods, fond laughters, scoffs, and gibes, at her hyppocritical
sanctity, as they would term it. And that the rather in beholding Sophia her
self with her il trained daughter, to concur with them, and openly as it were,
to applaud them for it, being so opposite as they were to her in their
conditions. For Elizabeth being now in contempt with her self, esteemed the
vanity of the world as filth and dung; together with these excellencies and
preeminences of honor, and the pompes and gorgeousnes of attires: but they on
the contrary, loved, reverenced* and esteemed nothing less, then what
Elizabeth did love, reverence, and esteem. She desired to please God only; but
they, so they pleased the world, esteemed little to offend God. Thus the
diversity in their hearts, caused a great dissimilitude, and Antipathy in their
manners: so as hardly now, could they look upon her, with an equal eye, as
commonly is wont in such occasions; laying open a large and spacious field to
the Virgin to exercise al virtues in, and no small rock of scandal to the other
of their spiritual ruin; if the Sacraments repaired not the secret wracks of
their soul which the Stillicids of envy had wrought, while her humility in her
ordinary conversation increased the same.

For lo Elizabeth, leaving the company of the Nobles, and such as rufled in
their silks, and sauoured of their ciuets, and amber-gris, who were clad in
purple, kissing the hand at every word, and full of their courtly co^pleme^ts
withal; affected rather the familiarity of the simple, and delighted more with
the conversation of poor women, and the more sober Damoselles of her age,
discoursing with them of spiritual and pious things; then to tattle of this or
that fashion, or to use those courtly exercises which her Sister Agnes and her
like applied themselves unto. And hence it was that Sophia would often say to
her ladies, that Elizabeth should be placed among the Nuns, since her manner
of life, even wholely resembled theirs, doing nothing worthy the greatness of
her House. Nay there were some of the Nobles, whose impudent boldness we
mentioned above, who stuck not to avouch, that Elizabeth, in respect the
portion she brought, was not answerable to the Estate and dignity of their
Prince; should either be sent back to Hangary again, or be given in Marriage to
some other of the Nobility there. Which words were so confidently and freely
delivered here and there, and uttered every where, as they could not choose but
come to the ears of the innocent Lady.

Now what should the Virgin do admidst those venomous and serpentine tongues,
but as a Rose pricked with the thorns, wherewith it is beset, vent forth a
sweeter odor of meekenes, by the wounds she received from them, which without
such occasions had layne as hid before; yet could she not choose but weep of
te^dernes, seeing her self so injuriously conte^ned, especially by such, of
whom in duty she ought to be honored. And so much the rather as she feared
her constant purpose of Humility, through their envious ^raynes and wicked
practices might come to suffer detriment. Til considering with her self, how by
these co^tempts, affronts, and humiliations, she should the better resemble
her Lord JESUS Christ, and his Apostles and Saints, and how they had passed
the^ al, and greater to; in respect whereof, these here were to be esteemed as
nothing. And weighing also how great a favor and mercy it was to her from God,
to be so clothed with his livery: and that the indignityes offered her, were
but as money or merchandise, wherewith heaven was to be purchased by her; that
after the measure of the^, her glory should be rated, and that she ought to
hold any pain or mortification soever, as a pearl or precious ruby of no
less value and estimation, then heaven it self. And finally, that the traueils
of this world, have no comparison Romans 8. 17.
with the weight of glory, which is given for them, as S. Paul says. She
resolved at last, and purposed with the divine grace, to suffer not only with
patience, al manner of disgraces and affronts soever, but even with
cheerefulnes and alacrity; it being the holy will of God, yea more to desire and
seek them by all means possible without offense of hers; thereby to conform
her self the more to his divine Majesty: and so dried up her eyes, commending
her case entirely to the divine providence, resigning her self wholely to his
will, in these words.

O sovereign Spouse of my heart. O suffer me not to affect any thing
inordinatly without thee; that is not wholly in order unto thee; yea, that al
things else whatsoever without thee, may be ungrateful and bitter to me, and
thou only sweet. That thy will be mine, and this my desire withal; that as in
heaven thy will is punctually performed; so may it be don likewise here on
earth, and most particularly in me. And since Love requires an union, and a
most entire resignation of al things into the hands of the beloved; I give thee
my whole self without reserving ought to my self. And as before, so now do I
offer thee a new; a full affect of poverty; renouncing in heart al riches and
pomps of the world; and if I had many worlds, I would leave them al for thee
and become poor, as thou wast poor for me. O Spouse of my heart, so great is
the love I bear thee, and poverty, for thy sake; that if it were possible, I
would leave to be what I am, to be transformed into thee. My enemies seek my
overthrow, and to entrap me, and with their guiles to draw me from thy
service. O let them not prevail upon my weakness? but be thou a Rampart to me
against the assaults and batteries they lay against me, to pull me off from my
settled purpose to follow thee as nearly as my state and condition will permit.
I trust thou will perfect what thou have begun, and I shall remain victorious
over al my Adversaries: This I beseech thee for thy Beloved Servants sake, S.
John my venerable Patron; for the love of thy dearest Mother; and above al, for
thy most precious Blood, wherein I put my chiefest trust. Nor was she any whit
received, as shall appear hereafter.

HOW THE YOUNG PRINCE, Jews declared his affiction to Elizabeth, not
withstanding the malignity of her Adversaries. CHAP. IIII.
BY this time, Jews the Prince like a rising sun began to draw the eyes of
al upon him, every one admiring some excellence or other in him, as each
apprehended excellence to be. Some would note his goodly personage, some
observe the whole symetry or due proportion of his body in the parts thereof;
others his complexion strong and robustious, his actiuity others, and dexterity
in the manage of his horse. When he was practicing (though young) with the
rest of his Nobles and pages of his Court, a man would have thought him, as
only made for martial exploits, and feats of Chiualry. But then in court to
have seen his fair behavior, his sweet disposition and affability to al, you
would say that Mars had no part in him; but that he had been made for
carpetts only, to comply with Ladies; so ingenious and gracious he was in his
discourse. But after that again to have seen him in the C appel, had been able
to move devotion in the beholders, so devout he would be at the solemn
offices; so as then they would judge him truly in his Element. And as he was
so pious and virtuous in himself, he was highly beloved of al good and
virtuous men, and a bridle to the vicious, to restrain their exorbitances,
through his rare example of modesty, Te^pera^ce, Meeknes Courtesy, Sobriety;
and hence it was, he was so taken and enamoured with his chaste Spouse his
incomparable Elizabeth. Who^ he noted to be so eminently virtuous, as he
could not choose but effect and highly regard her; though he were otherwise so
te^perat and discrete in his carriage toward her, as not a person in the world,
nor yet the Spouse her self, could guess so much.

Which was the cause such diverse censures ran upon the nullity of the
Espousalls made between them in their Infancyes. For seeing such temperance in
the youthful Prince, so active otherwise, and full of life, they judged he had
no liking to her, and that therefore he would sure refuse her, when he came to
mature age. Especially since Elizabeth his Espouse, was so aliened her self
from that estate, as the company and society of men, seemed to be irksome to
her; much less that she would ever admit the married state; so as now in a
manner she was held a Religious woman. And these discourses every where, made
the pious and discret Prince, the sooner to declare and express himself to the
virtuous Elizabeth, as well to give satisfaction to the world in that point; and
stopp the diverse rumors and judgments of men, as to satify his own affection
toward her, and to be secured of hers to him, which could not be without some
manner of expression; and which now at last he did discreetly, chastely,
opportunely to the great contentment and full satisfaction of each other.

For lo this match of theirs, so made no doubt in heaven, received no less the
fulness of benediction from thence. So, as though she seemed otherwise in her
life and example to have been vowed already to an other Spouse in heaven; yet
was it so, as not in compatible with an earthly Spouse, whose will some way or
other, was known to her, to be, it should be so; and that he was content with
conditions happyly agreed between them, to have a Riual for a time. How often,
alas, had the chaste Elizabeth, in the closet of her heart put forth that Theme
to be disputed of, how often had she concluded, now for the one side, and then
again for the other; now it must be thus, now thus, now this, now that. Til at
last knowing evidently as it were, the will of God, which was the main argument
of her assent to that estate; after she had resolved with her self, to harken
to the Prince, she would further satisfy her self with these morral reasons of
inducements.

First, that Marriage was honorable as ancient as the world itself, reigned in
the Law of Nature, the written Law, and now a holy Sacrament in the Law of
grace, and a great mystery between Christ and his Church. Secondly, that this
Sacrament, is the root of the faithful people, the Nursery of Christianity,
the soil that brings forth Creatures, able to repair the empty seat of the
preuaricating Angels: The series of the living stones wherewith the walls of
Jerusalem are (...). The very trunck whence issued forth all the branches,
flowers, and fruits of the heavenly Paradise. The Spring whence all the brooks
do flow, that water the Hierarchy of the Church. Then what an honor it was for
Parents to be cooperatours with God, in the most excellent workmanshipp of the
world, and chief Maister-peece of the Universe; which is man's body, the
perfect and best organized of al bodies; whereinto being once formed, God
infuseth the soul as a Margarit into the Mother pearl, which he creates, and
sends thereinto, a soul immortal, spiritual, and capable to know him, love,
and adore him. Then for the place of the Institution of Marriage, she found it
to have a singular prerogative, when she considered the same to have been
established in the terrestrial Paradise, the most delicious place of the world,
a place most happy and regarded with the most favorable influences of heaven,
which, in the estate of Innocence was a happy and angelical state, if our first
Parents had constantly perseuered therein, and not lent their ears to the
suggestions of Satan. And though commonly it be said, that Chastity
replenisheth heaven, and Marriage the earth. Which she easily granted, since
she held for certain that without a chaste and pure soul none can see the face
of God, yet she knew well, even in those tender years of hers, to distinguish
rightly of the triple chastity: Virginal, Coniugal and vidual. She knew it to
be most true, that chaste continence replenisheth not the earth, but heaven; but
yet withal considered, how the Coniugal, by the earth, replenisheth heaven; and
with yts fruits, replenisheth and furnishes both heaven and earth. For it
furnishes the terrestrial Jerusalem with soldiers, and the celestial with
most noble and victorious Triumphers.

Now in regard these passages between the young Prince and Princess Elizabeth,
as yet appeared not to the world by any outward sign, the Nobles and
Courteours taking encouragment from the cariages and deportmens of Sophia and
Agnes, who never left flerting and provoking the innocent Damosel, with taunts
and quips to her face, but especially with bitter nips behind her back among
themselves, the matter grew now to be common in men's mouths, that the Lady
Elizabeth should be sent into her Country again and the young Prince was now
to think of an other Spouse, more competent for him, and deserving his
Princely Highness. In regard her Portion (as they said) was too small, and the
Virgin her self affected him not. That doubtless she was not for the world, and
that the Prince would sure^y never match with such an one, as ^ad no
application to the world, much ^sse to the person of the Prince. Thus ^uerie
one passed his censure on the ^atter, as it seemel most likley to him, and
indeed according to his particular ^ffection. Whereas besides there was ^o want
of those, who framed far ^igher conceits of the ancient Espou^lls, solemly
made in the face of ^e world in their tender infancyes, ^ith so general
applause of either people, at the entreaty of the old Lant^raue Herman
deceased, and not without the great contentment and ^atisfaction of Sophia her
self, how^euer now through dissimilitude of ^anners she favored not the
allya^ce, ^s before. But that which made the ^reatest impression with the
grauest of them, was the sage prediction and prognosticat which Elinsor (whose
credit and authority in those Northern parts was much respected) had made of
her, and that contract I may say, even before her Nativity it self, as we have
mentioned above, which was no doubt a great motive to the old Lantgra^e of that
so early a Match, made in their tender infancy and nonage.

Among these, there was one Gualter a great Peer of the State, who much
misliked such rumors should be bruited every where to the prejudice as he
took it of the innocent Virgin, and no small disparagement to the young Prince;
that so excellent a piece of grace and Nature as the Lady Elizabeth was, should
so lightly be prized now, which heretofore was hopefully admitted into their
land as a fair benediction and future happynes unto it. Wherefore being
directed (as it should seem) by the fingar of God, in behalf of the innocent,
and for the singular love he bare unto his Prince; taking a fair occasion and
fit opportunity, said thus unto him. My Liege, I trust the ancient services I
have done to your deceased Father the renowned Lantgraue of happy memory; and
the Princely favors I have re^eiued from his hands in liew thereof; will
preoccupat for' me and prevent any sinister suspicion of my Loyalty ^owards
the person of your self, in whom I behold the true and lively ^igure, and
pourtraict of the great Her^an himself; and that as I loved and honored him
alive, I must ^eeds likewise honor him in your per^onage, in whom so perfectly
he lives. Which laid as a good foundation, I ^ust my boldness with your Highness
will come off the better, when I shall ^resse the same, with a matter of
im^ortance, not knowing yet how gra^eful my officiousnes may prove unto our
Highness. Laying then ambages side, I come to the point, which in co^^dence is
to understand your pleasure and princely disposition, touching your ^pouse in
Court. I say, to know what ^our inclination is toward her; to wit, whether in
your election, you will ratify yonr Fathers choice of her for a Spouse, and
second the general applause thereof through the world, or proceed to a new
election of an other, more worthy in your eyes. And this the rather I urge your
Highness with, for that it is generally voyced abroad, (upon what ground I know
not) your Highness means to retract from the ancient Espousalls, and to seek
a new.

To which the Prince with color in his cheeks of a maiden blush, sweetly
made answer, but breifely, as became him. My Lord, I thank you for your
loving care of our honor and chiefest good in this life, and for a full
satisfaction to your demand, take this from me: You see yon Mountain there:
I tell you truly, were it al of gold, and all the stones most precious Rubyes and
carbuncles; yet I prize and set by more, those ancient Spousalls made between
us, then such an one; and that he would shortly give to understand what little
reckoning he made of such fond bablings of the envious and maleuolent; and
would make his affection to the Virgin yet more manifest to the world. May it
please your Highness answered Gualter, that I signify so much to the Lady
Elizabeth her self. To which the Prince condiscended, and to give his words
more credit with her, went to his Closet and fetched out a jewel of no small
worth; and sent it by him to his dear Elizabeth, as a token and pledge of his
affection to her. It was a mirror or glass, garnished with stones of
inestimable value as in a tablet, with two Christals opening of each side; One
simple to look into and behold one self in; and a Christ crucified most
curiously and artificiously wrought on the other. This token the Baron took
joyfully in his hands, and making his Obeissance to him, thought it long til he
had delivered his Embassage, for he was one that truly honored the happy
couple.

At last, he comes unto her presence, and in a gracious sort delivered the
whole discourse unto her, in manner as it passed between the Prince and him;
and withal, presented her the foresaid Jewel; which she took into her
Virgin hands, as sent from heaven; not without a crimson blush; so to have
discovered her conceived joy in a matter of that nature; giving the Noble man
many thanks for his loving care of her honor, and his traueills taken on her
behalf, protesting she would remember him if she were able, at least with her
poor unworthy prayers for him to her heavenly Spouse. Madam, said he, I take
you at your last, and so departed from her presence. When it cannot be
imagined, what joy the Virgin took here at, seeing her self now almost put
into possession of her hearts content; since now at last besides the enjoying of
such a friend, she hoped her enemies would come to have their mouths stopped,
who had so maliciously presaged of her; and that which pleased her most; was,
she hoped thereby to have a larger scope to serve her beaue^ly Spouse, noting
the Prince to be so virtuously disposed of his own inclination.

After which, she being now of years complete, to be joined in marriage, the
Prince hasted the Nuptials as soon as might be, and if there were so much
pomp, at her entrance into that State, as we have said above, she being then
a Child, and her Spouse but an Infant likewise, as Roses in their bud; You may
judge the solemnityes of the Nuptial pomps; they being now as full blown Roses
exposed to the view of the whole world. When to the confusion of the ill
affected, to that most happy co niunction of the Alman and Hungarian Stars;
the Prince declared by that public Act of his, how far they were mistaken
and deceived, in their so maleuolous Omens of the match; who so temerariously
had passed their censures on the Princely Pair; showing moreover and
manifestly declaring, that he neither respected wealth, beauty, nor Nobility
of stock, so much in the choice of his Spouse, though all were competently at
least, if not eminently found in her: as her religious simplicity and integrity
of mind, matched with a Princely Majesty triumphing over the world, and the
Vanities thereof.

HOw ELIZABETH BEING married, remitted not her devotions a whit; and how she
carried her self in her Mortifications. CHAP. V.
WHEN the Angel Raphael, discovered himself to T^by; he said, that Prayer was
good with ^ob. 12. (...).
fasting: Which Fasting is commonly understood by the Fathers, to be all
manner of pe^nance, and mortification of the flesh. Which Eliz. considering,
and weighing the great importance, Prayer and Mortification were of, to the
atteyning of perfection, which in that very state, she aimed at: She now
applied her self more seriously the^ ever to the exercize of these two means,
so efficacious to obtain her end. For truly, she was so far from slacking a
whit her former desires, as now they began to break forth into open flames of
feruourous acts, being never well but when some ways or other, she practiced
the works of either Virtues.

For first she fed her mind with thae heavenly and delicious viandes, of
sweet conte^plation, devoutly meditating the points of the four last things,
to make her self vigilant and cautious. Or the mysteries of the Life and
Passion of our Lord, to breed Compassion in her gentle breast: Or the Life of
our Lady and the Saints, to pattern or frame her Life by. For as for higher
speculations of the divine attributes, as yet her years would not bear them;
Or if they would, her singular humility permited her not to look so high;
contenting her self with the Dove, to abide in the holes of the rock Christ
JESUS; and to dwell in his Wounds. For which end, she exercized her body with
watchings, macerations, and fasts. For even then she began, to abandon the
softnes and deliciousnes of her downy bed, fearing least by pampering the flesh
so much, she might unworthy of the Love of Christ. And therefore she would
often steal from the Princes bed, and did it so cunningly indeed, that likely
he was not aware thereof, when she thought she had gotten a great purchase,
to win so much time unknown to her Spouse, to attend more freely to the
traffic of her soul, without any danger of vain glory therein; sometimes
she was taken in the act of stealing forth, and then she would be sad, to be
so discovered in her pious endeauours, but yet would ^raue his license to
proceed notwithstanding, which she did most seriously, and often obtained her
desire of the good Prince: somtymes again she would steal forth to prayer,
when she thought him a sleep, or he but dissembled the matter, and then
rejoice in her heart, as much as before. And again sometimes well knowing the
good disposition in the Prince, she would plainly beg, and he as freely
permit, she might rise in the night, or early in the morning, to give her
self to Prayer, and to commend her estate, and actions to God.

The Prince howsoever he approved these devotions, yet affecting her so dearly
as he did; could not choose but admonish her sometimes, to temper and moderate
the excess she used, either in the time or intensnes of her prayer;
discreetely aduising her to beware she empayred not the health of that her
weak and feeble body. But what gained he by it, but a fuller satisfaction in
his conscience, to have sweetly admonished her of the perils, which are
ordinarily incident to the Servants of God, in the way of perfection; referring
the rest to his divine pleasure, so pious he was. While she, guided by the
Holy Ghost noe doubt, pursued her course, or increased it rather with the more
caution, and greater circumspection not to offend her husband in the least,
whom she honored so much. And to avoid sloth and sleepynes, to the end she
might rise in the night, and not neglect her religious custume of nigthly
prayer; she gave order to her Mayds to awake her, at a certain time, when
she appointed to arise, Which to be done more privily; and that her watching
and nightly rising might the better be kept from her Lord the Prince. She
took one of her Mayds aside, in whom she had greater confidence, then in the
rest; coniuring her thus. Thou know Isentrude (for so was her name) what
trust I have always reposed in thee, and here I acknowledge how faithful I
have found thee hitherto; I must now therefore commend a new Office to thee, to
be my Alarm in the night, if I be not up, by such an hour: and to have it
done more secretly; my will, is, that thou shoudst awake me, in giving me a
remembrance at least, by pulling me by the Toes, at the Bedds feet; for fear
I disturb and awake my Lord. The faithful Servant apprehended her straight,
and assumed the charge, and diligently performed it a good while together, til
at last, being once mistaken I know not how), she took the Prince by the toe
instead of her; Who awaking thereat, and perceiving the matter, was not a whit
displeased therewith, as being acquainted with her custom of arising in the
Night to Prayer.

Which custom continually so prevailed upon her, and her feruours therein now
grew so great, as she was not contented, that by stints and turns to enjoy
these vicissitudes of rest, and rising in the night; but in the absence of the
Prince she was often found by her Mayds sleeping on a Carpet spread and
exte^ded on the ground, when finding her self through a freindly and loving
liberty of theirs, to be handsomely checked and rebuked by them, as fearing
least such manner of austerities might breed her harm and some great
inconvenience to her. Her answer was, she reaped a double fruit and
commodity by it. First that she less regarded her bed* And secondly,
abstained from the softnes of those downs, or the approach of her husband;
that her mind more easily and freely might apply it self to heavenly thoughts
and spiritual exercizes, so opposite to sense, softnes, and carnal delights.

She would often complain, she was unworthy to dedicate her virginity when
time was, to her heavenly Spouse; and yet loved her Lord no whit the less;
from whom she would willingly never be absent; even when he took any journey
in hand, were it in frost or snow, heat, or cold, or any stormy weather
soever. For she well understood his company debarred nor hindered her at all
from her exercize of watching and Prayer, and the sweet Embraces of her
heavenly Spouse; wherein she daily increased so much, as now she took up
streighter austerityes and afflictions to macerate more that innocent body of
hers, to whipp her self every Friday in the year, in memory of the Passion of
her dear Savior: which in the Lents and oftentimes in the nights when she
arose, was don by her Mayds to humble and confound her the more, and yet with a
marvelous chearefulnes and sweetness she suffered all; obliging them to a
perpetual silence.

HOW ELIZABETH SVBMITS her self to the Obedience of one Conrad, a religious
Priest: and what followed thereof. CHAP. VI.
Almighty God, has so ordered, and disposed of things, in the fair Economy
of his divine providence; touching the way and Life to be led and traced by
mortals in this world; that none may be his own Guide, nor yet rely on his
proper knowledge; or trust to his prudence. And if this be so in general, how
much more in the way of spiritual perfection, can one walk without a true,
sincere, discreet, and prudent Guide in a spiritual life. For alas how hard a
thing it were for a man, as well out of passion, as self-loue, to know the
defects of the mind, and to persuade himself he has any; and therefore the
amendment of them, in a manner becomes impossible. What necessity each one
has to be assisted in this point we may imagine: For if the sick and infirm
for the great desire they have to be cured, be content to submitt themselves
to the bitter Pills and Receipts of the Physician, and oftentimes to the
launcings and incisions of the sharp knife for a present ease, or at most for
a momentary life, what should we do in the matter of Salvation, and eternal
life. But seek a Reverend, learned, and a pious Physician of our soul to
deal with, when especially eternal happynes, or everlasting misery depends
thereon. Not only to lay open the soars of our conscience to him, in matter of
sins, and temptations; but even also of penances, mortifications, devotions,
and in all other things wherein a man may easily digress, and step asi le from
the right path, not only of sanctity and perfection, but even of necessary
salvation it self. Wereby we walking more securely in the way of God, may be
apter to receive the divine graces, since with this resignation and act of
Humility, and this holy hatred of our selves, (besides the keeping and
preserving the soul for eternal life) God is exceedingly pleased therewith,
and by means of such spiritual Physicians; and faithful Interpreters of his
will, the more clearly he manifests to us, what we ought to do.

Such a Guide now had Elizabeth great need of, to govern her amid such new
devotions and feruours, every day so taken up by her, least that which was
intended for her greater good and advancement in spirit, for want of such a
Guide or Directour, might redound to the greater damage, or at least
degenerate in spiritual gluttony. And this is that, which the Prince seemed to
intimate to her, while he admonished her to moderate her feruours. When lo
much about that time, came thither a Priest as dropped from heaven, called Conrad
of Marpurge; a most worthy and famous personage, both in his exemplar manner of
life, and eminent Learning; being sent by his Holiness at that time, to preach
the word of God, throughout the Provinces of Germany. Who prevailed so much
through the singular gift he had in preaching, and the Authority he purchased
by it; that he no less repressed rebellious minds with a strickter hand held
upon them, a gravity of aspect, and powerful presence, then he attracted and
comforted the obedient with his lenity and sweet proceedings with every one.
His life was fully answerable to the doctrine he preached, and his works to
the words he uttered. His eloquence or grace in speaking was such, as was not
easy to be judged which the greater: his learning or fervor in the pulpit,
which the more; or whether he were more happy in private discourses to win
and allure the hard unto him; or more successful in preuayling with them,
through force of the eminent tallents he had, especially in guiding and
governing souls. He wholely contemned wealth and honors, riches, and
dignityes, and had an extraordinary zeal of christian Religion. He was
besides a fatal Enemy and a main impugner of Heretics; nor was he ever
noted, ambitiously to seek for Ecclesiastical lyuings * or the spiritual
goods of the Church for his own use, or use of his Nephews or Kindred, or so
much as to accept of what was freely offered him in that or any of the like
kind. His apparel was suitable and agreeable with the decenter sort of the
Clergy in those times, nor exceeded the co^moner sort of the grauer of them.
His table frugal, the difcipline of his house hold very Regular and good; in a
word a very absolute and complete Ecclesiastique; and worthy to have* sit in
the highest chayrs of Pontifical dignity; which surely he had, if his
disposition of shuning Prelacyes, had not been too well known to the world.

To this worthy man, and eminent Star of the Church, the noble and virtuous
Jews, upon knowledge of his so rare worths, being now grown into some
familiarity with him, and he again very grateful to both the young Princes,
and the whole Court of Thuringia, gave leave to bestow at his pleasure, and his
own discretion the whole government and superintendency of all the Churches
and Aduowsons of Benefices, which in his State were remaining in his hands. And
whereas the Lady Elizabeth her self with consent of the Prince, requested the
venerable Father, with much instance, to receive her into his charge; he
granted it, so she promised such obedience to him, as might stand with her
Marriage estate which she vowed devoutly, and performed exactly indeed, not
only for the few years the Prince lived with her, but even after his decease
likewise; and then much more readily, punctually, and absolutely, then ever.

Now then, after this reverend Priest had taken her to his charge, to guide and
govern her in the way of spirit, and that she had delivered up herself wholly
into his hands, to be directed by him, the good Father perceiving her good,
desires, and noting how prosperously she had succeeded hitherto, through the
especial assistance of the Holy (...); began to conceive very highly of his new
charge; imagining with himself, much fruit might be wrought with such, a
subject, and therefore determined to use al diligence he was able, to advance
to some degree of perfection, noting such singular and most eminent seeds of
grace to be sown already in the fertile soil of her prompt and ready soul.
And she of the other side, having thus made a surrender of herself, wholly and
entirely unto him, to be ruled and governed by him: disposed her self to be
most punctual in observing his behests, and to regard him as an Angel sent
from heaven, to guide her in the path way of perfection.

How after many other practices of less moment used by the good Father, in
dealing with this soul, wherein he found her still to come with great facility
in the exercise of all ordinary virtues; he began to proceed more stricktly and
imperiously with her, to put her to the touch and trial of her true virtue and
sanctity in deed. When behold a convenient occasion thereof represented it
self to him, and this it was.

The good Father on a time was to preach (as he was ordinarily wont) of
heavenly things, when especially he commanded this Servant of Christ, not to
fail to be present thereat; and whether it were that he knew before the
necessary occasion she had, to be absent or no, can no mantel* this only
appears, that she by accident failing to be present at that time, through the
unexpected arrival of her husbands Sister; in great displeasure, as it were he
sent her a sharp rebuke, and as to one disobedient sent her word, he would
never command her any thing more, who for so slight an occasion had broken her
promise of obedience to him; and now she might use ^er own liberty again, as
she would her self, signifying withal, he could by no means take it well at
her hands, to be so slightly regarded by her.

At which message, you may imagine how Elizabeth was stung to the quick, and
grieved in her Soul, and thereupon went immediately in all have to her
Master, (for so she used to call him,) with her eyes cast down to the ground
for shame, as not daring to look him in the face, she humbly craved pardon of
him; from whom when the angry Father, as in disdain turned his face away; the
humble creature not respecting her birth and dignity, fell down at his feet,
and would not rise till at last, through her humiliation she obtained; pardon
acknowledging her error therein, with all submissio^, but privately chid her
mayds in a sweet complaining manner, through whose occasion (as she made it
appear unto them,) she had committed the offense.

It is the property of the tenderest consciences, especially in their first
conuersions, to be apt to scruples, which is a mere trick of the enemy of
their good resolutions, to make them either wholly to break with them, or if
they will needs proceed therein, to take away the sweetness they should otherwise
find in the service of God, and the way of perfection. This then was it, which
troubled so our new Nouice, and Disciple here in the school of Conrad, who
being warned by him, not to eat of meats purchased either by violence or any
kind of oppression; and sitting at table (contrary to the custom of such Royal
personages) the very next to the Prince himself, through the extraordinary love
that was between the^, she incurred many grievous scruples, fearing to touch
now this, now that kind of meat, where to abstain from al, as she was not
bound, so in that same place she could not do it.

Two of her Mayds were joined with her in this kind of abstinence, for whose
quiet, besides her own, she fully provided for, and therefore procured their
diet to be prepared a part together with hers; and to be allowed them out of
her kitchen. Wherein she had likewise good experience of the Princely
disposition of her husband in such things, and of his singular favors toward
her, in these and the like occasions. For if any thing had been served into the
table that might breed any scruple in her; he would certify her of it, either
with a wink or nod or some other sign. And of his own accord would have
obliged himself to the same abstinence, had he not been hindered and crossed
therein; by the misinterpretatio^ of some of his Nobility, who ascribed the same
no whit to Religion, or any devotion in her, but to mere superstition and
folly; protesting he would ere ^ong, embrace it himself, exhorting her maids
to go on with their purpose; since himself likewise would shortly ^e one of
their number. And as for Elizabeth her self, she would often enquire, in the
Visitts of the Offices of the household, what provisions were made of meat and
drink; and whether instly or unjustly they were purueyd or no; and when she
was satisfied, al was well, with great joy she certified and secured her Mayds
thereof, saying. To day, God be thanked, we shall fare very well.

In the principal Feasts, indeed, she was likely put to her shifts, in the
assembly of many of the States and Peers of the Realm, how to dissemble her
abstinence, not only from meats forbidden by obedience, but even likewise from
such as were lawful, and fit to be eaten, when they were either costly or
deinty, or any ways curious and not ordinary. For then, to dissemble her
abstinence from al such dishes, according to her pious and devout resolutio^s
made for the Love of God; she would either discourse with the guess, or else
talk with the Prince at table, or be caruing the daintyest morsels to others,
or drink to friends, according to the manner of that country, or else send
forth her Mayds upon sleeueles errands here and there, or change her trencher
very often, and would use a thousand other inventions to deceive her appetite,
and the eyes of the Guess and weighters, so ingenious is a mortified creature,
disposed to deny, and bar it self of all that is dainty or delicate: so as
while others had been glutted with the choycest meats, she very often would
arise a hungry, and go to her chamber, where she fed very sauourly on bread and
honey and sometimes be contented with a bare crust, and that very often of Rye
bread, and a cup of the smalest wine. Whenever she dined or supped by her
self and not with the Prince her husband, she would fare very coursely and
poorly, together with her said Mayds, who^ she had as companions of her
discipline, and order of abstine^ce so taken up amongst the^. And not to charge
the La^tgraue her husband with extraordinary expenses in this kind of special
diet, between themselves, she caused the same to be allowed her out of her
own rents, though her husband always offered them some daintyes or others to
mend their commons, which they would never accept. If she knew of any, who had
wrongfully lost any part of his goods, she presently caused (if it lay in her
power) the whole loss to be restored him again, so as the party seemed to
have only but exchanged his goods, and not lost them at all.

HOW ELIZABETH CONTEMnes all bravery and vanity of Apparel, persuading other
Ladies to do the same. CHAP. VII.
THough the glorious and bewtiful Hester, for God and her countries service,
put herself into sumptuous and gorgeous attires, yet she did it with grief
and repugnancy in her self, protesting in the presence of Almighty God that
from her heart she detested the diadem she ware. The like Elizabeth used to
do, when she dressed her self more richly and curiously then ordinary as she
was forced somtymes, to give satisfaction to the world, and to cover the
humility of her heart, for now began the eyes of men to be cast upon her as a
young Saint. Til at last, on a certain solemn, feast being richly attred with
princely Robes, and wearing a crown of gold on her head, attended with a
stately train of her household, and some other of the Nobility, entering into
the Church, to hear the divine Office, and espying the cross with the ^mage
of our Savior hanging thereon, on the Rood-lost, being sudde^ly moved to
compunction thereat, fell a weeping, and weeping entered into th^se cogitatious.
Alas, behold how my Creator and Redeemer, hangs naked on the cross, dying
thereon a most shameful and opprobrious death for my sake, while I a vile and
wretched sinner, attired with silk and purple, and adorned with ^ewells, live
vainly, rather then lead a life worthy a Christian, much less of a Servant of
God, especially devoted and consecrated in desire at least to a state of
greater perfection. Acrowne of thorns, pricked his head in Pilates house, and
look how he wears it while I am dressed with a Coronet of gold, he my God,
for me is as forsaken abandoned of his friends and disciples, and
ignominiously entreaded by the Jews with whips and scourges, look how the
blood runs trickling from him, while I here am guarded and attended on, with
a goodly family of servants about me, waiting my pleasure, every one striving
to magnify and honor me in what they may: Is this the fervor of the Love I
bear him? Is this the gratitude I repay him with? Is this the requital of the
love he has borne me? Alas poor wretch as I am! O woe to me unfortunate
wretch! And do I thus obey his precepts: thus call to mind his benefitts
received: thus follow his steps; who created me, when I was not, and of
nothing, made me such as I am, and when I was lost redeemed me with his
precious blood? O wretch!

These meditations and internal colloquyes with the present Crucifix, were so
vehement with her, that she was absorpt as it were, and without sense, when
suddenly her strength failing her, and her face now pale and wan, she fell to
the ground, as without life, whereat all the company of Lords and Ladies about
her being terribly affrighted and amazed, took her up from the ground, and
cast holy water on her: When their astonishme^t was passed over, she returned
to her self again. And ever after, remained with such a horror and
detestation against al vanity, that as if she had been admonished by some
divine Oracle, she abstayned from al sumptuous apparel, as much as her state
and dignity would permit, so as many times she ware under her silks very
sharp and cruel cilices. And if at any time, through the length of any
journey, which her husband was to take, she could not accompagny him, staying
at home; she laid aside al costly attires, being contented to have the
courser habits without tincture, but merely of their own native colors, not
differing a whit from the common wear, of the ordinary people of that
country. When being so alone, through use of Prayer and frequent meditation,
through multiplying disciplines, through prolonging her vigils, and nightly
watches, she so subdued the flesh to the spirit, and mortified the alluring
and enticing delights of the flesh, that might have tempted her, amidst
occasions in the court, ^hee being so young and delicate of complexion, as she
seemed to be rather a claustrial Widow, or recluse Auchorite, shut up in walls,
then a Lady of the court, or especially the Princess thereof. This she did in
the absence of her Lord only: but at his return; she put on again more
fitting clothes, to give content to her husband, and the rest of the court;
which she for virtues sake, and affect of poverty; for so long time had laid
aside; declaring thereby, what became a virtuous and chaste wife to do, as well
in the absence of her husband abroad, as in his presence at home.

She also, endeavored both by word and example, to draw some Noble Ladies of
the court, with whom she was familiarly conversant, from their excesses in
rich apparel: telling them with effectual discourses, many excellent points and
reasons against it; especially for Christians, professing to be the members of
Christ; declaring how unfitting it was, he being our head, and crowned with
thorns, that our bodies should be so softly entreaded, acknowledging our
selves to be his members. She would bring in the example of Rachael, as a
patterue of womanly Gen 24.
modesty and sobriety; how she covered her face with her mantle in the sight
of her Spouse: that they at least should not expose their beauty to the view of
Strangers, by adorning and setting it forth, and making ostentation thereof, by
borrowed and counterfeyt shadows or lusters of rich array, when they are
rather to hide even that which nature warrants them to auow: unless with Dina,
desiring to see, and to be seen, they come to meet with occasions as she did,
to loose the jewel of their virginal integrity.

She remembered them withal, what S. Hierome said, as she heard once in a
Sermon which her Master preached, discoursing of the penitent state and
plight, wherein Magdelen was prostrate at the feet of Christ, washing them
with her tears, and drying them again with the hair of her head. That she
was so much the fayrer as less decked. How Hester and Judith, going to pray,
clothed themselves in sackcloth, and dolfully sprinkled ashes on their heads,
in witness of the state of human condition, and their own dust and ashes. How
Saint Paul wills women to perform at least Tim. 2
their devotions in the church, in attires that testify shamefastnes and
modesty, not with frizled hair, or with gold or pearls, or precious garments.
She added withal, how this gold, was to be left in the bowels of the earth, yts
proper place, and pearls in their shells, in the bottom of the seas: and how
this sumptuous apparel belongs to Pagans and Infidells, who make an Idol of
their body, and dress it up to adore it afterward because indeed they know
not Christ, nor aspire to the service of the true God, who is to be honored
with simplicity and integrity of the body and mind, and not with plumes so
borrowed of the birds of the air, dross of the earth, or fishes of the Sea,
concluding her speech at last with that terrible menace of the Prophet Esaias
against the Isaye 3.
Daughters of Syon: which her Master had often thundered in her ears.

With these, and such like reasons, the wife and discreet Duchess softened the
hearts of some of the Ladies, and made them to relent and remit somewhat of the
excess they used in brave attyres, now leaving off one thing, and then an
other, that they might not sudenly seem to make such a change al at once, and
might the less be perceived; so that ere long, an admirable change was made in
that court, from gorgeous dressings, to a decenter manner of habit, partly
through the example it self of their Lady, and of the sainctly life she led,
and partly also for those reasons alleged by her, against such excesses, It
cannot be told, what comfort the Princess her self took at this wholesome
change which she presently aduerted: and therefore taking more courage, to
ascend to higher points of perfection with such as were capable thereof, she
took a fair occasion and opportunity with the younger and tenderest of them,
to fall in commendation of the Single life, but especially advancing beyond
measure, the Virginal state. To which purpose she brake forth in this manner.
You may think maidens, that what I shall say, perhapps, may not well proceed
from my mouth: who in fact have embraced an other state, then what I comme^d
unto you. But this, good sisters, must I tell you, by the way, it is no precept
at al* but merely a counsel. And al are not worthy and capable thereof, then
let the^ take the same, that can take it; among who^, good sisters, I have
always reckoned my self the vnworthyest. And therefore, I would not have you
to wonder a whit, or hold my words in less regard, if I seem to commend one
thing, and choose and embrace the contrary my self. The thing then, I advise
you, is to a perpetual Virginity of mind and body. For this is the noblest
degree of al Chastity: consisting formally in a perpetual purpose, to abstain
from al carnal delectation, being a special virtue, and the principal point
thereof; whereto is promised the fruit of a hundred fold, and is reserved for
such as keep it entirely. It is the flower of the Ecclesiastical Stemm, the
Beauty and sple^dour of the spiritual grace, the most illustrious portion of
the Redemption of JESUS. This Virginity, is most amiable in it self: sweet as
the savor of the odoriferous Balm, wherewith as the bodies embalmed, are
preserved from the teint of any corruption, so by it, are no less preserved
both the spirit and body, and the virtues and humane actions conserved, most
pure in the sight of God, who restraynes and contaynes the senses and
appetites, in a singular ca^dour and beautyful luster, representing the state
of the immortal glory. Chastity, and specially entire Virginity, is it, which
takes yts origin from the kingdoms of the heavens which makes you Maidens of
earth, as wholly celestial and angelical. For what is more beautyful, trow you,
or more resplendant then Chastity and true Virginity, which transformes a
Virgin, to an Angel. A chaste Virgin indeed being a terrestrial Angel, and an
Angel being none other then a celestial virgin, different truly one from the
other, but in happiness and felicity only, in nature and not in virtue. For, if
the Chastity of the Angel be more happy in it self, yet that of the Virgin in
earth is confessed to be stronger, in co^bating continually against the
intestine and foreign assaults of the flesh. And is so fair and goodly a
virtue indeed, that as material whitnes or the color of white in yt self, is
the chief among al colors, and the very foundation of all the rest: So is
Chastity, the spring and foundation of al good works. And lastly Chastity, is a
glorious virtue, the miracle of grace, the singular fruit of the Passion of
Jesus, of the nature of Angels, the sacred Sanctuary of the holy Trinity, the
Bed and Couch, of more then Solomon, strewed al with flowers. Love then, o
Virgins, this so noble a virtue of Virginity, prise this precious gemme and
jewel of Chastity, cherish the same far more then the apple of your eyes, yea
more life yt self, the most inestimable of sublunary things.

Thus spoke the Princess Elizabeth, to the Mayds of honor about her, and they
as seriously gave attention to her. It can not be told, how their hearts were
now enflamed with the Love of Chastity, and perpetual Virginity; insomuch as
diverse of them were moved thereby, to embrace that counsel, and through the
help and assistance of their Lady were admitted into cloisters to become
Religious. Which favor and benefit next to God and the immaculate Queen of
Virgins, they acknowledged from her. Thus she spent her time in Court, and
thus happily succeeded her fair endeauours. With this ardent affect of
Chastity, she had the affect of fecundity also, and with the merit of a votiue
and no vowed Chastity, she had the blessing of material fruictfulnes. There
never was a creature carried her self more even between her heavenly and
earthly Spouse then Elizabeth did, she rendered so her debts, as she defrauded
neither, and therefore was blessed from heaven, with three children by the
Prince her husband Lewys, the Lantgraue of Thuringia. First with a Son named
Herman, who succeeded his father in the Dukedom; and then two Daughters, one
whereof was given in Marriage, to the Duke of Brabant then living; and the other
admitted into a Monastery of Religious women, where in time she was chosen to
be the Lady Abbess of the house, and where she governed the family most
religiously, not unlike to the Daughter of such a Mother.

Her manner was, after she was brought to bed, and delinered, and the rights
of churching ended, to take her little Babe, and carry it in her arms and
going barefoote, and clad with an humble garment of home-made cloth, with a
slender retinew about her, descend down a rocky and steepy hill, and there
enter into the church. Where Mass being ended, she would offer the same upon
the Altar, with a waxen taper burning in her hand, and then as she returned
home again, give her gown and veyle to the next poor Woman she met.

WHAT CHARITY ELIZAbeth showed to her Neighbor: and how she gave the Clothes
from her back to the poor. CHAP. VIII.
NO doubt, but the good father Conrad, had given to the Lady Elizabeth, many
singular documents of the theoricke of al virtues, and that by the use of
Prayer and meditation she had got many rare principles of speculatiue
knowledge, of the divine attributes, and the infinite perfections of God, and
many practical Rules besides of true and solid virtues. Yet as reasons and
considerations suffice not to take away fear which is natural to man, but it
is needful also to apply some outward remedies: as to bid them to approach
nearer to the thing they apprehend to be a Phantasme, and to touch it with the
finger, to try and see by experience, that there is no cause of fear, and al
to be nothing else but merely imagination and their own apprehensions. So
likewise to loose the opinion and estimation we have of the world and of al
worldly honor and vain pomp, and to make us to set little by them, neither
reasons nor yet considerations suffice; but the acts of humility, which are the
most principal and efficacious means, we can use of our part to obtain the
same; the thing which this good lady aimed at, in all the whole course of her
life. For, as sciences and Arts are purchased with exercise, so likewise the
morral virtues are not truly gained, but by frequent external acts in the same
virtues. As for one to be a good Musician, good Artizan, or a good Rhetorician,
or Philosopher, he had need to exercise himself well to attain perfection
therein.

Now Elizabeth, having in truth for her principal scope to Love God above al
things, and the Neighbor as her self; conceiving very well how the same,
consisted not so much in documents alone, or mere speculations, as in putting
the same into outward practices, and to effect: and that virtues are not kindly
indeed, but with habits; and habits not purchased (as I said) without frequent
acts of the same virtues. Though her mind were well inclined to pious works, and
works of mercy to the poor, and such as were impotent and diseased any ways,
yet she satisfied not her self with that pious effect only toward them, as
thinking it not sufficient not to oppress any, and to pass by, and say, God
help you, to such as she knew to be in any distress, or which is more, not
contented to persuade others, or to inuit them to be pitiful and helpful to
the poor and necessitous, but releiued them her self with her own hands: So
as, that saying of Job very aptly agreed Job 31*
with her. From mine infancy, pity and compassion has been bred in me: and
from the womb of my Mother, it grew up with me. And to the end, this virtue of
Compassion, might not be fruitles and barren in her, a singular Liberality was
annexed to it, to which the Princes free disposition concurring, made her works
to the Neighbor vrey admirable, as shall appear in the ensuing narration
throughout. Of which kind, for the present we will intimate two only examples
of especial regard.

It chanced then, that this pitiful and merciful Woman, came to the knowledge
of a poor and miserable wretch exceedingly affected with a certain loathsome
disease of lice in his head, which is called Phthiriasis, in such abundance
indeed, together with the headache, as it was no small torment and confusion to
him, and with all the means he made, he could never be rid of them. when lo,
the blessed Elizabeth, desirous to dress him her self, to cure the same,
though she might have commended the matter to some other: yet by no means
would she give consent, to have any Rival or companion with her in that act,
being so fair an occasion offered, as she thought to overcome her self for
the love of JESUS. And therefore for the more priuacy thereof, and not to be
deprived of so great a merit; unknown to any, so much as to her most intimate
servant Isentrude, she found the way to co^ueigh the Wretch aside in all
secrecy into her private Orchard, wherein many high trees were growing; for
within doors it was not possible to be done without some notice taken: at
least that she might not be hindered in her pious endeavor. Where
notwithstanding the auersion and loathing, she might easily have had thereat;
she kembed his head, and cut his hair, al clotted with filth, and till then
vnkembed for many days, and killed the lice, and willed him confidently to lay
it in her lap, which he did for a pretty space, til she had well scoured and
washed the same. When her mayds, coming in by chance, and fynding their lady
employed in so abject a work, and so unseemly for her: admiring it, as not
beleiuing at first it should be she, roundly rebuked her for it, that she
being a lady of such degree and royal descent, would defile her fingars with so
loathsome a disease, in pouling and washing the head of so miserable a
creature; exaggerating withal the arguments that might be, how il it became
her to do, it, which they for their parts would not do, for any thing in the
world: Inferring besides, that doubtless her Lord, the Lantgraue would be much
offended, if he chanced to come to the knowledge thereof.

When behold, the good Lady somewhat blanck thereat, to be taken so suddenly in
the manner, beyond expectation, not so much for the shame she had of the
servile work, as for that the secrecy thereof was broken, which she intended*
and offered to the sight of God, and not to the eyes of Mortals, or human
censures; but smiling, she handsomely seemed to put off the discourse to some
other matter, upon a good occasion offered: as not willing to justify the same
too much for fear of vain glory, or to hear them inveigh so bitterly,
against a thing which she held as pious, at least not worthy of so bitter
reprehensions, though otherwise glad and well satisfied to have done that and a
great deal more, for whose sake she did it: making account, that what she
did, was merely done for the love of God, and not for human respects, and
therefore she ought not to regard it. And that to Love God, it was necessary
further, to put away al respects of any creature soever, and to purge it from
all terrene and carnal ends, and to love and regard none, but God, who is
highly indeed, and above al to be regarded: and if she chanced to love or
esteem ought else, it should be for God; in so much indeed as she loved not
God for her self, nor her self, for her self; nor her neighbor for himself,
but rather God for God, and her self for God, and her Neighbors for the same
God; since the love of God can not brook the company of any other love or
respect, then of God. This surely, was a worthy example of perfect Charity to
her Neighbor, being so merely done for the divine Love.

For she well considered with her self, what she was of her self, in her first
beginning. As for the Body. she considered the same to be a vile and base
thing, like other creatures: a little blood; and a piece of flesh, skynned over
with a parchment, as it were, somewhat finer then ordinary; yea less then it
even earth and clay. And for the Soul, how it was merely as nothing: since
God created it in her Mothers womb, of nothing. For the present, she likewise
considered how miserable she was in the same body, how full of defects, of
miseryes, and infirmityes every way: for the Soul, how poor she was of
understanding and judgment, how little she knew, or could reach into, how full
of ignorance and errors. But that, which touched her most was a true and
lively consideration of what she was like to come unto, in respect of the
Body. How she was to be afflicted with some grievous malady or other, that
should usher her to death, and death, deliver her over to the tomb, where she
should make a feast or banquet for the worms, and lasty be reduced into a
little earth, and brought into perpetual oblivion. And therefore, why should
she ever be proud a whit, or regard what her mayds said to her in that kind?
For, thou earth and ashes Eccl. 10. 9.
(would she say unto her self) what shouls'd thou be proud of? To day a
woman, tomorrow perhaps, a lump of earth? And if I should value my self, (as
they say) for my gentry, lineage, and nobility, whence I descend, from royal and
honorable Parents: Alas, how poor a thing it is; while truly it affords me
nothing nor putts any thing into me, being only a mere estimation of men, and
nothing in substance. Since, there is no difference a whit, that I can find
among us al, either in the entry into the world, or the going forth, be we
rich or poor, noble or ignoble.

This judgment now, and esteem, which she framed of her self, concerning her
own nature, and person, being more her own and intrinsecal to her, then the
goods of fortune, which but only accompanied her without, and attend more
extrinsecally on her; it cannot be imagined how great was the contempt she had
in her heart, against al these temporal riches, which the world prize's and
valu'es so much. From vhence proceeded the second example I promised above,
which was this.

On a certain Festiual day, the young Prince was disposed to inuit the Peers
and Nobles of his land, to a solemn dinner, which being now in order, and the
Guess come, and nothing wanting that could be desired in so honorable an
assembly, but the presence of the Princess Elizabeth her self, who by chance
was then missing, being al ready to sit down at table, and she not there, the
loving Prince would not sit down til she came; and therefore he sent the
usher in all have for her, who went and met her coming thither, and told her,
how the Prince her husband, and all the strangers attended her coming, nor would
sit down til she were present. Whereupon she hastened so much the more, and
was now going up the stairs unto the dyning room, and as she went, she
heard a lamentable voice of a poor man, with great importunity begging an
alms, she being now on the midst of the stayres, and he on the bottom
thereof; being moved with the cries he made, she willed him to stay a while,
and promised out of hand to send him something, since for the present she had
nothing about her. But this would by no means satisfy him, fearing be like, he
might be forgotten: and therefore cried out more earnestly then before, saying:
Good Madam may it please your Highness, not to dismiss or dispatch me so. Your
highness was not wont to put off your clyents in this sort: and if your
Excellence slight us thus, who will regard us? Something I beseech your Highness
to bestow upon me, ere you pass any further and shut not up the bowels of
mercy against so miserable a wretch, and this I beg for the Love of JESUS whom
you serve. Elizabeth, hearing the sweet name of JESUS, in his mouth, made
suddenly a stop: and pausing with her self a little, considered what she should
do. Money she had none, and to dismiss any empty away, demanding in the name
of JESUS stood not with her gentle and amourous heart to the same JESUS her
heavenly Spouse. The wretch was naked* and she gorgiously and richly
apparelled, as became her state and dignity, especially on a festiual day.
Wherefore, she took off her mantle, of exceeding great value, and without more
ado, let it fall from the stayre, cast into his arms; which he took and went
his ways out of the Castle most happy and glad of the charitable spoil. And
herewith, she went up to the dyning room in all have, fearing she had stayed
too long; when the Usher, who had beheld al, before she arrived into the
Princes presence, had declared the whole passage already, to that honorable
assembly, not without some show of disgust and complaint for it. Which the
Prince understanding, smiled thereat; and she entering in, he arose up from his
seat, to meet her as she came, saying most sweetly to her, according to his
manner. Good Sister, why staid you so long; to whom she answered. Truly good
Brother, I made what have I could. The Prince said then: Where have thou left
thy mantle then? when she pointing with her fingar, replied: Look where yt
hangs on the tacke there. And so it was, he looked and viewed it well, examining
and turning it up and down, perceived it to be the very same. And was
exceedingly astonished thereat, not knowing what to think of it: and al were
put into a strange amazement; every one judging and coniecturing thereof, as
they were affected, some one thing and some an other: only the Prince being
privy to the virtues, and sanctity of his Spouse, made the best construction of
it, making very noble reflections thereon, not knowing whether to magnify more,
either the operative faith or religious simplicity of his dear Consort, but so
as he ascribed the honor of the whole matter unto the Goodness of God, as a
most undoubted miracle.

CERTAIN ADMIRABLE effects of Elizabeth's affection to voluntary Ponerty: and
the works she wrought in that kind. CHAP. IX.
IT is incredible almost to be believed, what a holy celestial Love, and
poverty of Spirit, this virtuous Lady had, to an entire renunciation of al
wordly riches and pomps whatsoever: I call it holy; because without earthly or
terrene mixture; and celestial, because it transported her heart disentangled
from the goods of this life, to the fruition of the eternal infinite
sovereign, immovable Goodness, and therefore heavenly: I call it poverty of
spirit, because she dispoyled her self of al things in affect at least; which
notwithstanding I term an, entire renunciation of al wordly riches, because
whenever her affection seemed to harken to any such thing, she interiourly
renounced it by intense acts of the will, disclayming from it, being wholly
enamoured of the chief and only good. This love of hers, to voluntary poverty,
may well be resembled to the Turkey stone, being al azure and of a celestial
color; or rather the stone called Lasial from whence the Painters (having
beaten it into powder) do fetch the goodly blew or azure they use, being a
stone entermixed and diuersified sometimes with some little specks of gold,
which glister within it: because indeed this Love admits no terrestrial thing,
but admirably adornes and beautifies the Soul, is always mixed with specks of
gold, to wit, of wisdom and divine contemplations of the supreme goodness and
divine providence, whereto she wholly remitted her self; and whereon she only
relied, which made her so precious in the eyes of God, as we may discover in
the whole narration. And this in her was a perfect alienation and auersion of
spirit from al these temporal goods, which God had put into her hands in that
state and condition she was in, for the use of her life, and to perform many
acts of charity to the poor and necessiteous. For God, would needs have her
heart, wholly free and acquit from al affects to terrene things; the better to
give up her self afterward entirely to him in full possession, for the fuller
accomplishment of the spiritual, even in this life, and the greater increase of
her glory in the next.

Hence it was that she gave her self wholly to works of mercy and voluntary
poverty in all kinds. And first conceiving Idleness to be the Mother and nurse of
al evils, and a marvelous hinderance to al Christian piety, whereto she wholly
intended to addict her self, for the love of her heavenly Spouse, she had an
especial care to bestow all the time she had spare from spiritual exercizes, and
other necessary employments about her own person; in workmanshipps and labors
of the hand or body. Nor yet did she as the Ladies of her rank are wont to do:
who will not set their fingers to any thing, coarser then the finest silks: but
delighted rather amongst her mayds to handle the coarsest wooles, somtymes in
spinning, somtymes carding, somtymes in winding on the reele what others had
spun, and then sending or carrynig her bottomes of yarne to be wouen and made
into the coarser cloth, which ordinarily she distributed to the poor, and
especially to the Friars of Saint Frauncis his Order, to whom she was much
devoted; amd in whom she noted a most strickt observance of the vow of Poverty,
whereto she was singularly inclined.

Out of the great affection she had to this voluntary Poverty, she would mend
the habits of the poor with her own hands, setting patch upon patch, with a
religious envy or emulation that she might not wear such clothing her self.
She trampled under foot, in the interior of her heart, al those worldly
things, which Seculars esteem so much; and whereof, these mad lovers of the
world make such account, there being nothing more idle, frivolous, and vain.
She would her self for the Love of Christ experience now and then the effects
of Poverty, and for the commodityes which she was forced to take by reason of
her state and condition, she used them as she used them not, to serve and Love
God the better, and with more freedom; and through excessive Love to fly into
the arms of her crucified JESUS, her only good, her joy, her love, her
desire. And lastly her whole felicity was, to suffer incommodityes, not only
thus voluntarily, as it were in jest, by framing of occasions for the purpose,
but even really: wishing indeed, to want the necessityes of a common life, for
the same Crucifyeds sake, who in the article of death, was by his enemies
denied a drop of cold water to quench his thirst.

She sought out Gentiles, whereof there wanted not store, at that time in those
parts, who being already convinced of their infidelity some one way and some
another, made suite to receive our holy Faith. These, she instructed, as
occasion served, in the Christian Doctrine, and while they remained
Cathecumens, she releiued them with meat and drink, and what other
necessityes they stood in need of, until such time as they were baptized and
many times be their Godmother her self at the font. She was not content to
command such things to be done, which yet had been a most pious work, or to
see it done, which had truly been more; but was no ways satisfied if she had
not been an Actor in the things themselves: so saithful a Steward she was, of
the divine dispensations in the service of Christ in his impotent members.

It is a wonderful thing, with what courtesy and humility, she visited,
comforted and releiued the poor sort of women with child, especially when she
heard of their travail in childbirth, or that they were newly delivered: for
then, she would come to them at al hours of the night or day, bringing such
things along with her, as she thought most necessary for them; neither yet
could the length or tediousnes of the ways, either craggy or durty, or of the
weather, either rain, wind, hayle, or snow, or the noysomnes or il savors of
such houses, so much as hinder her awhit, from going to them, to perform that
corporal work of Mercy, which without some labor of the body, she imagined to
be of little worth. And would rather want her own commodityes, yea miss even
things about her that seemed necessary, then the poor should want any thing
which she could remedy. She was doubtless a rare pattern of Charity, the jewel
of that age, a Margarite for purity and simplicity; a Ruby or Carbuncle for
enflamed Charity to God and divine Love, and especially for her singular affect
to Poverty and the poor, a Sapphire right; and therefore when she left al
besides, to put her in mind of that virtue above the rest; she kept and ware
that stone.

The Saphyre is a stone of a pleasing color to behold, and the soul of this
Lady, was most pleasing to God, as we may well conjecture; how beyt with her
self she were ever displeased. And for as much as, the Saphyre, is a solid
stone, and not transparant, this soul being invested with the love of
humility, was always solidiy founded upon her nothing, being one indeed that
could not be prolated or pierced by the light, or rays of any vanity soever.
The Sapphire is unapt for sculpture, they cannot engraue any thing upon yt; and
this soul so humble, could receive no strange impression contrary to that,
which she once considerately thought or resolved upon, or to that which she
saw and verily believed of her self: no opinion or vain estimation of her
self, no vaunting word, or the like could be ever heard to come from her,
though men and Angels had endeavored to persuade her to think well her self.
That which makes the Sapphire more pleasing is, certain little marks or
sprinckles of gold here and there, wherewith it shines, and sparcles as it
were: so the shafts of love and wisdom, which this soul would dart and send
forth to God; and her amiable humiliations, or modest and sweet fashions of
fraternal charity wherewith she conuersed with all, made her most gracious and
acceptable to God and men. This jewel expells al venomous things, and mortifyes
the Spider, as S. Bonauenture says: So her humility easily expelled al sins,
and especially vain glory, whose works are as unprofitable as the Spiders web.

So great and ardent a desire Elizabeth had of this virtue of humility, and
especially so enflamed an affect to poverty; as al her practizes almost were
nothing else but experiments and proofs of that virtue; so as laying aside her
princely robes, she would make her mayds to dress her up, in a gown of
course cloth, and put on some plain kercheife or some such thing about her
head, and being so apparelled skee would go soberly up and down in good
earnest, with her eyes and countenance cast down to the earth, and not
disguizing her self out of leuity in that manner, as some will do, but truly and
seriously indeed, as desirous in her heart to continue so still; Sayng to her
Mayds I shall one day my self walk in that manner, in the streets in good
earnest; when I shall be found worthy to suffer iniuryes and reproaches for my
Gods sake. Wherein, as it afterward proved she showed she had the spirit of
Prophecy, to foresee what should happen to her in time to come, which so fell
out indeed. Good God, how gallant she mi^ht have been in apparel, if she
would her self, what attendances and obsequiousnes, might she have had in such
a court of Lords and Ladies. She might have glittered al in gold, have
sparckled with Diamonds, been reueling and masking al day and night, among the
rest of the Ladies. Nay what pleasures are there which courts can afford, or
delights, that liberty and license can yield, which she might not easily have
enjoyed, had she been so pleased; and yet abandoning al for the love of
Christ, she embraced this affect of Poverty above al, and even courted the
same as a dear friend of hers, and would often prove effects thereof in no
small matters. So as no mortal man was ever so drowned in the pleasures of the
world, or more doted thereon, then she was enamoured and wholly inebriated
therewith, which surely was most grateful and acceptable to God, as may appear
by that which follows.

News was brought, that certain Noblemen of the kingdom of Hungary, were
coming to see the Court, being thither sent by the King, the father of
Elizabeth, upon some weighty affairs and negociations of great importance for
both the States, and that now they were near at hand. Which tidings, when the
Prince had heard, he went immediately to his Elizabeth, and said unto her, not
without some anxiety and perplexity of mind. Have you heard Sister the news?
And what news, I pray dear Brother, replied she then, with a cheerful
countenance? Behold Ambassadors, are near at hand from our royal Father of
Hungary. If that, be al, dear Brother, (said she) they are heartily welcome.
Why then, replied he an^n, and is that al think you, and know you not, how il
you are furnished with apparel and decent ornaments, befitting your state and
calling to receive and encertaine them with, and to yield them satisfaction, as
I desire, for my honors sake? and which is worse, there is now no time to
furnish you better. Alas* good Brother, replied she then, there is no cause
why this my attire should so trouble you. Since you know well enough, how little
I have always regarded such things. For my part, I have but little desire to
please men, and to be gracious in their sight, with the hazard of loosing the
grace and favor of my heavenly Spouse. But what, trow you, will they signify to
your royal Father at their return: Good Brother, said she, dispose you of the
rest for their better entertaynement, and take you no care for me, I trust our
Lord will provide for both our honors.And not long after the Ambassadors came
to the Court, and were very Princely and honorably enterteyned by the
Lantgraue, and the Nobles. When after they had delivered the letters of
credence, and the effect of their Embassage with a gracious audience on the
part of the Lantgraue. The Princess Elizabeth her self was sent for, to come
into the presence at the earnest suite of the Ambassadors themselves, who had
an earnest desire to behold her now a woman grown, whom long since they had
seen to be a hopeful Infant, and whom fame had spread to be a Paragon of the
world, both for beauty, personage, and much more for her singular virtues and
eminent sanctity of life. When behold, she came in, like a He^ter before
Assuerus? for lo, the Author of al beauty and exterior grace no less then
interior; had so adorned her with comelynes, and especial outward graces
withal, besides the inward of the soul and mind, as she seemed to be an Angel
apparelled in flesh, and adorned with purple beset with the richest stones; to
the great astonishme^t of all the beholders, and especially the Prince himself,
who was privy to her great defects of such ornaments, jewels, and attires, he
having before distributed them to the poor, and had no time to be furnished
anew, When secretly demanding of her, how it came to pass, Elizabeth made
answer smiling. My Lord and Master can when he list, prepare such ornaments
for me. Nor was the same observed by the Prince himself only, but diverse
others; especially by her Mayds about her, who now regarded her as a great
Saint, and favorite of God.

THE DEVOVT AND pious exercises of Elizabeth, at the Sacrifice of the Mass.
CHAP. X.
OUR Savior Christ, as we read in the Ghospel, one day found a great noise
and tumult in the Gallery of the Temple, by such as bartered therein, and
bought and sold; and therefore being enflamed with the Io. 2. 5.
zeal of Gods honor, with certain cords and whipps which he took up from
the ground, as one in choler, drove them forth of the Temple: and as S. Mark
says, overthrew al their ware. But now, alas, were he to come into our
Temples, what abuses doubtless might he there find to reform amongst us, what
noyses, what gigling, what chatting, wha^ conuersations, and perhaps lascivious
glaunces?

But this lady Elizabeth here of the contrary, was exceeding devout, as well at
her entrance into the house of God; as during the whole time she was there
present: Knowing well, that one of the greatest devotions a Christian could use,
was to hear Mass every day, or as often as he could. First, because the
excellence and dignity of the Mass is infinite, as being a Sacrifice wherein
Christ is offered to God; who offered up himself once on the Cross, with all
his trauells and merits; and is the most perfect act of Religion, wherein we
give God the greatest honor we can give him: and secondly, is the most
excellent act of prayer we can possibly make. Wherefore from her infancy and
tender age, til her dying day, she was wont always to be present at this
venerable and dreadful Sacrifice; and very often was there her self before any
other; when she would keep her mind as free from distractions, as she could;
and if she ware any ornament, which with convenient decency might well be
spared, she would either put it off quite, or handsomely conceal it, some way
or other, until the Offices and Ceremonies of so admirable a Sacrifice were
ended. But especially, she used a singular reverence, as well while the Ghospel
was reading, as the body of our Lord JESUS Christ was handling; applying no
doubt her whole attention thereto, and preparing the mouth of her Soul for the
worthy receiving thereof.

Her manner of hearing Mass was commonly in this sort. Most devoutly on her
knees, with great silence, and deep and profound reverence, and attention,
without speaking with any or turning her head on the one side or other, but
fixing her eyes on the Altar, and Priest (who represents Christ) and observing
the actions he used: for all is a lively representation of that, which the
Redeemer of life, did, and suffered in his most holy life and passion. When the
Priest at the beginning, said the General Confession; she silently said it
with the Minister also, being contrite for her sins, and craving pardon for
the same. After which, she attended to the words of the Priest, because they
are sacred, it is fi^ to hear them, though they be not understood.

The Ghospel and (...) being ended, she said inwardly in herself, making
lively acts of faith. I confess to thee Lord, al these verityes, and
whatsoever are contained in the Creed, and the whole divine Scripture. And
through thy divine favor am ready to yield my life for them. Do thou my God
give me grace, that with my life, and holy works, I may confess, teach, and
preach them to al, unto thy glory.

At the Offertory, she made an oblation of her self, and devoutly presented
her self and her occasions and affairs to God, that with the purest and most
holy offering of his most blessed Son, they might fairly ascend into his
divine presence in an odor of sweetenes.

At the Sa^ctus, she would convert her self to the most holy Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, true God, in the company of all the
Angels, and of all the Blessed Spirits, wishing that al creatures, and al men
whosoever, would know, praise, and serve the same; and she especially above
the rest, might love and honor it, with all her forces, and all the powers of
her soul.

While the Priest was reciting the Secrets, and Cannon of the Mass, she
meditated upon some point of the Passion of our Savior Christ, with an
admirable fervor as her devotion served, and if not, she recited some vocal
prayers.

At the Memento, she would call her proper necessityes to mind, and those of
others, and propose them sweetly to her Lord with enflamed affects.

At the Elevation of the sacred Host, she would most devoutly and reverently
adore the most sacred body of our Lord JESUS Christ, which for her and all the
world, was exalted and extended on the tree of the Cross.

At the Elevation of the Chalice, she would likewise adore with unspeakable
inward affects and aspirations, the most precious Blood of her Redeemer, which
was shed for her and all the world; beseeching her Savior through the same to
make her pertaker of the fruits of the Tree of Life which he was himself: And
since he dyed for her sins; she might dye to them; and live to him; and that
her heart might be the rock, whereon his Cross might fix it self, and be the
Vessel whereinto his most precious blood, might be received, a liquor of
infinite value and price, and therewith be washed and cleansed from al her
sinful spotts.

At the Second Memento, she called to mind very seriously the Souls of the
faithful deceased, and prayed for those, whom she thought best of, and were
dearest to her, most heartily craving, to make them pertakers of that dreadful
Sacrifice, and speedily to enter into the joys of Paradise, where they might
live, and reign with him for ever.

At the Agnus Dei, she demanded an ample pardon and remission of her sins,
imploring his favor and graces that she might receive him, if not
sacramentally, at least spiritually, and that by means of the divine
Sacrament, so received, she might be united with his infinite goodness.

And thus she used to communicate at least spiritually every day, which surely
was a singular benefit for her spiritual profit, and which advanced her to so
eminent a degree of sanctity.

She was wont to burn with a vehement affection to the blessed Sacrament,
admiring much, how so admirable a Sacrament, should be afforded and bestowed
upon mortal creatures, and deeply considering and pondering the omnipotence
and infinite wisdom of God, in preparing such remedy against the rancour and
poison of sin, and his infinite bounty in the free and liberal distribution
thereof. And when she communicated sacramentally she was often heard to break
forth into these aspirations. Burn then o fire, and consume whatsoever thou
see unworthy in me o^ thy presence and which may, put any obstacle to thy
grace. O Bread of Angels, nourish my soul, and may it loose al taste of
whatsoever is displeasing to thee Most sweet JESUS. O say that same to me,
which thou said to Zacheus heretofore, to wit* Salvation is fullfilled in thy
hewse* God of my heart, let me be wholly thine* and let none but thou, have
possession of my soul. After which, for a quarter of an hour she seemed to
enjoy the presence of the Sacred Host within her; and then to break forth
again into these acts of admiration. Who am I and who art thou my God, that I
should be so visited by thee! O eternal God, what is man, whom so unworthy thou
set thy heart upon! Nay what is the Son of man, since thou lodgest they
flesh, thy blood, thy soul, thy Divinity, within him, as in a most delicious
bower. She further admired, how the Lord of Majesty, and King of glory, not
contenting himself, to become man, for the health and salvation of men, but
that he would needs abase and humble himself so low, as to remain with us,
in this Sacrament, and to leave us on earth such a visible throne as it were of
his mercy: more excellent without comparison, then the Arc of Alliance, to
have our recourse thereto, in all our necessityes.

In these cogitations, the dignity of man's nature, especially of the soul,
would glide into her mind, for that God so created it merely and wholly for
himself. The heavens, he afforded to the Angels, the air to the birds, the Sea
to the fishes, and the earth to plants; and Man to whom but to himself? Man
therefore was created for God only: O then, may he be (she would say) entirely
possessed by God alone. She would further imagine, how the Angels were of a
nature more noble, and sublime then Man, yet God has so much valued this his
creature, as he has in a sort subjected these noble spirits to his service;
according to the Prophett: He has commanded (...). ^. 11
the Angels to guard man in all his ways: and to foresee and prevent the
occasions of his fales. And how not contented herewith, he made such reckoning
of him, as that notwithstanding his utter ruin, he redeemed him, with the
precious redemption of his own blood, and after nourished him being redeemed,
with the wholesome food of his own flesh, affording his real presence and
assistance thereto. Then she would inwardly grieve at the ingratitude of men,
for all these graces and favors, so vainly bestowed on millions of them, most
highly extolling the goodness of God for all.

Now this, so vehement fervor of hers being such, through these and a thousand
such ardent meditations, pious exercises, and occupations of the mind, amidst
her holy Communions, which she often frequented* it could not easily be
concealed, but that some enflamed affects of so great a fire and ardour within;
must needs break forth at last. For so it happened on a time, while she was
in these serious and deep contemplations, immediately after the Consecration of
the blessed Host; that she was environed with a great light, which gave forth
such a flash and splendor, as a certain Priest thereby, who for his virtuous
life deserved the sight, could not (as after he confessed) behold her face,
such a beam of glory, proceeded from thence. When returning into her self
again, and casting the eyes of her body and soul upon the Crucifix on the
Altar hanging most piteously wounded on the Cross, and all empurpled with his
most sacred and precious blood, she said unto him by way of Apostrophe Tell
me I prithee, how much is this blood of thine worth. Ten thousand worlds
here beneath (she replied her self) and as many of those above, by a thousand
degrees, cannot once approach to the worth and value thereof. And yet has the
same been given, and afforded me. O wretch as I am to serve for my redemption.
Then do thou value thy worth, o soul of mine, and make an entire resolution
from henceforth to serve him better, then hitherto thou have done, who has so
much honored and cherished thee. O my Lord Jesus thy love has caused thee to
suffer as much for me alone, as for all the men and women created. Then give
me grace from this time forwards in consideration of this my true nobility to
acknowledge in some manner this infinite love of thine. And since I bear the
image of thy Divinity so stamped as it were and printed in me, since I am so
created for thee only, let me wholely and entirely be thine only.

Thus would this Saintly Woman apostrophize, and Dialogue sometimes upon every
occasion, either secretly within her self when she was in the presence with
others, in Church or Chapel, or else with the voice, as she found opportunity.

OF THE GREAT CHARITY of Elizabeth, to her neighbor, and her exceeding
liberality to the poor. CHAP. XI.
AS to arrive at the Port with a Galley, it is not enough to have eyes to
consider the card and compass, and to gaze on the North Pole, to have a
Tongue, to discourse of the winds, a Sea Mapp, to contemplate the regions and
degrees therein, if they have not besides a pair of hands and arms to row
with the oars. So to arrive at the haven of Glory, it is not enough to
speculate with the eyes of faith on the divine mysteries, to reason and
discourse well and suttly of them; nor to pray much, an argument of their hope,
and confidence in God, united with a good faith in him, if they put not their
hands besides to Works, in testimony of this faith and hope. Believe it, wings
are not more necessary for a foul to fly with, and to soar up into the air,
then good works, especially Alms to the poor, are simply necessary to such
as would attain unto heaven. Hence it was, that Elizabeth so addicted her self
to works of piety, devotion, and all Christian exercises, as she did. For
she always, and especially in the Lent, observed most religiously the
precepts of the holy Church, and Christian traditions, and obseruances, by
giving her self not only to fasting and prayer, as we said before, but even
also to show much charity to her Neighbor, in assisting the distressed, and
relieuing the poor with plentyfull alms, and in chastizing her weak body,
with frequent Cilices, Disciplines, and watching. She observed with great
devotion the Solemnityes of the Holy Week, wherein the mysteries of our
Redemption are represented to us: and celebrated the same with such fervor of
mind, as clearly showed her intense love to her Savior, who so highly praised
to the Pharisey, the good and pious works of his servant Magdalen, as he
forgot not to recount the least of them, and recite them with all the special
circumstances they had: showing how grateful and pleasing to him were all
those little offices of piety, which she did about his pertreame love toward
him* For that kissing of his feet, that bathing with her tears, that warming
them with her ardent sighs, those annoyntings with precious unguents, yea the
drying and wiping them with the tresses of her hair, though so slender an
office it was, yet of singular weight with the pious and considerate JESUS.

In the Holy Week again, especially on Maunday Thursday, which day is
solemnized, in remembrance of Christ's last Supper, laying aside all costly
apparel, attired as one of the vulgar sort, she was wont to walk the
Stations in the afternoon, and to visit the Churches in that humble manner, so
as one that knew her not well, might have easily mistaken her for one of the
meaner sort; when sending for twelve of the Poor, she disdayned not to kneel
down before them, and to wash, wipe, and kiss their feet, and finally to
give them twelve pence a piece in money together (...) loaf. Upon which day,
on a time* she entertained in that sort, no small number of leaprous persons,
for of such only she made choice, whose hands and feet, when she had washed,
she disdained not to kiss the swellings of their loathsome soars, and after
that time, she never shunned such manner of people, but walked and freely
talked with them, and familiarly sat down by them, as if they had been whole
and sound, and exhorting them to Patience, she would give them a liberal
alms. The night before Good Friday, she spent in prayer, and in deep
meditation of our Lords passion, and charged her Mayds in any case, to have an
especial care, not to show any reverence to her on that day, but would needs
go the Stations barefoote. And at every Sepulcher and Altar, lay down a
bundle of flax, and set up a burning taper, and put a quantity of Incense, or
other such like perfumes into a Thurible; that the Churches might be full of
odoriferous and fragrant savors wheresoever she came; and so taking the
smallest moneys she could get together, and passing in company with the
meanest sort, she went up and down the streets barefoote, dealing them very
bounty fully to all the poor.

Some there were, who esteemed this manner of distribution of small moneys, to
be nothing suitable to her state and calling, and to proceed of Coueteousnes,
and of not of Princely and heroical disposition, saying, that she being a
Kings daughter, should use the bounty and liberallity of a Princess; and for
her to abase her self so, as one of the multitude and vulgar sort was most
unworthy, and no argument at all, of her sanctity or devotion, but rather of a
base and degenerate mind. But the glorious Princess, made little account of all
those whisperings, and regarded not what the maleuolous said, and thought it
better to relieve many, with many litles, then to give much to a few. And
therefore ceased not, to persevere daily in that which she had so seriously
determined to do, assuredly presuming that God who is above, and sees all
things, knew her heart, to be as far from any covetous humor, in so doing, as
those rash and sharp censurers, were alienate from truth and equity.

On the days of public Litanyes in the streets, the Lady Elizabeth,
clothed her self in course cloth, and so went along in Processions, and to
hear the Sermons in the Church, would thrust her self among the meaner sort,
and take up her place amidst them, as holding the Seed of heaven for the most
part, to spring and grow up more willingly and abundantly, in the soil of an
humble heart.

It happened now, in the year of our Lord 1225. the Prince taking his journey
unto Apulia, to wait on the Emperor, that through all the Provinces of
Germany, was a general famine, and many perished for want of food. Whereupon
Elizabeth, taking occasion by the Princes absence to exercize the works of
piety, with more liberty then ever, began with a bountyfull hand to distribute
to the poor, the corn which had been gathered and stored up in all her
Dominions, allowing to a great number of them a daily portion of corn, for
their maintenance, according to the age and condition they were of, and the
extreme necessity they were in. Nor did any of them want (through the
especial grace and providence of God) though happily they received less then
a measure convenient to sustain them with* And forasmuch as she understood
there were many sick and infirm persons, who by reason of their maladies or
other impediments, were not able to ascend unto the Castle and Palace which
was situated on the top of a steepy hill; she caused presently an Hospital of
an exceeding beauty and capacity to be erected in the bottom of the said
Hill, under the castle, and therein placed especially such of the poor, as
were most maimed in their lymmes, and the weakest and feeblest of them, whom
she in person her self once a day, and sometimes more, would go to visit,
though hindered not a little by the difficult descent of that craggy mountain:
and then she would demand of each one, how they did, and what they ayled
most, or what kind of meat liked them best, which when she understood, she
gave to every one accordingly of the provision she had brought along with her
for that intent, with so much love and tenderness toward them as you would
rather have thought her a Mother among so many Children, then so great a Lady
to wait on the poor, and with her own hands to feed the feeble and weak,
and to lift them up in their Beds, who were otherwise not able to stir
themselves, yea to carry them in her arms, and make their beds, and perform
other servile offices about them, which her Mayds could by no means endure.

Among which, so dispicable creatures, she principally applied her self, to
poor Orphans and little Children left destitute and void of friend, whom with
a motherly care, she would ^end her self, or cause to be brought up, so as al
of them flockt about her, calling her Mother, as well as they might, she being
no less indeed, them a common Parent to them: showing her self besides, most
tender and indulgent to choose Children particularly as were either naturally
illfauoured by reason of some deformity or other, or weak through sickness or
infirmity, or loathsome and fastidious, by reason of soars and V^cers, not
disdayning to touch them with her holy hands as occasion served, and even to
dandle them in her lapp, whom her Mayds for horror only, could not patiently
abide to look on; such was her Charity and fortitude of mind, as with the one,
she would attempt any thing, and go through stitch with the other, in
whatsoever she once took in hand.

She made choice of certain of the poor from the rest of the multitude, that
resorted to her, whom she especially commanded, at a time appointed to attend
at the Castle Gate, to whom with her own hands she distributed the scrapps
and fragments which were left at her table, using now and then some pretty
slights to spare the^ not only from her own trencher, but even likewise, when
handsomely she could, from those of others, who^ she knew well could help
themselves otherwise, to the end the poor who waited upon her, might not
depart empty away, but find sufficient refection, whenever they came: and
this (as I said) she distributed with her own hands. Which though to some
might seem indecent and extrauagant, that so great a personnage should descend
so low, saying the office might better have been recommended to others: yet I
presume if they consider the Gifts of the holy Ghost, and the fire of Charity,
that burned within her, they would leave to wonder or spare to censure her; but
rather reverence and admire her for it, and finally endeavor to imitate her
rare example.

This her singular Charity by some outward signs of Gods especial favors
toward her, seemed to be not a little approved by him, which how little soever
they appeared to be, yet proceeding from him, are not to be accounted little.

Upon a time, Elizabeth bringing down from the Castle certain presents of
toys made of earth and glass, for the use of Children, and being set on
horsbacke, with her lapfull of such things, to deal amongst the little
Innocents as occasion served; her apron by chance being loosse, althose little
toys fell to ground, which never left tumbling down, til they came to the
bottom on a rocky, and stony way, which being taken up and brought to her,
were found to be as whole and entire as ever.

She took great pleasure somtymes, to have the poor fed within the Gates of
her Palace, and which is more, somewhat near to her own table, to whom now
and then, she reached meat with her own hands, of the dishes which she her
self was served with, and many times caused them to be left alone by
themselves, that they might eat, drink, and chat together the more freely,
as wishing them, together with the satiety of the belly, to have some good
relaxation of the mind, that so God might be honored either ways. Whereby it
happened once, that they having drunk a good quantity of drink amongst them,
the Vessel was yet found to remain little less repleate then at first, in
testimony no doubt, how grateful this kind of Hospitallity was to the divine
Majesty.

She took order in the Hospital, for 28. poor people, to be carefully
provided of all things necessary, and that when any of them dyed, an other
should be put into the place. Such as daily in her sight received alms
otherwise, according to the quality or necessity of each one, were nine hundred
persons at least. And for the rest, whom she otherwise liberally sustained by
the means (...), and Officers, they could not be told. Wherein she wasted,
spent, and consumed the revenues of a most opulent Signory, and oftentimes sold
the clothes and ornaments from her back, and her jewels, and the hangings and
furniture of her house; that the members of Christ might not perish for hunger.
In which holy exercise she served God with so good a will, as that a certain
sick body, one day begging a little milk at her hands, she took up a payle
her self, (being so great a Lady and Princess) and went to milk with her
delicate fingars, unacquainted therewith, so much milk as satisfied the party.

In this manner, Elizabeth sustained the poor, until Harvest time, when she
dismissed them who were able to work, providing them with sickles and
instruments for the purpose, and with hose and shoes to their feet, and to
the rest being weaker, she gave apparel and moneys (...) (...) (...) most. To
(...) Women, she affoarded Kercheifs and Veyles for the head, whereof some
were of silk, which she willed them to sell to supply their greater
necessityes, and not to wear them themselves, willing such as were able to
labor, to earne their living, wishing the rest to do somewhat at least
toward it. One of which having, unlooked for, received a Gift of that kind,
cried out for joy, she was the happyest Woman alive, and being oppressed with
the suddennes thereof, fell down in a sown, which Elizabeth seeing, supposing
her dead, was troubled thereat; fearing in deed, least she might be culpable
of her death, in bestowing a bigger Alms upon her then was meet.

When any of the poor dyed, she was not content to afford them winding
sheets of her own spinning, but she her self would sock them and lay them
forth, without any manner of horror at all, and graced and honored them
further with her presence to their graves, even to the end of their Exequyes,
and funeral Rites, and pay the duties of all. And was even so forward in this
act of Charity, as she spent a large webb of new lynnen merely in such uses:
and much it was against her own inclination (if she could have helped it)
that the wealthy people, who had always their ease and pleasures in the world,
should go forth of the same with new Syndons; and not the poor* who in the
world had been served with rags: So highly she esteemed the poor.

OF A COMPLAINT MADE against Elizabeth, to her husband: With some examples of
his Noble disposition therein. CHAP. XII.
IT cannot be denied, but the state of Matrimony is a yoke, howsoever in some a
most sweet yoke, though it please the Apostle to term it a weighty one, while
he says, that. Such as marry do take upon them a troublesome 2. Cor. 6. 14.
1. Cor. 7. 28.
burden of the flesh. And to say truth, if the Married unite themselves to
carry the said burden equally between them, it is a light and pleasant yoke,
otherwise the same is a most intolerable clogg. To this purpose, Eccl. 25. 2.
the Wiseman says very well: That three things are very pleasing to God and
men: Concord among Brothers, Love of the Neighbors, and a Union and Conformity
between Man and Wife. This same are the Married to endeavor to have by all
means possible, without which, the married life were no better then that of
Slaves in a Galley, whereas with union and Peace, it is no less then a Life of
Angels.

This union and Concord in this state, the happy couple of Princes kept
inviolable between them, and this was that, which the Enemy of all peace
enuyed in them, and labored what possibly he could, by his Ministers and
malignant persons, to enfringe through malicious suggestio^s framed against the
innocent Spouse, traducing her unto her husband at his return from Apulia, as
a prodig all in his absence; and a most immeasurable waster of his estate, so
much exaggerating the Complaint against her, as they blushed not to auerr, she
had left them nothing to feed on, having unnecessarily consumed all the rents
in Alms and liberalityes they knew not what, which they impiously blasphemed
with the title of prodigalityes. But what answer made the Lantgraue think
you, to those bitter complaints against her? Like a noble and worthy Prince,
setting light by all those shrewd accusations: Let my Sister alone (said he)
and spend a Gods name, as she has hitherto done, so she leave me my Castles
and Manors free. For I assure my self we shall not want, so long as we
suffer her to relieve and favor the necessiteous people as she does. A worthy
answer surely of such a One, in whose heart the love and honor of his Wife
was more engraven, then of all the ample demeanes he had, though never so
great; being more willing to have them so dispensed and disperced with her
liberal hand: then that so sovereign a virtue as Charity, should not be
exercized; which to the living augments and heaps up riches, even in the
present world, and forsakes not the dead unto the next. So as well may that
same of Ecclesiastes be said of him. Blessed is the Man, that has a good Wife.
And again: A good Wife, is a good portion for such as fear God: she shall
be given to a Man for his good works.

And surely, this Prince was a very good man, as shall appear by some things I
shall here but touch briefly, and show how worthy he was of such a Wife, and
of the former Elogies I affoarded him, declaring especially among other things,
how eminent and singular the Virtue of Chastity was in him, and how remarkable
was his loyalty to his Wife, and fidelity to the Marriage bed.

Where by the way, is to be noted, the unhappy condition of the Princely and
royal state, in that of all others, they have not only invisible and spiritual
enemies, continually assayling the Citadel of their hearts, infernal spirits I
mean, which labor nothing more, then to surprise them, and lead them into
sin, as also Domestical at home, to wit, the flatteryes and allurements of
the flesh, but even the enchauntments of the world, to charm their ears, and
the others senses, thereby to cast them on the rocks and shelues of perdition,
and wrack of honor.

For, on a time, there happened in Court certain Revels and Masks of Ladies,
where the Prince alone, without Elizabeth, was spectatour from a Gallery
window; and was noted seriously to observe a beautyfull Lady amongst them, more
attentively then ordinary: A certain Courteour who sat the nearest to him
perceiving his attention, and measuring the Princes inward thoughts by the Ell
of his own inclination and corrupt judgment, said to him whispering in his
ear. Noble Prince, if it please your Excellence, to enjoy the happy embraces
of that Lady there, I make no doubt but to put your Highness into full possession
of her. He said no more; but therein had said enough, to stir the coals of
the Princely indignation against him: For, casting a stern look upon this
Minister of Satan, with sparkling eyes, immediately he bad him hold his peace,
and speak no more in that kind, nor once suggest such lewdnes and dishonesties
to his chaste heart. Thou deceiued'st thy self (said he) if thou thoughtest I
heeded or regarded that Lady thou meanest; for I tell thee I had nobler obi^cts
in mind, when mine eyes seemed to wander as they did. From the creature, I
could tell how to mount to my Creator, while thou endeauourest by the same, to
cast me down into the center of impietyes, and to auert me wholly from the
Creator: Noe more then of that tenor, I say, unless you have a mind to prove
and incurr my just displeasure. Whereat the carnal spirit vanished thence and
sluncke away: Might al such Pandars be so well checked, then should we not
have such debauchments and dissolutions in Court.

An other time, the Prince being come into the house of a certain Count, a
special friend and kinsman of his, upon a visit for his own recreation; and
after a magnificent and Courtly enterteynement: the Supper ended, and the time
of rest being come, when he was now left to himself, retired from the company,
and every one was brought ceremoniously to their Lodgings, the virtuous Prince
was no soouer lying in his bed, and reco^mended his soul to the custody and
tuiton of his Angel and peculiar Patrons, and fallen asleep; but a lewd and
impudent woman, incensed and raging with the fire of Lust, or else perhaps for
golden ends; found the means to steal into his Chamber, unperceived of any,
where privily dispoyling her self of her Clothes, got into his bed and laid her
self by him. Which the good Prince perceiving at last, through the rusling of
her silks, or awaked by his good Angel, started out of bed, and calling for
his faithful Counselor and Secretary Gualter, and the Gentlemen of his privy
Chamber, lay near unto him, caused them to arise, and remove her thence, and
to dispatch her away with some money; supposing belike the coueteousnes thereof
had brought her into so strange and exorbitant a practice: afterward speaking
of the matter, he protested before God, that howbeit he had no auersio^ or
detestation from the sin of Adultery at al, as offensive to God, yet for the
respect he bare to Elizabeth his wife, he would by no means have given way to
so notable an injury to his dearest Spouse, whom he honored so much.

Behold an other of the like kind. A certain principal Captain and Commander
of his, on a time, having occasion upon public affairs to treat with the
Lantgraue, the busynes dispatched, fell by chance into discourse of his own
particulars, complaining how unfortunate he was, that whereas God, had blessed
him with a competent estate, and a beautyful wife, he should be so unhappy
through sterility, to leave no heirs behind him, to enherit his substance and
the honors he had purchased in the field: and therefore if it pleased his
Highness he might use his wife, to raise him seed to his house, and he would
willingly embrace them as his own. Whereat the Prince was abashed, and pausing
with himself, shaped him so wise and discreet an answer, as he let him see
the folly of his desire in his own respect; in seeking to purchase him an
heir in that sort, and for himself discovered in his countenance a high
disdain and deep indignation against him for making the motion; and framing
so foul a suggestion against the honor of both their Bedds, and cheifely in
contempt of a principal commandment of God, and so, an open practice of
Rebellion against his divine Majesty. The Captain admired the wisdom and
Loyalty of the Prince, and craving pardon of him, protested he was extremely
edifyed with his speeches, and instructed with his virtuous example, aduowing
he had made him a Penitent and Conuertite, being so convinced through the
potency of his reasons: and so humbly took his leave, with the favor after
al, to kiss his hand, in token of his infallible reconciliation, after so
insolent and rash attempt.

So great was the modesty of this Prince, and so singular the gift of Sobriety
and Continence in him, as there was none of his family or any of his most
familiar friends, how confident soever, that at any time durst open their
mouths in his presence, to let fall the least word of impudicity, were it never
so seasoned with wit, or innocently intended for mirth or relaxation: much
less any rudenes in that kind or gross obsceanes; so delicate and chaste were
his ears. And whenever any one was so bold, to use any least dishonest
gesture, or utter any wanton word in his presence, they were sure to have a
sharp rebuke, at least, if not a more severe punishment.

Such was his devotion to the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, as he would daily
hear it, and reverently assist therrat, and cause it often to be solemnized
and celebrated with great pomp of Musiques, and his Chapel to be adorned
with tapestryes, the best and richest the Country afforded. In all his words
and deeds he was true and constant, keeping always a steadfast and even tenor,
not to day one thing, to morrow an other, as you left him so should your find
him still the same. His wit, and memory was so pregnant, as he needed no
Memorialls, unless very breife, to put him in mind in the least or weightiest
affairs, a word was enough. His behavior was gracious and debonaire, and yet
not ef^eminate or dissolute, but demure and modest, especially amongst women;
so as his presence was enough to compose the freer dispositions, and to give a
check to the liberty of those times.

His pity and compassion to the poor was such, as noe bountyes and
liberalityes toward them, besides the particular and extraordinary alms he
gave himself, or caused to be distributed amongst them through his assent; he
became a Riual with his Wife also, in those heavenly bootyes which she sent
before into heaven. In a word, he was a good Man, and an notable Regent which
do not always meet, while his devotions and private spiritual gusts,
hindered not the progress of public affairs, his even and just
distributions of times, so tempered and ordered al things, as he seemed
perpetual in those occasions, and yet equally found in Closet and private
retirements. He gave audience and executed Justice himself, with such
equallity, patience, and longanimity, as he not only by his example led the
way to other Princes, but seemed to be a lamp before them. He knew how to
show Mercy in its time, and to bend the brow when occasion served, as also to
contract or dilate the palm. Finally to maintain Peace in such sort, as he
never was seen to break it with his neighbor Princes.

THE SECOND BOOK.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE LIFE OF S. ELIZABETH.
The publishing of the Croysado, and the manner how it first began. CHAP. I.
THE people of God, now for the space of 480. years, had patiently endured a
most intolerable and cruel servitude, not ceasing continually to cry unto God
for mercy, and compassion upon their deplorable state with unspeakable tears,
deep groans, incredible sighs perpetual prayers and oraisons, beseeching him,
through his divine goodness and clemency, to have pity on his afflicted people;
and pardoning their offenses, to turn away the rod of his indignations and
displeasure against them. Til at last being now fallen into the depth of al
miseryes, inuoking te Abisse of mercy, they were heard by him who is the God of
al consolation The form or model whereof, or rather the first occasion taken
of their redemption, I will here declare in breife.

The holy City of God Jerusalem, sometimes most dear unto him: being thus in
a miserable bondage, subject to infinite oppression under the tyranny of the
Infidels and Saracyns, among those who of devotion went thither to visit the
venerable places of our Redemption, being led with the same fervor; came
likewise a very notable man of the Church, called Peter the Hermit by name,
borne in the diocese of Amiens in France.

He was a person but little of stature, and for the exterior, carrying no great
part with him? but of a great viuacity of spirit, and fit for high
atcheiuements, being interiourly accomplished otherwise with singular virtue
and prudence, as one that could well explicate and deliver himself and his
affairs. This Pilgrim entering into the City with the rest, and noting the
wretched and calamiteous state of the faithful people living therein, and
thither repayring for devotion sake, resenting the matter and taking it unto
the heart, found the means to acquaint himself with Symeon the Bishop thereof,
a very good man, of a tender conscience, and fearing God, to confer with him
thereof, and to consult upon some remedy. When Peter understanding from him the
lamentable state of that City, groaning under the intolerable burden of the
Saracyns and Enemies of the Faith; was so moved thereat, that he could not
refrain from tears, but demanded what help there was for so great mischeefs
and evils: the good Pastor replied. The sins of the people are cause of al.
But if the Christians were so zealous of the honor of God, as they be, some
help might yet be found, but there is none will take our cause in hand.
Whereupon the pious Hermit undertook, that if he would write to his Holiness,
to the Emperor, and to the rest of the Kings and Princes of the west: and give
them to understand at large the miseryes and afflictions the people were in,
confirming it with the authority of his seal; he himself would be the
messinger if he pleased to make use of him, and would most faithfully
discharge ^he trust. And would moreover viua voce, make a fuller remonstrance
unto them, of what his eyes had seen; adding spurrs where need required to
incite them to so noble an enterprise.

This free promise of his, seemed to come from heaven, and pleased the
Patriarch and the assistance of the faithful beyond measure; and therefore most
affectuously the holy man thankt him for his offer, and addressed letters of
that tenor with those of credence as the matter required. In the mean while,
the poor man finding his shoulders too feeble for a busynes of that
importance, began to faint, but yet his great Charity put him on more hotly
upon it. And the rather having received a Revelation from God in his sleep, to
encourage him to it, which signified thus much. Arise up Peter, and be
diligent, not fearing to perform what thou have undertaken; assuring thy self
I will never forsake thee, but will be always with thee. For the time shall
come, that the holy places shall be purged and cleansed from al pollution, and
my servants succored. Whereupon Peter awaking, leapt up, wholly comforted with
the vision, being encouraged thereby to prosecute the busynes; and so taking
his leave of the Patriarch, with good diligence arrived at Rome, where finding
Pope Urban, he presented him the letters, and faithfully made him a perfect
relation of the state of Jerusalem, and did it so efficaciously, as moved him
not a little to apply what remedy he could. And therefore immediately, being the
year of the Incarnation of our Lord. 1085. Pope Urban called a Council at
Cleremont, wherein he assembled all the Provinces beyond the Alps. So as on the
Month of November following, was gathered together in the Name of our Lord
JESUS Christ, a holy assembly of Archbishops, and other Prelates of the Church,
accompanied with a good number of Princes of the Kingdom of France. And Urban
remembering his promise to Peter the Hermit, in a most eloquent and prolix
Oration, recommended to the Council the important buisynes of Jerusalem: and
having lively set down the deplorable state of those countries, he granted
that famous Indulgence of the Croysado, in these words.

Being assured of the mercy of God, and of the authority he granted to the
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, we remit to all Christians, who shall take
up arms against the infidels, and shall voluntarily offer themselves to this
voyage, hazarding their lives in defense of the Faith, and of their Christian
Brothers; all the penances enjoined them heretofore for their sins, and for
which they have not yet satisfied. And such as being truly penitent shall
depart this life, may assure themselves of the pardon of their sins, and the
fruition of the eternal life, prepared for such as shall willingly offer
themselves to the service of God. In the mean while, they who shall present
themselves with a lively and ardent faith, shall be received by us as Children
of true obedience, under the safeguard and defense of the Church, and under the
protection of Saint Peter and S. Paul. And so we will and Ordeyne them to be
in all security of their persons, and for their Goods exempt from al troubles
and impediments. And if it chance, (which Good forbid) that any one should
rashly and temerariously molest them, we will that he be excommunicated for it
by the Bishop of the place, and that the censure have the force; that full
restitution be made them, as well in their honor, and persons, as in goods,
with due satisfaction of al their domages and interests. And if it happen that
the Bishops and the other Prelates of the Church should be negligent, remiss,
or pusillanimous in this point, and shall not resist with all their power such
delicts, we will then to be suspended of al their state and dignity, until
they have obtained pardon of the Sea Apostolic. These Indulgences of the holy
Pastor, were received as come from heaven, and al with one consent applauded
the same, and embraced them willingly. Whereby may easily be judged how the
words of Christ were accomplished here. I come not to bring peace into the
land, but the sword. For presently you might see the husband to absent himself
from his wife, fathers to abandon their children, Children their parents. In so
much, as the Religious who had vowed a recluse and solitary life, went forth of
their cloisters. Now it was ordained, and as it were die divine commandment
enjoined, to al those who would employ themselves in this happy warfare, to
wear on the right shoulder some sign of the Passion of our Lord JESUS Christ,
for example, a Cross in testimony of the vow they had made, to go visit the
Land, wherein was literally accomplished the precept of JESUS Christ in Luc 9.
the Ghospel. He that will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross, and follow me.

Thus much I have set down, of the first origin of that famous enterprise
which then began, and which has been diverse times upon sundry occasions since
renewed. Whereof one was after two notable victoryes which the Christian
Princes had got upon the common Enemy which gave them encouragement to advance
the Croysado anew, being unanimously resolved upon, in the Council of Lat^ran,
one of the greatest and most famous assemblyes that ever Christendom had
seen: where besides the Ambassadors from al Princes were two Patriarcks, 70.
Archbishops, 402. Bishops, and eight hundred other Prelates.

Andrew the King of Hungary and Transiluanie the aforesaid father of our
Elizabeth, was chosen General of the Christian forces at that time, which he
willingly accepted for the zeal of Gods glory, and desire of honor. But
perceiving noe good success of the enterprise, he gave over and returned home,
re infecta. After which, al Europe being now in great dread and amazement, for
the late happy successes of the infidel Army in Egypt. Frederick Babarossa the
Emperor, who had espoused the daughter of the King of Jerusalem, was
entreated by all the Christian Princes to succor the decayed and declyning
state of Christendom. Wherefore he assembled a great part of the Christian
Princes at Cremona to consult thereof, among which was our noble La^tgraue the
forwardest of al, to promote the enterprise, so as he was held the fittest of
any to have the chief Command, if any such thing were resolved upon: which
were the occasions of those former services and atte^dances on Frederick the
Emperor in Apulia, we mentioned above.

HOW THE CROYSADC being published anew, the Lantgraue secretly received the
Cross, and went to meet with the Emperor in Sicily. CHAP. II.
THe holy City of Jerusalem having been (...) subdued and subjected to the
power of the enemies of the Christian faith, for our demerits, endured the yoke
of an intolerable and calamitous servitude about some 490. years at least,
under diverse reuolutions and mutations of states In which time, as often as
things had their several vicissitudes, following the diverse alterations and
variety of the times, so often had this City changed their Lords. According to
whose government and disposition, it received sometimes joyful, and somtymes
sad alterations of fortunes, not unlike to the accesses of a burning fever in
a sick man, without ever being able wholly to recover it self, and a perfect
state of health, until the first publication of the Croysado aforesaid: when
through the instigation of Peter the Hermit, and the glorious atcheiuements of
Godfrey of Bulloigne; It was conquered and recovered from them: though relapsed
afterward for the sins of the people into the state as before.

And this was that, which moved the Vicar of Christ, and Pastor of the
universal Church at this time; considering the chosen people of God, to be now
come Slaves to the Turkish y^ake, and the royal Preisthood and the holy City
of God, the Princess of Provinces, to be subject to those servile tributes, to
promulgate a third time the said Croysado for the redemption of that City and
to vindicate the sacred pledge of the Sepulcher of Christ, from the Infidel
power. For what Christian heart could endure the holy places whereon the feet
of our Savior Jesus Christ, so familiarly had trod, and which have so
plentifully been dyed with his precious blood, should so impiously be
profaned and polluted by those miscreants, that tyrannically held them by
strong hand. Who is he that considering these things would not melt into
tears! Who is he, that considering these things would not melt into tears?
Who is he whose heart would not pine and languish quite, reducing these things
to memory? Who is he, that would not be moved to hazard his life to
enfranchize his brethren enthralled in so cruel a captivity.

Whereupon it being now three years since the Prince returned from Apulia, by
the Popes decree, the Cross began to be preached again, throughout al
Christendom against the professed enemies of Christ: and the Christian name,
who h^ld the captive Jerusalem in their possession with all the Countries
adjoining thereto, commonly called the Holy Land. This same besides other
summons used and confederations, labored with the greater Lords, both Princes
and Bishops, allured the noble Lantgraue and Prince of Thuringia, as I said, to
prepare himself for this expedition of the Holy Land, and to show himself as
forward as any, to receive the Cross from the Bishop Heldesam, which he fixed
on his habit: The only care he had, was to conceal it from his Wife for a
time, that he might not grieve her too suddenly, or make her la^guish for
sorrow any time before his voyage, being privy to the great affection she bare
unto him.

But alas, the Cross thus co^cealed, notwithstanding all the diligences used
that possibly could be, to keep the secret from her. Elizabeth ere long came
privily to the knowledge thereof, while according to custom she searched the
Princes purse, to find some money to give unto the poor, presuming on the
general leave and liberty afforded her in all such occasions. Whereupon though
she loved the Cross very well, yet was she never so troubled at the sight
thereof, as she was at this time. For being quick of apprehension, and
understanding of the publishing of the foresaid Croysado, with the known zeal
and valor of her Hushand: she soon concluded against her self. When you
might have seen a notable conflict of sundry passions, now of love, now of
fear, by enterchanges of white and red, to appear in her countenance. One
while the absence of his dearest personage seemed to wound her heart; increased
with the fear of seeing him no more? Oh what a knife was this to her gentle
breast? Then again, she would call to mind, the noblenes of the enterprise it
self; the honor that would redound to God thereby, and profit to the Church.
Considering which, at last she yielded; for what was she, whose private
interests should poyse withal these high and honorable respects, and
especially with the greater glory and service of God.

With this she stood as it were like a Satue, when behold the Prince suspecting
nothing, and entering in, as he was wont perceived how the matter went, and not
being able to hold any longer, most loving and cheerfully spoke thus unto her,
taking her by the hand. How fares it with my Sister now. What a la mort? And is
it even so? You were not wont to look so sadly; those clouds used not to
shadow the serenity of your face. Something dear Sister is amiss. Oh what
disastre I pray has obscured the cheerfulnes of that brow wont to entertayne
me with a gracious smile at my entering. Oh speak dear Sister, and put me
out of pain. Whereto Elizabeth answered. You must pardon me Dear Lord and
my loving Brother: if I be not now as yesterday, or as I have formerly been
since I am of flesh and blood and subject to the sense and passions thereof;
Whereas were I otherwise, or wholly spiritual you might well expert so even a
tenor of mind and countenance as you speak of. Alas (good Brother) how should
I be otherwise, when I am to loose the staff of my estate, the comfort of my
heart, the apple of mine eye, the moytie of my self, even my second self. How
can I choose but be heavy at all these disasters surprising me at once, how
can I choose but be sensible of the Cross which you have taken on your
shoulders. Whereto the Prince replied, the truth is dear Sister I have taken
up the Cross you speak of, which our Redeemer has laid upon me. Would you
not have me to correspond with his service. The Temple of our Lord God from
whence Jesus Christ, being jealous of his honor and moved with divine zeal,
drove away the profane Merchants, not suffering the house of his Father, to
become a den of Beasts, or retraite of Thieves, is now unfortunately made a
hell of infernal inhabitants. The City of the king of kings, which to others
has given rules of true faith, is now at this present extremity outraged and
constrained to serve the superstitions of the Gentiles. And would you not have
me set my hand to the redemption of these places? I know you would, your zeal
to Gods honor, I assure my self, will not permit you to envy him the same, nor
your charity and love to his flock, suffer you to bar them the succor: and
therefore dear Sister let me entreat you to ^esigne your self in this, to
the especial ordination of God. Noe my dear Lord, (said she) may it please
you to know, I am not troubled at your voyage or enterprise so much for any
thing as that my sex and condition will not permit me to accompany you
thither, since I assure you, if my blood and life would excuse the whole
voyage, for my Savior and my neighbors sake, I should freely and easily lay
down the same; but consider I am a Woman of flesh and blood, and noe senseles
image, or a mere spirit deuoyd of passions and affections, and therefore
pardon my infirmity herein, while in the Superior I am wholely resigned to
that which is yours, and the will of God. And so she dried up her eyes, and
from that time forward, gave her self to prepare for the voyage, as she had
been to have gone her self.

Till at last, things now being put in a readiness, the complete armor
prepared for his own person, his Esquiers, and Estat^sions appointed and
ordained, his steeds bravely caparisoned, his Sumpters and all things now in
goodly equipage. Rodulph the Princes Cu^bearer who had the office assigned him
comes into the room unto the Princely couple, and tells them, it was now time
to take their leave of each other, since his Marshall troops expected his
coming, and were ready to march to the randeuous. The good Elizabeth
notwithstanding, would go along with her dearest Spouse on the way, not willing
to leave his company, till of force she must, so long then as they were in
their own Territoryes, she accompanied him till they arrived to the confines
thereof, when it was not fit, she should pass any further.

They are now then come to the place assigned* when behold no tongue tan
possibly express, the amourous, and dolourous significations of the chaste
Spouses in their last adieu: such Spouses as the world had not a better pair,
if we regard the piety of their minds, the purety of their hearts, the
integrity of their bodies, inuiolably kept for each other, in that honorable
state: besides the conjugal unity between them which is even the very
happynes thereof, wherein these things are truly found, as with them it was in
the greatest punctuallytie that might be, as appears by those special and
mutual appellations of of Brother and Sister, which passed between them. For
now were words of no use with them, nor could express a last adieu; the eyes
with tears were feign to supply that office, and shaking the hands to each
other a far of, was al they could do. While the noise of fi^e, drum, and
trumpets with other warlike instruments, had made the tongue unprofitable in
that Ceremony.

Elizabeth returning home with her sad company, for lo they were al touched
very deeply with the sorrow of this so loath depart of these true Lovers: like
an other Judith, she lays aside, the attires of her glory and magnificence,
and took to her self (...) Widow habit she was wont to wear in her husbands
absence, and for as much as she was now more desolate then ever, as having, as
she thought, much more cause of discomforts then she had at any time before,
she addicted her self to a greater retirednes, acting as it were her Widows
part before her time, in outward show. But for the interior, she was now more
free then ever, to attend to her spiritual Spouse. For never any one I think,
so mingled two such seeming contrary loves as th^se, with better harmony and
temper then she; so as her heavenly Spouse had no cause to envy the others
part, nor her earthly one, to say she was too religious and altogether unapt
for the Wedlock state. Because indeed she knew right well what it was to love
God above al things, with all her heart, and with all her powers, and the
Neighbor as her self, her parents with the love due unto Parents, her Children
with that belonged to them, and lastly her husband with a love transcending al
other earthly love, but far inferior to that of God.

THE ARRIVAL OF THE Lantgraue in Sicily, where the Emperor was: his Death, and
the Lamentation made by Elizabeth for him. CHAP. III.
SVch is the inconstancy and mutability of earthly things; so various are the
adventures of this life, and so diverse the events of human actions, as
nothing seems more constant, then a kind of inconstancy in all things, nothing
more steedy then a perpetual vnsteedynes and mutability of fortunes: and
finaly, nothing fuller of Varietyes, and viciscitudes then is the life of this
glorious Princess, the sport of fortune, a Scene of enterludes, a tragedy full
of sad Catastrophes, in a word a pattern of al patience, exposed on the
spacious Theater of the world. For she being now settled in her vidual way; a
course which gave her extreme contentment wherein she might with fuller scope
attend to the affairs of her soul: Posts continualy pass to and fro, still
certifying her of the safe arriual, and good health of her Lord the renowned
Lantgraue in Sicily, with the great expectation the world had of him, and how
the voice went, he was to be the General of all the Christian forces, in that
great expedition: a thing suitable to his zeal of Gods honor, and his heroical
heart, matched with a singular prudence in him, and dispose fit for so great a
manage, by whom likewise she particulary understood of the great entertaynement
made him by the Emperor Frederick: and how for the present they were busied
with settling of affairs in those parts in visiting of Forts, Castles, and
cittyes for the greater security of Christendom, with a thousand other things
of good importance and of much consolation to her in her Spouses absence. She
heard withal, that the Prince would happily find the leisure to visit her yet
before the voyage to the Holy Land could be wholly prepared. The Posts still
brought nothing but comforts to Elizabeth insatiable to hear from him, over
ioyed with the hope to see him ere long.

But fortune, or rather divine Ordination, so disposing when the Prince now
tho^ght to have taken his leave of the Emperor, to return to his Country for
dispatch of same particular affairs, which pressed him much; Tidings was
brought, that the Sultan the professed enemy was in readynes to make some
notable attempt upon the Christians. The news amazed them much, and doubtesse
had not the Princes valor and expectation reared their hopes, their hearts had
failed. So as now it was necessary the Prince should stay, and his return was
grown impossible Wherefore taking pen and incke in hand, instead of going
himself in person, he was feign to write to his dearest Elizabeth, his true
and unfeigned excuse in these words.

Dear Sister, by this you may read how poor a thing Man is: he often
determines this or that, but God disposes al things: I had my foot even ready
in the stirrup, to have seen th^e once more, according to my purpose in my
last. But behold the face of things is altered, through the hot unexpected
charging of the Enemy on our frontiers; and we who at ley sure had thought to
have found him out to confront him, are now enforced to provide for our selves
to repel him: We must needs therefore sudainely make head, and hasten sooner
then we thought, commending the whole enterprise to thy prayers, and
especially my life and person, that we return victorious and triumphant over
the enemies of the Christian Name, and I may see and enjoy thee once more,
howsoever I trust that I have so provided for thee, as whatsoever become of
me, thou shall be able to live of thy self, and that if I dye thou will be
myndful of my soul, so as at least we may happily meet in heaven. Til when I
bid thee adieu. And so putting to his wonted subscription, he sealed it up in all have, dispatching the Post as soon as might be.

These last words were as certain presages of what immediately followed; For
after he had labored much to animate the army disconsolate and dismayed with
the former news, spending his spirits too prodigally, fell into a Calentura or
malignant f^auer, and being youthful and full of blood, the malignity of ^he
malady increasing, his life was utterly dispayred; and finally receiving the
Sacraments, of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, he gave up his happy spirit on the
eleauenth of September.

It can not be told what expressio^s of mourning there was through the whole
Camp, and but for that the Body was to be conveyed by his Friends into
Thuringia, never general had been more honorably enterred by the Emperor and
the Army, then he: how soever they spared it not, in a marshall manner to
condole with his Hearse, so long as they had him present in that sort. When
the News of this untimely death was brought unto Thuringia, the former Post
was permitted to deliver his letters from the Prince unto the Dutchese his
Spouse, written with his own hand, immediately before his infirmity, which they
all supposed would be a good disposition to prepare her against the last
encounter, that should be given her of his certain departure out of this
world; which she read and took as discreetly as was to be expected From her;
But then all the care was taken that possibly could be, how to break the
latter tidings unto her, Whom they knew to be so tender and affectionate to
her Lord.

Wherefore by common consent of the Peers of the Land and Council of Estate;
it was resolved the old Duchess Sophia, the Prince his Mo^her, should warily
and discreetly acquaint her with it: For they verily feared, that if she came
to the knowledge thereof by any other ways abruptly and of a sudden, some
great inconueniencies at least, would ensue thereof. Sophia for the present,
like a wise and discreet Matron, having as well as she might disgested her
proper sorrow, for the loss of so hopeful a Prince her son, taken her
fairest occasion, and the best opportunity she could, as is were, upon an
ordinary Visit, went to see her at her Castle, where she lived a Vyduall and
retired life in the absence of her Husband, having lately read and received the
last Tidings as she took it, from her never sufficiently honor Spouse and
Lord; And having saluted her according to custom; she chearefully spoke to her
in this sort.

Madam I he^re you have heard from m^ son^e your husband; if so; how fares he
I pray? ^ul well I hope (said she) And so do I, quoth the Duchess straight.
Why Madam, answered Elizabeth: and is he so soon taken prisonner, and his
person in safety, if it be so, Lady Mother, by Gods grace and the bounty of
his friends, he shall soon be ransomed again. He is taken indeed Dear
Daughter, (replied she again,) not as you imagine, Captiued by his enem^es,
but led in triumph by the hands of Angels, to the heavenly Jerusalem; so
happy an issue his voyage has had, as that instead of a terren and earthly
land, but Holy in name only and mere denomination; he ha^h made a conquest
of the heavenly Country, the celestial Jerusalem, the true Holy land indeed.

Whereat the Princess was truly pierced through the heart with the sorrow of
Sorrow, and wringing her woeful hands, wept most bitterly, till recovering her
self again, she said: And if my Brother be dead, I here do promise hence
forth to dye to my self, and to the world, with all its vanit^es. So great and
intense her sorrow was, and so deep sighs and sobbs she fetched from the
center of her heart, as there was none able to comfort her, they being all now
likewise nigh dro^vne in tears, as well as she, to behold her mourning. And
the calamity which but now seemed universal, ^or the loss of a Prince, a
Pat^on, and a common Father of his Country; in a moment is turned into a
private condolement, and tender compassion on a desolate Princess.

Thus alas, the doleful Widow was assailed with the batteryes of a hard
disaster* which ha^ been able to have made her onstant mind to have surrendered
to impa^ience, had not the Cittadell of her heart been well fortifyed before
hand with most noble and heroical resolutions and well practiced with the
mortifications of self-loue and her proper interest, and above all prevented
with peculiar favors from heaven, the Holy Ghost revealing to her what crosses
and tribulations she was to suffer hereafter; and how this was but only a
Praeludium of the rest: and therefore it behooved her to buckle her self for
them, and to be armed with the complete harness of Fortitude against the
volleys of misfortunes which our Lord would send her, for her greater Crown,
according to the measure of her patience. From which time, the Ro^all Princess
offered her self to suffer whatsoever fortune, or to say better, the execution
of the divine Will, could any ways power upon her. Thus it pleased the
Almighty to comfort his pore distressed Servant in the midst of her greater
calamityes. Whereby she was now grown a Lioness, as it were, even daring
fortune her self to do her worst.

HOW HENRY BROTHER to the deceased Lan^graue usurped the Dukedom: and eiected
Elizabeth and her Children from al their* right. CHAP. IIII.
ALthough the affections and il dispositions, yea the rancour and envy of the
friends and kindred of the deceased Prince Jews, and of all the Nobles and
Peers of that state, had been ever poisonous and malicious, and were grown
inueterate in them, against the royal and most virtuous Princess Elizabeth,
yet during the Lantgraues life, they were but raked up, as fire in the ashes,
nor ever durst they so much as let them appear, for the extraordinary love and
respect the Prince did bear to Elizabeth. But he was no sooner departed this
transito^y life beyond al expectation, being yet in the flower of his youth;
but the fire of their indignation, rancour, and ^nuy, against the innocent Lady
brake forth, and now they al beg^nne mainely to oppose and to set themselves
against her. To this was add a greedy, and most insatiable appetite, and
thirst of rule, in Henry the Brother of Lewys, egged and set on by the wicked
and maleuolous ^action, diametrically opposite to the weal and prosperity of
the desolate Widow and her princely issue. Who ruling; they thought they should
not be able to bear such sway in the government as they ambitiously desired.
There wanted not reasons to advance the business, alleging that Herman the
undoubted heir was yet an Infant, and the Mother Rege^t unfit for government.
The state stood in need of an able Governor for years discretion, and mature
judgment. That Henry was amply endowed with all these, and the nearest of blood,
and consequently by all reason he should mount into the Throne, at least til
the Infant were come to perfect, age to be able to sway the scepter himself.
Besides, that he was apt for chiual^y, and well trained in arms, whereby he
might be able to defend his Country at least, if not to augment and propagate
the same, and was every way a complete Prince to comply with the government,
and to give contentment to al.

They labored so effectually in the business, as what with their reasons, and
other more powerful means which they wrought, they brought it to pass: and
Henry was invested with the Princely robes, and adorned with the marks of the
Signory of that state, and proclaimed Governor of Turingia. Being then thus
established in the government: the first thing he did, of consequence after
the same, to give the World more plainly to understand, the il affection he
had toward the Princess Elizabeth and her issue, and to do a thing most
grateful as he took it, to his accomplices and abetters who had promoted him ^o
it, was to expel her from her Castle or Palace, where she innocently lived a
private and retired life, by reason of mourning for her Princely and loyal
husband, with all her mayds and Damozells about her, without any furniture,
provision, or necessaryes to live, and to maintain her family, or so much as
food to sustain nature with, commanding besides, all those of the village by,
that none should harbor or receive her into their howses, to the end, the
Subjects beholding her reduced to that miserable estate, might never intermedle
or once go about to restore her again into her Principallity, unjustly
usurped by him, or to vindicate the Infants wrongs, who by all good men, were
held most tyrannically and injuriously dealt with.

But then, what did Elizabeth the while, the noble Imitatresse of the Apostles,
deserving well the purple of Martyrs? She bare her self with an incredible and
most prodigious patience, far transcending the power of nature, wholly
heavenly and above all nature. For in her heart was no revenge so much as
imagined, much less intended or harbored; in her mouth noe word of
impatience, or any interiection that might any ways seem to express the
same; for how could it be, where there was noe spleen? And for her outward
gestures they were all so composed, as she had been in the greatest
tranquillity that might be.

She murmured not, she complained not, for being so injuriously put forth of
her chamber, and Royal bed, to seek her lodging on bare boards against all
reason and justice. But rather inwardly rejoiced to see her self, so ill
entreated and so little respected, for that in truth her whole heart and
confidence was placed in God, and so went she away, saying with Bias the
heathen Philosopher: Lo, I carry what soever I have along with me. She carried
indeed noe transitory things of this world about her, but others much better,
and not on her back, but all in her mind, which could not be usurped or taken
from her.

Being thus driven out of her own house, she went to the town in the botome
of the Castle hill, where she entered in with her Mayds that were with her into
a common Inn; some say into the cottage of a poor woman, where she remained
til midnight, when the Friars of S. Frauncis, began to ring to Ma^tins, and
then went to the Monastery, at that hour of the night, and finding the doors
open, entered into the Church, where she humbly besought the Friars they would
please to sing Te Deum with much solemnity for her, in token how joyous and full
of consolation she was in her self for this first encounter of fortune
Comforting her self with that of the Apostle writing to the Romans, where he
said. He comforted himself and gloryed in his tribulations, and gave infinite
thanks to God for them. From that time forward she edeauoured by all means
possible to procure her self a room or lodging of her own, where she might
freely live by her self, and not depend of others. But those of the town for
fear of Henry and his Accomplices, durst not afford her any, so much as the
meanest Houel, and therefore she was feign for want of a hole to put her head
in, to remain in the Church of the fore said Monastery all that day following
unto the Evening; which being come, her grief, and affliction was augmented
the more, for that Henry her Brother in Law, to be more free in the
government of the State, cast forth of the Castle also the Infant Herman,
Heir apparent, with his two little Sisters, whom now she beholds to descend
down the hill, to come to their Mother, in the Monastery where she was, for as
yet she had no other dwelling, but the Church porch, whom notwithstanding she
received with a magnanimous and vndau^ted courage, though otherwise she could
not choose but tenderly weep to see those Innoce^ts so insensible of their
estate, as to smile upon her, amidst their greatest disasters, rejoicing no
doubt to have so recovered their Mother, whose little absence the while, had
been a bitter pil unto them. Ah little Babes (she said) little do you know the
wretched state you are in, and where to lodge you (alas) this night, I know
not; poor hearts where are your delicate and soft Couches, where are now your
attendants. Nay where is any meat to put into your mouths? The Foxes have
holes to harbor in, the Birds have plumage of their own to keep them warm,
and when their young lie gaping in their nests for food, their damme is at hand
to afford it them, your only little Infants more unhappy in this, then Birds
and Beasts, have not a morsel to put into your mouths, and yet you smile upon
me, and soon I fear will cry as fast, when I have it not to give you.

Whereupon to lodge and repose her Children, she repaired to the house of a
certain Clerk, who poorly entertained her in a room, without hangings,
money, or furniture, or any thing to eat. Where she remained for certain
days most incommodiously, and in great misery; partly through the straightnes
of the place, for her whole family, and partly also through the great penury of
al things there, for the susteynance of man. After that she removed her self
into greater and more ample rooms, to be able to accommodate her children and
family the better. But there she remained not long, but soon she found out
that one commodity of a larger room, did bring a thousand discommodityes with
it: for the Owner of the house and the inhabitants there, were so cross and
peevish to her, as she could find no rest amongst them but infinite vexations
of every side. Wherefore having no other helps in that place, but what the bare
walls were able to afford her, departing thence and bidding them farewell,
which had somewhat defended her and hers from the asperityes of the Winter, for
it was at that time, using these speeches to the bare walls. I thank you
Walls most heartily, for the harbor you have given me this while, and would
have binne glad to have yielded as much to the Inhabitants, had they been as
civil; And so not able to find any other lodging in the whole Town; she
betook her self to her former cottage or little ease.

Thus this great Lady and Princess Elizabeth in a moment as it were, cast
down from the throne of eminent dignity into the Abyss of temporal miseries,
and she, who the other day harbored thousands of poor, now poor her self,
could find no entertaynement or harbor any where: She that cherished Infants
and Orphans, was glad her self to beg for hers, and to crave an Alms from
door to door, and seek to her Enemies themselves. Oh instability of human
things! and which is yet more admirable, who could discern in all this while
any least sign of pusillanimity in her, any least wonder, or murmr against
God or his holy Ordination to proceed, but rather perpetual blessings and
benedictions to flow from her; saying ever. Blessed be the Name of God; and
with holy Job: Our Lord has given, and our Lord has taken away: and a
thousand other iaculatoryes besides, which she how rely sent up to heaven.

While Elizabeth was yet in this distress, there happened a thing to her which
I may not let pass. She going one day alone by her self upon some occasion or
other, and being by the way to cross over a certain durty or myery Lane,
where was no passage, but upon stumps and stones, placed for steps here and
there for the purpose, and the good Lady, standing with her self in a study how
she should do to pass over, having no staff to sustain her self withal, in
case her heart should fail in the way, nor practiced in this kind, having ever
been carried til then, in coaches and litters. Behold who should she see on
the other side, but a certain old woman whom she knew very well, being one,
whom she had in her better fortunes exceedingly favored with many
extraordinary benefits: this woman likewise, as she imagined, stood still on the
other side, as pausing with her self what to do. Wherefore they both stood
awhile immovable as pinching courtesy who should first pass over. The Lady
thought for respect sake she had forborne, or through gratitude for former
courtesies; but she like a Monster in nature, purposed a worse matter. For the
Lady not to stand over long upon such ceremonies aduenturing first, being now
in the midst of the steps trembling as she went for fear of falling, the other
more practiced in such ways, susteyning her self with a staf in her hand, met
her in the midst, and thrust her down into the dirt, and having so done, went
her ways, ieering and laughing at her. Ah monstrous impiety to deal so with
an innocent Lady, in the extremity of her miseryes! The holy Elizabeth came
forth of the dirt in so foul a plight as you may guess: and having wiped her
self as well as she might, went on her ways, and took the injury so patiently,
as she returned not the least word of discontent thereat, but inwardly smiled
with the excessive joy she felt, to see her self so basely affronted without
cause, which she offered up in union with all the indignityes her Savior
suffered at the hands of the Romans and Jews in the house of Annas, Cayphas,
Pilat, and Herod; and for this act, she received of her Spouse incredible
favors, as shall immediately appear.

THE ESPECIAL FAVOVRS, and sweet consolations from God, which Elizabeth had
in hearing of Mass, and otherwise. CHAP. V.
THe more Elizabeth suffered the bitter storms of the Sea of this world, the
greater were the favors she interiourly received from God. It happened then
that Elizabeth in the holy time of Lent, according to her ordinary devotion
hearing Mass religiously on her knees, considering the inestimable price, of
that most dreadful and heavenly Sacrifice, and feeling her heart by little and
little enflamed with fervent meditations on that subject fell into this prolixe
Colloquy, as follows. O then let me love thee my dear Spouse, may I covet
thee, desire thee, thirst and hunga^ after thee; may I taste, eat, and drink
thee. Osweetenes of love, O love of sweetenes; let my soul feed upon thee,
and my bowels be replenished with the sweet liquor of thy love, that my heart
may be inebriated therewith. Oh Charity, my God, sweet honey! most sweet
milk! most delicious food! Oh sweetenes! and suauity of my will, my Love, and
the desire of my heart! Why am I not wholly enflamed! wholly burned with the fire
of thy Love? Why am I not all and wholly transformed into thee through Love? So
as in me there may be nothing else but Love! O divine fire! O heat, O fire!
Why am I not wholly converted into thy Love? Why is there ought else in me then
Love? Why am I not wholly enthraled with Love? Let thy charity burn in my heart:
let thy Love kindle and flame in my soul! Here now with a smiling countenance
she cries out. O joy! O pleasure! O solace! Oh my comfort! O my Iubiley!
enlarge me in thy Love, that I may learn in all my interior affairs, to
taste how sweet a thing it is to love, to liquify; and swim in thy Love. Let
me sing to thee the Canticles of Love! O good love, that love most
perfectly! O increated Love! O divine Love! O divine charity! O embowel'd
dilection! O wholly amiable! O wholly desirable! O most blessed light, fill the
most intimous part of my soul and enkindle the fire of thy consuming Love in
me, that in me may nothing remain but thee, With that, she pawses awhile, and
then breaks forth again, as follows. Ah, Ah, Ah, my Lord God. Be thou to
me, and I to thee. Oh what is this my Lord God, my love, my Saint? Thou all
mine, and I all thine: Let me love thee my God and my Lord above all things,
and more then my self, and let me not love my self but for thee, and all in
thee. Let me love thee with all my soul, let me love thee with all my
memory, let me love thee with all my power and forces, with a most straight,
fervent, and sovereign love, with a love, not familiar to all. I will not rest
most blessed Divinity, and one most loving God, and surely I shall never rest,
till I love thee with a most burning Love. O let me enjoy thee, Let me enjoy
thee. O most blessed Trinity, one God, let me enjoy thee.

Having said all this within her self, because she was in the open Church,
moving but her lips only, as Anna did when she begged Samuel at the hands of
God, which proved a Prophet, and consequently Seeing God, as all Prophets are
said to do; she obtained very special graces, and the vision of strange and
mysterious things. For lo, she was suddenly rapt into an ecstasy, eleuating
and raising her soul and understanding so up to heaven, as she seemed to be
kneeling, fixed in the place, without judgment, or operation of the senses,
with eyes notwithstanding as glued to the Altar. Till at last returning to her
self again; Isentrude her dearest and most faithful servant, being confident
of her love and respect toward her; presumed so far as to press her much,
after many refusalls, to declare unto her, what she had seen, while she was
so rapt, and alienated in her senses, with her eyes fastened on the Altar. To
whom at last she answered, and said. O daughter, I may not make any mortal
wight privy to those heavenly secrets which I saw. But this I tell thee, since
thou vrgest me, and coniurest me of al loves; that I was replenished with
wonderful and unspeakable joy, beholding with the eyes of my mind such
heavenly mysteries: and this is al good Isentrude, I can say unto thee in this
matter.

Isentrude was forced to rest satisfied with this answer, though her much
curiosity, could hardly brook the denial, so curious are mortals of immortal
secrets: But resolved if ever the like happened again, she would be so refused
no more. From thence then they returned to their poor and most pityful lodging
again. Where the holy and blessed Elizabeth, was feign to restore nature, with
such poor pitance as she had, after so strange an ecstasy and alienation of
mind. Which though it wrought on the soul, yet was it doubtless laborious and
toil some to the body, to be so long suspended from the functions and
operations of the powers thereof, they being so dear and indiuidual companions
during life. But being of a weak constitution, a little sufficed her; then
after refection, she desired to be private, as willing to rest and repose her
self in her Chamber with Isentrude alone. And being as I said extreme weary
with the former excesses of the mind, she laid down her head on Isentrudes
lapp: and so began to fall asleep, and soon after to weep as she slept, and
then again to smile of a sudden, showing a cheerful and serene countenance
withal, as she had received extraordinary contentment at somewhat or other.
Anon she would weep again, and then smile, welnigh as soon: and those
alterations and strange viciscitudes of diverse and opposite feelings, went and
came all that day until the evening, yet seemed she oftener to smile then
weep, and then at last she uttered these words. Yea truly my Lord so it
please thee, to remain with me, I will never depart from thee, but still
persevere to abide with thee for ever. When she had once expressed these words,
which Isentrude directly heard and punctually observed; she awaked, nor can it
be imagined how great was the desire which Isentrude had to hear the mystery,
and therefore laid so strange a battery of importunityes against her Ladies
humble resolution, as she was forced to yield to her, and to reveal the whole
passage as it was, saying in this manner. I saw the Heavens to open, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, to appear unto me, and to comfort me for my trauayles
and tribulations past, in whose presence as I stood, I was extraordinary
cheerful and glad, but as sad and full of heauynes again, when he offered
to depart and go away from me; whereon taking presently compassion, he
immediately returned again, and at last, after many alterations in this kind,
he said to me. Tell me Elizabeth, will thou remain with me, as I will do
with thee. Whereto I answered these wotds you heard me utter even now.

ELIZABET VISITSH her Aunt an Abbess, and then her Uncle, the Bishop of
Bamberg: who plotted to have her married, but in vain. CHAP. VI.
THe fame of the calamitous state of the Princess Elizabeth, who as before was
famous for Sanctity, now as remarkable for misery; contained not yt self within
the bounds of the Territoryes near at hand, or the borders of Thuringia it
self, but had dilated yt self to forrayne and remote places. So as indeed
there was nothing more in every ones mouth, then the hard disasters of so noble
a Lady, some blaming her fortune, and some were carried so far into passione,
as nigh to murmr at the Ordinance of God, to see so innocent a Lady, without
al desert of hers, to fall so suddenly into so great an abyss of miseryes,
calamities, and afflictions. And others the while, for so diverse are the
humors of men, spared not to traduce the innocence and religious simplicity of
the admirable Lady, with the impious aspersion of foolish stupidity. For else
they say, how should it be, that she being the Widow of so great a Prince,
and daughter of so puissant a king, should be so injuriously entreated by
Prince Henry, and the Nobles of the land, were she not altogether forlorn and
destitute of friends to right her cause, she being so innocent and her wrong so
patent to al. Thus diverse according to their fancyes shot their bolts, but few
so wise and versed in spiritual things, as to hit a right, or to measure the
drift or scope of the eternal Ordination herein, to dispose al to his glory and
her greater crown, through the exercize of so Heroical a virtue as her
invincible Patience was, in all these things.

Save only an Aunt she had, being Sister to her Mother, and Lady Abbess of a
famous Monastery in those parts, who hearing of the savage vsages and
proceedings with her Niece, framing a far higher conceit of her deserts, then
the ordinary sort could diue into: Partly moved with the respect of blood,
partly out of charity, and partly also for the rumor of her sanctity, which
amidd all her aduersityes and contradictions more and more dilated it self, in
the opinion of the best judgments, and all such indeed as were not carried away
with ignorance or sinister passions. This Aunt of hers, took such order, what
with her loving inuitements, and what with the means she contrived to bring
her to her, which wanted no difficultyes, by reason of her great necessityes,
that she and all her Mayds, having taken in the mean time the best order for
the children that might be; were brought to the Grate of the Monastery, humbly
attending the good pleasure of her Aunt there ready to expect her: Where who
could express the tenderness that passed between them. The Abbess was much
moved in seeing her Niece so poorly clad and accommodated for all things,
considering the diameter of both her fortunes. That so great a Lady, so
delicate, and highly descended, should in so short a time be brought into such
extremity.

When having mutually saluted each other as became then, and fallen upon many
virtuous, spiritual, and divine discourses, they gave no place to murmures or
complaints at al: whether it were that Elizabeth was unwilling to be drawn
unto them; or the Abbess not willing to renew the soars of her Neeces
sorrows: The Abesse differring those matters rather to some conference more at
leisure with Isentrude, whom she noted to be greatest in her Ladies favor. And
having now at last well understood her cause, she knew the better how to apply
comforts in the rest of her discourse with her, which she did most aptly
indeed: in humouring the affect of voluntary Poverty in her, yet tempering the
same with the will to recover her right again, to be able to make a larger and
freer donation of what she had to the benefit of the poor, rather then by such
a general renunciation, mixed with a kind of violent compassion to suffer her
means so silently to remain in the hands of injurious Extortioners, greatly
to the detriment of the poor, whom she desired to releive so much; in
referring the innocence of her cause to the latter day. Wherefore she advised
her to repair as soon as might be to her Uncle the Bishop of Bamberg: a man
of prudence, charity, and power noe doubt, to restore her to her Dowry, and
Viduall rights: at least to provide so for her, as she might be able to
maintain, that poor family of her self, Children, and Mayds, being the only
ambition she seemed to aim at.

The desolate Widow was somewhat revived heerewith, and yiedling many thanks to
her Aunt, for her grave and discreet counsels, promised immediately to put
them in practice with all speed. And so taking their leaves of either part
with such assistance as the Lady Abbess could give her, and very efficacious
letters to the said Bishop, she went to Bamberg.

Where being come, the Bishop was aduertized thereof, who could hardly believe
the same, til he saw and read the letters from his Sister her Aunt, which she
sent him before she came into his presenee. The Bishop, good man, could by no
means hold from weeping, at the sight and reading of them, much less when
they met, which moved the hearts of all the Clergy about him, considering the
strangnes and rarenes of the accidents of this poor Lady. When appointing a
Lodging near his palace, for her and hers, they had good commodity to meet
often, and to conferr of matters concerning her weal, and recovery of her
dowry; and if it were possible, which he proiected, and she maynely resisted,
to restore her again to her estate as amply as ever. Which design of his by
degrees took so great impression in him, as he not only apprehended it
possible to take effect, but as it happens in such cases, held it in a manner
as done already. So as noting his Niece to be young and beautyfull, he began
to plot with himself, how to marry her honorably, a second time, and to match
her in some potent family to strengthen her cause, the more easily to purchase
her right. And thereupon till he were better, and more fully resolved thereof,
what Prince she might be espoused unto, and how to deal in the matter, he sent
her, with her humble train to a certain Castle of his, to be accommodated
with all things fit for her Calling; at least what was necessary for her in
that estate, till she might be better provided, as occasion served.

The innocent Lady her self was nothing aware of al these plots and workings in
her Uncles head, as being a matter she least dreamed of, so far she was from
favoring yt in the least, or giving any way thereunto. Howbeit her Mayds some
way or other, (who knows) had got some knowledge of the Bishops intent. And
being privy to their Ladies most chaste purpose, and little less then a settled
Vow, and partly jealous of their own, least their Ladies resolutions once
being violated, theirs might suffer wrack, and they likewise be drawn some way
or other to embrace the coniugal state, notwithstanding their Vows of
Chastity; became very sad and anxious, discoursing thereof now and then
sollicitously among themselves, what were best for them to do to prevent the
same, and whether it were not fit to prove their Ladies constancy or no, for
their better satisfaction, and to give her notice of the danger she stood in;
which happily she aduerted not, a thing so far perhaps from her innocent
apprehe^sion.

While they were in this deliberation with themselves. Elizabeth comes in,
suspecting nothing less then that their whole discourse was touching her: but
yet could easily perceive her Maids were greiued and perplexed at some what;
for they al stood looking on each other, as if they had something to say to
her, but were not well determined who should begin. Wherefore, to break their
silence, she thus begins her self. Maidens, what is the matter with you, you
are so troubled in your mynds? for I discern some sudden change among you. Are
we not welcome here and fairly entreated in our Uncles house? Tell me, I say,
are you not well used, has any discourtesy been done you since your coming
hither, or tell me what is the matter with you? When lo, they all stand looking
on Isentrude, thereby insinuating as much, as she should speak and express
their common grief and lay open to her their fears and iealousies. Which she
did, presuming of the liberty and freedom she had often given her to be a
faithful Admo nitresse to her.

The truth is Madam (said she) my Sisters are al in a great perplexity about
your Ladyship, least your Uncles royal entertaynement here might have some
sinister end, so far they are, from what your Ladyship misgaue, of their al
usage, as that from the contrary they gather a worse conclusion. Madam in a
word they fear least your Uncle intends to assault your noble resolutions of
vidual chastity, and go about to plot and contriue how to violate the same by
a tender of some honorable match to your Lady ship, which in reason he may
think you cannot refuse, your stare and condition being such, for your present
temporalities as they are. This Madam was the argument of their discourse, and
these their fears, grounded on the tenderness they have of the honor of your
Ladyship, and somewhat to of their own imbecilities who rest so much on the
rock of your constancy Which causeless iealousies, as I suppose, I have been
laboring to supplant and root out of their hearts. But one word Madam* from
your self, will effect more then all the reasons I am able to allege against
the same.

To which Elizabeth with a cheareful and serene countenance, smiling, said.
Take you no care my daughters: nor trouble your selves any more about this
matter. I trust in the divine protection for my part, that look what I
promised in the life of my honored Lord, I shall perform and accomplish
punctually eue^ after his death, likewise to the end of my life. And though it
should fall out, that I were pressed by any authority or command whatsoever, or
otherwise were menaced by power, or were allured with all the flatteryes of
freindship whatsoever; I shall never suffer my self to be drawn from that man,
whom not for man I took but for the holy Sacrament of Matrimony. Nor do I fear
a whit, what force can do against me, since let them use what violence they
can, yet still I shall reteyne entire the liberty of my free will, and shall
show my self to be such a Mistress of my self, as I shall never yield consent
thereto, but sooner disfigure my self for a last refuge.

With these her resolute, and heroical words, her Mayds were well satisfied,
and comforted. And the Venerable Bishop who as yet had done nothing in the
matter, but only reuolued the thing in mind, having religiously commended the
affayre to God, being moved and touched by the divine spirit, let fall his
designs, and desisted of himself from the enterprise, without having ever
made the least intimation thereof to any. Giving order, that Elizabeth might
stay there where she was, as long as she would, and be left free to dispose of
her self, or go whersoeuer she pleased.

HOW THE BODY OF Prince Lewys was brought out of Sicily into Germany to be
buried. CHAP. VII.
IT has been ever the manner of great Princes dying forth of their Count^yes,
to have their bodies transported to some honorable place or other to rest with
their Ancestors in peace: and besides to be carried with great pomp in their
funeral solemnityes, especially men of more eminent note. Hence it was that
the hopeful Prince Lewys dying in forrayne parts, and in so Noble an Assembly
of Princes and Lords, in company of the Emperor himself, gathered together
from all parts of Christendom: I may say indeed the flower of Europe at that
time; Yet the desolate Friends of the deceased Prince would by no means yield
his corpse should remain behind, and that his own native Country, and
natural Citizens should be deprived of his bones, whose life they had lent for
the Christian Cause: and where they could not have him alive, should likewise
be dispoyled of so dear a pledge and precious depositum being dead. Wherefore
the devotions and grateful offices of al, being now satisfied, those noble
Gentlemen of the Prince his Family, who had accompanied him thither, and who in
this had accomplished their promise to the letter, in following him to death:
and who moreover were better then their words, in not leaving him after death:
disposed themselves to order the conueying of his hearse, into their own
Country in the best equipage they could.

The body then being taken out of the tomb? wherein it lay; and the flesh
consumed by such artificious means as they used, by the diligence, of the most
expert therein, they took the bones and enclosed them charily, in a certain
Chest, or precious Casket, and being attended for a good space by a world of
Princes, Dukes, and Marquesses, and of Counts, Barons, and Knights without
number, in marshal order, they went with Ensigns folded up together with a
doleful and dismal sound of drumms, al clothed in black, and other warlike
instruments in like sort. Thus went they on in goodly order to a certain place
appointed, where they were solemnly met with, by other Princes and Gentlemen
of the Countries they passed thorough, where the Marshal troops took their
leaves in warlike, wise And so went on through Villages and towns, and
wheresoever they came, were freshly encountered with new companyes succeeding by
turns, and all with lamentable expressions of dolor for the loss of so
Noble a Prince, their sorrows being renewed afresh with the presence of the
Corpse.

Thus every day they carried the body, going in manner of Procession, deposing
it in some Church at night, or else in a Monastery, causing Masses, Dirges, and
other suffrages to be said for his soul, offering up many Gifts and donaryes*
to every Church, where the Offices and Rites were performed, as Tapers,
Herse-cloths, and Blacks. In this goodly order they marched into Franconia, and
when they arrived at Bamberg, the Bishop of that Church came forth in
Procession to me^te the Body, having given order before, that all the Nobility,
Knights, and Gentlemen there, should accompany the woeful Elizabeth with her
desolate and truly disconsolate Train, giving in charge especially that some
few of the choycer sort, should be always at hand with the sorrowful Widow
to comfort and sustain her, as need should require, which they did.

At last the Servant of God came forth with her Mayds in mourning weeds, with
minds more sable, and mourning far, then that color could express, yet she
bare her self most discreetly in that assembly, in bridling so the current of
her tears, for the present; as every one judged, measuring the cause, the
great and absolute command she had over her passions, and what she powerfully
restreined in her self, they as prodigally showred forth for her sake, so as
hardly besides her own, were seen, any cheeks vnwatered, and some with the
eyes in tears to the brimme.

But then entering with the Corpse into the Church, especially when the Hearse
was uncovered, and the Casket of the bones set open to satisfy her request,
the Ca^aracts of her eyes, so violently kept in and restrained before, burst
forth against her will, who ^ayne would have moderated the same, but the great
excess of her affection to the Prince, at that time got the upper hand, and
cruelly tirannized her poor heart: Which the people seeing, excusing her,
blamed the indiscretio^s of those about her, in giving such way to the opening
of the shrine: but in truth, her former demeanor and temper she showed, was
cause of the scope and liberty they gave her at her request.

Which she perceiving, and showing the soueraignety she had of her passions, as
before giving a check as it were to her natural propension, was presently
composed and serene as if noe such matter had been. And changing the key of her
former dolourous expressions, into a more greatefull and pleasing note; She
rendered thanks to the heavenly Father, that since it had pleased his divine
Majesty to dispose so of her honorable husband, to take him thus into his
heavenly* Tabernacles, so seasonably for himself, being ready for him; though
most importunely for her, and the whole world, and that she could not any
longer enjoy him alive, he had vouchsafed thus to do her the favor before her
death to afford her the means to kiss and embrace his honored bones, who in
so holy an enterprise had given up his life to his honor, and in his quarrel.

The body, by reason of the greater solemnityes here used, in respect of the
Bishop allied, and the presence of the woeful Widow her self; made a longer
abode there then in any other station on the way. Whereby the Princess
Elizabeth, had good leisure to condole with the Lords who came out of Sicily
with the body, and they wither. When after a competent time afforded them, for
sad repetitions of old matters, such as dolorous Widows are apt to find out
concerning the sickness, of her honored Lord, the manners, and how he dyed,
what mention he made of her, and his children, and a thousand the like, and
especially of his last words; in which questions they satisfied her to the
full, but with a thousand interruptions the while to put her off, for fear of
aggravating and renewing her grief. At last when she saw they were willing noe
longer to mainteyne that discourse with her, wihch by her good will she would
never have ended; She craved their patience to hear the narration of her own
story, since the death of her deceased Lord: unfolding to them without any
acerbity of speech, that it had pleased God for her sins to dispossess her
of her estate, being by her adversaries turned out of doors, and v^terly
stripped and dispoyled of all she had, so that she, her children, and Mayds,
were forced to beg: till it pleased the honorable Abb^sse her Aunt, and her
Uncle the Venerable Bishop of this place, to send for her, and to accommodate
her as they found her.

While the Lady continued her discourse, and before she could fully finish her
sad narration, and close up the tragical Catastrophe, the Noble Gentlemen,
being now already enflamed with choler, and with high indignation against the
Prince and his adherents, had instantly vowed the ruin of her Adversaries, had
not the Princess her self, fearing some great disastre might follow thereof
mitigated their furyes, especially against the Prince her Brother in Law, by
laying the fault of all to his wicked Councillors, whom she pretended not to
know, or at least would not discover to them, for fear of further
inconveniences; and finally excused the Prince with greenenes of years, and
too great a facility to be carried away with sinister Counsels, most opposite
as she said to his own swe^ter disposition: signifying to them that all what
she required, and the end why she made her complaint to them, was but only that
they would please to let him see his own error in a sweet manner, and as
faithful Councillors in deed to possess him with sager and more wholesome
advice, affirming she doubted not, but the Prince hearing it from their mouths,
would give ear unto it, and from a Lion become a Lamb like himself, for she
could not be otherwise persuaded of his good disposition.

The Lords by this time, were grown more temperate, being sweetly pacifyed
with the reasons and fair demeanours of the Lady; admiring her Patience and
heroical Virtues, especially in so easy pardoning her professed enemies, and
those who had done her such open wrongs, wherein rather she showed her self an
Evangelical follower of Christ, then a secular Princess descended from the
loins of Kings, and earthly Monarke, more apt for revenge then pardoning
iniuryes. And thereupon they agreed among themselves at their arriual in
Turingi^, to treat with the Prince in a gentle, and mild manner, but yet
fully, and wholly give him to understand his own errors, and cruel dealings.
And so satisfying the Princess herewith, they went on with the honorable
pledge as before, with the greatest pomp, and solemnity that might be.

HOW THE NOBLEMEN expostulate with Prince Henry, and obtain what they desire,
and what Elizabeth did there upon. CHAP. VIII.
THE body of Prince Lewys, after many a tedious journey, and much difficulty
vanquished: was at last brought to Thuringia, and there, with magnificent
funeral pomps, very solemnly buried, by the Gentry, and Commons of the land,
not without very lively expressions of much dolor, and extraordinary sense,
and feeling of the Nobility, especially of the best affected to the former
government, and wholly misliking the present state of things, together with
the universal condolement of all the said Clergy, and Commons, and generally of
al good men, and above al of the poor; who in his death having lost a common
Parent, and particularly by the despoliation of Elizabeth goods occasioned
thereby, had been left to the mercy of extreme Necessity, made a lamentable
complaint through the whole City, and Country thereabouts, deploring their
miserable and wretched state, and not sparing in the bitterness of their
anguishes to let fall murmures, and bitter words against the new Prince, and his
mercylesse dealing with Elizabeth their tender Mother.

Whereupon the B^rons and Knights aforesaid and some other of the chiefest note
amongst them with one accord assembled themselves in a mild and peaceable
manner, to negotiate with the Prince touching the common aggreeuance of al,
through his unjust usurpation of the Princess Elizabeth's right, and that of
her Children; and especialy for his inhumane and savage proceedings with her,
against al right; equity, and Laws, both humane and divine. The principal
amongst these friends of Elizabeth, were Rodolph, Ludolph, Haruing, and
Gualter: who finding a fair occasion and opportunity, went confidently to the
Prince, where Rodolph as the chiefest of them, and the best spoken, after the
accustomed salutations used, said thus unto him.

May it please your Excellence, what sinister same is this, which since our
arriual hither, has landed in our ears. Are these the courtesies and thanks
you yield to your deceased Brother, that most renowned Prince of happy memory;
so to thrust his Spouse and most innocent Children out of al, and force them to
go from door to door? Oh unhappy man, a blot and dishonor to your house, to
commit so foul a fact: (I say) so foul, which so long as you live shall live,
with you, and after your death shall be an endless and perpetual obloquy to
you, and even wound your conscience for ever as well in this world as in the
next. Do you begin thus young so injuriously to Violate al Laws, both Civil,
Moral, and Natural, and perticularly the Laws of Christian Charity, and common
hospitality? Tell me I pray by the immortal God who sees and beholds al things:
what could a silly Woman full of peace and piety offend you, that so against al
justice and right of Nature, without any cause at al, you should thrust her out
of al her Goods, and not contented therewith, deal so inhumanely with those
Princely Innocents, as to engage them also, so young, and tender, in the like
calamityes with her. Whereas if had you no bowels of Mercy, toward your own
blood, yet might you at least have had some compassion on the tenderness of
their years, unmeet as yet to suffer such iniuryes.

But yet ( Sir) thus much I must confess, I understand that you your self are
not altogether in the fault, whom we know to have been bred and endued with a
milder, and more generous disposition, but rather the lewd, and ungodly Council
about you, who having impiously abandoned al piety and goodness, have labored
to entangle you likewise in their wickedness, and seeking to make you degenerate
from your own blood, have first endeavored to dispoyle you of al feeling of
common sense. Pardon me I pray, most noble Prince, if I speak with more
vehemence, and boldness then becomes me: for I cannot flatter nor sooth up
Princes in their humors, but must sweetly put them in mind of their duties
when they seem to swerve; and tax and vprayd the vices which I note in others.
You have been hitherto abused with the venomous perswations of the maleuolous:
Now follow my council then, and correspond with the Votes and desires of al
these Gentlemen here, who wish the increase of your honor, and reputation. Put
Elizabeth entirely into her state, and dignity again, and I will undertake she
shall be reconciled unto you, and return to the ancient freindship again with
you, as no such thing had ever been, and such capitulations, and conditions
shall be had between you, as greatly shall redound to your honor, and the
greater profit and advancement of all yours.

Thus spoke the stout and valorous Champion of Elizabeth, as ready to enter
into the marshall lists in her behalf, as to plead so like an Advocate her
cause, in whom was no less fortitude and magnanimity to go through an
enterprise, then sagacity and discretion to contriue the same. His valor and
hear of courage, made him not precipitous a whit to attempt any thing
unadvisedly, but gave him force and vigor to atchieue what soever he had
sagely premeditated before. He was no less rich and potent, then stout and
prudent: all which so concurring in one man, gave a powerful and efficacious
energy to his speech. Wherefore the Prince, besides the pregnant and conuincing
reasons he gave, being moved not a little with the authority of the man;
relented somewhat, and anon surrendered the Citadell of his heart, wholely into
the power and disposition of the Baron: the rest of the Lords rejoicing the
while, to behold so great a change and alteration in him. For his eyes now
standing all in tears, his lips being full of lenitiues and sugared words, he
now desired nothing more then to have his hands appeate as effectual in works.
And therefore immediately offered to Elizabeth, not only her proper demeanes of
Dowry and other Viduall rights belonging to her, but even likewise the
government of the state as she had before.

These news were almost as soon brought to the ears of the virtuous
Elizabeth, as uttered from the mouth of the Prince, so joyful they were all,
to hear them so ingenuously to proceed from so franck and liberal a heart.
Only Elizabeth when she heard the same, most heartily answered, she would by no
means yield her assent to take the government of Thuringia upon her, or to
charge her weak shoulders with so insupportable a burden; and that if it
pleased the Prince to restore her dowry again and other rights belonging to
it, it was al she desired, that she might use them for her own salvation, and
the behoof and benefit of her hushands soul: and as for the government she
regarded it not, but left it wholely to their dispose.

Hereupon they carried her with a great train into her ancient Castle again,
where she lived before, and whence she had been injuriously expelled. And
Henry thenceforth regarded her as a great Lady and Princess, desiring
obsequiously as it were in all things to accomplish what she required; she no
sooner intimated her pleasure in any thing, but he was ready to see it
executed to the full, and especialy he besought her at least, to use the marks,
and ornaments in use with Princesses like her self. Who would have thought now
but this Lady would have taken some complacence at this happy return into her
own again, and howbeyt to be eased of the burden of the government she might
refuse indeed the charge; yet for the rest which she well, and lawfully might
enjoy without dommage, and prejudice of her religious purposes, to leave so
merely for the love of Poverty was an act indeed of heroical fortitude.

For lo the Servant of God, remaining thus for some days in her said Palace,
re-installed and re-invested again in all that belonged thereto, fearing least
perhaps through abundance of al daynties, delicious fare, pomp, attendancyes,
and worldly glory, wherewith she was now entreated, she might come to loose in
a moment the divine grace, wherewith she had hitherto been copiously endued,
she refused wholly those special cherishments they gave her, and freely and
voluntarily left that delicious and dayntie life, and immediately betook her
self, to an humble Cottage thereby, with intention to live and persevere in
that manner of life now of her own election, which of force heretofore she was
feign to lead: and this for the love of her Savior JESUS CHRIST her heavenly
Spouse.

HOW THE POPE TOOK notice of Elizabeth's Sanctity, and received her into his
protection: and how she made her profession of the Third Order of Saint
Francis. CHAP. IX.
AS the wisdom of this world, is a mere folly in the sight of God, and his
blessed Angels and Saints in heaven: soe^rue wisdom to sensual men is
indeed, a rock of scandal, and block for every one to humble at; they make a
wonder of all those things which they cannot understand, because they being
carnal and sensually given, perceive not the things which are of God. Hence it
is, that Elizabeth embracing the folly of the Cross, as worldlings account of
it, was not only condemned by her ancient ill Willers, for superstitious,
hippocriticall, and a mere dissembler; but even her best friends, and such as
hitherto had stood most for her, began to dis-esteeme her by little and little,
till she lost them quite, holding it a madness in her, so in the flower of her
youth, now they had procured her to be restored to her former dignity and
estate, to disclayme from it of her own accord, and so much to neglect her
self, and contemn the world as she did by that act of renunciation which she
made, especially when they saw her to respect Poverty so much, as to prefer
it far before all the honors, riches, and delights of the world, and to
prise Devotion before the Court, and the delights thereof: so as they now
could hardly look on her with an equal eye. But the Servant of Christ, upon
the warrant and testimony of a good conscience, knowing she did it for the love
of her dear Savior, set light by all, and endured all their affronts,
scorns, and reproaches, with such patience and constancy, as she rejoiced not
a little to be able to suffer any thing for the love of him, Who had vouchsafed
her the favor to suffer: Who as she was now grown a wondering stock to the
world, and by the foolish followers thereof, adjudged and held as a mere
distracted Woman, for those her extrauagancyes, (as they took them) to fly
industriously, what they al ambitiously sought for and so eagrely aimed at; as
honor pleasure, preferment, and the like; utterly refusing the Regency of
those estates, with the liberty, delights, and pompes of the Court, abandoning
all in pursuit of Poverty, so greatly in contempt with them. So was she, in
another sense as much admired and beloved of the pious, just, and all good
people, for a mirror and pattern of all virtues. So as now, the Pope at that
time being Gregory, having heard the fame of her excellent virtues, took
especial notice of her, and for her better encouragement therein, admitted her
as his Daughter into the protection of the Sea Apostolic, and understanding
how that famous Conrad the venerable Priest, had some practice and dealing with
her heretofore in spiritual matters, he recommended her more over particularly
by letters unto him, to have more special care then ordinary of her, in
guiding her in the way of perfection: pursuing the pious and religious
inclination he found in her to the utmost scope and extent she was capable of;
sending her withal in the said Letters, Which purposely he was to show unto
her, most grave and holy admonitions and words of exceeding comfort,
instructing her by the example of the blessed Saints, to the practice of
Patience, Chastity, and perseverance in all virtues, giving her to Understand,
there was noe other way to Heaven, but that which Christ, with all his Saints
had trod before her, and as it were even leuelled for her, with continual
pains, invincible labors, and infatigable trauaills: assuring her moreover,
he would not forsake her, but ever esteem her as his dear Child and loving
Daughter, if she went forward and proceeded with constancy in the course so
happily begun.

These letters, you may imagine were accordingly showed by Conrad, to the
virtuous Elizabeth, and gave her incredible content, to understand, his
Holiness, the Vicar of Christ, should take so especial a note and regard of
her, and therefore now more then ever, determined to advance her self what
possibly she might, in the way of perfection: beseeching Conrad, according to
the Popes instruction, to take a more special account of her, then hitherto he
had done, giving him from thenceforth absolute power of her. Which accordingly
he accepted, and she thereupon made a surrender of her self into his hands, to
be wholly guided by him, submitting her self to a punctual obedience to him in
all things, for her greater merit.

The Father then with a grave and venerable aspect, made a large discourse unto
her; unfolding many Texts of scripture, and alleging for her comfort, many
testimonies and examples of Saints in approbation of the act she had done, in
making a voluntary Oblation of her self, into his hands, by so free a Donation
and entire surrender of her self; and encouraged her also, to a contempt of the
world, chastizement of the flesh, and to an utter divorce and full renunciation
of all transitory things, in affect at least, though not in effect for special
ends.

This Servant of God was so enflamed with these sweet speeches of her Master,
as she was now more set on fire then ever, so as she would needs arrive at
once to the utmost perfection of Poverty and humility: and for this end
entreated her Master, she might be suffered to beg her living from door to
door; but the holy man by noe means would condescend thereto, saying. It was
not convenient that a Princess of that blood, and so tender and delicate of
Complexion, should go up and down the streets a begging. And for that she
persisted still in her suite with many tears, he chid her for it, saying:
where was her Obedience now, had she so soon forgot her holy purpose? that
Obedience was a Sacrifice, and little less then a kind of Martyrdom; and that
if aimed at perfection, there was noe other way, more secure, more compendious,
and sublime then to yield up her self, in a whole and entire holocaust, by a
perfect abnegation of her Will in all things, through a voluntary obedience,
and a most exact accomplishment of her Vow. Whereupon she passed noe further
with her humble suit.

But yet was not a little troubled that she might not be suffered to renounce
and abandon all at once protesting privately to her Mayds in familiar discourse
with them, that she accounted the World as mere dung, and had never heretofore
affected wealth or worldly riches half so much, as now she had a loathing, not
only of the property and dominion over them, but even the use and handling of
them, even for the use of others, if she might have her will; but my Master
(she would say) will have it otherwise, and so will I to, since he will have
it so. And for her Children, she professed more then once, that she loved them
with the same affection she loved others, since she had now commended them to
God, and left them to his heavenly protection. And finally for the pure love of
God, that she willingly endured all the slanders and contumelyes of the
envious, and the reproachful mocks and scoffs, abstracting from their sins
who so freely and prodigally brake them on her, she both desired them, and
delighted and gloried in them, as the Apostle in his infirmityes.

Wherefore seeing her former design took noe better effect; she so submitted
her will to the necessity of obedience, in that point of not begging from door
to door, as she thought her self as yet left free in the other; to dispoyle
her self at least of all dominion or power in what she had assigned for her
dowry, and other Viduall rights allotted by the Prince in the agreement made
between them, thinking it enough to content her self, with the use only of
what should be necessary for her, from the said rents. And therefore she
watched but occasion to abandon such property and dominion in them, to follow
as she desired evangelical Poverty, and the example of her dear Savior, the
nearest she could possibly. When presently this occasion was offered.

It was then the holy Week, when upon Good Friday she went with her Master,
together with her Mayds to the Monastery of Saint Frauncis, to be present at
the Ceremonies, and to hear the Sermon of the Passion on that day. After
which, the solemnityes ended, they retired themselves, to a certain Chapel
of the said Monastery, for their particular devotions, where fynding the Altar
dispoyled likewise of all the ornaments, as in all other places uses to be on
the same day: Upon the sudden in a fervor, she went to the said Altar, and
laying her hand thereon, with a solemn Vow made her self formally a Nun of
the Third Order of Saint Frauncis of the Penitents, wherein she renounced her
Parents, her Children, and al her friends with the pomps and Vanities of the
world; and finally her proper Will, and was even about (and certainly had
effected it) to have renounced the property and dominion also of all her
terrene possessions; If the Reverend Father Conrad at hand, with his sage
wisdom, and sweet and apt words, had not hindered, and suddenly interrupted
her speech, commanding her to stay there, and to pass noe further in her Vow;
saying, she had promised enough, that first it were fit to put in practice what
she had already taken in hand, ere she rashly adventured on the rest, without
sufficient advice and mature deliberation. The servant of God was immediately
checked herewith, and very willingly obayed her Master, in a matter very
mainely repugnant to her inclination, but not her will, since now her will was
grown to be wholly the same with that of his. Yet fearing she had done against
the former Vow of Obedience, made unto him, in offering to do a thing contrary
to his lyking, she craved pardon for it. Beseeching him she might presently
take the secret habit belonging to the said Third Order, from the hands of the
Guardian there present, and make her absolute profession thereof, in all their
sights: and further for a more assurance on her part, desired she might
likewise renew her particular Vow of Obedience to him, Which was granted.

HOW ELIZABETH BVILT her self a poor Cottage, while her house was building in
the City: and what a holy life she led afterward. CHAP. X.
SPiritual Children are to observe three things, with their Superiors, and
spiritual guides of their soul. First to love them truly indeed as Fathers,
and not to judge their works, but rather if their Superiors, have any
appearance of evil in them, they are to cover them with love, and to seek
reasons to excuse them. They are also to have compassion on them, for the
pains they take in guiding them, in the way of perfection: and continually to
implore at the hands of God, to afford them light, and grace, to govern, and
direct them to the greater glory, and honor of his divine Majesty, and the
good, and behoof of their Subjects. Secondly, to reverence them as Fathers,
who are in the place of Jesus Christ, and are his Vicars as it were, and
Vicegerents on earth. The third, is to obey him in all things, and by how much
the thing commanded be diametrically opposite to proper will, so much the more
is he to enforce, and to use violence with himself, to effectuate the same,
understanding the great merit which comes thereof. And especially to observe
these seven conditions of perfect Obedience. The first, is to obey with great
promptnes, and readynes. Secondly, with a good will. Thirdly, simply, blindly,
and without reply. The fourth, without sadness, or rather with mirth, and very
chearefuly. The fifth, with fortitude, and without impatience. The sixth with
perseverance. And the seventh, and last, with humility.

These things this great Servant of God observed very punctualy toward her
Superior, whom she had formerly chosen, and whom his Holiness had now
especially recommended to her, and lastly, whom she her self had accepted by a
formal Vow on that behalf for her spiritual guide. Hence it was, that loving
her Master dearly, and reuerencing him so highly as she did; being desirous
to be trained up, and practiced in holy Obedience, which she could not well
exercise in his absence from her. He then having urgent, and necessary
occasion to reside at Marpurge a chief City in Hassia, the holy Elizabeth by
no means would stay behind, but follow him to the same City. Where being
arrived, fynding the ancient enmity (as yet) not quenched which had
universally, and most injuriously been conceived every where against her: And
having no house there as yet convenient for her, she left the Town for a while
to live in the Country near at hand, giving order to have one built there
according to her mind. And for that, she would not be troublesome to any the
while, she settled her self in the ruins of an old Palace thereby. Where
fynding the shaft or tunnel of the chimney lying open to the foresaid Palace
yard, she caused certain prongs to be pitched some distance from the wall of
the said chimney, and a sorry beam to be laid a cross, from thence she raised
very slender poles insteede of rafters, to sustain the reeds, thatch, and
boughs she intended to lay upon them, which she did as well as she could, and so
built her a house, such as it was. Where so long as she made her aboade, we may
imagine the many incommodityes she suffered: partly by the smoke, partly by
the heats, and sometimes again by the wynd, and rain; where hardly blew any
great blast but put her in fear of being vnhowsed: al which discommodityes she
chearefuly endured, still praising and magnifying God for all.

In this mean while was her house finished in the City with more speed then
expenses, when presently she returned thither: Where she began afresh to serve
God in all holiness of life; more like an Angel in Paradise, then a Nouice in her
new Institute. Whatsoever she heard or saw in any other, she ever would
imagine, they spoke or did them with a good intention, though the contrary
rather appeared, because humane judgments, and suspicions, are easily deceived.
She despised none, nor spoke any thing tending to her own praise to any how
familiar soever with whom she conuersed, not so much as with her own Mayds, in
whom notwithstanding she was very confident; but labored rather to cover, and
hide her virtues from them, then her vices. She listened more willingly to
hear one praised, then to be dispraised never so little. Whenever she spoke,
her words were few, grave, and most commonly of God. When any secular chanced
to speak any vain, and unprofitable thing in her presence, she endeavored to
cut of the discourse, and apply* it to God, or divert the speech some other
way, til at last she had brought it to some pious matter of edification. She
took little care for any thing that happened to her or others, nor would be
troubled for Adversities, or puffed up with any Prosperities whatsoever; she
set light by all things, and praised God in every thing. She shunned al tatlers
as much as might be, as holding it better to hold her peace, then to speak
sometimes, though to the purpose, out of a love she had to religious silence.

If she noted any thing in an other which seemed not well, she would consider
with her self, whether she were not subject to the same vice; if she were, she
would be confounded thereat, and if otherwise, give thanks unto God for it, and
crave to be delivered from it: whereby each thing became as a glass unto her.
She would not pertinaciously affirm or deny any thing, but al her
affirmations, and denyals were as prudent doubts. She kept her self from al
manner of laughing, or even from smiling, unless very seldom on good occasions,
and that with exceeding modesty, more like a forced, and feigned smile then open
laughter. Finally al her words, and speeches were such as caused no doubts,
suspicions, or iealousyes in any that heard them, but were always very plain,
and simple. So much for her words, and Tongue, the most difficult instrument
of the rest to be well ordered, and governed. And now for her actions, and
works of her hands.

She was very hospitable, and charitable to the poor, now more then ever, as
she arrived to a greater perfection, and knowledge, and consequently a more
ardent love of God, whom she cheifely regarded in her Neighbor, and for whose
sake she respected him wholly. She often visited the hospital, which she had
formerly built at her own cost, still cherishing the members of Christ, with all
the comfort she was able to affoard them. And how beyt, she gave alms in
common to the poor, according to her ability, yet she made particular choice
besides, to place in her hospitals such, as either excelled in the exercize of
the Christian Religion, or else were the most infirm, and disabled of the rest.
And many times she invited to her own table the most impotent, and miserable
wretches of al, bidding them heartily welcome, and served them likely from her
own trencher, and if any thing were more dainety, and choice then other, she
would be sure to share, and divide it amongst them, wherein she esteemed she
fed Christ; and therefore no marvel she was so respectful, and tender of them.

Now then the venerable Conrad seeing her manner, how she entertained such so
familiarly to her own Table, considering the dignity of her person, esteemed
it unfitting; saying it was too much rusticity in her to do so, and that better
it were to recommend such offices to others in her own name, which would be
as acceptable to them, and perhaps more, while they could not be so free with
her, as with others. Wherefore it were much fitter for her to forbear from
them, and to addict her self unto more solid virtues which had not so much of
the extraordinary, and a kind of dangerous singularity in them. Whereat the
reverent Matron besought pardon of him, if she herein had done amiss,
protesting indeed for her part, she found no such inconvenience therein of
self complacence, vanity, and the like; but a great deal of submission, and
lowlynes of heart, in that rather then any other ways, and for any difficulty
or auersion therein, she found none, nor the company of such, gave her any
offense at al, but a great deal of sweetness which he might deprive her of, if
it pleased him, and she would obey, affirming that her scope therein was, but to
mortify her self, and to satisfy for her too much curiosity, nicenes, and
dainetynes in those very things in her former life as holding that Evils were
best cured by their contraryes. Whereat her Master was silent, and thereby
tacitly licenced her to do what she would, since therein be noted the Unction
of the Holy Ghost to work in her, and that it were no discretion for him to
debar her thereof. But intended to prove her in some other things for her
greater spiritual advancement.

HOW CONRAD DISMISsed two of Elizabeth's chiefest Mayds: and how strict a life
she led in extreme poverty. CHAP. XI.
TRue it is, that our perfection, consists not essentially in mortification,
but in Charity rather, and in the ardent love of God, and to say true, a Man is
so much the more perfect, as he is more united with God through love. For even
as a stone remaining aloft, in taking the impediments away which hold it there,
against its natural inclination, presently hyes to the earth its proper
center: so our soul being a spiritual substance, and created for God, in
taking away the letts and impediments of disordinate appetites, and evil
inclinations, which dispose and incline it to things beneath, being presently
assisted by divine grace, goes directly to God as to her Center, and last end,
and through love embraces him, and unites her self with him. My weight is my
love, thither am I swayed whithersoeuer I am carried. That which is the weight,
in the elements, and natural bodies, is Love in rational creatures, and as
natural things do move downwards according to the weight they have: So the
reasonable Creatures are moved according to the love which predominates, and
swayes in them: because indeed that same is the weight that belonges unto
them. Now then if the love of things beneath predominates in us, and
particularly the appetite to private familiarity sway with us, our motions, and
desires shall be sensual, and enclining to the earth: But if we untie our
selves through mortificatio^ from the love of all those sensual things, the
love of the Creator shall rule in us, and that shall be our weight, and our
heart shall presently fly unto God with more lightness and agility then a stone
to its center.

Wherefore like a wise and discrete man, perceiving how Elizabeth with all her
forces and endeauours, labored to attain to the highest pitch of all
perfection, and that especially by the works of charity; thought himself to
be strictly bound in conscience, to have an especial care to promote such a
subject, the best he could, to some higher point of perfection, then he had
hitherto done, as conceiving now more highly then ever of her greater capacity
and longer extent in spiritual matters, intending on his part, that nothing
should be wanting to further the same, nor any impediment be put that might any
ways hinder greater advancement in spirit. While Conrad was in this serious
deliberation with himself, contriuing what was fit to be done, he bethought him
of a certain thing, expedient to be practiced with her for that end: and that
was this.

His long experience now by this time, in guiding of souls, had let him see
how great a hinderance it was in spiritual warfare, even in the choysests
spirits and best refined, to have any private affections to any friend or
acquaintance soever, not only in worldly conuersations, which infaillibly
destroys the spirit quite, but even in things directly spiritual, and wholly
te^ding to heavenly matters. And therefore considering the great love and
affection which passed between Elizabeth and two of her Maids above the rest,
namely Isentrude and Guta, he thought it good to send for them both, and
fairly deal with them about their remove from their Lady for certain reasons
of his, which he presumed they would not disallow of, if it were convenient
they should be acquainted therewith: in the mean time he wished them to submit
their wills and judgments thereunto, and they should be otherwise provided for.
The sober and discreet Maids they had likewise, together with their Lady, as
he knew, given up themselves to his dispose, so as there remained noe more for
them to effect his will, then to know his pleasure. That said, and they
departed; he calls for Elizabeth her self, and told her his mind very plainly,
without any manner of circumlocutions or ambages at all, that his pleasure was,
for some reasons which she was not to examine, or enter into, to dismiss
presently two of her mayds: Who supposing it had been to ease her of her
charge of some that might seem to him supers^ous, and might well be spared;
replied: She was ready to obey, but feign would know who they were and
understanding, that Guta, and Isentrude were they, her color altered alitle
to and fro, and interchangeably went and came, and presently again having
gathered, her spirits together, with a cheereful and serene countenance, gave
her consent, to have the divorce effected out of hand, since it was his
pleasure. They were therefore immediately sent for in, to come before them, to
whom Conrad very peremptorily delivered the sentence of their separations from
their Lady and Mistress, not without the tears and te^dernes of al parties.
For though the superior parts were assigned in all, yet were not the inferior
so composed, as not to discover their imbecillityes, save only Elizabeth soon
recollected her self again, leaving her Maids disconsolate, to see themselves
deprived of the Solace they were wont to receive in her angelical company and
religious conversation. For she well considered with her self, that Obedience
consisted not in the exterior execution only of the thing commanded, but in
the conformity also of the will and Judgment, with that which the Superior
wills and thinks fitting, holding the foundation of Obedience to be a firm
faith that the Superior is ruled and governed by God in what he commands,
since he is in the place of God, and our savior Christ says: who hears you,
hears me: and therefore is to be obayed in every thing wherein noe sine
appears. She remembered the saying of her Master at other times, that a true
obedient Child should carry himself as a dead body which has neither
Understanding nor will* Like a Crucifix which suffers i^ self to be moved
either this way or that way, without any difficulty at all, and considered
besides how this kind of Blind Obedience, so much recommended by Saints,
co^sisted in this; that a man accomplish what he is commanded to do, for the
reason only that obedience co^maunds and for that the Superior stands in the
place of God, without any other reason or discourse at all. And that, even as
in matters of faith, one yields and submittes himself for this cause only, that
God reueales, and delivers what is commended to be believed, and for the only
authority of God, which is the highest truth: So likewise one obayes and
eff^cts what the superious commands for this only reason, that it is the
commands of the Superior, who is in the place of God, and that to obey him is
to obey God, nor obayes he for any other reason. For which cause, the same is
called a Blind obedience, as the aforesaid faith is called Blind. Thus
discoursed the holy Matron within her self upon the act of Obedience which her
Master so put her to; Which truly bred a most singular effect in her. For
being thus bereft of the comfort she formerly took in the sweet familiarity
of those two Maids, so grateful to her, the river as it were so dammed up on
every side with churlish banckes, made the waters of spiritual graces to
abound more in her, and to mount up to heaven with more facility. For as a pipe
or Conduite which leakes in many places at once, discharges less waters into
the Cesterne then otherwise it would; Which being stopped, delivers them forth
with a greater abundance: So needs must the Soul being a copious Cesterne
of heavenly graces, appear to be less redundant, and to yield fewers acts of
love and charity to God, by how much more are the leakes of terren love it is
affected with. Which being here stopped in the Servant of Christ, made her to
spring up so high to so heroical acts of eminent Virtues, as she did here
upon.

For after this, living in great poverty with her other Maids, her food but
lettice and other hea^bes, commonly sod in fair Water, through her extreme
love of Poverty without any Oil or butter, or so much as Vinegar or Salt,
which sometimes through her great neglect of such things, would be, as they
say burnt too; for which fault being sometimes her own Cook, she disdayned
not to be rebuked of her own Maids, and many times when she lighted on a
morsel better then ordinary, she would spare from her self, and deprive her
self thereof, to impart to the poor which were in the house with her. She
received at the hands of her Master a habit made of the coursest cloth,
without any other dye then the natural tincture, and a short cloak
exceedingly patched with diverse colors, which cloak because it was held too
short for her gravity, was afterward lengthned with an other piece of a
differente color. Whenever she had necessity, as sometimes she had to mend
her own clothes, she was so unskillful in that art, as she might be said
rather to mar then to amend awhit. She was feign to spinne wool, for want of
skill to handle flax, wherewith she seemed to gain her living which was fare
more grateful to her, then all the pleasures of Princes: and to this kind of
work, she applied her self so earnestly as that being sickly, and keeping her
Bed, she would have the rock and distaffe in her hand to spinne with, when she
could hardly lift up her head, which if her Maids, as sometimes they would,
had snatched out of her hands, to avoid Idleness she would prepare and dress
the same with Garding or the like, and spinne it afterward in better health,
and being sorupulous, would abate some part of the price she was to have, as
fearing and mistrusting her work deser^ed not so much, so done in sickness.
Nor may we think she did these things out of a base and dejected mind: for
while she was thus lowly spinning in the Chimney Corner, her mind would be
co^templating most high and sublime points, of the huswiuery our Lady used in
her humble Nazareth, What Joseph did the while she was spinning, and what the
Infant Jesus did, when they both were so busily employed. She would meditate
how unworthy she was to have dressed up our Ladies work for her, how gladly
she would have carded or reeled for her, and a thousand such conceits she
reuolued in mind, and yet her hands, her head, and body were as busy, as she
had minded naught, but what she was doing. And though in presence she enjoyed
the company of her Maids here beneath, yet in spirit her whole conversation
was with the Angels above.

A CERT AINE NOBLEM AN of Hungary endeauours in vain to persuade Elizabeth to
return with him to her Father, and what acts of humility she showed. CHAP. XII.
SVch is the perverse condition of some wordly men, that having Children, and
consequently being Parents only, as touching the extraction they received from
them, and not having any power over the souls of their Children, being
immediately created of God, and infused into the organized body, they take upon
them (I know not how) and usurp a kind of tyra^nical power over them,
diuerting them too often from virtuous courses, when they are well given, and
religiously disposed. Pressing them over hardly with the fourth precept of the
decalogue of honoring Parents. For every one is free in what Exodus 2^ 12.
concerns the choice of a state of life; nor may the Parents force the Son
or Daughter to match against their likings; nor does Parental power extend so
far. And though we Owe unto Parents much, for giving us these bodies which we
take from them; Yet we owe more unto God, who has given us also these very
bodies in a higher nature; and for our souls, himself has given them us
alone. God, is Father of Body, and Spirit both; they Parents of the Body only;
God for our own profit, and salvation becomes our Father; and they for their
honors sake, their inheritances, and perpetuityes on earth, to lead us often
into hell with them. Wherefore in the affayre of our salvation there is no duty
neither with Father or Mother nor other Parents, while Christ says, we are
to reject, and refuse them al in this case.

Hence it was, that Elizabeth being well instructed in either duties, could
answer well to a certain Count, who in behalf of her Father, came from
Hungary to visit her where she remained in Hass^a. Who fynding her in that
state we mentioned above, and half besides himself to behold such a spectacle,
could hardly believe it was she, but being struck with astonishment,
endeavored with all the rhetorique he had, to diswade from those courses, so
unfit (as he said,) and misbeseeming her state, and dignity, as the Widow of
such a Prince as Lewys was, and Daughter of so great a Monarke, as his Master:
Telling her that he was sent a purpose to bring her into Hungary, where she
should live according to her dignity, and not be forced to live in obscurity,
in that vile, and abject manner, assuring her besides, that her tender Father
now hold no longer, hearing in what extremity she was, and therefore by all
means, she was to resolve upon the matter, and to prepare for the journey
since he was sent to her a purpose to bring her to him. Whereto she answered,
her state, and manner of life, she hoped, did noe ways derogate from a
Christian Woman, and so long, One had not degenerated awhit, or wro^ged her
Family from whence she came, and therefore she entreated him, he would be
pleased to satisfy her Father, that though otherwise she were the wredchedst
sinner on earth, yet for her duty toward him, she found not her conscience
touched with the least remorse, for any disparagement of his house or family
that she had incurred in harkening to the vocation of her heavenly Father who
had called her to that state, and manner of life. The Count replied, the state,
and Nobility of Princes, was different from that of others, and how it was each
thing should be rankt in its order, according to the dignity thereof, and where
the harmony of Order was once broken, there could be no less then a mere
confusion in things. That those courser habits, which she wore, became her il;
that so much maceration of her body had greatly decayed her goodly complexion,
which she was bound to cherish, to the honor of the Creator, and not so
injuriously to deface the workmanship of his hands with such excesses as she
used. He said besides, that if the state of the Continent be holy, the
married state is likewise, to such as holily embrace it. And that S. Anthony
from the desert, and S. Francis from his Cel was conveyed to heaven: so
likewise, with the cares of royalty S. Lewis most gloriously mounted thither.
And if the affairs, and traffiques of the world be so great an impediment to
attain to heaven; What hindered S. Maurice in the libertynes, and negotiations
of war: and SS. Cosmas and Damianus in their practizes of Phisique, and a
number of other holy souls in other professions, you will think very full of
distractions, but indeed most nearly conjoined with God in that state, and
why might not she returning to her Father in Hungary, and restored to her
former dignityes, betake her self to a second match, such as he shall easily
find out for her, and live as happily, and securely in that state as she had
done in her husbands life, through her great liberality to the poor,
perseuering in such works as she formerly had practiced during his life, and
gain as great a place in heaven? Alleging also, the known example of the
Abbot Paphnutius, Who having once demanded of God whom he resembled nearest in
this life, learned diverse times from the mouth of an Angel, that a certain
Player of the flute, and a Merchant of Alexandrie were his equal in merits. So
that if they in these exercizes which are accompanied with so many
disstractions have been able to attain to such a degree of perfection, What
great disturbance is it, trow you, should she find in such a state as would
better agree with her calling, and condition, then that which now she had
undertaken.

Thus spent this faithful Ambassador his breath in vain, prevailing no more
with this constant heart; then the winds and waves of the impe tuous seas are
able to move a huge rock; and therefore was dispatched by her, full of wonder,
and astomishme^t to hear her admirable wisdom, and to note her discretion in
giving answer to all this, which she did so iudicially, and piously to every
point, as he now began to think she had great reason of her side, and that his
agreements on the contrary were but frivolous, and to no purpose: as he
affirmed at his return, persuading not only her Royal Father, but all the Court
of Hungary to conceive most highly of her courses, so as her Father began now
to promise to his house more honor to redound to it by such a Daughter, then
heretofore he had ever surmized dishonor.

In the mean while, Elizabeth now delivered of the earnest importunityes of
the solicitous Ambassador, considering with what industry, and diligence those
of the world endeavor to go forward, and advance themselves more, and more,
and to make themselves more excellent in any manner of profession as of
Learning, Arms, or the like, and how a rich man the more he has, the more he
couets to have, and labors more to make his gain, and all for frail and
transitory goods: she bethought her self how much rather she should addict her
self to the purchase of celestial and eternal goods: And therefore knowing of
what avail the Works of Charity were, and especially of Humility: She now
applied her self to acts of humiliation more then ever. And her singular
humility, and familiarity was such with her Maids at home, as she made her
self their equal at least, if not inferior, so as to lay aside the name of
Lady or Mistress, she would only be called by them by her proper name, and
that as familiarly as, they use to style it.

Finally Causing them to sit down with her at the same table, she would be
their Cook sometimes in her turn, and eat together of the same dish with
them. Which humility of hers, when one of her Maids admiring, said: Good
Woman you little regard, it seems, our danger here, while seeking to increase
your own merits, you put us in hazard to be easily tempted, with proud
cogitations by being made so familiar with you, and used as yous equals,
Whereby we may loose the fruit of our conversation with you. Whereto Elizabeth
replied. Why Daughter if it trouble thee so to sit by me at the same Table,
thon shall eat, and take thy meat from my Lap, and made her so to do in good
earnest. This her humility and Mildenes* of behavior, was likewise adorned
with a wondrous gracious kind of speech, Which she always practiced among her
Maids. And as she had a strange, and extraordinary Care, that noe words of
vanity should come from them, or peevish or distastful speech, be vtered by
them in her presence against each other, as with the best disposed will happen
now, and then, either by words, signs, or otherwise, she would readily, and
handsomely check them for it in a very good manner* saying: Where is our Lord
now Sisters, who promised assuredly to be present with his Servants whenever
they talked of him: Her sharpenes was mixed with such sweetness, that as she
would dissemble and wink at noe faults: so she was not austere in punnishing
any, While her familiarity caused not impunity, nor her rebukes carried any
acerbity with them.

THE THIRD BOOK.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF S. ELIZABETH.
Of the exceeding Charity of S. Elizabeth toward her Neighbor, especially the
sick: With her great humility. CHAP. I.
SEEING we are al pertakers of the self same nature, and every living
creature, is apt to love and affect another like to it self, and that Man
especially is borne without weapons or corporal defense, as other creatures
are, as being wholly made for peace and concord: it follows by consequence how
greatly we stand in need of each other, and this same, so ordained of God,
for a stricter bond of mutual Charity and assistance one of another. For while
one loves or hates his neighbor, he loves or hates the Image of God, framed by
his own hand. Noe maruaille then, if Elizabeth considering these things, (as
doubtless she did,) was found to be so charitable toward the poor upon al
occasions, in whom she considered the said Image of God, to remain so lively
imprinted, as it were in the nature of Man. But then considering him again, as
redeemed by the precious Blood of our Savior Christ, though otherwise he had
had no such dignity at al, before in his Creation, she well understood the
Ransom had been able it self to have made him far more precious ^en heaven
and earth; and consecuently she labored by all means to ^leiue these Images of
God, so pre^ous, and soto be valued for either ^tles. And she wisely pondered
^ithal, what good soever was found (...) her Neighbor, was the goods ^f God,
and common to al; and what ^uil, a common calamity and detri^ent to al; and
that, as we are al members, as it were, of the same body; she considered how
careful we ought to ^ee, to succor and releive one another; ^s we see in the
body of a man, how sensible are all the members of the hurt ^r dommage of any
particular one.

Besides, these common inducements to move her unto Charity, toward the needy
and afflicted neighbor; she would likewise help and excite her self thereunto,
by this special reason. That even those wh^m she beheld to be in great
extreamityes, either of poverty, sickness, or greiuous infirmityes, she might
happily one day see and observe to be heirs of God, and coheyres of Christ
resplendent as the Sun, in the kingdom of their heavenly Father, Citizens
among the Saints, and Dearest to God, and might behold there, as so many
Aultars of incense, as so many Kings of glory, and so many Organs to praise
and exalt the most holy Trinity.

The deep apprehension no doubt of these things, had bred that enflamed
Charity she felt in her self, in relieuing, assisting, and comforting her
Neighbor in all distresses. This made her, when she went to visit the poor, in
their own howses, (as often she did;) to be always attended by one or other,
to carry along with her sundry sorts of al kind of provisions, as meat,
drink, and clothes for the purpose, not omitting the while, fit medecins for
the sick, as she understood they were in need; and would minister to them with
her own hands, and deal and distribute to the poor, what necessary things
she had brought with her, and accordingly examine their apparel and other
necessaryes, for their howses, as bedds, sheets, couerlets, and blanckets, and
ever supply what was wanting, if she had wherewithal; and if she had it not,
she would provide it for them, by selling her rings of gold, her bracelets, and
jewels, which still she had for the same purpose; so as she was forced at last
to sell with much disadvantage, certain apparel she wore in former times, as
yet left her, to furnish them with things which she held to be simply needeful
for them.

Amid these spoils which she made so of her own goods, she being now
exhausted, not having wherewith to ful-fil the suite and humble request of a
poor man, who begged but a sorry fish at her hands, on a certain day of
abstinence; she made her prayer to Christ very anxiously for him; when arising
from prayer, whether it were that she expected what followed, as the fruits and
effect thereof, or that otherwise she had need of some water for some uses of
hers, I cannot say* but she going to the Spring to draw thereof, where no fish
at al could be any ways expected, she fetched up one in her bucket, for the
satisfying of the hunger, or the longing of the poor man: this is certain she
drew up the fish, and giving it to him, sent him away exceedingly well
satisfied. And verily it is thought she had done the like before and after
diverse times, which still for humility she sought to conceal, but could not now
do it in his presence; who doubtless went away satisfied, praising the works of
God, being so miraculously fed through the prayers and merits of Elizabeth, the
great Servant of God.

Her Charity likewise much appeared in a certain difficult thing; for being a
woman of that condition as she was, so delicately bred up, as she had been;
took upon her to tend an Orphan, sick of many irksome and greiuous diseases at
once, as of the palsy, catarrhe, and bloody flux, so as very often in the
night, she was feign to take up the child, in her tender arms, not being
otherwise able to wield it self; and did it with such willingness and alacrity,
as astonished such as were witnesses thereof; and to show that she did it very
freely and willingly indeed; when as after notwithstanding the care she had,
the Child dyed; as if she had lost some notable benefit by its death; she was
not quiet til she had privily taken to her charge, to tend a certain Maid
wholly destitute and forlorn, and sorely infected with a greiuous leaprosy,
whom she served with such Charity, as she not only dressed her meat, made her
bed, and fetched her water to wash her hands, but being so great a personage,
disdayned not to abase her self even to the ground to pull off her hose and
shoes, and the like. Which when the venerable Conrad understood; considering
the loathsommes of that disease, and the daintynes of her complexion, he gave
on the sudden express order, the leaprous Maid should be removed thence, and
the Lady debarred from coming at her, providing otherwise for the party.

Though Elizabeth by some, might well be thought to be thoroughly mortified
herein, to be so peremptorily barred of her will, (as they might imagine) in so
pious a thing, she having as it appeared, so seriously set her mind thereon,
yet in truth it troubled not her awhit, for weighing with herself, that
charitable acts, how great soever, do loose their virtue and efficacy, if they
be not discreet withal, she was satisfied with the will of her Superior, whom
God had appointed over her. For she considered indeed that true Charity
principally required two things: First, not to content our selves with the only
shadow of Charity, which is sweet and tender feeling toward the Neighbor,
but such an effect also, as properly bereaues a man of al self-loue, as not to
seek nor mind any thing but the glory of God, and to ful-fil his blessed will,
And whatsoever any ways befalls him, either interiourly or exteriourly, to
accept from the hand of God, in doing al to his greater glory, and not to seek
what is pleasing to himself, but what is most agreeable to the will of God. The
second is, that howbeyt the Love of God can not be so great, but that still he
is worthy of much greater, yet are the exterior works and practizes thereof,
to be measured with a certain moderation of discretion, least being neglected,
they hurt either our own health, or hinder the edification of our neighbor.
And therefore she wisely considered, there was no greater security herein, then
wholly to stand to the iudgmens of her lawful Superior. Who if he grant and
afford us, to do less then we willingly would do, yet shall a supple and
pliable mind herein, relinquishing its proper will, be a great deal more
grateful to God, then the hardest and most difficult thing that may be
enterprized, without the same refignation.

Yet could not Elizabeth forbear, such was her Charity, to receive a Boy into
her charge, whose head was al become bald, by reason of the S^uruy or Scurfe,
which had ouergrowne yt, whom she out of hand, what with washing, anointing,
and the attendance she gave him cured, or rather with the fervor of her fai^n
procured his recovery from the hands of God* (...) she had none, yet wrought
she ma^y cures, no doubt under the color of some manner of skill at least,
through her charitable diligence doing therewith many admirable things.

And lastly, this excellent Charity of hers, was ever accompanied with
humility, as Sisters hand in hand. For besides her ordinary employments in the
exercize of al virtues: she would often wash the dishes, even out of her tu^n,
with the p^ts and other vessels belonging to the kitchen, sending away her
Mayds many times about other business, that she might more freely attend to her
own humiliatio^, so as often they found her busyed either in wiping them up,
or but newly making an end, to their singular edification, in beholding the
humility of the Servant of God.

HOw ELIZABETH Delivers the soul of the Queen her Mother from Purgatory, with
her prayers only: and likewise procured the vocation of a certain libertine
unto Religion. CHAP. II.
AS it is noe ordinary thing, but wholly miraculous, for souls being departed
this life, to return to this world, from whence they passed so it cannot be
denied, but that sometimes they appear unto us, where, when, and how, through
divine dispensation, the same is permitted unto them. Now for their own
commodity, because thereby they are the more succored by the living when they
are suffered to appear to them; and somtymes for our instruction and profit,
because that in hearing or in seeing them, we are not only the more confirmed
in the faith of the immortallity and resurrection of the dead, but do likewise
receive many other benefits withal: and likely always they give us a faithful
testimony of the providence which our Lord has as well over the living as the
dead. And howbeit, al souls which have left the body have proper power of
their own nature, to move themselves from one place to an other, yet have not
all the license or liberty to use the same, some for being perpetually condemned
to prison in Hell it self, others in Purgatory for a time, in punishment for
sin, though not against their will, which is wholely conformable to God, nor
can the one or other come from thence, without express order from the supreme
Judge of the living and Dead.

Now then it happened in these days, in the night time, while Elizabeth was
settled to sleep, that the Soul of one, of a sudden, appeared to her in her
dream. Which vision how beyt in her sleep, yet appeared it as sensible unto
her imagination, as she had been perfectly awake at noone day, and had seen
an object indeed very subject to the senses; appearing at first in a mourneful
guise, and not manifesting as yet who it was: and after the invocation of the
most holy Trinity, with the sign of the holy Cros^e, she demanding who it
was: The Spirit seemed to answer in her sleep, she was the Queen of Hungary
her Mother, and falling on her knees, besought her most earnestly to have pity
and compassion on her, as soon as might be: Whereupon awaking she immediately
offered up to God her deuout' prayers, not without many tears in behalf of her
Mother, and so laid her down to sleep a second time, and again the same
very soul appeared to her in a glorious manner, and gave her infinite thanks
for her sudden and speedy deliverance, assuring her besides, that her prayers
had so great an energy with them in the ears of the divine Majesty, and were so
graciously efficacious in his sight, as they were available as well for the
living as for the dead: which shortly she found to be true, by her own
experience.

For having now already showed how for^ible and efficacious the prayers of
Elizabeth have been for souls departed. Let us see here how effectual they are
in behoof of the living.

It happened as then the manner was, that diverse Ladies and personages of good
sort; some for devotion, and some for curiosity, and some (no doubt) to carpe
at the manner of her life, came to visit her; such was the fame and opinion
they had of her; she being so rare a pattern of Contempt of the world, and
especially, of voluntary Poverty. Among which, one day, came a certain Lady of
her acquaintance, with a good intention to keep her company, being vshered by
a son of hers, a proper and goodly Gentleman, and who exceedingly set forth
himself, being extraordinary brave and gallant in apparel, and extremely in
the fashion; so as easily appeared no little pains and care had been taken by
him in all his habit well perfumed, to exhibit (...) a perfect and complete
Courtier: in a word, in his garb and whole comporteme^t, he seemed a true
Courtier, to comply with ladies in their element. The salutations between the^
were hardly passed, when Elizabeth, not much accustomed with those sights,
found her self to be touched with a double zeal, the one of the honor and
glory of God, seeing his Image to be so ^owlely polluted with secular vanities,
for so she esteemed those trickings and deckings of the body; the other for the
soul of that poor young man, so vainly given and carried away with the gentle
stream and slyding vogue of the world. And therefore knowing him well to be a
youth of a good disposition, and perhaps made acquainted heretofore with some
other better inclinations and intentio^s of his; could She not choose but
ingenuously say to him.

Good Sir, how happens you are now so brave at this time, and grown such a
Gallant; I have known when it has been far otherwise with you: Are al those
goodly designs of yours, now come to this, thus vanished into a smoke of so
much vanities, what trick you up so trow you, but a mass of flesh, a tru^se
of hay, and no more; to day very goodly as you seem to your glass, to morrow
a fee for the worms. Go to, my Child, away with these toys, and rear your
mind to higher things, that soul of yours is too precious to be drowned so in
these transitory waves of these secular pomps; Look back again into those
former reflections of yours, you were wont to make, when your judgment was
better then now it is; and make now at last a firm resolution to break with all these transitory things. Thus she. To whom the Gentleman replied. True it
is Dear Madam, your Ladyshipp is in the right, and I must confess I have been
too much to blame, to frustrate the good inspirations which God has sent me,
and whereto for a time I lent my ears, but now Lady through my own
ingratitude, I know not how I am fallen into so strange a tepidity in such
matters, if not stupidity, as I cannot think thereof, without a great aridity
of mind, so as I feel my self now wholely possessed with a dullnes and lethargy
as it were of al good things, that they take up entirely all the facultyes of my
soul. This only remedy remains for me Madam, that your Ladyship would be
pleased to implore and beseech our Lord in my behalf to take me forth of this
dangerous state wherein I am, and to give me his grace I may break insunder
these chains that entangle me, and so inueagle me in the snares of secular
appetites and desires, and make me unapt for all goodness. To which she replied.
And do you wish me indeed to pray for you as you say, and are you in earnest?
Madam, said he, it is my desire and the height of my ambition. Marry then,
said she, you must join with me, and unite your vows with mine* and second
my prayers with yours. Which when he had yielded to; She craving pardon and
license of his Mother, took him into a private Oratory hard by, where they
prayed together a pretty space, and it was not long ere the young Gentleman
began to call upon her, saying: Cease now your pra^ers Madam, and give over, for
I find my self so enkindled with their fervor, that I can not endure their
heat any longer. When; she prayed more heartily and more earnestly then
before, and wi^h greater vehemence then ever, still called upon God, he would
please to look down upon that Wretch enthralled in the snares of this world,
and call him efficaciously into some family of his, whereby wholely to bid adieu
to the vanities of the world. But he feeling his body and especially his heart
to be more and more enflamed within him, and his strength by little and little to
fail him quite, being al over in a sweat, sometimes hot, sometimes cold,
panting and striving for breath, as it were; called out more loud then before,
and casting out his arms for wearines, yiedling a puff withal, as the last of
his breath, cried out amain, saying interruptedly as well as he could: Cease,
cease o my dear Lady, for all my entrails and bowels, and even the very
marrow of my bones are exhausted quite, and nigh consumed with extreme fervor
of your prayers. When two of the Mayds together with the venerable Matron his
Mother, coming in all have, with hearing the cries he made, who were hardly
able to hold him up by the wast, from sinking to the ground, or to stay, so
that he might not take any harm by a fall through weakness, or that in
aswoune, he might pass away and return no more unto himself. His body the
while was so hot, as they could hardly endure to touch his flesh, being bathed
al over with the sweat that started forth of the pores of his body, a liquor
expelled and put forth, through excess of heat within him.

At length, while she still perseuered in prayers, the young man now able hardly
to fetch his breath, still called upon her with a voice as loud as he could,
saying with all submission, and greatest importunity he could. O Madam, I pray
give over your prayers for the love of JESUS Christ, that I may not untimely
thus end my days, whom you have so designed to a better life. Whereupon
Elizabeth making an end, the young man began presently to come to himself,
and to cool in his body, the heat ceasing, and he coming at last to a more
natural temper, promised the Lady out of hand to receive the habit of Saint
Fra^^is of Assisium, which shortly after he performed, to his unspeakable
comfort and joy of his Mother, who loved him truly as Mothers ought to love
their children, not barring him through carnal affection from his spiritual
preferrements; where he continued to his dying day, still magnifying Elizabeth
as the Author next unto God of his chiefest happiness and greatest felicity.
Besides which act of hers, it is commonly reported, this blessed Matron
procured the salvation of many, by the efficacy of her prayer.

THE GREAT LIBERALITY and mercy of Elizabeth, showed after she had recovered
her portion into her hands. CHAP. III.
AS in all species or kinds of things, every one has some manner of excellence
above the rest: as in flowers, the Rose: the Lion, among the four footed
beasts: the Delphin, with the fishes: in stones, the Diamant: the Fire, above
the rest of the Elements: So Mercy among the rest of moral virtues seems to
carry away the palm. But if we speak of the mercy of God, of all the divine
attributes that are, there is none more aduantageous to man, nor any found more
glorious to himself: in this virtue God has lodged perfection, which the Sages
have constituted in a heap of al virtues; so as the merciful by means of
this, may be said to possess al virtues. Secondly, o^ Lord has placed
felicity therein, and made a Beatitude thereof. And lastly in mercy God has
delineated a perfect draught as it were, according to the image and
ressemblance of himself, where he says. Be you merciful a^ your heavenly
Fathers is. A holy virtue no doubt which so dignifyes men that it makes them
not only as Angels, but even like God himself.

When Elizabeth therefore had recovered from the Prince the portion due unto
her in consideration of her dowry, she was to receive of him, by a certain
accord, made between them; She desired to have it reduced into a gross
sum, that she might according to the Ghospel* sell what she had, to have
means to show this mercy we speak of, to the poor: Which she did,
remembering the examples of the old and new Testament: That whereas Adam Genesis 3.
being naked after his sin; God though much offended with him, instead of
punishing him, presently took care to cloth him: and therefore she would
cloth the Leui^ 25.
naked. The Iubily which was ordained in the old law, in favor of debtours,
that in that holy year they should be freed of all their debts: taught her to
releive the needy and miserable in their necessityes. The ordinance of God to
leave the shatered ears of corn to the gleaners in the field during the
harvest, was a lesson to her, to disperse what she had among the poor.

In the new Testament, she had a^ assurance given her of a liberal rewar^ at
the hands of God, for a dish of water given to the poor in his name* The
Parables inuiting the poor to the banquets of the rich householders were as so
many instructions to her, to show mercy to them. The remembrance of that sad
catastrophe of the rich Glutton for his want of compassion to Lazarus, and his
unmerciful dealing with him, was a caution and terror to her. And she weighed
withal, how the dreadful sentence of that terrible Judge at the latter day;
vpbrayded not, the committing of sins so much, as the omitting of the works
of mercy. Considering therefore how in the harmony of man's body, one member
succors an other without any manner of discourse a^ al, by the only impulse
and inclination, they have of correspondences one with an other; she held it
unreasonable and against nature not to succor the needy members of the
mystical body of the Church, with whom she was one among the rest. And
beholding how beasts of the same kind do flock together, to defend each other
^n al occasions, she held it a shame her reason should be put to confusion by
their want of reason, or to be found more brutish then beasts themselves, not
to help, succor, and releive her Neighbor of the self same species with her.
But that which seemed to ^ouch her most, was that saying of 1. Ioh 3.
Saint John. He that beholds his brother ^n necessity, and shuts up the
bowels of ^is mercy against him, how is it that Charity should rest in him? For
this she considered, who has not Charity has not grace, and by consequence
not life, but even remaynes in death; and lastly that he is not ^ike to find
any mercy at the hand of God who shows it not unto an other.

Wherefore, I say, Elizabeth having gotten these treasures into her hands, she
hid them not in the earth, as on^ that were fearful of wants her self* nor
locked them up in Coffers, a^ one that were covetous: but relying rather on the
providence of God, and having an eye on the immense profi^ and return she was
to make thereof in the next life, she intended to put them forth to use, into
the hands of Christ, by dealing them to the poor, in hope I say of an excess
usury of (...) hundred for one. She sent them into every Coast of the
countries round about to assemble the poor together at a certain day
designed by her, appointing likewise a certain place, least through ignorance
perhapps any might err and miss the Deal. When lo at the place and time
appointed, an incredible multitude of the poor of al sorts, came flocking
thither, so as the like number of them had never been seen in Thuringia or
Hassia either: it was a world to see how great a multitude there was: some
lame, some blind, some deaf, some Orphans, some Widows, and some aged persons,
and some with their whole familyes at once, as having noe resting or abiding
place. There might you see a mother carrying one child on her back, and an other
hang clinging to her breast. A child leading his blind father, and the father
carrying his lame child. The lame who had his eyes, but wanted limbs, was
carried and sustained by him who had his limbs but not his eyes, being guided
by him that sat above. If there were any with stump arms who had no hands,
but his tongue very voluble and free, he would join with him that was dumb,
and beg the one with his tongue, the other with his hand stretched forth; and
Elizabeth her self would stand the while extteamely edifyed with the mutual
charity which appeared amongst them. They showed being altogether, like a huge
army scattered after a discomforture given, discovering their wounds and maymes
received in service, repayring to their Captain for pay, and stretching forth
the hand to receive the same.

Elizabeth therefore appointed some, both men and women to keep good order, in
the distribution of the alms she intended to give, and to cause the multitude
to sit down in certain files and rancks, and to quiet them if they chanced
to tumultuat among themselves, as usually such people do, complaining of each
other for the lightest cause, and many times without any cause at al; she
prescribed a penalty of a public confusion, to the faulty and delinquents, by
cutting off the hair of any whosoever should once presume to go forth of
their place, while the dole was made, or were noted to molest their fellows
any ways, or to offer to take a double alms, to the prejudice of the rest,
who might happily want by such an abuse.

Besides these poor, were present likewise an innumerous multitude of other
people to behold the sight, whom the rarenes thereof had moved to come and view
the same. When this religious Comforter of the poor would walk among the
midst of the rancks distributing the monyes her self, which howbeit she might
well have recommended to others, yet such was the pleasure she took therein, as
she could not be satisfied, if she did it not with her own hands; doing herein
like the careful and sollicitous husbandman* who though he trust others to plow
his land, yet will he sow the seed himself: being well advised, that who sowes
sparingly shall as sparingly reap, and who shall sow in benedictions, shall reap
in benedictions. And this she did with so pleasant and cheareful a countenance,
as well demonstrated the confidence she had of her future harvest in the next
life. So as besides the treasures she laid up there, she gave forth a most
excellent odor of sanctity to God and Angels, and a most lively example to men
to follow her therein. In which distributions at one time only, she spent
little less then five hundred pounds sterling, to the incredible releife of a
world of people

When lo the dole was ended, and the company were now broke up, they returned
to their homes, al praising God with hymns and Canticles of joy, and
magnifying this his trusty Stewardesse and faithful Dispensatress^ of his
goods, extolling her to the skies, and pouring forth a million of blessings
upon her. Yet some there were who by reason of some sickness or other
infirmityes, were feign to abide there al night, and lie here and there al
scattered up and down in the Hospital, the place appointed for the said dole,
of whom this zealous Servant of Christ, not satisfying her self with what she
had most charitably and liberally done already, took a most tender compassion,
and presently commanded good fires to be made every where of Charcoales and
billets, which she there procured at her own cost and charges, and the poor
to be called to the same, and that every one, besides what they had already,
should have a loaf of bread and sixpence a piece; and some who had the
greatest need should moreover, have their feet ^oth washed and anointed.
Whereat the multitude brake forth into shouts of joy and hearty acclamations in
her praises, crying out with one accord, Long live Elizabeth great Saint and
servant of God: and she rejoiced the while, not to hear her own praises, ^ut
to see the members of Christ so well contented.

OF A CERTAIN ACCIDENT which showed how Elizabeth had likewise the gift of
Prophecy: With her charitable acts in relief of the poor. CHAP. IIII.
AS the glorious Elizabeth was thus renowned for her bounteous alms, and the
exercize of al virtues, which illustrate and eternize Saints to the end there
might nothing be wanting to adorn her life, it appears she had likewise the
Gift of Prophecy, and revelation of future things Which before we set down in
particular, we will glaunce a little upon the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
in this point of revelations in general, to engender a more constant belief of
such things being related in particular. Now then a^ divinely* declares Pope
Boniface the Ninth, in the Bull of the Canonization In (...). Brig.
of Saint Bridgit; even from the beginning of the world Revelations have been.
For that (according to the Apostle) to some is given the grace to work
miracles; to some Prophecyes etc. and it is a matter of faith to believe there
have been such; and he were Heretic, who should deny the revelations of the
Prophets, and perticularly the Apocalips of Saint John. The Popes recount the
visions and Revelations of many Saints, when they canonize them. Besides that,
many Saints have written Revelations of other Saints: as S. Basil those of S.
Columbanns and others: Saint Paulinus: Bishop of Nola, wrote those of Saint
Faelix: S. Bernard those of S. Malachy: S. Bonauenture of S. Frauncis. And
finally al those who but write the Lives of Saints, recount their Revelations
and Prophecyes, as here we shall do of our Saint. Thus it was: At what time,
that great and general doale was made to the poor we mentioned above, under
the penalty of cutting off the hair of delinquents. A certain Damsel in the
company was brought to Elizabeth, and accused, as one who had transgressed the
aforesaid Ordinance made by her. Which she understanding, and not respecting
her singular beauty and feature, nor yet her goodly hair laid forth to view,
without more ado, not regarding her plaints, or listening to her friends who
speak in her behalf, caused the same to be quite cut off; whereat the Virgin
wept most bitterly, pitifully lamenting she was undone, there being some who
constantly affirmed the young Maiden had committed no fault at al, and therefore
had great injury offered her, by them who wrongfully accused her, she coming
thither not for any greedynes of alms, but to see a sister of hers there
present. Whereat Elizabeth not moved awhit, smiling, replied. Go too then, the
maid has committed noe manner of offense here, it is well, it is well, so much the
better; and now by the loss of her hair she is like to gain her soul, and
hereafter I trow she will refrain from her dancing, and the like. And sending
for her, she appeared with a sad and desolate countenance, having lost so, that
goodly ornament of her head; the dear Servant of Christ demanded of her,
whether she ever had a desire or resolute purpose or not, to have lead a more
regular and spiritual life then she had done. Whereto the Maid answered with
a modest look, as being not a little confounded at the question she made her.
True it is Madam, I must confess, nor if I would, without impiety can I deny,
but that long since I had the mind to have entered into Religion, in some one
of the best reformed orders; and surely had done yt, if the gayness and beauty
of my hair, which is now cut off, had not cooled my desire and frustrated the
same.

It is well then, replied Elizabeth and therefore am I now glad thy hair is cut
off, for that I s^e it has been a great hinderance and impediment to thee, in
a spiritual course: and this I say to thee besides, that I should not take so
much comfort to have my son proclaimed Emperor, and see him seated and
established in that Imperial Throne, as I shall do to see thee in so fair a way
to become a Religious woman as thou first intendest; pray for me and bless
the occasion that made you thus to enter into your self. How say you, are you
not content to abandon the world, and to betake your self to a stricter life
for his sake, who has so mercyfully expected this long? Yea Madam replied
she, I am content, and more then that, to do any thing else your Ladyshipp shall
appoint for my good. Whereupon she took the Maid and gave her worse apparel
then that she ware, and placed her as a Servant in the Hospital; which office
she faithfully and piously executed so long as she lived. And the standers by
were greatly moved at the accident, concluding al, that infallibly she had the
gift of Prophecy, and revelations of things remote, hidden, and future: and now
they began more then ever to regard her, while nothing is more specious in the
eyes of men, then Gifts of these kinds, and such especia favors from God. But
leaving these, let us return to her wonted work^ of Charity again, whereof I
find no end.

Although a man would verily have thought, to have seen the profuse largess
of this incomparable Stewardesse of Christ, she might well have sat down with
what she had already done: Yet as one but now to begin, and who as yet had
done nothing to the purpose; she had a good mind with the like bounty, to have
disposed to the releife of the poor, the remaynder of her portion still in her
hands; whereof she was to live and sustain her self: she was so extremely
enamoured of that virtue, and so wonderfully affected to the needy and
necessitous people. And surely she had done so indeed, had not the Reverend
Father and Guide of her soul, her dearest Master, prevented her in taking
care for her temporaltyes: and therefore wisely foreseeing and providing for
future necessityes, forbad her the same with a strickt command, making use of
the absolute power and authority he had over her; appointing some hard and
severe persons to accompany her always, and to observe very diligently all her
actions, and to intimate to him and complain of her, if she obayed not his
commandments, to wit, if she were observed to pass her stint assigned her,
in dealing alms.

An order was taken, that if any one had complained of her, she was humbly to
come, and take correction for it, both by words and stripes as the matter
required; so as sometimes she was smit on the cheeks, in which kind of
correction she much rejoiced, remembering the boxes of the ears which Christ
had in his passion, especially that same of the Soldier with his armed fist,
in the presence of Annas; holding them all as too light in regard of the same;
she would have wished their hands more hard and a great deal more heavy to
suffer more for his sake, and the love of that special virtue. Which fault when
she had once committed, and accordingly been punished, she was commanded to
distribute no more then a penny at once to a poor body. Wherein with a pious
breach, and yet a litteral observance, she so obeyed her Master, as she
nevertheless gave reasonable satisfaction to her tender and merciful mind. For
now she would give to many, one by one, what she had wont to fewer in greater
pieces: Which when her Master once perceived, because she obeyed not his will
therein, he forbad her to give any more money, and only permitted her to give
Bread, which when she began to deal more bountyfully then he would have her,
he restrained her to give pieces of bread only, whereas before she had dealt
whole loaves at once to several persons, and so with a wonderful variety, was
both Obedience exercised in her, and compassion provoked.

If she had been commanded at any time to refrain from giving of alms or
to meddle with leaprous or diseased persons, or else to discharge and dismiss
such as she had already* it was a wonder to see how upon a sudden, her
color would go and come, as she had verily been in a strange dilemma what
to do; When indeed it would be no more but a terrible conflict in her self
between the superior and inferior part of her soul, or the sovereign power
which Obedience exercised upon her own inclination to communicate her means
to the poor, and to pratise such works of piety. So as now and then, she
would be in such a perplexity of mind thereat, as the good Father knew not
what to do in the case. For one while he feared least the disquiet of her mind
she felt therewith might bring her into some inconvenience of her health,
which was the thing he doubted so much, by dealing so boldly with such leaprous
people; otherwhile again he would fear as much, least her excessive
liberality would bring al to naught, and he be blamed for guiding her no
better. And lastly otherwhiles but very tenderly he began to suspect her
promptnes in Obedience, that found such maine opposition inthe inferior part
of her soul: til weighing the matter with more deliberation, he found it to be
rather an emulous strife between two noble and eminent virtues in her: of
Charity to the Neighbor, and Charity to God; Piety to the poor, and a perfect
Obedience to her Superior. And therefore commending the matter to God from
thenceforth he was resolved in those things to leave her to the unction of the
Holy Ghost, to inspire and direct her in the best.

Which liberty, as she perceived to be afforded her from her Master, fearing
she had violated the Laws of Obedience, and that her Master had been feign
to condescend to her infirmityes, she resolved with her self thenceforth, she
would be more exact, precise, and punctual, not only to obey him to the letter,
but even likewise to the utmost extent of his intention, as near as she was
able to interpret the same. Wherein doubtless she made a notable conquest of
her self, considering her pious inclination to works of Charity; so to immolate
the same on the Altar of Obedience, as she did afterward. And therefore
henceforth she contented her self with such works of Charity only, as were not
only, not expressly forbidden her, but likewise such as she might imagine, he
intended to include in his prohibitions and injunctions given her. And so she
went with her Mayds to the Hospital to tend the sick, not infected with
leaprosy, and washed them, and made their bedds for them, and covered them as
they lay. And would often say to her Mayds whom she made as her fellows in
these occasions: How happy are we, Sisters, who have the honor t^ wash our
Lord, to tend him so, and to cover him in his bed. Whereto being enflamed with
her example, they would answer, Yea; and take great complacence therein, how
beyt one of them being somewhat less mortifyed then the rest, one day gave her
this answer, not so pleasing to her; You Lady, it seems can away with this
sluttishnes, but so cannot we, and other women: which Elizabeth hearing,
dissembled the matter, and replied not a word; but we piously believe she
labored not a little, what with prayers, and other means to reclayme her from
that coldness and tepidity in the service of God in his weak and feeble members

Upon a certain Woman great with child and near her time, she bestowed
hous-roome and al necessary furniture for her childbirth, and she being
delivered of a daughter, newly borne; she caused it to be Christened, and
baptized by the name of Elizabeth, and likewise daily visited the woman in
childbed, and still carried some good dish of meat or other with her, to
comfort her withal. But at length this ungrateful woman being now recovered
and brought to a perfect state of health, together with her husband, with one
consent, ran quite away from her, leaving their little daughter behind them, to
the mercy, of the charitable Matron, taking some part of the furniture with
them, that was but lent them for the time only. Whereof when the Servant of God
had notice given her, by her Maid whom she had sent unto her, with a good dish
of meat; she presently commanded the child to be brought to her, and put it
forth to be nursed by a soldiers wife a neighbor by: When sending immediately
to the Governor of the City, he caused a diligent search and pursuit to be
made for those wretched vagabonds. But when they could not be found, the holy
woman betook her self to her prayers, and so caused them shortly to return
against their wills, and to beg pardon very humbly on their knees, for their
great ingratitude and prodigious impiety: affirming they had been very
miserably punished already, in that, through the just judgment of God, they
were not able to pass any further, but were constreyned in spite of their
hearts to return again. The fault was soon pardoned by the blessed woman,
with condition to take their child again: and so they were both restored to
her favor. But yet in some manner of penance for their heinous delict, she
took away from her a cloak which she had given her before, saying: that an
injury was so to be pardoned, as the same might not come to be offered any
more. Which cloak she presently bestowed on a poor Maid at hand; who through
the merits of the Saint, was so i'lumined thereby with the grace of God, as
she vowed immediately thereupon, perpetual Virginity, and observed the same to
her dying day, leading a most virtuous life.

THE CHARITY OF Elizabeth to the Neighbor in spiritual mercyes: and
particularly of her singular gift of Prayer. CHAP. V.
IT is not enough to have these temporal mercyes, in behoof of the poor, if
we have not the spiritual works of mercy withal. There are some very apt to
put their hands very readily in their purse, to releive the necessityes of the
poor. Many who can prodigally enough, lay out very largely upon building of
pious howses. And many likewise will spare for no cost, to endow them with Rents
very amply, so they may have but the name of Founders only, and have their
arms advanced in the Frontispices thereof: But, to put the hand to the heart to
raze out rancour by the roots; to pardon an injury received, to love ones
enemy, to do good for il, to direct the ignorant and tepid in the way of
salvation, being sinners to reconcile them to God, and remaining in grace, to
harten them on to perseverance, and to help them to the use of the Sacraments,
and a thousand more of the like kind, and all this for the true Love and Charity
of God: How few there are God wot! Alas, kow few! in regard of those who do
wholely neglect such things.

But Elizabeth as she was pittyful in all external things belonging to the
body: so must you imagine, her zeal to be much more in the spiritual
necessityes of the soul. Hence it was, that she would earnestly exhort a^
Mothers, after their children were borne, not to differ baptism. For the
sick now lying in extremes at the mercy of God, she would carefully persuade
and procure them to cleanse their consciences by confession, and to receive
their Viatique with the rest of the rights of the Church. And once her zeal
carried her so far, as she that otherwise was so meek as to submit her self
to any correction, for the least transgression in the world, did beat a woman
somewhat handsomely with a wand in her hand, for differring her Confession too
long, whereby with stripes, she expelled the spirit of slouthfulnes, and
tepidity from her.

And for her piety and devotion to holy things, though she honored the
Relics of Saints, with tapers and incense according to the custom of good
Christians, piously offering besides the money she had earned her self, with
her handy works, most reverently on the Altar. Yet she seemed to mislike
those sumptuous Images. And therefore entering once into a Church of Friars
professing Poverty, she rebuked them for their excess therein, beholding such
curious and exquisit pieces of workmanship there, saying: These had been better
bestowed upon the mayntenance of the poor, the living images of their
Creator, and that the memory of the Saints were rather and better to be
honored with a religions mind, then with all such external ornaments, to
insist so much upon them and neglect the other. And to the end, ^t may appear
with what spirit she spoke it, that which she said upon some other occasion
is worth the noting; which was this.

To one who had exceedingly commended an Image there present, both for the
excellency of the workmanship; and the rarenes and preciousnes of the stuff
it was made of; She answered, how all that which he praised so much in the
image she possessed in her heart, and had it there more lively imprinted and
charactered.

Thus this great Servant of God, being endowed with so rare and excellent
virtues, faithfully executed the office of Martha, Yet so you may imagine as
she omitted not the while the Contemplative, and quiet life of Mary. For when
she was not busyed about the external works of Charity; and the care of her
house, she ordinarily repaired to a certain solitary place, where falling with
her knees on the ground, and lifting up her eyes, hands, and heart to heaven,
she would pray prolixly for diverse hours together with extraordinary
devotion and feeling, and not without great plenty of tears, wherein she had
a (...) singular gift from God. For as she wept she disfigured not her face a
whitt as others are wont, through excess of dolor, but with a cheerful and
pleasant countenance testified and expressed comforts and great consolations
the while. And the tears she let fall in her latter times, were accompanied
rather with smiles then sighs, or groans, so as she seemed to weep, rather
then to greiue and lament. And no marvel, for her countenance upon no
occasion of misfortune would ever change or alter a whitt, but always keep
the same tenor of chearefullnes and serenity with it.

Nor may we imagine she arrived to this so high perfection of Prayer at once,
but ascended thereto by certain degrees. For first, she only began to have a
lively desire of perfection and Love of God. Secondly, she stirred up and
excited her self to attain this perfection with acts of desire and Love, and
from sighs even fetched from the inward of the heart still craving of our Lord
this perfection and love. Thirdly she had a continual watch upon all her
thoughts, words, and works, not to offend and displease God in whatsoever,
being still present to her self in all affairs, and not suffering her heart to
be carried and distracted with them. Fourthly, she would deal very really
indeed to obtain Virtues, practizing and exercizing some acts of them in
particular things, nor ever ceased till she had gotten a facility and habit in
them. Fifthly, she would take her sustenance and corporal food very
sparingly, no more then would serve to maintain life, and to comply with her
necessary obligations; but herein she would not be too extreme but ruled and
guided by her Masters direction, especially after she had once submitted her
self to his Obedience. Sixthly, she attended with great care to the
mortification of her disordinate affections, and in particular to the
abnegation of her self and her Will and inclinations good or ill, wherein as I
have said above, she found any difficulty; as in the points of dealing alms
more profusely then she ought, and doing some special mortifications she
affected most, to wit, with meddling with leapers to the hazard of her health,
and the like. Seauenthly, she had her interior and exterior powers
exceedingly recollected, and especially her five senses, that they might not
be scattered and dispersed on creatures. And for her thoughts, and memory,
likely she would busy and employ them in the Meditation of the Last things,
and of the judgments of God.

Lastly, she would put before her eyes the imitation of the Life of our
Savior Christ, and his Saints; conforming her life as much as she could with
their lives, in doing sharp penances as they: discovering her soul entirely to
her Master, or spiritual Guide, not concealing any thing either good or bad,
which she did not manifest to him: that she might be the more secure from all
illusions and deceites of the common enemy. She held with herself a certain
norm^, rectitude, and equallity in her life and actions, and the same she
would keep with others. Her thoughts were always of the shortness of this
life, and how the same continually went drawing to its end* for which cause it
behooved her to go with a continual watch and examen upon all her life and
actions, walking ever in perpetual prayer in the presence of God: all which
proceeded from her much retirement as from a river and fountain. And this
prayer she would usually make of the mysteries of the Life, Passion, and Death
of our Redeemer, whence her soul would receive particular light of the
verities and mysteries of our holy Faith, and illustratio^s and sovereign
feelings, which she concealed and discovered not to any but her Master. By
which prayer likewise her soul came to have a chaste fear of God, not to
offend him in ought whatsoever, and a great oblivion, neglect, and contempt of
her self, attributing never any thing to her self, but wholly to God.

By these degrees as so many steps as it were Elizabeth mounted to the height
of perfection, and many times she was in rapts, being ravished in spirit, for
certain hours, and taken with an ecstasy, wherein she enjoyed the company of
Angels, and many times beheld and heard even JESUS himself, the sovereign
comfort and amiable delight of all men, environed round with millions of
Saints. When returning to her senses again, she would plainly declare, what
co^forts she had received, what delights she enjoyed, and what virtues she
procured. Besides that her face, as we read of Moses, would shine very
bright, by reason of the rays which commonly were directed toward her, and
had so thoroughly illumined her heart, as the abundant Charity, being not able
to contain it self within those bounds, even shined through her countenance it
self as if it had been the window of the heart. These things when they happened
to her (as often they did) being so glutted as she was with spiritual
delights, made her to refrain a long time from all manner of food, or else ^o
use the same very sparingly, and never but when mere necessity required.

HOW ELIS ABETH FELL sick, the manner of her sickness: and of the happy end
which she made. CHAP. VI.
BLessed are the Dead who dye in our Lord; As it was heard by a voice that came
from heaven, because what works they wrought in this life, shall accompany them
in their death: And to a good life is properly due a good death. Besides it is
an evident rule in Philosophy, how in all both natural and supernatural
things, beginning, medium* and end have a great conformity with them. And so
surely was it in the life and Death of this great Servant of Christ. For you
shall understand, how this his blessed Servant, having spent many years in
that manner we have related, the time of her departure forth of this Vale of
tears now drawing near, her dearest Spouse Christ in a comfortable manner
appeared to her in a gracious and glorious sort, with a sweet and amiable
countenance saying unto her. Come my sweet Spouse, whom I have chosen, and
possess the heavenly Bride-chamber, which I have ordained and appointed for
thee, before the creation of the world. Whereat Elizabeth being replenished
with unspeakable joy, not able hardly to contain her self with the sight of
this so comfortable a Vision, according to her custom in such cases (for she
was frequently favored with such like Visits and graces from heaven) went
presently to visit her Master, to give him account of what had happened unto
her, who at the time as it chanced lay very sick in his bed, and when after
some discourses between them, of mortallity, and the manyfold casualtyes of
this life, of the vanity of the world, of the uncertainty of Death, and yet
the most certain infallibility thereof, discoursing somewhat of the occasion
of his infirmity, as usually they are wont, and of the excesses and remissions
he had of his whole sickness, not without some doubt of his recovery again: he
fell at last upon the point, what course she would take, if God (as he feared
not a little) should call him thence, and take him away out of this world. To
whom the reverend Matron answered. God Master, I trust for all this, your
Reverence is like to live many days yet longer, for the comfort of others, to
whom your life, noe doubt is necessary for the glory of God. But as for me,
dear Master, I have no fear, but your life will be sufficient for my be^oofe,
and so particularly gave him a faithful relation of what had happened to her
in all points. After which, the good Father recovered speedily, and she within
four days after, began to complain somewhat of an indisposition of body, and
the malady preuayling by little and little, she was forced to yield to keep her
bed, reteyning her heart still fixed in heavenly things, and always enflamed
with the Love of God.

While one of her Mayds, sat on a time by her bed side, where she lay,
behold, quite contrary to the manner of the sick, she did hear her sing m^st
sweetly, and tune her notes most artificiously, according to the rules of
Music, the Maid was attentive to all, not ima^ining her Lady had been so
(...) a Musician, to descant so curiously as she did, not remembering she had
ever heard her sing any other then the Hymns and Canticles of the Church as
there they are toned, or else some other spiritual songs in time of her
spinning, and such lik^ works though sweet and tunable yet pain and void of
art: and being in this thought her Lady called upon her, and said to her.
Where art thou Daughter; when her Maid answering; here Lady, presently added,
saying: Good Madam, how your Ladyship delighted mine ears with your music
and ditty you sang even now. To whom Elizabeth; Heard you me sing then? Yea
truly Madam, replied the Maid, I heard it to my great comfort.

When by and by the Saint declared unto her, how a certain little Bird sent
from heaven sat between her and the wall, and with sundry streynes of most
sweet music, made her such heavenly melody that howbeit her body were so
weak as she saw, she could not refrain from singing as well as she might.
The bird, now it seemed, the Maid heard not, but only the voice of her sick
Lady: by which she concluded, it must needs be the music of some Angel
from heaven, come thither to solace her languishing spirits through force of
the malady, and that they had held as a Quire between them, of two several
sides, though she heard but one. The third day before her death, desiring to
be solitary, she willed that as many as came to visit her might be excused
their labor and such as were present to void the Chamber, and none s^ffered to
enter into the room. The cause being required of the nearest about her, she
answered. My desire is to be rid of the tumults and noyses of this world,
because I would give my self to remember my Judge and the dreadful account I
am shortly to make. She was obeyed, and even the very day before her
departure, she made to her Master, a general confession of her whole life.
And by her last Will, made Christ, in the Poor, her sole ^eyre; reserving only
^o her self a certain old gown, wherein she wished to be buried, not taking
any other care for the solemnity of her funerals. Shortly after, she received
the blessed Sacrament and Extreme Unction, and the rest of the day and night
she spent in such feruours of spirit, as well showed the Ghest she had
received into her, saving. Dismiss now thy handmayd, O Lord, according to thy
word in peace. Now do I h^ld thee sweet Love, and I will hold thee still, and
now most freely I bid adieu to the world, and all earthly things. Now joyful
do I come to thee my God. Nor shall any thing henceforth: O my good IEVS sever
me from thee: for I am joined to thee o Christ, I will live in thee, and dye
in thee, and ^ll remain in thee if thou will, eternally.

When she had made this prayer, she concluded and fell upon a large
discourse, how Christ went to visit Mary and Martha in their mourning for their
Brothers death, how he sweetly comforted them, how he reared their hopes with
his firm promise, how they went altogether to the monument, and finally how
he shed tears, in testimony of his inward and tender compassion. And here now
entering upon this passage, into a deep and profound discourse of so worthy a
subject, to the great astonishment and admiration of all there present, her
affects of the tears of Christ were so effectual, so urgent, so enflamed, and
so piercing, even to the bottom of their hearts, as made them all to weep most
tenderly, being stricken to the heart, and greiued, that she was to leave them,
and they to be deprived of so holy and so gracious a Mother.

To whom Elizabeth turning her self, said. Good Christians weep not for me,
but rather for your selves. And more she uttered not, but they heard a most
sweet and delicious harmony, without any motion of her lips, and yet as a
voice proceeding from her. And when the company enquired what that singing was,
she answered. It was I who sung as well as I could, to those who first did
sing to me, and seem to inuit me to it, whom I wonder you heard not
likewise as well as I. By which they gathered al, as well they might, how the
(...) a ^ayting for her soul, now near the solution from the prison of her
body; sung unto her with such heavenly melody, and provoked her so to sing with
them. Anon after, about midnight, looking toward them who sat round about
her: What shoud we do, said she, if the Enemy of Mankind, should appear unto
us* and presently cried out with a confidence, as if now she beheld him* and
would drive him away thence, appearing in some horrible shape or other, saying
alowd. Auant thou miserable Wretch, hence I say thou accursed Caytife. And so
it vanished whatsoever it was, for she spoke no more of it.

Being soon after at the point of death, she said. This is the time of the
Virgins Delivery, and of the immaculat fruit of the Virginal womb; which puts
us in mind to speak some what of the little sweet Babe Igsus, how he was borne
in the Winter, in the night, and in an other man's house, swathed in Clouts, and
laid in a Crib, how he was found by the Sheaphards, manifested by a star, and
lastly, how he was worshipped and adored by the Chaldeys. For these are the
mysteries of our Redemption, these the worthy gifts and ornaments of our
riches. In these consists our hope, in these our Faith increases, and our
Charity is enflamed: I pray you then my friends let us confer of these
matters, and freely talk thereof one with an other to our great consolation.
And so the blessed Servant of God in speaking those words, laid softly her head
down, as if she would sleep, and quietly rendered up her soul, and departed
this life.

THE FUNERAL OFFICES of the glorious Elizabeth, are piously performed: With a
touch only of her singular virtues. CHAP. VII.
THE piety of the Living toward the dead, in the care they have generally of
their funerals and buryall, according to the use and custom of the Church, is
laudable and much commended in Sacred Writ, as One of the Works of mercy, and
so pleasing to God, that he not only rewards the pious affect wherewith they
commit them to the common Mother the Earth, but even rigorously punishes those
who presume to violate the corpse of the buried, or disturb their Sepulchers.

When the departure of Elizabeth then was known and voyced abroad, it was a
wonder straight to behold, how many Religious Monks and Priests, and poor
people had recourse to her funeral service. Where the poor so filled the eyes
and ears of all there present with mourning gestures and clamorous outcryes;
as made all the rest to weep who saw them, affirming all with one accord, they
had lost a merciful Mother in their great extremity, and their only friend
and surest refuge on earth, that now they had noe more help or succor left
them, since they knew not whither to go for releife, or whither to fly for
comfort in distress. The buryall of this sacred body, was diferred until the
fourth day after, by reason of the incredible concourse of devout people who
flocked thither from all parts. Nor moved it any horror awhit, to see her
face, head, and hands bare (it being the custom there to bury in their
habits,) since besides the palenes they had, there was nothing ghastly or
hideous in them, the same softnes and tenderness of flesh remaining still which
was before, yiedling to the least touch of the fingar.

There might you have seen every one to strive what possibly they might, to
get something of hers, to keep as a Relic (and which is more) to cut off any
thing whatsoever they could light on, some a lock or tresse of the hair of her
head, and some one thing, and some an other; and many, the skirts of the course
and homely habit she ware, which they highly prized as excellent pieces of
inestimable worth, and after many devout kisses, laid them up with great
reverence. There was besides, a wonderful sweet and odoriferous savor, which
filled every one with great devotion, as likely such fragrant smells in those
occasions use to do. Neither was there any at that time, that could complain
of any noisome or ill sent; but was as if a box of precious ointments and
perfumes had been spilt in the place; and not a human corpse exposed to view.

And no marvel, the body should send forth such an odor of perfumes, whose
soul during her life, perfumed so the world, with the odor of her Virtues,
and now much more the heavens, with the savor of her sanctity. L. 6. de bell.
Iud c. 6.
Whom I may say Almighty God was pleased on earth to set up as an Altar of
Thymiama, framing a balle of aromaticall spices of all the most excellent
virtues that were as enkindled in the Thurible of her heart, to breath the air
of a more then ordinary sanctity from her. Which Josephus says, in those
days, was wont to be made of thirteen species of the fragrant and odoriferous
things fetched from diverse parts of the world. And so we may imagine in the
Altar of the memory of this Saint, this mixture and composition to be of no
less then thirteen special virtues, which shined in this Servant of God, in
diverse occasions and passages of her life: As first, a Charity and Lone of God,
and the Neighbor for his sake, which she had so vehemently enflamed in her,
as she seemed to be quite exhaled, being always so employed in the acts of
his Love, as she had continually a burning furnace of the Love of God in her
breast: And for the Love of the Neighbor, it was so great, as none could ever
find in her, but bowels fraught with a tender love and feelings of their case.
The second Spice, a most profound Humility in her, which was so great, as
before her Superior, especially her Master, she was as an Infant: For with
how much Humility would she hear others speak of spiritual matters, yea even
her Mayds, to whom otherwise she was a Mistress, and they her scholars. And
for her exercise of abject things, as appears in her life, she was wholly in
them. The third aromatique Spice, was a rare Obedience in her, whereof though I
might allege many examples, that of conquering her self, in so difficult a
point, as we have written, may stand for many; where she resigned her self,
and refreyned from certain pious things forbidden by her Master. The Fourth,
was a high and most sublime Prayer, wherein through the Gift of God she
proceeded so far as would require a special treatise to set it down. This
only, that dwelling first as it were in Foraminibus Petrae, and always digging
in the wounds of her Savior in his Passion, she attained at last the highest
points of Contemplation, and was frequently rapt in spirit, as we have said,
where she saw such things as were not to be told. The Fifth, was a continual
interior and exterior Mortification of her Senses and passions. For
immediately in her actions, would appear how present she was to her self. And
what a martyrdom there was in her proper will, which God alone could thoroughly
know. The Sixth was her Purity and Chastity, which was so great that with her
only aspect, composition of the eyes, modesty of her countenance, and her whole
motions and gestures, she seemed to excite efficatious desires of that Virtue
in others, The Seventh, was her extrame Poverty, while no curious (...) (...)
hardly necessary, were to be found in her Chamber. For how little curiosity had
she in her habits and apparel, neat indeed and well put on, but homely,
course, and poor, and very rarely or never would she put on any thing which
was new, but ordinarily what others had used before. The Eight, was her
singular Patience. For she had suffered very great and grievous pressures and
afflictions. both interior and exterior in the whole course of her life: in
all which, her countenance was ever serene, and she without any murmures and
complayntes, holding it still for a singular grace and favor from God to
suffer for innocence sake. The Ninth, an extraordinary Temperance in speech and
conversation with others, whereby she would never contradict any, either with
or against reason, were they Superior, equal, or inferior, conforming her
self always to the judgment of an other, if it were not sin. Nor would ever
excuse her self, though with reason she (...) (...) she were not bound
thereunto. The Tenth, a notable Contempt of her self, whereby she desired to
be held ignorant of al, that she might be wise in the sight of God: and this
in what she might without the hurt of the Neighbor or offense of God, that so
contemning those terrene things she might gain the celestial and eternal. The
Eleauenth, an ardent desire of greater perfection. For she supposed the going
not forward in the way of virtue, was no less then turning back. And therefore
she endeavored with might and main, to advance forward, remitting never any
good devotion she once undertook with good deliberation. The Twelfth, an
amourous affection to the Cross of Christ, which she would always be taking
up, with four arms or branches to it. The first, (...) perfect mortification
of all vices. Secondly, a renouncing of all temporal goods. Thirdly, a neglect
of carnal affections as of friends, parents, and country. And lastly, an utter
contempt of the world in all things else. The thirteenth and last aromatical
Spice, was a diffidence of her self, imagining still that howbeit she might
seem to have done many notable things to the honor and glory of God, and the
great benefit of the poor, which was singular and most extraordinary in her,
yet held she her self as unprofitable merely, and good for naught, and verily
believed, they were al better then she, and none so wicked as her self;
considering the favors which God continually had showed her. And these were
her thirteen aromatical spices of virtues, which sent forth such an odor of
example on earth; and such a perfume of sanctity to the Citizens of heaven.

Now by this time being the fourth day after, when the rites of the Church were
ended, with great solemnity, pomp, and magnificence according to her dignity,
in the presence of many worthy religious Fathers, with an incredible multitude
of al sorts of people, as well of the Clergy as Laity; the precious body was
honorably interred, in a certain Chapel belonging and adjoining to her
Hospital, to the great resentment of al, who would willingly have enjoyed her
still, had it been convenient.

THE CANONIZATION of Saint Elizabeth: the Translation of her Body: and the
beginning of the relation of her miracles. CHAP. VIII.
So precious is the death of Saints in the Psalm. 15. Orat. in 4^. Mart.
sight of God: that, (as Saint Basil testifyes) as heretofore who touched but
the bones of a dead body, ws held contaminated: So now on the contrary, who
touches the bones or other Relics of some Saint, may receive some operative
virtue from them, and (...) our Lord would have such bones removed and divided
into sundry places, that they might be as a fortress or Citadel against our
enemies, and an honor to the faithful themselves. If you demand of me (says
S. Ambrose) what I worship in the bones Con^. Amb. l. 4 c. 2. de San.
and relics of these Saints: I answer, in the body of each Saint, I
reverence the wounds, which he has received for Christ, I worship his memory,
who led his life, always embracing virtue: I venerate the ashes consecrated
through the confession of his Lord; and even in the ashes themselves, I worship
the seed of eternity: I worship the body who has instructed me to love God,
to please him, and not to fear death. And why should not the faithful honor
the body, which even the Diuils themselves do tremble at? For whom alive they
afflicted with Crosses, they owe love and reverence in the Sepulcre. Lastly, I
worship that body, which our Lord Christ has honored in this world, and whose
soul is now reigning with (...) in (...) uen.

Now these titles, motives, and benefits, proceeding from the veneration and
worship of the Relics of Saints, is the cause why noe sooner any dies with
the opinion of a Saint, especially auerred so, by authentical approbation of
his Holiness, through that illustrious ceremony of Canonization, used in the
Church, but that generally the faithful do throng to his Shrine or Hearse to
obtain some Relic of his, be it the very hair of his head or the least
piece of his garment, which having gotten, they piously make reckoning they
have gained a most precious and inestimable jewel. Noe marvel theh, that our
glorious Elizabeth, being so illustrious through the most holy life she had
led on earth, and the undoubted opinion she had purchased, of a Saint even
during life, but that the people should flock so unto her, as they daily did,
as to a mercyful (...) (...) in his Court of Requests, to receive the humble
petitions of all that come, where hardly she sent any empty away, contristat,
and not satisfied some way or other. So as it is commonly reported, that she
raised some sixteen at'least from death to life; and cleansed the leaprous,
gave hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, (...) to the lame, eyes to the
blind, and comfort to the miserable and afflicted; and curing al manner of
diseases else whatsoever without number.

All which miracles Siffrid Bishop of Mogunce caused to be authentically
proved, and sent them to Gregory the Ninth then Pope, who after diligent debate
of so weighty a cause, with the College of Cardinals in the presence of the
Patriarks of Jerusalem and Antioch, and sundry Bishops; and after a solemn
and magnificent Procession had, on the 27. of May, being then the Feast of
Pentecost, canonized Elizabeth at a high Mass in all his Pontificalibus, (...)
(...) red as a Saint, in the universal Church, in the fourth year after her
happy decease, in the house of the Friars Dominicans in the City of Perugia,
where he dedicated an Altar, which he erected to her honor, and enriched with
ornaments, endowing it with privileges convenient, as Popes are accustomed to
do in like cases. Which solemnity being stately and very honorably performed,
and the fame thereof universally spread through all the parts of Germany, the
aforesaid Bishop Siffrid to the great joy and iubiley of all the people of what
condition soever, assigned a certain day for the solemn Translation of the
blessed bones into the City of Marpurg, where he assembled all the States
spiritual and temporal of both the dominions of Thuringia and Hassia, and the
principal Pastors of many other Churches besides.

At the day appointed, to such as weigh not the devotion of the people to this
admirable Saint, it may seem incredible to estimate the number of men and
women of all estates and callings who repaired to Marpurg, where the Shrine was
opened, and the sacred bones discovered in the presence of Frederick the
Emperor, offering a crown of gold to the Relics, attended by a most
honorable company of Princes, Lords, and Gentry, besides the Bishops of Mentz,
Cullen, and Breame, and many other remarkable Prelates of other Churches, and
Heads of Religious howses. Neither was there (as I said before also in the
Translation) any manner of il savor at al, as in other dead bodies is usually
had, but as it had been a chest of balm and most precious perfumes, it
breathed forth a most pleasing and delicious odor, to the great astonishment
and unspeakable content of al who approached to participat thereof.

Then were the Relics safely enclosed again in a leaden Coffer, and the same
very softly included in a precious casket of most curious workmanship, besides
the stuff* which I could not learn by reason the enamel had so disguised the
same: being carefully sealed up with the signet of the Bishop himself, and
carried in solemn pomp, through the midst of the multitude of the people
there greedily waiting for them, with incredible affection and devotion. There
you might see the windows hung with Tapistryes, al replenished with Ladies and
Gentlewomen, exceedingly moved with veneration at the sight of the sacred
Pledge as it passed along, the rest being feign to stay beneath, or get such
standings as they could on tops of howses, towers, and steeples every where,
where likewise you might discover the Ecclesiastical ensigns carried along in
that Procession, the Canons in their Copes, and Quiristers, and the rest of the
Chaunters in their c^ates singing Alleluya, like so many Angels come from
heaven to converse with men, and to grace the present solemnity. Finally, and
which was strange in such a world of people, you might there observe a deep
silence, more like to the solitude of a desert, then so great an assembly of so
populous a City and Country round about, al whist for the time; so attentive
they were to their sacred sight or spectacle of their dearest depositum; nor
should I think there was an eye, that stood not to the brim in tears of joy,
and devotion at once; for now sorrow all was exiled with the confidence they
had in so great a Patroness of their City. And here behold the first
primitias of the future wonders which I shall relate.

The next day, when by order and direction of the Bishop, with great reverence,
the Chest wherein the body was deposed, was opened again, a marvelous thing
it was, to see how the bones of this bountyful and charitable Matron as living
she had always been most munificent and liberal to the poor, with the goods
of fortune wherewith she was endowed, exhausting her temporal substance in
their behoof; so now showing mercy likewise to the sick and infirm, even
after death, she distilled no less her very marrow and substance; her bones
as it were resolving into oil, the truest symbol of mercy; yssuing forth
sweat and trickled down by drops on every side of the Casket; which as many
as were there present, might well perceive; who piously receiving it as it
flowed, and reserving it for the sick, thereby cured al those whom they
anointed therewith.

The second miracle happened before the bones were ever translated, as is for
certain registered from the parties own report, to whom it happened, and
confirmed by oath. That a certain Monk of the Order of the Cisterce, having
been grievously tormented for the space of forty years together with a
trembling of the heart; and using all the means that possibly he could, with
the furtherance of Superiors for remedy* in vain, and now wholly despayring of
humane helps: at last, hasting to the Sepulcher of S. Elizabeth not without
good faith and confidence, through her merits to obtain his health, was
immediately by touch of the shrine wherein she lay, most perfectly cured.

It is likewise manifest by the constant asseueration of a certain Nobleman by
birth and by Ecclesiastical dignity, yet more conspicuous in the world, who had
no reason to double and affirm a falsehood of himself in such a case, that he
with tears at last and with most indicative signs of co^trition and
compunction of heart, renounced and bewailed his lascivious affections and lewd
life, wherein til then he had long continued still impenitent, by the only
visiting and touching the said Saint Elizabeth's shrine: which he steadfastly
affirmed to the Reverend Father Conrad, the aforesaid Master of the said
Saint, in his Confession to him. Which by his free leave to the greater honor
of God and the said Saint; he sets down in writing as a thing authentically
auerred.

But now, because I will not oppress my Reader, with the relation of al which I
could set down, that come into my knowledge of these kinds of miracles, which
are, notwithstanding as I hear, but the least parcel only of the infinite
multitude she has wrought after her Translation since that time I think good
to select some of the chiefest and most principal of them in an other Chapter,
for the purpose: admonishing him the while, that what I shall here recount is
most irrefragably auerred, and shall therefore, I trust, not need any more
asseueratio^s thereof to enforce belief, since what is written in this kind,
is meant for the obedient, and ready wills within the Church; for with the
others who remain without, in things of this nature, what have we to do, whom
if an Angel come from heaven can not persuade to believe miracles, what should
we do?

A CONTINVATION OF THE miracles wrought at the Shrine of S. Elizabeth after the
Translation of her Body. CHAP. IX.
THe first we shall set down, is an evident proof and undoubted confirmation
of Pilgrimages and vows, and may serve as an apt proem to the rest that
follow: and this it was. There was a Monk, whose name was Henry, of the
aforesaid Order of Ciste^cians, who day and night was grievously afflicted and
tormented with a pain, which I find not expressed any where, yet so excessive
and intolerable it seems, as with his cries and groans he moved his
Brethren to compassion of his case: While lo, upon a certain night above the
rest, a comely and beautyful Lady appeared to him apparelled al in white, and
persuaded him to make his vow to S. Elizabeth, if ever he intended to be cured
of his malady: Which he delaying yet to do, the same Lady as before, appeared
to him again the next night, and used the same persuasion she had done in the
night before. Then he in the absence of he Abbot and Prior who were then from
home at that time, consulted with his immediate Superior, and so very formally
made his vow: When lo, the next night, the same Woman appeared again, making
the sign of (...) (...) Cross upon him, whereat presently he found himself to
be perfectly cured. Which when the Abbot and Prior perceived, at their return,
they wondered much to see him so recovered, but yet approved not his vow because
indeed they said: That Monks by illusion of the common Enemy are sometimes
moved to evil, under a fair pretense of good, while Satan now and then for
ends of his, will transfigure himself into an Angel of light. Especially knowing
well that no Monk had power of himself alone to make a vow; and therefore it
were better, and more secure for him to make his Confession excusing himself of
the wow, and commit his soul to God, and his body to the Monastery. Then the
fourth time the same Woman appeared to him, and told him that if he delayed to
perform the Vow he had made, he should presently relapse into his former
disease, and his torments should endure so long, til he were fully resolved to
fulfill his promise. Which threats, the lamentable effect ensued, and then the
Monk at last obtained leave and went his Pilgrimage, and was so recovered
thereof, as that after he had once accomplished his Vow, he was never molested
more with the like disease.

The second, shall be a good adm^nishment to such as begin well and not
persevere, and having made their vows and performed them, fynding no present
remedy, give over their devotions strait, and fall into diffidence and
pusianimity, whereby they miss of their purposes, and discourage others to
attempt or regard their vows so made: And this it is.

In the Diocese of Traiect, was one Theodorick apt to be moved on every
occasion to great devotion, whereby in his feruours, fynding himself in a great
extremity for want of the use of one of his hands being withered, to follow
his worldly occasions, he made a Pilgrimage two several times to S. (...) at
Marp^rge, to gain the use of his said hand, where visiting her Shrine at both
those times, and fynding no help thereof, began to be out of heart, and to loose
courage, but yet exciting himself, adventured to go once more, to make a
further trial of the benignity of the Saint; when being on his way at that time
with more confidence then before, there met him, a comely, grave, and venerable
old man, and exceedingly well spoken, who asked him, whither he was going, to
whom he answered, he intended to go to Marpurg, there to visit S. Elizabeth's
Shryne, whereupon he wished God to bless him, and bad him go on a Gods name,
assuring him he should infallibly obtain his suite, and receive his health, by
putting but his hand into her Sepulcher. And further willed him ever after, to
honor and bear devotion also to Saint Nicolas: Adding that such were ill
advised and most unwise, who seeking help at the Relics of Saints (according
to the laudable custom of good Christians,) and having performed their vows
in part, depart presently discouraged and dishartned; when they find not such
speedy remedy, as they desire; Since perseverance in prayer, and faith, is that
which God and his Saints exact in such occasions. And when he had said this, he
vanished away: and the other as he was wished, when he arrived at the Shrine,
thrusting his hand in the Monument was presently cured. This man no doubt was
S. Nicolas himself; by which we may learn what Charity and fair
correspondencyes, there is, among the Saints in heaven; and thereby take
example to have the like also among our selves on earth.

Besides the former two exaples of the benignity of this Saint, I find a third,
noe less miraculous, and which shows her excellent Charity now in heaven, and
her great longanimity, in co^descending so sweetly to our infirmityes; for who
would expect, for murmures uttered, such favors should come and descend from
heaven, and for words little less then blasphemies, at least the affect of
extraordinary impatience, so great a miracle should ensue. It happened then in
the Territory of Mentz, that one Beatrice a young Girl, was soarely vexed with
many infirmityes at once, wherewith she had a long time of that little she had
lived, most piteously been tormented; so as at last, having a terrible swelling
in her throat growing out before her, and a huge bunch which much deformed
her, on her back behind, thus molested with a double malady and impediment,
she was feign to creep with her head even bowed to the ground, and her hand
fast joined to her knees, moving (...) (...) (...) ^arts of all that beheld so
miserable a spectacle. What then was to be done, the Mother hereupon causing
her to be carried in a great basket on the shoulders of some Potter hired for
the purpose, and conuayed her to the Tomb of S. Elizabeth, where she remained
for ten days space without any succor at al. Which the Mother took most
sensibly to the heart, falling into great intemperance of speech, seasoned with
much impatie^ce, as well in gestures as in words; saying thus foolishly among
the rest. What mean you S. Elizabeth to bestow your Charity upon every one,
and to leave me only of al other most disconsolate and deuoyd of comfort, who
am thus visited with so miserable a cross without remedy: and therewithal in a
great chafe, went her ways home again, threatening she would hinder al she
could, from making any prayers or petitio^s to her: When the night following, a
comely Matron appeared to the Child, and stroaking very gently her throat
together with her back, (...) (...) (...) walk, who presently being thus
restored to her health, told her Mother next morning what she had seen in her
sleep, which caused them both to return to the Shrine again, to yield her
there immortal thanks for so great a miracle; which having rendered, she gave
lauds and infinite praises unto God, and leaving their basket behind them, as
a testimony of the wonder, they returned very joyfully home again.

I may not here let pass some breife touches at least of diverse other miracles
besides, which happened at the Shrine of this glorious Saint. As first, of a
cet^aine Maid in the Diocese of Mentz, possessed with an evil spirit, who with
only eating a little holy bread at her Shrine, and drinking a little holy
water, was dispossessed. Secondly, of an other in the Diocese of Cullen, who
being condemned to death, and calling earnestly upon the blessed S. Elizabeth,
after he was hanged so long as he might well have dyed, was found to be alive to
the great asto^ (...) (...) Thirdly, of a Scholar in the Diocese of Mentz, who
being drowned by chance, as he was a fishing, was, by the instance of some
friends of his there present craving the help of S. Elizabeth, restored to life
again. Fourthly of an other child of four years (...), in the same Diocese,
who after undoubted signs of death, was by the prayers of his Mother to Saint
Elizabeth, restored to life again. Fif^ly, of an other child of the same age,
who falling into a deep pit and killed, was restored to life again, by one
who passing by, most affectuously prayed to S Elizabeth for him. Sixthly, in the
same Diocese of Mentz, one Frederick in swimming in a River being drowned,
was, by a vow to S. Elizabeth made by his friends, restored to life again.
Seauenthly, one John in the same Diocese of Mentz, being wrongfully condemned
to death and reco^mending himself, with the rope about his neck, to the
glorious S. Elizabeth, and hearing a voice at that time, which said: Trust to
S. Elizabeth, and thou shall be delivered, being turned (...) (...) (...), was
saved by the breaking of the haulter, without any harm at al saying: Most
mercyful Lady S. Elizabeth ^hou have delivered me, and by consent of al was
hanged no more. Eighthly in the Territory of the said Mentz, was one Voliner a
religious man who being ^ame of a bruized arm, and commen^ing himself to S.
Elizabeth, was by her ^n the night with a soft and gentle touch in the il
affected place, perfectly ^ured of the hurt. Ninthly, in the same Territory was
a child of four years old, through the prayers of his Mother, being brought
to the tomb of S Elizabeth, cured of his blindness, with a little of the earth
thereof, applied ^hereunto. Tenthly in the same Territory was Gertrude a very
Criple of both her legs, who being advised to ^oe to Saint Nicolas, found ease
of the ^ne but not a perfect cure of both, til ^he touched S. Elizabeth's to^b,
they both ^iuiding as it were the cure between ^he^. The Eleauenth miracle was
shew^d upon an other Gertrude in the same (...) who being blind, was restored
(...) her light, by her intercession made ^o the same S. Elizabeth. The
Twelfth, appeared in one Henry of the said Diocese, who by visiting Saint
Elizabeth's Tomb, was first cured of his blindness, and then after, of a
desperate disease, by taking in his drink, the dust only of the said Tomb. The
Thirteenth miracle was, of one Mechildis a girl of the Territory of Treuers,
both blind, deaf, dumb, and lame, who after her Parents had made a vow to
visit Saint Elizabeth's Relics, was perfectly restored to health. Al which is
most true and authentically registered in writing. The fourteenth, was a woman
in the same Territory of Treuers, who being blind a whole year, and praying to
Saint Elizabeth, and led to her Tomb, received there the sight of one of her
eyes, but the other was not restored her until she returned home, where the
blessed Saint Elizabeth appeared to her in the night, and wished her to go to
the Altar, and desire one to move the air toward her, with the silk veyle
where the Body of Christ, was wont to be placed, which being done, she received
the benefit of both her eyes. Finally to conclude this relation of the
admirable Miracles of this great S. Elizabeth; I will finish the same with one,
of an other Theoderick in the Diocese of the said Mentz, and because I will not
trouble the Reader with the recital of any more, I will express the same more
at large as I find it. This Theodorick then being lame of both his legs, made
a vow to visit S. Elizabeth, and ariuing thither, partly by creeping, and
partly through the help of other men, not having remedy thereof in a whole
months space, returned homewards again as leysurely as he went thither, and
being yet in his way, and sleeping by the sides of an other, as infirm and
diseased as himself, thought verily in the night some water had bin powered upon
him, and waking thereupon, complained of his fellow, as one who had cast some
water upon him in his sleep. But he discreetely coniecturing the thing, as in
truth it happened, denied the same, persuading him* there was something else in
the matter, more then he perhapps would imagine, and therefore advised him to
arise and try whether happily he could walk or not. When behold a marvelous
thing, he, who went so lame to bed, arose very sound and whole, so as laying
aside his crutches, whereas before he was wont to bear and susteyn himself
with them, he could now carry them lustily, as he did to the Tomb of the Saint;
which done, he returned home to his friends very joyful of the benefit
received, nor ever ceased to magnify God in this Great Saint.

A TABLE COLLECTED of the eminent virtues and perfections of S. Elizabeth,
concluding with a prayer to the Saint. CHAP. X.
SVch as could not praise and magnify the Emperous of Rome enough, when they
entered in triumph into that stately City, the Paradise of the delights of the
world, after they had atcheiued some notable enterprise in conquests of the
Enemies of their Country; Would strew on their heads whole handfulls of Roses
and Lillyes, and a deluge of flowers, for an amorous testimony of the joy and
good will they bare them, and an iudicatiue argument of the great applauses for
their heroical victoryes obtained. Now after this great Princess Elizabeth, a
Saint among the greatest Saints, and still a Princess amongst Saints, has made
her entrance, no less in triumph into the heavenly and celestial Jerusalem,
after the taming of those hellish monsters, the world, the flesh, and the
Devil, the professed enemies of that heavenly Country; I now, not better able
to express my zeal, come throwing after her, those little handfulls of the
roses of her virtues, and Lillyes of perfection, which I could pick up here
and there, of her own scattering in the world, which she so prodigally has
left behynd her. In testimony of the joy likewise of my heart, for the
glittering rays sheenow is darting forth among those stars of the Emperyal
heavens. Psaphon having got together many little birds taught them only these
few words: Psaphon is a God: after which affording them the air and liberty;
these little spirits of birds, flying through the Universe; repeating the lesson
they had learned, spread, and dilated every where the glory of their Master,
causing the world to hold him as a God. All these little Essays of praises
which I have here amassed together with my hand, have learned all the name of
S. Elizabeth, and can say: Elizabeth is a great Saint: which being once
diuulged and spread abroad, shall inuit all the brave spirits of the world to
acknowledge her as such, and to admire and implore her intercession. Rash as I
am, alas, what do I attempt? I must confess I am too rash herein, to go about
thus to engage my self, within this laborinth whence there is no means to get
forth again. For what appearance is there, I should ever once make good what I
have promised here and taken on me. I will yet venture since I am got in, God
and his Saint I trust, will assist me in it, and if all fail, I shall suffer
wrackin a goodly Sea, where shipwreck were no loss, but rather to be wished
for, while it were no better then to loose ones self in her praises, and to
show how boundles and immense, the Ocean of her virtues, and perfections were,
the thing I principally affect.

Hitherto I have gone like a faithful Truchman, or Interpretour; I may say
likewise, and say not amiss, like an Ambassador who can say no more then what
he finds in his Commission, wherein he must look, to be punctual, while he
puts on the person of such an one; after which discharged, he is not debarred,
to speak more freely of his own. He may, if he will, fall into his Masters
praises, and speak what of him he ingenuously thinks, without impeachment to
his charge or office. So hitherto have I been a faithful Historian of the Life
of this Saint, wherein I would not exceed the bounds of a modest Relator of
the truth; what I find precisely delivered by other Historians, and recommended
to posterity each one in their ways. But now that I have discharged it; and all this while taken that person on me, not exceeding my Commission, in the
substance of the matter, in ought I know; I see not why I may not now take the
liberty to speak of my self, what I think, of my Lady and Mistress in her
praises.

But where shall I begin, or how proceed, but without beginning or any method
at al, for in this office I hold my self not obliged to any. These are but
scatterings as I promised you, which I find here and there neglected in the
trace of her life, which yet require regard and some reflection.

In the History her Infancy is noted to be a fair Aurora, promising a
beautyful and goodly day, and not without good reason, having now already seen
the happy progress of her Day, which had as fair a Sunne-set, as the Morn
was promising, and the day performed, glorious in refulgent rays of virtuous
and religious works, til night; when every plow ends his furrow, and every
constant labourer goes to rest.

The Aurora and beginning of which day was wholly spent in the Virginal; the
Noone and middle season in the Coniugal; and the rest til the utmost period, in
the Vidual state. O happy Day the while, that knew no night of mortal sin, no
heats of concupiscences, or clouds of melancholy, Her flowers in this first
season, were Lillyes al, and Roses in the bud, enclosed from the eyes of
mortals, with a silken veyle of chaste retirement, and fenced with the thorns
of Vigilance as with a court of guard. In her infancy, nothing more innocent,
in her minority full of sports, witty and ingenious, but tending all to piety,
and for the rest, to the years of election of a constant state most stayed and
prudent, far beyond her years. Sophia her cursed Mother, in the time of her
Espousals, had cause to know it well, when she a woman of so great a spirit,
and who had such a tongue as had been able Syren-like, to have enchaunted and
be witched any tender Maiden, to have persuaded what she listed, was so put to
silence with her prudent answeares, as she durst never provoke such a piercing
wit any more. But thou Sophia were deceived the while, it was not her wit so
much as thou imagind'st which foiled thee so, in thy proper element of a potent
tongue, but the sweet Unction of the holy Ghost, that gave such a force and
energy to her speech in defense of her self, being pressed so hottly with such
batteryes, as thou laydst against her; Which oil of grace in her heart* once
taking fire, within her mouth, turned to such a flame of seeming Eloquence.

For if she a Child, had such a loathing and contempt of the vanities of this
world, as tyres and dressings, pearls, and carkanets, which the Daughters of
the world affect so much and desperately dote upon in that age; Who doubts but
the holy Ghost did dictate to her what she spoke in that occasion. But leaving
those, pass we unto her pucellage; the time being come she should assent or
disassent from the Spousalles made in her Infancy, with L^wys, the gallantest
Prince, and the most accomplished of al Europe: No doubt but here was a
combat all the while, in the breast of this noble Princess and such a one as
happily had she not a sure rampart or bullwark to repair unto, she had
questionless sunck down in the field, and her tender breast had never been
able to have endured the shocks and counterbuffs were given on either side. The
Prince for his person, dignity, piety, and qualityes of a Prince, was void of
a^l exceptions; what then? and should she give her full consent to ratify the
espousalles made long since between them; Should she so easily give over her
former fair designs of abandoning the world, the pompes and vanities thereof,
should she now leave her heavenly Spouse, for an earthly one? And what
comparison I pray (would she say within her self) may be found between them?
He a noble Prince but yet a man subject to death and al calamityes. The other a
Prince of Princes, and which is more, my God; and though a man and mortal
heretofore, yet now immortal.

The Prince of Th^ringia, as yet seeks not to me, nor do I know his mind, as
yet. But my other Spouse, has woed me long, and graced me much. Him if I
e^ioy, and none but him; In him have I all that heart can possibly require: And
this when I shall have, though he were the Monark of the world, yet should I
want these (...) contents which he affords. The sweet conversation of one h^wer
with him to me is more, then all the solaces, the other can affoard in a whole
age. And if for his sake I shall leave an earthly Spouse, I shall oblige to me a
heavenly one, and look what terren things I shall renounce for him, I shall find
to be multiplied a hundred fold. Yet is this Prince, I understand, a virtuous
and religious Prince. Why then may I not enjoy him too, in his degree an
earthly Spouse, and yet reteyne my heavenly and chiefest Spouse, and yield my
body, and my second faith to one, and not infringe the loyalty of my first to
the other, but keep my soul inuiolably his? And why may I not love him with all the powers of my body and soul, as my spiritual Spouse and yet love my
earthly Spouse with a love subordinate to his, and proper to it?

What here now should this poor Virgin do in this doubtful dilemma? what
should she choose? Fair and goodly reasons seem to inuit on either side.
She has no way to cut this Gordian knot, but with the sword of entire
resignation, in putting it freely into the hands of ^er heavenly Spouse, and
make him the vmpire in his own cause. The history makes no mention of it but,
we piously presume, she shut her self in her Closet hereupon; where what
passed between these amourous Spouses, cann^t be set down, because I never
heard sh^e revealed it to any.

This only do w^e find in effect from that time forwards she was wholly cle^red
of her doubt. For thence she resolved indeed to hear ken to the Prince, and
for her part to yield a full consent unto (...) Spousalls. Res^luing so to
entertayne the one, as she never mea^ed to forg^e the other. And truly this
we may boldly say, if ever woman kept her self entire in these double
Spousalls, without exception of either part, our S. Elizabeth has had the
happynes and prerogative above others.

With this began her N^ one or Midday of her age* w^e^ the heat of youth; is
apt to carry us into youthful thoughts; such as are sports and pastimes,
gallantry in apparel, deintyes and delicacyes in diet, especially which Princes
in the Court. And yet this Ph^nix among the Ladies and Princesses of the earth,
living in a vain and want on Court, as it was when she found it first, took
no more of those relishes, then fishes are wont of the brackish seas. She was
a Salama^der amid the fires of earthly co^cupiscences. A Bird of Paradise,
which had no fee^e to settle on terren things, but always houering in the
air of heavenly and spiritual contemplation* How often had the Music played
in her presence, when she adue^ted nothing; and when her Sister Agnes had been
dancing among the Ladies of the Court, she would be stealing to her Oratory
to converse with her heavenly Spouse, either in reading of some pious and
devout book, when she would imagine her Spouse had spoken familiarly with her,
or in vocal or mental prayer, making then account she treated with her Spouse*
and thus she would spend whole houers, while Agnes and the rest would spend as
many in their chatts and daliances with the youthful Lords. How often had Sophia
fetch Elizabeth out of her Closet, to consort with such as these, saying, they
were company indeed fit for Ladies like her self; and for those retirements
she affected so, they were for Anchoretts, and not for wives, especially great
Ladies. When she for satisfaction sake would now and then come forth, in
person indeed and bodily, but in soul left b^hind. Madam Mothers, she would
say, if I be not with my Lord and Spouse, give me leave I beseech you to
converse with my Lord God, assuring you, if I be not with the one, of necessity
I must be in company of the other, or else Madam I must tell you plainly and
ingenuously, and confess unto you I am not my self. Which answer, while
there was no remedy she was feign to take for payment.

The reason why she so divided her self bet^ween her Spouses, was because by
experience she found that the sweet conversation of the one diminished not the
others; for likely with her Lord she would have no other talk, nor he to give
her satisfaction, would discourse of nothing else but of pious things, as of
some pretty new devotion or other, and somtymes she would ask some cases of
cons^ience of him, and he would answer probably what he thought and so beguile
the time with one an other. It was an admirable thing how from her hushand she
could presently co^pose her self to prayer, and from her prayer how amiable and
gracious she would be to her husband.

But alas this Noone of her age, lasted not long; The Sun being got to the
top of the Zodiaque, in a moment as it were* is in the decline: and what is a
year, some two or three, or three or four, but a moment once compared with
eternity? The Noone then of her Coniugal state being ended, with the
unlooked for and untimely death of her earthly Spouse, her Vidual began, which
lasted til the evening of her own. Where do we meet with a passage worth the
note. Who would have thought measuring the love she bare to her deceased Lord,
but one Tomb might have held them both, whose hearts during life seemed all as
one, since the heart goes likly where the body is. She was so wholly to her
husband while he lived, as she had been a stranger merely to all things else;
Who being dead, she seemed as he had never been, not that she could forget
him, but as if the love she bare him, only had been lent and borrowed for a
time, being now restored again to the owner of her whole love her heavenly
Spouse, as holding her self heerby to be entirely acquit of the debt, she was
now more free for her only Spouse.

But lo the state of her Widow hood wanted not difficultyes enough, the medal
of her Noone, where the Sun of her good fortune was in the highest pitch, was
of a sudden in decline and changed into a bitter Afternoon: her Roses all
were turned to Thorns* For now new batteryes were bent on every side against
the Citadel of her heart, to render it to a second earthly Spouse. Al fairest
means were used to work their ends, no stone was left unremoved to effect what
what they desired. Her nearest friends she lost in that same quarrel. Her Aunt,
her Uncle, yea her Father were denied admittance to a parley in any equal
terms, she stop her ears against the^ al, as at the bewitchings of a Sirens
song. She was a Rock immovable, that dashed the forces of their arguments to
naught, like billows vanishing to froth. I speak of her wordly Crosses, when
she was thrust out of doors, stripped of al she had, was forced with her
children, to beg from door to door, for these were roses, and not thorns to
her. These were the favors which he^ heavenly Spouse upon her late entire
conversion to him did present her with. For lo the thorns I speak of were not
thorns indeed, they were rather flowers unto her, to weaue her garlands, to
make her self more grateful to him. Open affro^ts were crowns upon her front,
nor ever Queen or Empress in the world, seemed more to tickle for joy on the
triumphal day of their coronations, then Elizabeth did, when she found her self
so injuriously confronted by that monster of ingratitude, and thrown into the
mire and dirt; when she was feign to sit upon a sunny bank to dry her self, and
with a knife to scrape away the mire from her course and homely garments,
imagining the while she clea^sed her soul withal, from the ordure and
contagion of the sins of vanity she feared she had contracted in her life: in
a word she seemed in that same plight to have bin a Job upon his dunghill, and
yet as rieh as Cressus with all his gold, which she held no more then earth and
yellow clay, and really is noe more indeed but Earth, save that esteem does
give it worth and price, which she could do, and truly did. But the great
Cross she apprehended all the time, were the bounds and limits which her
Master put upon her pious inclinations of releiuing the poor, touching the
Leapers, and handling their soars, and this indeed did try her to the quick.
That same of leaving so her Maids was no little Cross unto her, but nothing
like to this, yet did she swallow up both*pills, with invincible fortitude; and
so refined, she came at last to that, as she knew not her own, til she were
assured of her Masters mind. Never was Afternoon more piously and better
spent: she being wholly seen and employed in works of mercy. For who ever asked
an alms that was refused? She clothed the naked, fed the hungry, and for the
cold made fires for them; she cherished Orphans, releiued Widows, comforted
the distressed, dressed the most noisome and loathsome soars with her our
hands, buried the dead: in a word what did she not, that any other Saint had
ever done, that came within her way or reach?

It is true indeed that Ss. are not to be compared together in a factious
sort. N^r Peter, Paul, and Apollo, in contentious wise, to be made the heads of
other private spirits, but al are to be reuere^ced as one in God, and God in all. Yet howsoever, though they may not be t^us paralelled, yet may they well be
resembled in their similitudes, wherein they agree without any breach of
Charity, in us or them. I hope then it shall not be il taken, if I say our Saint
was not a Prophet merely, or an Apostle, or a Mart^r, or a Doctor of the
Church, for these in verity she could not be; yet as Elizeus is said to have
the spirit of Elias, and which is more a double spirit too, so may we say she
had the spirit of Prophecy in her, when she foresaw the future vocation of
that Virgin whose hair she cut off: An Apostolical spirit when she labored
so, in the conversion of Infidels, and baptizing Infants: the spirit of
Martyrdom, whose fervent desires she had so boiling in her breast, whose life
otherwise was a perpetual martyrdom, in the cruel macerations of her body. The
spirit of the Doctors she had, in that she labored to catechize the Children
and the ignorant, and was a light of instruction to her mayds. She was an
Hermitesse in spirit, in so affecting the solitude of her closet, as she did;
whereby she was a true Confessor in fasting, prayer, and alms doing, all to
confess the holy name of JESUS in her works. And for ^he rest as we have said;
s^ee had truly been, a Virgin, Wife, and Widow, and though she dyed not in
the first, yet had she the affect thereof, and spirit, to her death.

Thus had our Saint here more then a two fold spirit, and vertually contained
in her a whole Hierarchy of Sanctity. And now let us see how she approached to
the Angelical Hierarchy of the blessed Spirits. First then, she was an Angel
in her modesty, whereby she edifyed. In Obedience an Archangel to perform the
heasts of her heavenly Spouse, and of man, in contemplation of him. She was as
one of the Virtues, in her promptnes, to help and assist her Neighbor. As one
of the Powers to vanquish il with good. One of the Principates, in her exercise
of Humility, and assiduous practice of humiliations. A Domination in the
victory of her passions. A Throne, in her repose and peace of mind. A Cherubin
in her in-sight into heavenly and divine mysteries. And lastly a Seraphin in
her bu^ning flames of Charity and the Love of God. And shall we yet go higher,
with Your leave, the Purest of all pure creatures. For lo I here set forth no
Paragons, nor paralels do I here make with any; much less with you, o most
blessed Virgin Mary, the sovereign Lady* of all the Ecclesiastical and
triumphant Hierarchyes, spiritual or angelical. But only with your fair
leave, do make some resemblances between you as the Mother, and this Saint
the Daughter.

First then I find these sympathies between you. You were a Virgin, Wife, and
Widow; so was she, wi^h this difference that you were perpetually a Virgin
really before, in, and after Childbirth, really a Wife indeed and fruitful in
effect, and truly a Widow both in effect and affect. Whereas she the first,
not perpetually in effect, though in affect perpetually such, and the other
truly* and r^ally so* Secondly you were presented in the Temple at three
year old, as dedicated to the service of God; and she at three year old,
affianced to an earthly Prince, as dedicated to the service of the world. You
at fourteen consented to the Espousalles of Joseph, having first made a Vow of
perpetual virginity: and she consented to the espousalles of Prince Lewys,
with the purpose of still retayning the affect of Chastity. You remaining
perpetually a Virgin, saw yet the fruit of your Womb; and she with the affect
of Chastity had likewise hers. Thirdly. You persecuted by Herod fled into Egypt
with your little child, and she persecuted by Henry with her children likewise
was thrust out of doors. You Queen of Angels lived in Nazareth in a slender
house: and she Princess of Thuringia at Marpurg in a poor houell. Finally,
you the Patroness and Protectresse of all, that come running for succor: And
she had not the heart to send any unsatisfied away, but was the Mother of
Orphans, the Physician to the sick, Chirurgie^ to the lame, a staff to the
aged, Cloth to the naked, bread to the hu^gry, a storehouse of al provision for
the poor and needy: in a word you the Mother of mercy, and she your daughter
right, al of mercy.

This leave allowed me now to go so high, gives me a confidence to go yet
higher: to find resemblances, as in the Mother, so likewise in the Son. Now
then to end with her, where he began. He at his Nativity into this world, had
an Angel singing as he lay in the Crib: and she at her Natals, her Nativity
into the next, had an Angel likewise singing by her bed side. He wept in
entering into this vale of miseries: she sung in going forth. His Angel tuned
and first gave the tone, saying Glory to God above, and peace to men of good
will: and hers glory to God, and peace unto her Soul. An host of Angels joined
to his Guiuer: and so there did to her. This only difference was, she sung with
them again, he wept, and cried as Infants use to do in their birth. She in
convenient time was baptized with water: and he with his proper blood in
circumcision. She found an Astrologer, to cast her Natiu^ty, who presaged her
future glory: And he a Symeon that fore told him likewise to become hereafter a
Light unto the Gentiles, and a glory unto Israel. What more? S. John Io. 1. c. 3.
has truly said: that We should be like one day to Jesus Christ: and our
Lord himself has likewise uttered with his own mouth: that Such as shall
believe in him, Io. 14.
shall do the things which he ^ath done. Yea, and which is more, shall arrive
to such a point of happiness, as they shall do yet greater things then he has
done If so, then Elizabeth may be said to resemble him: For if an intimous
conversation makes a simpathy and similitude among friends, and that Moses
conuersing with our Lord on Mount Syna got a Gloriet on his head, so like to
his. No marueil that Elizabeth should seem so to resemble her Spouse, with
whom she had so frequent and private familiarityes in the Syna o^ Mount of
sublime Contemplation. And I should think it no dishonor orderogation to
Christ her Spouse, that she should be said to have wrought the same wonders
and greater, when it (...) confessed that what he did he did of himself and of
his own power: and she by his, as a mere participation from him. Say we then
with confidence, if Jesus Christ the Spouse of Elizabeth wrought Miracles.
Elizabeth likewise the Spouse of Jesus wrought Miracles. If he cured the sick
and infirm; even so did she. if he gave eyes to the blind, feet to the Lame,
and blood to the withered arm; so did she. If he dispossessed Devils and
cast them out of their holds; so did she. If he fed multitudes with bread and
fish of his own power: she fed them likewise of her store through his power.
Thus do we see how near this Saint resembled and approached her dearest
Spouse, and so near that I may say yet more, that they seem to be as One,
since she being united with him, was One and the self same in spirit with him,
so Deifyed in a sort: where I leave her adoring the blessed Trinity, she
having through a divine and Seraphicall Love ascended so by the ladder
aforesaid from the lowest state of a Conjugal lif^ to the highest pitch of the
burning and most amorous Seraphins.

Now then to descend again, excuse my rudenes while I call upon you, Mirror
of piety, Pattern of sanctity, Model of innocence, image of virtue* Example
of perfection, Terror of Diuills, Consolation of the afflicted. You the fair
Elizabeth, the Well Beloved of the blessed Spirits, the Sister, the Dove, and
singular Spouse of your beloved Jesus. Most delicious soul, most merciful,
and gracious, in the midst of the pleasures now, and divine delights which you
enjoy: Grant I beseech you, I may always remain under the shadow of your
wings, under the folds of your protection and sweet mercy, intercede you for
the salvation of my soul, for the corporal health, and happy success of me
poor Worm and miserable wretch. Obtain for me all those gifts of God, which
are expedient for me and to his greater glory; that I may be Master of my
passions, and have a sovereign command over all my affections. You, who
already have found such grace in the sight of God, cause through your prayers,
O dearest Saint of many Saints most dear unto me. O noble Princess of
Thuringia, I may always find grace in the sight of God your dearest Spouse,
and before the whole celestial Court of the blessed Saints and holy Spirits.
Grant I beseech you, I may not once forget or ever seem to neglect the means
of my salvation, that mine Enemies may never vaunt they have prevailed against
me; that being fed with the bread of grace, of life, of wisdom, and receiving
the sacred food of Angels, which is the precious Body of my sweet Jesus, your
dearest Spouse and mine* I may suck in the fountain self, the sweet pleasures
of the Divinity, and be inebriated and drunk of the divine consolations. O let
your humble servant find so much grace with your dear Spouse, that his devout
prayers may suddenly be heard his vows and good desires, find entrance and
access to his Throne of Majesty, that his just petitions may freely be
accorded to. And this do I demand of your, this I desire, and ^quire of you
by all the acts of pure dilection which in your prayers your ever aimed and
leueled at the Divinity. And while I shall perform my race in this list in the
vale of miseryes, his Omnipotency would please to unite my heart and spirit unto
his more then most holy one, through the sacred cheyne of his most fair
transforming and deifying love. And pardon me o most holy Lady, gracious S.
Elizabeth, that offering your and dedicating to your honor in all humility,
this little Work of mine. I do it in so poor a fashiou. Oh graciously deigne
to accept it so, and it shall be rich enough.

Amen.
FINIS.

