HEAVENS JOY, OR, HEAVEN BEGVN UPON Earth. Wherein there is discovered more
plainly then ever formerly. The happy and surpassing glorious estate of a
Justified Person, or a Saint on Earth. Also that greater happiness at the day
of Judgment. And a small taste of that greatest and most glorious Estate
prepared for us in the highest Heavens. Also the Writer will be ready to
defend what is here written against all opposers whatsoever.

PHILIP. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

LONDON. Printed by T. C. and B. A. for John Harrison; and are to be sold in
Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Golden Anchor. 1616.

TO THE READER.
Beloved Reader if thou be desirous of Novelties, here is News worth thy
hearing. It is the Report of the Situation, the Beauty, and comeliness of a
Citizen of New Jerusalem: which I shall show thee the rather I do attempt
it because of the slanders that generation of Hypocrites do cast upon this
City. They do tell thee faintly, that here is much good to be found: but when
thou hear their uncertain relation, and viewest their tottred Habit, and
considerest their leannes, and how much they are distracted; it makes thee much
to question the truth of their Report. They tell thee they are inhabitants of
it. And if thou question further of the qualities of those Citizens: Thou shall
hear them say, they all are Peacemakers, Joyful, Holy, Wise, bold, Rich, and
Humble people. But when thou take a view of their Pride, see their
Poverty, perceiuest their fears, obseruest their folly, know their
filthiness, considerest their heaviness, and are acquainted with their
contentions, This I say, makes thee to question the truth of their report.
Wherefore in hope of thy desire to get this Possession, I was emboldened to
rehearse, what by experience I know, and by diligent trial I understand of
that Royal City. Thou shall have nothing here but words of truth and
soberness, and that which thou thy self shall find written in the Book of
Life. And because there are many inhabitants of this City, that being but newly
entered, are scarce acquainted with the Glory, Majesty, the Content, Riches,
Wisdom, and safety it affoords: I have desired to impart to such what they
may find, if they proceed in the course they have well begun. And I do the
rather endeavor it, that as men are helped by reading to discover counterfaite
Travelers: so men may be assisted to find out the false brags, and vain
boastings these Hypocrites do make: and howbeit I know some of them will
learn by this Book, the more craftily to deceive, and will be able better to
color their estate to others: yet knowing also that Heaven shall reueile such
iniquity, and the God of vengeance will take vengeance of the abuse of such
pains. I commend it to the protection of that most Powerful God, and rest yet
a while.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Page 3. marg. b 4. 16. line 23. earth. p. 9. f Ps. 38. p. 11. m Heb. 10.18. p.
13. t 57. 19. p. 15. l. 7. an, un. p. 16. a 1. 8. p. 17. l. 4. Heads. p. 22. s
Phil. 2.6.7.8. p. 26. l. 22. learn that p. 27. l. 1. were redeemed. p. 31. l.
23. soul p. 41. l. 4. is evident. p. 47. c Mat. 26. p. 48. d. Romans 10.10. p.
50. l. 3. this caused. p. 61. l. 23. blot out all. p. 63. l. 4. translated. p.
98. c Isa. p. 90. l. 19. willing, but by. p. 98. l. 17. store. p. 99. l. 9. As
if. p. 103. l. 27. forth for trouble p. 119. i Ps. 16. p. 122 l. 1. them. p.
127. l. 11. b John 14.3. p. 154. l. 17. as blessed. p. 159. l. 5. for God read
good. If it be not well pointed the next Impression may help that.

There is a little Book called Christ's Kingdom discovered, which is worth thy
reading.

HEAVENS JOY, OR, HEAVEN BEGVNNE UPON Earth.
THis small Treatise of Hell being fitted for the press, it was thought fit by
the learned examiner, that it should not pass alone, but that as much at least
of Heaven should be added to it: that as the reader should be driven by
Judgments, so he might also be drawn by Mercies, to turn unto God by true
and unfeigned Repentance. Now therefore that what is expected, may be
performed: here shall also be observed, the same order (as near as may be)
that was before observed. As first, that there is a Heaven, or place of
Blessedness. Secondly, what this Heaven is? Thirdly, where it is and shall be?
Fourthly, for whom it is prepared? Lastly, how long it shall continue? And
first, That there is a Heaven. This albeit none can deny, when they do behold
the glorious firmament, so wonderfully adorned and beautified, with a bright
and great light for the Day, a glorious, though less light for the Night; so
trimmed and decked with a many of glittering Stars, each differing from other
in Glory: this cannot but enforce all wise men, to conceive of a higher place,
and far more excellent, then this is: yet because nothing does so well
satisfy the Conscience, as the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, let
us see it made evident by plain Scriptures: as where it is written, That
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, but into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Heb. 9.24.
Also at the last day it is written, that the Lord himself shall descend from
Heaven. 1. These. 4.
Also where we read, that the Apostles looked up steadfastly toward heaven, at
our Lords Ascension: it is written. That two men stood by them in white
apparel, which also said; ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven? This same Jesus who is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in
like manner, as you have seen him go into Heaven. Act. 1.10.11.
Also the Saints that are persecuted on eath, are willed to Rejoice, and to be
exceeding glad, yea, to leap for Joy because their reward is great in Heaven.
Mat. 5.11.12. Luck. 6.23.
Again it is written, Tha^ Joy shall be in Heaven, over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, that need no
repentance. Luc. 15.7.
Also we read that in the resurrection. They neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. Mat. 22.30.
And this shall suffice to prove that there is a Heaven. Now to show what this
Heaven is? This is the great difficulty which does amaze all that shall
endeavor to express it: hear they all come short, this is that which is so
surpassing Glorious, and so Excellent, as that no heart can conceive, nor
tongue express, much less any pen describe, or set forth the wonderful and
unsearchable excellency thereof: as it is evident by that the Apostle speaking
out of the Prophet, of the beginnings of it even here: says, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. Is. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2.9.
If these lesser be so far out of the reach, especially of natural men, how
impossible is it for any so to express those greater, that natural men (who
are thereby to be drawn to Repentance) should conceive of it in any wise as it
is, and as it shall be clearly seen of such as are spiritual, at the last
Day: yet because the beginnings of it are here, even upon Earth, and they that
will ever see, and enjoy the fullness of it hereafter, must be acquainted with
the Beginnings here: as it is written, He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life. Io. 3.36.
Also, he that hears my word (says Christ) and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting life; and shall not come into condemnation, but has
passed from death to life. Io. 5.24.
And on the contrary, he that believes not on the Son, shall not see Life,
but the wrath of God abides on him. Io. 3.36.
Therefore here shall be first showed somewhat concerning those beginnings, which
the sons and daughters of the Almighty do enjoy even here: Secondly, those
Scriptures which concern the excellent Glory hereafter, shall be laid down:
and that blessedness looked for, at least pointed at. And that as much as we
enjoy hear may the better appear, and we may sensibly perceive how good the
Lord is, and how blessed they are that trust in him: even while they soiourne
on Earth. That this may the more set forth the loving kindness of the Lord,
and the wonderful change that such have made, as are once translated from
death to life; such as have once overcome; and have their part in the first
Resurrection. We will first take a view, of what we are by nature since Adams
fall, and then shall be showed, what we do become by Grace. By Nature we are
all dead: 1. Cor. 15.22.
Accursed, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
the wrath of God abides on us, Ioh. 3.36.
there is none of us righteous, no not one: There is none that understands,
none that searches after God: we are all gone out of the way, we are
altogether become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one: we
are all guilty of condemnation before God. Romans 3.10.11, 19.
We are dead in sins and trespasses, we all walk according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that
works in the children of disobedience. Among whom we all have our
conversation in the lusts of the flesh, and fulfilling the desires of the
flesh, and of the mind, and are by Nature the children of wrath, as well as
others; we are without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world; Ephesians. 2.1.2.3. v. 12.
we are unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice, and envy, hateful, and hating one another: Tit. 3.3.
We are in the snare of the Devil, taken captive by him at his will: 2. Tim.
2.26.
We yield our members servants to uncleanness; and to iniquity unto
iniquity: Romans 6.19
we are wretched, miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: Reu. 3.17.
we are firebrarnds in the fire, Zach. 3.2. Jude. 23.
we are cast out into the open field, polluted in our blood: Ezec. 16.5.6.
we are lost, Luc. 19.10
stinking, corrupt, and very loathsome. psa. 31.5.7
This, and much more then this, is our misery by Nature; but here, behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the
Sons of God 1. Io. 3.1.
? Oh, consider I pray you, the wonderful change that we have made. And that
we may truly taste the goodness of our God, even to all his; in this life, here
shall be laid open, some few of those many benefits, inward and outward;
which we do enjoy while we are yet upon earth.

The first is Peace and rest: Peace.
yea such Peace as passes all understanding phil. 4.7.
: and such Rest as is not to be expressed: For where as by Nature by reason of
our Guilt, we are at great unrest, and have no Peace: but are at much disquiet,
yea we are therefore compared, and that fitly to the troubled Sea that cannot
rest Is. 57.20.
. As Job truly says of himself, I was not in safety, neither had I rest,
neither was I quiet, yet trouble came. Yea, when we say our bed shall comfort
us, our couch shall ease our complaint, then such are scared with dreams, and
terrified with visions, so that their souls many times choose strangling and
death rather then life Job. 7.13.14.15.
. Yea, as Mariners in a tempest they are tossed up and down, sometimes they
mount up to the heaven, and they go down again to the depths: so that their
souls are melted because of Trouble. They reele too and fro, and stagger like
drunken men: and are at their wits end. But when crying to God in such trouble,
they are indeed delivered out of such distres: when the storm is once become a
calm, and the waves are still: then such are glad, because they be at Rest,
when they are brought to the desired Haven psalm. 107.26.27.
. Here is now a wonderful change, when men have once gotten the victory by the
blood of the Lamb Heb. 10.28.19. 1. Cor. 15.57.
: when once we have overcome by Faith in Christ 1. Ioh. 5.4.
. Then follows such Peace, such Rest, as cannot by any means be expressed:
as it is written, We being justified by Faith, have Peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ Romans 5.1.
. Also, this is plainly spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, thus: The work of
righteousness shall be Peace: and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a Peaceable habitation, and in
sure dwellings and in quiet resting places Isa. 32.17.18.
. Also the Apostle plainly affirms, that such as have believed do enter into
Rest Heb. 4.3.
not shall hereafter, but do. This our Lord notes, where he speaks of this
faith, he says: That many shall come from the East, and West, and North, and
South, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
God (...). 8.11 L^c. 13.28.29.
. By sitting down, is noted unto us this Rest or Quietness. As a man greatly
is refreshed when he can have a convenient place to sit down, especially at
the end of his Journey: so are the children of God at quiet when they sit down
on the top of this glorious mountain, which with great difficulty they have
climed. This is that Rest which the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, where speaking
of Christ's kingdoms flourishing, he says; In that day there shall be a root
of Iesse, which shall stand up for an ensign to the people: to it shall the
Gentiles seek, and the Rest shall be glorious Isa. 11.10.
. And the same Prophet in another place ^aith thus, from the Lord, Behold I
^reate the fruit of the lips Peace, Peace to him that is a far off, and to
him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him Isa. 57.13.
. Also speaking of the Church: The Lord by that Prophet says thus: Behold I
will extend Peace to her like a River Isa. 66.12.
. And this is that Peace which our blessed Redeemer speaks of, where he
says: Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives, give I unto you, let not your hearts be troubled, neither let it be
afraid Io. 14.27.
. Here this Peace is directly opposed to the fears and terrors, the trouble
and disquiet of such as have it not. Hence it is that such as hearken to
wisdom are promised to dwell safely, and to be quiet from fear of evil, yea
this is manifest in David, when he had once overcome he could say, Return to
thy Rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And
turning him to the Lord, he says, Thou have delivered my soul from Death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling psalm. 116, 7.8.
. In this comfortable estate was Hezechiah when Isaiah comes unto him, with
terrible tidings, and that from the Lord, telling him: That the days come that
all that was in his house, and that which his fathers had laid up in store
unto this day should be carried away into Babylon, and that the Lord had said,
that nothing should be left. And that his sons which should issue from him, and
which he should beget, they should take away, and they should be Eunuchs in
the Palace of the king of Babylon. At this terrible and dreadful tidings, he
is not disquieted, but he does manifest his peaceable, and most comfortable
estate, yea ^^t he had obtained this Peace and ^^st; the inseparable companions
^r effects of righteousness: by his ^ouing, amiable, and most temperate
answer, where he says, Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken:
And to this he added. Is it not good if Peace and Truth be in my days 2. Kin.
20.17.18.19.
. And is not this and unspeakable benefit to have such a blessed change
wrought, to have such surpassing Peace and Rest, in this Life! If there were no
more but this, it is worth all the pains we suffer, and all the afflictions we
undergo; and yet men are so ouer^ome with doubtings, and vnbe^efe, that they
struggle not for this Rest, and surely the Reason is, because ^hey believe not
the Scriptures. To this Peace which passes all understanding, is added Joy,
which is unspeakable, and full of Glory 1. pet. 18.
. The is that joy of the holy Ghost tha^ blessed and glorious Comfor^er, Joy.
a^ it is written, The kingdom of Go^ is not Meat and Drink, but
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy of the holy Ghost Romans 14.17.
. The difference between this, and the Joy of Hypocrites, is known by these.
The Joy o^ Hypocrites is very short, and it dot^ vanish at length, and come to
nothing: as it is written, The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the Joy
of the Hypocrite but for a moment. Though his excellency mount v^ to the
Heavens, and his head reac^ unto the Clouds: yet he shall peris^ for ever like
his own dung, and the^ which have seen him shall say where is he? He shall
fly away as a dream and shall not be found: yea he shall b^ chased away as a
vision of the night Job. 20.5.6.7.8.
But the joy of the Saints is everlasting, as it is written: The Redee^ed of
the Lord shall return, and ^ome with singing to Sion; euerla^ting Joy shall be
upon their Herds: they shall obtain joy, and gladness, and sorrow, and
sighing shall fly away. Is. 35.10. Isa. 51.11.
It shall never be taken from them, as it is written; I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice, and your Joy no man takes from you. Io. 16.22.
This continually increases: as it is written, that our Lord says to his
Disciples. As my Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my
Love. These things have I spoken unto you that my Joy might remain in you, and
that your ^oy might be full. Io. 15.9.11.
And this is the first difference, between the Joy of Hypocrites, and our Joy.
Theirs is short or momentany, ours everlasting; ^heirs is taken from them, ours
never; ^heirs vanishes, ours increases. A second difference is, that the Joy
of the Hypocrite is not accompanied with Peace, and Rest, for these are always
the effects of Righteousness. And we know, that, there is no Peace to the
wicked: for the Lord has spoken it. Is. 48.22.
And who knows not that an Hypocrite, is a wicked man in the highest degree.
But the Joy of the righteous, is always accompanied with Peace, and Rest; as
it is evident, where Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy of the holy Ghost, are
joined together as inseparable companions, and that very often in Scriptures,
as where it is written, The Kingdom of God, is not meat and drink, but
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy of the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.
As if it should have been said in more plain words, it is not the
observation of meats, and drinks, and such other outward things, that
discouers us to be of the Kingdom of Christ, but it is Righteousness, and
Peace, and Joy of the holy Ghost: these are indeed the things that makes us
manifest to our selves, and others to be Christ's subjects; also the same
Apostle says to the same Saints, Now the God of hope fill you with all Joy,
and Peace in believing. Romans 15.13
Lo hear Joy, and Peace, are joined together in true believers. Also we
being justified by Faith, have Peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the glory
of God. Romans 5.1.2
Also in that excellent Psalm. Then are they glad, because they be at quiet,
and so he brings them to their desired haven. Hear is also gladness, and
rest. Also the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Church, says, Thus says the
Lord, behold I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, and be borne upon her
sides, and dandled upon her knees: as one whom his mother comfort, so will I
comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem; And when ye see this,
your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb. Is.
66.12.13.14.
Here is Peace, and Joy, to the Saints. And this is another manifest
difference, between the Joy of the Hypocrite, and of the child of God. Though
the Hypocrite triumph and rejoice, yet he is never at quiet. But the child of
God has also Peace, and Rest. A third difference is this, the Joy of the
Hypocrite lifts him up: as before, Though his excellency mount up to the
Heavens, and his head reatch unto the Clouds. Job. 20.6.
This does plainly show the exaltation of Hypocrites in their rejoicing and
triumph: yea these are so exalted that they despise others: which our blessed
Lord observed, and discovered by a parable, where it is written, That he spoke
this parable to certain men which trusted in themselves, that they were
righteous, and despised others: Two men went up into the Temple to Pray, the
one a Pharisee, the other a Publicane; The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
himself, God I thank thee that I am not as other men are. Luc. 18.9.10.11.
Thus do Hypocrites exalt themselves, and are lifted up with Capernaum to
Heaven, though they shall come down to Hell. Mat. 11.23.
He is so carried away with the Love of himself, that he basely accounts of
other. But the Joy of the Saints, is never severed from meekness and
lowliness. Gal. 5.22.23.
They are all clothed with humility. 1. Pet. 5.5.
For these have learned not to rejoice in themselves, but in the Lord, as it is
written, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, let your
Moderation be known unto all men: the Lord is at hand; yea the same mind is
in them which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought
it no robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto Death, even to the Death of the Cross Phil. 4.4.5
. So those that rejoice with exceeding great joy, when they saw that the Lamb
had prevailed to open the Book with seven seals, we read that they fell
down before the Lamb Revel. 5.8.
. And this is another manifest difference, between the Hypocrites Joy, and the
Joy of the Saints. The Hypocrites Joy makes him proud, and lifts him up; and
causes him to despise others. The Joy of the Saints does humble him, yea cast
him down before the Lord: and is always accompanied with Humility. A fourth
difference is this: That the Joy of the Hypocrite holds not out in
persecution, as it is plain, where it is written: Those on the Rock are such,
which when they hear, receive the word with Joy, and these have no root,
which for a while believe; and in time of Temptation fall away. Luc. 8.13.
But Matthew writes thus, He that receives the seed in stony places, the
same is he which hears the word, and anon with Joy receives it, yet has
he no root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when Tribulation, or
Affliction arises because of the word, by and by he is offended Mat. 13.20.27.
. Whereas the Joy of the child of God, that is indeed justified by Faith in
the blood of Christ: does increase in tribulation, yea even in the greatest
trials, such do glory: as it is written, We glory in Tribulation Romans 5.3
. And James also bids us, To account it all Joy, when we fall into diverse
Temptations Iam. 1.2.
. Also Peter speaks of this Joy, where speaking of manifold Temptations, yet
we rejoice greatly in them all, in the consideration of the lively Hope, and
never fading inheritance which we believe is laid up for us, and shall be
revealed in the last time 1. Pet. 1.5.6
. We are as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing 2. Cor. 6.10
. This appears plainly in the examples of such Redeemed ones; As the blessed
Apostles when they were beaten, departed from the Counsel, rejoicing, that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name Act. 5.41.
. So Paul and Silas, when they were cruelly beaten, and had received many
stripes, and were cast into prison, yea thrust into the inner prison, and their
feet made fast in the stocks, yet at midnight they prayed, and sang praises
unto God so loud, that the prisoners heard them.

Act. 16.22.33.24.25.
Thus having laid down some differences, between the Joy of Hypocrites, and of
the Saints, as that their Joy is but for a moment, ours is everlasting: their
Joy does exalt, and lift them up; ours does humble, and cast us down: theirs
is severed from Peace, and Rest; ours accompanied with them both: theirs fails
them, when tribulation comes; ours holds out, nay which is more, increases:
in the most sharp and fiery Trials. And by this the false Joy of the Hypocrite
being discovered, the true Joy of the Saints is clearly seen. Which Joy does
so comfort them, as that it is truly said of them. That the voice of
rejoicing and salvation is in the dwellings of the Righteous. Ps. 118.15.
These are ever singing, and making melody in their hearts unto the Lord.
Speaking to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5.19
singing with Grace in their hearts unto the Lord Col. 3.16.
. So we read of the hundred forty and four thousand that were with the Lamb
on mount Sion: that they had the voices of harpers, harping with harpes, and
they sang (as it were) a new song before the Throne, and before the four
Beasts, and the Elders: and no man could hear that song, but the hundred
forty and ^ure thousand which were never ^edeemed from the Earth Revel.
14.1.2.3.
. Also ^hen the Lamb had taken the ^ooke out of the hand of him that ^te upon
the Throne, having also ^reuailed to open the seven seals ^hereof, we read
that the four ^eastes, and the four and twenty ^lders, fell down before the
Lamb, ^auing every one of them harpes and golden Vials full of Odours, which
are the Prayers of Saints. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy
to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou vast slain, and
have Redeemed us, ^o God; by thy blood, out of every ^indred, and tongue, and
people, and nation: And have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests; and we
shall reign on earth Reu. 5.8.
. Also John says, I saw as it were a Sea of Glass, mingled with fire, and
them that had got^en the victory, over the Beast, and over his Image, and over
his mark^ and over the number of his Nam^ stand on the Sea of Glass; hauin^
the Harpes of God. And they sing the Song of Moses, the servant of God and the
song of the Lamb, saying Great and marvelous are thy work Lord God Almighty,
Just and true are thy ways; thou King of Saints who shall not fear thee, O
Lord, an^ glorify thy Name? for thou only ar^ holy, for all nations shall
come, an^ worship before thee, for thy Judgments are manifest Reu. 15.3.4.5.
. Here is a Tas^ of the inward Comforts of Gods redeemed ones, yea a beginning
of that Fullness which they have abiding for them in the Heavens: whereas such
as are out of Christ, albeit, Their way seem right unto them, yet the ends
thereof are the ways of death: yea in laughter their hearts are sorrowful, and
the end of that mirth is heaviness Prou. 14.12.13.
. For as the ^rackling of thorns under a Pot, (...) is the laughter of a Fool
Eccl. 7.6.
. And ^he Prophet Isaiah tells us, that ^uch as take their own courses ^o
comfort themselves, and do not ^rust in the name of the Lord, and ^tay upon
their God: that the end of such solace shall be sorrow, in ^hese words; Behold
all ye that kindle a Fire, that compass about with sparks: walk in the light
of your fire, and the sparks that ye have kindled. This ye shall have of mine
hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow Is. 50.11.
. And so you have these two sweet and comfortable fruits of the Spirit, Peace,
and Joy; with which the children of God are maruellously cheared in this Life.

To these may be added Love; this Love is not the Love of the world, nor of
men or Angels, but the Love of Christ, or of God the Father, by Christ: through
the assistance of the holy Ghost. This Love we read of where it is written,
That the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is
given unto us Romans 5.5.
. Also, we love him because he loved us first 1. Io. 4.19.
. This Love of Christ does ravish the soul, and makes it to mount on high,
yea, to be above in heavenly Meditations. As it appears by the Song, which
for the excellency is termed the Song of Songs: where there shines out the
unspeakable Love of Christ, and the Church: and of the loving speeches the
Church uses, we find these amongst many: Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth, for thy Love is better then wine. Also, Draw me, and we will run
after thee, the King has brought me into his Chambers, we will be glad and
^eioyce in thee, we will remember thy Love more then wine, the upright Love
thee Cant. 1.2.4.
. Also as the Apple tree, among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved amongst
the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet unto my Taste. He brought me unto the banqueting house and his
banner over me was Love. Stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I
am sick of Love h. Can. 2.3.4.5.
Also, by night upon my Bed; I sought him whom my soul loves; I sought him,
but I found him not; I will rise now and go about the City, in the Streets,
and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him but
I found him not, The watchmen that go about the City found me, to whom I
said, saw ye him whom my solue loves? It was but a little that I passed from
them, bu^ I found him whom my soul loves: held him, and would not let him go
until I had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the chamber, of her
that conceived me Can. 3.1.2.3.4.
. Her^ is the wonderful Love of the Spous^ to Christ: yea we see her soul
loves him, yea she is sick of Love And this is a notable representation of
the Love of every child o^ God, to God; they are even sick o^ Love. As is
evident in the example of Paul where he writes thus, I am in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.
(Nevertheless) to abide in the flesh, is more needful for you Phil. 1.23.24.
. Also where he speaks in the behalf of all the Saints he says: We know,
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
with God, an house not made with hands eternal ^n the heavens. For in this we
groan ^arnestly, desiring te be clothed upon with our house which is from
heaven. If so be that being clothed, we shall not be found naked. For we that
are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened; Not for that we would be
unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Now
he that has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who also has given
unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always confident, knowing
that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. For we
walk by Faith, and not by sight. We are confident I say, and willing rather
to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord 2. Cor.
5.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.
. This also appears evidently, where the same Apostle writes thus. Our
selves which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan^
within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, that is the Redemption of the Body
Romans 8.23.
. Here is the Love wherewith the souls of the children of God are ravished,
with a desire to see God face, to face: a^ it is written. 1. Cor. 13 12.
Now we see through a Glass darkely, but then face to face And this none
conceive of, bu^ such as feel it. And this is not al^ that may be said of
this Love, bu^ as it makes us desire to be ever with the Lord, so it does
also exceedingly help us, to perform the will of God upon Earth. For such as
do thus Love God, they are content to do his will, yea his Law is within
their Hearts. And howsoever formerly they have been much grieved with the
burden of the Law, now it is the Joy, and Rejoicing of their hearts, to do
the will of God, as it is plain, where it is written, This is the Love of God,
that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous 1 Io.
5.3.
. Also David could say: That the Law of the Lord was more to be desired then
Gold: yea, then much fine Gold: sweeter also then the honey, and the honey comb
Psa. 19.7.10.
. Also, The Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of Gold and Silver
Ps. 119.72.
. Also, How sweet are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter then honey unto my
mouth Verse. 103.
. Also, I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold psa. 119.127.
. This we see clearly to appear in the example of Abraham, who being once
Justified by Faith in Christ, deferred not to do the will of God: but
speedily, even the same day he performed what God commanded, as it is
written. And Abraham took Ismaell his son, and all that were borne in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of
Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskinne, the self same
day, as God had said unto him Genesis 17.23
. This is twice repeated to stir us to take the more special notice of
Abraham's willing obedience, and ready performance of Gods Commandment. Thus
in the self same day, was Abraham circumcised, and Ismaell his son, and all
the men of his house Verse. 26.27.
. And a little after that when God appeared unto him, he ran to meet him,
and vouchsafed to be feasted of him, it is written: that he hastened into the
Tent, and willed Sarah quickly to make ready. Cha. 18.2.
And he ran to the herd, and fetched a calfe tender and good, and gave it ^o a
young man, that hasted to dress it Verse. 5.6.7
. And a little after that, when Sarah desired, that he should ^ast out the
bondwoman and her son, it was grievous to him: yea, very grievous, because of
his son Ismael. But as soon as the Lord bid him, it is written, that he
rose up early in the morning to perform it Chap. 21.10.11.13.14.
. And a little after we read, that this Father of the Faithful, when he was
tried by a wonderful strange Commandment, that is to offer up his son
Isaac for a burnt offering: yea his only son, whom he loved so tenderly: it
is written, That he rose up early in the morning, and performed chearefully
what the Lord commanded Chap. 22.1.2.3. and 10.11.
. So David will run the ways of Gods commandments, when his heart is once
enlarged ps. 119.32
. For the Love of Christ constrayneth them 2. Cor. 5.14.
. And this is not the least part of the Saints happiness upon Earth: that they
are no longer under a Schoolmaster Gal. 3.25.
, or a Law commanding: 1. Tim. 1.9
but they having the Spirit of Christ, have liberty: yea, a glorious Liberty,
which is not the least taste of Heaven upon Earth 2. Cor. 3.17 18. Romans 8.21.
. To this Peace, Joy, and Love of Christ, may be added, Hope of the Glory of
God. Hope.
This is not the least privilege that we have, that this is that which
continues our Peace, increases our Joy, and holds us fast to this Love of
Cod, and this delight to do his will. By this we are preserved and kept from
wavering, or being tossed up and down with every wind of Temptation. This
bears us up that we are not destroyed, and that we sink not under the hard
stripes of grievous assaults of the Devil, and ^he world, that lay on load
upon us. This keeps us from the ^hame of reproaches, which are ordinarily cast
upon Gods children. This Hope of the Glory of God, we find where we read it
thus written, we that have access, or entrance by Faith in Christ, into this
Grace, wherein we stand, do rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God Romans 5.2.
. Hereby we are preserved and kept, even all our life time, while we wait for
our adoption: even the redemption of our bodies. That as God is the Father
only of Spirits here; So he may become the Father of Bodies and Spirits; for
this time these waiting are kept by Hope, as it is written, We our selves,
groan within our selves: waiting for the adoption, that is, the Redemption of
our Body: for we are saved by Hope Romans 8.23.24.
. By this we are stayed from being beaten up and down, and being driven hither
and thither by every Wind, and Tide, and therefore it is called the Anchor of
the soul, where it is written, We have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the Hope set before us, which Hope, we have as an
Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast Heb. 6.18.19.
. By this also we are defended, and are helped to wrestle with Principalities
and Powers, and with the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness: or rather wicked spirits, which are in heavenly, or
high places. And for this purpose, together with the Girdle of Truth, the
Brestplate of Righteousness, the shoes of the Preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, the shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit; together with these we
are also commanded to take the Helmet of Salvation Ephesians. 6.17.
. And that his Helmet (which is not the least ^art of the spiritual armor) is
Hope, as evident where it is writ^en: Let us who are of the Day, be sober,
putting on the Brestplate of Faith, and Love: and for an Helmet, the Hope of
Salvation 1. These. 5.8.
. By this we have the shame of reproaches, and disgraces: of afflictions, and
persecutions taken away. And therefore the Apostle says, Tribulation works
Patience: and Patience, Experience: and Experience, Hope; and Hope makes not
ashamed Romans 5.3.4.5.
. And this is one of our inward privileges, even this Hope: whereby we are
preserved and stayed from fleeting hither and thither. Defended against the
violence of those with whom we combat in Christ's behalf: and hereby the shame
of all our afflictions and reproaches is clean taken away.

To this Peace, and Joy, this perfect Love and blessed Hope, may be added
Boldness: which does much cheer the children of God, and that they are bold,
is evident: By these Scriptures, and Examples. As it is written; The Righteous
are bold as a Lion prou. 28.1.
. Here you see is a wonderful boldness expressed by that it is compared to
the Boldness of a Lion, as it is also written of the righteous: That five of
them shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of them shall put ten thousand to
flight Leu. 26.8
. Also such as are wise, One of them shall chase a thousand, and two of them,
shall put ten thousand to flight Deuteronomy. 32.29.30.
. And therefore when the Lord would fit Iosuah for the performance of that
great work, he bids him to be strong and of a good ^ourage, three several
times Iosuah. 1.6.7.8.
. And David could say, that he would not ^e afraid of ten thousands of people,
that have set themselves against him round abaut, when the Lord was ^nce become
his shield ps. 3.3.6.
. Also he says The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto
me: All nations compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord I will destroy
them psa. 118.6.10.
. It was Ieremies complaint, that there were none valiant for the Truth upon
the earth Ier. 9.3.
. The Apostles did manifest this Boldness, when they were called before the
Council, and commanded not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answered and said unto them: Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken to you more then to God, judge ye. For, we cannot but
speak the things which we have seen and heard. And when they came to their
own company, and had reported all that the chief Priests and Elders had done
unto them, they joined all with one accord in Prayer to God, especially for
boldness to speak the word, and received from the Lord gifts of the holy
Ghost, so that they spoke the word of God with Boldness Ast
4.13.19.20.23.29.31.
. So we read of Paul that he spoke boldly in the Synagogue at Ephesus for the
space of 3. months, disputing and persuading things pertaining to the kingdom
of God Act. 19.8.
. Also he exhorts the Ephesians to pray for him that utterance may be given,
that he may open his mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel
Ephesians. 6.19
. This boldness appeared in Steven, who being full of faith and power, spoke
boldly to the adversaries, applying his speech so closely to their consciences,
that they were cut at the heart, and gnashed on him with their ^eeth; yea, they
stoned him with stones that he died Act. 7.51.52.54.55.
. This boldness ^s evident also in Paul, when as there went many Prophecies of
him concerning his handling at Jerusalem, and all his loving friends with
tears entreated him not to go thither. But his answer was, what mean ye to
weep, and to break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, but to die
at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus Act. 1.12.13.
. This boldness or confidence is an inseparable effect of faith in Christ, and
where it is not, there is not any faith in Christ at all, as it is evident
where it is written, We are always confident. For we walk by faith and not
by sight, we are confident I say: and that this is faith in Christ, the words
following do make plain; The Love of Christ constrains us, and God has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ* Again, the same Apostle writes
thus; That unto Principalities an^ Powers, in heavenly Places is mad^ known by
the Church the manifold wisdom of God. According to the eternal purpose,
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. In whom we have boldness, and
access with confidence by the faith of him Ephesians. 3.10.11.12.
. Here is boldness and confidence as before joined with faith in Christ. Also
such as have believed the Gospel and are entered into rest, such do come
boldly to the throne of Grace Heb. 4.16.
. Add to this where it is written. That where remission of sin is, there is
no more offering for sin, but such have boldness to enter into the holiest
by the blood of Jesus He. 10.22
. So that you see that boldness is an inseparable companion of faith in Christ.
And therefore such only are the Lambs warriors as are called, and chosen,
and faithful Revel. 17.14.
. Observe, men may be chosen to salvation, and not yet called nor faithful, so
was Paul when he consented to Stephens death Act. 7.58. the 8.1.
. Also, they may be called, and neither chosen nor faithful, as it is
written, Many are called but few chosen Mat. 20.16.
. So were Judas and Demas called, but neither chosen, and so not faithful. So
were the Apostles before the holy Ghost was given unto them, or before that
power from on high was received Lu. 24.49
. Witness their running from Christ at his apprehension Ioh. 16.30 31.32.
. And Peter's denial of him three several times with cursings and swearing
Mat. 6.70.72.74.
. Now then we may safely conclude, that such only are the bold Soldiers of
the Lamb as are called, and chosen, and faithful: as were all the Apostles
and Disciples, when they had once received the holy Ghost, and as Paul could
with comfort testify of himself. I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the Faith. So these only shall be able to testify: and
every of these shall be able to testify the same. So that it is now most
evident, that such as do indeed believe with the heart to Righteousness, do
also confess with the mouth unto Salvation Romans 19.
. And such as believe in Christ shall not be ashamed Ver. 11.
. And Paul could say, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the
power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes Romans 1.16.
. Yea every such believer can hazard his life for Christ's sake: as it is
written, Whosoever will loose his life for my sake and the Gospels: the same
shall save it. And there is added, whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of the Father with the holy
Angels. Mar. 8.35.38.
Neither are the Saints terrified by their Adversaries, which is to them an
evident token of Perdition: but to themselves of salvation, and that of God:
for unto such it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake Phil. 1.28 29.
. The contrary to this, is in men before Justification, as it is plain where
it is written. The wicked fly when none pursues. Prou. 28.1
Also we have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear again Romans 8.15
. Where we plainly see, that before Justification, we have that Spirit of
Bondage. This made the Iaylor to tremble l: and Paul to be astonished, and to
tremble, when he was smite^ to the Earth Act. 9.6.
. And caused this Cornelius to be afraid of the Angels Act. 10 4.
. This is evident, where it is written: That the curse, or the wrath of God
abides on such as do not yet believe in Christ Io. 3.36.
. And part of that curse, is fear and astonishment: as it is written, I will
appoint over you terror; Leuit. 26.19
and ye shall flee when none pursues you Verse. 7.36.37.
. Also God says to the disobedient: I will give thee a Trembling heart; and
thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night,
and shall have no assurance of thy Life: in the morning thou shall say, would
God it were Even: and at Even thou shall say, would God it were Morning; for
the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall Fear Deuteronomy: 28.65.66.67.
. And it is also said, that men remaining so fearful, shall have their
portion with whoremongers, the abominable, and murderers, and sorcerers,
idolaters, and all liars: in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the second Death Revel. 21.8.
. And thus you have seen the wonderful Blessedness, which such as are once
Justified by Faith in Christ, have obtained by this Boldness and Courage, even
here in this life.

To these may be added their Freedom from the reigning power of Sin,
Freedom.
which is not the least Privilege, and does wonderfully increase their Peace,
nourish their Joy, kindle their Love, strengthen their Hope, and a^de unto
their Boldness. This, this may be rightly termed: a Glorious Liberty, Romans
8.2.21.
and a Freedom indeed 2. Cor. 3.17.18. Io. 8.36.
. This is that for which Paul gave thanks, even when a little before he has
spoken of his wretched Body: yet proceeds thus. I thank God thorugh Jesus
Christ our Lord: So then with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God, but
with the flesh the Law of Sin Romans 7.24.25.
. This Freedom shines out clearly, where it is written: Where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is Liberty 2. Cor. 3.17.
. Also where the Spirit of Christ is, it does free such from the dominion of
Sin, as appears by these words of Paul. The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death Rom 8.2.
. That is the power of the Spirit of Christ has freed me from the power of
sin and death. Again the same Apostle affirms. That where Sin abounded,
Grace did much more abound. That as sin had reigned unto Death; even so might
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord Romans 5.20 21.
. Also in the very next Chapter, the same blessed Apostle answers an
objection that might hence arise amongst such as pervert the truth thus. If
Grace does the more abound, where sin has most abounded? then let us
continue in sin, and multiply Transgression: that Grace may the more abound
Romans 6.1.
. To this devilish objection the Apostle answers in that whole Chapter very
plainly and largely, and adds Reason, to Reason: yea very strong and
invincible Reasons are brought in place; First, he does show his detestation
of such conclusions, and how far it is from the Saints so to conclude, in
these words. Far be it from us to admit of this Romans 8.8.
. And he draws a Reason from the impossibility of any such thing. How shall
we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein Romans 6.2.
. As if he would say, as it is impossible for dead men to perform any thing:
so impossible is it for us to bring any sin forth to perfection Iam. 1.15
. Then he draws us to consider of Gods proceeding, in bringing us to Christ:
that is, As many of us as are now in Christ, were first baptized into his
death. That is, were slain or killed by the Power of Repentance; For here is a
twofold baptism spoken of: one, A Baptism into the death of Christ, Another,
a Baptism into Christ Romans 6 3. Heb. 6.2. Mat. 3.11. Io. 1.33.
. The first, giving Sin his deadly wound, or killing us to Sin; the other
quickening us, or making us alive to Righteousness. After this it is added,
that we are not only dead, but buried by the first Baptism into death: that
is by Repentance, all the glory, and beauty of our flesh is taken away Is. 40 6
7 1. Pet. 1.24.
, that being raised by Faith in Christ's blood, we should walk in newness of
life Romans 6.4.
. Now this Newnes of Life, notes to us this Freedom from our old course of
sinning. As it is a little after, He that is dead is freed from Sin verse 7.
. That is, from the service of Sin verse. 6.
. Now that it may yet more plainly appear, there is added the continuance of
this glorious Liberty, or blessed Freedom from Sinnes-seruice, thus: Now if
we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him, Knowing
that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more
dominion over him; For in that he dyed, he dyed unto Sin once: but in that he
lives, he lives unto God. Likewise, reckon ye also your selves dead indeed
unto Sin, or truly dead: but alive indeed, or truly alive to God through
Jesus Christ verse. 8.9.20.11.
. Here does manifestly appear this Freedom from Sin, and so also from
death, even in the same manner, in respect of continuance and truth, as Christ
is freed, as it is evident by that it is said, Likewise; as also it is
clearly made manifest, that when once the spirit of life begins our
Liberty, we are never after that inthralled, or brought into Bondage. Besides
these, that Scripture is exceeding full stuffed, with forcible and strong
Reasons, even to the end of that Chapter: as only to touch them, verse. 12.
Let not Sin reign. For Sin shall not have dominion over you verse. 14.
: ye were the servants of Sin verse 17.
. Being made Free from Sin, ye became servants of Righteousness verse. 18.
, When ye were the servants of Sin, ye were Free from Righteousness verse.
20.
. But now being made Free from Sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life verse. 22.
. And that this Freedom from Sinnes-seruitude or Bondage, may yet more
clearly appear: consider that where it is written. If Christ be in you, the
body is dead for Sin, but the Spirit is Life, for Righteousness Romans 8.10
. Also, walk in the spirit, and ye shlal not fulfill the lusts of the flesh
Gal. 5.16
. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts Gal. 5.24
. Also if any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature? And such an one can
truly say, and with comfort: yea great boldness and confidence; I live no
more, but Christ Jesus lives in me 2. Cor. 5.7.
. Of this Freedom Paul gloried, where it is written: I am the least of all the
Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God. But by the Grace of God, I am what I am, and his Grace which was
bestowed upon me, was not in vain. But I labored more abundantly then they
all, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me 1. Cor. 15.9.10.
. Also he writes thus of himself; I thank Christ Jesus who has enabled me,
for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, who was
before a Blasphemer, and a Persecuter, and Injurious 1. Tim. 1.12.13.14.
. But I obtained Mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And the Grace
of God was exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.
Here you see Paul proposing, or setting forth himself as an example of one,
that had obtained this Freedom which every Justified one, has also obtained:
as it is evident in David's example, who could say of himself, when once he
had gotten this Freedom, or Liberty. Thou have delivered my soul from death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling ps. 116.8.
, Also o Lord, thou have loosed my Bonds verse. 16.
.

But some will here object. O B.
Do not the Children of God Sin, after they are once Justified by Faith in
Christ? What say you then to that where it is written. If we say that we have
no Sin, we deceive our selves 1. Io. 1.8.
? Also in many things we offend all Iam. 3.2.
, Also there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not
B^^le. 7.20.
. And many more Scriptures to the same purpose.

I answer, ANS.
That there is great difference between having sin, and sinning; between
sinning altogether against purpose, and sinning with delight, and consent of
heart: between failing in the performance of good, and doing that which is
absolutely evil: between reigning and dwelling. So that these Scriptures are
thus to be reconciled. The Saints after justification have sin dwelling, not
reigning in them, and hence it is, that in every good Purpose they fail much
in their performance, and give offense to God, and many times to their
brethren. And therefore they are taught daily to forgive their brethren Luc.
17.3 4.
. And daily to ask forgiveness of God, in the name of Jesus Christ Mat.
6.9.12.14.15.
. Yet all this does not prove that which some would urge out of these, and such
like places, that they commit sin, and this is most evident: for if they
should commit, then were they still the servants of sin, as it is written,
Whosoever commits Sin, is the servant of ^in Ioh. 8.34.
. Such an one is a tran gessor of the Law 1. Ioh. 3.1.
, he abides not in Christ, neither did ever see him, or know him Ver. 6.
. Such an one is of the devil, neither is it possible for him that is borne of
God to commit sin Ver. 8.9.
. For wheresoever the Son of God dwells and abides, he does manifest his
abode there, by destroying the works of the devil Ver. 5. with 8.
. And howsoever it is objected that Paul does cry out of his Body, and
confesses that he cannot do the good he would, but the evil which he would
not, yet observe the same words, and he shall answer for himself. Thus, Now
if I do that I would not, it is no more I, that do it, but sin that
dwells in me Romans 7.20
, not that reigns in me, but dwells in me. Thus Paul has freed himself
from committing sin. So that then he is thus to be understood, that he is
thus to be understood, that he^ could perform nothing, so perfectly as he
would. And this made him groan under his Tabernacle 2. Cor. 5.1.2.3.4.5.6.7 8.
Romans 7.24.
, and cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
o^ Death. So that the Saints Freedom from the reigning power of Sin,
remains firm and unshaken, and it is most manifest, that where Christ has
once cast out the strong man, he as the stronger takes possession never to be
dispossessed Lu. 11.21 22. Ioh. 10.29. Ioh. 8.35.
. And this is not the least benefit that the Children of God do enjoy in this
life, and for which they praise God, as it is written, God be thanked, ye were
the servants of Sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine
which was delivered you Romans 6.17.
. Also, the same Apostle writing to the Colossians, gives thanks unto the
Father, who has made them meet to ^e partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, and had delivered the^ from the Power of Darkness, and
translate them into the kingdom of his dear Son Col. 1.12 13.
. And this freedom for which they continually praise God, and which they most
comfortably enjoy, comes by embracing the Truth, as it is written, The Truth
shall make you free Ioh. 8.32.
. Whereas before they are overcome of sin and it is evident they are
sins-slaues or bondmen, as it is written: Of whom a man is overcome, of the
same is he brought into Bondage. And Paul tells us plainly, that as he himself,
so all of us were by nature servants to diverse lusts and pleasures Tit. 3.3.
. And this is one of the most excellentest benefits that we here enjoy, and the
want of this is accompanied with the want of all the Rest that have been
before, or shall hereafter be mentioned.

Add to this the unsearchable Wisdom, Wisdom.
which the Saints do enjoy even here; such, as Christ is become their Wisdom
1. Cor. 1.30.
. These are Wise indeed: and how can it be but such should be Wise? for whom
God lays up sound Wisdom, and who may at any time when they want it, go to
God and have it for the asking: as it is written, If any of you lack Wisdom,
let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally and vpbraideth not: and
it shall be given him Iam. 1.5.
. This is not that earthly, sensual, and devilish Wisdom, which is
accompanied with bitter envying and strife. But this is the Wisdom from
above, that is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full
of mercy, and good fruits, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy, yea such as
have it will show out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of
wisdom Iam. 3.13.14.15.16.17
: This was one of the Reasons that Moses used to provoke the people of Israel
to obedience: showing them, That it should be their wisdom, and
understanding, in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these
Statutes, and say: Surely this great Nation, is a wise, and understanding
people Deuteronomy. 4.6.
. This was the wisdom, that made Joseph famous in Pharaohs Court, and exalted
him to be Ruler over all Egypt. As it appears; by Pharaohs speech; can we
find such a man as this, in whom is the Spirit of God Genesis 41.38
. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God has showed thee all this,
there is none so discreet and wise. Thou shall be over my house, and
according to thy word, shall all my people be ruled Verse. 39.
. And we read, that the Lord lays up sound wisdom for the Righteous
Prou. 2.6.
: yea, as before he is their treasurer. This wisdom appears in Elihu,
where he reprooueth Job, and his three friends, and checketh them sharply for
their gross ignorance: As it is written of him, I said: Days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom: But there is a spirit in man,
and the Inspiration of the Almighty, gives understanding. Great men are not
always Wise, neither do the aged understand Judgment. Job. 32.7.8.9.
And a little after he says, Wherefore Job hear my speeches; I pray thee, and
hark to all my words. My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart, and
my lips shall utter knowledge clearly Job. 33.1.2.5.
. This wisdom was in David, as it is evident where he says; O how I love thy
Law, it is my Meditation all the Day. Thou (o Lord) through thy commandments
have made me wiser then mine Enemies: for they are ever with me, (that is, thy
co^mandeme^ts are ever with me.) I have more Understanding then all my
Teachers, for thy testimonies are my Meditation. I understand more then the
Ancients, because I keep thy Precepts ps. 119.97 98.99.100.
. Also it is said of Steven, that his Adversaries were not able to resist the
Wisdom, and Spirit by which he spoke Act. 6.10.
. Yea the Saints are said to be so Wise, as that their mouths are as wels of
Life Prou. 10.11
. Their Tongues as choice silver Verse. 20.
. Their mouths bring forth Wisdom Verse. 31.
. Their lips know what is acceptable Verse. 32.
. Their lips Verse. 31.
feed many Verse. 21.
. Their fruit is a Tree of Life Pro. 11.30
. They are all as well watered gardens, and as springs of water, whose waters
fail not Is. 58.11.
. Yea, our Lord has said, That such as drink of the water that he shall
give him: whosoever it be, shall never thirst; but the water that he shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into Everlasting Life
Io. 4.13.14.
. Also he has said, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He
that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of water of Life Io. 7.37.38.
. This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.
And how can it be, but they should be Wise? that are become so familiar with
God, as to be called his friends, as was Abraham Is. 41.8. iam. 2.23.
, of whom God said, shall I hide from Abraham the thing I do? For I know
him Genesis 17.18.19.
. And speaking of believers, he says: ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. I shall no more call you servants, (that is, when
once you do indeed believe in me,) For the servant knows not what his Lord
does, but I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you. Io. 15.14.15.
. And surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reueileth his secrets to his
servants the Prophets Amos. 3.7.
. Add to this, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant ps. 25.14.
. Yea, these have the mind of Christ. As it is written of Paul, My speech and
my preaching, was not with entising words of man's Wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and Power. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them
that are perfect, yet not the Wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of
this world, which come to naught. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God or dained before the world unto
our Glory. Yea eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has revealed to us by his Spirit: for the
Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God: Yea he that is
spiritual discerns all things, yet he himself is discerned of no man. For
who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have
the mind of Christ 1. Cor. 2.4.5.6.7.9.10.15.16.
. Lo here as in a glass, the wonderful Wisdom of a Child of God, in whom
Christ dwells; whereas, before he walked in darkness, and knew not whither
he went, because that darkness had blinded his eyes 1. Io. 2.11.
. He was held captive under the Power of it Col. 1.13. Act. 26.18.
. He was foolish and ignorant, even as a beast ps. 73.22.
. Yea Isaiah says, that the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
Crib Is. 1.3.
. But rebellious People do not know, they do not consider. And Jeremiah
tells us, that wicked men are brutish in knowledge Ier. 10.8.14.
. And Solomon terms them, Prating fools Pro. 10.8.10.
, and simple ones Pro. 1.22.
. And the Wisdom of this world is foolishnes with God. For it is written, He
takes the wise in their own craftiness 1. Cor. 3.19.
. Thus the inward Privileges which at this time shall be touched, being
dispatched: in the next place, the outward benefits are to be handled. These
are also manifold, whither we respect the near communion of the Saints, the
glorious service of Angels, the wonderful reconciliation of all the creatures,
the abundance of all things necessary for the body to our selves, and children,
and the certain continuance of all this blessedness. All these with many
more, as clearly shine forth in Scripture, as the former from within:
Howsoever the last, which is the certainety of the continuance of such a
blessed estate, pertains to both outward and inward benefits. And first of
the Communion of Saints. Communion of Saints.
This is not the least benefit that they enjoy upon Earth, nor the least taste
of Heavens happiness, here begun, to know that we have near fellowship, and
true familiarity with all the Saints in the world: though we never saw them
face, to face: nor ever so much as heard of them by name. This was used as one
help to comfort Elijah in his distress, when he complained: That he only was
left, and they sought his life, to take it away. He received an answer; That
God had left him seven thousand in Israel, all the Knees which had not bowed
unto Baal, and every mouth, which has not kissed him. 1. King. 19 14.18.
And it is no small comfort to the children of God, to know that albeit they
live where they have but little fellowship, with Gods children, yet are they
not destitute of their fellowship: but do enjoy the help of the effectual
fervent prayers of all the Saints in the world Iam. 5.16.
. Howbeit the enjoying of their sweet Communion, face to face: and that in
great multitudes, in times of Peace: as in the Apostles time, when they
continued daily with one accord together, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart, Praising
God Act. 2.46.47.
. This sweet Communion of the Saints, face to face: and their bold
familiarity in the service and worship of God, is a most glorious privilege,
and an excellent Benefit.e This Beauty and comeliness, in these exercises of
Prayer and Prophecy and breaking Bread: is noted where Christ says of this his
Spouse. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an Army with Banners. Also in the same place. Who is she that
looks forth as the Morning, Fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun,
terrible as an Army with Banners. Cant. 6.4.10.
Me thinks, I hear Christ also speaking of such an assembly; Thou have
ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse: thou have ravished my heart, with one
of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck Cant. 4.9.
. And if Christ himself be ravished with Comfort, much more are the Saints:
who have been sometimes oppressed with sorrow, and horror: because that they
saw themselves unworthy of being present at such glorious and beautiful
assemblies, by reason of their sins: when these do see, and know themselves
so blessed, as that they are now by Grace, become the Sons and Daughters of
God, then they rejoice and say with John, Behold what manner of Love the Father
has showed unto us, that we should be called the Sons of God 1. Io. 3.1.
. That he should separate us to be the Sons and Daughters of the Lord
Almighty 2. Cor. 6.18.
. That we should have Fellowship, not only with the Father, and the Son,
but such unspeakable comfort amongst the Saints in Light 1. Io. 1.3.7. Col.
1.12.13.
. And surely the comfort of such Communion is set forth plainly, where it is
written: The Ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion: with Songs
and everlasting Joy upon their heads: they shall obtain Joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing, shall flee away 1. Is. 35.10.
. Yea this is that feast spoken of, where it is written: And on this mountain
shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people; a feast of fat things, a feast
of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full of Marrow, of wine on the Lees well
refined. And he will destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering: cast
over all people, and the veil that is spread over all Nations Is. 25.6.7.
. Also to this purpose is that where it is written of the Church. Lift up thine
eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to
thee, as I live says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth thee with them all, as
with an ornament: and bind them on thee as a Bride does. Thus says the Lord
God: behold I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standerd to
the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. And Kings Is. 49.18.22.23.
shall be thy noursing Fathers, and Queens thy noursing Mothers. Also, Thy
watchmen shall lift up the voice: with the voice together shall they sing:
for they shall see eye, to eye: when the Lord shall bring again Sion. Break
forth into Joy, sing together ye wast places of Jerusalem: for the Lord has
comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem Is. 52.8.9.
. Also, Thou shall see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be
inlardged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee Is. 60.5.
. Also, Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her all ye that love her
rejoice for Joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: That ye may suck and
be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations: that ye may milk out, and
be delighted with the abundance of her Glory. For thus says the Lord, Behold
I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the glory of the Gentiles, like a
flowing stream, then shall ye suck, and be borne upon her sides, and be
dandled upon her knees. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your heart
shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb Heb.
66.10.11.12.13.14.
. And how can they but rejoice in such assemblies, who do love one another not
in word, and in tongue: but in deed and truth 1. Io. 3.18.
. Yea, their love is fervent Love, out of pure hearts 1. Pet. 1.22
: yea such is the feruency of their love, as that they cannot only be content
to part with goods, but they can willingly lay down their lives one for
another. 1. Io. 3.16.
This we see plainly in that example of Aquila and Priscilla Romans 16.3.4.
: who laid down their own necks for Paul's life. These are one another
Keepers Genesis 4.9.
. They do watch over one another Heb. 13.17
, exhorting one another Heh. 3.13
, and provoking to love, and to good works Heb. 10.24
. And to this end they do not only rejoice in great assemblies in times of
Peace, as before, but even in the hotest times of the most bloody persecution,
they cannot be withholden, but will come together though it cost them their
Lives Act. 20.24.
: witness their often meetings in the time of the Apostles Act. 4.12.17.
. Yea, though they were drawn and haled out by violence before Magistrates
Iam. 2.6.
: yea they rejoice at the very sight one of another, and receive one another
with fear and trembling 2. Cor. 7.15.16.
: they are ready to perform the basest offices one for another, as to wash one
another feet Io. 13.14.15.
. And the rather, because of the high esteem they have one of another, when
they consider one another, not as the sons and daughters of an earthly King,
which would procure an high esteem, if it were but so; but they consider one
another, as the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty 1. Cor. 6.18 Io.
1.12.13.
: yea when they understand themselves to be no less then heirs with God, and
coheires with Christ, this is that which does knit them together, and makes
them to think, that all they do one for another, to be too too little Romans
8.17.
. What should be more spoken? great is the comfort that Gods children have one
from another, and the sweet Communion amongst the Saints, is not to be
expressed. And how can it be? but such as are Subjects of one Kingdom Revel.
15.3
, Citizens of one City Ephesians. 3.14.
, Servants of one Family Ephesians. 3.14.15.
, Sons and Daughters of one Father, and Mother Gal. 4.26 L^. 15.1.2.5
; Branches of one vine, ^iuely stones of one building 1. Pet. 2.^
, members of one body, 1. Cor. 12.27.
yea one body and one Spirit Romans 12.5 Ephesians: 4.4.
. How is it possible but such should be nearly lincked together ^n Love, and
have so especial familiarity amongst themselves, and be marvelous
comfortable one to another? And therefore these may be justly called: A chosen
genera^ion, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people: 1. Pet. 2.9
seeing by his Love, they do show forth the praises of him who has called them
out of Darkness, Guard of Angels.
into his marvelous Light. And this is not the least beginning of Heaven upon
Earth: nor the least taste of that unspeakable comfort the Saints shall en^oy
at the right hand of God in the Heavens for evermore. Add to ^^is the comforts
we have by the service of the blessed spirits, the Angels Heb. 1.14.
. Who do encampe round about such as fear God, to deliver them from evil
Psalm. 34.7
. These blessed and loving Spirits, do always behold the face of God, as
ready executioners of his vengeance upon any such as dare to offend the Saints:
as it is written. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones
which believe in me, for I say unto you (says our Lord) that their Angels in
Heaven do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven Mat. 18.10.
. This assistance of Angels is evident, plentifully in holy scripture, as where
it is written. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of
Angels: The Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy Place Ps. 68.17.
. Now that these Chariots do attend Gods children, and are their host, as
Jacob calls them, where before his great distress these met him, and when he
saw them, he said: This is Gods host Genesis 32.1.2.
, or that host wherewith God defends his children, as it is evident by that
example of Elisha, who when his servant had gone forth in the morning and
seen a great host of the Syrians compassing Dothan, with horses and chariots,
and said unto him: Alas my master, how shall we do? Elisha answered: Fear
not, for they that be with us, are more then they that be with them. As if he
would have said, if thou did see how we are guarded with horses, and chariots
of greater power then those. Thou would not be affraide as thou art. But
his servant not understanding any such safety that they had, Elisha prayed
unto the Lord and said, Lord I pray thee open his ^yes that he may see. And
the Lord opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw. And behold the
Mountain was full of horses, and Chariots of Fire, round about Elisha 2. King.
6.16.17.
. Here it is evident, that the servants and children of God are always
attended with a powerful host, for if we do but consider of this history, it
will appear, that by this is noted the safe estate, not of Elisha alone, but
of all the Saints of God. As first, it is evident by two things that Dothan was
compassed about with hills; one was, that the young man saw them compassing
the City Ver. 15.
. Against this, some may say, that it was more likely that it was upon a hill,
but this reason it self will convince, for then one man could see but part of
the Army, on what side soever of the hill he should stand, but the next thing
makes it plain, where it is said, They came down unto him Ver. 18.
. By this it is clear that Dothan stood in a valley, and was compassed round
with hills: and therefore it must be, not a bodily, but a spiritual
Mountain, upon which that young man saw his master, as another thing makes
more manifest, which is, the opening of his eyes, which were open before in an
ordinary manner, for he was not blinded that could discover an Army of men,
and so we have here the spiritual saftetie of Elisha, and so of all the
children of God, to whom Gods Angels are an host compassing them about
continually. For so it is also expressly written, That we are come to Mount
Sion, to an innumerable company of Angels Heb. 12.22.23.
. So we see that Eliah in his distress was fed by an Angel 1. King. 19.5.7.
, Daniel comforted by an Angel, Dan. 9.21
, The three children kept by an Angel Dan. 3.28
. And the readiness of that Angel at the prayer of Isaiah, and Hezekiah, when
they cried to Heeuen 2. Chr. 32.20.
. That Angel speedily, even in one night slew an hundred, fourscore and five
thousand, all mighty men of valor: Leaders, and Captains 2. King. 19.35. 2.
Chro. 32.21.
. Here you see the readiness of these blessed and powerful spirits to
protect, or defend Gods children, and to execute vengeance upon their
adversaries, and this is not our least benefit, that we here enjoy, and no
small beginning, but a very great taste of the powers of the world to come.

These are not alone, but we may add the Love of the Creatures, Creatures
Love.
yea of all the Creation to the children of God; Their unwillingness to hurt
them, and their readiness to do them good. The reason is, it was Gods
ordinance at first in man's innocence: to him was given the Lordship of them
all, as it is plain, God blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over
the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and over every liling
thing that moves upon the earth Genesis 1.28.
.

Now albeit this was lost by our disobedience in Adam: yea, we were deprived
of any good: yet we being again recovered by Christ, these are also recovered
to us. This appears plainly by the Scriptures thus, when Adam had sinned,
then began the whole creation, to groan under the burden thereof, as it is
written: unto Adam God said, Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten of the Tree, of which I commanded thee, saying: Thou
shall not eat thereof, Cursed is the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shall
thou eat of it all the days of thy Life Genesis 3.17 18.
. Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee Genesis 3.17.18.
. Also when Cain had killed his Brother, this was a part of his Curse: when
thou tillest thy ground it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength
Genesis 4.12
. Also it is written: that God turns rivers into a wilderness, and water
springs into a dry ground. A fruitful Land into barrenness, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein ps. 107.33 34
. Also the old world was drowned for the wickedness of man a. Genesis 6.12.13.
and 8.2^.
And Sodom and Gomorrah with those other Cities were burnt for the sins of
the inhabitants Genesis 19.15
. Contrariwise the Earth has been blessed, and the habitatio^s of the Saints
preserved for their Sakes. Witness that blessing, with which Isaac his field
was blessed in a year of famine: he sowed and received an hundredfold in the
same year Genesis 26.12.
. And for Joseph's sake, all that was in the Egyptians house, and in the field:
the blessing of the Lord was upon it Genesis 39.5
And so it is also written, that when men shall have repented, and partake by
Faith in the blood of Christ, of the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God:
The Creatures shall rejoice with them in these words, They shall go out with
Joy, and be led forth with Peace: The Mountains and the Hills shall
break forth before them into singing, and all the Trees of the Field shall
clappe their hands Is. 55.12.
. And amongst other blessings that the Church is promised when she shall be
glorious even on earth: this is one, that they shall build houses and inhabit
them, and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them Is. 65.21.
. So spoke our Lord of Zacharias, This day is salvation come to this House, for
so much as he is also the Son of Abraham Luc. 19.9.
. This is very manifest, if we consider the blessings, and the Curses
promised, and denounced to and against the obedient, and disobedient Louit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28.
. So that hence we may now truly conclude, That the earnest expectation of the
Creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. For the Creature
was made subject to vanity, not willing, by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope: Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God.
For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, and trauaileth in pain together
until now Romans 8.19 20.21.22.
. And it is evident that the creatures are freed from bondage, when Gods
children are made manifest, to be such: as it is plain by this one Scripture,
if there were no more. A righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the
tender mercies of the wicked are cruel Pro. 12.10.
. But all this being but a passage to this Love of the Creatures to us; when we
are once reconciled to God, and the restitution of them to their former
liberty, we will come yet to that which shall manifestly discover this, as
where it is written. That the man whom God chasteneth, whom he makes sore, and
binds up: whom he wounds, and his hands make whole: Such an one shall be
delivered in six troubles, and in seven none evil shall touch him: He shall
not be afraid of the Beasts of the Earth; for he shall be in league with
the stones of the Field, and the beasts of the Field shall be at Peace with
him Job. 5.17.23.
. Also where God speaks of reconciling a people to himself, we have the same
thing set forth thus, That Day I will make a covenant for them with the Beasts
of the Field, and with the fowls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of
the ground, and I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle out of
the Earth, and I will make them to lie down safely; And I will betroth thee
unto me for ever, Yea I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, and in
Judgment, in loving kindness, and in mercies, I will even betroth thee unto
me in Faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. And it shall come to pass
in that Day I will hear says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they
shall hear the Earth: And the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and
the Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel Hos. 2.18.22.
. Also we have the express promise of God, where it is written: Thus says
the Lord that created thee o Jacob, and he that formed thee o Israel: fear
not; for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine:
when thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers
they shall not ouerflowe thee: when thou walk through the fire thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy
God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior Is. 43.1.2.3.
. Also, behold I have created the smith that blows the coals in the fire,
and that brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the
water to destroy. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and
every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment, thou shall condemn Is.
54.16.
. Of this league between Gods reconciled children, and the Creatures, there
are many examples found in Scriptures, yea such as God has but respected
outwardly, have received this privilege. As of the readiness to fight for
Gods children, and take part with such as God has favored: as the readiness
of the sea and the wind, to make way for the children of Israel, to pass
through as on dry land Ex. 14.21
. And of the earth, how ready was it to open her mouth, Number. 16.32.33.
and to swallow up Corah Dathan, and Abiram, and all their rebellious company,
who were Moses adversaries. Also how ready was the fire, to consume 250. more
of that proud Conspiracy ver. 35.
. How ready was the Sun and Moon to stay their course, till Joshua and the
people of Israel had avenged themselves on their enemies Ios. 10.13.
. Also that glorious Song of Deborah. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in
their courses fought against Sisera Judge. 5.20.
. How readily did the Ravens bring flesh and bread morning and evening to
refresh Elijah 1. King. 17.6.
? How readily came those Bears to tear the children, that mocked Elisha 2.
King. 2.24.
. Also how readily did that fire descend from Heaven, to consume those two
proud Captains, and their fifties 2. King. 1.10.12.
. How readily did the fire drown those valiant men, that undertook the
casting of the three Children into the fiery furnace Dan. 3.22.
? Also how speedily did those Lions even break all the bones in pieces of
Daniels enemies, ere they came at the ground. On the contrary we see their
unwillingness to touch Daniell for hurt Dan. 6.22.25.
. And of the three children Shadrach, Meshach. and Abednego. That freedom from
the fire, is wonderful: of whom we read: That when they came forth out of
the midst of the fire, And the Princess, Governor, Captains, and the Kings
Counselors being gathered together saw them, upon whose bodies the fire had
no Power, nor was an hair of their head sindged, neither were their coats
changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them Dan. 3.26 27.
. And of Daniel it is recorded, That where he was taken out of the Lions den,
no manner of hurt was found upon him because, he believed in his God Dan. 6.23.
. And thus you have the Love of the creatures and the certainty of their
reconciliation ^o the Children of God, when ^^nce they themselves are
reconci^ed. For if they have been so or^ered before their reconciliation that
they have not touched them ^or hurt, but have fought for them, ^ow much more
when they are re^onciled, and made manifest in^eed, to be the Sons and
Daugh^ers of the Lord Almighty. And ^urely this is no small outward be^efit,
neither is it slightly to be pas^ed over, as many use, but seriously ^o be
weighed and considered of, that the praise of that may be ren^red unto the
giver thereof, as well ^s for the rest.

Another outward Benefit which ^uch enjoy is the Abundance of ^ll good things
for the body, Abundance o^ outward Riches.
and that to themselves and their chil^ren. That this may appear plain^y, let
us consider of such Scriptures as do make it manifest, as where it is written:
Godliness is profitable unto all things 1. Tim. 4.8
: Also, Godliness with contentment is great gain 1. Tim. 6.6.
. Again, we find it an express promise to believers, or such as yield
willing obedience to Gods Commandments. That they shall have Rain in due
season and their Land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field
shall yield their fruit. And their threshing shall reatch unto the vintage, and
their vintage shall reatch unto the sowing time, and they shall eat their
bread, to the full, and they shall eat old stone, and bring forth the old,
because of the new Leuit. 26.4.10.
. Also in another Place it is written of them thus: If thou shall hearken
diligently to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his
Commandments, which I command thee this Day, that the Lord thy God will set
^hee on high, above all the Nati^ns of the Earth, and besides many other
blessings there mentioned, ^here are these: The Lord shall command the
plessing upon thee ^n the storehouses, and the Lord shall make thee hlentious
in good^esse in the fruit of thy Body, in ^he fruit of thy Cattle, and in
the ^ruite of thy ground. The Lord shall open to thee his good Trea^ure, the
Heaven to give the Rain ^o thy Land in his Season, and to ^lesse all the work
of thine Hand, and thou shall lend unto many Nations, and shall not borrow
Deuteronomy. 28.1.12.
. Also it is written, At destruction and famine thou shall laugh Job. 5.22.
. Also, ^o Fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that
fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord, shall want no good thing ps. 34.9.10.
. If such as do but seek the Lord, shall have sufficient without want, how
much more will God open his hand even wide to such as have found him, and do
walk with him. Also The Lord is a Sun, and shield, the Lord will give grace,
and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly ps.
84.11.
. Also it is one of the promises made to the Saints by Ezechiel. That God will
cause them to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded. And the
desolate Land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate, in the sight of all
that passed. And they shall say the Land that was desolate is become like the
Garden of Eden, and the wast and desolate, and the ruined Cities are become
fenced, and are inhabited. Add to this that where our blessed Redeemer makes
many such promises, for the incourgement of his Redeemed ones, as where he
wills us to take no thought for our lives; what we shall eat, or what we
shall drink, nor for our bodies, what we shall put on. Is not the life (says
he) more then Meat, and the Body more then Raiment? Also, if he should say:
have I given you the more, and will I deny you the less? Has your Father given
you Life, and will he deny food? Has he given you Bodies, and will withhold
Raiment? Who clotheth lillyes, who feeds Ravens? is it not your Father? and
are ye not much better then they? Does God provide so for the worser, and will
he not provide for the better Mat. 6.25 26.27.
? And where Peter demanded of our Lord, what they should have: urging that
they had forsaken all. Our Lord having answered the^ with a peculiar promise,
adds also for our instruction: Verily I say unto you, Every one that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, o^ fathers, or mothers, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold Mat.
19.27.29.
. Luke writes, manifold more in this present time Luc. 18.30.
. And Mark has thu^ written. There is no man, that has left house, or
bretrhen, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my names sake, and the Gospelles: But he shall receive an hundred fold,
now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children,
and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life Marc. 10
29.30.
. Now that these promises do extend, or stretch even to our children, is
evident where it is written: I have been young, and now am old, (says David)
yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He
is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed ps. 37.25.26.
. And it is also written. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that
delights greatly in his Commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon
Earth, the generation of the upright shall be blessed ps. 112.2.
. And we read, that blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and that
walks in his ways. For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, o well is
thee, and happy shall thou be! Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine, by the
walls of thine house, thy children like olive plants, round about thy table.
Also it is a promise to the Saints: That they shall not labor in vain, nor
bring forth troubles, for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, Is.
65.23.
and their offspring with them. So that you see it most manifest that the
children of God shall never want any good thing for themselves or their seed,
and how can it be, that they should, seeing they have the promise of God: Yea,
of the God of Truth: The God that cannot lie Deu. 32.4. Tit. 1.2.
.

Object.
But some object that Gods children have been destitute, yea that the Ministers
of Christ are approved by their patience in distresses and necessities, And
that some shall be thrown to hell at the day of judgment, because they have
not relieved the hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, imprisoned, and wandering Saints,
And Lazarus say they was a beggar. Answ. Note.
For the better and more speedy answer of these and all other such objections
against such plain Scriptures, as are before set down. Observe always this
rule that the the plainst and the most in number are ever to be regarded, and
other Scriptures that are more obscure and dark to be suspected, the reason of
this rule is, that the word of the Lord is pure and cannot admit deminishing or
addition, as it is written, Every word of God is pure, add thou not unto his
words lest he reprove thee and thou be found a Liar Pro. 30.5.
. And let God be true and every man a liar Romans 3.4.
. The testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple Ps. 19.7.
. Also, Wisdom says, Hear, for I will speak of excellent things, and the
opening of my lips shall be right things, for my mouth shall speak truth, and
wicked is abomination to my lips. All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness, and there is nonothing froward or perverse in them. They are
all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge
Pro. 8.6.7.8.9.
, out of these, this Rule is gathered. That such as have understanding, do know
that the Scriptures are not so dark and crooked, and perverse, or froward, as
men do make them: neither do they at all cross one another. And therefore the
answer is, that that of Lazarus is a parable, noting thus much, that howsoever
Gods children are esteemed miserable and wretched here, and rich men set light
by them: yet hereafter their estate shall be so different as that wicked men
would change their minds, if it were possible, but then it will be too late.
And in a word: The necessity, distress hunger, thirst, and such like miseries
of Gods children, are only in seeming. The truth is, they are ever in a
marvelous comfortable estate, howsoever their adversaries judge no and
according to their judgment of the estate of Gods children, shall they be
judged at the last day. For they do indeed account them a cursed company of
People, worthy of all shame and reproach: They oppress them, draw them before
judgment seats, mock them, rent their garments from them, withdraw from the^
al succor, and do scarce account them worthy of the licking of their dogs:
yea, they keep them as much as in them lies, from the means of life or
comfort. And in this sense are they said to be destitute, hungry, thirsty,
naked, sick, strangers, in necessity, and distress, in heaviness,
sorrowful, poor, yea, most miserable: but here observe the Love of God. These
tyrants that shall be damned, and perish eternally at the last day, for
handling the Saints thus, and for not stretching out their hands to releive
them Mat. 25.41.42.43.
. These bloody Tyrants that think they do God service, (through their
blindness) when they kill the Saints Io. 16.1.2.3.
, and speak hard things against them Jude 15.
. They are deceived, for though the Saints are troubled on every side, yet are
they not distressed, though perplexed, yet not in despair, though persecuted,
yet not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed 2. Cor. 4.8.9.
. They are as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things 2. Cor. 6.10.
: yea, they take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake 2. Cor. 12.10.
. And when such Tirants think they are in great heaviness, then do they
greatly rejoice 1. Pet. 1.6.
, Mat. 5.12
yea they are exceeding glad, so that they rejoice with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory Luc. 6.23. 1. Pet. 1.7.8.
: for they can be abased and they can abound, they have learned in what estate
soever therewith to be content: yea they possess the hundredfold gain of
godliness 1. Tim. 6.8.
, notwithstanding the, bloodiest persecution of their most raging adversaries:
Yea in all, they are more then conquerors, and though they are slain all the
day long, and are accounted even as sheep appointed for the slaughter: yet in
all this they know God is faithful: and the issue shall be his glory, and
their everlasting good Romans 8.28
. And so you see clearly that the promises of God are yea, and Amen in Christ
Jesus; and perverted Scriptures do not darken them a Jot, to such as walk by
Faith and not by sight 2. Cor. 5.7
.

Continuance.
Lastly, that we may truly, (though not fully) see this beginning of Heaven
upon Earth, and the excellency of the estate of Gods children, even whiles they
are yet on Earth: Let us consider what the Scripture speaks of their safety,
and assured continuance, in this condition. Thus the Scripture speaks
plainly; They that trust in the Lord shall never be removed, but abide for
ever Ps. 125.1
. Also, he will not suffer thy foot to be moved, and he that keeps thee,
will not sleep Ps. 121.3
. And having described an inhabitant of Sion, or a Justified child of God. The
Prophet David affirms by the holy Ghost. That he shall never be moved Ps.
15.5.
. Also our Lord himself had said, that whosoever hears and does his
sayings, is like unto a wise man; which built his house upon a Rock. And the
rain descended, and the flood came, and the wind blewe, and it beat upon
that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock Mat. 7.24 25.
. And Luke writes his words thus, whosoever comes to me, and hears my
sayings, and does them, I will show you to whom he is like: He is like a
man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation on a
Rock, and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house
and could not shake it, for it was founded upon a rock Luc. 6.47 48.
. So of the whole Church it is written: upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it Mat. 16.16.18.
. Now because in this Scripture we read that he said: Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock. etc. The name Peter signifying a stone: hence there are some
would have the Church to be built upon Peter, others upon Peter's confession.
Both these are deceived: howbeit the lat-seeme to come somewhat nearer the
truth: and their errors especially of the former sort, is as was the errors of
those false witnesses: that stood up against Christ, and testified. That if
they would destroy the Temple at Jerusalem, which was forty and six years in
building, he would raise it up again in three days: whereas it is evident,
he spoke of the Temple of his Body. So do these apply that to Peter and to
Peter's confession, which was but a voice which should be applied to Christ
himself, who ^s indeed the Rock, as he is expressly called by Paul, where
he writes thus. Our Fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat: and did
all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual Rock
that followed them, and that Rock was Christ 1. Cor. 10.4.
. So also the same blessed Apostle writing of the Saints has these words: Ye
are built upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone Ephesians. 2.20
. Also the same Paul writes thus, other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 3.11.
. And let us add to all these that of the Prophet Isaiah, where it is thus
written. He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises
the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes,
stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing
evil, he shall dwell on high: his place of defense shall be the Munitions of
Rocks Is. 33.15.16.
. Thus by these it appears plainly, that the children of God are so safe, and
firm, and their estate is so stable, and immovable, as that they cannot fall,
no not so much as be shaken: for they are built upon the Rock Christ, even the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. And the gates of hell shall never
prevail against it: So that our condition is not fickle, subject to change, or
uncertainty, but we are confident, that he that has begun a good work,
will finish it Phil. 1.6.
. Wheresoever he begins it, to the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. And our
Lord says: My sheep, hear my voice, and I know them: and they follow me.
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me is greater
then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hands, I and my
Father are one Io. 11.27.28.29.30.
.

But some object, that men may taste the heavenly gift, Ob.
be pertakers of the holy Ghost, taste the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come; yea, be so enlightened, that they receive the knowledge of
the Truth, and be sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, and yet after all
this, fall away, and become adversaries Heb. 6.4.5.6. Heb. 10.26.26.28.29.
. Yea turn from the holy Commandment 2. Pet. 2.20.21.
.

I answer these are said to receive the knowledge of the truth, and
afterward to fall away, and to turn from the holy Commandments, are such as
are lifted up with Capernau^, with a seeming blessedness Mat. 11.2^
. They only think they stand 1. Cor. 10.12.
, the unclean spirit is cast out, but they remain empty swept and garnished
Mat. 12.43.44.45.
: they have escaped some corruptions in the world, and cast up their vomit like
the dog, but with a purpose to resume it again 2. Pet. 2.22.
. And so their sanctification by the blood of the Covenant, is only seeming
sanctification They have no such thing, as it is evident, where it is written.
Whosoever has, to him shall be given: and from him that has not, shall be
taken away even that which he seems to have Luke. 8.18 Mat. 13.12. the 25.29.
. So that it is evident, that whatsoever in this kind may be had and lost, was
never truly had, but only in seeming.

Thus we have now seen the excellent estate of Gods children upon earth, after
Justification by these inward and outward benefits which have been named. This
passing Peace, and glorious Joy, this fervent Love, and steadfast Hope, this
undaunted Boldness, and freedom from reigning sin, this deep and
unsearchable Wisdom, this happy fellowship with the Saints in light, this
powerful host of Angels, this perfect League with all the Creatures, this
Abundance of all good things for them and their children, this certain
Assurance of al such blessedness for ever. Add to these those gracious promises
which are also enjoyed even on earth, and more clearly seen in the life to
come. That such shall eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God. They shall not be hurt of the second death. They shall eat of
the hidden Manna, and shall receive a white Stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows saving he that receives it. They shall have
power over the nations. And shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, as the vessels
of a Potter shall they be broken to shiuers. Even as Christ received of his
Father, they shall receive the morning star. They shall be clothed in white
raiment, their names shall not be blotted out of the book of life, but shall
be confessed by their Lord before his Father, and before his Angels. They shall
be Pillars in the temple of God, and shall go no more out. They shall have the
name of God written upon them, and the name of the City of God, new Jerusalem
which comes down out of heaven from God, even Christ's new name. Yea such as
overcome shall sit with Christ in his Throne Revel. 2 7.11.17.26.27.28. Revel.
3.5.12.21.
.

And all these are yet but small tastes, and very little beginnings of that
infinite blessedness, which is prepared for the Saints hereafter. Yea, albeit
if these duly weighed they be exceeding great, yet by comparison, as erst
before, so say I now again: They are but as a very small drop of a whole
river, a handful of sand, that is on the sea shore, the dust of the balance,
or a small point of the compass of Heaven, if we respect that inconceiuable
glorious condition that abides for them in Heaven.

This may appear something plainly unto us, if we take a view of the
Scriptures, which do concern that Estate, which are these. In Gods presence
there is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore ps.
11.11.
. Everlasting life Ma. 19.29
. They shall be as the Angels in heaven Mat. 22.38
. They shall have a great reward in heaven Mat. 5.12
. They shall shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father Mat.
13.43.
. They shall behold Christ's glory Io. 1.24.
. They shall have eternal life Romans 2.7.
. An exceeding, 2. Cor. 4.17.
and eternal weight of glory 2. Cor. 4 17.
. Their vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body Phil. 3.21
1. These. 4.17
. They shall be ever with the Lord 1. Cor. 9.27.
. They shall have an incorruptible Crowns. A Crown of Righteousness 2. Tim.
4.8.
. An inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, is reserved
in heaven for them 1. pet. 1.4.
. They shall have the Crown of life Iam. 1.12.
. When he shall appear they shall be like him, for they shall see him as he is
1. Io. 3.2.
. They shall have heavenly bodies, yea incorruptible, glorious, powerful, and
spiritual, for they shall bear the Image of the Lord of heaven y. Add to all
this, that they shall inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the
foundation of the worlda.

And is not this wonderful blessedness, which is reserved to be reueiled in
the last times b? What should be more said to express it, and we are plainly
taught that it does not yet appear, what we shall be 1. Io. 3.2.
: Yet by these Scriptures we may take a view a far off, and see as in a
glass darkely the infinite glory, and most happy condition, which shall then
be enjoyed: by these we may know in part, the excellency of our condition
then: how vile and base soever, it is esteemed in this Life. As to live
everlastingly in such a Paradise of Pleasures; to be at Gods right hand, to
enjoy his presence, and in his presence perfect Joy. It is a great privilege
to stand before an earthly Prince, and to solace our selves familiarly with the
Kings of this world. Oh what then will the estate be, to such as shall stand
before the King of Kings: and Lord of Lords: nay which is more, shall be
feasted by him; yea, and he himself shall gird himself, and serve thee Luc.
12.37.
. Oh happy are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are the people
whose God is the Lord Jehovah. Could the Queen of Sheba say to Solomon, happy
are thy men, and happy are these thy servants which stand before thee
continually, and hear thy wisdom 2. Chron. 9.7.
. What shall we say that do not only hear a report of such a glorious King,
and such happy servants: nay more such a loving Father, and such blessed
children: but we know it to be truth, yea the one half of it: nay the least
jot of it, not one part of many 100000. can possibly be discovered. Is it a
small thing said David to be a kings son in law, is it a smalthing may it be
truly said to be as the Angels in Heaven: to receive that infinite reward: to
shine as the Sun in Gods Kingdom eternally? were Salomons servants happy
that heard his Wisdom, and saw his Glory? and shall not those be happy that
shall behold the glory and majesty of Christ: and that eternally; yea enjoy
themselves an exceeding weight of Glory, when they shall be fashioned like
unto Christ Jesus himself: and bear his image: having Spiritual, powerful,
Glorious, Incorruptible, and Heavenly Bodies: crowned as Kings, and possessing
a perpetual Kingdom prepared from eternity for them to inherit; yea, me
thinks I clearly see as great a difference between the best estate, of the
most happy man upon earth, and this estate in Heaven, reserved for the Saints:
as there is between, Similitude.
a man alone in the midst of a mighty storm, beaten upon with tempestuous
winds in a very dark night, far from any succor, terrified with terrible
thunderings, and scorching flashes of fearful lightnings: yea compassed round
with Devils. And another man in the midst of a strong City, in a fair house
with great lighes in a bright day, well attended on by comely waiters, in the
company of his beloved friends, at a royal table well furnished with all
sorts of dainties, having a most melodious Harmony of the best Music: being
in perfect health of body, and of a sound mind. Here is great difference
between these two conditions: yet is the estate of men on earth, and the
Saints in heaven far more different: yea the estate of Gods own dear ones is
so different here, and hereafter: that when they have gotten all the
privileges before mentioned, Similitude.
yet they differ far more then a child in his mothers womb yet unborn, and
a man in his perfect age, and full strength: and yet great is the difference
between these, if we consider the weakness of the one, the strength of the
other; the ignorance of the one, and the knowledge of the other, the darkness
with which the one is compassed and enclosed; and the light with which the
other is comforted the solitariness of the one, and the multitudes of
companies the other enjoys? Oh blessed estate, happy life, glorious
condition, for which we wait; It is no wonder then that the Saints groan for
it, and wonderfully desire it 2. Cor. 5.1.2. Romans 8.23.
. Yea hereby we see that all the hardness they endure, the tribulation they
go through, the afflictions, and persecutions, and fiery trials they pass,
the shame and torment they suffer: all the distresses, necessities, stripes,
imprisonments, tumults, labors, watchings, fastings: may be termed justly
light and momentany, in comparison of this exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, which Gods children shall obtain. To conclude, let us with all
sobriety praise God, that such an estate is prepared for us: and not pry too
far, what estate it is, or shall be? For secret things belong to the Lord
our God: but those things which are reueiled to us and to our children for ever
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
.

Now follows to be showed, where these Pleasures, and this fullness of Joy,
with all that has been mentioned, and more then can possibly be expressed:
where or in what place this shall be enjoyed? This is very evident by the
Scriptures, that it shall be above the Heavens which our eyes do behold, and
not upon Earth: as some do dream; and that it shall be above, let us consider
these Scriptures, which as so many witnesses do all testify this Truth: That
whereas our Lord said to his Disciples. I go to prepare a place for you: and
if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you to my
self: that where I am, there ye may be also 1. Job. 14.3.
. Also, this is witnessed by our Lords glorious Ascension, where it is written.
After the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into Heaven, and
sat at the right hand of God Mar: 16.19.
. Also, it came to pass while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and
carried up into Heaven Luc: 24.51.
. Add to this, That when many were gathered together while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight Act: 1.9.
. Also it is written: That the heavens must receive Christ, until the time of
restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his
Prophets since the world began Act. 3.20.21.
. Also, Stephens glorious vision, when being full of the holy Ghost he looked up
into heaven, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God. And he said, behold I see the heavens opened, and the son of man
standing at the right hand of God Act. 7.55.56.
. By these Scriptures and many more it is evident, that our Lord ascended up
from earth to heaven. And he has said that where he is we shall also be, as
it appears where it is written, that he says, Father I will that they also
who^ thou have given me be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory
which thou have given me. Io. 17.24.
Also, The dead in Christ shall arise first, then we also which are alive, and
remain, shall be caught up together with them into the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the Air, and so we shall be ever with the Lord. 1 Thessalonians: 4.17.
Also our Lord said unto the thief on the Cross; To day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. Lu: 23.43
This Paradise ( Paul speaks of) and terms it also the Third Heaven, or
place of Blessedness, as it is written, where he says, I know a man in Christ,
about fourteen years ago, whether in the Body, I cannot tell, or whether out
of the Body, I cannot tell God knows, such a one caught up into the third
Heaven. And I know such a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, God
knows, how that he was caught up into Paradise. 2. Cor. 12.2.3.4.
So Eliah went up by a whirlwinde into Heaven. 2. Kings, 2.11.
And let us call to mind the saying of our Lord to Marie, when she drew near
to him, at his Resurrection, Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not
yet ascended to my Father: but go to my Brethren, and say unto them: I ascend
to my Father, and to your Father to my God, and your God. Io. 20.17.
This is most plain, where the Church groans, desiring to be clothed upon
with her house, which is from Heaven. 2. Cor. 5.
Also, our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ

Phil. 3.21
And so by these Scriptures it is most manifest, that the Haven of eternal
happiness, and fullness o^ Joy, is not on Earth, but in the glorious Heavens:
yea, above the Firmament, which we behold, and that al^ conceits of men of
corrupt minds that Heaven shall be enjoyed on Earth, are to be rejected, as
most false and Devilish.

Now it follows in order, to be showed, for whom it is ordained? This the
Scriptures do make manifest, as it appears where it is written. That Grace
and Glory is given to such as walk uprightly Psalm. 84.11
. Also, the Righteous shall shine forth at the sun in the ^ingdome of their
Father Mat. 13.43.
. Such ^s are washed with the washing of re^eneration, and renewed by the holy
^host Tit. 3.5.
. Such as repent and be^eeue in Christ, as it is written; Re^ent, and be
converted, that your sins ^ay be blotted out, when the time of ^efreshing shall
come from the pre^ence of the Lord Act. 3.19.
. Such as are Merciful, as it is written: Then shall the King say to them, on
his ^ight hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
^or you, from the foundation of the ^orld; For I was an hungered, and ^ee gave
me meat: I was thirsty, and ^ee gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye
took me in: naked, an^ ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye^ visited me: I was
in prison, and ye^ came unto me. Then shall the Righ^^teous answer him,
saying: Whe^^ saw we thee a stranger, and took^ thee in: or naked, and
clothed thee or when saw we thee sick, or in pri^son, and came unto thee? And
the King shall answer, and say vnt^ them: Verily I say unto you, in a^^much as
you have done it to one of the least, of these my brethren, ye hau^ done it to
me. And these shall go into eternal life Mat. 25.34.40. Verse. 46.
. The poor of the world, as it is written. Blessed be ye^ poor, for yours is
the Kingdom o^ God Luc. 6.20.
. But more plainly, Iame has written thus: Hearken my be^loued brethren, has
not God chose^ the poor of this world, rich in Fait^ and heirs of the
Kingdom which he^ has promised to them that love him Iam. 2.5.
And Paul writes plainly of this ^n these words. Brethren you see ^our
calling, how that not many wise ^en after the flesh, not many mighty, ^ot many
noble are called. But God ^ath chosen the foolish things of the world, to
confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of ^he world, to
confound the things which are mighty. And base things ^f the world, and things
which are despised, has God chosen: and things which are not, to bring to
naught things which are 1. Cor. 1.26.2.2^.
. Such as are ^ated and reproched, persecu^ed, and afflicted here: for these ^s
everlasting life ordained, as ^t appears plainly, where it is written.
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the
Son of Man's sake, rejoice in that day, an^ leap for Joy: for behold your
rewar^ is great in Heaven Luc. 6.22.23.
. Also, blesse^ are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye^ when men shall revile and
persecut^ you, and shall say all manner of eui^ against you, falsely for my
sake (sait^ the Lord Christ) rejoice and be ex^ceeding glad, for great is your
rewar^ in Heaven Matt. 5.10.11.12.
. Also James, Blesse^ is the man that endures temptation for when he is tried
he shall receiu^ the Crown of Life which the Lord has promised to them that
love him Iam. 1.12.
^ And to this Peeter assenteth, when he writes thus, Blessed be the Go^ and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which according to his abundant me^^cy has
begotten us again to a live hope, by the resurrection of Jesus from the Dead:
to an inheritance incorrup^tible and undefiled, the ^^deth not away, reserved
in Heaven for you, wherein ye greatly rejoice; Though now for a season ye are
in heaviness, through manifold temptations 1. Pet. 1.3.4.5.6.
. Also, It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you: and to you which are troubled, rest with us 2. These. 2.5.7.
. When the Lord Jesus shall be reueiled from Heaven with his mighty Angels.
Thus it is plain, that Everlasting life is prepared for the righteous or
upright, the regenerate, or such as have repented and do believe in Christ,
the merciful, the poor, the foolish, weak, and despised, the hated,
reproched, scorned, persecuted, and troubled ones. Such in a word, as the world
knows not, but do basely esteem and account as the offscouring of the
earth. These being rich in Faith, are those the shall enjoy Eternal Happiness
in the Heavens.

Object.
But some may say you seem hereby to exclude all rich, and mighty ones, out of
this Blessedness.

Answ:
Far be it. For then should be condemned, the generation of the Just: and the
Scriptures teach, that we pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1.
Tim. 2.1
and that because God will have all men to be saved. v. 4.
That is, not the whole world of men created, as some pervert it to their own
destruction: but men of all Degrees, Kings, as well as meaner people, as the
Scriptures do make it plainly to appear, and plentifully do confirm it,
that fewest great and mighty ones, yea, very few of them shall be saved.

Matt: 19.23.24. Psalm: 49.12.14.19.
Thus this glorious Estate of the Saints here and hereafter, being manifest,
and for whom it is prepa, red? we shall see in the last place, how long it
shall continue. This the Scriptures do clearly show to be for ever, yea, to be
Everlasting, as GOD is everlasting. For so we find, That their Fullness of Joy
in Gods presence, and the pleasures at his right hand, are for evermore. psalm.
16.11
Also, the Righteous is an everlasting Foundation. pro. 10.25.
And our Lord himself says, that such as follow him in the Regeneration, and
every one that forsakes ought for his Names sake, shall receive in this
present, an hundred fold more with persecutions, and shall inherit
Everlasting life. Mat: 19.29.
Also he says again. That at the last day, Luc: 18.30.
the Righteous shall go away into eternal life. Matt. 25.46.
Also, whosoever belieueth in Christ shall have everlasting life. Io:
3.15.16.36.
Also, the Apostle tells us, That our light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal wait of Glory. 2. Cor.
4.17.18.
Also, the same Apo: says, We shall be ever with the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
Therefore it is termed an incoorruptible crown. 1 Cor. 9.25.
And an Inheritance that fades not 1 Pet. 1.4.
. Also, a Crown of Life Iam. 1.12
. By all these and many more it appears evidently that the Blessed, and most
happy condition of the Saints is eternal, or everlasting, Incorruptible, it
never fades, but abides for evermore: Yea, it may be said of this for the
unspeakable comfort of all the Godly, the poor hated, despised, scorned,
reproched, and persecuted members of Christ Jesus, that their momenta^y, or
light afflictions, shall be recompensed with long and exceeding lardge
continuance of happiness in the Heavens: yea, their happiness, and Comfort
there shall have no end. But when so many thousand years are passed and gone
away as there are Stars in the Firmament, drops of water in the Sea, sands
on the Sea shore, grasses on the earth, Leaves in Summer, ha^^es on the Bodies
of living Creatures: yea, when an hundred thousand times so many shall be
passed away and gone over, yet the end of the wonderful Joys, and the
Pleasures which the Righteous shall possess, is as far, as it was at the
beginning.

Is it even so that there is a Heaven, that is of old prepared for the godly?
and is it so lasting and perpetual? is the blessedness so exceeding great?
shall this excellent and most glorious estate be enjoyed for evermore? Then may
Gods adopted sons, and his dear children; yea every redeemed one, may thus
solace and comfort himself. Happy day! blessed hour! yea thrice happy time!
that ever I was borne! blessed be the God that created me, the parents that
brought me up, the earth that has borne me, the other creatures with which I
have been nourished to this end; But a thousand times more blessed those
times that mine eyes were opened, mine heart turned, and my sins pardoned.
What thanks shall I return to the Lord for such mercy, such unspeakable
loving kindness! Alas in what case are my poor brethren and sisters which
were created in the same Image, but either live in such Countries where they
utterly are deprived of all such means of Salvation as I have had; or else
living in this land where it is: do utterly neglect, or wilfully reject it: oh
that they did but know what Peace I feel, what rest I have obtained; whereas
they cannot deny but they are tossed up and down, as a ship with waves in a
terrible storm: yea they know not where to rest them, so that they are at
their wits end, not knowing what to do, or which way to turn them. Oh that
they would hearken and hear that they might take the same course which I have
taken, to obtain this sweet Peace, and blessed Rest. Neither have I only
such Rest and Peace, but also my Joy is unspeakable, and glorious. I have
formerly walked in seeming good ways, and have kindled fires, and compassed my
self with sparks; but even in laughing my heart was sorrowful, and the end
of that mirth was heaviness. But since I have received the assurance of the
Love of God in Christ, I have been so comforted, for the most part, that I
have been constrained to break forth into singing: yea, the high praises of
God have bin in my Mouth, and I have sung a loud upon my bed, yea night and day
I have had Melody in my Heart: and albeit this has sometimes been less then
at other times; yet when I have searched my self duly and found out the cause:
and have sought it again diligently, by fasting, watching, and prayer: it has
returned with great advantage. And besides this, I am so ravished with the Love
of Christ, that I can truly say, my soul loves him: yea, I account all
things doung, yea filthy and loathsome. I desire so much to be with him which
is best of all: yea many times I do groan earnestly in this Tabernacle:
willing to be absent from it, and to be present with the Lord: Oh how easy
is his yoke unto me now, and how light his burden, his Commandments are no
longer grievous, but they are become the Joy, and rejoicing of my heart;
whereas sometimes I was obstinate, and rebellious, and only what I did, was
compelled by the terrors of God which made me affraide: and when I was
reproved for swearing, lying, breaking of the Saboth, neglecting utterly the
worship of God, and such like, it makes me to blush in secret: when I do but
think of my folly, and ignorance, with these I also am stayed to depend upon
God in all trialles, and to wait for an issue: yea, I can bear any thing
through the sweet Hope, and blessed expectation of a good end which the Lord
will make: yea, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, because I can wait
for the Salvation that it brings. Besides these, I have such wonderful
Boldness, as cannot be expressed with Pen, whereas before the shaking of a
leaf, would put me in fear: and great men would affright me with their high
words. But now I fear them not, for I know they shall die and fade as
grass: neither can the greatest oppressor touch one hair of my head for hurt.
As for death, it is swallowed up in victory by my Lord Jesus Christ. And
whereas formerly I was led violently to the committing of sin, and lust did
reign in me: yea sin had dominion over me, and I like a base Captive, bound
hand and foot, not able to resist, did yield the service of my members to
sin: yea had not God in his abundant mercy holden me, I had broken forth
into all foul sins. But here behold the wonderful mercy of God! and
unspeakable loving kindness! I have gotten the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Yea I can with comfort say; O Death where is thy sting! Yea, I live no
more, but Christ Jesus lives in me. The strong man is cast out, and the
stronger has taken possession never to be dispossessed. I am now his Freeman,
he has resisted the Devil, crucified the flesh, and overcome the world for
me. Yea, old things are passed away, and all things are become new, and I
know my self to be in Christ, by that I am a new creature. And when I take a
view of my Folly, and ignorance, how brutish I have been, it does even cover
me with blushing, and shame: and when withal I do call to mind, what
abundance of wisdom I have obtained since Christ became my wisdom, yea
when I consider Gods wonderful liberality, in opening to me his treasury of
wisdom and knowledge: and bidding me ask what I will: this does many times
amaze me, and wonderfully astonish me, that so vile a person as I am, should
be trusted with Treasures of such value, and Pearls of such price: I do
think thus with my self, what am I? that I should be so regarded, as that my
mouth should be made a Well of Life? my lips should know what is acceptable,
that they should feed many: and that other should seek the Law at my mouth?
That such Wisdom and Spirit should be given me, that all mine adversaries
should not be able to gainsay, or resist; oh blessed be my God for evermore! oh
let my tongue never cease to sound forth his praises, and to tell of his
loving kindness from day to day. And when I look without me, me thinks the
Communion of Saints does ravish me, the fervent Love, which we have amongst
our selves, whereas I was once a companion of Murderers: such I mean, as
unadvisedly would break out into anger, wrath and rage, disclose secrets,
break covenants, carry tales to shed blood, amongst whom, though I sometimes
blessed my self, yet was my condition fearful, for I could expect nothing
but death every day, such was the uncertainty of any staidness in their
familiarity.

But now I am a Companion of the Sons of Peace: All my Familiars are
Peacemakers, we are one an others Keepers, Many wholesome exhortations, Loving
instructions, and Amiable reprooffes, do pass between us.

Many are the fervent Prayers, we put up one for another: yea, all that we
have, we account not our own, in one another necessity.

Our Love is not in word, and in Tongue, but in deed, and in Truth It is
continually increased, and does daily Flourish: Oh what comfort is it to meet
in great Assemblies, in the time of Peace; to hear the Word! break Bread
together! and to join in hearty prayers and praises to our loving Father!
Also, I now do plainly see, that we have more with us, then against us; For I
was wont to consider of the multitude of wicked men in the world, and how they
bandie themselves, and conspire against the Saints, but now I see their
attempts are exceeding weak: for we have our Seat on high, and are compassed
round, with a Wall of Fire: yea, the Angels of God, as Chariots of Fire, and
Horses of Fire, do compass us round continually: Yea, they also behold our
Fathers face in Heaven, ready to execute vengeance on our adversaries, and to
bear us in their hands, that we hurt not our foot against a stone.

Besides all this, the Creatures were at enmity with me, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, in their courses, the Earth would have swallowed, the Water drowned,
the Fire consumed me: yea, the Wind would have thrown down Trees, and Houses
upon me: the very stones of the Field were at odds with me, the Beasts,
Fowls, and Creaping things at variance.

The Corn, Wine, and Oil, these did (as it were) disdain or refuse to yield
me strength: whereas now on the contrary, the sweet Familiarity which is
between us, is exceeding great.

The Sun will not hurt me by day, nor the Moon by night: the Heavens, do as
it were smyle upon me: the Fire warmes me: the water yields me moisture: the
Earth habitation: the Air, refreshing: What shall I say? Me thinks, I see
the Fire coming from Heaven: the Water preparing, the Earth opening wide her
mouth: the Air threatening: yea, all the Creatures mustering themselves: and in
continual readiness, to execute vengeance upon such, as shall ever dare to
touch me for hurt.

And all these are accompanied with abundance, of all necessaries for my self
and my children: and whereas before I was in continual want, in the midst of
plenty: and ever caring for more, though I had enough: Now have I abundance of
all things with gteat Contentment: that hundred fold gain by Godliness, yea,
I can truly say, I can be abased, and I can abound, I have learned in what
estate so ever, therewith to be content. Yea, I know that I shall never want
any thing that is good: neither shall my children beg their bread.

And when to this I can add the sure continuance of this estate, and do know
that I shall never be removed, neither is my estate subject to Change: but I
shall increase, not decrease: grow, not dye: go forwards, not backwards,
flourish, decay; and that I am in Christ, as stable, firm, and immovable, as
God is stable, firm, and immovable, this does so ravish me with comfort,
that it draws tears from mine eyes, I cannot but rejoice exceedingly. And yet
further, when I think on my estate to come, at that day, which will be a
dreadful day to the wicked. I find that all this which I have called to mind
is very little, yea scarce a handful of the whole sand of the Sea, in
comparison of that blessedness then to be received. Then when our glorious
Lord, the Lord of Glory, shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of an Arch-angell, and which the Trumpe of God: when he shall come most
gloriously, in his own Glory, his fathers Glory, and the Glory of all his holy
and mighty Angels: attended with ten thousands of his Saints in flaming fire
to be glorified in them. When he shall sit upon the throne of his Glory, and all
nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate them one from
another, as the shepherd divides his sheep from the Goats: and having set
the sheep on his right hand; then shall this King of Glory, say unto them on
his right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundations of the world, Then shall I with the rest of Gods
redeemed ones, pass away with great triumph, and in a glorious manner, enter
those heavenly Mansions, to take possession of my everlasting habitation.
There, I shall see God face, to face: Yea I shall know him, even as I am
known: Then shall I be like him, for I shall see him, as he is. And when this
my corruptible body has put on Incorruption: and this Mortal bopy has put on
immortality: then shall be fully and perfectly brought to pass, for me and
all the elect, that which before was truly believed. That death is swallowed
up in victory. And will not this be a wonderful and most glorious estate!
when I shall shine forth as the Sun in his greatest glitter: and most
glorious brightness? when I shall be as the Angels in Heaven, always
beholding the face God, Where I shall have no companions but glorified Saints,
and blessed Patriarchs, holy Prophets, glorious Apostles, triumphing Martyrs,
chaste Virgins, loving Angels! Where I shall have plenty without want, health
without sickness, honor without disgrace, peace without trouble, strength
without weakness, courage without fear, love without hatred, joy without
sorrow, light without darkness, beauty without deformity, safety without
danger; knowledge without ignorance, life without death, all good without any
evil: Yea this blessedness is so great, that the more I conceive of it, the
shorter I come to comprehend it. Yea if it were possible that the glory and
excellency of the meanest Saint in heaven, were to be known unto the Sons of
men, it would ravish them so, as that there would remain no spirit in them: so
wonderfully would it astonish and amaze them, oh how blessed then is my
condition! may a child of God say; That of one so poor, I shall be so
enriched: of base, I should become so honorable; of despised, so respected: of
deformed, so beautiful, so oppressed, persecuted, and afflicted: so free, so
glorious and triumphant a Conqueror! And am not I then in a most blessed
condition, has not God dealt richly with me? by whose spirit I am persuaded
firmly of such Happiness; of which I have already tasted abundantly? yea my
present condition, if there were no other, I would not exchange with the
Crowns of all the Kings in the world: so bountifully has God dealt with me,
yet I must confess, that the time was I could not conceive of Happiness, at
all, in this Life: which now I so plentifully enjoy, and so surely hold, as
that I know all the powers of Hell shall never prevail against me: oh how
hard a thing was it to me in former times, in blind times of my Ignorance: to
be moved to Repentance, it was exceeding harsh unto me: but now blessed be
God, I am so well acquainted with the rich inheritance of the Saints in light,
that if Repentance were again to be taken up, though it were a thousand tlmes
more difficult then it was, yet could I undergo it, for the happiness which I
do already enjoy: how much more for that fullness of happiness, which I shall
enjoy in the Heavens? Neither do I any longer marvel as I have done; why the
Saints have so willingly undergone such sharp and fiery trials as they have
done: yea, have gloried in them, and accounted it all Joy when they have fallen
into diverse trials; or, why the Prophets, and Apostles, and other Preachers of
Righteousness, before and since have cried so earnestly for Repentance: and
do daily provoke to repent, and turn unto God; For surely they have known,
and do know perfectly, that such a blessed condition will follow, not only in
this Life, but in that which is to come. And to conclude, let me be heard
amongst my Countrymen. Stick not at Repentance, what if it fill your hearts
with sorrow, your head with care, your eyes with tears, your chambers with
complaints, yet I know, and you shall find a recompense even here: yea, and a
full reward hereafter. The Lord open our eyes that we may see, and our ears
that we may hear, and our hearts that we may understand; for certainly this
is truth which is here laid down, for the God of truth has spoken it in
his own words.

And so desiring a blessing upon your reading: as I found upon my self
writing; in that God made me an able Minister of the truth, and ^ faithful
disposer of what I know, ^d do yet understand: for your ^d, and desiring that
the Church ^y be built up, and the Gospel flo^ish, that Satan may be
disaduantaged, our adversaries converted, truth maintained, love every where
increased. I do end, ascribing to our God all glory, honor, power praise,
thanksgiving, might, majesty, wisdom, riches and dominion by Jesus Christ
now and for evermore.

FINIS.

