An exposition of the whole eight Chapter to the Romans, expounded by Ihon
Hedlambe, Preacher and Minister to the Congregation at Braughin, and student of
Divinity in Peter house at Cambridge, before Master Doctor Squire, and the
whole Ministry assembled at the last Synod, holden at Ware in Lent last
past 1579. Wherein is perfectly proved our justification to be by faith
only, to the beatyng down and ouerthrowyng of all erroneous and false
opinions to the contrary.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by Robert VValley. 1579.

To the right woorshipfull master Thomas Meade, one of the Queens Maisties
Justices of her common Plees at Westminster, Ihon Hedlambe wishes long life,
with the increase of godliness and felicity.
THat the good and godly order of that man of God: the right worship full and
our godly Archdeacon master Doctor Squier, may be known unto your worshipp,
for who^ I with the rest of my brethren, and fellow Ministers of the Church
of God are to give GOD most hearty thanks, for that it pleased GOD to send
such a faithful distributer of his word to reign over us. Who both with
godly zeal sets forth the truth, and also with great mildness
encourages us to go foreward in the same: It was his good pleasurs to
appointe me, though most unworthy, at his last Sinode at Ware, to open as
GOD would bless me, and direct me at that time unto my fellow Ministers
those notes, which according to my small capacity, I had collected upon the
viij. Chapter to the Romans, after which my rude discourse being ended, he
did so comfort me to go foreward, as was greatly to my joy and consolation in
the Lord: wherefore as duty binds me, praiyng the Lord long to continue
this our church of England with him, and many such faithful Ministers to God
his glory, and their and, our great comfortes, not being able to speak that
he deserves, neither to utter that in him, which my heart does conceive, I
refer it to your worship and others, godly and learned. Wherefore now
returnyng my baise style to write unto your worship: as the divine Philosopher
Plato (right worshipful) did often times give thanks to the Angel of his
birthe for three things: first that he was a man, and not a beast: Secondly,
that he was a Grecian, and not a barbarian: thirdly, that he was borne in the
days of Socrates, which rhankfulnesse that Heathen Philosopher, even to that
God he knew not, and that for worldly and transitory things, has pricked me
forward (though not forgetful, yet unable to fulfill any part of my duties)
to be heartily thankful to the Father of mercy, and God of all power, whom I
truly know through Christ Jesus, for that he has created me like unto
himself, sin only excepted, and has not only brought me to the pleasant
spryng of the hie Helicon, but also has sent me such a Mecenas, who as he is
able, so is he willing to further those my studies and labors, whereunto God
has called me. And seeing (right worshipful) that you are that fauorer of my
labors in Christ Jesus, for whom I am not only to pray to God, but also
through his assistaunce in and by my self, to show some effects and tokens,
of my thankful mind and knowleging both with what love you embrace the
truth of God his word: and what favor you bear to the Ministers of the
same, as also what delight you take in reading of the same, and mixyng the
studies thereof, with other your labors professed: I have here sent unto your
worship a breef discourse of the whole viij. Chapter to the Romans, which
although I have neither so well pollished, drawn such lineame^tes, nor added
such colors as other both could and would have dooen, if they had been
appointed to have spoken in that place. Yet as GOD at that time did give me
grace and vtteraunce, and for the measure of that Spirit which he lent me, I
did breefly both in deuidyng and expounding, so labor, as the shortness of
time wherein I had warnyng, and was to speak permitted me: which my labors
if they be accepted and approved by your worship, I trust I shall (God his
grace assistyng me) take such like or greater pains, in some other place of
Scripture, to the building up of the walls of the decayed Jerusalem, and to
the beatyng down of the kingdom of Satan, both in other, and also in my
self. Thus desiryng the God of mercy, who raised again from death, the great
Shepherd of his flock, even Jesus Christ the righteous, always to preserve
and prospere your worship and yours, both to his Church, and also to this our
common wealth. Thus with due remembrance of my bounden duties, I cease to
trouble your worship: from Braughin this xxj. of May. 1579.

Your worshipps most bounden in the Lord, during life Ihon Hedlambe.

The Printer to the gentle Reader.
WHereas it has pleased God (gentle reader) through his holy spirit, to move
and direct the author hereof, to set down here for thy comfort an exposition
of the whole 8. Chapter to the Romans: These are to desire thee, with
humility and diligence to read the same, and also for the better understanding
thereof, to read over the eight Chapter, not doubtyng but that in readyng
hereof, thou shalt receive comfort through Gods holy Spirit, praiyng unto
him, that he will direct the hearts, minds, and pens of all readers and
writers that all their actions may be to God his glory, and to the edifiyng
of the readers and hearers, which God grant for his mercy sake. Thus fare
thou well in the lord, who ever bless us. Amen.

Octauum caput ad Romanos.
IT is not (as I suppose) unknown unto any of you, right worshipful
well-beloved brethren, and fellow ministers of Gods holy Mysteries, how and in
what order the blessed Apostle S. Paul disputes against that people, which
in his days did vex the Church with the deuelishe and abominable doctrine
of salvation, by their own works and santification, by the vanities of man's
brain: and yet I have thought it good at this present breefly to open the
whole method of the same, both because I fear there be some here, who
either have not perfectly heard, or learned the same, and other that have not
distinctly taught it: as also that I may by the assistance of Gods spirit and
your gentle patience, more plainly set open before you, the whole contents of
this present scripture, to the aduansement of Gods truth, to the true
understanding of his word, and the health of all our souls etc.

This whole Epistle may well be divided into two especial parts, the first
is of doctrine especially, I say especially because that in the disputation of
Doctrine, he handeleth other things by the way. The second of manners. And
in that first part which is doctrine he disputes at large of justification
by faith in the first 8. Chapters. And the 9.10.11. Chapters he bestows in
the confirming of the other part of this doctrine which is predestination. And
in the other Chapters he only handles their manners. Thus you see the scope
of the Apostle: Now let us consider the Scripture which is read thus etc.

Read the 8.
After that the holy man of God Paul had satisfied the doutefull and wavering
minds, and overthrown the subtle and crafty reasons of those, who most
impudently ascribed the causes and means of their salvation to works, he
adds this 8. 2. Principal things.
Chapter wherein we are to know that there are contained two principal
things. First a conclusion of those things, which he set down in the former
Chapiters. Secondely a comfort and consolation for all those who embrace this
Doctrine, and cast from them those relikes of error. The conclusion which I
spoke of containing in it, an affirmation of the whole disputation from the
viverse of the first Chapter unto this 8 Chapter is confirmed this sentence,
without good works is only granted salvation too the elect. The
confirmation is in the second verse of this Chapter, wherein the third verse
is expounded, a doubt as it wear of the weakness and inabilitie of the
Spirit, which is answered in the same verse by an argument ex aduersis, that
is contraries which affirming are perpetually opposite.

That these things are only granted to those which are regenerat is set
forth in the fourth verse ex dissentaneis, whose first part set down in the
5. verse, is plainly declared of the effect following in the two next verses,
having their own conclusion in the 8. verse. The second part of the before
said argument, is in the 9. verse. Where are both the propositions of this
syllogism. Who so is in the spirit has the spirit: You are in the spirit
ergo.

The latter proposition, or as it is termed the Minor or assumption, is
confirmed by the effect of the graftyng into Christ in the 10. verse, and
effects of the spirit in the 11. verse. The conclusion of the first part is
in the 12. verse, and set forth by two disagreing arguments in the 13. verse,
the latter being proved in the 14. verse, by an enthimeme or imperfect
syllogism, whose proposition is confirmed by the effects and testimones of
the spirit, in the 15. and 16. verses. Which part thus orderly set down the
Apostle directed still by the same spirit, enters into the disposition and
artificial setting down of the comfort, which the Children of God receive
by that faith, in whose assurance he has so labored. Which comfort he takes
not of the vain delites, which carnal men wish or hope for in this life.
But first of that company, which we have with Christ in the end of the 17.
verse. Secondely a comparatis in the 18. verse, thirdly of an argument a Maiori
in the 19. verse, All things do look for this comfort, much more we
which God has blessed with reason, and called to the perticipation of his
mercies in Christ Jesus. And this lookyng for, is contained more largely in the
20.21.22. and 23. verses. Fourthly of the matter of hope 24. and 25. verses the
spirit helping and prayer 26. and 27. Fifthly of the end of our afflictions
28: God working the same, which has predestined us, as 29. and 30. verses.
Sixthly of an argument a Maiori 31.32 to the which he anexeth a most excellent
conclusion and affirmation, of the whole part beginning at the 33. verse unto
the end. Thus you see dear britheren, what order I am to observe in the
treatise of this Scripture, which that I may do too the glory of God etc.

I told you that the first part was a conclusion, which the blessed Apostle
Paul added to that notable disputation, which he before had handled to the
beating down, and erecting again both of Jew and Gentile, and to the
repairing in them whom God of his mercy, has called that the Image of
perfection, from which we fell with our forfathers, whose tokens we bear, I
mean original sin.

The exposition of the 1. verse.
(...), this word being without that accente which the Grecians call accentum
grave, is a note of copulation, and proves this to be joined to some
disputation going before, and addyng these words followyng, he gives them in
stead of a Buckler to defend us in that day of battle, when the Devil
shall be ready to give the onset, and to overcome us, if we arm not our
selves with this armor, either to preuente his malice, or valiantly to resist
his force. And here the wisdom of God by his servant Paul joins three
especial things to be marked: First, Three things to be marked.
the imperfections often incident disagree from the written word, then I say
they walk after the flesh, and yet they so sin, that for Christ his sake
these sins shall not be laid unto their charges: And therefore they fly unto
that mercy offered, and acknowledge the same. The second thing that I noted,
to be Gods favor toward us, which pardons and forgiueth us, so that
although sin assault us, and oftentimes subdue us, yet we acknowledge our
selves to be free from the power of Death, and the curse. Thus fell David in
committyng adultery with blood, Magi. Sententiarum libro 4 distinctio. 16.
thus fell Moses at the waters of strife in smiting the rock: Thus Peter, Mary
Magdalen and others whose falls were not to death, but to their farther
confirmation. And although the blodie Papists (trustyng in the defense of a
foolish distinction of sins Venial and Mortal, and willing in their
grossness to play and ieste with God, say that mortal sins must pay a
great ransom, but venial sins to be pourged with more easy remedies, as
with mumbling up and often repetition of the Lords prayer, with sprincklyng of
holy water, or the absolution of the Mass) would take away this place,
because it is say they, a paradox of the Stoickes making equality of sins,
yet let us (beloved) thus think, that if this were not true, that every one
should dye for ever, because Roma. 6.23.
the reward of sin is death, Ezech. 18.2^
because the same soul that synneth shall dye. Yea let us be persuaded that
all the sins of the faithful are remitted, not because they do not deserve
death, but because by the mercy of God, there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, so that their sins are blotted out by pardon, and shall
not be imputed unto them, neither does this place argue equality of sins
(as they dreamed) though it make all sins worthy of condemnation, or as they
term it Mortal. For in deed they them selves say, that the sins of
Ezechias, David, the Ninevites, Peter, and those that were converted at Peter's
sermon were all mortal, and yet some of them less then others: but we see
those sins not to have been taken away by man's power or policy, but by the
grace of God who called them to repentance. For Ezechias being King. 20.2.
^sai. 38.1.
afraied of the message of death that he received, prayed, weepyng, but looked
into the mercies of God, and trusted. David confessed his great sin in
numbryng the people, but he said Sam. 24.10.
Lord take away the iniquity of thy servant. He did acknowledge the sin
of adultery and manslaughter, at the reprehension of Nathan, and Sam. 12.13.16
cast him self down before the Lord, but in sure hope and steadfast faith.
The Ninevites troubled with the fearful threatenynges of destruction ^nas. 3.5.
put on Sackeclothe, sprinkled their heads with ashes, and prayed, hopyng that
the lord would have mercy, and turn his sharp wrath from them. Yea Peter
him self wept ^at. 26.75.
bitterly but ceased not to hope. And those which were stricken at the sermon
of Peter, only trusted in the goodness of God, and therefore said to the
Apostles, ^ct. 2.37.
men and brethren what shall we do.

Now let us come to the last part of this conclusion, which is the
regeneration of the spirit, 2. Daungen opiniones.
wherein there are two daungerouse opinions to be taken heed of, the one of
those sailyng abroad in the The family love and su like.
above the common use and custom of the life of gods Children, challenge to
themselves fantastical Spirits of sincerity. But as both these are most
horrible, so they which do either of them wrest the Scripture, are most
ungodly and damnable, unless they repent. For the Apostle in the sixth Chapter
of this Epistle, seeing the ungodly to challenge unto themselves, that liberty
says, that it is proper only to those, which put one the righteousness of
Christ, and that they are regenerate in spirit, and have a pledge of this
regeneration in their baptism. But for other which cleave not to Christ, he
promises the rigor of the Law, which ouerwhelmyng them with his curse,
does easily destroy them. Now as for those which would mount alofte in
their fained sincerity, because they study all that in them lies to make God
a liar, we are thus to persuade our selves, that to walk after the flesh, is
not to seek to put of all the senses of the flesh, and to fly up into the
middle heaven, or altogether to separate our selves from the company of the
wicked, for that is impossible for man: Cor. 5.10.
and therefore S. Paul willing us not to have any company with evil doers,
strait way expounds him self, saying: I mean not that you should not at
all company with them, for then you should go out of the world. And as I
think this is the true sense of this Scripture, to walk in the Spirit is to
be conversant in beatyng down fleshely lusts, and to give tokens of our
hatered of sin. And therefore not yeldyng to the former opinions, to say
thus unto our consciences, I have often fallen and sinned grievously, but the
Lord has received me to grace, he has graffed me into the communion of
Christ, he has brought me into the fellowship of the Church by Baptism.
Therefore as long as I go on forward in faith, although sin seek to deal
violently with me, yet shall I be free from all giltinesse and damnation,
because I being in the flesh, walk not after the flesh, yea, I abhor all
the lusts and concupiscence of the flesh.

To the confirmation of the Grace before concluded, might be proved by good
reasons, as if a man will allege works, we may thus reply, If Salvation or
justification be by works, then either by perfect works, or imperfect, but
not by imperfect works, for every imperfect work is sin, and therefore, if
it be by works it must needs be by perfect works, which no man is able to
work, but only the son of God, and therefore our works be accounted vile
and of none effect. I might reason against the blindness of the enemies of Gods
truth, but it needs not because it is here set down, ^he exposition ^f the
2. verse.
that only the Spirit of God gives all things, sets free, and makes
bond, gives health, and scourges with sickness. For by these words the
law of the Spirit of life is understood, the bountifulness and power of Gods
Spirit, the power which bringes us to a castyng away of the relikes of the
old Adam, and putting on of the righteousness of the new man Christ, the
bountifulness which as it grants pardon, and abolisheth the law of sin
in us, setting us free from the giltinesse of death. So it grants unto us
the holiness of Christ, which once imputed does, perfectly and absolutely
finish the sanctification begone in us.

This which is hear called the law of the Spirit of life, is that Spirit
which is promised to be poured on the seed of man, because man without the
moister of this spirit, is as a dry Esai. 44.3.
and barren land. Which Spirit also is promised to be Joel. 2.25.
powered upon all flesh, and is called the Ezech. 36.25.
clean water, which shall so reform and regenerate the elect, that they
shall be clean from all filthiness: this is that spirit which was sent Act.
2.4.
upon the Apostles and Church of God.

Now that this freedom is confirmed to be done by the woorkyng of the
Spirit, and not by works, let us see from what slavery it has freed us,
truly not as some think, who because of this freedom, say that we are not
bound to keep the Law of God set down in the ten Commandments. No my
brethren, that is a perilous doctrine, wherefore I pray you beware of it, for
to be free from the law of Sin and Death, is not to live as we list, or to
shake of the Commandments together with the Ceremonial law, but it is thus
to be taken, that we by the grace of Gods Spirit are so confirmed, that the
Law of concupiscence is overcome by us, that we be delivered from under the
yoke of our affections, so that we having rule over our own will, do seek
now nothing in all our doings, but to set forth the glory of God, to
repair the decayed Image of our former perfection, and to refer all our
worldly practizes or actions whatsoever, to be ruled and squared by the
written word. This did Paul feel and therefore he does triumph over sin,
over concupiscence, and affections of the old man whatsoever.

A doubt propounded and answered by the third ver. The doubt.
But I told you that this confirmation, was more clearly set forth in the
third verse, with a doubt there propounded, and an answer followyng in the
same. The doubt rises thus, it was said before that the law of the Spirit
abandoneth sin, and ouercommyng sets us free from Death. Here it is said
that the Law is weak, or as the Greek word (...) signifies impossible to
redeem, or to free from sin, so that it remains that the law is only a
shewer of our faults, and a condemner of our sins. And least any should
think that he condemned the Law, he sets down the cause of the
inhabilitie or weakness, namely, the corruption of our flesh, as though he
should say, the doctrine of the Law is able to justify, because it
contains a most exact and perfect rule of justice, but because no flesh
ca^ come unto that justice, the whole force and strength of the Law is
perished and taken away: but because we see that our corruption makes the
Law of God unprofitable unto us, and that though it show the way of life,
yet it is not able to keep back us from runnyng headlong into destruction:
Let us come to the aunsweryng of this doubt by the argument as I told you er
aduersis, that is of contraries which cannot agree: The answer
for the mercies preached in the Gospel, are opposed or set against the
severity of the Law, and the righteousness by the new man, in taking our
flesh, to the corruption of the flesh of the old Adam, which had spoiled
all mankind of the benefit of eternal life, if it had not pleased God to
have sent this present and only remedy. Now that Christ was perfect man, we
read that he was the seed of Genesis 3.15.
Abraham, and afterward of the seed of Genesis 17.2.
Jacob. So that then the curssed opinion of the Manaches may not be received,
The error of the Manaches and Marcionits confuted.
which would have him to be a fantastical body, neither as Marcion faineth
a heavenly body, for neither in a heavenly body, or bare show of a man is
the blessyng promised, but in the seed of Abraham to come out of the loins of
David, which Romans 1.3.
Paul affirms that he was made of the seed of David after the flesh. And
in an other place Math. 2.16.
that he sprange of the Jews, yea, and the Lord him self called him self not
only by the name of a man, but also by this name the Math. 6.28. Luke. 9.58.
soonne of Man, like unto man in all things except sin only which he
wanted (not because he was borne of a woman without the knowledge of a man, as
some vainly and childishly think) but because he was sanctified by the
Spirit, that his birthe might be pure, even as it should have been before the
fall of Adam, and in all the scripture these words Purity of Christ do note
unto us the true Nature of man in him: that he died only for our sins it is
manifest, but especially in that of Esaie: Esai. 53.4.5.
surely he has borne our sins and carried our infirmities etc. And in the
last verse in the same Chapter, he was accounted among the transgressors,
and he bare the sins of many, and that is most evident that 2. Cor. 5.21.
Christ which knew no sin, is become sin for us, that we might be
partakers of his righteousness. And that we may more assure our selves Paul
sets down, that this was dooen in our flesh, which when we see, we may
acknowledge our nature to be partaker of his victory.

And that the fruits before set down pertain only to the godly, The
exposition of the 4. verse.
I reason this out of the fourth verse. None have the forsaied fruits, but
such as fulfill the whole law, or such as being ingrafted in Christ are made
perfect by him. But they that challenge the fauore of God to their own
wantonness, or think evil of the doctrine of Salvation by faith, do
neither fulfill the law (for by it they are condemned) Neither are they
ingrafted but cut of from Christ. And that lest the rigor of the law might
prevail any more against them to condemnation. For the whole substance or
extremity of the law is in Christ fulfilled, that we might be found just
before God. For if once sanctification be imputed unto us with justification,
then is the whole form of the law made perfect. The exposition of the 5.6.7.8.
verses.
This part is playnlier set down in the next four verses. First of
arguments that disagree in the matter, as to walk after the flesh and after
the Spirit, to seek for carnal and Spiritual things. Neither is the
Apostle hear to be understood as before, for he makes not a flatt
opposition, but he comfort even the beginners in religion. For unto whom
he seemed to have denied the feloshippe of Christ, because they walk not
absolutely after the spirit, and wear guilty to themselves of many
infirmities, What is to live after the spirit and after the flesh.
for this is to live after the spirit, to give over our selves to the
governance of the Spirit: and again to live after the flesh is too imagine too
themselves an Epicurisme, and to give open tokens that they are excluded from
the Children of God, and have given themselves over to hunt after their hearts
desire, and to feed their own affections: Writing upon the same place
And therefore Master Calvin has translated (...) which is sapere cogitare,
that he might more manefestly declare their earnest zeal, in seking carnal
things which show them to be without all hope of regeneracion.

Now this part is set out by certain effects of both as the following of
the flesh is death, The effects of the spirit and of the flesh.
enemitie with God and disobedience, but the following of the spirit is life
and peace. And that to follow the will of the flesh is death, the old law
declares which wills every man too take heed of the lusts, which bring
transgressions of the law which causes death. It is enmity with God, because
it causes him to enter daiely into judgment, and to scourge us for the
breach of his statutes. It causes disobedience, because it is unwilling to
be bridled or kept under, but always rebelleth and seeks means whereby to
displease God. In this wisdom of the flesh walked Cain, Saul, Ahab, and all
other, the wicked which either wilfully broke the flat commandment, or
otherwise most shamefully transgressed. The 8. verse which is the conclusion
of the former verses.
In the eight verse I toulde you, was contained a conclusion, of the effects
which shows that the reason of the Apostle gathered together is this. An
argument.
Those that give themselves up to follow the flesh, and to work uncleanness
with greediness cannot please God. Those that live after the flesh are such,
therefore they cannot please God.

Seeing then that this conclusion gathers so well the reason of the first
disagreyng argument, which was to walk after the flesh, mark also how the
Apostle propounds and proves the second. For where in the ninth verse he
sets down the Propositions, The exposition of the 9.10 11. verse.
I toulde you before which wear.

They which are in Christ have the Spirit. You are in him. The conclusion is
in the twelfth verse, the conjunction of the Trinity is such, that no
reasonable man can deny the one to be so anexed to the other, that wheare
mercy is showed in the one, there grace abounds by the other. The assumption
he proves by the effects of our graftinge into Christ, by whom although he
acknowledges all things to come, Yet in this principally he comfort them
that beside the benefit they receive and enjoy in this life, even then when
their flesh lies in the Ground, (For so I expound Corpus for the one part
of the body only) their Spirit shall live in peace, and the Body which as
yet is not purified from corruption, shall receive life by the grace given by
him in whom they are ingrafted. An other proof of the assumption is in the
11. verse and it is of the effects and working of the holy Ghost, as if a man
would say, truly it is an hard thing to flesh and blood to think a body
burned, eaten with the fowls of the Air, or consumed with the same, to meet
again and to be joined together part to part, and then the whole to the
soul yet if such an one whosoever look too the power of the Spirit, The
power of the spirit.
and acknowledge Jesus Christ to have risen by the same Spirit, and then
acknowledge him self to be a member of Christ's body he shall easily discern
this, and se that the power of the Spirit is not diminished, but that it is
the same which it was from the beginning, and too whom every creature shall
give in account, and before whom even the Sea shall bring all the bodies it
has swallowed, the Beasts and fowls all that they have devoured and eaten,
and the Son shall restore those Bodies it has consumed. But as this power is
not denied to Christ, although it be here by words given to the Father, but
is made common with them both, so is this action of the holy Ghost not all
together to be referred to the last rising, which shall be down in the
twinkling of an eye, but even to the daiely helps that this spirit
ministereth to us, whereby he prepares us to be fit members of his Soonne
Christ, and to be made meet heirs of his kingdom, by the blood of his
son.

Now then the conclusion is in the 12. Note here the conclusion of the 9.10.11.
verses.
verse, which shows that we renounce the flesh, when we suffer Gods
Spirit to rule our actions, and wholly depend upon his providence, and if
we do so, then we are in Christ, that is, we live according to his will, and
walk in his commandments, Ephe. 4.30.
as it is said to the Ephesians, if we live in the Spirit, then we walk in
the Spirit. And although we see that this conclusion thus gathered does show
a truth, yet the Apostle proves it by certain disagreyng arguments, which
I will touch in a word or two, because the effect of them was set down
before. The exposition of the 13. verse.
The first therefore contains a sharp threatenyng against the wicked, and a
comfort to the godly, this threatenyng he places here to be as a prick in
their bodies, to stir them up to call for grace, and not to put their trust
in them selves, or to think that they may be saved without the righteousness
thereof, for if they do so, they shall surely dye. And why? truly because
they transgress the Commandment, and no marvel. For if a mortal Prince
appoint a Law to be kept, ^ similitude.
and decree that the breach thereof shall be punished with Death, if he
apprehende any transgressor, he shall dye without mercy. And shall a man deal
so with his brother, and shall not the Lord deal more severely with his own
handie work, if it rebel and say, why have thou done thus and thus to me?
The comfort he promises to all those, which give their endeavor to work the
will of God and to deny the will of the flesh, although they cannot do it as
they should. The second proof of his conclusion is, that they are the soonnes
of God, The exposition of the 14. verse.
if soonnes? Then fellow heirs, and alwaie so directed by the Spirit, The
exposi^on of the 15. and 16. verse
which things he proves in the 15. verse by the effects of the spirit, and
in the 16. by the testimonies of the same spirit: the effects are the surety
of trust, in which all the faithful believe, and the taking away of fear
and waueryng, acknowledgyng our selves not to come to mount Sinai, where all
thing were terrible, and the people as stricken with death fell down and cried,
that the Lord should not speak unto them, where Moises himself was afraid:
but we are come to Sion to the heavenly Jerusalem, where we have the
Mediator of the new Testamente. A great comfort of the spirit.
And where the Spirit of God assuryng us of his clemency, causes our spirit
to call upon him, and to take him as our heavenly Father, which we durst not
to do without such assurance: and this is that Spirit, whose universal
actions sustain all Creatures, whose particular actions give all other
blessings which are unto us seals, and pledges of everlasting life and
heavenly inheritance.

The second part.
THus I have spoken of the first part of of this Chapter which was a
conclusion, and as God has given me knowledge and utterance, I have in
sincerity of the word, showed the true meaning and order of the Apostle,
which I mean to do God willing in this last part, which is a consolation
drawn of six arguments, Arguments.
inferryng a godly and comfortable conclusion of this first part of the
doctrine of this Epistle.

Argument. ^he expositi^n of the 17. ^erse.
The first argument is drawn of the fellowshippe we have with Christ 17.
verse, we are the sons of God as he is, and being sons we are made free
partakers of our Fathers treasures, and are appointed to have our inheritance
with him, with the condition followyng, that we walk not according to our own
appetite, but prepare our selves to bear his cross, which if we do not, then
is there no hope for us. A double comfort.
And here we have a double comfort, that even in the beginning

The second argument is a comparatis, that is as the learned know, 2.
Argument.
two simple arguments compared together, The exposition of the 18. verse.
to the setting forth of the one 18. verse. He compares things present with
things to come, and sets down the vanity of things present in respect of
the others. For all the afflictions and evil dealings of men against the
children of God are nothing. Therefore I rather agree to their sentence, that
make these words a confirmation of the former comfort, then to some that say,
they are a manner of correction, because that he lighteneth the heaviness of
the Cross, in comparyng with it the greatness of the glory. And that he
might the better arm the minds of the faithful with patience he compteth all
troubles and afflictions whatsoever, which suddenly pass away nothing in
respect of the joys of the life to come. Where by the word (...), which is
futura, he means aeterna, so that by the glory to come, is meante the
eternal glory.

Argument.
The third argument is a Maiori, all things look for the accomplishyng of
this comfort, therefore much more man 19. The exposition of the 19. verse.
verse. And here we are taught patience, to abide the good will and pleasure
of the Lord, because there is no elimente nor any part of the world, which
does not feel this present misery, and yet suffer, in hope of the
resurrection: So then every creature does with reverence, even bareheaded and
with great diligence, crave at the hands of God to be dissolved, and to
receive those great fruits and blessing of eternal life, after they have put
of their corruption: but some will say that beasts have no hope, that is
true, but hope is ascribed unto them, that we might more earnestly seek the
kingdom of God, and with open eyes look for the comfortes which shall never
end, which are mentioned by the reuealyng of the sons of God: The exposition
of the 20.21. verse.
and he shows reasons in the next two verses of the first part of this
comparison, for says he the Creatures suffer with us, even against the
course of their nature, neither can they come to their former estate, but shall
still dye and be corrupt, until the soonnes of God be restored both in body
and soul, to that perfection which was lost in Ada^. But note first here,
Note.
that this which is called will, is a natural inclination, where by all
reasonable Creatures desire their perfection. And here is a notable figure
called Prosopopeia, Prosopopeia.
whereby he makes the senseless creatures to labor, and to will or nill, and
further to show their obedience, and in hope to be restored, for the Sun
and the Stars fulfill their courses and sure motions, the Air, the Water,
yea even the beast of the feelde: and all creatures do diligently their
duties, and yet all this is in hope to put of their old corruption, and to
be restored into a better estate, as the children of God shall be, but not to
be partakers of their joys. Now that we have seen our corruption to be
such, that even all creatures, The exposition of the 22. verse.
yea the very heavens are polluted thereby, in the next verse repeatyng first
the suffering of the treatures, he shows the greatness of the liberty, and
joys, by a similitude of a woman's grownyng in childbed, A similitude.
whose sorrow is great, yet when a man child is borne, she receives such a
comfort, that all her sorrows are forgotten. So after we have wallowed with
sin, and have polluted all creatures, yet being called of God, our sorrows
are no more frutelesse, then the woman which reioyseth, for they are taken
away quite, and Hebru. 10.17. verse.
our sins are blotted out. Now in the 23. The exposition of the 23. verse.
verse he comes to the latter part of the comparison, and exhorts by the
example of these creatures which daiely wish for our revelation, to be more
circumspect, and to look more narrowly unto our selves, that where we are
burdened with sin, we may sighe and groan, and yet patiently look for the
mercies of God, as also to strengthen our selves by the lookyng for of this
blessedness, that we may so prepare our minds, to overcome all present
sorrows and miseries, for that we are the first fruits of the Spirit by
Christ, who assuryng us by the testimony of his Spirit, even in us of our
redemption, do boldly challenge the benefit of Gods eternal decree, whereby
he electeth us before the beginning of the world, John. 3.16. Acts. 13.28.
as it is in the Gospel, and therefore sent his soonne, to pay the price of
our redemption, which cannot profit us, except the fruits thereof should
appear in our heavenly renuyng and regeneration.

4. Argument.
The fowerth argument is of the nature of Hope, The exposition of the 24. and
25. verse.
in the 24. and 25. verses, for this comfort is especially wrought by faith,
which faith makes us to hope assuredly, that after we have finished our
course, we shall attain the croune, and therefore he says, that hope is not
reposed in those things which we see or handle, What hope is.
but in those which we assuredly look for, and then he shows that hope is
pacient, long sufferyng: now this patience so strengthens us, that in the
midst of tribulations we do not despair, neither think much of the
differryng of a benefit. Col. 3. verse. 3.
And why? Truly because the health of the faithful is hid from them, because
the health of the faithful is laid up in hope, neither is hope at any time
without patience, and therefore by patience is the health of the faithful made
perfect. Now least that any man should either faint under the burden of the
cross or As the famile of love does challenge.
challenge to much to him self, if he has been aided by the Spirit of God, he
shows the means whereby the Spirit brings to this Grace, Faith and Hope
26.27. verses. The exposition of the 6. and 27. verse.
Where we learn thus much, that the Spirit does even as it were a great
burden, bear our infirmittes, which being by the Apostle, put in the Plural
number, shows the continuance of this goodness, least we should faint when
we were after a greater measure afflicted. Furthermore, we see a new
goodness added to the former assistance of the Spirit: A new goodness.
that it does not only arm and strengthen our infirmities, and seal us up
to eternal health, Math. 6.9.
but even daiely puts into our hearts and mouths, Luke. 11.2. Ihon. 14.26.
Zachar. 12.10.
that form and order of prayer, by which we are to crave the goodness of
our heavenly Father. And least we should be dismayed, when we praiyng after
our own fantasies be not heard, he says in this 26. verse, that the Spirit
does pray for us, that is: does cause us to shake of our former negligences,
and to prepare our selves to prayer, yea, that we may do this with a zeal,
he does as it were, put into our hearts words and sighthes, which the Father
acknowledgyng to come from his own Spirit which dwells in us, does hear
our prayers directed by that Spirit, and does easily grant our requests.

Argument.
The fifte argument, is of the end of our afflictions 28. verse, thus he
says: seeing we our selves have paste the pikes of these afflictions, The
exposition of the 28. verse.
and feel a joy in our spirits, we do not think, but do know, and
assuredly persuade our selves, that this comfort so proved before, belongs
to us, and al things are so tempered from above, that, that which the world
thinks to be hurtful, is by the grace before showed profitable unto us. But
how? Truly even by the eternal purpose of God, who loved us before we loved
him, yea whom we could not have loved, Gal. 4.9.
if he had not called us. Neither is this calling only mente of the election,
but also of the continual direction of all our works, which are moderated
by the hand of God, Ephe. 1.5.
and therefore it is Tim 1.9.
showed that all things (whatsoever) come of his good will, power, and
pleasure. The exposition of the 29. and 30. verse.
There follows now in the 29. and 30. verses a figure, which is called
clymax, gradatio, which goes from one word to an other, and adorneth all,
Clymax or gradatio.
which beginning with the order of our election he says, that all the
afflictions of the godly, are means whereby they are made sure to Christ,
which he before proved to be very necessary. The gradation is whom he knew
those he predestinate, or decreed of him self, for so the word (...) may
well be translated, whom he predestinate, those he called, whom he called,
those he justified, The duties and rewards of Christianity.
and by all which he opens the duties and rewards of Christianity: For if
we be compared with Christ (who is the elder Soonne) then are we also so to
frame our selves, that we may be conformable to his Image. And labouryng
thus, in these we know that with our vocation, justification and glory is
joined, the fellowshipp of the cross, which cannot be separated.

6. Argument.
The sixth and last argument is a Maiori in the 32. The exposition of the 32.
and 33. verse. 5.
and 33. verses, where he having acknowledged the infinite power and
unspeakable mercy of God, bursteth out into these words: what shall we say
then? Shall we even seeing the goodness of God increaste? Distrust because
we are wrapte in miseries? No, but rather let us think thus, God is with us,
and therefore these can not overthrow us. Now this is the greatest stay for a
Christian, to have God with him, but how shall I which see my selfbeset with
sins, take hold of this goodness? There is no good in my self. I am a
detter to God, and therefore dare not offer my self to him: In these conflictes
say thus to thine own conscience, God is my father, therefore I am not to
doubt of his beneficence, he has given Christ Jesus to be slain for mine
infirmities, which is the greatest benefit, which either is, or shall be: and
will not he together with him give me all things, yes assuredly, and therefore
I will in boldness offer my self before him, in the name of his and my
Christ, The conclusion with the 6. verses folloing.
and conclude with the Apostle in the verses followyng, that being assured by
these his promises, and grounding my faith, yea, staiyng my self, that neither
Hell, Devil, persecution, anguishe, things present, and things to come, can
separate me from the love of Christ Jesus, who for his mercies sake, A prayer.
grant that we may steadfastly believe his promises without presumption,
bear afflictions without desperation, ground our faith and hope upon his
word without waueryng, have true comfort in his Death without rashenesse,
confirmed to us by the fellowship we have with Christ, by hope of his mercies
and all other assurances here set down.

Amen.

