THE OBSERVATIONS OF SIR RICHARD HAVVKINS KNIGHT, IN HIS VOYAGE INTO THE South
Sea. Anno Domini 1593.

Per varios Casus, Artem Experientia fecit, Exemplo monstrante viam. -- Manil.
li. 1. PRINCEPS SVBDITORUM INCOLVMITATEM PROCVRANS.
ID

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by I.D. for JOHN IAGGARD, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Hand and Star in Fleete-streete, near the Temple Gate. 1622.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST EXCELLENT Prince CHARLES, Prince of Wales,
DVKE of CORNWALL, EARL of CHESTER, etc.
AMongst other Neglects prejudicial to this State, I have observed, that many
the worthy and Heroyque Acts of our Nation, have been buried and forgotten:
The Actors themselves being desirous to shun emulation in publishing them,
and those which ouerlived them, fearful to add, or to dimnish from the
Actors worth, Judgment, and valor; have forborne to write them: By which,
succeeding ages have been deprived of the Fruits, which might have been
gathered out of their Experience, had they been committed to Record. To avoid
this Neglect, and for the Good of my Country, I have thought it my duty to
publish the Observations of my South-sea-Voyage; and for that unto your
Highness, you Heirs, and Successors, it is most likely to be advantageous,
(having brought on me nothing but loss and misery) I am bold to use your Name,
a protection unto it, and to offer it with all humblenes and duty to your
Highness approbation, which if it purchase, I have attained my desire, which
shall ever aim to perform duty.

Your Highness humble and devoted servant, RICHARD HAVVKINS

To the Reader.
HAd that worthy Knight the Author lived to have seen this his Treatise
published: he would perhaps himself have given the account thereof: For by his
own directions it was put to the Press, though it pleased God to take him to
his mercy during the time of the Impression. His purpose was to have
recommended both it and himself unto our most Excellent Prince CHARLES, and
himself wrote the Dedication, which being imparted unto me, I conceited that
it stood not with my duty to suppress it.

Touching the discourse it self, as it is out of my element to judge, so it is
out of my purpose to say much of it. This only I may boldly promise, that you
shall here find an expert Sea man, in his own Dialect deliver a true relation
of an unfortunate Voyage: which howsoever it proved lamentable and fatal to the
Actors, may yet prove pleasing to the Readers: it being an itch in our natures
to delight in newnes and variety, be the subject never so grievous. This (if
there were no more) were yet worthy your perusal: and is as much as others
have with good acceptance, afforded in relations of this nature. Howbeit
besides the bare series and Context of the story, you shall here find
interweaved, sundry exact descriptions of Countries, Towns, Capes,
Promontories, Rivers, Creekes, Harbors, and the like, not unprofitable for
Navigators: besides many notable observations, the fruits of a long
experience, that may give light touching Marine accidents, even to the best
Captains and Commanders: who if they desire to learn by precepts shall here
find store: but if examples prevail more with them, here are also aliena
pericula, if you believe me not, read and judge. Farewell.

THE OBSERVATIONS OF SIR RICHARD HAWKINS, KNIGHT, in his VOYAGE into the South
SEA. ANNO DOMINI. 1593.
SECT. I.
WITH the COVNSELS consent, and help of my Father, Sir John Hawkins, Knight, I
resolved a Voyage to be made for the Islands of Iapan, of the Phillippinas, and
Molueas, the Kingdoms of China, and East Indies, by the way of the Straites of
Magelan, and the South Sea.

The principal end of our Designements, was, The necessary use of Discoveries.
to make a perfect Discovery of all those parts, where I should arrive, as well
known as unknown, with their Longitudes and Latitudes; the lying of their
Coasts; their Head-lands; Of travail.
their Pons, and Bays; their Cities, Towns, and Peoplings; their manner of
Government; with the Commodities which the Countries yielded, and of which they
have want, and are in necessity.

For this purpose in the end of Anno 1588. returning from the journey against
the Spanish Armado, I caused a Ship to be builded in the river of Thames,
betwixt three and four hundred tons, which was finished in that perfection
as could be required For she was pleasing to the eye, O^ Shipping.
profitable for Stowage, good of Sail, and well conditioned.

The day of her Lanching being appointed, the Lady Hawkins (my Mother in Law)
craved the naming of the Ship, which was easily granted her: who knowing what
Voyage was pretended to be undertaken, named her the Repentance: what her
thoughts were, was kept secret to her self; And although many times I
expostulated with her, to declare the reason for giving her that uncouth name,
I could never have any other satisfaction, then that repentance was the safest
Ship we could sail in, to purchase the haven of Heaven. Well, I know, she was
no Prophetess, though a religious and most virtuous Lady, and of a very good
understanding.

Yet too prophetical it fell out by Gods secret Judgments, which in his
Wisdom was pleased to reveal unto us by so unknown a way, and was
sufficient for the present, to cause me to desist from the Enterprise, and to
leave the Ship to my Father, who willingly took her, and paid the entire
charge of the building and furnishing of her, which I had concorted or paid.
And this I did not for any superstition I have in names, or for that I think
them able to further or hinder any thing; for that all immediately depends
upon the Providence of Almighty God, and is disposed by him alone.

Improper Names for Shipping.
Yet advise I all persons ever (as near as they can) by all means, and in all
occasions, to presage unto themselves the good they can, and in giving names to
terrestrial Works (especially to Ships) not to give such as merely represent
the celestial Character; for, few have I known, or seen, come to a good end,
which have had such attributes. As was plainly seen in the Revenge, The
Revenge.
which was ever the vnfortunatest Ship, the late Queens Majesty had during
her Reign; for coming out of Ireland, with Sir John Parrot, she was like to
be cast away upon the Kentish Coast. After in the Voyage of Sir John Hawkins my
Father, Anno 1586. she struck aground coming into Plymouth, before her going
to Sea: Upon the coast of Spain, she left her Fleet, ready to sink with a
great Leake: At her return into the Harbor of Plymouth, she beat upon
Winter stone; and after in the same Voyage, going out of Portsmouth Haven, she
ran twice a-ground; and in the latter of them, lay twenty two hours beating
upon the shore, and at length with eight foot of water in hold, she was
forced off, and presently ran upon the Oose: and was cause, that she
remained there (with other three Ships of her Majesty's) six months, till the
Spring of the year; When coming about to be decked, entering the river of
Thames, her old Leake breaking upon her, had like to have drowned all those
which were in her. In Anno 1591. with a storm of wind and weather, riding at
her Moorings in the river of Rochester, nothing but her bare Ma^ts over head,
she was turned topse-turvie, her Kele uppermost: And the cost and loss she
wrought, I have too good cause to remember; in her last Voyage, in which she
was lost, when she gave England and Spain just cause to remember her. For the
Spaniards themselves confess, that three of their Ships sunk by her side, and
was the death of above 1500. of their men, See M^ster Hac^u^ts Relations.
with the loss of a great part of their fleet, by a storm which suddenly
took them the next day. What English died in her, many living, are witnesses:
Amongst which was Sir Richard Greenfeild, a noble and valiant Gentleman,
Vice Admiral in her of her Majesty's Fleet. So that well considered, she was
even a Ship laden, and full fraught with ill success.

The like we might behold in the Thunderbolt of London, The Thunderbolt o^
London.
who in one Voyage (as I remember) had her Mast cleft with a Thunderbolt, upon
the Coast of ^arbary. After in Dartmouth, going for Admiral of the Whaftage,
and guard of the Fleet for the River of Bourdieux, had also all her Poope
blown up with fire suddenly, and until this day, never could be known the
cause, or manner how: And lastly, she was burned with her whole Company in
the River of Bourdieux, and Master Edward Wilson, General in her, slain by
his enemies, having escaped the fire.

The success of the Jesus of Lubecke, The Jesus of Lubeck.
in Saint John de Vlua, in the Nona Spania, infamous to the Spaniardes; with my
Repentance in the South Sea, The Repentance.
taken by force, has utterly impoverished, and overthrown our house.

The Journey of Spain pretended for England, The Journey of Spain.
Anno 1587. called the Journey of Revenge, left the principal of their men and
Ships on the Rocks of Cape Finister, and the rest made a lamentable end, for
the most part in the Groyne. No more for this point, but to our purpose.

SECT. II.
THe REPENTANCE being put in perfection, and riding at Detford, the Queens
Majesty passing by her, to her Palace of Greenwych, commanded her Bargemen to
Row round about her, and viewing her from Post to Stem, disliked nothing but
her Name, and said, that she would Christen her a new, and that thenceforth
she should be called the Dainty; which name she brooked as well for her
proportion and grace, as for the many happy Voyages she made in her Majesty's
services; Having taken (for her Majesty) a great Bysten, of five hundred
Tons, laden with Iron, and other Commodities, under the conduct of Sir
Martin Furbusher; A Caracke bound for the East In^ies, under my Fathers charge,
and the principal cause of taking the great Caracke, brought to Dartmouth by
Sir John Borrow, and the Earl of Cumberlands Ships, Anno 1592. with others
of moment in her other Voyages. To us, she never brought but cost, trouble,
and care. Therefore my Father resolved to sell her, though with some loss,
which he imparted with me: and for that I had ever a particular love unto her,
and a desire she should continue ours, I offered to case him of the charge and
care of her, and to take her, with all her Furniture at the price he had before
taken her of me; with resolution, to put in execution the Voyage, for which
she was first builded; Although it lay six months and more in suspense,
partly, upon the pretended Voyage for Nombrededios and Panama, which then was
fresh a foot; and partly, upon the Caracke at Dartmouth, in which I was
employed as a Commi^sioner: but this Business being ended, and the other
pretense waxing cold, the fifth of March I resolved, and began to go forward
with the journey, so often talked of, and so much desired.

Considerations for pretended Voyages.
And having made an estimate of the charge of Victuals, Munition, Imprests,
Sea-store, and necessaries for the said Ship; consorting another of an hundred
Tons, which I waited for daily from the Straites of Giberalter, with a Pynace
of sixty Tons, all mine own: And for a competent number of Men for them; as
also of all sorts of Marchandises for trade and traffic in all places where
we should come; I began to wage men, to buy all manner of victuals and
provisions, and to lade her with them, and with all sorts of Commodities (which
I could call to mind) fitting; and dispatched order to my servant in Plymouth,
to put in a readiness my Pynace; as also to take up certain Provisions, which
are better cheap in those parts then in London, Provisions better provided at
Plimmouth, then at London.
as Beef, Porke, Biscuit, and Sider. And with the diligence I used, and my
Fathers furtherance, at the end of one Month, I was ready to set Sail for
Plymouth, to join with the rest of my Ships and Provisions. But the
expecting of the coming of the Lord high Admiral, Sir Robert Cecill,
principal Secretary to her Majesty, and Sir Walter Rawley, with others, to
honor my Ship and me, with their presence and farewell, detayned me some
days; and the rain and intemperate weather deprived me of the favor, which I
was in hope to have received at their hands; Whereupon, being loath to loose
more time, and the Wind serving according to my wish, the eight of April
1593. I caused the Pilot to set Sail from Blackwall, and to veil down to
Graues-end, whether that night I purposed to come.

Having taken my unhappy last leave of my Father Sir John Hawkins, I took my
Barge, and rowed down the River, and coming to Barking, we might see my Ship
at an Anchor, in the midst of the Channel, where Ships are not wont to more
themselves: this bred in me some alteration. And coming aboard her, one and
other began to recant the peril they had past of loss of Ship and goods,
which was not little; for the wind being at East North-east, when they set
sail, and vered out Southerly; it forced them for the doubling of a point to
bring their tacke aboard, and looffing up; the wind freshing, suddenly the
Shipp began to make a little hele; and for that she was very deep laden, and
her ports open, the water began to enter in at them; which no body having
regard unto, Note.
thinking themselves safe in the River, it augmented in such manner, as the
weight of the water began to press down the side, more then the wind: At
length when it was seen and the shete flowne, she could hardly be brought
upright. But God was pleased, that with the diligence and travel of the
Company, she was freed of that danger: which may be a gentle warning to all
such as take charge of Shipping, even before they set sail, either in River or
Harbor, or other part, to have an eye to their ports, and to see those shut
and callked, which may cause danger; for avoiding the many mishaps, which daily
chance for the neglect thereof, and have been most lamentable spectacles and
examples unto us: Experiments in the great Harry, Admiral of England, which
was over-set and suncke at Ports-mouth with her Captain, Carew, and the most
part of his company drowned in a goodly Summers day, with a little flawe of
wind; for that her ports were all open, and making a small hele, by them
entered their destruction; where if they had been shut, no wind could have hurt
her, especially in that place.

In the River of Thames, Master Thomas Candish had a small Ship over-set
through the same negligence. And one of the Fleet of Sir Francis Drake, in
Santo Domingo Harbor, turned her keele upward likewise, upon the same
occasion; with many others, which we never have knowledge of.

And when this comes to pass, many times negligence is cloaked with the fury
of the wind: which is a double fault; for the truth being known, others would
be warned to shun the like neglects; for it is a very bad Ship, whose Masts
cracked not asunder, whose Sails and tackling fly not in pieces, before she
over-set; especially if she be English built. And that which oversetteth the
Ship is the weight of the water, that presses down the side, which as it
enters more and more, increases the weight, and the impossibility of the
remedy: For the water not entering, with casing of the sheate, or striking the
sails, or putting the Ship before the wind or Sea, or other diligences, as
occasion is offered (and all expert Mariners know) remedy is easily found.

With this mischaunce the Mariners were so daunted, that they would not
proceed with the Ship any further, except she were lighted, which indeed was
needelesse, for many reasons which I gave: but Mariners are like to a stiff
necked Horse, which taking the bridle betwixt his teeth, forces his Rider to
what him list ma^ger his will: so they having once concluded, and resolved, are
with great difficulty brought to yield to the raynes of reason: And to color
their negligence, they added cost, trouble, and delay. In fine, seeing no other
remedy, I dispatched that night a servant of mine to give account to my Father
of that which had past, and to bring me presently some Bark of London to go
along with me to Plymouth; which not finding, he brought me a Hoye, in which I
loaded some six or eight tunns, to give content to the company; and so set
sail the 13. of April, and the next day we put in at Harwich, for that the
wind was contrary, and from thence departed the 18. of the said Month in the
morning.

When we were clear of the Sands, the wind vered to the South-west, and so
we were forced to put into Margat Road, whether came presently after us a
Fleet of Hollanders of above an hundredth Sail, bound for Rochell to load
salt: and in their company a dozen ships of War; their wasters very good
ships and well appointed in all respects. All which came along by our ship,
and ^^^ured us, as is the custom of the Sea, some with three, others with
five, others with more pieces of Ordinance.

The next morning the wind vering Easterly, I set sail, and the Hollanders
with me, and they with the flood in hand, went out at the North-sands-head; and
I through the Gulls to shorten my way, and to set my Pilates shore.

Coming near the South-sore-land, the wind began to vere to the South-east
and by south, so as we could not double the point of the Land, and being close
abourd the shore, and putting our ship to slay, what with the chapping Sea, and
what with the Tide upon the Bow, she mist staying, and put us in some
danger, before we could flact about; Note.
therefore for doubling the point of any land better is ever a short bourd,
then to put all in peril.

Being tacked about we thought to anchor in the Downs, but the sails set, we
made a small bourd, and after casting about again, doubled the foreland, and
ran along the Coast till we came to the I Will of Wight: where being becalmed
we sent a shore Master Thomson of Harwich our Pilot, not being able before to
set him on shore for the perverseness of the wind.

Being clear of the Wight, the wind vered Southerly, and before we came to
Port-land, to the west, South-west, but with the help of the ebb we
recovered Port-land ronde, where we anchored all that night; and the next
morning with the ebb, we set sail again, the wind at west South-west;
purposing to bear it up, all the ebb, and to stop the flood being under sail.

SECT. III.
THe Fleet of Flemings which had been in our company before, came towering
into the road, The Providence o^ the Dutch.
which certainly was a thing worth the noti^g, to behold the good order the
Masters observed in guard of their fleet.

The Admiral headmost the r^st of the men of War, spread along to
wind-ward, all saving the Vice Admiral and her consort, which were lee-most
and stern-most of all, and except the Admiral, which was the first, that came
to an Anchor; None of the other men of war anchored, before all the Fleet
was in safety; and then they placed themselves round about the Fleet; the
Vice Admiral Seamost and Leemost; which we have taught unto most Nations, and
they observe it now a days better then we, to our shame, The English, Authors
of Sea discipline.
that being the Authors and reformers of the best Discipline and Laws in Sea
causes, are become those which do now worst execute them.

And I cannot gather whence this contempt has grown, except of the neglect of
Discipline, or rather in giving commands for favor to those, By them again
n^glected.
which want experience of what is committed to their charge* Or that there has
been little curiosity in our country, in writing of the Discipline of the
Sea; which is not less necessary for us, then that of the Law; And I am of
opinion, that the want of experience is much more tolerable in a General by
Land, then in a Governor by Sea. For in the field the Lieutenant General, the
Sergeant Mayor, and the Coronels supply what is wanting in the General, for
that they all command; and ever there is place for Counsel, which in the Sea
by many accidents is denied: and the head is he that manageth all, in whom
alone if there be defect, all is badly governed; for, by ignorance how can
errors be judged, or reformed? And therefore I wish all to take upon them that,
which they understand, and refuse the contrary.

As Sir Henry Palmer, The modesty of Sir Henry Palmer.
a wise and valiant Gentleman, a great commander, and of much experience in Sea
causes, being appointed by the Queens Majesty's Counsel, to go for General
of a Fleet for the coast of Spain, Anno 1583. submitting himself to their
Lordships pleasure, excused the charge, saying, that his trayning up had been
in the narrow Seas; and that of the other, he had little experience. And
therefore was in duty bound to entreat their Honors, to make choice of some
other person, that was better acquainted, and experimented in those Seas; that
her Majesty, and their Lordships might be the better served. His modesty and
discretion is doubtless to be had in remembrance, and great estimation; For
the ambition of many which covet the command of Fleetes, and places of
government (not knowing their Compass, nor how, nor what to command) do
purchase to themselves shame; and loss to those that employ them: Being
required in a Commander at Sea, Parts required in a Commander at Sea.
a sharp wit, a good understanding, experience in shipping, practice in
mannagement of Sea business, knowledge in Navigation, and in command: I hold it
much better to deserve it, and not to have it, then to have it not deserving it.

SECT. IV.
THe fruits and inconveniences of the latter we daily partake of, to our loss
and dishonor. As in the Fleet that went for Burdieux, Anno 1592. which had six
Gallant Ships for Wasters. The loss of the Burdieux Fleet, Anno ^592.
At their going out of Plymouth, the Vice Admiral that should have been
starnmost of all, was the headmost, and the Admiral the light, and he that did
execute the office of the Vice Admiral, lanching off into the Sea, drew after
him the greater part of the Fleet, and night coming on, and both bearing
lights, caused a separation: so that the head had a quarter of the body, and
the Fleet three quarters, and he that should go before, came behind. Whereof
ensued, that the three parts meeting with a few Spanish Men of War, wanting
their head, were a prey unto them. For the Vice Admiral, and other Wasters,
that should be the Shepherds to guard and keep their flock, and to carry
them in safety before them, were headmost, and they the Men who made most have
to fly from the Wolf. The caus^.
Whereas if they had done as they ought, in place of loss and infamy, they
had gained honor and reward.

This I have been informed of by the Spanish and English, which were present
in the occasion. And a ship of mine, being one of the Starnmost, freed her
self, for that she was in warlike manner, with her false Netting, many
Pendents and Streamers, and at least 16. or 18. Pieces of Artillery; the enemy
thinking her to be a Waster, or Ship of war, not one of them durst lay her
aboard: and this the Master and company vaunted of at their return.

In the same Voyage, in the river of Burdieux (as is credibly reported) if the
six Wasters had kept together, they had not only not received damage, but
gotten much Honor and Reputation. For the Admiral of the Spanish Armado, was
a Flemish Ship, of not above 130. Tons, The weakness of the enemy.
and the rest Flie-boates and small shipping, for the most part.

And although they were 22. Sail in all, what manner of Ships they were, and
how furnished and appointed, is well known, with the difference.

In the Fleet of her Majesty, under the charge of my Father Sir John Hawkins,
Anno 1590. upon the coast of Spain, The Voyage of Sir John Hawkins, Anno 1590.
the Vice Admiral being a head one morning, where his place was to be a
Stern, lost us the taking of eight men of War, laden with Munition,
Victuals, and Provisions, for the supply of the Soldiers in Britain: and
although they were seven or eight Leagues from the Shore, when our
Vice Admiral began to fight with them, yet for that the rest of our Fleet
were some four, some five Leagues, and some more distant from them, when we
began to give chase: the Spaniards recovered into the Harbor of Monge,
before our Admiral could come up to give direction, yet well beaten, with
loss of above two hundredth men, as they themselves con^essed to me after.

And doubtless, if the wind had not over-blowne, and that to follow them, I
was forced to shut all my lower ports, the ship I undertook, doubtless had
never endured to come to the Port; but being doubble Fli-boates, and all good
of Sail, they bare for their lives, and we what we could to follow and fetch
them up.

In this point, at the I Will of Flores, Sir Richard Greenfield got eternal
honor and reputation of great valor, Sir Richard Greenfield at Flores.
and of an experimented Soldier, choosing rather to sacrifice his life, and to
pass all danger whatsoever, then to sail in his Obligation, by gathering
together those which had remained a shore in that place, though with the hazard
of his ship and company; And rather we ought to embrace an honorable death,
then to live with infamy and dishonor, by failing in duty; and I account
that he, and his Country, got much honor in that occasion: for one ship, and of
the second sort of her Majesty's, sustained the force of all the Fleet of
Spain, and gave them to understand, that they be impregnible, for having
bought dearly the boording of her, diverse and sundry times, and with many
jointly, and with a continual fight of 14. or 16. hours, at length leaving
her without any Mast standing, and like a Logge in the Seas, she made
notwithstanding, a most honorable composition of life and liberty, for above
two hundredth and sixty men, as by the Pay-booke appears: which her Majesty
of her free grace commanded in recompense of their service, to be given to
every one his six months wages. All which may worthily be written in our
Chronicles in letters of Gold, in memory for all Posterities, some to beware,
and others by their example in the like occasions, to imitate the true valor
of our Nation in these Ages.

In point of Providence, which Captain Vavisor in the foresight gave also good
proof of his valor, Captain Vavisor.
in casting about upon the whole Fleet, notwithstanding the greatness and
multitude of the Spanish Armad^, to yield that succor which he was able,
Although some do say, and I consent with them, that the bes^ valor is to
obey, and to follow the head, seem that good or bad which is commanded. For
God himself tells us, that obedience is better then sacrifice. Yet in some
occasions, where there is difficulty, or impossibility to know what is
commanded; many times it is great discretion and obligation, iudiciously to
take hold of the occasion, to yield succor to his associats, without putting
himself in manifest dang^r^: But to our Voyage.

SECT. V.
BEing clear of the race of Portland, the Wind began to suffle with fogge and
misling rain, and forced us to a short sail, which continued with us three
days; the Wind never vering one point, nor the fogge suffering us to see the
Coast.

The third day in the fogge, we met with a Bark of Dartmouth, which came from
Rochell, and demanding of them, if they had made any land, answered, that they
had only seen the Edie stone that morning, which lies thwart of the sound of
Plymouth, and that Dartmouth (as they thought) bare off us North North-east:
which seemed strange unto us; for we made account that we were thwart of
Exmouth: within two hours after, the Weather began to clear up, and we
found our selves thwart of the Berry, and might see the small Bark bearing
into Torbay, having over-shot her port: which error often happens to those
that make the land in foggie weather, and use not good diligence by sound, by
lying off the land, and other circumstances, to search the truth; and is cause
of the loss of many a Ship, and the sweet lives of multitudes of men.

That evening, we anchored in the range of Dartmouth, till the flood was spent;
and the ebb come, we ^et Sail again. And the next morning early, being the
26. of April, we harbored our selves in Plymouth.

My Ship at an Anchor, and I ashore, I presently dispatched a messenger to
London, to advise my Father, Sir John Hawkins, what had past: which, not only
to him, but to all others, that understood what it was, seemed strange; That
the wind contrary, and the weather such as it had been, we could be able to
gain Plymouth; But doubtless, the Dainty was a very good Sea ship, and
excellent by the wind; which with the neap streams, and our diligence to
benefit our selves of all advantages, made sezible that, which almost was not
to be believed.

And in this occasion, I found by experience, that one of the principal parts
required in a Mariner, Parts requisite in a good Mariner.
that frequenteth our coasts of England, is to cast his Tides, and to know how
they set from point to point, with the difference of those in the Channel from
those of the shore.

SECT. VI.
NOw presently I began to prepare for my Dispatch, and to hasten my Departure;
and finding that my Ship which I expected from the Straites, came not; and that
she was to go to London to discharge; and uncertain how long she might
stay; I resolved to take another of mine own in her place, though lesser,
called the Hawke, only for a Victualler; purposing in the coast of Brasill, or
in the Straites, to take out her men, and Victuals, and to cast her off.

SECT. VII.
WIth my continual travel, the help of my good friends, and excessive charge
(which none can easily believe, but those which have prooved it) toward the
end of May, I was ready to set sail with my three Ships, drawn out into the
sound, and began to gather my Company aboard.

The 28. of May (as I remember) began a storm of wind Westerly; the two
lesser ships presently harbored themselves, and I gave order to the master
of the Dainty (called Hugh Cornish) one of the most sufficientest men of his
coat, to bring her also into Catt-water, which he labored to do, but being
near the mouth of the harbor, and doubting least the Anchor being weighed,
the Ship might cast the contrary way, and so run on some peril, entertained
himself a while in laying out a warpe, and in the mean time, the wind
freshing, and the ship riding by one Anchor, brake the flooke of it, and so
forced them to let fall another: by which, and by the warpe they had laid out,
they rydd. The storm was such, A cruel Storm.
as being within hearing of those upon the shore, we were not able by any
means to send them succor, and the second day of the storm, desiring much to
go aboard, there joined with me Captain William Anthony, Captain John Ellis,
and master Henry Courton, in a Light-Horsman which I had: all men exercised in
charge, And therein the effects of courage and advise.
and of valor and sufficiency, and from their youth bred up in business of
the Sea: which notwithstanding, and that we labored what we could, for the
space of two hours against waves and wind, we could find no possibility to
accomplish our desire; which seen; we went aboard the other Ships, and put
them in the best security we could; thus busied, we might see come driving by
us the main Mast of the Dainty: which made me to fear the worst, and so
hasted ashore, to satisfy my longing.

And coming upon Catt-downe, we might see the Ship heave and set, which
manifestly showed, the loss of the Mast only, which was well employed; for,
it saved the ship, men, and goods. For had she driven a ships length more,
she had (no doubt) been cast away; and the men in that place could not choose
but run into danger.

Coming to my house to shift me (for that we were all wett to the skin) I
had not well changed my Clothes, when a servant of mine, who was in the Pynace
at my coming ashore, The loss of the Pynace.
enters almost out of breath, with news, that she was beating upon the
Rocks, which though I knew to be remediless, I put my self in place where I
might see her, and in a little time after she sunk down right: These losses
and mischances troubled and grieved, but nothing daunted me; for common
experience taught me, that all honorable Enterprises, are accompanied with
difficulties and dangers; Si fortuna me tormenta; Esperanca me contenta* Of
hard beginnings, many times come prosperous and happy events. And although, a
well-willing friend, wisely foretold me them to be presages of future bad
success, and so dissuaded me what lay in him, with effectual reasons, from my
Pretense, yet the hazard of my credit, and danger of disreputation, to take in
hand that which I should not prosecute by all means possible, was more
powerful to cause me to go forwards, then his grave good counsel, to make
me desist. And so the storm ceasing, I began to get in the Dainty, to Mast
her anew, and to recover the Fancy, my Pynace which with the help and
furtherance of my Wines Father, who supplied all my wants, together with my
credit (which I thank God was unspotted) in ten days put all in his former
estate, or better. And so once again, in Gods name, I brought my Ships out
into the found, the Wind being Easterly, and began to take my l^aue of my
friends, and of my dearest friend, my second self, whose unfeigned tears had
wrought me unto irresolution, and sent some other in my room, had I not
considered, that he that is in the Dance, must needs dance on, though he do
but hopp, except he will be a laughing stock to all the lookers on: So,
remembering that many had their eyes set upon me, with diverse affections, as
als^ the hope of good success, (my intention being honest and good) I shut the
door to all impediments, and mine ear to all contrary counsel, and gave
place to voluntary banishment from all that I loved and esteemed in this life,
with hope thereby better to serve my God, my Prince and Country, then to
increase my Tallent any way.

And so began to gather my company aboard, which occupied my good friends,
Abuses of some Seafaring men.
and the Justices of the Town two days, and forced us to search all Lodgings,
Tavernes, and Alehouses. (For some would ever be taking their leave and never
depart:) some drink themselves so drunk, that except they were carried
aboard, they of themselves were not able to go one step: others knowing the
necessity of the time, feigned themselves sick; others, to be indebted to
their Hosts, and forced me to ransom them; one his Chest; another, his Sword;
another, his Shirts; another, his Card and Instruments for Sea: And others, to
benefit themselves of the Impressed given them, absented themselves; making a
lewd living in deceiving all, whose money they could lay hold of: which is a
scandal too ri^e amongst our Seamen; by it they committing three great
offenses: 1. Robbery of the goods of another person; 2. Breach of their faith
and promise; 3. and hinderance (with loss of time) unto the Voyage; all being
a common injury to the owners, victuallers, and company; which many times has
been an utter overthrow, and undoing to all in general. An abuse in our
Commonwealth necessarily to be reformed; And, as a person that has both
seen, and felt by experience these inconveniences, I wish it to be remedied;
For, I can but wonder, that the late Lord high Admiral of England; the late
Earl of Cumberland* and the Lord Thomas Howard, now Earl of Suffolk, being
of so great authority, having to their costs and loss so often made
experience of the inconveniences of these lewd proceedings, have not united
their Goodnesses and Wisdoms, to redress this dis-loyall and base absurdity
of the Vulgar.

Master Thomas Candish in his last Voyage, Master Thomas Candish.
in the sound of Plimmouth, being ready to set Sail, complained unto me, that
persons which had absented themselves in Imprests, had cost him above a
thousand and five hundred pounds: These Varlets within a few days after his
departure, I saw walking the streets of Plymouth, whom the Justice had before
sought for with great diligence, and without punishment. And therefore it is no
wonder that others presume to do the like. Impunit as peccandi illecebra.

The like complaint made master George Reymond; Master George Reymon^.
and in what sort they dealt with me, is notorious, and was such, that if I had
not been provident, to have had a third part more of men, then I had need of,
I had been forced to go to the Sea vnmanned; or to give over my Voyage. And
many of my company, at Sea vaunted, how they had cosoned the Earl of
Cumberland, master Candish, master Reymond, and others, some of five pounds,
some of ten, some of more, and some of less. And truly, I think, my Voyage
prospered the worse, for theirs and other lewd persons company, which were in
my Ship: which, I think, might be redressed by some extraordinary, severe, and
present Justice to be executed on the offenders by the Justice in that place,
where they should be found. And for finding them, it were good that all
Captains, and Masters of Ships, at their departure out of the Port, should
give unto the head Justice, the names and signs of all their runnawayes, and
they presently to dispatch to the ^igher Ports the advice agreeable, where
meeting with them, without further delay or process, to use Martial Law upon
them. Without doubt, seeing the Law once put in execution, they and all others
would be terrified from such villainies.

It might be remedied also by utter taking away of all Imprests, The
inconvenience of Imprests.
which is a thing lately crept into our Commonwealth, and in my opinion of
much more hurt then good unto all; and although my opinion seem harsh, it
being a deed of charity to help the needy, (which I wish ever to be
exercised, and by no means will contradict) yet for that such as go to the
Sea (for the most part) consume that money lewdly before they depart, (as
common experience teaches us:) and when they come from Sea, many times come
more beggarly home, then when they went forth, having received and spent their
portion, before they embarked themselves, and having neither rent nor
maintenance more then their travel, to sustain themselves, are forced to
theeue, to cosen, or to run away in debt. Besides, many times it is an
occasion to some to lie upon a Voyage a long time; whereas, if they had not
that Impressed, they might perhaps have gained more in another employment, and
have been at home again, to serve that which they wait^ for. For these, and
many more weighty reasons, I am still bold, to maintain my former Assertions.

The true use of Imprests.
Those only used in his Majesty's Ships I comprehend not in this my opinion:
neither the Imprests made to married men, which would be given to their Wives
monthly in their absence, for their relief. For that is well known, that all
which go to the Sea now a-dayes, are provided of food, and house-roome, and
all things necessary, during the time of their Voyage; and in all long Voyages,
of apparel also: so that nothing is to be spent during the Voyage. That money
which is wont to be cast away in Imprestes, might be employed in apparel, and
necessaries at the sea, and given to those that have need, at the price it was
bought, to be deducted out of their shares or wages at their return, which is
reasonable and charitable. This course taken, if any would run away, in Gods
name fare him well.

Some have a more colorable kind of cunning to abuse men, and to sustain
themselves. Such will go to Sea with all men, and go never from the shore.
For as long as boord-wages last, they are of the Company, but those taking end,
or the ship in readiness, they have one excuse or other, and think themselves
no longer bound, but whilst they receive money, and then pluck their heads out
of the collar. An abuse also worthy to be reformed.

SECT. VIII.
THe greater part of my Company gathered aboard, I set sail the 12. of June
1593. about three of the Clock in the afternoon, and made a bourd or two off
and in, waiting the return of my boat, which I had sent ashore, for dispatch
of some business: which being come aboard, and all put in Order, I looft near
the shore, to give my farewell to all the Inhabitants of the Town, whereof the
most part were gathered together upon the How, to show their grateful
correspondency, to the love and zeal which I, my Father, and Predecessors,
have ever borne to that place, as to our natural and mother Town. And first
with my noise of Trumpets, after with my waytes, and then with my other
Music, and lastly, with the Artillery of my Ships, I made the best
signification I could, of a kind farewell. This they answered with the Waytes
of the Town, and the Ordinance on the shore, and with shouting of voices;
which with the fair evening and silence of the night, were heard a great
distance off. All which taking end, I sent Instructions and Directions to my
other Ships. The consequence of Instructions at departure.
Which is a point of special importance; for that I have seen Commanders of
great name and reputation, by neglect and omission of such solemnities, to have
run into many inconveniences, and thereby have learnt the necessity of it.
Whereby I cannot but advise all such, as shall have charge committed unto them,
ever before they depart out of the Port, to give unto their whole Fleet, not
only Directions for civil government, but also where, when, and how to meet,
if they should chance to loose company, and the signs how to know one another
a-far off, with other points and circumstances, as the occasions shall minister
matter different, at the discretion of the wise Commander.

But some one may say unto me, that in all occasions it is not convenient to
give Directions: for that, if the enemy happen upon any of the Fleet, or that
there be any treacherous person in the company, their Designements may be
discovered, and so prevented.

To this I answer, that the prudent Governor, by good consideration may
avoyde this, by publication of that which is good and necessary for the guide
of his Fleet and people; by all secret instructions, to give them sealed, and
not to be opened, but coming to a place appointed, (after the manner of the
Turkish direction to the Bashawes, who are their Generals;) and in any eminent
peril to cast them by the board, or otherwise to make away with them. For he
that sets Sail, not giving directions in writing to his Fleet, knows not
if the night or day following, he may be separated from his Company, which
happens sometimes: and then, if a place of meeting be not known, he runs
in danger not to join them together again.

And for places of meeting, when separation happens, I am of opinion, to
appoint the place of meeting in such a height, twenty, or thirty, or forty
Leagues off the Land, or Island. East, or West, is not so fitting, if the place
afford it, as some sound betwixt Islands, or some Island, or Harbor.

It may be alleged in contradiction, and with probable reason, Objections
against meeting in Harbors.
that it is not fit for a Fleet to stay in a Harbor for one Ship, nor at an
Anchor at an Island, for being discovered, or for hinderance of their Voyage.

Yet it is the best; for when the want is but for one or two ships, Answered,
a Pynace or Ship may wait the time appointed, and remain with direction for
them. But commonly one Ship, though but a bad Sayler, makes more have then a
whole Fleet, and is at the meeting place first, if the accident be not very
important.

The place of meeting, if it might be, would be able to give, at the least,
refreshing of water and wood.

SECT. IX.
LAnching out into the Channel, the wind being at East and by South, and East
South East, which blowing hard, and a flood in hand, caused a chapping Sea, and
my Vice Admiral bearing a good Sail made some water, and shooting off a piece
of Ordinance, I edged toward her, to know the cause; who answered me, that
they had sprung a great Leake, and that of force they must return into the
sound, which seeing to be necessary, I cast about, where Anchoring, and going
aboard, presently found, that betwixt Wind and Water, False Calking.
the Calkers had left a seame vncalked, which being filled up with Pitch only,
the Sea laboring that out, had been sufficient to have sunk her in short
space, if it had not been discovered in time.

And truly there is little care used now adays amongst our countrymen in this
Profession, in respect of that which was used in times past, and is accustomed
in France, in Spain, and in other parts. Which necessity will cause to be
reformed in time, by assigning the portion that every workman is to Calke;
that if there be damage through his default, he may be forced to contribute
toward the loss, occasioned through his negligence.

For prevention thereof.
And for more security I hold it for a good custom used in some parts, in
making an end of calking and pitching the ship, the next tide to fill her with
water, which will undoubtedly discover the defect, for no pitched place without
calking, can suffer the force and peaze of the water. In neglect whereof, I
have seen great damage and danger to ensue. The Arc Royal of his Majesty's,
may serve for an example: Example.
which put all in danger at her first going to the Sea, by a trivuell-hole
left-open in the post, and covered only with pitch. In this point no man can
be too circumspect, for it is the security of ship, men, and goods.

SECT. X.
THis being remedied, I set sail in the morning and ran South-west, till we
were clear of Vsshent; and then South south-west, till we were some hundred
Leagues off, where we met with a great Hulke, of some five or six hundred
tons, well appointed, the which my company, (as is natural to all Mariners)
presently would make a prize, Advise for shooting at Sea.
and laden with Spaniards goods, and without speaking to her, wished that the
Gunner might shoot at her, to cause her to amain. Which is a bad custom
received and used of many ignorant persons, presently to gun at all whatsoever
they discover, before they speak with them; being contrary to all discipline,
and many times is cause of dissension betwixt friends, and the breach of Amity
betwixt Princes; the death of many, and sometimes loss of Ships and all,
making many obstinate, if not desperate: whereas in using common courtesy,
they would better bethink themselves, and so with ordinary proceeding
(justified by reason, and the custom of all well disciplined people) might
perhaps many times breed an increase of Amity, a succor to necessity, and
excuse diverse inconveniences and suits, which have impoverished many: for it
has chanced by this error, that two English ships, neither carrying flag for
their particular respects, Sundry mischan^es for neglect thereof
to change each with other a dozen pair of shot, with hurt to both, being
after too late to repent their folly. Yea a person of credit has told me,
that two English men of War in the Night, have laid each other aboard
willingly, with loss of many men, and damage to both, only for the fault, of
not speaking one to the other; which might seem to carry with it some excuse,
if they had been near the shore, or that the one had been a Hull, and the
other under sail, in fear she should have escaped, not knowing what she was
(though in the night it is no wisdom to bourd with any ship) but in the maine
Sea, and both desiring to join, was a sufficient declaration, that both were
seekers: and therefore by day or night, he that can speak with the Ship he
sees, is bound, upon pain to be reputed void of good Government, to hayle
her before he shoot at her. Some man may say, that in the mean time, Object.
she might gain the wind: in such causes and many others, Answer.
necessity gives exception to all Laws; and experience teaches what is fit
to be done.

Master Thomas Hampto's.
Master Thomas Hampton once General of a Fleet of Wasters, sent to Rochell,
Anno 1585. with secret instructions, considering (and as a man of experience)
wisely understanding his place and affairs, in like case shut his Ear to the
instigations and provocations of the common sort, preferring the public good
of both Kingdoms before his own reputation with the vulgar people: And as
another Fabius Maximus, cunctando restituit rem, non ponendo rumores ante
salutem. The French Kings Fleet coming where he was, The French and English
Fleet salute one another.
and to winde-ward of him, all his Company were in an vproare; for that, he
would not shoot presently at them, before they saw their intention: wherein
had been committed three great faults: the first and principal, the breach of
Amity, betwix^ the Princes and Kingdoms: the second, the neglect of common
courtesy, in shooting before he had spoken with them: and the third, in
shooting first, being to lee-wards of the other.

Besides there was no loss of reputation, because the French Kings Fleet was
in his own Sea; and therefore for it to come to winde-ward, or the other to go
to lee-ward, was but that, which in reason was required, the Kingdoms being in
peace and Amity: For every Prince is to be acknowledged and respected in his
jurisdiction, and where he pretends it to be his.

The French General, likewise seemed well to understand what he had in hand,
for though he were far superior in forces, yet used he the terms which
were required; and coming within speech hayled them, and asked if there were
peace or war betwixt England and France: whereunto answer being made, that
they knew of no other but peace; they saluted each other after the manner of the
Sea, and then came to an Anchor all together; as and friends visited each other
in their ships.

One thing the French suffered (upon what occasion or ground I know not) that
the English always carried their flag displayed; which in all other parts and
Kingdoms is not permitted; at least in our Seas, The English carry up their
flagg in the French Seas.
if a Stranger Fleet meet with any of his Majesty's ships, the forraigners
are bound to take in their flags, or his Majesty's ships to force them to it,
though thereof follow the breach of peace or whatsoever discommodity. And
whosoever should not be jealous in this point, he is not worthy to have the
command of a Cock-boat committed unto him: yea no stranger ought to open his
flag in any Port of England, The honor of his Majesty's ships.
where there is any shipp, or Fort of his Majesty's; upon penalty to loose his
flagg, and to pay for the powder and shot spend upon him. Yea, such is the
respect to his Majesty's Ships in all places of his Dominions, that no
English Ship displayeth the Flagge in their presence, but runs the like
danger, except they be in his Majesty's service; and then they are in
predicament of the Kings Ships. Which good discipline in other Kingdoms is not
in that regard as it ought, but sometime^ through ignorance, sometimes of
malice, neglect is made of that duty and acknowledgement which is required, to
the cost and shame of the ignorant and malicious.

In Queen Mary's Reign, King Philip of Spain coming to marry with the
Queen, Practiced at the coming in of King Philip into England.
and meeting with the Royal Navy of England, the Lord William Haward; High
Admiral of England, would not consent, that the King in the narrow Seas should
carry his Flagge displayed, until he came into the Harbor of Plymouth.

I being of tender years, there came a Fleet of Spaniards of above fifty
sail of Ships, bound for Flaunders, to fetch the Queen, Dona Anna de
Austria, And in the passage of Dona Anna de Austria.
last wife to Philip the ^econd of Spain, which entered betwixt the Island and
the Maine, without vayling their Top-sayles, or taking in of their Flags: which
my Father, Sir John Hawkins, (Admiral of a Fleet of her Majesty's Ships,
then ryding in Catt-water) perceiving, commanded his Gunner to shoot at the
flagge of the Admiral, that they might thereby see their error: which
notwithstanding, they persevered arrogantly to keep displayed; whereupon the
Gunner at the next shot, lact the Admiral through and through, whereby the
Spaniards finding that the matter began to grow to earnest, took in their
Flags and Top-sayles, and so ran to an Anchor.

The General presently sent his Boat, with a principal personage to
expostulate the cause and reason of that proceeding; But my Father would not
permit him to come into his Ship, nor to hear his Message: but by another
Gentleman commanded him to return, and to tell his General, That in as much
as in the Queens Port and Chamber, he had neglected to do the acknowledgment
and reverence, which all owe unto her Majesty, (especially her Ships being
present) and coming with so great a Navy, he could not but give suspicion by
such proceeding of malicious intention, and therefore required him, that within
twelve hours he should depart the Port: upon pain to be held as a common
enemy, and to proceed against him with force.

Which answer the General understanding, presently embarked himself in the
same Boat, and came to the Jesus of Lubecke, and craved license to speak with
my Father: which at the first was denied him, but upon the second entreaty was
admitted to enter the Ship, and to parley. The Spanish General began to
demand, if there were Wars betwixt England and Spain; who was answered, that
his arrogant manner of proceeding, usurping the Queen his Mistresses right, as
much as in him lay, had given sufficient cause for breach of the Peace; And
that he purposed presently, to give notice thereof to the Queen, and her
Counsel; and in the mean time, that he might depart. Whereunto the Spanish
General replied, that he knew not any offense he had committed, and that he
would be glad to know, wherein he had mis-behaved himself. My Father seeing he
pretended to escape by ignorance, began to put him in mind of the custom of
Spain and France, and many other parts, and that he could by no means be
ignorant of that, which was common Right to all Princes in their Kingdoms;
Demanding, if a Fleet of England should come into any Port of Spain (the
Kings Majesty's Ships being present) if the English should carry their Flags in
the top, whether the Spanish would not shoot them down; and if they
persevered, if they would not beat them out of their Port. The Spanish
General confessed his fault, pleaded ignorance, not malice, and submitted
himself to the penalty my Father would impose: but entreated, that their
Princes (through them) might not come to have any jarre. My Father a while (as
though offended) made himself hard to be entreated, but in the end, all was
shut up, by his acknowledgement, and the ancient amity renewed, by feasting
each other aboard and ashore.

The self same Fleet at their return from Flaunders, meeting with her
Majesty's Ships in the Channel, As also in her repas^age.
though sent to accompany the aforesaid Queen, was constrained during the time
that they were with the English, to veil their Flagges, and to acknowledge
that which all must do that pass through the English Seas. But to our Voyage.

SECT. XI.
Coming within the hayling of the Hulke, we demanded whence she was? Whether
she was bound? and what her loading? She answered, that she was of Denmark
coming from Spain, laden with Salt: we willed her to strike her Top-sayles,
which she did, and showed us her Charter-parties, and Dilles of loading, and
then saluted us, as is the manner of the Sea, and so departed.

SECT. XII.
THe next day the wind became Southerly, and somewhat too much, and my Ships
being all deep laden, began to feel the Tempest, so that we not able to lie
by it, neither a hull, nor a try, and so with an easy Sail bare up before the
Wind, with intent to put into Falmouth; but God was pleased that coming within
ten leagues of Sylly, the wind vered to the North-east, and so we went on in
our Voyage.

Thwart of the Flees of Bayon, we met with a small Ship of Master Waltre of
London, called the Elizabeth, which came out of Plymouth some eight days after
us: of whom we informed our selves of some particularities, and wrote certain
Letters to our Friends, making Relation of what had past till that day, and so
took our farewell each of the other. The like we did with a small Carvell of
Plymouth, which we meet in the height of the Rock in Portingall.

From thence we directed our course to the Islands of Madera, and about the end
of June, in the sight of the Islands, we descryed a Sail some three leagues to
the East-wards, and a league to Wind-ward of us, which by her manner of
working, and making, gave us to understand, that she was one of the Kings
Frigarts. For she was long and snugg, and spread a large Clewe, and standing
to the West-wards, and we^ to the East-wards to recover her Wake, when we east
about, she began to ^eco shete, and to go away lasking, and within two
glasses, i^ was plainly seen, that she went from us, and so we followed on
our course, and she seeing that, presently stroke her Topsayles, which our
Pynace perceiving, and being within shot continued the Chase, till I shot off a
Piece and called her away; which fault many run into, thinking to get
thereby, and sometimes loose themselves by being too bold to venture from their
Fleet; for it was impossible for us, being to leeward, to take her, or to
succor our own, she being a Ship of about two hundredth Tons.

And Pynaces to meddle with Ships, The duty of Pynaces.
is to buy Repentance at too dear a rate. For their office is, to wait upon
their Fleet, in calmes (with their Oars) to follow a Chase, and in occasions
to Anchor near the shore, when the greater Ships cannot, without peril; Above
all, to be ready and obedient at every call. Yet will I not, that any wrest my
meaning; neither say I, that a Pynace, or small Ship armed, may not take a
great Ship unarmed; for daily experience teaches us the contrary.

The Madera Islands are two: The Madera Islands.
the greater, called La madera, and the other Porto Santo; of great fertility,
and rich in Sugar, Conserves, Wine, and sweet Wood, whereof they take their
name. Other commodities they yield, but these are the principal. The chief
Town and Port is on the Souther side of the Madera, well fortified; they are
subject to the Kingdom of Portingall; the Inhabitants and Garrison all
Portingalles.

The third of July, we past along the Islands of Canaria, Canaria Islands.
which have the name of a Kingdom, and contain these seven Islands, Grand
Canaria, Tenerifa, Palma, Gomera, Lancerota, Forteventura, and Fierro. These
Islands have abundance of Wine, Sugar, Conserues, Orcall Pitch, Iron, and other
Commodities, and store of Cattle and Corn, but that a certain Worm, called
Gorgosh^ breeds in it, Gorgosh^.
which eats out the substance, leaving the husk in manner whole. The head
Island, where the Justice, which they call Audiencia, is resident, and whither
all suits have their appealation, and final sentence, is the Grand Canaria,
although the Tenerifa is held for the better, and richer Island, and to have the
best Sugar: and the Wine of the Palma is reputed for the best. The Pitch of
these Islands melts not with the Sun, and therefore is proper for the higher
works of Shipping. Betwixt Forteventura and Lancerota is a goodly found, fit
for a meeting place for any Fleet. Where is good Anchoring, and abundance of
many sorts of Fish. There is water to be had in most of these Islands, but with
great vigilance. For the naturalls of them are venturous and hardy, and many
times clime up and down the steep Rocks and broken hills, which seem
impossible, which I would hardly have believed, had I not seen it, and that
with the greatest art and agilitie that may be: Their Arms for the most part,
are Lances of nine or ten foot, with a head of a foot and half long, like
unto Boare-Speares, save that the head is somewhat more broad.

Two things are famous in these Islands, the Pike of Tenerifa, which is the
highest Land in my judgment that I have seen, and men of credit have told
they have seen it more then forty leagues off. It is like unto a Sugar loaf,
and continually covered with Snow, and placed in the midst of a goodly
vallie, most fertile, and temperate round about it. The Description of Tenerif.
Out of which, going up the pike, the cold is so great, that it is
insufferable, and going down to the Towns of the Island, the heat seems
most extreme, till they approach near the coast. The other is a Tree in the
Island Fierro, Of a Tree in Fierro.
which some write and affirm, with the dropping of his leaves, to give water
for the su^tenance of the whole Island, which I have not seen, although I have
been on shore on the Island: but those which have seen it, have recounted
this mystery differently to that which is written, in this manner; That this
Tree is placed in the bottom of a Valley, ever flourishing with broad leaves,
and that round about it are a multitude of goodly high Pynes, which overtop
it, and as it seems were planted by the divine providence, to preserve it
from Sun and Wind. Out of this Valley ordinarily rise every day, great
vapors and exhalations, which by reason that the Sun is hindered to work
his operation, with the height of the Mountains toward the South-east,
convert themselves into moisture, and so bedewe all the Trees of the Valley,
and from those which overtop this Tree, drops down the dew upon his leaves,
and so from his leaves into a round Well of Stone, which the Naturals of the
land have made to receive the water; of which the people and cattle have great
releife: but sometimes it raineth and then the Inhabitants do reserve water
for many days to come in their Cisterns and Tynaxes, which is that they drink
of, and wherewith they principally sustain themselves.

The City of the Grand Canaria, and chief Port is on the west side of the
Island; the head Town and Port of Tenerifa, is toward the south part, and the
Port and Town of the Palma and Gomera, on the East side.

In Gomera, some three Leagues southward from the Town, is a great River of
water, but all these Islands are perilous to land in, for the seege caused by
the Ocean sea, which always is forcible, and requires great circumspection;
whosoever has not urgent cause, is either to go to the East-wards, or to the
west-wards of all these Islands, as well to avoid the calmes, which hinder
sometimes eight or ten days sailing, as the contagion which their
distemperature is wont to cause, and with it to breed Calenturas, which we
call burning Fevers. These Islands are said to be first discovered by a
Frenchman, The first discoverers of these Islands.
called John de Betancourt, about the year 1405. They are now a Kingdom
subject to Spain.

SECT. XIII.
BEing clear of the Islands, we directed our course for Cape Blauce, and two
hours before Sun set, we had sight of a Carvell some League in the wind of
us, which seemed to come from Gynea, or the Islands of Cape de Verde, and for
that he, which had the sery-watch, neglected to look out, being too lee-ward
of the Islands, and so out of hope of sight of any shipp, for the little trade
and contrariety of the wind, that though a man will, from few places he can
recover the Islands: coming from the south-wards, we had the wind of her, and
perhaps the possession also, whereof men of War are to have particular care:
Note.
for in an hour and place unlooked for, many times chance accidents contrary to
the ordinary course and custom, and to have younkers in the top continually,
is most convenient and necessary, not only for descrying of sails and land,
but also for any sudden gust or occasion that may be offered.

Seeing my self past hope of returning back, without some extraordinary
accident, I began to set order in my Company and victuals. And for tha^, to
the south-wards of the Canaries, Exercises upon the Southwards of the Canaries.
is for the most part an idle Navigation, I devised to keep my people
occupied, as well to continue them in health (for that too much case in hott
Countries is neither profitable nor healthful) as also to divert them from
remembrance of their home; and from play, which breeds many inconveniences,
and other bad thoughts and works which idleness is cause of; and so shifting my
company, as the custom is, into Starboord and Larboord men, the half to watch
and work whilst the others slept, and take rest; I limited the three days of
the week, which appertayned to each to be employed in this manner: the one for
the use and clensing of their Arms, the other for roomeging, making of Sails,
Nettings, Decking, and Defenses for our Ships; and the third, for clensing
their bodies, mending and making their apparel, and necessaries, which though
it came to be practiced but once in seven days, for that the Sabbath is ever
to be reserved for God alone, with the ordinary Obligation which each person
had besides, was many times of force to be omitted; And thus we entertained
our time with a fair Wind, and in few days had sight of the Land of Barbary,
some dozen Leagues to the Northwards of Cape Black.

Before we came to the Cape, we took in our Sails, and made preparation of
Hooks and Lines to Fish. For in all that Coast is great abundance of sundry
kinds of Fish, but especially, of Porgus, which we call Breames; many
Portingalls and Spaniards go yearly thither to fish, as our Countrymen to
the New Foundland, and within Cape Black have good Harbor for reasonable
shipping, where they dry their Fish, paying a certain easy tribute to the
Kings Collector. In two hours we took store of Fish for that day, and the
next: but longer it would not keep good; and with this refreshing set Sail
again, and directed our course betwixt the Islands of Cape de Verd and the
Maine. Cape de Verd.
These Islands are held to be situate in one of the most vnhealthiest Climates
of the world, and therefore it is wisdom to shun the sight of them, how
much more to make abode in them.

In two times that I have been in them, either cost us the one half of our
people, with Fevers and Fluxes of sundry kinds; The vnwholsomnesse thereof.
some shaking, some burning, some partaking of both; some possessed with frenzy,
others with sloth, and in one of them it cost me six months sickness, with
no small hazard of life: which I attribute to the distemperature of the air,
for being within fourteen degrees of the Equinoctial line, the Sun has
great force all the year, and the more for that often they pass, two, three,
and four years without rain; and many times the earth burns in that manner
as a man well shodd, The heatt.
cannot endure to go where the Sun shines.

With which extreme heat the body fatigated, greedily desires refreshing,
and longs the coming of the Breze, The Brezes.
which is the North-east wind, that seldom fails in the afternoon at
four of the clock, or sooner: which coming cold and fresh, and finding the
poores of the body open, and (for the most part) naked, penetrateth the very
bones, and so causes sudden distemperature, and sundry manners of sickness,
as the Subjects are diverse whereupon they work.

Departing out of the Calmes of the Islands, and coming into the fresh Brese,
it causes the like, and I have seen within two days, after that we have
partaked of the fresh air, of two thousand men, above a hundredth and fifty
have been crazed in their health.

The Inhabitants of these Islands use a remedy for this, The remedy.
which at my first being amongst them, seemed unto me ridiculous, but since,
time and experience has taught to be grounded upon reason. And is, that upon
their heads they wear a Night-capp, upon it a Moutero, and a Hat over that,
and on their bodies a suit of thick Cloth, and upon it a Gown, furred or
lyned with Cotton, or Bays, to defend them from the heat in that manner, as
the Inhabitants o^ cold Countries, to guard themselves from the extreamitie of
the cold. Which doubtless, is the best diligence that any man can use, and
whosoever prooveth it, shall find himself less annoyed with the heat, then
if he were thinly Clothed, for that where the cold air comes, it peirceth
not so subtly.

The M^one also in this Climate, as in the coast of Guyne, and in all hott
Countries, The influence of the Moon in hot Countries.
has forcible operation in the body of man; and therefore, as the Plannet,
most prejudicial to his health, is to be shunned; as also not to sleep in the
open Air, or with any Scuttle or Window open, whereby the one, or the other,
may enter to hurt.

For a person of credit told me, that one night in a river of Guyne, leaving
his Window open in the side of his Cabin, the Moon shining upon his shoulder,
left him with such an extraordinary pain, and furious burning in it, as in
above twenty hours, he was like to run mad, but in fine, with force of
Medicines and cures, after long torment, he was eased.

Some I have heard say, and others write, that there is a Star which never
seperateth it self from the Moon, but a small distance; which is of all
Stars the most beneficial to man. For where this Star enters with the
Moon, it makes void her hurtful enfluence, and where not it is most
perilous. Which if it be so, is a notable secret of the divine Providence, and
a special cause amongst infinite others, to move us to continual
thankesgiving; for that he has so extraordinarily compassed and fenced us from
infinite miseries, his most unworthy and ungrateful Creatures.

Of these Islands are two pyles: the one of them lies out of the way of Trade,
more Westerly, and so little frequented; the other lies some fourscore
Leagues from the Main, and contains six in number, to wit; Saint Iago,
Fuego, Mayo, Bonavisto, Sal, and Bravo.

They are belonging to the Kingdom of Portingall, and inhabited by people of
that Nation, and are of great trade, by reason of the neighborhood they have
with Guyne and Bynne; but the principal is, the buying and selling of Negros.
They have store of Sugar, Salt, Rice, Cotton-wooll, and Cotton-Cloth,
Ambergris, Cyvit, Oliphants teeth, Brimstone, Pummy stone, Sponge, and some
Gold, but little, and that from the main.

Saint Iago is the head Island, and has one City and two Towns, with their
Ports. The City called Saint Iago, Saint Iago.
whereof the Island has his Name, has a Garrison, and two Fortes, situated in
the bottom of a pleasant Valley, with a running stream of water passing
through the midst of it, whether the rest of the Islands come for Justice,
being the seat of the Auaiencia, with his Bishop.

The other Towns are Playa, some three Leagues to the Eastwards of Saint Iago,
placed on high, with a goodly Bay, whereof it has his name: and Saint Domingo,
a small Town within the Land. They are on the Souther part of the Island, and
have been sacked sundry times in Anno 1582. by Manuel Serades, a Portingall,
with a Fleet of Frenchmen; in Anno 1585. they were both burnt to the ground
by the English, Sir Francis Drake being General; and in Anno 1596. Saint Iago
was taken, and sacked by the English, Sir Anthony Shyrley being General.
Sacked by Manuel Serades, St. Francis Drake, and Sir Anthony Shyrley.


The second Island is Fuego, Fuego.
so called, for that day and night there burns in it a Vulcan; whose flames
in the night are seen twenty Leagues off in the Sea. It is by nature
fortified in that sort, as but by one way is any access, or entrance into it,
and there cannot go up above two men a breast. The Bread which they spend in
these Islands, is brought from Portingall and Spain, saving that which they
make of Rice, or of Mayes, which we call Guynne-wheate.

The best watering is in the I Will of Bravo, Bravo.
on the west part of the Island, where is a great River, but foul Anchoring, as
is in all these Islands, for the most part. The fruits are few, but
substantial, as Palmitos, Plantanos, Patatos, and Coco Nutts.

The Palmito is like to the Date tree, The Palmito.
and as I think a kind of it, but wild. In all parts of Afrique and America
they are found, and in some parts of Europe, and in diverse parts different. In
Afrique, and in the West Indies they are small, that a man may cut them with a
knife, and the lesser the better: But in Brasill they are so great, that with
difficulty a man can fell them with an Axe, and the greater the better; one
foot within the top is profitable, the rest is of no value; and that which is
to be eaten is the pith, which in some is better, in some worse.

The Plantane is a tree found in most parts of Afrique and America, The
Plantane.
of which two leaves are sufficient to cover a man from top to toe; It bears
fruit but once, and then dries away, and out of his root sprouteth up others
new. In the top of the tree is his fruit, which grows in a great bunch, in
the form and fashion of puddings, in some more, in some less. I have seen in
one bunch above four hundred Plantanes, which have weighed above fourscore
pound weight. They are of diverse proportions, some great, some lesser, some
round, some square, some triangle, most ordinarily of a spanne long, with a
thick skin, that peeleth easily from the meat; which is either white or
yellow, and very tender like Butter; but no Conserve is better, nor of a more
pleasing taste. For I never have seen any man, to whom they have bred
mis-like, or done hurt with eating much of them, as of other fruits.

The best are those which ripen naturally on the tree, but in most parts they
cut them off in branches, and hang them up in their houses, and eat them as
they ripe. For the Birds and Vermin presently in ripning on the tree, are
feeding on them. The best that I have seen are in Brasill, in an Island called
Placentia, Platentia.
which are small, and round, and green when they are ripe* whereas the others
in ripning become yellow. Those of the West Indies and Guynne are great, and
one of them sufficient to satisfy a man; the only fault they have is, that
they are windy. In some places they eat them in stead of bread, as in Panama,
and other parts of Tierra firm. They grow and prosper best when their roots
are ever covered with water; they are excellent in Conserve, and good sodden in
different manners, and dried on the tree, not inferior to Suckett.

The Coco nutt is a fruit of the fashion of a Hassell nutt, The Cocos, and
their kinds.
but that it is as big as an ordinary Bowl, and some are greater. It has
two shells, the uttermost framed (as it were) of a multitude of threeds, one
laid upon another, with a green skin over-lapping them, which is soft and
thick; The innermost is like to the shell of a Hazell nutt in all proportion,
saving that it is greater and thicker, and some, more blacker. In the top of
it is the form of a Munkies face, with two eyes, his nose and a mouth. It
contains in it both meat and drink; the meat white as milk, and like to
that of the kernel of a Nutt, and as good as Almonds blancht, and of great
quantity: The water is clear, as of the fountain, and pleasing in taste, and
somewhat answers that of the water distilled of Milk. Some say it has a
singular property in Nature, for conserving the smoothness of the skin; and
therefore in Spain and Portingall, the curious Dames do ordinarily wash their
faces and necks with it. If the holes of the shell be kept close, they keep
four or six months good, and more; but if it be opened, and the water kept in
the shell, in few days it turns to Vinegar.

They grow upon high Trees, which have no boughs; only in the top they have a
great cap of leaves, and under them grows the fruit upon certain twigs; And
some affirm that they bear not fruit, before they be above forty years
old, they are in all things like to the Palm trees, and grow in many parts of
Asia, Afrique, and America. The shells of these nuts are much esteemed for
drinking cups, and much cost and labor is bestowed upon them in carving,
graving and garnishing them, with silver, gold and precious stones.

In the Kingdom of Chile and in Brosill, is another kind of these, which they
call Coquillos, as we may interpret (little Cocos) and are as big as Wal-nuts;
but round and smooth, and grow in great clusters: the trees in form are all
one, and the meat in the nut better, but they have no water.

Another kind of great Cocos grows in the Andes of Peru, which have not the
delicate meat nor drink, which the others have, but within are full of
Almonds, which are placed as the grains in the Pomegrannet, being three times
bigger then those of Europe, and are much like them in taste.

In these Islands are Cyvet-Cats, Cyvet-Catts.
which are also found in parts of Asia, and Afrique; esteemed for the Civet
they yield, and carry about them in a cod in their hinder parts, which is
taken from them by force.

In them also are store of Monkies, Munkeyes.
and the best proportioned that I have seen; and Parrots, Parrots.
but of color different to those of the west Indies; for they are of a russet
or gray color and great speakers.

SECT. XIIII.
WIth a fair and large wind we continued our course, till we came within five
degrees of the Equinoctial line, where the wind took us contrary by the
Southwest, about the twenty of Iulie, but a fair gale of wind and a smooth
Sea,; so that we might bear all a taunt: and to advantage our selves what we
might, we stood to the East-wards, being able to lie South-east and by South;
The next day about nine of the Clock, my company being gathered together to
serve God, which we accustomed to do every morning and evening, it seemed
unto me that the color of the Sea was different to that of the days past,
and which is ordinarily where is deep water; and so calling the Captain, and
Master of my Ship, I told them that to my seeming the water was become very
whitish, and that it made show of Should water. Whereunto they made answer,
that all the lines in our Ships could not fetch ground: for we could not be
less then threescore and ten Leagues off the Coast, which all that kept
reckoning in the Ship agreed upon, and my self was of the same opinion. And so
we applied our selves to serve God, but all the time that the service endured,
my heart could not be at rest, and still me thought the water began to wax
whiter and whiter. Our prayers ended, I commanded a lead and a line to be
brought, and having the lead in fourteen fathoms we had ground, which put us
all into a maze, and sending men into the top, presently discovered the land
of Guynne, some five Leagues from us, very low Land. I commanded a Piece to be
shot, and lay by the lee, till my other Ships came up. Which hayling us, we
demanded of them, how far they found themselves off the Land; who answered,
some threescore and ten, or fourscore Leagues: when we told them we had
sounded, and found but fourteen Fathomes, and that we were in sight of Land,
they began to wonder; But having consulted what was best to be done, I caused
my Shalop to be manned, which I towed at the Stern of my Ship continually, and
sent her and my Pynace a head to sound, and followed them with an easy Sail,
till we came in seven and six fathom Water, and some two Leagues from the
shore anchored, in hope by the Sea, or by the Land to find some refreshing. The
Sea we found to be barren of Fish, and my Boats could not discover any landing
place, though a whole day they had rowed along the Coast, with great desire
to set foot on shore, for that the sedge was exceeding great and dangerous.
Which experienced, we set sail, notwithstanding the contrariety of the
wind, sometimes standing to the West-wards, sometime to the East-wards,
according to the shifting of the wind.

SECT. XV.
HEre is to be noted, that the error which we fell into in our accounts, Note.
was such as all men fall into where are currants that set East or West, and
are not known, for that there is no certain rule yet practiced for trial of
the longitude, as there is of the latitude, though some curious and
experimented of our Nation, with whom I have had conference about this point,
have showed me two or three manner of ways how to know it.

This, some years before was the loss of the Edward Cotton, The loss of the
Edward Cotton.
bound for the Coast of Brasill, which taken with the wind contrary near the
line, standing to the East-wards, and making account to be fifty or sixty
Leagues off the Coast, with all her Sails standing, came suddenly a ground
upon the sholes of Madrebombat; and so was cast away, though the most part of
their company saved themselves upon Raffes; But with the contagion of the
Country, and bad entreatie which the Negros gave them, they died; so that
there returned not to their Country above three or ^oure of them.

But God Almighty dealt more mercifully with us in showing us our error in the
day, and in time, that we might remedy it; to him be evermore glory for all.

This current from the line Equinoctial, to twenty degrees Northerly, has
great force, and sets next of any thing East, directly upon the shore; which
we found by this means: Standing to the Westwards, the wind Southerly, when we
lay with our Ships head West, and by South, we gained in our heith more then if
we had made our way good west south-west; for that, the current took us under
the bow: but lying west, or west and by north, we lost more in twelve hours
then the other way we could get in four and twenty. By which plainly we saw,
that the current did set East next of any thing. Whether this current runs
ever one way, or does alter, and how, we could by no means understand, but
tract of time and observation will discover this, as it has done of many
others in sundry Seas.

The current that sets betwixt New Foundland and Spain, runs also East
and West, and long time deceived many, and made some to count the way longer,
and others shorter, according as the passage was speedy or slow; not knowing
that the furtherance or hinderance of the current, was cause of the speeding or
slowing of the way. And in sea Cards I have seen difference of above thirty
Leagues betwixt the Island Tercera, and the Main. And others have recounted
unto me, that coming from the India's, and looking out for the Islands of
Azores, they have had sight of Spain. And some have looked out for Spain, and
have discovered the Islands.

The self same current is in the Levant Sea, but runs trade betwixt the
Maynes, and changeable sometimes to the East-wards, sometimes to the West-wards.

In Brasill and the South Sea, the current likewise is changeable, but it
runs ever along the Coast, accompanying the wind: and it is an infallible
rule, that twelve or twenty four hours (before the Wind alters) the current
begins to change.

In the West Indies only the current runs continually one way, and sets
along the Coast from the Equinoctial line toward the North. No man has yet
found that these courrants keep any certain time, or run so many days, or
months, one way as another, as does the course of ebbing and flowing, well
known in all Seas: only near the shore they have small force; partly,
because of the reflux which the coast causes, and partly for the ebbing and
slowing, which more or less is general in most seas.

When the current runs North or South, it is easily discovered by augmenting
or diminishing the height, but how to know the setting of the current from East
to West in the main Sea, is difficult, and as yet, I have not known any man,
or read any Author, that has prescribed any certain mean or way to discover
it. But experience teaches that in the main Sea, for the most part it is
variable; and therefore the best and safest rule to prevent the danger, (which
the uncertainty and ignorance hereof may cause) is careful and continual
watch by day and night, and upon the East and west course ever to be before
the shipp, and to use the means possible to know the error, by the rules
which new Authors may teach: beating off and on, sometimes to the west-wards,
sometimes to the East-wards, with a fair gale of wind.

SECT. XVI.
BEing betwixt three or four degrees of the Equinoctial line, my Company
within a few days began to fall sick, of a disease which Seamen are wont to
call the Scurvey: The Scurvey.
and seems to be a kind of dropsy, and reigns most in this Climate of
any that I have heard or read of in the World; though in all Seas it is wont to
help and increase the misery of man; it possesses all those of which it
takes hold, with a loathsome sloathfulnesse, even to eat: they would be
content to change their sleep and rest, which is the most pernicious Enemy in
this sickness, that is known. It brings with it a great desire to drink,
and causes a general swelling of all parts of the body, especially, of the
legs and gums, and many times the teeth fall out of the jaws without pain.

The signs to know this disease in the beginning are diverse, The signs.
by the swelling of the gummes, by denting of the flesh of the legs with a
man's finger, the pit remaining without filling up in a good space: Others, show
it with their lasinesse, Others, complain of the cricke of the back, etc. all
which, are for the most part, certain tokens of infection.

The cause of this sickness, The cause.
some attribute to sloth; some to conceit; and diverse men speak diversely:
that which I have observed is, that our Nation is more subject unto it, then
any other; because being bred in a temperate Clymate, where the natural heat
restrained, gives strength to the stomach, sustayning it with meats of good
nourishment, and that in an wholesome air, whereas coming into the hot
Countries, (where that natural heat is dispersed through the whole body,
which was wont to be proper to the stomach; and the meats for the most part,
preserved with Salt, and its substance thereby diminished, and many times
corrupted) greater force for digestion is now required, then in times past; but
the stomach ^inding less virtue to do his office, in reparting to each
member his due proportion in perfection, which either gives it raw, or
remains with it indigested by his hardness or cruditie; infeebleth the body,
and makes it unlusty and unfit for any thing, for the stomach being strong,
(though all parts else be weak) there is ever a desire to feed, and aptnes to
perform whatsoever can be required of a man; but though all other members be
strong and sound, if the Stomach be oppressed, or squemish, all the body is
unlusty, and unfit for any thing, and yields to nothing so readily, as to
sloathfulnes, which is confirmed by the common answer to all questions: As,
will you eat? will you sleep? will you walk? will you play? The answer is,
I have no stomach: which is as much, as to say, no not willingly, thereby
confirming that without a sound and whole stomach, nothing can be well
accomplished, nor any sustenance well digested.

The seething of the meat in Salt water, Seething of meat in Salt water.
helps to cause this in^irmitie, which in long Voyages can hardly be avoided:
but if it may be, it is to be shunned; for, the water of the Sea to man's body
is very unwholesome. The corruption of the victuals, Corruption of victual.
and especially of the bread, is very pernicious; the vapors and air of the
Sea also is nothing profitable, Vapors of the Sea.
especially, in these hot Countries, where are many calmes. And were it not for
the moving of the Sea by the force of winds, tides, and currants, it would
corrupt all the world.

The experience I saw in Anno 1590. lying with a Fleet of her Majesty's ships
about the Islands of the Azores almost six months; Azores.
the greatest part of the time we were becalmed: with which all the Sea became
so replenished with several sorts of gellyes, and forms of Serpents, Adders,
and Snakes, as seemed wonderful: some green, some black, some yellow, some
white, some of diverse colors; and many of them had life, and some there were
a yard and half, and two yards long; which had I not seen, I could hardly
have believed. And hereof are witnesses all the Companies of the Ships which
were then present; so that hardly a man could draw a Buckett of water clear of
some corruption. In which Voyage, toward the end thereof, many of every Ship,
(saving of the Nonpereli, which was under my charge, and had only one man
sick in all the Voyage) fell sick of this disease, and began to die apace,
but that the speedy passage into our Country was remedy to the crazed, and a
Preservatiue for those that were not touched. The best prevention for this
disease (in my judgment) is to keep clean the Ship, The remedies;
to be sprinkle her ordinarily with Vinegar, or to burn Tar, and some sweet
savours, to feed upon as few salt Meats in the hot Country as may be, and
especially to shun all kinds of salt Fish, By diet.
and to reserve them for the cold Climates, and not to dress any meat with
salt water, nor to suffer the company to wash their Shirts nor Clothes in it,
nor to sleep in their Clothes when they are wett. For this cause it is
necessarily required, that provision be made of apparel for the Company, that
they may have wherewith to shift themselves. By shift.
Being a common calamity amongst the ordinary sort of Mariners, to spend their
thrift on the shore, and to bring to Sea no more Clothes then they have backs;
for the body of man is not refreshed with any thing more, then with shifting
clean Clothes; a great preservatiue of health in hott Countries.

The second Antidote is, By labor.
to keep the company occupied in some bodily exercise of work, of agilitie,
of pastimes, of dancing, of use of Arms; these helps much to banish this
infirmity. Thirdly, In the morning at discharge of the watch, By early eating
and drinking.
to give every man a bit of bread, and a draught of drink, either Beer, or
Wine mingled with water (at the least, the one half) or a quantity mingled
with Beer, that the pores of the body may be full, when the vapors of the
Sea ascend up.

The morning draught should be ever of the best, and choysest of that in the
ship. Pure wine I hold to be more hurtful, then the other is profitable. In
this, others will be of a contrary opinion, but I think partial. If not, then
leave I the remedies thereof to those Physicians and Surgeons who have
experience. And I wish that some learned man would write of it, for it is the
plague of the Sea, and the spoil of Mariners; doubtless, it would be a
meritorious Work with God and man, and most beneficial for our Country, for
in twenty years, since that I have used the Sea, I dare take upon me, to give
account of ten thousand men consumed with this disease.

That which I have seen most fruitful for this sickness, is sower Oranges
and Lemmons, and a water which amongst others (for my particular provision) I
carried to the Sea, called Doctor Stevens his Water, By sower Oranges and
Lemmons. By Doctor Stevens water.
of which, for that his virtue was not then well known unto me, I carried but
little, and it took end quickly, but gave health to those that used it.

The oil of Vitry is beneficial for this disease; By oil of Vitry.
taking two drops of it, and mingled in a draught of water, with a little
Sugar. It takes away the thirst, and helps to cleanse and comfort the
stomach: But the principal of all, is the air of the Land; for, the Sea is
natural for fishes, and the Land for men. By the air of the land.
And the oftener a man can have his people to land, (not hindering his voyage)
the better it is, and the profitablest course that he can take to refresh them.

SECT. XVII.
HAving stood to the westwards some hundredth leagues and more, the wind
continuing with us contrary, and the sickness so fervent, that every day
there dyed more or less: my Company in general began to dismay, The company
sick, and dismayed.
and to desire to return homewards which I labored to hinder by good reasons,
and persuasions: As, that to the West Indies, we had not above eight hundredth
leagues, to the Islands of Azores little less, and before we come to the Islands
of Cape de Verde, that we should meet with the Breze; for every night we might
see the reach go contrary to the wind which we sailed by; verifying the old
Proverb amongst Mariners; That he has need of a long Mast, that will sail by
the Reach; and that the nearest land and speediest refreshing we could look
for, was the coast of Brasill; and that standing toward it with the wind we
had, we shortened our way for the Indies; and that to put all the sick men
together in one Ship, and to send her home, was to make her their grave. For
we could spare but few sound men, who were also subject to fall sick, and the
misery, notwithstanding, remediless; with which they were convinced, and
remained satisfied. So leaving all to their choice, with the consideration of
what I persuaded, they resolved with me, to continue our course, till that God
was pleased to look upon us, with his Fatherly eyes of mercy.

As we approached nearer and nearer the coast of Brasill, Brasill.
the wind began to vere to the East-wardes, and about the middle of October, to
be large and good for us; and about the 18. of October, we were thwart of Cape
Saint Augustine; Cape S. Augustine.
which lies in six degrees to the Southwards of the line: and the 21. in the
height of Farnambuca, Farnambuca.
but some fourscore leagues from the Coast; the twenty four, in the height
of Bayea de todos Santos; near the end of October, betwixt 17. and 18.
degrees, we were in 16. fathomes, sounding of the great Sholes, which lie
along the Coast, betwixt the Bay of todos Santos, Todos Santos.
and the Port of Santos alias ura senora de Vitoria; De Vitoria.
which are very perilous.

But the divine Providence has ordained great flocks of small Birds (like
Snytes) to live upon the Rocks, and broken lands of these Sholes, and are met
with ordinarily twenty leagues before a man come in danger of them.

It shall not be amiss here to recount the Accidents which befell us during
this contrary wind, and the curiosities to be observed in all this time. Day
and night we had continually a fair gale of wind, and a smooth Sea, without
any alteration; one day, the Carpenters having Calked the Deck of our Ship,
Dangers of Fire.
which the Sun with his extreme heat had opened, craved license to heat a
little Pitch in the Cook-roome: By heating of Pitch.
which I would not consent unto by any means; for that my Cook-roomes were
under the Deck, knowing the danger; until the Master undertook, that no
danger should come thereof. But he recommended the charge to another, who had a
better name, then experience. He suffered the Pitch to rise, and to run into
the fire, which caused so furious a flame, as amazed him, and forced all to
fly his heat; one of my Company, with a double pair of Gloves took off the
Pitch-pot, but the fire forced him to let slip his hold-fast, before he could
set it on the Hearth, and so overturned it, and as the Pitch began to run, so
the fire to enlarge it self, that in a moment a great part of the Ship was
on a light fire. I being in my Cabin, presently imagined what the matter was,
and for all the have I could make, before I came, the fire was above the Deck:
for remedy whereof, I commanded all my Company, to cast their Ruggegownes
into the Sea, with Ropes fastened unto them. These I had provided for my people
to watch in; for in many hott Countries the nights are fresh and cold; and
divided one Gown to two men, a Starboord and a Larboord man; so that he which
watched had ever the Gown: for they which watched not, were either in their
Cabins, or under the Deck, and so needed them not. The Gowns being well
soked, every man that could, took one, and assaulted the fire; and although
some were singed, others scalded, and many burned, God was pleased that the
fire was quenched, which I thought impossible; And doubtless, I never saw my
self in greater peril in all the days of my life. Let all men take example
by us, not to suffer (in any case) Pitch to be heat in the Ship, except it be
with a shot heat in the fire, which cannot breed danger: nor to permit fire
to be kindled, but upon mere necessity; for the inconvenience thereof (is for
the most part) remediless.

With drinking of Tobacco it is said, By taking Tobacco.
that the Roebucke was burned in the range of Dartmouth.

The Primrose of London was fired with a Candle at Tilbery-hope, and nothing
saved but her Kele.

And another Ship bound for Barbary, at Wapping.

The Jesus of Lubecke had her Gunner-roome set on fire with a Match, and had
been burnt without redemption, if that my Father, Sir John Hawkins Knight,
then General in her, had not commanded her Sloppers to be stopped, and the men
to come to the Pumpes, whereof she had two, which went with chains, and
plying them, in a moment there was three or four inches of water upon the
Deck, which with Scoopes, Swabbles, and Platters, they threw upon the fire,
and so quenched it, and delivered both Ship and men out of no small danger.

Great care is to be had also in cleaving of Wood, in Hooping or Scutling of
Caske, By Hooping and Scutling of Caske.
and in any business where violence is to be used with instruments of Iron,
Steel, or Stone; and especially, in opening of Powder, these are not to be
used, but Mallets of Wood; for many mischances happen beyond all expectation.

I have been credibly informed by diverse persons, that coming out of the
Indies, with Scutling a Butt of water, the water has taken fire, and flamed
up, and put all in hazard: And a servant of mine, Thomas Gray told me, that in
the Ship wherein he came out of the Indies, Anno 1600. there happened the
like; and that if with Mantles they had not smoothered the fire, they had bin
all burned with a Pipe of Water, which in Scutling took fire.

Master John Hazlelocke reported, that in the Arsenall of Venice happened the
like, By natures of waters.
he being present. For mine own part, I am of opinion, that some waters have
this property, and especially such as have their passage by Mines of
Brimstone, or other Mineralls, which (as all men know) give extraordinary
properties unto the waters by which they run: Or it may be that the water
being in wine Caske, and kept close, may retain an extraordinary property of
the Wine. Yea, I have drunk Fountain, and River waters many times, which have
had a savor as that of Brimstone.

Three leagues from Bayon in France, I have proved of a fountain that has
this savor, and is medicinable for many diseases. In the South Sea, in a River
some five Leagues from Cape Saint Francisco, in one degree and a half to the
Northwardes of the line, in the Bay of Atacames, is a River of fresh water,
which has the like savor. Of this I shall have occasion to speak in another
place, treating of the diverse properties of Fountains and Rivers; and
therefore to our purpose.

SECT. XVIII.
We had no small cause to give God thanks and praise for our deliverance, By
Swearing.
and so all our Ships once come together, we magnified his gloririous Name for
his mercy toward us, and took an occasion hereby, to banish swearing out of
our Ships, which amongst the common sort of Mariners, and Seafaring men, is
too ordinarily abused. So with a general consent of all our company, it was
ordained that in every Ship there should be a Palmer or Ferula, which should be
in the keeping of him, who was taken with an oath, and that he who had the
Palmer should give to every other that he took swearing in the Palm of the
hand a Palmada with it, and the Ferula. And whosoever at the time of evening,
or morning Prayer, was found to have the Palmer, should have three blows given
him by the Captain, or Master, and that he should be still bound to free
himself by taking another, or else to run in danger of continuing the
penalty; which executed, few days reformed the Vice; so that in three days
together, was not one oath heard to be sworn. This brought both Ferula's, and
swearing out of use.

And certainly, in vices, custom is the principal sustenance; and for their
reformation, it little avails to give good counsel, or to make good Laws
and Ordenances, except they be executed.

SECT. XIX.
IN this time of contrary Wind, those of my Company which were in health,
recreated themselves with Fishing, and beholding the Hunting and Hawking of the
Sea, and the Battle betwixt the Whale and his enemies, which truly are of no
small pleasure. And therefore for the curious, I will spend some time in
Declaration of them.

Ordinarily such Ships as Navigate between the Tropiques, are accompanied with
three sorts of Fish; The Dolphin, which the Spaniards call Dozado: The Bonito,
or Spanish Makerell: and the Sharke, alias Tiberune.

The Dolphin I hold to be one of the swiftest Fishes in the Sea: The Dolphin.
He is like unto a Breame, but that he is longer and thinner, and his scales
very small. He is of the color of the Rayn-bow, and his head different to
other Fishes; for, from his mouth half a spanne it goes straight upright, as
the head of a Wherry, or the Cut-water of a Ship. He is very good meat if he
be in season, but the best part of him, is his head, which is great. They are
some bigger, some lesser; the greatest that I have seen, might be some four
foot long.

I hold it not without some ground, that the ancient Philosophers write, that
they be enamoured of a man: for in meeting with Shipping, they accompany them
till they approach to cold Climates; this I have noted diverse times. For
disembarking out of the West Indies, Anno 1583. within three or four days
after, we met a Scole of them, which left us not till we came to the Islands of
Azores, nere a thousand Leagues. At other times I have noted the like.

But some may say, that in the Sea are many Scoles of this kind of Fish, and
how can a man know if they were the same?

Who may be thus satisfied, that every day in the morning, which is the time
that they approach nearest the Ship, we should see four, five, and more, which
had (as it were) our ^are-marke, one hurt upon the back; another near the
tail; another about the fynnes, which is sufficient proof that they were the
same. For if those which had received so bad entertainment of us would not
forsake us, much less those which we had not hurt; yet that which makes them
most in love with Ships and Men, are the scrappes and refreshing they gather
from them.

The Bonito, The Bonito.
or Spanish Makerell, is altogether like unto a Makerell, but that it is
somewhat more grown; he is reasonable food, but dryer then a Makerell. Of
them there are two sorts; the one is this which I have described; the other, so
great, as hardly one man can lift him; At such times as we have taken of
these, one sufficed for a meal for all my company. These, from the fynne of
the tail forwards have upon the chyne seven small yellow hillockes, close one
to another.

The Dolphins and Bonito's are taken with certain instruments of Iron, which
we call Vysgeis, in form of an E^le-speare, but that the blades are round, and
the points like unto the head of a broad Arrow; these are fastened to long
Staves of ten or twelve foot long, with lines tied unto them, and so shot to
the Fish, from the Beake-head, the Poope, or other parts of the Ship, as
occasion is ministered. They are also caught with Hooks and Lines, the Hook
being bayted with a redd Cloth, or with a white Cloth, made into the form of a
Fish, and sowed upon the Hook.

The Sharke or Tiberune, The Sharke.
is a Fish like unto those which we call Dogge-fishes, but that he is far
greater. I have seen of them eight or nine foot long; his head is flatt and
broad, and his mouth in the middle, underneath, as that of the Seat; and he
cannot byte of the bayte before him, but by making a half turn; and then he
helps himself with his tail, which serves him in stead of a Rudder. His
skin is rough (like to the Fish which we call, a rough Hound) and russet,
with reddish spots, saving that under the belly he is all white: he is much
hated of Seafaring men, who have a certain foolish superstition with them,
and say, that the Ship has seldom good success, that is much accompanied
with them.

It is the most ravenous Fish known in the Sea; for he swalloweth all that he
finds. In the Puch of them has been sound hatts, cappes, shoes, shirts,
legs and arms of men, ends of Ropes, and many other things; whatsoever is
hanged by the Ships side* he sheereth it, as though it were with a Razor;
for he has three rows of teeth on either side, as sharp as Nails; some say,
they are good for Pick-tooths. It has chanced that a yonker casting himsel^e
into the Sea to swim, has had his leg bitten off above the knee by one of
them. And I have been informed, that in the Tiger, when Sir Richard Greenfild
went to people Virginia, a Sharke cut off the leg of one of the company,
sitting in the Chains, and washing himself. They spawne not, as the greatest
part of Fishes do, but Whelpe, as the Dog or Wolf; and for many days after
that she has whelped every night, and toward any storm, or any danger which
may threaten them hurt, the Damme receives her Whelps in at her mouth, and
preserves them, till they be able to shift for themselves. I have seen them
go in and out, being more then a foot and half long; and after, taking the
Damme, we have found her young ones in her belly.

Every day my Company took more or less of them, not for that they did eat
of them (for they are not held wholesome; although the Spaniards, as I have
seen, do eat them) but to recreate themselves, and in revenge of the
injuries received by them; for they live long, and suffer much after they be
taken, before they dye.

At the tayl^ of one they tied a great logge of wood, at another, an empty
Batizia well stopped; one they yoaked like a Hog; from another, they plucked
out his ey^s, and so threw them into the Sea. In catching two together, they
bound them tail to tail, and so set them a swimming; another, with his belly
slit, and his bowels hanging out, which his fellows would have every one a
snatch at; with other infinite inventions to entertayne the time, and to avenge
themselves; for that they deprived them of swimming, and fed on their flesh
being dead: they are taken with harping Irons, and with great hooks made of
purpose, with Swyvels and Chains; for no line, nor small rope can hold them,
which they share not asunder.

There does accompany this fish, diverse little fishes, which are callet Pilats
fishes, and are ever upon his fynnes, his head, or his back, and feed of the
scraps and superfluities of his prays. They are in form of a Trought, and
streked like a Makerell, but that the strekes are white and black, and the
black greater then the white.

The manner of Hunting and Hawking represents that which we reasonable
creatures use, saving only in the disposing of the game. For by our industry
and ability the Hound and Hawke is brought to that obedience, that whatsoever
they seize, is for their Master; but here it is otherwise. For the game is for
him that seizes it. The Dolphins and Bonitoes are the hounds, and the
Alcatraces the hawks, and the flying fishes the game: flying Fishes.
whose wonderful making magnifieth the Creator, who for their safety, and
help, has given them extraordinary manner of fynnes, which serve in stead of
wings, like those of the Batt or Rere-mous^; of such a delicate skin,
interlaced with small bones so curiously, as may well cause admiration in the
beholders. They are like unto Pilchards in color, and making; saving that they
are somewhat rounder, and (for the most part) bigger. They fly best with a
side wind, but longer then their wings be wett, they cannot sustain the weight
of their bodies; and so the greatest flight that I have seen them make, has
not been above a quarter of a mile. They commonly go in Scoles, and serve for
food for the greater Fishes, or for the Fowls. The Dolphins and Bonitoes do
continually hunt after them, and the Alcatraces lie soaring in the air, to see
when they spring, or take their flight; and ordinarily, he that escapes the
mouth of the Dolphin, or Bonito, helping himself by his wings, falls
prisoner into the hands of the Alcatrace, and helps to fill his gorge.

The Alcatrace is a Sea-fowle, Alcatrace.
different to all that I have seen, either on the land, or in the Sea. His
head like unto the head of a Gull, but his bill like unto a Snytes bill,
somewhat shorter, and in all places alike. He is almost like to a Heronshaw,
his legs a good spanne long, his wings very long, and sharp toward the
points, with a long tail like to a Pheasant, but with three or four feathers
only, and these narrower. He is all black, of the color of a Crow, and of
little flesh; for he is almost all skin and bones. He soareth the highest of
any foul that I have seen, and I have not heard of any, that have seen them
rest in the Sea.

Now of the fight betwixt the Whale and his contraries; The fight of the Whale,
which are the Sword fish and the Thresher. The Whale is of the greatest fishes
in the Sea; and to count but the truth, unless daily experience did witness
the relation, it might seem incredible, he is a huge vnwildlie fish, and to
those which have not seen of them, it might seem strange, that other fishes
should master him; but certain it is, that many times the Thresher, and Sword
fish, meeting him jointly, do make an end of him.

The Sword fish is not great, with the Sword-fish,
but strongly made, and in the top of his chine (as a man may say) betwixt the
neck and shoulders, he has a manner of Sword in substance, like unto a bone of
four or five inches broad, and above three foot long, full of prickles of
either side, it is but thin, for the greatest that I have seen, has not been
above a finger thick.

The Thresher is a greater fish, and Thresher.
whos^ tail is very broad and thick, and very weighty. They fight in this
manner; the Sword fish places himself under the belly of the Whale, and the
Thresher upon the Ryme of the water, and with his tail thresheth upon the head
of the Whale, till he force him to give way, which the Sword fish perceiving,
receives him upon his sword, and wounding him in the belly forces him to
mount up again: (besides that, he cannot abide long under water, but must of
force rise up to breath) and when in such manner they torment him, that the
sight is sometimes heard above three leagues distance, and I dare affirm, that
I have heard the blows of the Thresher two leagues off, as the report of a
piece of Ordinance, the Whales roaring being heard much farther. It also
happens sundry times, that a great part of the water of the Sea round about
them, with the blood of the Whale changes his color. The best remedy the
Whale has in this extremity to help himself, is to get him to land, which
he procures as soon as he discoverth his adversaries, and getting the
shore, there can fight but one with him, and for either of them hand to hand,
he is too good. The Whale is a fish not good to be eaten, he is almost all
fat, but esteemed for his train: and many go to the New Foundland;
Greene-land, and other parts only to fish for them, which is in this manner;
when they which seek the Whale discover him, they compass him round about
with Pynaces or Shalops. The taking of the Whale.
In the head of every Boat is placed a man, with a harping Iron, and a long
Line, the one end of it fastened to the harping iron, and the other end to the
head of the Boat; In which it lies finely coyled; and for that he cannot keep
long under water, he shows which way he goes, when rising near any of the
Boats, within reach, he that is nearest, darteth his harping Iron at him. The
Whale finding himself to be wounded, swimmeth to the bottom, and draws the
Pynace after him; which the Fisher men presently forsake, casting themselves
into the Sea; for that many times he draws the Boat under water: those that
are next, procure to take them up. For this cause all such as go for that
kind of Fishing, are experimented in swimming. When one harping Iron is
fastened in the Whale, it is easily discerned which way he directs his course;
and so ere long they fasten another, and another in him. When he has three or
four Boats dragging after him; with their weight, his bleeding, and fury, he
becomes so over-mastred, that the rest of the Pynaces with their presence and
terror, drive him to the place where they would have him, nature instigating
him to covet the shore.

Being once hurt, there is little need to force him to land. Once on the shore,
they presently cut great pieces of him, and in great Cauldrons sees them. The
uppermost in the Cauldrons is the fatt, which they skimme off, and put it into
Hogsheads and Pipes. This is that they call Whales oil, or Train oil,
accounted the best sort of Train oil. It is hard to be believed, what
quantity is gathered of one Whale; Of the tongue, I have been informed, have
many Pipes been filled. The fynnes are also esteemed for many and sundry uses;
as is his spawne for diverse purposes: This we corruptly call Parmacittie; of
the Latin word, Sperma Ceti.

And the precious Ambergris (some think also) to be found in his bowels,
Ambergris.
or voyded by him; but not in all seas; yea, they maintain for certain, that
the same is engendered by eating an herb which grows in the Sea. This herb
is not in all Seas, say they, and therefore, where it wants, the Whales give
not this fruit! In the coast of the East Indies in many parts is great
quantity. In the coasts of Guyne, of Barbary, of the Florida, in the Islands
of Cape de Verde, and the Canaries, Ambergris has been many times found,
and sometimes on the coast of Spain and England. Whereupon it is presumed,
that all th^se Seas have not the herb growing in them. The cause why the
Whale should eat this herb, I have not heard, nor read. It may be surmised,
that it is as that of the Becunia, and other Beasts, which breed the Beazer
stone; The Beazar stone.
who feeding in the valleys and mountains, where are many venomous Serpents,
and herbs; when they find themselves touched with any poison, forthwith they
run for remedy to an herb, which the Spaniards call, Contra yerva, that is
to say, contrary to poison; which having eaten, they are presently cured: but
the substance of the herb converteth it self into a medicinable stone; So it
may be, that the Whale feeding of many sorts of fishes, and some of them (as is
known) venomous, when he finds himself touched, with this herb he cures
himself; and not being able to digest it, nature converteth it into this
substance, provokes it out, or dies with it in his belly; and being light,
the Sea brings it to the Coast.

All these are imaginations, yet instruments to move us to the glorifying of
the great and universal Creator of all, whose secret wisdom, and wonderful
works, are incomprehensible.

But the more approved generation of the Amber greece, Amber greece.
and which carries likliest probability is, that it is a liquor which issues
out of certain Fountains, in sundry Seas, and being of a light and thick
substance, participating of the air, suddenly becomes hard, as the yellow
Amber, of which they make Beads; which is also a liquor of a Fountain in the
Germayne Sea: In the bottom it is soft and white, and partaking of the air
becomes hard and stony: Also the Corrall in the Sea is soft, but coming
into the air, becomes a stone.

Those who are of this former opinion, think the reason (why the Amber greece
is sometimes found in the Whale) to be for that he swalloweth it, as other
things, which he finds swimming upon the water; and not able digest it, it
remains with him till his death.

Another manner of fishing, and catching the Whale I cannot omit, used by the
Indians in Florida; By the Indians.
worthy to be considered, in as much as the barbarous people have found out so
great a secret, by the industry and diligence of one man, to kill so great and
huge a Monster; it is in this manner.

The Indian discovering a Whale, procures two round billets of wood, sharpneth
both at one end, and so binding them together with a cord, casts himself
with them into the Sea, and swimmeth toward the Whale; if he come to him, the
Whale escapes not; for he places himself upon his neck, and although the
Whale goes to the bottom, he must of ^orce rise presently to breath, (for
which nature has given him two great holes in the top of his head, by which
every time that he breaths, he spouteth out a great quantity of water) the
Indian forsakes not his hold, but rises with him, and thrusts in a Logg
into one of his Spowters, and with the other knocks it in so fast, that by no
means the Whale can get it out: That fastened, at another opportunity, he
thrusts in the second Logg into the other Spowter, and with all the force he
can, keeps it in.

The Whale not being able to breath, swimmeth presently ashore, and the Indian
a cock-horse upon him, which his fellows discovering, approach to help him,
and to make an end of him: it serves them for their food many days after.

Since the Spaniards have taught them the estimation of Amber greece, they
seek curiously for it, sell it to them, and others, for such things as they
best fancy, and most esteem; which are (as I have been informed) all sorts
of edge-tooles, Copper, Glasses, Glasse-beads, red Caps, Shirts, and Pedlery
ware. Upon this subject, diverse Spaniards have discoursed unto me, who have
been eye witnesses thereof, declaring them to be valorous, ventrous, and
industrious: otherwise they durst not undertake an enterprise so difficult and
full of danger.

SECT. XX.
FRom the Tropike of Cancer to three or four degrees of the Equinoctial, the
breze which is the North-east wind, does reign in our Ocean sea the most part
of the year, except it be near the shore, and then the wind is variable. In
three or four degrees of either side the line, the wind hangs Southerly, in
the months of July, August, September and October: all the rest of the year
from the Cape bona esperanca to the Islands of Azores, the breze raygneth
continually; and some years in the other months also, or calmes, but he that
purposes to cross the line from the North-wards to the South-wards, B^st
times to pass the line, from the North-wards to the Southward.
the best and surest passage is, in the months of January, February, and
March. In the months of September, October and November is also good passage,
but not to sure as in the former.

SECT. XXI.
BEtwixt nineteen and twenty degrees to the South-wards of the line, the wind
took us contrary, which together with the sickness of my people made me to
seek the shore, and about the end of October, we had sight of the Land, which
presenlty by our height and the making of it, discovered it self to be the
port of Santos, alias nostra Senora de Victoria, and is easy to be known, for
it has a great high hill over the Port, which (howsoever a man comes with
the land) rises like a bell, and coming near the shore presently is
discovered a white Tower or Fort, which stands upon the top of a hill over
the Harbor, and upon the seamost land: It is the first land a man must
compass, before he enter the Port; coming within two Leagues of the shore we
anchored, and the Captains and Masters of my other ships, being come aboard,
it was thought convenient (the weakness of our men considered, for we had not
in our three ships twenty four men sound) and the wind uncertain when it
might change, we thought with policy to procure that, which we could not by
force; and so to offer traffic to the people of the shore, by that means to
prove, if we could attain some refreshing for our sick Company.

In execution whereof, I wrote a letter to the Governor in Latin, and sent
him with it a piece of crymson Velvet, a bolt of fine Holland, with diverse
other things, as a present; and with it, the Captain of my ship, who spoke a
little broken Spanish, giving the Governor to understand, that I was bound to
the East Indies, to traffic in those parts, and that contrary winds had
forced me upon that Coast: If that he were pleased to like of it, for the
commodities the Country yielded in abundance, I would exchange that, which
they wanted. With these instructions my Captain departed about nine of the
clock in the morning, carrying a flagge of truce in the head of the boat, and
sixteen men well armed, and provided; guided by one of my Company which two
years before had been Captain in that place, and so was a reasonable Pilot.

Entering the Port, within a quarter of a mile is a small Village, and three
Leagues higher up, is the chief Town: where they have two Forts, one on
either side of the Harbor, and within them ride the Ships which come thither
to discharge, or load. In the small Village is ever a Garrison of a hundredth
Soldiers, whereof part assist there continually, and in the white Tower upon
the top of the hill, which commands it.

Here my Captain had good entertainment, and those of the shore received his
message and Letter, dispatching it presently to the Governor, who was some
three Leagues off in another place: at least, they bear us so in hand. In the
time that they expected the Post, my Captain with one other entertained
himself with the Soldiers a shore, who after the common custom of their
profession (except when they be hesonios) sought to pleasure him, and finding
that he craved but Oranges, Lemmons, and matters of small moment for refreshing
for his General, they suffered the women and Children to bring him what he
would, which he gratified with double Pistolets, that I had given him for that
purpose. So got he us two or three hundredth Oranges and Lemmons, and some few
Hens.

All that day and night, and the next day, till nine of the clock, we waited
the return of our boat; which not appearing, bred in me some suspicion, and
for my satisfaction I manned a light horseman which I had, and the Fancy, the
best I could; showing strength, where was weakness and infirmity, and so set
sail toward the Port; our Gunner taking upon him to be Pilote, for that he
had been there some years before.

Thus, with them we entered the Harbor, my Captain having notice of our being
within the Bar, came aboard with the Boat, which was no small joy to me; and
more, to see him bring us store of Oranges and Lemmons, which was that we
principally sought for, as the remedy of our diseased Company. He made
relation of that had past, and how they expected present answer from the
governor. We anchored right against the village, and within two hours, by a
Flagge of Truce, which they on the shore showed ^s, we understood that the
Messenger was come: our Boat went for the answer of the governor, who said,
he was sorry that he could not accomplish our desire, being so reasonable and
good; for that in consideration of the war betwixt Spain and England, he had
express order from his King, not to suffer any English to trade within his
jurisdiction, no, nor to land, or to take any refreshing upon the shore. And
therefore craved pardon, and that we should take this for a resolute answer:
And further, required us to depart the Port within three days, which he said
he gave us, for our courteous manner of proceeding; If any of my people from
that time forwards, should approach to the shore, that he would do his best to
hinder and annoy them. With this answer we resolved to depart; and before it
came, with the first fair wind, we determined to be packing: but the wind
suffered us not all that night, nor the next day. In which time, I lived in a
great perplexity, for that I knew our own weakness, and what they might do
unto us, if that they had known so much. For any man that puts himself
into the enemies Port, had need of Argus eyes, and the wind in a bag,
especially, where the enemy is strong, and the tides of any force. For, with
either ebb or flood, those who are on the shore, may thrust upon him
inventions of fire; and with swimming, or other devises may cut his Cables. A
common practice in all hott Countries. The like may be effected with Raffes,
Cannoas, Boats or Pynaces, to annoy and assault him; and if this had been
practiced against us, or taken effect, our Ships must of force have yielded
themselves; for they had no other people in them but sick men; but many times
opinion and fear preserves the Ships, and not the people in them.

Wherefore it is the part of a provident Governor, to consider well the
dangers that may befall him, For prevention of annoyances, etc. in Harbors.
before he put himself into such places; So shall he ever be provided for
prevention.

In Saint John de Vlua, in the New-Spaine, when the Spaniards dishonored their
Nation with that foul act of perjury, and breach of faith, given to my Father,
Sir John Hawkins (notorious to the whole world) the Spaniards fired two great
Ships, with intention to burn my Fathers Admiral, which he prevented by
towing them with his Boats another way.

The great Armado of Spain, sent to conquer England, Anno 1588. was with that
self same industry overthrown; for the setting on ^ire of six or seven
ships (whereof two were mine) and letting them drive with the flood, forced
them to cut their Cables, and to put to Sea, to seek a new way to Spain. In
which the greatest part of their best Ships and men were lost and perished.

For that my people should not b^ dismayed, I dispatched presently my
Light-horsman; with only four men, and part of the refreshing, advising them
that with the first calm, or slent of wind, they should come off.

The next night, the wind coming off the shore we set sail, and with our
Boats and Barks founded as we went.

It flowed upon the Bar not above four foot water, and once in four and
twenty hours (as in some parts of the West Indies) at full Sea there is not
upon the bar above 17. or 18. foot water. The harbor runs to the
South-westwards. He that will come into it, is to open the harbors mouth a
good quarter of a league before he bear with it, and be bolder of the wester
side; for of the Easterland lies a great ledge of Rocks, for the most part,
under water, which sometimes break not, but with small shipping, a man may go
betwixt them and the point.

The virtue of Oranges.
Coming aboard of our Ships, there was great joy amongst my Company, and many
with the sight of the Oranges and Lemmons, seemed to recover heart; This is a
wonderful secret of the power and wisdom of God, that has hidden so great
and unknown virtue in this fruit, to be a certain remedy for this
infirmity; I presently caused them all to be reparted amongst our sick men,
which were so many, that there came not above three or four to a share; but
God was pleased to send us a prosperous wind the next day, so much to our
comfort, that not any one dyed before we came to the Islands, where we pretended
to refresh our selves; And although our fresh water had failed us many days,
(before we saw the shore) by reason of our long Navigation, without touching
any land, and the excessive drinking of the ^icke and diseased, (which could
not be excused) yet with an invention I had in my Ship, Distilling of Salt
water.
I easily drew out of the water of the Sea, sufficient quantity of fresh water
to sustain my people, with little expense of fuel; for with four Billets I
stilled a Hogshead of water, and therewith dressed the meat for the sick and
whole. The water so distilled, we found to be wholesome and nourishing.

SECT. XXII.
THe Coast from Santos, to Cape Frio lies west and by South Southerly. So we
directed our course West South-west. The night coming on, and directions given
to our other Ships, we set the watch, having a fair fresh gale of wind and
large. My self, with the Master of our Ship, having watched the night past,
thought now to give Nature that which she had been deprived of, and so
recommended the care of Steeridge to one of his Mates; Unskillfulness of the
Masters Mate.
who with the like travel past being drowsy, or with the confidence which he
had of him at the Helm, had not that watchful care which was required; he at
the Helm steered West, and West and by South, and brought us in a little time
close upon the shore; doubtless, he had cast us all away, had not God
extraordinarily delivered us; for the Master being in his dead sleep, was
suddenly awaked, and with such a fright, Providence of God, and the care of the
Master.
that he could not be in quiet: whereupon, waking his youth, which ordinarily
slept in his Cabin by him, asked him how the watch went on; who answered, that
it could not be above an hour since he laid himself to rest. He replied, that
his heart was so unquiet, that he could not by any means sleep, and so taking
his Gown, came forth upon the Deck, and presently discovered the Land hard by
us. And for that it was sandy and low, those who had their eyes continually
fixed on it, were dazeled with the reflection of the Stars, being a fair
night, and so were hindered from the true discovery thereof. But he coming out
of the dark, had his sight more forcible, to discern the difference of the
Sea, and the shore. So that forthwith he commanded him at the Helm, to put it
close a starbourd, and tacking our Ship, we edged off; and sounding, found
scant three fathom water, whereby we saw evidently, the miraculous mercy of
our God; that if he had not watched over us, as he does continually over his,
doubtless, we had perished without remedy; To whom be all glory, and praise
everlastingly, world without end.

Immediately we shot off a Piece, to give warning to our other Ships; who
having kept their direct course, and far to wind-wards and Sea-wards, because
we carried no light, for that we were within sight of the shore, could not
hear the report; and the next morning were out of sight.

SECT. XXIII.
IN this point of Steeridge, Care of Steeridge,
the Spaniards and Portingalls do exceed all that I have seen, I mean for
their care, which is chiefest in Navigation. And I wish in this, and in all
their works of Discipline and reformation, we should follow their examples; as
also those of any other Nation.

In every Ship of moment, upon the half deck, or quarter deck, they have a
chair, or seat; out of which whilst they Navigate, Exquisit in the Spaniards
and Portingalls.
the Pilot, or his Adiutants (which are the same officers which in our Ships
we term, the Master and his Mates) never depart, day nor night, from the sight
of the Compass; and have another before them; whereby they see what they do,
and are ever witnesses of the good or bad Steeridge of all men that take the
Helm. This I have seen neglected in our best Ships, yet nothing more
necessary to be reformed. For a good Helme-man may be overcome with an
imagination, and so mis-take one point for another; or the Compass may err,
which by another is discerned. The inconveniences which hereof may ensue, all
experimented Seamen may easily conceive; and by us take warning to avoid the
like.

SECT. XXIIII.
THe next day about ten of the Clock, we were thwart of Cape Blanco, Cape
Blanco.
which is low sandy Land, and perilous; for four Leagues into the Sea (thwart
it) lie banks of sand, which have little water on them; on a sudden we found
our selves amongst them, in less then three fathom water; but with our Boat
and Shalope we went sounding, and so got clear of them.

The next day following, we discovered the Islands, where we purposed to
refresh our selves: They are two, and some call them Saint James his Islands,
and others, Saint Annes. Saint James Islands, alias Saint Annes.
They lie in two and twenty degrees and a half to the South-wards of the
line; and toward the evening (being the fifth of November) we anchored betwixt
them and the Main, in six fathom water, where we found our other Ships.

All which being well Moored, we presently began to set up Tents and Booths for
our sick men, to carry them a shore, and to use our best diligence to cure
them. For which intent our three Surgeans, with their servants and adherents,
had two Boats to wait continually upon them, to fetch whatsoever was needful
from the Ships, to procure refreshing, and to Fish, either with Netts, or
Hooks, and Lines. Of these implements we had in abundance, and it yielded us
some refreshing. For the first days, the most of those which had health,
occupied themselves in romeging our Ship, in bringing a shore of empty Caske,
in filling of them, and in felling and cutting of Wood: which being many
works, and few hands, went slowly forwards.

Near these Islands, are two great Rocks, or small Islands adjoining. In them
we found great store of young Gannetts in their nests, Gannets.
which we reserved for the sick, and being boiled with pickled Porke well
watered, and mingled with Oatmeale, made reasonable Pottage, and was good
refreshing and sustenance for them. This provision failed us not, till our
departure from them.

Upon one of these Rocks also, we found great store of the herb Purslane,
Purslane.
which boiled and made into Sallets, with oil and vinegar, refreshed the sick
stomachs, and gave appetite.

With the air of the shore, and good cherishing, many recovered speedily* Some
died away quickly, and others continued at a stand. We found here some store of
fruits; a kind of Cherry, Cherries.
that grows upon a tree like a Plum-tree, red of color, with a stone in it,
but different in making to ours, for it is not altogether round, and dented
about: they have a pleasing taste.

In one of the Islands, we found Palmito trees, Palmitos.
great and high, and in the top a certain fruit like Cocos, but no bigger
then a Wallnut. We found also a fruit growing upon trees in codds, like Beans,
both in the codd, and the fruit. Some of my Company proved of them, and they
caused vomits and purging, Purgatiues.
as any medicine taken out of the Apothecaries shop, according to the quantity
received. They have hudds, as our Beans, which shaled off, the kernel parts
it self in two, and in the middle is a thin skin (like that of an Onion)
said to be hurtful, and to cause exceeding vomits, and therefore to be cast
away.

Monardus writing of the nature and property of this fruit, as of others of
the Indies, for that it is found in other parts, also calls them Havas
purgativas, The use of Havas purgativas.
and says, that they are to be prepared, by peeling them first, and then
taking away the skin in the middle, and after beaten into powder, to take the
quantity of five or six, either with Wine or Sugar. Thus they are good
against Fevers, and to purge gross humors; against the Collicke, and pain of
the joints, in taking them a man may not sleep, but is to use the diet usual,
as in a day of purging.

One other fruit we found, very pleasant in taste, in fashion of an Artechoque,
but less; on the outside, of color redd; within white, and compassed about
with prickles; our people called them Prick-peares; Artechoques, or
Prick-Peares.
no Conserve is better. They grow upon the leaves of a certain root, that is
like unto that which we call semper viva; and many are wont to hang them up in
their houses: but their leaves are longer and narrower, and full of Pricks on
either side. The fruit grows upon the side of the leaf, and is one of the
best fruits that I have eaten in the Indies. In ripening, presently the Birds
or Vermin are feeding on them; a general rule to know, what fruit is wholesome
and good in the Indies, and other parts. A good note to take, or refuse
unknown fruits.
Finding them to be eaten of the Beasts or Fowls, a man may boldly eat of
them.

The water of these Islands is not good; the one, for being a standing water,
and full of venomous Worms and Serpents, which is near a Butt-shot from the
Sea shore, where we found a great Tree fallen, and in the root of it the names
of sundry Portingalls, Frenchmen, and others, and amongst them, Abraham Cocks;
with the time of their being in this Island.

The other, though a running water, yet passing by the roots of certain
trees, which have a smell as that of Garlique, takes a certain contagious
sent of them; Contagious water.
Here two of our men dyed with swelling of their bellies: The accident we could
not attribute to any other cause, then to this suspicious water. It is little,
and falls into the sand, and soketh through it into the Sea; and therefore we
made a well of a Pipe, and placed it under the rock from which it falls, and
out of it filled our Caske: but we could not fill above two Tons in a night
and a day.

SECT. XXV.
SO after our people began to gather their strength, we manned our Boats, and
went over to the Main, where presently we found a great Ryver of fresh and
sweet water, and a mighty Marish Country; which in the Winter seems to be
continually over-flowne with this River, and others, which fall from the
mountaynous Country adjacent.

We rowed some leagues up the Ryver, and found that the further up we went, the
deeper was the River, but no fruit, more then she sweat of our bodies for the
labor of our hands.

At our return we loaded our Boat with Water, and afterward from hence we
made our Store.

SECT. XXVI.
THe sickness having wasted more then the one half of my people, Wast and
loss of men.
we determined to take out the victuals of the Hawke, and to burn her; which
we put in execution. And being occupied in this Work, we saw a Ship turning
to Windwards, to succor her self of the Islands; but having discryed us, put
off to Sea-wards.

Two days after, the wind changing, we saw her again running along the
coast, and the Dainty not being in case to go after her, for many reasons, we
manned the Fancy, and sent her after her; who about the setting of the Sun
^etched her up, and spoke with her; when finding her to be a great Fly-boat, of
(at least) three or four hundredth Tons, with 18. Pieces of Artillery, would
have returned, but the wind freshing in, put her to Leewards; and standing in
to succor her self of the land, had sight of another small Bark, which after
a short chase she took, but had nothing of moment in her, for that she had
bin upon the great Sholes of Abreoios in 18. degrees, and there thrown all
they had by the board, to save their lives.

This and the other chase were the cause that the Fancy could not beat it up
in many days: but before we had put all in a readiness, the wind changing,
she came unto us, and made Relation of that which had past; and how they had
given the small Bark to the Portingalls, and brought with them only her
Pilot, and a Merchant called Pedro de escalante of Potosi.

SECT. XXVII.
IN this Coast the Portingalls by industry of the Indians, Industry of the
Indians;
have wrought many feats. At Cape Frio they took a great French Ship in the
night, the most of her company being on the shore, with Cannoas, They surprise
the French,
which they have in this Coast so great, that they carry seventie and eighty
men in one of them. And in Isla grand, I saw one that was above threescore
foot long, of one tree, as are all that I have seen in Brasill, with
provisions in them for twenty or thirty days. At the Island of San-sebastian,
San-sebastian.
near Saint Vincent, the Indians killed about eighty of master Candish his
men, kill the English,
and took his Boat, which was the overthrow of his Voyage.

There comes not any Ship upon this Coast, whereof these Cannoas give not
notice presently to every place. And we were certified in Isla grand, that
they had sent an Indian from the River of Ienero, through all the Mountains
and Marshes, to take a view of us, and discover us.
and accordingly made a Relation of our Ships, Boats, and the number of men,
which we might have. But to prevent the like danger that might come upon us
being careless and negligent, I determined one night, in the darkest and
quietest of it, to see what watch our Company kept on the shore; manned our
Light-horsman, and Boat, armed them with Bows and Targetts, and got a shore
some good distance from the places where were our Boothes, and sought to come
upon them vndiscovered: we used all our best endeavors to take them at
unawares, yet coming within forty paces we were discovered; the whole and the
sick came forth to oppose themselves against us. Which we seeing, gave them
the Hubbub, after the manner of the Indians, and assaulted them, and they us;
but being a close dark night, they could not discern us presently upon the
Hubbub.

From our Ship the Gunner shot a piece of Ordinance over our heads,
according to the order given him, and thereof we took occasion to retire unto
our Boats, and within a little space came to the Boothes and landing places,
as though we came from our Ships to aid them. They began to recount unto
us, how that at the wester point of the Island, The events of good watch.
out of certain Cannoas, had landed a multitude of Indians, which with a great
outcry came upon them, and ^ssaulted them fiercely, but finding better
resistance then they looked for, and seeing themselves discovered by the
Ships, took themselves to their heels, and returned to their Cannoas, in
which they embarked themselves, and departed. One affirmed, he saw the Cannoas;
another, their long hair; a third, their Bows; a fourth, that it could not
be, but that some of them had their payments. And it was worth the sight, to
behold those which had not moved out of their beds in many Months, (unless by
the help of others) gotten, some a bow-shoot off into the Woods* others into
the tops of Trees, and those which had any strength, joined together to fight
for their lives. In fine, the Booths and Tents were left desolate.

To color our business the better, after we had spent some hour in seeking
out, and joining the Company together, in comforting, animating, and
commending them; I left them an extraordinary Guard for that night, and so
departed to our Ships, with such an opinion of the assault, given by the
Indians, that many so possessed (through all the Voyage) would not be persuaded
to the contrary. Which impression wrought such effect in most of my Company,
that in all places where the Indians might annoy us, they were after most
careful and vigilant, as was convenient.

In these Islands it heigheth and falls some five or six foot water, and but
once in two and twenty hours; as in all this Coast, and in many parts of the
West Indies; as also in the coast of Perew and Chely (saving where are great
Bays or indraughts) and there the tides keep their ordinary course of twice
in four and twenty hours.

In the lesser of these Islands, is a Cave for a small Ship to ride in,
Land-lockt, and she may moore her self to the trees of either side: this we
called Palmito Island, Palmito Island.
for the abundance it has of the greater sort of Palmito trees, the other
has none at all. A man may go betwixt the Islands with his Ship, but the
better course is out at one end.

In these Islands are many Scorpions, Snakes, and Adders, with other venomous
Vermin. They have Parotts, and a certain kind of foul like unto Phesants,
somewhat bigger, and seem to be of their nature. Here we spent above a month
in curing of our sick men, supplying our wants of Wood and Water, and in other
necessary works. And the tenth of December (all things put in order) we set
sail for Cape Frio, having only six men sick, with purpose there to set
ashore our two Prisoners before named; and anchoring under the Cape, we sent
our Boat a shore, but they could not find any convenient place to land them
in, and so returned: the Wind being Southerly, and not good to go on our
voyage, we succored our selves within Isla Grand, which lies some dozen or
fourteen Leagues from the Cape, betwixt the West, and by South and West
South-west; the rather to set our Prisoners a shore.

In the mid way betwixt the Cape and this Island, lies the River Ienero, Ienero.
a very good Harbor, fortified with a Garrison, and a place well peopled. The
Isla Grand, is some eight or ten Leagues long, and causes a goodly Harbor for
Shipping; It is full of great sandy Bays and in the most of them is store of
good water; within this Island are many other smaller Islands, which cause diverse
sounds and creekes; and amongst these little Islands, Little Island.
one, for the pleasant situation and fertility thereof, called Placentia.
This is peopled, all the rest desert: on this Island our Prisoners desired to be
put ashore, and promised to send us some refreshing. Whereto we condescended,
and sent them a shore, with two Boats well manned and armed, who sound few
Inhabitants in the Island; for our people saw not above four or five houses,
notwithstanding our Boats returned laden with Plantynes, Pinias, Potatoes,
Sugarcanes, and some Hens. Amongst which they brought a kind of little
Plantyne, green, and round, which were the best of any that I have seen.

With our people came a Portingall, who said, that the Island was his; he seemed
to be a Mistecho, who are those that are of a Spanish and an Indian brood,
poorly apparelled and miserable; we feasted him, and gave him some trisles,
and he according to his ability answered our courtesy with such as he had.

The wind continuing contrary, we emptied all the water we could come by,
which we had silled in Saint James his Island, and filled our Caske with the
water of this Isla Grand. Isl^ Grand.
It is a wilderness covered with Trees and Shrubbes so thick, as it has no
passage through, except a man make it by force. And it was strange to hear the
howling and cries of wild Beasts in these Woods day and night, which we could
not come at to see by any means; some like Lions, others like Bears, others
like Hoggs, and of such and so many diversities, as was admirable.

Here our Nets profited us much; for in the sandy Bays they took us store of
fish. Upon the shore at full Sea-marke, we found in many places certain shells,
like those of Mother of Pearls, Shells of mother of pearl.
which are brought out of the East Indies, to make standing cups, called
Caracoles; of so great curiosity as might move all the beholders to magnify
the maker of them; And were it not for the brittlenes of them, by reason of
their exceeding thinnes, doubtless they were to be esteemed far above the
others; for, more excellent workmanship I have not seen in shells.

The 18. of December, we set sail the wind at North-east, and directed our
course for the Straites of Magalianes. The twenty two of this month, at the
going too of the Sun, we descryed a Portingall ship, and gave her chase, and
coming within hayling of her, she rendered her self, without any resistance,
she was of an hundred Tuns bound for Angola to load Negroes, to be carried and
sold in the River of Plate; It is a trade of great profit, and much used, for
that the Negroes are carried from the head of the river of Plate, to Patosi, to
labor in the Mines. It is a bad Negro, Price of Ne^roes.
who is not worth there five or six hundredth pieces, every piece of ten
Ryals, which they receive in Ryals of Plate, for there is no other Merchandise
in those parts. Some have told me, that of late they have found out the trade,
and benefit of Cochanillia, but the River suffers not vessels of burden; for
if they draw above eight or seven foot water, they cannot go further; then
the mouth of the River, and the first habitation is above a hundred and twenty
leagues up, whereunto many Barks trade yearly, and carry all kind of
Merchandise serving for Patosi and Paraquay; the money which is thence
returned, is distributed in all the Coast of Brasill.

The loading of this Ship was meal of Cassavi, Cassavi meal.
which the Portingals call Furina de Paw. It served for Merchandise in Angola,
for the Portingals food in the ship, and to nourish the Negroes, which they
should carry to the river of Plate; This meal is made of a certain root
which the Indians call Yuca, much like unto Potatoes. Of it are two kinds; the
one sweet and good to be eaten (either roasted or sodden) as Potatoes, and the
other of which they make their bread, called Cassavi, deadly poison, if the
liquor or juice be not thoroughly pressed out. So prepared it is the bread of
Brasill, and many parts of the Indies, which they make in this manner: The
preparing thereof for ^ood.
first they pare the root, and then upon a rough stone they grate it as small
us they can, and after that it is grated small, they put it into a bag or poke,
and betwixt two Stones with great weight, they press out the juice, or poison,
and after keep it in some bag, till it have no juice nor moisture left. Of
this they make two sorts of bread, the one finer, and the other courser, but
bake them after one manner. They place a great broad smooth stone upon other
four, which serve in steed of a Trevet, and make a quick fire under it, and
so straw the flower or meal a foot long, and half a foot broad. To make it
to incorporate, they sprinkle now and then a little water, and then another
row of meal, and another sprinkling, till it be to their mind; That which is
to be spent presently, they make a finger thick, and sometimes more thick;
but that which they make for store, is not above half a finger thick, but so
hard, that if it fall on the ground it will not break easily: Being newly
baked, it is reasonable good, but after few days it is not to be eaten,
except it be soaked in water. In some parts they suffer the meal to become
fen^ed, before they make it into bread; and hold it for the best; saying, that
it gives a better taste, but I am not of that opinion; In other parts they
mingle it with a fruit called Agnanepes, which are round, and being ripe are
gray, and as big as an hazell not, and grow in a cod like pease, but that it is
all curiously wrought, first they parch them upon a stone, and after beat them
into powder, and then mingle them with the fine flower of Cassavi, and bake
them into bread, these are their spice-cakes, which they call Xanxaw.

The Agnanapes are pleasant, Agnanapes.
give the bread a yellowish color, and an Aromaticall savor in taste. The
finer of this bread, being well baked, keeps long time, three or four
years. In Brasill, since the Portingalls taught the Indians the use of Sugar,
they eat this meal mingled with remels of Sugar, or Malasses; and in this
manner the Portingalls themselves feed of it.

But we found a better manner of dressing this Farina, in making Pancakes, and
frying them with butter, or oil; and sometimes with Mant^ca de Puerco; when,
strewing a little Sugar upon them, it was meat that our company desired above
any that was in the Ship.

And for Bevera^e.
The Indians also accustom to make their drink of this meal, and in three
several manners.

First, is chewing it in their mouths, and after mingling it with water, after
a loathsome manner, yet the commonest drink that they have; and that held best
which is chewed by an old woman.

The second manner of their drink, is baking it till it be half burned, then
they beat it into Powder; and when they will drink, they mingle a small
quantity of it with water, which gives a reasonable good taste.

The third, and best, is baking it (as aforesaid) and when it is beaten into
Powder, to sees it in water; after that it is well boiled, they let it stand
some three or four days, and then drink it. So, it is much like the Ale
which is used in England, and of that color and taste.

The Indians are very curious in planting and manuring of this Yuca; The manner
of planting Iuca,
It is a little shrubb, and carries branches like Hazell wands; being grown
as big as a man's finger, they break them off in the midst, and so prick
them into the ground; it needs no other art, or husbandry, for out of each
branch grow two, three, or four roots, some bigger, some lesser: but first
they burn and manure the ground, the which labor, and whatsoever else is
requisite, the men do not so much as help with a finger, but all lies upon
their poor women, with the labor of the women.
who are worse then slaves; for, they labor the ground, they plant, they dig
and delue, they bake, they brew, and dress their meat, fetch their water, and
do all drudgerie whatsoever; yea, though they nurse a Child, they are not
exempted from any labor; their Child they carry in a Wallet about their
neck, ordinarily under one arm, because it may suck when it will.

The men have care for nothing but for their Cannoas, to pass from place to
place, and of their Bows and Arrows to hunt, and their Arms for the war,
which is a sword of heavy black wood, some four fingers broad, an inch
thick, and an ell long, something broader toward the roppe then at the
handle. They call it Macana, and it is carved and wrought with inlayd works
very curiously, but his edges are blunt. If any kill any Game in hunting, he
brings it not with him, but from the next tree to the Game, he breaks a
bough (for the trees in the Indies have leaves for the most part all the year)
and all the way as he goes streweth little pieces of it, here and there, and
coming home gives a piece to his woman, and so sends her for it.

If they go to the War, or in any journey, where it is necessary to carry
provision, or Merchandise, the women serve to carry all, and the men never
succor, nor ease them; wherein they show greater Barbarism then in any thing
(in my opinion) that I have noted amongst them, except in eating one another.

In Brasill, and in the west Indies, Polygamy of the Indians* Their attire*
the Indian may have as many wives as he can get, either bought or given by her
friends: the men and women (for the most part) go naked, and those which have
come to know their shame, cover only their privy parts with a piece of cloth,
the rest of their body is naked. Their houses resemble great Barnes, covered
over, or thatched with Plantyne leaves, which reach to the ground, and at
either end is the door.

In one house are sometimes ten or twenty households: Their manne^ of housing.
they have little household stuff, besides their beds, which they call Hamacas,
and are made of Cotton, and stained with diverse colors and works. Some I have
seen white, of great curiosity. They are as a sheet laced at both ends, and
at either of them long strappes, with which they fasten them to two posts, as
high as a man's middle, and so sit rocking themselves in them. Sometimes they
use them for seats, and sometimes to sleep in at their pleasures. And
sleeping.
In one of them I have seen sleep the man, his wife, and a child.

SECT. XXVIII.
We took out of this Prize, for our provision, some good quantity of this
meal, and the Sugar she had, being not above three or four Chests, after
three days we gave the Ship to the Portingalls, and to them liberty. In her
was a Portingall Knight, which went for Governor of Angola, of the habit of
Christ, with fifty soldiers, and Arms for a hundredth and fifty, with his
wife and daughter. He was old, and complained, that after many years service
for his King, with sundry mishapps, he was brought to that poor estate, as for
the relief of his wife, his daughter, and himself, he had no other substance,
but that he had in the Ship. It moved compassion, so as nothing of his was
diminished, which though to us was of no great moment, in Angola it was worth
good Crowns. Only we disarmed them all, and let them depart, saying, that
they would return to Saint Vincents.

We continued our course for the Straites, my people much animated with this
unlooked for refreshing, and praised God for his bounty, providence, and grace
extended toward us. Here it will not be out of the way to speak a word of the
particularities of the Country.

SECT. XXIX.
BRASILL is accounted to be that part of America, The description of Brasill.
which lies toward our North sea, betwixt the River of the Amazons, near the
line to the Norwards, until a man come to the River of Plate in 36. degrees to
the South-wards of the line.

This coast generally lies next of any thing South and by west; It is a
temperate Country, though in some parts it exceeds in heat; it is full of
good succors for shipping, and plentiful for Rivers and fresh waters; Its
Havens.
The principal habitations, are Farnambuca, the Bay De todos los Santos,
Nostra Senora de victoria, alias Santos, the River Ienero, Saint Vincents, and
Placentia; every of them provided of a good Port. The winds are variable, but
for the most part trade along the Coast.

The Commodities this Country yields, Its Commodities.
are the wood called Brasill, whereof the best is that of Farnambuc; (so also
called, being used in most rich colors) good Cotton-wooll, great store of
Sugar, Balsamom, and liquid Amber.

They have want of all manner of Cloth, Lynnen, and Woollen, Its wants.
of Iron, and edge-Tooles, of Copper, and principally in some places, of Wax,
of Wine, of Oil, and meal, (for the Country bears no Corn) and of all
manner of Haberdashery-wares, for the Indians.

The beasts that naturally breed in this Country, are Tigers, Lions, Hoggs,
Dogs, Dear, Monkeyes, Mycos, and Conies, The bestiall thereof.
like unto Ratts, but bigger, and of a tawney color, Armadilloes, Alagartoes,
and store of venomous worms and Serpents, as Scorpions, Adders, which they
call Vinoras; and of them, one kind, which the divine providence has created
with a bell upon his head, that wheresoever he goes, the sound of it might be
heard, and so the Serpent shunned; for his stinging is without remedy. This
they call the Vynora with the bell; of them there are many, and great store of
Snakes, some of that greatness, as to write the truth, might seem fabulous.

Another worm there is in this Country, The discommodities.
which killed many of the first Inhabitants, before God was pleased to discover
a remedy for it, unto a religious person; It is like a Magot, but more
slender, and longer, and of a green color, with a red head; This worm
creeps in at the hinder parts, where is the evacuation of our superstuities,
and there (as it were) gleweth himself to the gutt, there feeds of the blood
and humors, and becomes so great, that stopping the natural passage, he
forces the principal wheel of the clock of our body to stand still, and
with it the account of the hours of life to take end, with most cruel torment
and pain, which is such, that he who has been thoroughly punished with the
Collique can quickly decipher or demonstrate. The Antidote for this pernicious
Worm is Garlique; and this was discovered by a Physician to a religious person.

SECT. XXX.
BEtwixt 26. and 27. degrees near the coast lies an Island; the Portingalls
call it Santa Catalina, Santa Catalina.
which is a reasonable Harbor, and has good refreshing of wood, water, and
fruit. It is desolate and serves for those, who trade from Brasill to the
River of Plate, or from the River to Brasill, as an Inn, or bayting place.

In our Navigation toward the Straites, by our observation we found, that our
Compass varyed a point and better to the Eastwards. Variation of the Compass.
And for that diverse have written curiously and largely of the variation
thereof, I refer them that desire the understanding of it, to the Discourse
of master William Aborrawh, and others; for it is a secret, whose causes well
understood are of greatest moment in all Navigations.

In the height of the River of Plate, we being some fifty leagues off the
coast, a storm took us Southerly, which endured forty eight hours; In the
first day about the going down of the Sun, Robert Tharlton, master of the
Fancy, bare up before the wind, without giving us any token or sign, that
she was in distress. We seeing her to continue her course, bare up after her,
and the night coming on, we carried our light; but she never answered us; for
they kept their course directly for England, which was the overthrow of the
Voyage, The overthrow of the Voyage.
as well for that we had no Pynace to go before us, to discover any danger, to
seek out roades and anchoring, to help our watering and refreshing; as also
for the victuals, necessaries, and men which, they carried away with them:
which though they were not many, yet with their help in our fight, we had
taken the Vice Admiral, the first time she bourded with us, as shall be
hereafter manifested. For once we cleared her Deck, and had we been able to
have spared but a dozen men, doubtless, we had done with her what we would;
for she had no close fights.

The cause,
Moreover, if she had been with me, I had not been discovered upon the coast
of Perew. But I was worthy to be deceived, that trusted my Ship in the hands of
an hypocrite, and a man which had left his General before in the like
occasion, and in the self same place; Infidelity.
for being with master Thomas Candish, master of a small Ship in the voyage
wherein he dyed, this Captain being aboard the Admiral, in the night time
forsook his Fleet, his General and Captain, and returned home.

This bad custom is too too much used amongst Seamen, and worthy to be
severely punished; for doubtless the not punishing of those offenders, has
been the prime cause of many lamentable events, losses, and overthrowes, to
the dishonor of our Nation, and frustrating of many good and hono^rable
Enterprises.

In this point of Discipline, the Spaniards do far surpass us; Discipl^ne
of the Spanish,
for whosoever forsakes his Fleet, or Commander, is not only severely
punished, but deprived also of all charge or government for ever after. This in
our Country is many times neglected; for that there is none to follow the
cause, the principalls being either dead with grief, or drowned in the gulf
of poverty, and so not able to wade through with the burden of that suite,
which in Spain is prosecuted by the Kings Attorney, or Fiscall; or at least, a
Judge appointed for determining that cause purposely.

Yea, I cannot attribute the good success the Spaniard has had in his Voyages
and peoplings, the only cause of their prosperities.
to any extraordinary virtue more in him then in any other man, were not
Discipline, Patience, and justice far superior. For in valor, experience, and
travel, he surpasses us not; In shipping, preparation, and plenty of
victuals, he comes not neer^ us; In paying and rewarding our people, no
Nation did go beyond us; But God, who is a just and bountiful rewarder,
regarding obedience far above sacrifice, doubtless, in recompense of their
indurance, resolution, and subjection to commandment, bestows upon them the
blessing due unto it. And this, not for that the Spaniard is of a more
tractable disposition, or more docible nature then we, but that justice
halteth with us, and so the old Proverb is verified, Pity marreth the whole
City.

Thus come we to be deprived of the sweet fruit, which the Rod of Discipline
brings with it, represented unto us in ancient Verses, which as a Relic of
experience I have heard in my youth Recorded by a wise Man, and a great
Captain; Thus; The rod by power divine, and earthly Regal law,
Makes good men live in peace, and bad to stand in awe:
For with a severe stroke the bad corrected be,
Which makes the good to joy such justice for to see;
The rod of Discipline breeds fear in every part,
Reward by due desert does joy and glad the heart.


The cunning of Runnawayes.
These absentings and escapes are made most times only to pilfer and steal, as
well by taking of some prise when they are alone, and without command, to
hinder or order their bad proceedings, as to appropriate that which is in their
entrusted ship; casting the fault, if they be called to account, upon some
poor and unknown Mariners, whom they suffer with a little pillage, to absent
themselves, the cunninglier to color their greatest disorders, and robberies.

For doubtless, if he would, he might have come unto us with great facility;
and ignoble Captains,
because within sixteen hours, the storm ceased, and the wind came fair,
which brought us to the Straites, and dured many days after with us at
North-east. This was good for them, though naught for us: If he had perished
any Mast or Yard, sprung any leake, wanted victuals, or instruments for finding
us, or had had any other impediment of importance, he might have had some
color to cloak his lewdnes: but his Mastes and Yards being sound, his Ship
staunch and laden with victuales for two years at the least, and having order
from place to place, where to find us, his intention is easily seen to be
bad, and his fault such, as worthily deserved to be made exemplary unto
others. Which he manifested at his return, by his manner of proceeding, making
a spoil of the prise he took in the way homewards, verified at their
returns.
as also of that which was in the ship, putting it into a Port fit for his
purpose, where he might have time and commodity to do what he would.

We made account that they had been swallowed up of the sea, for we never
suspected that any thing could make them forsake us, So, we much lamented them.
The storm ceasing, and being out of all hope, we set sail and went on our
course. During this storm, certain great fowls, as big as Swannes, Birds
like Swans
soared above us, and the wind calming, settled themselves in the Sea, and fed
upon the sweepings of our Ship; which I perceiving, and desirous to see of
them, because they seemed far greater then in truth they were, I caused a
hook and line to be brought me; caught with lin^ and hook
and with a piece of a Pilchard I bayted the hook, and a foot from it, tied a
piece of cork, that it might not sink deep, and threw it into the Sea,
which, our ship driving with the Sea, in a little time was a good space from
us, and one of the Fowls being hungry, presently seized upon it, and the hook
in his upper beak. It is like to a Faulcons bill, but that the point is more
crooked, in that manner, as by no means he could clear himself, except that
the line brake, or the hook righted: Plucking him toward the ship, with the
waving of his wings he eased the weight of his body; and being brought to the
stern of our ship, two of our Company went down by the Ladder of the poope,
and seized on his neck and wings; but such were the blows he gave them with
his Pinnions, as both left their hand-fast, being beaten black and blew; we
cast a snare about his neck, and so tryced him into the Ship.

By the same manner of Fishing, we caught so many of them, Prove good
refreshment.
as refreshed and recreated all my people for that day. Their bodies were
great, but of little flesh and tender; in taste answerable to the food whereon
they feed.

They were of two colors, some white, some gray; they had three joints in each
wing; and from the point of one wing, to the point of the other, both stretched
out, was above two fathomes.

The wind continued good with us, till we came to 49. degrees and 30. minutes,
where it took us Westerly, being (as we made our account) some fifty leagues
from the shore. Betwixt 49. and 48. degrees, is Port Saint Julian, a good
Harbor, and in which a man may grave his Ship, though she draw fifteen or
sixteen foot water: But care is to be had of the people called Pentagones.
Care of the Pentagones.
They are treacherous, and of great stature, so the most give them the name of
Giants.

The second of February, about nine of the Clock in the morning, we discryed
land, which bare South-west of us, which we looked not for so timely; and
coming nearer and nearer unto it, by the lying, we could not conjecture what
land it should be; for we were next of any thing in 48. degrees, and no Platt
nor Sea-card which we had, made mention of any land, which lay in that manner,
near about that height* In fine, we brought our Lar-bord tacke aboard, and
stood to the North-east-wardes all that day and night, and the Wind continuing
Westerly and a fair gale, we continued our course along the coast the day
and night following. In which time we made account we discovered well near
threescore leagues off the coast. It is bold, and made small show of dangers.

The land is a goodly Champion Country, and peopled; we saw many fires, but
could not come to speak with the people; A description of the unknown land.
for the time of the year was far spent to shoot the Straites, and the want
of our Pynace disabled us for finding a Port or Road; not being discretion
with a ship of charge, and in an unknown coast, A caveat for coming suddenly
too nere an unknown land.
to come near the shore before it was sounded; which were causes, together
with the change of the wind, (good for us to pass the Strait) that hindered
the further discovery of this Land, with its secrets: This I have sorrowed for
many times since, for that it had likelihood to be an excellent Country. It
has great Rivers of fresh waters; for the out-shoot of them colors the Sea in
many places, as we ran along it. It is not mountaynous, but much of the
disposition of England, and as temperate. The things we noted principally on
the coast, are these following; the westermost point of the land, with which we
first fell, is the end of the land to the West-wardes, as we found afterward.
If a man bring this point South-west, it rises in three mounts, or round
hillockes: bringing it more Westerly, they shoot themselves all into one; and
bringing it Easterly, it rises in two hillocks. This we called poyn^
Tremountaine. Point Tremountaine.
Some twelve or fourteen leagues from this point to the East-wardes, fair by
the shore, lies a low flat Island of some two leagues long; we named it Fair
Island; Pair Island.
^or it was all over as green and smooth, as any Meddow in the spring of the
year.

Some three or four leagues Easterly from this Island, is a goodly opening, as
of a great River, or an arm of the Sea, with a goodly low Country adjacent.
And eight or ten leagues from this opening, some three leagues from the
shore, lies a big Rock, which at the first we had thought to be a Ship
under all her Sails; but after, as we came near, it discovered it self to be
a Rock, which we called Condite-head; Condite head.
for that howsoever a man comes with it, it is like to the Condite heads
about the City of London.

All this coast so far as we discovered, lies next of any thing East and by
North, and West and by South. The land, for that it was discovered in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, my sovereign Lady and Mistress, and a maiden
Queen, and at my cost and adventure, in a perpetual memory of her chastity,
and remembrance of my endeavors, I gave it the name of HAVVKINS- maiden-land.
Hawkins-maid^n-land.


Before a man fall with this land, some twenty or thirty leagues, he shall
meet with bedds of Oreweed, driving to and fro in that Sea, with white flowers
growing upon them, Bedds of Oreweed, with white flowers.
and sometimes farther off; which is a good show and sign the land is near,
whereof the Westermost part lies some threescore leagues from the nearest land
of America.

With our fair and large Wind, we shaped our course for the Straites, Our
coming to the Straites.
and the tenth of February, we had sight of land, and it was the head land of
the Straites to the North-wards, which agreed with our height, wherein we found
our selves to be, which was in thirty two degrees and forty minutes.

Within a few hours we had the mouth of the Straites open; which lies in 52.
degrees, and 50. minutes. It rises like the North foreland in Kent, and is much
like the land of Margates. It is not good to borrow near the shore, but to
give it a fair birth; within a few hours we entered the mouth of the Straites,
which is some six leagues broad, and lies in 52. degrees, and 50. minutes;
doubling the point on the Star-board, which is also flat, of a good birth, we
opened a fair Bay, in which we might discry the hull of a Ship beaten upon the
Beach. It was of the Spanish Fleet, that went to inhabit there, in Anno 1582.
under the charge of Pedro Sarmiento, who at his return was taken Prisoner, and
brought into England.

In this Bay the Spaniards made their principal habitation, and called it the
City of Saint Philip, Pedro Sarmi^nto bu^ld^th San-Philip.
and left it peopled; But the cold barrennes of the Country, and the malice of
the Indians, wi^h whom they badly agreed, made speedy end of them, as also of
those, whom they left in the middle of the Straites, three leagues from Cape
Froward to the East-wards, in another habitation.

We continued our course along this reach (for all the Straites is as a River
altering his course, sometimes upon one point, sometimes upon another) which is
some eight Leagues long, and lies West North-west. From this we entered into a
goodly Bay, which runs up into the land Northerly many Leagues; and at first
entrance, a man may see no other thing, but as it were, a maine Sea. From the
end of this first reach, you must direct your course West South-west, and some
fourteen or fifteen leagues lies one of the narrowest places of all the
Straites; This leads unto another reach, that lies west and by north some
six leagues.

Here in the middle of the reach, the wind took us by the north-west, and so
we were forced to anchor some two or three days. In which time, we went a
shore with our Boats, and found near the middle of this reach, on the
Star-boord side, a reasonable good place to ground and trim a small Ship;
where it higheth some nine or ten foot water. Here we saw certain Hogs, but
they were so far from us, that we could not discern, if they were of those
of the Country, or brought by the Spaniards; these were all the Beasts which
we saw in all the time we were in the Straites.

In two tides we turned through this reach, and so recovered the Islands of
Pengwins; they lie from this reach four leagues South-west and by west. Till
you come to this place, Note.
care is to be taken of not coming too near to any point of the Land; for
being (for the most part) sandy, they have sholding off them, and are somewhat
what dangerous. The Islands of Pengwins.
These Islands have been set forth by some to be three; we could discover but
two; And they are no more, except that part of the Main, which lies over
against them, be an Island; which carries little likelihood, and I cannot
determine it. A man may sail betwixt the two Islands, or betwixt them and the
Land on the la^boord side; from which land to the bigger Island is as it were a
bridge or ledge, on which is four or five fathom water; and to him that
comes near it, not knowing thereof, may justly cause fear: for it shows
to be should water with his rypling, like unto a race.

Betwixt the former reach, and these Islands, runs up a goodly Bay into the
Country to the North-wards. It causes a great indraught, and above these
Islands runs a great tide from the mouth of the Straites to these Islands, the
land on the larboord-side is low land and sandy, (for the most part, and
without doubt, Islands) for it has many openings into the Sea, and forcible
indraughts by them, and that on the starboord side, is all high mountaynous
land, from end to end; but no wood on either side. Before we passed these
Islands, under the lee of the bigger Island we anchored, the wind being at
North-east, with intent to refresh our selves with the fowls of these Islands.
They are of diverse sorts, and in great plenty, Good provision in the Straites.
as Pengwins, wild Ducks, Gulles and Gannets; of the principal we purposed to
make provision, and those were the Pengwins; which in Welsh (as I have been
informed) signifies a white head. From which derivation, and many other Welsh
denominations given by the Indians (or their predecessors) some do infer,
that America was first peopled with Welsh-men: and Motezanna King (or rather
Emperor) of Mexico, did recount unto the Spaniards (at their first coming)
that his Ancestors came from a far Country, and were white people. Which
conferred which an ancient Cronicle, that I have read many years since, may
be coniectured to be a Prince of Wales, who many hundredth years since, with
certain ships, sailed to the westwards, with intent to make new discoveries.
He was never after heard of.

The Pengwin, The description of the Pengwin.
is in all proportion like unto a Goose, and has no feathers, but a certain
down upon all parts of his body: and therefore cannot fly, but avayleth
himself in all occasions with his feet, running as fast as most men. He
lives in the Sea, and on the Land; feeds on fish in the Sea, and as a Goose
on the shore upon grass. They harbor themselves under the ground in burrowes,
as the Connies; and in them hatch their young. All parts of the Island where
they haunted were undermined, save only one valley which (it seems) they
reserved for their food; for it was as green as any Medowe in the month of
April, with a most fine short grass. The flesh of these Pengwins is much of
the savor of a certain foul taken in the Islands of Lundey and Silley, which
we call Puffins; by the taste it is easily discerned that they feed on fish.
They are very fatt, and in dressing must be flead as the Byter; they are
reasonable meat, roasted, baked, or sodden; but best roasted. We salt^d some
dozen or 16. hogsheads, which served us (whilst they lasted) in steed of
powdered beef.

The hunting of them (as we may well term it) was a great recreation to my
Company and worth the sight, Hunting the Pengwin.
for in determining to catch them, necessarily was required good store of
people, every one with a cudgel in his hand, to compass them round about, to
bring them, as it were, into a ring; if they chanced to break out, then was
the sport, for the ground being undermined, at unawares it failed, and as they
ran after them, one fell here, another there; another offering to strike at
one, lifting up his hand, sunk up to the arm pits in the earth, another
leaping to avoid one hole, fell into another. And after the first slaughter, in
seeing us on the shore, they shunned us, and procured to recover the Sea; yea
many times seeing themselves persecuted they would tumble down from such high
rocks and mountains, as it seemed impossible to escape with life. Yet as soon
as they came to the beach, presently we should see them run into the Sea, as
though they had no hurt. Where one goes, the other follows like sheep after
the Bel-wether; but in getting them once within the ring close together, few
escaped, save such as by chance hid themselves in the borrowes, and ordinarily
there was no drove which yielded us not a thousand, and more: the manner of
killing them which the hunters used, being in a cluster together, was with
their cudgels to kn^cke them on the head; for though a man gave them many
blows on the body, they di^d not: Besides the flesh bruised is not good to
keep. The Massaker ended, presently they cut off their heads, that they might
bleed well: such as we determined to keep for store, The keeping for store.
we saved in this manner. First, we split them, and then washed them well in
sea water, then salted them, having layne some six hours in salt, we put
them in press eight hours, and the blood being soaked out, we salted them
again in our other caske, as is the custom to salt beef, after this manner
they continued good, some two months, and served us in stead of beef.

The Gulls and Gannets, The Gulls,
were not in so great quantity, yet we wanted not young Gulles to eat all the
time of our stay about these Islands. It was one of the delicatest foodes, that
I have eaten in all my life.

The Ducks are different to ours, Ducks.
and nothing so good meat; yet they may serve for necessity: They were many,
and had a part of the Island to themselves several, which was the highest hill,
and more then a Musket shot over.

In all the days of my life, I have not seen greater Art and curiosity in
creatures void of reason, then in the placing and making of their nestes; all
the hill being so full of them, that the greatest Mathematician of the world,
could not devise how to place one more then there was upon the hill, leaving
only one pathway for a foul to pass betwixt.

The hill was all level, as if it had been smoothed by Art; the ne^tes made
only of earth, and seeming to be of the self same mould; for the nests and
the soil is all one, which, with water that they bring in their Beakes, they
make into Clay, or a certain dawbe, and after fashion them round, as with a
Compass. In the bottom they contain the measure of a foot; in the height
about eight inches; and in the top, the same quantity over; there, they are
hollowed in, somewhat deep, wherein they lay their eggs, without other
prevention. And I am of opinion, that the Sun helps them to hatch their
young: their nests are for many years, and of one proportion, not one
exceeding another in bigness, in height, nor circumference; and in
proportionable distance one from another. In all this hill, nor in any of their
nestes, was to be found a blade of grass, a straw, a stick, a feather, a
moate, no, nor the filing o^ any ^owle, but all the nestes and passages betwixt
them, were so smooth and clean, as if they had been newly swept and washed.

All which are motives to praise and magnify the universal Creator, who so
wonderfully manifests his wisdom, bounty, and providence in all his
Creatures, and especially for his particular love to ungrateful mankind, for
whose contemplation and service, he has made them all.

SECT. XXXI.
ONe day having ended our hunting of Pengwins, one of our Mariners walking
about the Island, discovered a great company of Seals, or Sea-wolues (so called
for that they are in the Sea, Of Seals, or Sea-wolues.
as the Wolves on the Land) advising us, that he left them sleeping, with their
bellies rosting against the Sun; we provided our selves with staves, and
other weapons, and sought to steal upon them at unawares, to surprise some of
them, and coming down the side of a hill, we were not discovered, till we
were close upon them, notwithstanding, their Sentinel (before we could
approach) with a great howl waked them: we got betwixt the Sea and some of
them, but they shunned us not; for they came directly upon us; and though we
dealt here and there a blow, yet not a man that withstood them, escaped the
overthrow. They reckon not of a Musket shot, a sword peirceth not their
skin, and to give a blow with a staff, is as to smite upon a stone: only in
giving the blow upon his snowt, presently he falls down dead.

After they had recovered the water, they did, as it were, scorn us, defy us,
and daunced before us, until we had shot some Musket shot through them, and
so they appeared no more.

This Fish is like unto a Calfe, with four legs, but not above a spanne long:
his skin is hayrie like a Calfe; but these were different to all that ever I
have seen, yet I have seen of them in many parts; for these were greater, and
in their former parts like unto Lions, with shagge hair, and mostaches.

They live in the Sea, and come to sleep on the Land, and they ever have one
that watches, who advises them of any accident. They are beneficial to man
in their skins for many purposes; In their mostaches for Pick-tooths, and in
their fatt to make Traine-oyle. This may suffice for the Seal, for that he is
well known.

SECT. XXXII.
ONe day, our Boats being laden with Pengwins, and coming aboard, Devises in
sudden accidents.
a sudden storm took them, which together with the fury of the tide, put them
in such great danger, that although they threw all their loading into the Sea,
yet were they forced to go before the wind and Sea, to save their lives. Which
we seeing, and considering that our welfare depended upon their safety, being
impossible to weigh our Anchor, fastened an empty Barrel well pitched to the
end of our Cable, in stead of a boy, and letting it slip, set sail to succor
our Boats, which in short space w^e recovered, and after returned to the place
where we ryd before.

The storm ceasing, we used our diligence by all means to seek our Cable and
Anchor, but the tide being forcible, and the weeds (as in many parts of the
Straites) so long, that riding in fourteen fathom water, many times they
streamed three and four fathomes upon the ryme of the water; these did so
inrole our Cable, that we could never set eye of our boy; and to sweep for him
was but lost labor, because of the weeds, which put us out of hope to recover
it.

And so our forcible business being ended, leaving instructions for the Fancy
our Pynace, (according to appointment) where to find us, we inroled them in
many folds of Paper, put them into a barrel of an old Musket, and stopped it
in such manner as no wett could enter; then placing it an end upon one of the
highest hills, and the most frequented of all the Island, we embarked our
selves, and set sail with the wind at North-west, which could serve us but to
the end of that reach, some dozen leagues long, and some three or four leagues
broad. It lies next of any thing, till you come to Cape Agreda, South-west;
from this Cape to Cape Froward, the coast lies West South-west.

Some four leagues betwixt them, was the second peopling of the Spaniards: The
second peopling of the Spaniards.
and this Cape lies in fifty five degrees and better.

Thwart Cape Froward, the wind larged with us, and we continued our course
toward the Island of Elizabeth; which lies from Cape Froward some fourteen
leagues West and by South. This reach is four or five leagues broad, and in it
are many channells or openings into the Sea; for all the land on the Souther
part of the Straites are Islands and broken land; and from the beginning of this
reach to the end of the Straites, high mountaynous land on both sides, in most
parts covered with snow all the year long.

Betwixt the Island Elizabeth, and the Main, is the narrowest passage of all
the Straites, it may be some two Musket shot from side to side. From this
Strait to Elizabeth bay, Elizabeth's Bay.
is some four leagues, and the course lies North-west and by west.

This bay is all sandy, and clean ground on the Easter part; but before you
come at it, there lies a point of the shore a good birth off, which is
dangerous. And in this reach, as in many parts of the Straites, runs a
quick and forcible tide. In the Bay it higheth eight or nine foot water. The
Norther part of the Bay has foul ground, and rocks under water: and therefore
it is not wholesome borrowing of the main. One of master Thomas Candish his
Pynaces (as I have been informed) came a-ground upon one of them, and he was
in hazard to have left her there.

From Elizabeth Bay to the River of Ieronimo is some five leagues. The River of
Ieronimo.
The course lies West and by North, and West. Here the Wind scanted, and
forced us to seek a place to anchor in. Our Boats going along the shore,
found a reasonable Harbor, which is right against that which they call, River
Ieronimo: but it is another channel, by which a man may disemboake the
Strait, as by the other which is accustomed; for with a storm, which took us
one night, suddenly we were forced into that opening unwittingly; but in the
morning, seeing our error, and the wind larging, with two or three bourds we
turned out into the old channel, not daring for want of our Pynace to attempt
any new discovery.

This Harbor we called Blanches Bay; Blanches Bay.
for that it was found by William Blanch, one of our Masters mates. Here having
moored our ship, we began to make our provision of wood and water, whereof
was plenty in this Bay, and in all other places from Pengwin Islands, till
within a dozen leagues of the mouth of the Straites.

Now finding our Deckes open, with the long lying under the line, and on the
coast of Brasill, the Sun having been in our Zenith many times, we calked
our ship, within bourd and without, above the Decks. And such was the diligence
we used, that at four days end, we had above threescore Pipes of water, and
twenty Boats of wood stowed in our Ship: no man was idle, nor otherwise busied
but in necessary works: some in felling and cleaving of wood; some in carrying
of water; some in romaging; some in washing, others in baking; one in heating
of pitch, another in gathering of Mussells; no man was exempted, but knew at
evening, whereunto he was to betake himself the morning following.

Objection of wast.
Some man might ask me, how we came to have so many empty Caske in less then
two months; for it seeemeth much that so few men in such short time, and in so
long a Voyage should waste so much?

Whereto I answer, Answer.
that it came not of excessive expense; for in health we never exceeded our
ordinary; but of a mischance which befell us unknown in the Island of Saint
James, or Saint Anne, in the coast of Brasill; where we refreshed our selves,
and according to the custom laid our Caske a shore, to trim it, and after to
fill it, the place being commodious for us. But with the water a certain
worm, called Broma by the Spaniard, and by us Arters, entered also, which eat
it so full of holes, that all the water soaked out, and made much of our Caske
of small use. This we remedied the best we could, and discovered it long
before we came to this place.

Hereof let others take warning, Warning against worms.
in no place to have Caske on the shore, where it may be avoided; for it is one
of the provisions, which are with greatest care to be preserved in long
Voyages, and hardest to be supplied. These Arters, or Broma, in all hot
Countries enter into the plankes of Ships, and especially where are Rivers of
fresh water; (for the common opinion is, that they are bred in fresh water, and
with the current of the Rivers are brought into the Sea) but experience
teaches, that they breed in the great Seas in all hott Clymates, especially
near the Equinoctial line; for lying so long under and near the line, and
towing a Shalop at our stern, coming to cleanse her in Brasil, we found her
all under water covered with these worms, as big as the little finger of a
man, on the outside of the planke, not fully covered, but half the thicknes of
their body, like to a gelly wrought into the planke as with a Gowdge. And
natural reason (in my judgment) confirms this; for creatures bread and
nourished in the Sea, coming into fresh water die; as those actually bred in
Ponds, or fresh Rivers die presently, if they come into Salt water.

But some man may say; this fails in some Fishes and Beasts.

Which I must confess to be true; but these either are part terrestryall, and
part aquatile, as the Mare-maide, Seahorse, and other of that kind, or have
their breeding in the fresh, and growth or continual nourishment in the Salt
water, as the Salmond, and others of that kind.

In little time, if the Ship be not sheathed, Sheathing of Ships.
they put all in hazard; for they enter in no bigger then a small Spanish
Needle, and by little and little their holes become ordinarily greater then a
man's finger. The thicker the planke is, the greater he grows; yea, I have
seen many Ships so eaten, that the most of their plankes under water have
been like honey combs, and especially those betwixt wind and water. If they
had not been sheathed, it had bin impossible that they could have swomme. The
entering of them is hardly to be discerned, the most of them being small as the
head of a Pin. Which, all such, as purpose long Voyages, are to prevent by
sheathing their Ships.

And for that I have seen diverse manners of sheathing, for the ignorant I will
set them down which by experience I have found best.

In Spain, and Portingall, In Spain and Portugal,
some sheath their Ships with Lead; which, besides the cost and weight,
although they use the thinnest sheet-lead that I have seen in any place, yet
it is nothing durable, but subject to many casualties.

Another manner is used with double plankes, with double plankes.
as thick without as within, after the manner of furring; which is little
better then that with Lead; for, besides his weight, it dureth little, because
the worm in small time passes through the one and the other.

A third manner of sheathing has been used amongst some with fine Canvas;
With Canvas.
which is of small continuance, and so not to be regarded.

The fourth prevention, which now is most accounted of, With burnt plankes.
is to burn the utter planke till it come to be in every place like a Cole,
and after to pitch it; this is not bad.

In China (as I have been informed) they use a certain Betane or Varnish, In
China with Varnish.
in manner of an artificial pitch, wherewith they trim the outside of their
ships. It is said to be durable, and of that virtue, as neither worm, nor
water peirceth it; neither has the Sun power against it.

Some have devised a certain Pitch, mingled with Glass, and other
ingredients, beaten into powder, with which if the Ship be pitched, it is
said, the worm that touches it, dies; but I have not heard, that it has
been useful.

But the most approved of all is the manner of sheathing used now adays in
England, In England*
with thin bourds, half inch thick; the thinner the better; and Elm better
then Oak; for it ryveth not, it indureth better under water, and yields
better to the Ships side.

The invention of the materialles incorporated betwixt the planke and the
sheathing, is that indeed which avayleth; for without it many plankes were not
sufficient to hinder the entrance of this worm; this manner is thus:

Before the sheathing board is nailed on, Best manner of sheathing.
upon the inner side of it they smere it over with tar half a finger thick,
and upon the tar, another half finger thick of hair, such as the
Whitelymers use, and so nail it on, the nails not above a spanne distance one
from another; the thicker they are driven, the better.

Some hold opinion, that the tar kills the worm; others, that the worm
passing the sheathing, and seeking a way through, the hair and the tar so
involue him, that he is choked therewith; which me thinks is most probable;
this manner of sheathing was invented by my Father; and experience has taught
it to be the best, and of least cost.

SECT. XXXIII.
SVch was the diligence we used for our dispatch to shoot the Straites, that at
four days end, we had our water and wood stowed in our Ship, all our
Copper-worke finished, and our ship Calked from Post to Stem; the first day
in the morning (the wind being fair) we brought our selves into the Channel,
and sailed toward the mouth of the Straites, praising God; and beginning our
course with little wind, we descryed a fire upon the shore, made by the
Indians for a sign to call us; which seen, I caused a Boat to be man'de, and
we rowed ashore, to see what their meaning was, and approaching near the
shore, we saw a Cannoa made fast under a Rock with a with, most artificially
made with the rindes of Trees, and sowed together with the sins of Whales; at
both ends sharp, and turning up, with a green bough in ^ither end, and ribs
for strengthening it. After a little while, we might discern on the fall of
the mountain (which was ^ull of trees and shrubbes) two or three Indians
naked, which came out of certain Caves, or coats. They spoke unto us, and
made diverse signs; now poynting to the Harbor, out of which we were come; and
then to the mouth of the Straites: But we understood nothing of their meaning.
Yet left they us with many imaginations, suspecting, it might be to advise us
of our Pynace, or some other thing of moment; but for that they were under
covert, and might work us some treachery (for all the people of the Straites,
and the land nere them, use all the villainy they can toward white people,
taking them for Spaniards, in revenge of the deceit that Nation has used
toward them upon sundry occasions:) as also for that by our stay we could
reap nothing but hinderance of our Navigation, we hasted to our Ship, and
sailed on our course.

From Blanches Bay to long reach, Long Reach.
which is some four leagues, the course lies West South-west entering into the
long reach; which is the last of the Straits, and longest. For it is some
thirty two leagues, and the course lies next of any thing North-west.

Before the setting of the Sun, we had the mouth of the Straits open, and
were in great hope the next day to be in the South sea; but about seven of the
clock that night, we saw a great cloud rise out of the North-east, which
began to cast forth great flashes of lightnings, and suddenly sailing with a
fresh gale of wind at north-east, another more forcible took us astayes; which
put us in danger: for, all our sails being a tant, it had like to have overset
our ship, before we could take in our sails. And therefore in all such
semblances it is great wisdom to carry a short sail, or to take in all
sails.

Here we found what the Indians forwarned us of; Note.
for they have great insight in the change of weather, and besides have secret
dealing with the Prince of Darkness, who many times declares unto them
things to come; By this means and other witch-crafts, which he teaches them,
he possesses them, and causes them to do what pleases him.

Within half an hour it began to thunder and rain, with so much wind as we
were forced to lie a hull, and so dark, that we saw nothing, but when the
lightning came. This being one of the narrowest reache^ of all the Straits, we
were forced, every glass, to open a little of our fore-sayle, to cast about
our ships head: any man may conceive if the night seemed long unto us, what
desire we had to see the day. In fine, Phoebus with his beautiful face
lightened our Hemisphere, and rejoiced our hearts (having driven above twenty
four leagues in twelve hours lying a hull: whereby, is to be imagined the
force of the wind and current.)

We set our fore-sayle, and returned to our former harbor; from whence, within
three or four days, we set sail again with a fair wind, which continued
with us till we came within a league of the mouth of the Strait, here the
^inde took us again contrary, and forced us to return again to our former
port; where being ready to anchor, the wind scanted with us in such manner, as
we were forced to make a bourd. In which time, the wind and tide put us so
far to lee-wards, that we could by no means seize it: So we determined to go
to Elizabeth Bay, but before we came at it, the night overtooke us: and this
reach being dangerous and narrow, we durst neither hull, nor try, or turn to
and again with a short sail, and therefore bare along in the midst of the
channel, till we were come into the broad reach, then lay a hull till the
morning.

When we set sail and ran along the coast, seeking with our boat some place
to anchor in; some four leagues to the West-wards of Cape Froward, we found a
goodly bay; which we named English bay: English Bay.
where anchored, we presently went a shore, and found a goodly River of fresh
water, and an old Cannoa broken to pieces, and some two or three of the houses
of the Indians, with pieces of Seal stinking ripe. These houses are made in
fa^hion of an Oven seven or eight foot broad, with boughs of trees, and
covered with other boughs, as our Summer houses; and doubtless do serve them
but for the Summer time, when they come to fish, and profit themselves of the
Sea. For they retire themselves in the Winter into the Country, where it is
more temperate, and yields better sustenance: for on the Main of the
Straits, we neither saw beast, nor foul, Sea foul excepted, and a kind of
Blacke-bird, and two hoggs toward the beginning of the Straites.

Here our ship being well moored, we began to supply our wood and water, that
we had spent. Which being a days work, and the wind during many days
contrary, I endeavored to keep my people occupied, to divert them from the
imagination which some had conceived; Sloth cause of imagination.
that it behooved, we should return to Brasill and winter there, and so shoot
the Straites in the spring of the year.

So one day, we rowed up the River, with our boat and light horseman, to
discover it, and the inland: where having spent a good part of the day, and
finding should water, and many Trees fallen thwart it, and little fruit of our
labor, nor any thing worth the noting, we returned.

Another day, we trained our people ashore, being a goodly sandy Bay:
another, we had a hurling of Batchelers against married men; This day we were
busied in wrestling, the other in shooting; so we were never idle, neither
thought we the time long.

SECT. XXXIIII.
AFter we had past here some seven or eight days, one Evening with a flawe
from the shore, our Ship drove off into the channel, and before we could get
up our Anchor, and set our sails, we were driven so far to lee-wards, that
we could not recover into the bay; and night coming on, with a short sail,
we beat off and on till the morning. At the break of the day conferring with
the Captain and Master of my ship, what was best to be done, we resolved to
seek out Tobias Coue, Tobias Cove.
which lies over against Cape Fryo, on the Southern part of the Straites,
because in all the reaches of the Straites (for the most part) the wind
blows trade, and therefore little profit to be made by turning to winde-wards.
And from the Islands of the Pengwins to the end of the Straites toward the
south Sea, there is no anchoring in the channel; and if we should be put to
lee-wards of this Coue, we had no succor till we came to the Islands of
Pengwins; and some of our Company which had bin with master Thomas Candish in
the Voyage in which he died, and in the same Coue many weeks, undertook to be
our Pilots thither. Whereupon we bare up, being some two leagues thither,
having so much wind as we could scarce lie by it with our course and bonnet of
each; but bearing up before the wind, we put out our Topsayles and
Spritsayle, and within a little while the wind began to fail us, and
immediately our Ship gave a mighty blow upon a Rock, Setting of the Ship
upon a Rock.
and stuck fast upon it. And had we had but the fourth part of the wind,
which we had in all the night past, but a moment before we struck the Rock,
our Ship, doubtless, with the blow had broken her self all to pieces. But
our provident and most gracious God which commands wind and Sea, watched
over us, and delivered us with his powerful hand from the unknown danger and
hidden destruction, that so we might praise him for his fatherly bounty and
protection, and with the Prophet David say, Except the Lord keep the City,
the watchmen watch in vain; for if our God had not kept our Ship, we had
bin all swallowed up alive without help or redemption, and therefore he for
his mercies sake grant that the memorial of his benefits, do never depart
from before our eyes, and that we may evermore praise him for our wonderful
deliverance, and his continual providence by day and by night.

My company with this Accident were much amazed, The company dismayed.
and not without just cause. Immediately we used our endeavor to free our
selves, and with our boats ^ounded round about our Ship; in the mean time
assaying our pumpe, to know if our Ship made more water then her ordinary,
Diligence to (...) it.
we found nothing increased, and round about our Ship deep water, saving
under the mid-shippe, for she was a floa^e a bead and a ^terne* and bearing
some fathom before the main Must, and in^o other part, was like to be our
destruction; for being ^bbing water, the weight in the head and stern by
failing of the water began to open her plankes in the midst; and upon the
upper Deck they were gone one from another some two fingers, some more; which
we sought to ease and remedy by lightning of her burden* and throwing into the
Sea all that came to hand; and laying out an Anchor, we sought to wend her off:
and such was the wa^ and force we put to the Capsten and Tackles fastened upon
the (...), that we plucked the ring of the Anchor out of the eye, but after
recovered it, though not serviceable.

All our labor was fruitless, till God was pleased that the flood came, To
the laborious God propitious,
and then we had her off with great joy and comfort, when finding the current
favo^^able with us, we stood over to English bay* and serching it, ^^e a^chored
there, having been some three hours upon the Rock* and wi^h the blow, as
after we saw when our Ship was brought a ground in Peric^ (which is the Port of
Panama) a great part of her sheathing was beaten off on both sides in her
Bulges, and some four foot long and a foot square of her false stem,
joining to the Keele, wrested a cross, like unto a Hogs yoke, which
hindered her sailing very much.

Here we gave God praise for our deliverance, and therefor praised.
and afterward procured to supply our wood and water, which we had thrown
overbourd to case our Ship, which was not much: that supplied, it pleased God
(who is not ever angry) to look upon us with comfort, and to send us a fair
and large wind, and so we set Sail once again, in hope to disemboke the
Strait, but some dozen leagues before we came to the mouth of it, the wind
changed, and forced us to seek out some Cove or Bay, with our Boats to ride
in near at hand, that we might not be forced to return far back into the
Straites.

They sounded a Cove some sixteen leagues from the mouth of the Strait, which
after we called Crabby Cove. Crabby Cove.
It brooked his name well for two causes; the one for that all the water was
full of a small kind of redd Crabbes, the other, for the crabbed mountains
which over-topped it; a third, we might add, for the crabbed entertainment it
gave us. In this Cove we anchored, but the wind freshing in, and three or four
hills over-topping (like Sugar-loaues) altered and straightned the passage of
the wind in such manner, as forced it down with such violence in flawes and
furious blusterings, as was like to over-set our Ship at an Anchor, and
caused her to drive, and us to weigh; but before we could weigh it, she was
so'nere the Rocks, and the puffes and gusts of wind so sudden and uncertain,
sometimes scant, sometimes large, that it forced us to cut our Cable, and yet
dangerous if our Ship did not cast the right way. Here necessity, not being
subject to any law, forced us to put our selves into the hands of him that was
able to deliver us. We cut our Cable and Sail all in one instant; And God to
show his power and gracious bounty toward us, was pleased that our Ship
cast the contrary way toward the shore, seeming that he with his own hand did
wend her about; for in less then her length, she flatted, and in all the
Voyage but at that instant, she flatted with difficulty, for that she was
long, the worst property she had. On either side we might see the Rocks
under us, and were not half a Ships length from the shore, and if she had
once touched, it had been impossible to have escaped.

Magnified ever be our Lord God, which delivered Jonas out of the Whales belly;
and his Apostle Peter from being overwhelmed in the waves; and us from so
certain perishing.

SECT. XXXV.
FRom hence we returned to Blanches Bay, and there Anchored, expecting Gods
good will and pleasure. Here began the bitterness of the time to increase
with blustering and sharp winds, accompani^d with rain and sleeting Snow, and
my people to be dismayde again, in manifesting a desire to return to Brasill,
which I would never consent unto, no, no^ so much as to hear of.

And all men are to take care, that they go not one foot back, more then is
of mere force; for I have not seen, Voyages ^verthroune by pretenses.
that any who have yielded thereunto, but presently they have returned home. As
in the Voyage of master Edward Fontom, which the Earl of Cumberland set forth,
to his great charge. As also in that of master Thomas Candish, Edward F^nton
and master Thomas Cand^sh.
in which he dyed. Both which pretended to shoot the Straites of Magelan, and
by persuasion of some ignorant persons, being in good possibility, were
brought to consent to return to Brasill, to Winter, and after in the Spring to
attempt the passing of the Strait again. None of them made any abode in
Brasill; for presently as soon as they looked homeward, one, with a little
blustering wind takes occasion to loose company; another complains that he
wants victuals; another, that his ship is leake; another, that his mastes,
sails, or cordidge fails him. So the willing never want probable reasons to
further their pretenses. As I saw once (being but young, and more bold then
experimented) in Anno 1582. in a Voyage, under the charge of my Uncle William
Hawkins of Plymouth, Master William Hawkins.
Esquire, in the Indies, at the wester end of the Island of San Ivan de
Portorico. One of the Ships (called the Bark bonner) being somewhat leake,
the Captain complained that she was not able to endure to England; whereupon a
Counsel was called, and his reasons heard, and allowed. So it was concluded,
that the Victual, Munition, and what was serviceable, should be taken out of
her, and her men divided amongst our other Ships; the Hull remaining to be
sunk, or burned.

To which, I never spoke word till I saw it resolved; being my part rather to
learn, then to advise. But seeing the fatal sentence given, and suspecting
that the Captain made the matter worse then it was, rather upon policy to
come into another Ship, which was better of Sail, then for any danger they
might run into. With as much reason as my capacity could reach unto, I
dissuaded my Uncle privately; And urged, that seeing we had profited the
Adventurers nothing, we should endeavor to preserve our principal;
especially, having men and victuals. But seeing I prevayle^ not, I went
further, and offered to find out in the same Ship, and others, so many men,
as with me would be content to carry her home, giving us the third part of the
value of the ship, as she should be valued at, at her return, by four
indifferent persons; and to leave the Vice Admiral, which I had under my
charge, and to make her Vice Admiral.

Whereupon, it was condescended, that we should all go aboard the Ship, and
that the^e it should be determined. The Captain thought himself somewhat
touched in Reputation, and so would not that further trial should be made of
the matter; Saying, that if another man was able to carry the Ship into
England, he would in no case leave her; neither would he forsake her till she
sunk under him.

The General commended him for his resolution, and thanked me for my offer,
tending to the general good; my intention being to force those who for gain
could undertake to carry her home, should also do it, gratis, according to
their Obligation. Thus, this leake-ship went well into England; where, after
she made many a good Voyage in nine years, wherein she was employed to and
fro; and no doubt, would have served many more, had she not been laid up, and
not used, falling into the hands of those which knew not the use of Shipping.
It were large to recount the Voyages, and worthy Enterprises, overthrown by
this policy, with the Ships which have thereby gone to wrack.

SECT. XXXVI.
BY this and the like experiences, Danger to hearken unto reasons of return^.
remembering and knowing, that, if once I consented to turn but one foot
back, I should overthrow my Voyage, and loose my reputation, I resolved rather
to loose my life, then to give ear to such prejudicial Counsel; And so as
the Weather gave leave, we entertained our selves the first days in necessary
works, and after in making of Coal, (for Wood was plentiful, and no man
would commence an action of wast against us) with intent (the wind continuing
long contrary) to see, if we could remedy any of our broken Anchors; a Forge
I had in my Ship, and of five Anchors which we brought out of England, there
remained but one that was serviceable.

In the Islands of Pengwins, we lost one; in Crabbie Cove, another; of a third,
upon another occasion, we broke an arm; and the fourth, on the Rock had the
eye of his ring broken. This (one day devising with my self) I made to serve,
without working him a new. Which when I took first in hand, all men thought it
ridiculous: but in fine, we made it in that manner so serviceable, as till our
ship came to Callaw, which is the Port of Lyma, she scarce used any other
Anchor; and when I came from Lyma to Panama, which was three years after, I
saw it serve the Admiral in which I came, (a Ship of above five hundredth
tons) without other art or addition, then what my own invention contrived.

And for that in the like necessiti^, or occasion, others may profit themselves
of the industry, The mending of an unserviceable Anchor.
I will recount the manner of the forging our eye without fire, or iron. It was
in this sort.

From the eye of the shanke, about the head of the cross, we gave two turns
with a new strong Halser, betwixt three and four inches, giving a reasonable
allowance for that, which should be the eye, and served in stead of the ring;
then we fastened the two ends of the Halser, so as in that part it was as
strong, as in any other, and with our Capsten stretched the two byghtes, that
every part might bear proportionably; then armed we all the Halser round
about, with six yarne Synnets, and likewise the shanke of the Anchor, and the
head with a smooth Matt made of the same Synnet: this done, with an inch Rope,
we woolled the two byghtes to the shanke, from the cross to the eye, and that
also which was to serve for the ring, and fitted the stock accordingly. This
done, those who before derided the invention, were of opinion, that it would
serve for a need; only they put one difficulty, that with the fall or pitch
of the Anchor in hard ground, with his weight he would ^ut the Halser in sunder
on the head; for prevention whereof, we placed a panch (as the Mariners term
it) upon the head of the Anchor, with whose softness this danger was
prevented, and the Anchor past for serviceable.

Some of our idle time we spent in gathering the bark and fruit of a certain
tree, Entertainment o^ time, to avoid idleness,
which we found in all places of the Straites, where we sound trees. This tree
carries his fruit in clusters like a Hawthorne, but that it is green, each
berry of the bigness of a Pepper corn, and every of them containing within
four or five graynes, twice as big as a Musterd-seed, which broken, are
white within, as the good Pepper, and bite much like it, but hotter. The bark
of this tree, has the savor of all kind of Spices together, most comfortable
to the stomach, and held to be better then any Spice whatsoever; And for that
a learned Countryman of ours Doctor Turner, has written of it, by the name of
Winters bark, In gathering of Winter^ Bark.
what I have said may suffice. The leaf of this tree is of a whitish green,
and is not unlike to the Aspen leaf.

Other whiles we entertained our selves in gathering of Pearls out of Mussels,
whereof there are abundance in all places, from Cape Froward, to the end of
the Straites.

The Pearls are but of a bad color, Of Pearls.
and small, but it may be that in the great Mussels in deeper water, the
Pearls are bigger, and of greater value; of the small seed Pearl, there was
great quantity, and the Mussels were a great refreshing unto us; for they were
exceeding good, and in great plenty. And here let me crave pardon if I err,
seeing I disclaim from being a naturalist, by delivering my opinion touching
the breeding of these Pearls, which I think to be of a far different nature
and quality to those found in the East and West Indies, which are found in
Oysters* growing in the shell, under the ruff of the Oyster, some say of the
dew, which I hold to be some old Philosophers conceit, for that it cannot be
made probable, how the dew should come into the Oyster; and if this were true,
then, questionless, we should have them in our Oysters, as in those of the
East and West India's; but those Oysters, were, by the Creator, made to bring
forth this rare fruit, all their shells, being (to look to) pearl it self.
And the other pearls found in our Oysters and Mussels, in diverse parts, are
engendered out of the fatness of the fish, in the very substance of the fish,
so that in some Mussels, have been found twenty, and thirty, in several
parts of the fish, and these not perfect in color, nor clearenes, as those
found in the Pearle-Oysters, which are ever perfect in color and clearenes,
like the Sun in his rising; and therefore called Oriental, and not (as is
supposed) because out of the East, for they are as well found in the West, and
no way inferior to those of the East Indies.

Other fish, be^ides Seals, and Crabbes, like Shrimpes, and one Whale with two
or three Porpusses, we saw not in all the Straites; here we made also a
survay of our victuals; and opening certain Barrels of Oaten meal, we found
a great part of some of them, as also of our Pipes and Fatts of bread, eaten
and consumed by the Ratts; doub^lesse, a fifth part of my Company, did not eat
so much, as these devoured, as we found daily in coming to spend any of our
provisions.

When I came to the Sea, it was not supected, that I had a Ratt in my ship;
Prevention of Ra^s.
but with the bread in Caske, which we transported our of the Hawke, and the
going to and again of our boats unto our prise, (though we had diverse Catts
and used other preventions) in a small time they multiplied in such a manner, as
is incredible; It is one of the general calamities of all long voyages; and
would be carefully prevented, as much as may be. For besides that which they
consume of the best victuals, they eat the sails; and neither pack, nor
chest, is free from their surprises. I have known them to make a hole in a
pipe of water; and saying the pumpe, have put all in fear, doubting least some
leake had been sprung upon the ship. The Calamities they bring to a ship.


Moreover, I have heard credible persons report, that ships have been put in
danger by them to be sunk, by a hole made in the bulge. All which is easily
remedied at the first, but if once they be somewhat increased, with difficulty
they are to be destroyed. And although I propounded a reward for every Ratt
which was taken, and sought means by poison, and other inventions to consume
them, yet their increase being so ordinary and many; we were not able to
clear our selves from them.

SECT. XXXVII.
AT the end of fourteen days, one Evening being calm, and a goodly clear
in the Easter-boord, I willed our Anchor to be weyed, Backwardnes in the
Company,
and determined to go into the channel, whereof ensued a murmuring amongst my
company, who were desirous to see the wind settled before we put out of the
Harbor: and in part they had reason, considering how we had been canvased
from place to place; yet on the other side, if we went not out before night,
we should loose the whole nights sailing, and all the time which we should
spend in warping out; which would be, doubtless, a great part of the fore-noone.
And although the Master signified unto me, the disposition of my people, and
Master Henry Courton (a discreet and virtuous Gentleman, and my good friend,
who in all the voyage was ever an especial furtherer of all that ever I
ordained or proposed) in this occasion sought to divert me, that all but my
self, were contrarily inclined to that, which I thought fit: and though the
common saying be, and the consequences thereof.
that it is better to err with many, then all contradicting, alone to hit the
right way, yet truth told me, this proverb to be falsely founded; for that
it was not to be understood, that for erring it is better, but because it is
supposed that by hitting a man shall get emulation of the contradictors, I
encoun^ered it with another, that says, better to be envied then pitied, and
well considering, that (being out of the Harbor, if the wind took us
contrary) to go to Elizabeth Bay was better then to be in the Port, (for a
man must of force warpe in and out of it) and in the time that the Ship could
be brought forth into the Channel (the wind being good) a man might come
from Elizabeth Bay to the Port, and that there we should have the wind first,
being more to the East-wardes, and in an open Bay, and moreover might set sail
in the night, if the wind should rise in the Evening, or in the Night; whereas,
in the Port, of force, we must wait the light of the Day. I made my self
deaf to all murmurings, and caused my command to be put in execution, and,
doubtless, it was Gods gracious inspiration, as by the event was seen; for
being gotten into the Channel, within an hour, the wind came good, and we
sailed merrily on our Voyage; and by the break of the day, we had the mouth
o^ the Straites open, and about four of the Clock in the afternoon, we were
thwart of Cape Desire; which is the westermost part of the Land on the Souther
side of the Straites.

SECT. XXXVIII.
HEre such as have command may behold the many miseries that befall them,
Advertisements ^or C^mmanders.
not only by unexpected Accidents and mischances, but also by contradictions
and murmurs of their own people, of all calamities the greatest which can
befall a man of discretion and valor, and as difficult to be overcome; for, to
require reason of the common sort, is, as the Philosopher says, To seek
Counsel of a madd man. Herein, as I said before, they resemble a stiff necked
Horse, who taking the bridle in his teeth, carries the rider whether he
pleases; so once possessed with any imagination, no reason is able to convince
them. The best remedy I can propound, is to wish our Nation in this point to
be well advised, and in especial, all those that follow the Sea, ever having
before their eyes the ancient Discipline of our Predecessors; who in
conformiti^ and obedience to their Chiefes and Commanders, have been a mirror
to all other Nations, with patience, silence, and suffering, The advantage of
obedience.
putting in execution what they have been Commanded, and thereby gained the
blessings due to such virtues, and leaving to posterity, perpetual memories
of their glorious Victories. A just recompense for all such as Conquer
themselves, and subject their most specious wills, to the will of their
Superiors.

SECT. XXXIX.
IN apprehension whereof at land, I cannot forbear the Discipline thereof, as
at this day, and in the days of late memory, it has been practiced in the
States of Flaunders, France, and Brittayne, where as the Spaniards, Wallons,
Switzers, and other Nations, are daily full of murmurings and mutenies, upon
every slight occasion.

The like I also wish should be imitated by those, who follow the Sea, that is,
that those who are subject to Command, presume no further then to that which
belongs unto them; Qui nescit parere, nescit imperare, I speak this, for
that I have sometimes seen inexpert and ignorant persons, yea, unable to judge
of any point appertaining to government, or the guide of a Ship, or company
of men, presuming upon their fine wits, and enamored of their own conc^its,
contradict and dispute against gra^e, wise, and experimented Governors: many
forward fellows, thinking themselves better worthy to command, then to be
commanded. Such persons I advise not to go, but where they may command;
Advertis^ments ^or young Servi^ors.
or else looking before they leapt, to consider well, under whom they place
themselves, seeing (for the most part) it is in their choice, to choose a
Governor from whom they may expect satisfaction; but choice being once made,
to resolve with the patient wife in History; That, that day wherein she
married her self to an husband, that very day she had no longer any will,
more then the will of her husband. And so he that by Sea or Land places
himself to serve in any action, must make reckoning that the time the journey
endures* he has no other will, nor dispose of himself, then that of his
Commander for in the Governors hand is all power, to recompense and reward, to
punish or forgive.

Likewise those who have charge and Command, must sometimes with patience or
sufferance, overcome their fury and misconceits, according to occasions; for it
is a great point of wisdom, especially in a general murmuring, where the
cause is just, or that (as often times it happens) any probable accident may
divert the minds of the discontented, and give hope of remedy, or future event
may produce Repentance, to turn (as they say) the deaf ear, and to wink at
that a man sees. As it is sa^d of Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, and
King of Spain; who rounding his Camp, one night, disguised, heard some
Soldiers rail, and speak evil of him; those which accompanied him were of
opinion, that he should use some exemplary punishment upon them; not so, says
he, for these now vexed with the miseries they suffer, ease their hearts with
their tongues; but if occasion present it self, they will not stick to
sacrifice their lives for my safety. A resolution worthy so prudent a
Commander, and so magnanimous a Prince.

The like is written of Fabius Maximus, the famous Romayne, who endured the
attribute of Coward, with many other infamies, rather then he would hazard the
safety of his Country by rash and incertaine provocations.

No less worthy of perpetual memory was the prudent policy and government
of our English Navy, The patience of the Earl of Nottingham.
in Anno 1588. by the worthy Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of
England; who, in like case, with mature and experimented knowledge, patiently
withstood the instigations of many Courageous and Noble Captains, who would
have persuaded him to have laid them aboard; but well he foresaw that the enemy
had an Army aboard; he none; that they exceeded him in number of Shipping, and
those greater in Bulk, stronger built, and higher molded, so that they who
with such advantage fought from above, might easily distress all opposition
below; the slaughter peradventure prooving more fatal, then the victory
profitable; by being overthrown he might have hazzarded the Kingdom, whereas
by the Conquest (at most) he could have boasted of nothing but Glory, and an
enemy defeated. But by sufferance, he always advantaged himself of wind and
tide, which was the freedom of our Country, and security of our Navy, with
the destruction of theirs, which in the eye of the ignorant, (who judge all
things by the external appearance) seemed invincible; but truly considered,
was much inferior to ours, in all things of substance, as the event prooved;
for we sunk, spoiled, and took of them many, and they diminished of ours but
one small Pynace, nor any man of name, save only Captain Cock, who dyed with
honor amidst his Company. The greatest damage, that (as I remember) they
caused to any of our Ships, was to the Swallow of her Majesty, which I had
in that action under my Charge, with an Arrow of fire shot into her
Beake-head, which we saw not, because of the sail, till it had burned a hole
in the Rose as big as a man's head: the Arrow falling out, and driving along
by the Ships side, made us doubt of it, which after we discovered.

SECT. XL.
IN many occasions, notwithstanding, it is most prejudicial to dissemble the
reprehension and punishment of murmurings and mutterings, when they carry a
likelihood to grow to a mutenie, Mutenies not always to be winked at.
seem to lean to a faction, or that a person of regard or merit favors
the intention, or contradicts the Justice, etc. and others of like quality;
The prudent Governor is to cut off this Hydra's head in the beginning, and by
prevention to provide remedy with expedition; and this sometimes with absolute
authority, although the best be ever to proceed by Counsel, if necessity and
occasion require not the contrary; for passion many times over-ruleth, but that
which is sentenced and executed by consent, is justified, although sometimes
erroneous. March. 29. 1594.

SECT. XLI.
FRom Cape Desire, some four leagues North-west, lie four Islands, which are
very small, and the middlemost of them is o^ the fashion of a Sugar-loafe. We
were no sooner clear of Cape Desire, and his ledge of Rocks (which lie a
great way off into the Sea) but the wind took us contrary by the North-west;
and so we stood off into the Sea two days and two nights to the Westwards.

In all the Straites it ebbeth and flows more or less, and in many places it
higheth very little water, but in some Bays, where are great indraughts, it
higheth eight or ten foot, and doubtless, further in, more. If a man be
furnished with wood and water, and the wind good, he may keep the main Sea,
and go round about the Straites to the Southwards, and it is the shorter way;
for besides the experience which we made, that all the South part of the
Straites is but Islands, South part of the Straites Islands.
many times having the Sea open, I remember, that Sir Francis Drake told me,
that having short the Straites, a storm took him first at North-west, and
after vered about to the South-west, which continued with him many days, with
that extremity, that he could not open any Sail, and that at the end of the
storm, he found himself in fifty degrees, which was sufficient testimony and
proof, that he was beaten round about the Straites, for the least height of
the Straites is in fifty two degrees and fifty minutes; in which stand the
two entrances or mouths.

And moreover, he said, that standing about, when the wind changed, he was not
well able to double the Southermost Island, and so anchored under the lee of it;
and going ashore, carried a Compass with him, and seeking out the Southermost
part of the Island, cast himself down upon the uttermost point grovelling, Sir
Francis Drake imbraceth the Southermost poin^ of the world.
and so reached out his body over it. Presently he embarked, and then
recounted unto his people, that he had been upon the Southermost known land
in the world, and more ^urther to the Southwards upon it, then any of them,
yea, or any man as yet known. These testimonies may suffice for this truth
unto all, but such as are incredulous, and will believe nothing but what they
see; for my part, I am of opinion, that the Strait is navigable all the year
long, although the best time be in November, December, and January, and then
the winds more favorable, which other times are variable, as ^n all narrow
Seas.

Being some fifty leagues a Sea-boord the Straites, the wind vering to the
West-wards, we cast about to the North-wards; and lying the coast along, shaped
our course for the Island Mocha. M^cha.
About the fifteenth of April, we were thwart of Baldivia, Baldiv^a.
which was then in the hands of the Spaniards, but since the Indians, in Anno
1599. dispossessed them of it, and the Conception; which are two of the most
principal places they had in that Kingdom, and both Ports.

Baldivia, had its name of a Spanish Captain so called, whom afterward the
Indians took Prisoner, and it is said, they required of him the reason why he
came to molest them, and to take their Country from them, having no title nor
right thereunto; he answered, to get Gold; which the barbarous understanding,
caused Gold to be molten, and powered down his throat; saying, Gold was thy
desire, glut thee with it.

It stands in forty degrees, has a pleasant River and navigable; for a Ship
of good burden may go as high up as the City, and is a goodly wood Country.

Here our Beef began to take end, and was then as good, as the day we
departed from England; it was preserved in Pickell, which, though it be more
chargeable, yet the profit pays the charge, in that it is made durable,
contrary to the opinion of many, which hold it impossible, that Beef should be
kept good passing the Equinoctial line. And of our Porke I eat in the house
of Don Beltran de Castro, in Lyma, near four years old, very good, preserved
after the same manner, notwithstanding, it had lost his Pickle long before.

Some degrees before a man come to Baldivia to the South-wards, as Spaniards
have told me, lies the Island Chule, not easily to be discerned from the main;
for he that passes by it, cannot but think it to be the main. It is said to
be inhabited by the Spaniards, but badly, yet rich of gold.

The 19. of April, being Easter-euen, we anchored under the Island Mocha. It
lies in 39. degrees, it may be some four leagues over, and is a high
mountainous hill, but round about the foot thereof, some half league from the
Seashore, it is Champion ground, well inhabited, and manured.

From the Straites to this Island, we found, that either the coast is set out
more westerly then it is, or that, we had a great current, which put us to the
west-wards; for we had not sight of land in three days after. Our reckoning
was to see it, but for that we coasted not the land, I cannot determine,
whether it was caused by the current, or lying of the land. But Spaniards which
have sailed along it, have told me, that it is a bold and safe coast, and
reasonable sounding of it.

In this Island of Mocha we had communication and contratation with the
inhabitants, but with great vigilancie and care; for they and all the people of
Chily, are mortal enemies to the Spaniards, and held us to be of them; and so
esteemed Sir Francis Drake, when he was in this Island, which was the first land
also that he touched on this coast. They used him with so fine a treachery, that
they possessed themselves of all the Oars in his Boat, saving two, and in
striving to get them also, they slew, and hurt all his men; himself who had
fewest wounds, had three, and two of them in the head. Two of his company which
lived long after, had, the one seaventeene; his name was John Bruer, who
afterward was Pilot with master Candish; and the other, above twenty, a
Negro-servant to Sir Francis Drake.

And with me they used a policy, which amongst barbarous people was not to be
imagined, although I wrought sure; Treachery of the Indians.
for I suffered none to treat with me, nor with my people with Arms. We were
armed, and met upon a Rock compassed with water, whether they came to parley
and negotiate. Being in communication with the Casiques, and others, many of
the Indians came to the heads of our Boats, and some went into them. Certain
of my people standing to defend the Boats with their Oars, for that there
went a bad sege, were forced to lay down their Musketts; which the Indians
perceiving, endeavored to fill the barrells with water, taking it out of the
sea in the hollow of their hands. By chance casting mine eye aside, I
discovered their slynesse; and with a truncheon, which I had in mine hand, gave
the Indians three or four good lamskinnes; the Casiques seeing it, began to
give me satisfaction, by using rigor toward those which had been in the
Boats; but I having gotten the refreshing I desired, and all I could hope from
them, would have no further conversation with them. At our first coming, two
of their Casiques (who are their Lords or Kings) came aboard our Ship (we
leaving one of our company ashore as a pledge) whom we feasted in good manner;
they eat well of all that was set before them, and drank better of our Wine:
one of them became a little giddie headed, and marvayled much at our Artillery:
I caused a Piece to be primed, and after to be ^hott off, whereat the one
started, but the other made no show of alteration; after putting them ashore,
laden with toys and trifles, which to them seemed great riches; from all
Ports of the Island, the people came unto us, bringing all such things as they
had, to wit, sheep, Cocks, etc. (from Hens they would not part) and diverse
sorts of fruits, and roots, which they exchanged with us for Knives, Glasses,
Combs, Belles, Beads, Counters, Pinnes, and other trifles. Ex^hanges o^
t^ifles.
We saw little demonstration of Gold or Silver amongst them, though some they
had; and for that we saw they made estimation of it, we would not make
reckoning of it: but they gave us to understand, that they had it from the
Main.

The sheep of this Island are great, O^ Sheep.
good, and fatt; I have not tasted better Mutton any where. They were as ours,
and doubtless of the breed of those, which the Spaniards brought into the
Country. Of the sheep of the Country, we could by no means procure any one,
although we saw of them, and used means to have had of them; for they esteem
them much, as reason wills, serving them for many uses; as in another place,
God willing, I shall declare more at large. They have small store of fish.

This Island is situate in the Province of Arawca, and is held to be peopled
with the most valiant Nation in all Chily, though generally the Inhabitants of
that Kingdom are very courageous.

They are clothed after the manner of antiquity, all of woollen; their
Cassockes made like a Sack, Their apparel,
square, with two holes for the two arms, and one for the head; all open
below, without lining or other art: but of them, some are most curiously
wooven, and in colors, and on both sidesalike.

and housing.
Their houses are made round, in fashion like unto our Pigeon houses, with a
laver in the top, to evacuate the smoke when they make fire.

They brought us a strange kind of Tobacco, made into little cakes, like
Pitch, of a bad smell, with holes through the middle, and so laced many upon a
string. They presented us also with two Spanish Letters, thinking us to be
Spaniards, which were written by a Captain of a Frigate, that some days
before had received courtesy at their hands, and signified the same to the
Governor; wishi^g that the people of the Island would become good subjects to
the King, and that therefore he would receive them into his favor and
protection, and send them some person as Governor; but none of them spoke
Spanish, and so we dealt with them by signs. The people of this Island, as of
all Chily, People (...) Chily.
are of good stature, and well made, and of better countenance then those
Indians which I have seen in many parts. They are of good understanding, and
agilitie, and of great strength; Their weapons are bows, Their weapons.
and arrows and Macanas, their bows short and strong, and their arrows of a
small read, or cane, three quarters of a yard long, with two feathers, and
headed with a flint stone, which is loose, and hurting, the head remains in
the wound, some are headed with bone, and some with hard wood, half burnt in
the fire. We came betwixt the Island and the main; On the south-west part of
the Island lies a great ledge of Rocks, which are dangerous; and it is good to
be careful how to come too near the Island on all parts.

Immediately when they discovered us, both upon the Island, and the Maine, we
might see them make sundry great fires, which were to give advise to the rest
of the people to be in a readiness: for they have continual and mortal war
with the Spaniards, Their hate to the Sp^niards.
and the Ships they see, they believe to be their Enemies. The City
Imperial lies over against this Island, but eight or ten Leagues into the
Country: for all the Sea coast from Baldivia, till 36. Degrees, the Indians
have now (in a manner) in their hands free from any Spaniards.

SECT. XLII.
HAving refreshed our selves well in this Island, for that little time we
stayed, which was some 3. days we set sail with great joy, and with a fair
wind sailed along the coast, and some eight Leagues to the North-wards, we
anchored again in a goodly Bay, and sent our boats ashore, with desire to
speak with some of the Indians of Arawca, and to see, if they would be
content to entertain amity, or to chop and change with us. But all that night
and the next morning appeared not one person, and so we set sail again; and
toward the Evening the wind began to change, and to blow contrary, and that
so much, and the Sea to rise so suddenly, that we could not take in our
boats, without spoiling of them. This storm continued with us ten days
beyond expectation, A cruel storm
for that we thought our selves out of the climate of foul weather, but
truly it was one of the sharpest storms that ever I felt to endure so long.

In this storm, one night haling, up our boats to free the water out of them,
one of our younkers that went into them for that purpose, had not that regard
(which reason required) unto our light horseman: for with haling her up, to
step into her, out of the boat, The important loss of a small vessel.
he split her asunder, and so we were forced to cut her off; which was no
small hearts grief unto me, ^or that I knew, and all my company felt* and
many times lamented the loss of her.

The storm took end, and we shaped our course for the Island of Saint Mary's,
Saint Mary's.
which lies in thirty seven Degrees and forty minutes, and before you come
unto the Island some two leagues, in the trade way lies a rock, which a far
off, seems to be a Ship under sail. This Island is little and low, but
fertile and well peopled, with Indians and some few Spaniards in it. Some ten
leagues to the North-wards of this Island, lies the City Conception, City of
Conc^ption.
with a good Port; from this we coasted along till we came in thirty three
degrees, and forty minutes. In which height lay the Islands of Ivan Fernandes,
Ivan Fernandes
betwixt threescore and fourscore Leagues from the shore, plentiful of fish,
and good for refreshing I purposed for many reasons not to discover my self
upon this coast, Good to avo^d discovery
till we were past Lyma, (otherwise called Cividad de los Reyes, for that it
was entered by the Spaniard the day of the three Kings;) but my Company urged
me so far, that except I should seem in all things to over-beare them, in
not condiscending to that which in the opinion of all (but my self) seemed
profitable and best, I could not but yield unto, though it carried a false
color, as the end proved, for it was our perdition. This all my Company
knows to be true, whereof some are yet living, and can give testimony.

But the Mariner is ordinarily so carried away with the desire of Pillage,
Wilfulness of Mariners.
as sometimes for very appearances of small moment, he loses his voyage, and
many times himself. And so the greedines of spoil, only hoped for in ships
of trade, which go too and fro in this coast, blinded them from forecasting
the peril, whereinto we exposed our voyage, in discovering our selves before
we past the coast of Calla^, which is the Port of Lyma; To be short, we haled
the coast aboard, and that Evening we discovered the Port of Balparizo, which
serves the City of Saint Iago, standing some twenty leagues into the
Country; when presently we descried four ships at an Anchor: They seize
upon 4. Ships.
whereupon we manned, and armed our boat, which rowed toward the Ships:
they seeing us turning in, and fearing that which was, ran a shore with that
little they could save, and leaft us the rest; whereof, we were Masters in a
moment, and had the rifling of all the stor^houses on the shore.

This night, I set a good guard in all the ships, longing to see the light of
the next morning, to put all things in order; which appearing, I began to
survay them, and found nothing of moment, save five hundredth Botozios of Wine,
two or three thousand of Hens, and some refreshing of Bread, Bacon, dried
Beef, Wax, Candles, and other necessaries. The rest of their lading was
plankes, Spares, and Timber, for Lyma, and the valleys, which is a rich trade;
for it has no Timber, but that which is brought to it from other places. They
had also many Packes of Indian Mantles, (but of no value unto us) with much
Tallow, and Manteca de Puerco, and abundance of great new Chests, in which we
had thought to be some great mass of wealth, but opening them, found nothing
but Apples therein; all which was good Merchandise in Lyma, but to us of small
account. The Merchandise on shore, And the warehouses.
in their Storehouses was the like, and therefore in the same predicament. The
owners of the Ships gave us to understand, that at a reasonable price they
would redeem their Ships and loading, which I harkened unto; and so admitted
certain persons which might treat of the matter, and concluded with them for a
small price, rather then to burn them, saving for the greatest, which I
carried with me, more to give satisfaction to my people, then for any other
respect; because they would not be persuaded, but that there was much Gold
hidden in her; otherwise she would have yielded us more then the other three.

Being in this treaty, one morning, at the break of day, came another Ship
touring into the Harbor, and standing into the shore, but was becalmed.
Against her we manned a couple of Boats, and took her before many hours. In
this Ship, They seize upon another Ship,
we had some good quantity of Gold, and some gold.
which she had gathered in Baldivia, and the Conception, from whence she
came. Of this Ship was Pilot, and part owner, Alonso Perezbueno, whom we kept
for our Pilot on this coast; till moved with compassion (for that he was a man
charged with wife and children) we set him a shore betwixt Santa and Truxillo.
Out of this Ship we had also store of good Bacon, and some provision of
Bread, Hens, and other Victual. And for that she had brought us so good a
portion, and her owner continued with us, the better to animate him to play the
honest man (though we trusted him no further then we saw him, for we presently
discovered him to be a cunning fellow) and for that his other partner had lost
the greatest part of Gold, and seemed to be an honest man, as after he prooved
by his thankfulness, in Lyma; we gave them the ship, and the greatest part of
her loading freely.

Here we supplied our want of Anchors, Light Anchors brou^ht from the North S^a,
though not according to that which was requisite, in regard of the burden of
our Ship; for, in the South Sea, the greatest Anchor for a Ship of six or
eight hundredth Tons, is not a thousand weight; partly, because it is little
subject to storms, and partly, because those they had till our coming, were
all brought out of the North sea by land; for they make no Anchors in those
Countries. And the first Artillery they had, And the first Artillery.
was also brought over land; which was small; the carriage and passage ^^om
Nombre de Bios, or Porto Velo to Panama being most difficult and steep, up
hill and down hill, they are all carried upon Negroes backs.

But some years before my imprisonment, they fell to making of Artillery, and
since they forge Anchors also. We furnished our Ship also with a shift of
Sails of Cotton cloth, Sails of Cotton c^oth.
which are far better in that Sea, then any of our double Sails, for that in
all the Navigation of that Sea, they have little rain and few storms, but
where rain and storms are ordinary, they are not good; for with the wett they
grow so stiff, that they cannot be handled.

SECT. XLIII.
I Concluded the ransom of the Ships with an ancient Captain, and of Noble
blood, who had his daughter there, ready to be embarked to go to Lyma, to
serve Donia Teruza de Castro, the Vice-royes wife, and sister to Don Beliran de
Castro. Her apparel and his, with diverse other things which they had embarked
in the greatest Ship, we restored, for the good office he did us, and the
confidence he had of us, coming and going only upon my word; for which he was
ever after thankful, and deserved much more.

Another that treated with me was Captain Ivan Contreres, owner of one of the
Ships, and of the Island Santa Maria, in thirty seven degrees and forty
minutes. In treating of the ransomes, and transporting and lading the
provisions we made choice of, we spent some six or eight days; at the end
whereof, with reputation amongst our enemies, and a good portion toward our
charges, and our Ship as well stored and victualled, as the day we departed
from England, we set sail.

The time we were in this Port, I took small rest, They dep^rt from Lyma,
and so did the Master of our Ship, Hugh Cornish, a most careful, orderly,
and sufficient man, because we knew our own weakness; for entering into the
Harbor, we had but seaventie five men and boys, five Ships to guard, and
every one moored by himself; which (no doubt) if our enemies had known, and
conc^ale their weakness.
they would have wrought some Stratagem upon us; for the Governor of Chily was
there on shore in view of us, an ancient Flanders soldier, and of experience,
wisdom, and valor, called Don Alonso de Soto Mayor, The no^le^es of Alonso
^e Soto.
of the habit of Saint Iago, who was after Captain general in Terra firm,
and wrought all the inventions upon the River of Chagree, and on the shore,
when Sir Francis Drake purposed to go to Panama, in the Voyage wherein he
died; As also at my coming into Spain, he was President in Panama, and there,
and in Lyma, used me with great courtesy, like a noble Soldier, and liberal
Gentleman; he confessed to me after, that he lay in ambush, with three hundredth
horse and foot, to see if at any time we had landed, or neglected our watch,
with Balsas, which is a certain Raffe made of Mastes or Trees fastened
together, to have attempted something against us. But the enemy I feared not so
much as the Wine; The enemy less dangerous then the Wine.
which, notwithstanding all the diligence and prevention I could use day and
night, overthrew many of my people. A foul fault, because too common amongst
Seamen, and deserves some rigorous punishment, with severitie to be executed;
for it has been and is daily the destruction of many good Enterprises, amidst
their best hopes. And besides the ordinary fruits it brings forth, of
beggary, ^hame, and sickness, it is a most deadly sin. A drunkard is unfit
for any government, and if I might be hired with many thousands, I would not
carry with me a man known to put his felicity in that vice, instiling it with
the name of good fellowship; which in most well governed Commonwealths, has
been a sufficient blemish to deprive a man of office, of honor, and
estimation. It wastes our Kingdom more then is well understood, as well by
the infirmities it causes, as by the consumption of wealth, to the
impoverishing of us, and the enriching of other Kingdoms.

And though I am not old, in comparison of other ancient men, I can remember
Spanish wine rarely to be found in this Kingdom. Then hot burning Fevers were
not known in England, Spanish Wines and burning Fevers unknown in England.
and men lived many more years. But since the Spanish Sacks have been common
in our Tavernes, which (for conservation) is mingled with Lyme in its making,
our Nation complains of Calenturas, of the Stone, the Dropsy, and infinite
other Diseases, not heard of before this Wine came in frequent use, or but very
seldom. To confirm which my belief, I have heard one of our learned
Physicians affirm, that he thought there died more persons in England of
drinking Wine, and using hot Spices in their meats and drinks, then of all
other diseases. Besides, there is no year, in which it wastes not two
millions of Crowns of our substance by convayance into foreign Countries, And
consumes treasure.
which in so well a governed Commonwealth, as ours is acknowledged to be,
through the whole world, in all other constitutions, in this only remains to
be looked into, and remedied. Doubtless, whosoever should be the Author of
this reformation, would gain with God an everlasting reward, and of his
Country a Statua of Gold, for a perpetual memory of so meritorious a Work.

SECT. XLIIII.
A League or better before a man discover this Bay to the South-wards,
Description of the Bay.
lies a great Rock, or small Island, near the shore; under which, for a need,
a man may ride with his Ship. It is a good mark, and sure sign of the Port,
and discovering the Bay a man must give a good birth to the point of the
Harbor; for it has perilous Rocks lying a good distance off. It neither
ebbeth nor flows in this Port, nor from this, till a man come to Guayaquill,
which is three degrees from the Equinoctial line to the South-wards; Let this
be considered. It is a good Harbor for all winds, that partake not of the
North; for it runs up South and by West, and South South-west, but it has
much foul ground.

In one of these Ships we found a new devise for the stopping of a sudden
Leake in a Ship under water, without board, A new devise for stopping a Leake
without board.
when a man cannot come to it within board; which eased us of one, that we had
from the day we departed from Detford, caused by the touching a-ground of our
Ship at low water, being laden, and in the neape streams, coming a-ground
in the stern, the force of the tide caused to cast thwart, wrested her slegg,
and that in such sort, as it made a continual Leake, though not much. And for
that others may profit themselves of the like, I think it good to set down
the manner of it; which was, taking a round wicker Basket, and to fill it with
pieces of a Iunke or Rope, chopped very small, and of an inch long, and after
tozed all as Oacombe; then the Basket is to be covered with a Nett, the meshes
of it being at the least two inches square, and after to be tied to a long Pike
or Pole, which is to go a cross the Baskets mouth* and putting it under
water, care is to be had to keep the Baskets mouth toward the Ships side;
if the Leake be any thing great, the Oacombe may be somewhat longer, and it
carries likelihood to do good, and seems to be better then the stitching of
a Bonnet, or any other diligence, which as yet I have seen.

Another thing I noted of these Ships, which would be also used by us; that
every Ship carries with her a spare Rudder, Spare Rudders.
and they have them to hang and vnhange with great facility: and besides, in
some part of the Ship, they have the length, breadth, and proportion of the
Rudder marked out, for any mischance that may befall them; which is a very good
prevention.

Ten leagues to the North-wards of this Harbor, is the bay of Quintera, Bay
of Quintera.
where is good anchoring, but an open bay; where master Thomas Candish (for the
good he had done to a Spaniard, in bringing him out of the Straits of Magellan,
where, otherwise, Nota verum hispanum.
he had perished with his company) was by him betrayed, and a dozen of his men
taken and slain: But the judgment of God left not his ingratitude unpunished;
for, in the fight with us, in the Vice Admiral, he was wounded and maimed in
that manner, as three years after, I saw him beg with Crutches, and in that
miserable estate, as he had been better dead, then alive.

From Balparizo, we sailed directly to Coquinbo, Coquinbo.
which is in thirty degrees, and coming thwart the place, we were becalmed,
and had sight of a ship: but for that she was far off, and night at hand,
she got from us, and we having wind entered the Port, thinking to have had
some shipping in it; but we lost our labor: and for that the Town was half
a League up in the Country, and we not manned for any matter of attempt,
worthy prosecution, we made no abode on the shore; but presently set sail for
the Peru. This is the best Harbor that I have seen in the south sea, it is
land-locked for all winds, and capeable of many ships; but the ordinary place
where the ships lade, and unlade, and accommodate themselves, is betwixt a
Rock, and the Main on the wester-side; some half a league up within the
entrance of the Port, which lies south and south, and by East and North, and
by west.

In the in-country, directly over the Port, is a round piked hill, like a sugar
loaf, and before the entrance on the southern point of the port coming in,
out of the Sea, it is a great Rock, a good birth from the shore; and these are
the marks of the Port as I remember.

Being clear of this Port, we shaped our course for Arica, and leaft the
Kingdoms of Chily, Arica in Chily, much commended.
one of the best Countries that the Sun shines on: for it is of a temperate
clymate, and abounding in all things necessary, for the use of man, with
infinite rich mines of Gold, Copper, and sundry other metals.

The poorest houses in it, by report of their Inhabitants, have of their own
store, bread, wine, flesh, and fruit; which is ^o plentiful, that of their
superfluity they supply other parts; Sundry kinds of Cattle: as Horses,
Goats, and Oxen brought thither by the Spaniards, For all sorts of fru^tes.
are found in heardes of thousands, wild, and without owner; besides those of
the Country, which are common to most parts of America: in some of which are
found the Bezar stones, and those very good and great.

Amongst others they have little beasts, like unto a Squirrell, but that he
is gray, his skin is the most delicate soft, and curious furre that I have
seen, and of much estimation, (as is reason) in the Peru; few of them come
into Spain, because difficult to be come by, for that the Princes and Nobles
lay wait for them, they call this beast Chinchilla, and of them they have
great abundance.

All fruits of Spain, they have in great plenty, saving stone fruit, and
Almonds: ^or in no part of the Indies, have I known, that Plumbes, Cherries,
or Almondes have borne fruit: but they have certain little round Cocos, as
those of Brasill, of the bigness of a Wall-nut, which is as good as an Almond:
besides, it has most of the fruits natural to America, of which in another
place I shall (God wi^ling) speak particularly.

The Gold they gather, And plenty of Gold.
is in two manners; the one is washing the earth in great Trayes of wood in
many waters; as the earth wastes away, the Gold in the bottom remains. The
other is, by force of Art, to draw it out of the Mines, in which they find it.
In most parts of the Country, the earth is mingled with Gold; for the
Butizias (in which the Wine was) which we found in Balpharizo, had many
sparks of Gold shining in them. Of it the Goldsmiths I carried with me (for
like purposes) made experience.

When Baldivia and Arawca were peaceable, they yielded greatest plenty, and
the best: but now, their greatest Mines are in Coquinbo; as also the Mines of
Copper, which they carry to the Peru, and sell it better cheap, then it is
ordinarily sold in Spain.

The Indians knowing the end of the Spaniards molestation, to be principally
the desire of their riches, have enacted, that no man, upon pain of death, do
gather any Gold. The Indians forbid the search of gold.


In Coquinbo it rayneth seldom, but every shower of rain, is a shower of Gold
unto them; Every shower, a shower of gold.
for with the violence of the water falling from the Mountains, it brings
from them the Gold; and besides, gives them water to wash it out, as also for
their ingenious to work; so that ordinarily every week they have Processions
for rain.

In this Kingdom they make much linen and wool^en Cloth, Linen and woollen
cloth made in Coquinbo.
and great store of Indian Mantles, with which they furnish other parts, but
all is course stuff. It has no Silk, nor Iron, except in Mines, and those as
yet not discovered. Pewter is well esteemed, and so are finne linen, woollen
cloth, Haberdashers wares, edge-tooles, and Arms, or Munition.

It has his Governor, and Audiencia, with two Bishops: the one of Saint
Iago, the other of the Imperial; all under the Viceroy, Audiencia, and
Primate of Lyma. Saint Iago is the Metropolitan and head of the Kingdom, and
the seat of Justice, which has his appellation to Lyma.

The people are industrious and ingenious, of great strength, and invincible
courage; as in the wars, The valor of the Arawcans.
which they have sustained above forty years continually against the
Spaniards, has been experienced. For confirmation whereof, I will allege
only two proofs of many; the one was of an Indian Captain, taken prisoner by
the Spaniards; and for that, he was of name and known to have done his devoire
against them, they cut off his hands, thereby intending to disenable him to
fight any more against them; but he returning home, desirous to revenge this
injury, to maintain his liberty, with the reputation of his Nation, and to
help to banish the Spaniard, with his tongue entreated and incited them to
persevere in their accustomed valor and reputation; abasing the enemy, and
advancing his Nation; condemning their contraries of Cowardlinesse, and
confirming it by the cruelty used with him, and others his companions in their
mishaps; showing them his arms without hands, and naming his brethren, whose
half feet they had cut off, because they might be unable to sit on horseback
with force, arguing, that if they feared them not, they would not have used so
great inhumanitie; for fear produces cruelty, the companion of Cowardice.
Thus encouraged he them to fight for their lives, limbs, and liberty,
choosing rather to die an honorable death fighting, then to live in servitude,
as fruitless members in their Commonwealth. Thus, using the office of a
Sergeant Mayor, and having laden his two stumpes with bundles of Arrows,
succored those, who in the succeeding battle had their store wasted, and
changing himself from place to place, animated and encouraged his Countri-men,
with such comfortable persuasions, as it is reported, and credibly believed,
that he did much more good with his words, and presence, without striking a
stroke, then a great part of the Army did with fighting to the utmost.

The other proof is, that such of them as fight on horseback, are but
slightly armed, for that their armor is a Beasts hide, fitted to their body,
green, and after worn till it be dry and hard. He that it is best armed, has
him double; yet any one of them with these Arms, and with his Lance, will
fight hand to hand with any Spaniar^ armed from head to foot. And it is
credibly reported, that an Indian being wounded through the body by a Spaniards
Lance, with his own hands has crept on upon the Lance, and come to grapple
with his adversary, and both fallen to the ground together. By which is seen
their resolution and invincible courage, and the desire they have to maintain
their reputation and liberty.

SECT. XLV.
LEaving the coast of Chily, and running toward that of Peru, my company
required the third of the Gold we had gotten, which of right belonged unto
them; wherein I desired to give them satisfaction of my just intention, but not
to devide it till we came home, and so persuaded them with the best reasons I
could; alleging the difficulty to devide the bars, and being parted, how
easy it was to be robbed of them, and that many would play away their
portions, and come home as beggarly as they came out; and that the shares could
not be well made before our return to England, because every man's merits
could not be discerned nor rewarded till the end of the Voyage. In conclusion,
it was resolved, and agreed, that the things of price, as Gold and Silver,
should be put into Chests with three keys, whereof I should have the one, the
Master another, and the third some other person, whom they should name. This
they yielded unto with great difficulty, and not without reason; for the bad
correspondence used by many Captains and owners with their companies upon
their return, defrauding them, or diminishing their rights, has hatched many
iealousies, and produced many disorders, with the overthrow of all good
discipline and government, as experience teaches; for where the Soldier and
Mariner is unpaid, or defrauded, what service or obedience can be required at
his hands?

The covetous Captain, or Commander, Most men vnwillin^ to follow covetous
Commande^s.
loses the love of those under his charge; yea, though he have all the parts
besides required in a perfect Commander, yet if he prefer his private profit
before justice, hardly will any man follow such a Leader, especially, in our
Kingdom, where more absolute authority and trust is committed to those who
have charge, then in many other Countries.

And therefore in election of Chieftaines, care would be had in examination of
this point. The shameful fruits whereof (found by experience of many years,
wherein I have wandered the world) I leave to touch in particular; because I
will not diminish the reputation of any. But this let me manifest, that there
have bin and are certain persons, who, before they go to Sea, either rob
part of the provisions, The mischiefs of corrupt, or scant^e provisions.
or in the buying, make penurious, unwholesome, and avaritious penny-worths; and
the last I hold to be the lea^t; for they rob only the Victuallers and
owners, but the others steal from owners, victuallers, and company, and are
many times the only overthrowers of the Voyage; for the company thinking
themselves to be stored with four or six months Victuals, upon survay, they
find their Bread, Beef, or Drink short, yea, perhaps all, and so are forced
to seek home in time of best hopes, and employment. This mischief is most
ordinary in great actions.

Lastly, some are so cunning, that they not only make their voyage by robbing
before they go to Sea, but o^ that also which comes home. Such gamsters, a
wise man of our Nation resembled to the Mill on the River of Thames, for
Grinding both with flood and ebb; So, these at their going out, and coming
home, will be sure to rob all others of their shares: although this be a
great abuse amongst us, and but of late days practiced, and by me spoken unto
by way of animadversion, either in hope of redress, or for infliction of
punishment; yet I would have the world know, that in other Countries, the fault
is far more insufferable. And the principal cause which I can find for it,
is that our Country imployeth her Nobles, of men of credit in all actions of
moment, who rather choose to spend wealth, and gain honor, then to gain riches
without reputation; whereas in Spain, and other parts, the advancement of
poor men and mean persons by favor and interest produces no other end, but
private and particular respects, to enrich themselves, yet the Nobility
themselves (for the most part) in all occasions pretend rewards for any small
service whatsoever, which with us as yet is not in use.

But the greatest and most principal Robbery of all, in my opinion, is the
defrauding, or detaining of the Companies thirdes or wages, Of detayning and
def^auding of wages.
accursed by the just God, who forbids the hyre of the labourer to sleep
with us. To such I speak as either abuse themselves in detayning it; or else
to such as force the poor man to sell it at vile and low prices; and lastly to
such as upon fained cavils and suits, do deter the simple and ignorant sort
from their due prosecutions; which being too much in use amongst us, has bred
in those that follow the Sea a jealousy in all employments, and many times
causes mutenies and infinite inconveniences. A point deserving consideration
and reformation, and which with great facility may be remedied, if upright
justice would put it self as stickler betwixt the owners and Company.

No less worthy of reformation are the general abuses of Mariners and
Soldiers, who rob all they can, under the color of Pillage, Of mariners by
challenge of Pillage.
and after make Ordinance, Cables, Sails, Anchors, and all above Deckes, to
belong unto them of right, whether they go by thirdes or wages; this
proceeds from those pilfering wars, wherein every Gallant that can arm out
a Ship, takes upon him the name and office of a Captain, not knowing what
to command, nor what to execute. Such Commanders for the most part consort and
join unto themselves disorderly persons, Pirates, and Ruffians, under the
title of men of valor and experience: they meeting with any Prise, make all
upon the Deckes theirs of duty; viz. the best piece of Ordinance for the
Captain; the second, for the Gunner; the third, for his Mate; the best Cable
and Anchor for the Master; the Maine topsayle, for the Botesman, the bonnetts,
for the quarter Masters; and the rest of the Sails for the company: The Cards
and Instruments of the Master, for the Master; the Surgeans Instruments and
Chest, for the Surgean; the Carpenters Tools and Chest for the Carpenter; and
so consequently of each officer, that answers the other in the two Ships.

If one happen upon a bag of Gold, Silver, Pearl, or precious Stones, it is
held well gotten; provided it be cleanly stolen, though the Ship, and all her
loading besides be not worth so much, little considering the common injury, in
defrauding the owners, victuallers, and whole Company: and forgetting, that if
himself were a jury-man upon another in like case, he would adiudge him to the
Gallows. But I would advise such Novices to know, that our true and ancient
Discipline of War is far different, and being understood, is much more
better for the general. Besides, it is grounded on Gods law (from whence all
Laws should be derived) and true justice, which distributeth to every one that
which to him belongs of right, and that in due season.

In the time of war in our Country, as also in others, by the laws of
Oleron (which to our ancient Seamen were fundamental) nothing is allowed for
Pillage but Apparel, The laws of Oleron, con^erning pillage.
Arms, Instruments, and other necessaries belonging to the persons, in that
ship which is taken; and these too, when the ship is gained by dint of
sword; with a proviso, that if any particular pillage, exceed the value of
six crowns, it may be redeemed for that value, by the general stock, and
sold for the common benefit.

If the prise render it self without forcible entry, all in general ought to
be preserved and sold in mass, and so equally divided: yea though the ship
be won by force and entry, yet whatsoever belongs to her of tackling,
sails, or Ordinance, is to be preserved for the generality: saving a piece
of Artillery for the Captain; another for the Gunner, and a Cable and Anchor
for the Master, which are the rights due unto them; and these to be delivered,
when the ship is in safety, and in Harbor, either unloaded or sold: which
law or custom well considered, will rise to be more beneficial for the
owners, victuallars, and company; then the disorders newly crept in and before
remembered.

For the Sails, Cables, Anchors, and hull, being sold (every one a part)
yield not the one half, which they would do, if they were sold altogether,
besides the excusing of charges, and robberies in the unloading and parting.

In the wars of France, in the time of Queen Mary, and in other wars (as
I have heard of many ancient Captains) the Company had but the fourth part,
and every man bound to bring with him the Arms, with which he would fight:
which in our time, I have known also used in France; and if the Company
victualed themselves, they had then the one half, and the owners the other
half for the Ship, powder, shot, and munition. If any prise were taken, it
was sold by the Tun, ship and goods, so as the loading permitted it; that
the Merchant having bought the goods, he might presently tran^port them
whethersoever he would; By this manner of proceeding, all rested contented, all
being truly paid; for this was just dealing; if any deserved reward, he was
recompensed out of the general stock; If any one had filched or stolen, or
committed offence^ he had likewise his desert: And who once was known, to be
a disordered person, or a thief, no man would receive him into his ship,
whereas now a days many vaunt themselves of their theftes and disorders; yea I
have seen the common sort of Mariners, under the name of pillage, maintain
and justify their robberies most insolently, before the Queens Majesty's
commissioners, with arrogant and unseemly terms, for that they would not
condescend to their unreasonable challenges: The demands being better worth
then five hundredth pounds, which some one pretended to be his; and that of the
choysest Merchandise, and most of it robbed out of that part of the ship,
which they themselves, and all the world cannot but confess to be Merchandise.

My opinion is, that such Malaperts, deserve most justly to have their spoil
taken from them, or some worse consideration, and afterward to be severely
punished, in prevention of greater preiudices, then can by paper be well
declared.

But I must tell you withal (such has been the partiallitie of some
Commissioners in former times) that upon information, in lieu of punishment,
Opinion has held them for tall fellows, when, in truth, they never prove the
best men in difficult occasions. For their minds are all set on spoil, and
can be well contented to suffer their associates to bear the brunt, whillest
they are prolling after pillage, the better to gain and mainetaine the
aforesaid attributes, in Tavernes, and disorderly places.

For the orderly and quiet men, I have ever found in all occasions to be of
best use, most valiant, and of greatest sufficiency. Yet I condemn none: but
those who will be reputed valiant, and are not, examine the accusation.

All what soever is found upon the deck, going for Merchandise, is exempted
out of the censure of pillage; What ought to be reputed pillage.
Silks, Linen, or woollen cloth in whole pieces, apparel, that goes to be
sold, or other goods what soever (though they be in remnants,) manifestly
known to be carried for that end; or being comprehended in the Register, or
bills of lading, are not to be contained under the name of pillage.

But as I have said of the consort, so can I not but complain of many
Captains and Governors, Against the disloyalties of Captains.
who overcome with like greedy desire of gain, condescend to the smoothering
and suppressing of this ancient discipline, the cle^lier to smother their own
disloyalties, in suffering these breake-bulks to escape, and absent themselves,
till the heat be past, and partition made.

Some of these cause the bills of lading to be cast into the Sea, or so to be
hidden, that they never appear. Others send away their prisoners, who
sometimes are more worth then the ship and her lading, because they should
not discover their secret stolen treasure; for many times, that which is leaft
out of the Register or bills of lading, (with purpose to defraud the Prince of
his Customs, (in their conceits, Conc^^^eme^^; o^ much more value, th^n the
Trad^ng.
held to be excessive) is of much more value, then that which the ship and
lading is worth. Yea I have known ships worth two hundredth thousand pounds,
and better, clean swept of their principal riches, nothing but the bare bulk
being leaft vnsacked. The like may be spoken, of that which the disorderly
Mariner, and the Soldier terms pillage; yet all winked at, and unpunished,
although such prizes have been rendered without stroke stricken.

This doubtless, cannot but be an hearts grief and discouragement to all
those who virtuously, and truly desire to observe the ancient discipline of
our Nation, their own honors, and the service of their Sovereign.

But to prevent these unknown mischiefs, The prevention of undue pillagin^s.
(and for his better discharge) I remember, that my Father Sir John Hawkins in
his instructions, in actions under his charge, had this particular Article;
That whosoever rendered, or took any ship, should be bound to exhibit the
bills of lading; to keep the Captain, Master, Merchants, and persons of
account, and to bring them to him to be examined, or into England; If they
should be by any accident separated from him, what soever was found wanting
(the prisoners being examined) was to be made good by the Captain, and
Company, which took the ship, and this upon great punishments. I am witness,
and avow, that this course did redownd much to the benefitt of the general
stock; to the satisfaction of her Majesty, and Counsel; the justification of
his government, and the content of his followers.

Thus much have I set down concerning these abuses, and the reformation
thereof, for that, I have neither seen them divulged by any, with whom I have
gone to Sea, neither yet recorded in writing, by any man's pen; let
consideration, present them to the ears of the powerful; But now to our
Voyage.

SECT. XLVI.
RVnning along the coast, till we came within few Leagues of Arica, nothing
happened unto us of extraordinary noveltie, or moment, for we had the brese
favorable, which seldom happens in this Climate, finding our selves in
nineteen Degrees, we haled the shore close abourd, purposing to see, if there
were any shipping in the road of Arica. Arica.
It stands in a great large Bay, in eighteen degrees: and before you come to
it, a league to the southwards of the road and Town, is a great round hill,
higher then the rest of the land of the Bay, near about the Town: which we
having discovered, had sight presently of a small Bark, close abourd the shore
becalmed; manning our boat, we took her, being laden with fish from
Moormereno; which is a goodly head-land, very high, and lies betwixt twenty
four, and twenty five Degrees, and whether ordinarily some barks use to go a
fishing every year.

In her was a Spaniard and six Indians; The Spaniard, for that he was near
the shore, swam unto the Rocks, and though we offered to return him his
bark, and fish, (as was our meaning) yet he refused to accept it, and made us
answer, that he durst not, for fear least the Justice should punish him. In
so great subjection are the poor unto those, who have the administration of
Justice in those parts, and in most parts of the Kingdoms and Countries
subject to Spain. The severity of Spain.
Insomuch, that to hear the Justice to enter in at their doors, is to them
destruction and desolation: for this cause we carried her along with us.

In this mean while, we had sight of another tall ship, coming out of the
Sea, which we gave chase unto, but could not fetch up, being too good of
sail ^or us. Our small prize and boat standing off unto us, descryed another
ship, which they chased and took also, laden with fish, coming from the
Islands of Iuan Fernandes.

After we opened the Bay and Port of Arica, but seeing it clean without
shipping, we haled the coast along, and going aboard to vi^it the bigger
prize, my company ^aluted me with a volley of small shot. Amongst them, one
Musket brake, and carried away the hand of him that shot it, through his own
default, which for that I have seen to happen many times, I think it
necessary to note in this place, that others may take warning by his harm.

The cause of the Muskets breaking, was the charging with two bullets,
Overcha^^ing o^ Artileries.
the powder being ordained to carry but the weight of one, and the Musket not
to suffer two charges of powder or shot. By this oversight, the fire is
restrained with the overplus of the weight of shot, and not being able to
force both of them out, breaks all to pieces, so to find a way to its own
center.

And I am of opinion, that it is a great error, to prove great Ordinance, or
small shot, with double charges of powder, or shot, my reason is, for that
ordinarily the metal is proportioned to the weight of the shot, which the
Piece is to bear, and the powder correspondent to the weight of the bullet:
and this being granted, I see no reason why any man should require to prove
his piece with more, then is belonging to it of right: for I have seen many
goodly pieces broken with such trials, being clean without honey combs,
crack, flawe, or other perceavable blemish, which no doubt, with their
ordinary allowance would have served many years. Yea I have been certified by
men of credit, that some Gunners have taken a glory, for breaking many pieces
in the trial: which is easy to be done by sundry slights and means not fit
to be published, much less to be exercised, being prejudicial to the
seller, and chargeable to the Conscience of the practiser, therefore it were
good, this excessive trial by double charges were clean abolished. If I
should make choice for my self, I would not willingly, that any piece should
come into Fort, or Ship, (under my charge) which had borne at any time more
then his ordinary allowance, misdoubting, least, through the violence of the
double charge, the Piece may be crased within, or so forced, as at another
occasion, with his ordinary allowance he might break in pieces: how many men
so many minds: for to others, this may ^eeme harsh, for that the contrary
custom has so long time been received, and therefore I submit to better
experience, and contradict not but that in a demi Culvering, a man may put two
Saker or Minion shots, or many of smaller weight: and so in a Muskett, two
Calever shot, or many smaller, so they exceed not the ordinary weight,
prescribed by proportion, Art; and experience. These experiments, I hold
convenient upon many occasions, yea and most necessary; but the vain custom
of double charges, to cause their pieces thereby to give a better report, I
affirm can produce no other effect, but danger, loss and harm.

SECT. XLVII.
HAving visited our prises, and finding in them nothing but fish, we took a
small portion for our victualing, and gave the bigger ship to the Spaniards
again, and the lesser we kept, with purpose to make her our Pinnas. The
Indians (which we took in her) would by no means depart from us, The amity
of the Indians.
but desired to go with us for England; saying that the Indian and English
were brothers, and in all places where we came, they showed themselves much
affectionated unto us, these were Natives of Moremoreno, and the most brutish
of all that ever I had seen; and except it were in form of men and speech,
they seemed altogether void of that which appertained to reasonable men. They
were expert swimmers; but after the manner of Spaniels, they diue and abide
under water a long time, and swallow the water of the Sea, as if it were of a
fresh River, except a man see them, he would hardly believe how they continue
in the Sea, as if they were Mermaides, and the water their natural Element.

Their Country is most barren, and poor of food; If they take a fish alive
out of the Sea, or meet with a piece of salted fish, they will devour it
without any dressing, as savourely as if it had been most curiously sodden or
dressed, all which makes me believe, that they sustain themselves of that,
which they catch in the Sea.

The Spaniards profit themselves, of their labor and travel, and recompense
them badly, they are in worse condition then their slaves, for to those they
give sustenance, house-roome, and clothing, and teach them the knowledge of
God; but the other they use as beasts, to do their labor without wages, or
care of their bodies, or souls.

SECT. XLVIII.
THwart of Ariquipa, the ship we brought with us from Balparizo, being very
leake, and my Company satisfied, that their hope to find any thing of worth in
her, was vain, having searched her from post to stem, condiscended to fire
her, and the rather, to keep our Company together; which could not well suffer
any devision, more then of mere necessity: so by general accord we eased our
selves of her, and continued our course along the coast, till we came thwart,
of the Bay of Pisco; which lies within 15. Degrees and 15. minutes.

Presently after we were clear of Cape Sangalean, and his Islands, we ranged
this Bay with our Boat and Pinnace. It has 2. small Islands in it, but without
fruit, and being becalmed, we anchored two days thwart of Chilec.

By Sea and by Land, those of Clyly had given advise to Don Garcia Hurtado de
Mend^ca, Advise ^^ven ^y Sea and Land.
Marquis of Cavete, Viceroy of Peru, resident in Lima, of our being on the
Coast. He presently with all possible diligence, put out six ships in
warlike order, with well near two thousand men, and dispatched them to seek
us, and to fight with us, under the conduct of Don Beltrian de Castro Y
delaluca, his wives brother; who departing out of the Port of Callao, turned to
wind-ward, in sight over the shore, from whence they had daily intelligence,
where we had been discovered. And the next day after our departure out of
Chilca, about the middle of May, at break of day, we had sight each of other,
thwart of Cavete, we being to wind-wards of the Spanish Armado, some two
leagues, and all with little, or no wind. Our Pinnace or prise being furnished
with Oars came unto us, out of which we thought to have taken our men, and so
to leave her; but being able to come unto us at all times, it was held for
better, to keep her till necessity forced us to leave her: and so it was
determined; that if we came to likelihood of boording, she should lay our
Boat aboard, and enter all her men, and from thence to enter our ship, and
so to forsake her* Although by the event in that occasion, this proved good,
notwithstanding I hold it to be reproved, where the Enemy is far superior
in multitude and force, and able to come and bourd, if he list: and that the
surest course, is to fortify the principal, the best that may be, and to
cut-of all impediments, where a man is forced to defense; for that no man is
assured to have time answerable to his purpose and will, and upon doubt whether
the others in hope to save themselves, will not leave him in greatest
extremity.

SECT. XLIX.
We presently put our selves in the best order we could, to fight, and to
defend our selves: our prayers we made unto the Lord God of battails, for his
help and our deliverance, putting our selves wholly into his hands. About nine
of the Clock, the Brese began to blow, and we to stand off into the Sea, the
Spaniards cheek by iole with us, ever getting to the wind-wards upon us; for
that the shipping of the South Sea, is ever molded sharp under water, and
long; all their voyages depending upon turning to wind-wardes, and the Brese
blowing ever Southerly.

As the Sun began to mount aloft, the wind began to fresh: which together
with the Rolling Sea, that ever beats upon this Coast, coming out of the
westerne-bourd, caused a chapping Sea, wherewith the Admiral of the Spaniards
snapt his maine Mast asunder, and so began to lagge a stern, and with him,
other two ships. The Vice Admiral split her maine-sayle, being come within
shot of us, upon our broad side, but to le-wards: the Reare-admirall cracked
her maine-yard asunder in the midst, being a head of us. One of the Armado,
which had gotten upon the broad side of us, to wind-wards, durst not assault us.

With these disgraces upon them, and the hand of God helping and d^livering us,
night coming, we began to consult what course was best to be taken, to free
our selves; wherein were diverse opinions; some said it was best to stand off to
the Sea close by, all the night; others to lie it a hull; others to cast about
to the shoare-wards two glasses, and after all the night to stand off to Sea
close by. The Admiral of the Spaniards, with the other two, were a stern of
us, some four leagues* the Vice Admiral a mile right to le-wards of us; the
Reare-Admirall in a manner right a head, some Culvering shot; and one upon our
loose, within shot also, the Moon was to rise within two hours. After much
debating, it was concluded, that we should bear up before the wind, and
seek to escape betwixt the Amirall, and the Vice Admiral, which we put in
execution, not knowing of any other disgrace befallen them, but that of the
Reare-Admirall: till after our surrender, when they recounted unto us all that
had past. In the Morning at break of day, we were clear of all our Enemies,
and so shaped our course along the Coast, for the Bay of Atacumes, where we
purposed to trim our Pinnace, and to renew our wood and water, and so to depart
upon our Voyage, with all possible speed.

The Spanish Armado, returned presently to Callao, which is the Port of Lyma,
or of the City of the Kings.

It was first named Lyma, and retayneth also that name of the River, which
passes by the City called Lyma, the Spanish Armado being entered the Port, the
people began to go ashore, where they were so mocked, and scorned by the
women, as scarce any one, by day would show his face, they reviled them with
the name of cowards and golnias, and craved license of the Viceroy, to be
admitted in their rooms, and to undertake the surrendry of the English Ship.
I have been certified for truth, that some of them affronted their Soldiers
with Daggers and Pistols by their sides.

This wrought such effects in the hearts of the disgraced, as they vowed either
to recover their reputation lost, or to follow us into England, and so with
expedition, the Viceroy commanded two ships and a Pinnace, to be put in
order, and in them placed the chief Soldiers and Mariners of the rest, and
furnished them with victuals and munition.

The foresaid General is once again dispatched to seek us; who ranged the
Coasts and Ports, enforming himself what he could; Some fifty leagues to
the North-wards of Lyma, in sight of Mongon, we took a ship half laden
with wheat, sugar, miell de Canas, and Cordovan skins: which for that she was
leake, and sailed badly, and tackled in such manner (as the Mariners would not
willingly put themselves into her) we took what was necessary for our
provision and fired her.

Thwart of Truxille, we set the company of her a shore, with the Pilot which
we had taken in Balparizo, reserving the Pilot of the burnt ship, and a
Greek, who chose rather to continue with us, then to hazard their lives in
going a shore* for that they had departed out of the Port of Santa, (which is
in eight Degrees) being required by the justice, not to weigh anchor, before
the Coast was known to be (...).

It is a thing worthy to be noted, and almost incredible, with how few men they
use to sail a ship in the south Sea, for in this prise, which was above an
hundred Tuns, were but eight persons: and in a ship of three hundredth Tuns,
they use not to put above fourteen or fifteen persons: yea I have been
credibly informed, that with fourteen persons, a ship of five hundredth Tuns
has been carried from Guayaquil to Lyma, deep laden: (which is above two
hundredth Leagues) and are forced ever to gain their Voyage by turning to
wind-wards, which is the greatest toil and labor that the Mariners have; and
slow sometimes in this voyage four or five months, which is general in all
the navigations of this coast: But the security from storms, and certainty of
the Brese, (with the desire to make their gain the greater) is the cause that
every man forces himself to the uttermost, to do the labor of two men.

SECT. L.
IN the height of this Port of Santa, some seven hundredth and fifty leagues
to the west-wards, lie the Islands of Solomon, The Islands of Solomon.
of late years discovered. At my being in Lyma, a Fleet of four sail was
sent from thence to people them; which through the emulation, and discord that
arose amongst them, being landed and settled in the Country, was utterly
overthrown, only one ship, with some few of the people, after much misery,
got to the Philippines. This I came to the knowledge of, by a large relation
written from a person of credit, and sent from the Philippines to Panama: I saw
it, at my being there, in my voyage toward Spain.

Having edged near the coast, to put the Spaniards on shore, a thick fogge
took us, so that we could not see the Land: but recovering our Pinnace and
Boat, we sailed on our course, till we came thwart of the Port called
Malabrigo, It lies in seven Degrees.

In all this coast the current runs with great force, but never keeps any
certain course; saving that it runs along the coast, sometimes to the
South-wards, sometimes to the North-wards; which now running to the
North-wards, forced us so far into the Bay (which a point of the land
causes, Punta de Augus^a.
that they call Punta de Augussa) as thinking to clear our selves by roving
North-west, we could not double this point, making our way, North North-west.
Therefore special care is ever to be had of the current: and doubtless, if
the providence of Almighty God had not freede us, we had run ashore upon the
Land, without seeing or suspecting any such danger; His name be ever exalted
and magnified, for delivering us from the unknown danger, by calming the
wind all night: the Suns rising manifested unto us our error and peril, by
discovering unto us the Land, within 2 leagues, right a head. The current had
carried us without any wind, at the least 4. leagues; which seen, and the wind
beginning to blow, we brought our tackes abourd, and in short time cleared our
selves.

Thwart of this point of Augussa, lie two desert Islands; they call them Illas
de Lobos, for the the multitude of Seals, which accustom to haunt the shore.
In the bigger is very good harbor, and secure: they lie in six Degrees and
thirty minutes.

The next day after, we lost sight of those Islands, being thwar^ of Payta,
which lies in five Degrees and having manned our Pinnace and Boat to search
the Port, we had sight of a tall ship, which having knowledge of our being
on the Coast, and thinking her self to be more safe at Sea, then in the
harbor, put her self then under sail: to her we gave chase all that night,
and the next day, but in fine being better of sail then we, she freed her
self. Thus being too lee-ward of the Harbor, and discovered, we continued our
course along the shore. That Evening, we were thwart of the River of
Guayaquill, which has in the mouth of it two Islands: the Souther-most and
biggest, called Puma, in three Degrees, and the other, to the North-wards,
Santa clara.

P^ma is inhabited, Puma.
and is the place where they build their principal shipping; from-his River,
Lima and all the valleys are furnished with Timber, for they have none but that
which is brought from hence, or from the kingdom of Chile. By this River
passes the principal trade of the Kingdom of Quito, it is Navigable some
leagues into the Land, and has great abundance of Timber.

Those of the Peru, use to ground and trim their ships in Puma, or in Panama,
and in all other parts they are forced to carene their ships. In Puma, it
higheth and falls, fifteen or sixteen foot water, and from this Island,
till a man come to Panama, in all the coast it ebbeth and flows more or
less; keeping the ordinary course, which the Tides do in all Seas. The water
of this River, by experience, is medicinable, for all aches of the bones, for
the stone, and strangurie; the reason which is given is, because all the
banks, and low land adjoining to this River, are replenished with
Salsaperillia: which lying for the most part soaking in the water, it
participateth of this virtue, and gives it this force.

In this River, and all the Rivers of this coast, are great abundance of
Alagartoes; and it is said that this exceeds the rest, for persons of credit
have certified me, that as small fishes in other Rivers abound in scoales, so
the Alagartoes in this, they do much hurt to the Indians and Spaniards, and
are dreadful to all whom they catch within their clutches.

SECT. LI.
SOme five or six Leagues to the North-wards of Puma, is la Punta de Santa
Elena; under which is good anchoring, clean ground, and reasonable succor.
Being thwart of this point, we had sight of a ship, which we chased, but
being of better sail then we, and the night coming on, we lost sight of her;
and so anchored under the Isla de plata; to recover our Pinnace and Boat,
which had gone about the other point of the Island, which lies in two Degrees,
and forty minutes.

The next day we past in sight of Puerto Viejo, Puerto viejo.
in two degrees ten minutes; which lying without shipping, we directed our
course for Cape Passaos. It lies directly under the Equinoctial line; some
fourscore leagues to the west-wards of this Cape, lies a heap of Islands, the
Spaniards call Illas de los Galapagos; They are desert and bear no fruit:
from Cape Passaos, we directed our course to Cape Saint Francisco, which lies
in one degree to the North-wardes of the line; and being thwart of it, we
descried a small ship, which we chased all that day and night; and the next
morning our Pinnace came to bourd her; but being a ship of advise, and full
of passengers, and our ship not able to fetch her up, they entreated our
people badly, and freed themselves, though the fear they conceived, caused
them to cast all the dispatches of the King, as also of particulars into the
sea, with a great part of their loading, to be lighter, and better of sail,
for the ships of the South Sea load themselves like lighters, or sand
barges, presuming upon the security from storms.

SECT. LII.
BEing out of hope to fetch up this ship, we stood in with the Cape, where
the Land begins to trend about to the East-wards. The Cape is high land, and
all covered over with Trees, and so is the land over the Cape, and all the
coast (from this Cape to Panama) is full of wood, from the Staites of Magelan,
to this cape of San Francisco. In all the coast from head-land to head-land,
the courses lie betwixt the North and north and by west, and sometimes more
westerly, and that but seldom: It is a bold Coast, and subject to little
foul weather, or alteration of winds, for the Brese, which is the sowtherly
wind, blows continually from Balparizo to Cape San Francisco, except it be a
great chance.

Trending about the Cape, we haled in East North-east, to fetch the Bay of
Atacames, which lies some seven Leagues from the Cape. In the mid way (some
three leagues from the shore) ly^th a bank of sand, whereof a man must have a
care; for in some parts of it, there is but little water.

The tenth of June, we came to an anchor in the Bay of Atacames, which on the
wester part has a round hammock. It seems an Island, and in high springes, I
judge, that the sea goes round about it. To the East-wards it has a high
sandy cliffe, and in the midst of the Bay, a fair birth, from the shore
lies a big black Rock above water: from this Rock, to the sandy cliffe,
is a drowned Marsh ground, caused by his lowness; And a great River, which is
broad, but of no depth.

Manning our boat, and running to the shore, we found presently in the
western bight of the Bay, a deep River, whose indraught was so great, that we
could not benefit our selves of it, being brackish, except at a low water;
which hindered our dispatch, yet in five days, we filled all our empty Caske,
supplied our want of wood, and grounded and put in order our Pinnace.

Here, for that our Indians served us to no other use, They dismiss their
Indians.
but to consume our victuals, we eased our selves of them; gave them hooks and
lines which they craved, and some bread for a few days, and replanted them in
a far better country, then their own, which fell out luckely for the
Spaniards of the ship which we chased thwart of Cape San Francisco; for
victuals growing short with her, having many mouths, she was forced to put a
shore fifty of her passengers, near the Cape; whereof more then the one half
dyed with famine, and continual wading through Rivers and waters: the rest (by
chance) meeting with the Indians, which we had put ashore, with their fishing,
guide, and industry were refreshed, sustained, and brought to habitation.

SECT. LIII.
Our necessary business being ended, we purposed the fifteenth day of May, in
the morning, to set sail, but the foureteenth in the Evening, we had sight of
a ship, some three leagues to Sea wards; and through the importunity of my
Captain and Company, I condiscended that our Pinnas should give her chase*
which I should not have done, for it was our destruction; I gave them precise
order, that if they stood not in again at night, they should seek me at Cape
San Francisco, for the next morning I purposed to set sail without delay, and
so seeing that our Pinnas slowed her coming, at nine of the clock in the
morning, we weyed our Anchors, and stood for the Cape; where we beat off
and on two days; and our Pinnas not appearing, we stood again into the Bay,
where we descried her, turning in without a maine Mast, which standing off to
the Sea, close by, with much wind, and a chapping Sea, bearing a taunt-sayle,
where a little was too much (being to small purpose) suddenly they bare it by
the bourd; and standing in with the shore, the wind, or rather God blinding
them, for our punishment, they knew not the land; and making themselves to be
to wind-wards of the Bay, bare up and were put into the Bay of San Matthew; It
is a goodly Harbor, and has a great fresh River, which higheth fifteen or
sixteen foot water, and is a good country, and well peopled with Indidians,
they have store of Gold and Emeralds, here the Spaniards from Guayaquill, made
an habitation, whilst I was prisoner in Lyma, by the Indians consent; but after
not able to suffer the insolences of their guests, and being a people of
sto^acke and presumption, they suffered themselves to be persuaded, and led by
a Molato. The Indians led by a Molato
This leader many years before had fled unto them from the Spaniards, him they
had, long time, held in reputation of their Captain General, and was admitted
also unto a chief Office by the Spaniardes, to gain him unto them.

But now the Indians uniting themselves together, presuming that by the help
of this Molato, they should force the Spaniards out of the Country, put their
resolution in execution, drove their Enemies into the woods, and s^ue as many
as they could lay hands on, some they killed, few escaped with life; and those
who had that good hap, suffered extreme misery, before they came to Quito;
the place of nearest habitation of Spaniards.

To this Bay, as soon as our people in the Pynnas saw their error, they
brought their tackes abourd, and turned and tyded it up, as they could. As Soon
as we came to Anchor, I procured to remedy that was amiss; in two days we
dispatched all we had to do, and the next morning we resolved to set sail and
to leave the coast of Peru and Quito.

The day appearing, we began to weigh our Anchors, and being a Pike ready to
cut sail, one, out of the top, descryed the Spanish Armado, Spanis^ Armado.
coming about the Cape: which by the course it kept, presently gave us to
understand, who they were: though my company (as is the custom of Sea men,)
made them to be the Fleet bound for Panama, laden with treasure, and
importuned, that in all have, we should cut sail and stand with them, which I
contradicted, for that, I was assured, that no shipping would stir upon the
coast, till they had security of our departure (except some Armado, that might
be sent to seek us,) and that it was not the time of the year to carry the
treasure to Panama. And besides in Riding still at an Anchor, they ever came
nearer unto us; for they stood directly with us, and we kept the weather gage;
where if we had put our selves under sail (the ebb in hand) we should have
given them the advantage, which we had in our power, by reason of the point of
the Bay. And being the Armado (as it was) we gained time to fit our selves, the
better to fight. And truly (as before, to a stiff-necked horse,) so now
again, I cannot but resemble the condition of the Mariner to any thing
better, then to the current of a furious River, repressed by force or art,
which nevertheless cease not to seek a way to overthrow both fence and
bank: Even so the common sort of Seamen, apprehending a conceit in their
imaginations, neither experiment, knowledge, examples, reasons nor authority
can alter or remoove them from their conceited opinions. In this extremity,
with reason I labored to convince them, and to contradict their pretenses; But
they altogether without reason, or against reason, break out, some into
vaunting and bragging, some into reproaches of want of courage, others into
wishings, that they had never come out of their country, if we should refuse
to fight with two ships whatsoever. And to mend the matter, the Gunner (for
his part) assured me that with the first tire of shot: The unadvised courage
of the multitude.
he would lay the one of them in the sods: And our Pynace, that she would take
the other to task. One promised, that he would cut down the main yard,
another that he ^ould take their flagge; And all in general showed a great
desire to come to trial with the enemy. To some I turned the deaf ear, with
others I dissembled, and armed my self with patience (having no other defense
nor remedy for that occasion) soothing and animating them to the execution of
what they promised, and persuaded them to have a little sufferance, seeing they
gained time, and advantage by it.

And to give them better satisfaction I condiscended, that our Captain with a
competent number of men, should with our Pinnace go to discover them; with
order, that they should not engage themselves in that manner, as they might not
be able to come unto us, or we to succor them. In all these divisions and
opinions, our Master Hugh Dormish (who was a most sufficient man for government
and valor, and well saw the errors of the multitude) used his office, a^
became him; and so did all those of best understanding.

In short space, our Pinnace discovered what they were, and casting about to
return unto us, the Vice Admiral (being next her) began with her chase to
salute her with three or four pieces of Artilery, and so continued chasing
her, and gunning at her. My company seeing this, now began to change humor;
And I, then, to encourage, and persuade them to perform the execution of their
promises and vaunts of valor, which they had but even now protested, and given
assurance of, by their proferres and forwardness.

And that we might have Sea-roome to fight, we presently weighed Anchor, and
stood off to Sea with all our sails, in hope to get the weather gage of our
contraries. But the wind scanting with us, and larging with them, we were
forced to leeward. And the Admiral weathering us, The beginning of the ^ight.
came rome upon us: which being within Musket shot, we hayled first with our
noise of Trumpets, then with our Waytes, and after with our Artilery: which
they answered with Artilery; two for one. For they had double the Ordinance we
had, and almost ten men for one. Immediately they came shoring abourd of us,
upon our lee quarter, contrary to our expectation, and the custom of men of
War. And doubtless, had our Gunner been the man he was reputed to be, The
inex^erience of the Spa^iards.
and as the world sold him to me, she had received great hurt by that manner
of bourding: But contrary to all expectation, our stearne pieces were vnprimed,
and so were all those, And carelessness of the English.
which we had to leward (save half one in the quarter) which discharged
wrought that effect in our contraries as that they had five or six foot water
in hold, before they suspected it.

Hereby all men are to take warning by me, not to trust any man in such
extremities, when he himself may see it done: How far a Commander is to
trust his officers.
and coming to fight, let the Chiefetaine himself be sure to have all his
Artilery in a readiness, upon all occasions. This was my oversight, this my
overthrow. For I, and all my company, had that satisfaction of the
sufficiency, and care of our Gunner, as not any one of us ever imagined there
would be any defect found in him. For my part, I, with the rest of our
Officers, occupied our selves in clearing our deckes, laceing our nettings,
making of Bulwarks, arming our tops, fitting our wast-cloathes, tallowing
our pikes, slinging our yards, doubling our sheets, and tackes, placing and
ordering our people, and procuring that they should be well fitted and provided
of all things; leaving the Artilery, and other instruments of fire, to the
Gunners dispose and order, with the rest of his Mates and adherents: which (as
I said) was part of our perdition. For bearing me ever in hand, that he had
five hundred Cartreges in a readiness, within one hours fight, we were forced
to occupy three persons, only in making and filling Cartreges, and of five
hundredth Else of Canvas and other Cloth given him for that purpose, at sundry
times, not one yard was to be found. For this we have no excuse, and therefore
could not avoyde the danger, to charge and discharge with the ladell,
especially in so hot a fight. And coming now to put in execution the sinking
of the ship, as he promised, he seemed a man without life or soul. So the
Admiral coming close unto us, I my self, and the Master of our Ship, were
forced to play the Gunners.

Those instruments of fire, wherein he made me to spend excessiuely (before our
going to Sea) now appeared not; Deceit of the Gann^r, and his extreme
carelessness, and suspicious disloyalty.
Neither the brass Balls of Artificial fire, to be shot with slurbowes
(whereof I had six bows, and two hundredth bals, and which are of great account
and service, either by Sea or Land) he had stowed them in such manner, (though
in double barrels) as the salt water had spoiled the^ all; so that coming to
use them, not one was serviceable. Some of our Company had him in suspicion, to
be more friend to the Spaniards, then to us; for that he had served some years
in the Tercera, as Gunner, and that he did all this of purpose. Few of our
pieces were clear, when we came to use them, and some had the shot first put
in, and after the powder. Besides, after our surrendry; it was laid to his
charge, that he should say; he had a brother that served the King in the Peru,
and that he thought he was in the Armado; and how he would not for all the
world, he should be slain. Whether this were true or no, I know not, but I am
sure all in general gave him an ill report, and that he, in whose hands the
chief execution of the whole fight consisted, executed nothing as was promised
and expected.

The grief and remembrance of which oversights once again inforceth me to
admonish all Captains and Commanders hereby to take advice, Admonitions, for
Commanders.
now and then to survey their officers and storeroomes; the oftener, the
better; that so their defects and wants may be supplied in time; Never relying
too much upon the vulgar report, nor giving too much credit to smooth tongues
and boasting Companions. But to perform this task, it is requisite that all
Captains, and Commanders were such, and so experimented in all offices, that
they might be able as well to control as to examine all manner of errors in
officers. For the government at Sea hardly suffers a head without exquisite
experience. The deficiency whereof has occasioned some ancient Seamen, to
straighten the attribute of Mariner in such sort, Who to be accounted a true
Mariner.
as that it ought not to be given, but to the man, who is able to build his
ship, to fit and provide her of all things necessary, and after to carry her
about the world: the residue, to be but sailors. Hereby giving us to
understand, that though it is not expedient, that he should be an
Axe-Carpenter, to hew, cut, frame, and mould each timber piece, yet that he
should know the parts and pieces of the ship, the value of the timber, His
knowledge for Materials.
planke and yron-worke, so to be able as well to build in proportion, as to
procure all materials at a just price. And again though it be not expected,
that he should sow the sails, arm the shrowds, and put the tackling over
head, yet is it requisite that should know how to cut his sails, what length
is Competent to every Roape, and to be of sufficiency to reprehend and reform
those who err, For provisions.
and do amiss. In providing his ship with victuals, munition and
necessaries, of force it must be expected: that he be able to make his
estimate, and (that once provided, and perfected) in season, and with
expedition to see it laden and stowed commodiously, with care and proportion.
After that, He is to order the spending thereof, that in nothing he be
defrauded at home, and at Sea, ever to know, how much is spent, and what
remains unspent.

In the Art of Navigations, For Navigation.
he is bound also to know, so much, as to be able to give directions to the
Pilote and Master; and consequently to all the rest of inferior officers.

SECT. LIIII.
MY meaning is not that the Captain (or Governor) should be tied to the
actual toil, or to intermeddle with all offices, (for that were to bind him
to impossibilities, to diminish and abase his authority, and to deprive the
other officers of their esteems and of that that belongs unto them, which
were a great absurdity.) But my opinion is, that he should be more then
superficially instructed and practiced in the employments. Yea I am verily
persuaded, that the more absolute authority any Commander gives to hi^ under
officers, being worthy of it, the sweeter is the Command, and the more
respected and beloved the Commander.

For in matter of guide and disposing of the Sailors, Offic^ of the Master.
with the tackling of the Ship, and the works which belong thereunto, within
bourd and without, all is to be committed to the Masters charge.

The Pilote is to look carefully to the Sterridge of the Ship, Office of the
Pilot.
to be watchful in taking the heights of Sun and Star; to note the way of
his Ship, with the augmenting and lessening of the wind, etc.

The Boateswayne is to see his Ship kept clean; The Boteswaine.
his Mastes, yards and tacklings well coated, matted and armed; his shroudes
and stays well set; his sails repaired, and sufficiently prevented with
martnets, blayles, and Caskettes; his boat fitted with Sail, Oars, thougts,
tholes danyd, windles and rother; His Anchors well boyed, safely stopped and
secured, with the rest to him appertaining.

The Steward is to see the preservation of Vittayles and necessaries, The
Steward
committed unto his charge; and by measure and weight, to deliver the portions
appointed, and with discretion and good terms, to give satisfaction to all.

The Carpenter is to veiw the mastes and yards, The Carpenter.
the sides of the Ship, her deckes and cabines; her pumpes and boat; and
moreover to occupy himself in the most forceible works, except he be
otherwise commanded.

The Gunner is to care for the britching and tackling of his Artilery; The
Gunner.
the fitting of his shot, Tampkins, coins, crones and linstockes, etc. To be
provident in working his fire works, in making and filling his Cartreges; in
accommodating his ladles, sponges and other necessaries; in sifting and drying
his powder; in cleaning the arms, munition, and such like works, entrusted
unto him.

In this manner every officer, in his office, ought to be an absolute
Commander, yet ready in obedience and love, to sacrifice his will to his
superiors command: This cannot but cause unity; and unity cannot but
purchase a happy issue to dutiful trauelles.

Directions in secret.
Lastly, except it be in urgent and precise cases, the Head should never direct
his command to any, but the officers, and these secretly, except the occasion
require publication; or that, it touch all in general.

Such orders would be (for the most part) in writing, that all might know what
in general is commanded and required.

SECT. LV.
ANd as the wise husbandman, Parts requ^site in a good husbandman.
in walking from ground to ground, beholds one plowing; another harrowing;
another sowing; and lopping; another pruning; one hedging; another threshing;
and diverse occupied in several labors: Some he commends, others he
reproacheth; others he advises; and to another he says nothing, (for that he
sees him in the right way: and all this; for that he knows and understands
what they all do, better then they themselves, though busied in their ordinary
works:) even so, a worthy Commander at Sea, ought to have the eyes, The like
in a good Chie^etaine.
not only of his body, but also of his understanding, continually, set (with
watchful care) upon all men, and all their works under his charge; imitating
the wise husbandman; first to know, and then to command; and lastly, to will
their obedience voluntary, and without contradiction. For who knows not that
ignorance many times commands that, which it understands not; which the
Artist perceiving, first disdaineth, afterward disesteemeth, and finally in
these great actions, which admit no temporizing, either he wayueth the respect
of duty, or faintly performs the behest of his superior, upon every slight
occasion, either in public opposing, or in private murmuring: the smallest of
which, is most pernicious, Thus much (not amiss) for Instruction.

SECT. LVI.
THe reason why the Admiral came to leewardes, Why the Spanish Admiral ca^e
to leewa^ds.
(as after I understood) was for that her Artillery being very long, and the
wind fresh, bearing a taunt sail, to fetch us up, and to keep us company,
they could not use their Ordinance to the weather of us, but lay shaking in the
wind: And doubtless, it is most proper for ships, to have short Ordinance,
except in the stern or chase. The reasons are many: viz. easier charging, ease
of the ships side, better traversing, and mounting, yea, greater security of
the Artillery, and consequently of the ship. For the longer the piece is, the
greater is the retention of the fire, and so the torment and danger of the
piece the greater.

But here will be contradiction by many, that dare avouch that longer pieces
are to be preferred; for that they burn their powder better, and carry the
shot further, and so necessarily of better execution; whereas the short
Artillery many times spends much of their powder without burning, and works
thereby the slenderer effect.

To which I answer, that for Land service, Fortes, or Castles, the long pieces
are to be preferred; but for shipping, the shorter are much more serviceable.
And the powder in them, being such as it ought, will be all fiered long before
the shot can come forth; and to reach far in fights at sea, is to little
effect: For he that purposes to annoy his Enemy, must not shoot at random,
nor at point blanke, if he purpose to accomplish with his devoire, nether must
he spend his shot, nor powd^r, but where a pot-gun may reach his contrary; how
much the nearer, so much the better: and this duly executed, the short
Artillery will work its effect, as well as the long; otherwise, neither short,
nor long are of much importance: but here, my meaning is no^, to approve the
overshort pieces, devised by some persons, which at every shot they make,
dance out of their cariages, but those of indifferent length, and which keep
the mean, betwixt seven and eight foot.

SECT. XLVII.
THe entertainment we gave unto our contraries, Intertainment of Spaniards.
being otherwise then was expected, they fell off, and ranged a head, having
broken in pieces all our gallerie: and presently they cast about upon us, and
being able to keep us company, with their fighting sails lay a weather of us,
ordinarily within Musket shot; playing continually with them and their great
Artillery; which we endured, and answered as we could.

Our Pinnace engaged her self so far, as that before she could come unto
us, the Vice Admiral had like to cut her off, and coming to lay us aboard,
and to enter her men, the Vice Admiral boorded with her: so that some of our
company entered our ship over her bow-sprit, as they themselves reported.

We were not a little comforted with the fight of our people in safety, within
our ship, for in all, we were but threescore and fifteen, men, and boys,
when we began to fight, and our Enemies thirteen hundred men and boys; The
English, 75.
little more or less, and those of the choice of Peru. The Spaniards, 1300.


SECT. LVIII.
Here it shall not be out of the way, to discourse a little of the Spanish
Discipline, The Spanish discipline.
and manner of their government in general; which is in many things different
to ours. In this expedition came two Generals, the one Don Beltran de Castro,
who had the absolute authority and command: The other Michael Angel Filipon,
a man well in years, and came to this preferment by his long and painful
service, who though he had the title of General by sea, I think it was rather
of courtesy then by Pattent; and for that he had been many years General
of the south Sea, for the carriage and wa^tage of the silver from Lyma to
Panama; He seemed to be an assistant, to supply that with his counsel,
advice, and experience, whereof Don Beltran had never made trial (for he
commanded not absolutely, but with the confirmation of Don Beltran) for the
Spaniards never give absolute authority to more then one. A custom that has
been, and is approved in all Empires, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Armies,
rightly disciplined: the mixture has been seldom seen to prosper, as will
manifestly appear, if we consider the issue of all actions and iourneys
committed to the government of two, or more generally.

The famous victory of Hanniball against the Roman Consuls Paulus Emillius and
Terrentius Varro, Two Clac^etaines joined in Commi^^ion dang^rous.
was attributed to their equality of government. The unhappy overthrow, given
by the Turk Amurate to the Christian Princes, in the Journey of Nicapolis, is
held to have proceeded from the difference betwixt the Heads; every one leaning
to his own opinion. The overthrow in recovery of the Holy land, undertaken by
King Richard of England, and King Philip of France, sprang from the like
differences and dissentions. The victory of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
against the Protestant Princes of Germany, is imputed to their distractures
arising from parity in command. If we look into our own actions, committed to
the charge of two Generals, the effects and fruits which they have brought
forth, (for the most part,) will be found to be little better: yea, most of
them through emulation, envy and pride, overthrown, and brought to naught;
though to cover their confusions, there have never been wanting cloakes and
colors. The most approoved writers reprove, and call it a monster with two
heads, and not without reason. For if the Monarchy be generally approved, for
strongest, soundest, and most perfect, and most sufficient to sustain it
self; And the Democracie and Aristocracie, utterly reproved, as weak, feeble
and subject to innovations and infirmities; it cannot be but error, confusion,
and imperfection to differ or dissent from it. For where the supreme
government is divided betwixt two or more, the Authority is diminished, and so
loses his true force, as a fagget of sticks, whose bond being broken, the
entire strength is easily dissolved: but all under correction.

The Spaniards in their Armadoes by Sea, imitate the discipline, order and
officers, which are in an Army by land, and divide themselves into three
bodies; to wit Soldiers, Mariners and Gunners.

Their Soldiers, The Soldier.
ward and watch, and their officers in every Ship round, as if they were on
the shore; this is the only task they undergo, except cleaning their Arms,
wherein they are not, over curious. The Gunners are exempted from all labor
and care, The Gunner.
except about the Artillery.

And these are either Almaynes, Flemmings, or strangers; for the Spaniards are
but indifferently practiced in this Art. The Mariners are but as slaves to the
re^t, The Mariner.
to moyle and to toil, day and night, and those but few and bad, and not
suffered to sleep, or harbor themselves, under the deckes. For in fair or
foul weather, in storms, sun or rain, they must pass void of covert or
succor.

There is ordinarily in every ship of War, Officers i^ a shipp. of War.
a Captain; whose charge is, as that of our Masters with us, and al^o a
Captain of the Soldiers, Captain of the So^ldiers.
who commands the Captain of the Ship, Captain of the ship.
the Soldiers, Gunners and Mariners in her; yea, though there be diverse
Captains, with their companies in one ship, (which is usual amongst them,)
yet one has the supreme authority, and the residue are at his ordering and
disposing. They have their Mastros de Campo, Mr. Del Campo, etc.
Seargeant, Master, General (or Captain) of the Artillery, with their Assere
Mayor, and all other officers, as in a Camp.

If they come to fight with another Armado, they order themselves as in a
bat^ell by land; In a Vanguard, rereward, maine battle, and wings, etc. In
every particular ship the soldiers are set all upon the deckes; their
forecastle they account their head Front, or Vangard of their company; that
abast the Ma^t, the rereward; and the wa^te, the main battle; wherein they
place their principal force, and on which they principally rely; which they
call their placa de armas or place of Arms: which taken, their hope is lost.

The Gunners fight not, but with their great Artillery: the Mariners attend
only to the tackling of the ship, and handling of the sails; and are
unarmed, and subject to all misfortunes; not permitted to shelter themselves,
but to be still alof^, whether it be necessary or needless. So ordinarily,
those which first fail, are the Mariners and Sailors; of which they have
greatest need. They use few close fights or fireworkes; and all this
proceeds (as I judge) of error in placing land Captains, for Governors and
Commanders by Sea; where they seldom understand what is to be done or
commanded.

Prving of the Sp^niards into o^r Di^cipl^ne.
Some that have been our prisoners, have perfited themselves of that, they have
seen amongst us: and others disguised, under color of treaties, for ransoming
of prisoners, for bringing of presents, and other Imbassages, have noted our
form of shipping, our manner of defenses, and discipline: Sithence which
espiall, in such actions as they have been employed in, they seek to imitate
our government, Their imitation o^ o^t ^iscipline.
and reformed discipline at Sea: which doubtless is the best, and most proper,
that is at this day known, or practiced in the whole world, if the execution
be answerable to that which is known and received for true and good amongst us.

In the Captain (for so the Spaniards call their Admiral) was an English
Gunner, who to gain grace with those under whom he served, preferred
himself, and offered to sink our ship with the first shot he made: who, by
the Spaniards relation, being travesing of a piece in the bow, to make his
shot, had his head carried away with the first, or second shot, made out of
our ship. It slew also two or three of those which stood next him.

Which may be a good and gentle warning for all those, who moved either with
covetousness, or with desire of revenge, or in hope of worldly promotion, or
other respect whatsoever; do willingly and voluntarily serve the enemy,
against their own nation: nulla causa insta videri potest, adversus patriam
arma capiendi.

And if we consider the end of those, who have thus erred, we shall find them
for the most part lamentable, and most miserable. The ends of Fugitives.
At the least, those whom I have known, have lived to be pointed at, with
detestation, and ended their lives in beggary, void of reputation.

SECT. LIX.
THE fight continued so hott on both sides, that the Artillery and Muskets
never ceased playing. Our contraries, toward the evening, determined the third
time to lay us abourd, with resolution to take us, or to hazard all. The order
they set down for the execution hereof, was, that the Captain (or Admiral)
should bring himself upon our weather bow, and so fall abourd of us, upon
our broad side: And that the Viceadmirall, should lay his Admiral abourd
upon his weather quarter, and so enter his men into her; that from her, they
might enter us, or do as occasion should minister.

The Captain of the Viceadmirall, being more hardy then considerate, and
presuming with his ship and company to get the price, and chief honor;
waited not the time to put in execution the direction given, The Spaniards pay
dearly for their rashness.
but presently came abourd to wind wards upon our broad side. Which doubtless
was the great and especial providence of Almighty God, for the discouraging
of our enemies, and animating of us. For although she was as long, or rather
longer then our ship, being rarely built, and utterly without fights or
defense; what with our Muskets, and what with our fireworks we cleared her
deckes in a moment; so that scarce any person appeared. And doubtless if we
had entered but a dozen men, we might have enforced them to have rendered unto
us, or taken her, but our company being few, and the principal of them slain,
or hurt, we durst not, neither was it wisdom, to adventure the separation of
those, which remained: and so held that for the best and soundest resolution,
to keep our forces together in defense of our own.

The Viceadmirall seeing himself in great distress, called to his Admiral
for succor: who presently laid him abourd, and entered a hundredth of his men,
and so cleared themselves of us.

In this bourding the Viceadmirall had at the least thirty and six men hurt,
and slain; and amongst them his Pilote shot through the body, so as he dyed
presently. And the Admiral also received some loss; which wrought in them a
new resolution; And take a new resolution
only with their Artillery to batter us; and so with time to force us to
surrender, or to sink us; which they put in execution; and placing themselves
within a Musket shot of our weather quarter, and sometimes on our broad side,
lay continually beating upon us without intermission; which was doubtless the
best and securest determination they could take, for they being rare ships,
and without any manner of close fights, in bourding with us, their men were all
open unto us, and we under covert and shelter. For on all parts our ship was
Musket free, and the great Artillery of force must cease on either side (the
ships being once grapled together) except we resolved to sacrifice our selves
together in fire. For it is impossible, if the great Ordinance play (the
ships being bourded) but that they must set fire on the ship they shoot
at; and then no surety can be had to free himself, as experience daily
confirms. For a piece of Artillery most properly resembles a thunderclap,
which breaking upwards, or on the side, hurts not; for that the fire has
scope to dispense it self without finding resistance, till the violence which
forces it takes end, and so it mounts to its center: but breaking down right
or stooping downwards, and finding resistance or impediment (before the
violence that forces it take end, being so subtle and penetrable a substance)
passes and pierces so wonderfully, as it leaves the effect of his execution
in all points answerable to his level and nighnesse. For if the clouds be nigh
the earth (as some are higher, some lower) and break down-wards, the violence
wherewith the fire breaks out is such, and of so strange an execution, that
men have been found dead, without any outward sign in their flesh, and yet
all their bones burnt to dust. So the blade of the sword has been found
broken all to pieces in the scabard, and the scabard whole without blemish: And
a cristall glass all shiuered in pieces, his cover and case remaining sound,
which comes to pass, for that in the flesh, in the scabard, and in the case,
the fire being so subtle of nature, finds easy passage without resistance,
but the bones, the blade, the Cristall, being of substance more solid, makes
greater resistance, and so the fire with the more fury works the more his
execution in its objects. As was seen in the Spanish Admiral (or Captain)
after my imprisonment, crossing from Panama to Cape San Francisco, a Rayo (for
so the Spaniards call a thund^rclappe) brake over our ship, killed one in the
fore-toppe, astoni^hed either two or three in the shroudes, and split the Mast
in strange manner; where it entered, it could hardly be descerned, but where it
came forth, it drove out a great splinter before it; and the man slain, was
clean in a manner without sign or token of hurt, although all his bones
turned to powder, and those who lived, and recovered, had all their bodies
black, as burnt with fire, which plainly declares and confirms that above
said, and may serve to judge in such occasions of persons hurt with thunder:
for if they complain of their bones, and have little sign of the fire, their
hazard of death is the greater, then when the fire has left greater
impressions outward. The fire out of a cloud works like effect only, where
it leveleth directly, as experience daily teaches; killing those who are
opposite, hurting those who are near, And only terrifying those who are
further distant.

In like manner the piece of Ordinance hurts not those which stand aside, nor
those which stand a slope from his mouth, but those alone which stand directly
against the true point of his level: though sometimes the wind of the shot
overthrows one, and the splin^ers (being accidents) main and hurt others.
But principally where the piece does resemble the thunderclappe, as when the
ships are bourded. For then, although the Artillery be discharged without
shot, the fury of the fire, and his piercing nature is such, as it enters by
the seames, and all parts of the ships sides, and meeting with so fit matter as
Pitch, Tar, Ocombe, and sometimes with powder, presently conuerteth all into
flames.

For avoiding whereof, as also the danger and damage which may come by pikes
and other inventions of fire, and if any ship be oppressed with many ships
at once, and subject by them to be bourded; I hold it a good course to strike
his fire and main yards close to his deck, and to fight with sprit-saile, and
myson, and top-sayles loose: so shall he be able to hinder them from oppressing
him.

Some have thought it a good policy to lance out some ends of Mastes or yards
by the ports or other parts: Policies to avoyde bourdings.
but this is to be used in the greater ships, for in the lesser, though they
be never so strong, the weight of the bigger will beat out the opposite sides,
and do hurt, and make great spoil in the lesser. And in bourding, ordinarily
the lesser ship has all the harm, which the one ship can do unto the
other.

Here is offered to speak of a point much canvassed amongst Carpenters, and
Sea Captains, diversely maintained, but yet undetermined: that is, whether the
race or lofty built ship, be best for the Merchant, and those which employ
themselves in trading: Dispute concerning ships of Trade.
I am of opinion, that the race ship is most convenient; yet so, as that
every perfect ship ought to have two deckes, for the better strengthening of
her; the better succouring of her people; the better preserving of her
Merchandise and victual, and for her greater safety from sea and storms.

But for the Princes ships, Concerning the Prince his ships.
and such as are employed continually in the wars, to be built lofty I hold
very necessary for many reasons. First for Majesty and terror of the enemy;
secondly, for harboring of many men; thirdly for accommodating more men to
fight; fourthly, for placing and using more Artillery; fifthly, for better
strengthening and securing of the ship, sixthly for ouertopping and subiecting
the enemy; seventhly, for greater safeguard and defense of the ship and company.
For it is plain, that the ship with three deckes, or with two and a half,
shows more pomp then another of her burden with a deck and half, or two
deckes, and breeds greater terror to the enemy, discovering her self to be a
more powerful ship as she is, then the other; which being indeed a ship of
force, seems to be but a Bark, and with her low building hides her burden.
And who doubts, that a deck and a half cannot harbor that proportion of
men, that two deckes, and two deckes and a half can accommodate to fight; Nor
carry the Artillery so plentifully, nor so commodiously. Neither can the ship
be so strong with a deck and a half, as with two deckes, nor with two, as
with three; nor carry her Mastes so taunt; nor spread so great a clue; nor
contriue so many fightes, to answer one another, for defense and offense. And
the advantage the one has of the other, experience daily teaches.

In the great expedition of eighty eight, Al ships of war are not to below
bu^lt
did not the Elizabeth Jonas, the Triumph, and the Bear, show greater majesty
then the Arc Royal and the Victory, being of equal burdens? did they not
cause greater regard in the enemy? did they not harbor and accommodate more
then men? and much better? did they not bear more Artillery? And if they had
come to board with the Spanish high-charged ships, it is not to be doubted but
they would have mustred themselves better, then those which could not with
their prowess nor props, have reached to their wastes. The strength of the one
cannot be compared with the strength of the other: but in bourding, it goes
not so much in the strength, as in weight and greatness. For the greater ship
that bourdeth with the lesser; with her Mastes, her Yards, her Tacklings, her
Anchors, her Ordinance, and with her sides bruseth and beats the lesser to
pieces, although the lesser be far stronger according to proportion.

The Foresight of his Majesty's, and the Dainty, were ships in their
proportions far more stronger, then the Carake which was taken by them, and
their consorts, Anno 92. (For she had in a manner no strong building nor
binding, and the others were strengthened and bound, as art was able to
afford;) and yet both bourding with her, were so bruised, broken, and badly
hand^ed, as they had like to have sunk by her side, though bourding with
advantage to weather-wards of her. But what would have become of them, if she
should have had the wind of them, and have come aboard to windward of them? In
small time no doubt, she would have beaten them under water.

An. 90. in the fleet under the charge of Sr John Hawkins my father, coming
from the South-wards, the Hope of his Majesty's gave chase to a French ship,
thinking her to be a Spaniard. She thought to have freed her self by her
sailing, and so would not avail, but endured the shooting of many pieces, and
forced the Hope to lay her abourd; of which issued that mischief which before
I spoke off. For in a moment the French ship had all her Mastes, Yards, and
Sails in the Sea; and with great difficulty the Hope could free her self
from sinking her.

In the self same voyage, near the Islands of Flores and Corvo, the Rainbow
and the Foresight came foul one of another, the Rainbow (being the greater
ship) left the Foresight much torn; and if God had not been pleased to
separate them, the lesser (doubtless) had sunk in the Sea: bu^ in these
incounters, they received little or no hurt. The boord^ng of the Rainbow and
Foresight, (as I was informed) proceeded of the obstinacy and self will of
the Captain or Master of the Foresight, who would not set Sail in time, to
give Sea-roome to the other, coming driving upon her, Particular respects must
give place to the General.
for that she was more flotie. This pride I have seen many times to be the
cause of great hurt, and is worthy of severe punishment: for being all of one
Company, and bound every one to help and further the good of the other, as
members of one body, their ought to be no strayning of courtesy, but all are
bound to suppress emulation and particular respect, in seeking the general
good of all, yea of every particular more ingeniously, then that of his own.

But in equity and reason, the le-ward ship ought ever to give way to the
weather most, in hulling, or trying, without any exception. First, for that
she aduantageth the other in hulling or trying: which is manifest, for that
she to wind-wards drives upon her to le-wards. Secondly, for that the
windermost ship, by opening her sail, may be upon the other before she be
looked for, either for want of steeridge, not being under way, or by the
rolling of the Sea, some one Sea casting the ship more to le-wards then ten
others. And thirdly, for that the windermost ship being near, and setting
sail, is in possibility to take away the wind from her to le-wards coming
within danger. And this by way of Argument, for a hull and vnder-sayle in
storms and fair weather, in Harbor, or at Sea.

Humanity and courtesy are ever commendable and beneficial to all, whereas
arrogancy and ambition are ever accompanied with shame, loss and repentance.

And though in many examples (touching this point) I have been an eye
witness, Arrogance of a Spanish G^nerall.
yet I will record but one, which I saw in the River of Civil, at my coming
out of the Indies amongst the Galleons laden with silver. For their wafting,
the King sent to the Tercera, eight new Galleons, under the charge of Villa
viciosa: who entering the Bar of Saint Luar jointly, the ships laden with
silver Anchored in the midst of the River in the deeper water, and the
wafters on either side, near the shore. The Admiral of the wafters rode
close by the Galleon, in which I was, and had mored her self in that manner,
as her stream, Cable, and Anchor overlayed our land-most. And winding up with
the first of the flood, she her self in one of her Cables; which together
with the great current of the ebb, and force of the wind which blew fresh,
caused her to drive, and to dragge home her Anchors; and with that which
over-lay ours, to cause us to do the like. Whereupon on both sides, was crying
out, to veere cable: we for our part had lost all our Cables in the Terceras,
saving those which were a ground, and those very short, and vered to the better
end. The Admiral strained courte^ie, thinking the other (though laden with
silver) bound to let slip one, so to give him way; and the General standing
in his Gallery, saw the danger which both ships ran into, being in a manner
bourd and bourd, and driving upon the point of the shore: yet he commanded to
hold fast, and not to vere Cable, till he was required and commanded in the
Kings name, by the Captain of our ship; protesting, the damage (which should
ensue thereof, to the King and Merchants) to run upon the Admirals account;
and that in his ship he had no other Cable, but those which were aground; And
that they had vered as-much as they could: which the General knowing, and at
last better considering, willed to vere his Cable end for end, and so with some
difficulty and dispute, the punto was remedied, which if he had done at first,
he had prevented all other danger, inconvenience, and dispute, by only weighing
of his Cable and Anchor; after the gust was past, and letting it ^all in a
place more commodious: whereas his vainglory, stoutnesse, and self-will, had
put in great peril two of the Kings ships, and in them above two Millions of
treasure. And it may be, if he had been one of the ignorant Generals, (such as
are sometimes employed) whereas he was one of best experience, I doubt not, but
they would have stood so much upon their puntos, as rather then they would have
consented to vere their Cables, (for that it seemed a diminution of
authority,) they would rather have suffered all to go to wrack, without
discerning the danger and damage.

But to return to my former point of advantage, which the greater ship has
of the lesser; Doubts and objections resolved.
I would have it to be vnder^tood according to occasion, and to be understood
of ships of war, with ships of war: It being no part of my meaning to
maintain, that a small man of war, should not bourd with a great ship,
which goes in trade. For I know, that the warlike ship, that seeks, is
not only bound to bourd with a greater, And the duty of a small ship against a
greater.
but were she sure to hazard her self, she ought to bourd where any
possibility of surprising may be hoped for. Witness the Biscaine ships of
five hundredth tons, taken by ships of less then a hundredth; Such were
those which were taken by Captain George Reymond. and Captain Greenfield
Halse; both won by bourding and force of Arms. And did not Marks Berry with
a ship of fourscore tons, by bourding and ^ent of sword, take a ship,
which came from the Noua Hispania of near ^oure hundredth tons? to recount
all such as have been in this sort taken by our Countrymen, as also those of
great worth which they have lost, for not hazarding the bourding, were never to
make an end.

Yet discretion is ever to be used: for a man that in a small bark goes to
warre-fare is not bound to bourd with a Carake, nor with a ship, which he
sees provided with Artillery and other preuentions far above his
possibility.

The Spaniards confess us to advantage them in our shipping, and attribute all
our victories ^o that which is but a mass of dead wood, Vainglory of the
Spanish.
were it not managed and ordered by Art and experience, affirming; that if we
came to handle strokes and bourding, they should go far beyond us, which to
any person of reasonable understanding, cannot but seem most vainglorious;
for we leave not to bourd with them upon occasion, when otherwise we cannot
force them to surrender, but I conclude it to be great error, and want of
discretion in any man, to put himself, his ship, and company in peril,
being able otherwise to vanquish his enemy.

This imagination so vain, and void of ground, has grown from the ignorance
of some of our common sort of Mariners, and vulgar people, which have been
prisoners in Spain: Who being examined and asked, why her Majesty's ships in
occasions bourd not? have answered, and informed; That it is the express order
of her Majesty and Counsel; in no case to hazard her ships by bourding: yea
I have known some Captains of our own, (to color their faint proceedings)
have auerred as much, which is nothing so. For in the hour, that her Majesty,
or Counsel commits the charge of any her ships to any person, it is left
to his discretion to bourd, or not to bourd, as the reason of service
requires. And therefore let no man hereafter pretend ignorance, nor for this
vanity leave to do his duty, or that which is most probable to redound to the
honor and service of his Prince and Country, and to the damage of his enemy.
For in case, he excuse himself with this allegation, it cannot but redound to
his condemnation and disreputation; And I assure all men, that in any
reasonable equality of shipping, we cannot desire greater advantage, then we
have of the Spaniards, by bourding. The reasons why, I hold it not convenient
to discourse in particular, but experience and tract of time, with that which I
have seen amongst them, has taught me this knowledge; and those who have
seen their discipline, and ours, cannot but testify the same.

SECT. LX.
Again, all that which has been spoken of the danger of the Artillery in
bourding, is not to be wrested, nor interpreted, to cut of utterly the use of
all Artillery, after bourdin^, Courses for Artiller^ after bourding.
but rather I hold nothing more convenient in ships of war, then fowlers
and great bases in the cage works, and Murderers in the Cobridge heads; for
that their execution and speedy charging and discharging, is of great moment.

Many I know have left the use of them, and of sundry other preuentions, as of
sherehookes, stones in their tops, and arming them; Pikebolts in their wales
and diverse other engines of Antiquity. Disuse of engines of Antiquity.
But upon what inducement, I cannot relate, unless it be because they never
knew their effects and benefit; and may no doubt be used without the
inconveniences before mentioned in great Ordinance. As also such may be the
occasion, that without danger some of the great Artillery may be used, and that
with great effect, which is in the discretion of the Commanders and their
Gunners, as has been formerly seen and daily is experimented in the Revenge
of her Majesty's, good exper^ence was made; who sunk two of the Spanish Armado
lying abourd her.

SECT. LXI.
IN these bourdings, and Skirmishes, diverse of our men were slain, and many
hurt, and my self amongst them received six wounds; one of them in the neck
very perilous; another through the arm perishing the bone, and cutting the
sinews close by the Arme-pit; the rest not so dangerous. The Master of our
ship had one of his eyes, his nose, and half his face shot away. Master
Henry Courton was slain; on these two, I principally relied for the
prosecution of our voyage, if God by sickness, or otherwise, should take me
away.

The Spaniards with their great Ordinance lay continually playing upon us, The
Spaniards parley.
and now and then parled and invited us to surrender our selves a Buena Querra.
The Captain of our ship, in whose direction and guide, our lives, our
honor, and welfare now remained; seeing many of our people wounded and slain,
and that few were left to sustain, and maintain the fight, or to resist the
entry of the enemy (if he should again board with us) and that our contraries
offered us good pertido: came unto me accompanied with some others, and began
to relate the state of our ship, and how that many were hurt, and slain, and
scarce any men appeared to trauerse the Artillery, or to oppose themselves for
defense, if the enemy should bourd with us again: And how that the Admiral
offered us life and liberty, and to receive us a Buena querra, and to send us
into our own country. Saying, that if I thought it so meet, he and the rest
were of opinion that we should put out a flagge of truce, and make some good
composition. The great loss of blood had weakened me much. The torment of my
wounds newly received, made me faint, and I labored for life, within short
space expecting I should give up the ghost.

But this parley pierced through my heart, and wounded my soul; words failed me
wherewith to express it, and none can conceive it, but he which finds
himself in the like agony: yet grief and rage ministered force, and caused me
to break forth into this reprehension and execution following.

Great is the Cross, which Almighty God has suffered to come upon me; That
assaulted by our professed enemies, and by them wounded (as you see) in body,
lying gasping for breath,) those whom I reputed for my friends to fight with
me, those which I relied on as my brethren to defend me in all occasions; Those
whom I have nourished, cherished, fostered and loved as my children, to succor
me, help me, and to sustain my reputation in all extremities, are they who
first draw their swords against me; are they which wound my heart, in giving me
up into mine enemies hands, whence proceeds this ingratitude? whence this
faintness of heart? whence this madness? is the cause you fight for, unjust?
is the honor and love of your Prince and Country buried in the dust? your
sweet lives, are they become loathsome unto you? will you exchange your
liberty for thraldom, will you consent, to see that, which you have sweat for,
and procured with so great labor and adventure, at the dispose of your
enemies? can you content your selves to suffer my blood spilt before your eyes?
and my life bereft me in your presence? with the blood and lives of your dear
brethren to be unrevenged? is not an honorable death to be preferred before a
miserable and slavish life? The one susteining the honor of our nation, of our
predecessors, and of our society; the other ignominious to our selves, and
reproachful to our nation. Can you be persuaded that the enemy will perform
his promise with you, that never leaves to break it with others, when he
thinks it advantageous? and know you not, that with him, all is convenient
that is profitable? Hold they not this for a maxim; that, nulla fides est
seruanda cum hereticis. In which number they account us to be. Have you
forgotten their faith violated with my father, in St. John de Vlua, the
conditions and capitulations being firmed by the Viceroy, and twelve Hostages,
all principal personages given for the more security of either party to
other? Have you forgotten their promise broken with John Vibao, and his company
in Florida, having conditioned to give them shipping and victuals, to carry
them into their Country? immediately after they had delivered their weapons
and arms, had they not their throats cut? have you forgotten how they dealt
with John Oxtiam, and his Company, in this Sea, yields upon composition? and
how after a long imprisonment, and many miseries (being carried from Panama to
Lyma) and there hanged with all his Company, as Pirates, by the Justice? And
can you forget how daily they abuse our noble natures, which being void of
malice, measure all by sincerity, but to our loss? for that when we come to
demand performance, they stop our mouths; Either with laying the inquisition
upon us; or with delivering us into the hands of the ordinary Justice; or of
the Kings ministers. And then urged with their promises, they shrink up to the
shoulders; and say, That they have now no further power over us; They sorrow in
their hearts, to see their promise is not accomplished; but now they cannot do
us any good office, but to pray to God for us, and to entreat the ministers in
our behalf.

Came we into the South Sea to put out flagges of truce? And left we our
pleasant England, with all her contentments, with intention or purpose to
avayle our selves of white rags? and by banners of peace to deliver our
selves for slaves into our enemies hands? or to range the world with the
English, to take the law from them, whom by our swords, prowess, and valor,
we have always heretofore bin accustomed to purchase honor, riches and
reputation? If these motives be not sufficient to persuade you, then I present
before your eyes, your wives and children, your parents and friends, your noble
and sweet country, your gracious Sovereign: of all which account your selves
for ever deprived, if this proposition should be put in execution; But for all
these, and for the love and respect you owe me, and for all besides that you
esteem and hold dear in this world, and for him, that made us and all the
world, banish out of your imagination, such vain and base thoughts; and
according to your woonted resolution, prosecute the defense of your ship,
your lives, and liberty, with the lives and liberty of your companions; who
by their wounds and hurts are disabled and deprived of all other defense and
help, save that which lies in your discretions and prowess. And you
Captain, of whom I made choice amongst many, to be my principal assistant,
and the person to accomplish my duty, if extraordinary casualtie should
disable me, to perform and prosecute our voyage. Tender your obligation, and
now in the occasion give testimony, and make proof of your constancy and
valor, according to the opinion and confidence, I have ever h^ld of you.

Whereunto he made answer; my good General, I hope you have made experience
of my resolution, which shall be ever to put in execution, what you shall be
pleased to command me; and my actions shall give testimony of the obligation
wherein I stand bound unto you. What I have done, has not proceeded from
faintness of heart, nor from a will to see imaginations put in execution (for
besides the loss of our reputation, liberty, and what good else we can hope
for.) I know the Spaniard too too well, and the manner of his proceedings, in
discharge of promises, but only to give satisfaction to the rest of the
Company, which importuned me to move this point. I condiscended to that, which
now I am ashamed of, and grieve at, because I see it disliking to you. And here
I vow to fight it out, till life or lymmes fail me. Be you pleased to
recommend us to Almighty God, and to take comfort in him, whom I hope will
give us victory, and restore you to health and strength, for all our comforts,
and the happy accomplishing and finishing of our voyage, to his glory.

I replied: this is that which beseems you; this sorteth to the opinion I
ever held of you; and this will gain you (with God and man) a just reward. And
you the rest (my dear companions and friends) who ever have made a
demonstration of desire to accomplish your duties, remember, that when we first
discryed our enemy, you showed to have a longing to prove your valors against
him: Now that the occasion is offered, lay hold of the forelocke. For if once
she turn her back, make sure account never after to see her face again; and
as true English men, and followers of the steps of our forefathers, in virtue
and valor, sell your bloods and lives dearly, that Spain may ever record it
with sadness and grief. And those which surviue, rejoice in the purchase of
so noble a victory with so small means against so powerful an enemy.

Hereunto they made answer; that as hitherto they had been conformable to all
the undertakings, which I had commanded or counseled, so they would continue
in the self same duty and obedience to the last breath: vowing either to
remain Conquerours and Freemen, or else to sell their lives at that price,
which their enemies should not willingly consent to buy them at. And with this
resolution, both Captain and company took their leave of me, every one
particularly, and the greater part with tears, and and imbracings, though we
were forthwith to depart the world, and never see one the other again, but in
heaven; promising to cast all forepassed imaginations into oblivion, and never
more to speak of surrendry.

In accomplishment of this promise and determination, They resolve to fight it
out.
they persevered in sustaining the fight, all this night, with the day and
night following, and the third day after. In which time the Enemy never left
us, day nor night, beating continually upon us, with his great and small shot.
Saving that every morning an hour before break of day, he edged a little
from us, to breath, The Enemy breaths,
and to remedy such defects as were amiss; as also to consult, what they
should do the day and night following.

This time of interdiction, we employed, in repayring our sails, and
tacklings, in stopping our leakes, The English repair their defects.
in fishing and wolling our mastes and yards, in mending our pumpes, and in
fitting and providing our selves for the day to come: though this was but
little space for so many works, yet gave it great relief and comfort unto us,
and made us better able to endure the defense: for otherwise, our ship must
of force have suncke before our surrendry, having many shot under water, and
our pumpes shot to pieces every day: In all this space, not any man of either
part took rest or sleep, and little sustenance; besides bread and wine.

In the second days fight, the Vice Admiral coming upon our quarter, William
Blanch, one of our Masters mates, with a luckie hand, made a shot unto her,
with one of our stern pieces; it carried away his maine Mast close by the
deck: wherewith the Admiral bear up to her, to see what harm she had
received, and to give her such succor, as she was able to spare: which we
seeing, were in good hope, that they would have now left to molest us any
longer, having wherewithal to entertain themselves in redressing their own
harms. And so we stood away from them, close by as we could: Advant^ges
omitted.
which we should not have done, but prosecuted the occasion, and brought our
selves close upon her weather gage, and with our great and small shot hindered
them from repairing their harms: if we had thus done, they had been forced to
cut all by the bourd; and it may be (lying a hull, or to le-wards of us) with
a few shot, we might have suncke her. At the least, it would have declared to
our enemies, that we had them in little estimation, when able to go from
them, we would not: and perhaps bin a cause to have made them to leave us.

But this occasion was let slip, as also, that other to fight with them,
sailing quarter winds, or before the wind: for having stood off to Sea, a day
and a night, we had scope to fight at our pleasure, and no man having sea
room, is bound to fight as his enemy will, with disadvantage, being able
otherwise to deal with equality: contrariwise, every man ought to seek the
means he can, for his defense, and greatest advantage, to the annoyance of
his contrary.

Now we might with our fore-saile, low set, have borne up before the wind,
and the enemy of force must have done the like* if he would fight with us, or
keep us company: and then should we have had the advantage of them. For
although their Artillery were longer, waightier, and many more then ours, and
in truth did pierce with greater violence; The difference of shot.
yet ours being of greater bore, and carrying a waightier and greater shot, was
of more importance and of better effect for sinking and spoiling: For the
smaller shot passes through, and makes but his whole, and harmeth that which
lies in his way; but the greater shakes and shivereth all it meets, and
with the splinters, or that which it encountreth, many times does more hurt,
then with his proper circumference: as is plainly seen in the battery by
land, when the Saker, the Demy-Colverin, Their effects.
the Colverin, and demi-Canon, (being pieces that reach much further point
blanke then the Cannon) are nothing of like importance for making the breach,
as is the Cannon; for that this shot being ponderous pierces with difficulty,
yea works better effects, tormenting, shaking and overthrowing all; whereas
the others, with their violence, pierce better, and make only their hole, and
so hide themselves in the Wool or Rampire.

Besides (our Ship being yare and good of fleeridge) no doubt but we should
have played better with our Ordinance, and with more effect, then did our
enemies; which was a great error, being able to fight with less disadvantage,
Errors in Fight,
and yet to fight with the most that could be imagined, which I knew not off,
neither was able to direct, though I had known it; being in a manner
senseless, what with my woonds, and what with the agony of the surrendry
propounded, for that I had seldom known it spoken of, but that it came
afterward to be put in execution.

The General not being able to succor his Vice Admiral, except he should
utterly leave us, gave them order, to shift as well as they could ^or the
present, and to bear with the next Port, and there to repair their harms.
Himself presently followed the Chase, and in short space fetched us up, and
began a fresh to batter us with his great and small shot. The Vice Admiral
(having saved what they could) cut the rest by the bourd, and with Foresayle
and My son came after us also, and before the setting of the Sun, were come
upon our broad side, we bearing all our Sails, and after kept us company,
lying upon our weather quarter, and annoying us what she could.

Here I hold it necessary, to make mention of two things, which were most
prejudicial unto us, and the principal causes of our perdition, the errors
and faults of late days, crept in amongst those who follow the Sea, and
learned from the Flemings and Easterlings. Learned from the Flemings and
Easterlings.
I wish that by our misfortunes others would take warning, and procure to
redress them, as occasions shall be offered.

The one, is to fight unarmed, where they may fight armed. 1. To fight unarmed.

2. To drink to excess.


The other, is in coming to fight, to drink themselves drunk. Yea, some are
so madd, that they mingle Powder with Wine, to give it the greater force,
imagining that it gives spirit, strength, and courage, and takes away all
fear and doubt. The latter is for the most part true, but the former is false
and beastly, and altogether against reason. For though the nature of Wine, with
moderation, is to comfort and reviue the heart, and to fortify and strengthen
the spirit; yet the immoderate use thereof works quite contrary effects.

In fights, all receipts which add courage and spirit, are of great regard, to
be allowed, and used; and so is a draught of Wine, to be given to every man
before he come to action, but more then enough is pernicious; for, exceeding
the mean, it offends, and infeebleth the senses, converting the strength
(which should resist the force of the enemy) into weakness: it dulleth and
blinds the understanding, and consequently depraueth any man of true valor.
For that he is disenabled to judge and apprehend the occasion, which may be
offered, to assault, and retire in time convenient; the raynes of reason being
put into the hands of passion and disorder. For after I was wounded, this
nimium bred great disorder and inconvenience in our Ship; the pott
continually walking, infused desperate and foolish hardiness in many, w^o
blinded with the fume of the liquor, considered not of any danger, but thus and
thus would stand at hazard; some in vain glory, vaunting themselves; some
other railing upon the Spaniards; another inviting his companion to come and
stand by him; and not to budge a foot from him; which indiscreetly they put in
execution, and cost the lives of many a good man, slain by our enemies
Musketeers, who suffered not a man to show himself, but they presently
overthrew him with speed and watchfullnesse; For prevention of the second
error, although I had great preparation of Armours, as well of proof, as of
light Co^^eletts, yet not a man would use them; but esteemed a pott of Wine, a
better defense then an Armor of proof. Which truly was great madness, and a
lamentable fault, worthy to be banished from amongst all reasonable people, and
well to be weighed by all Commanders. For if the Spaniard surpasses us in any
thing, it is in his temperance, The Spaniard surpasses us only in temperance.
and suffering: and, where he has had the better hand of us, it has been
(for the most part) through our own folly, for that we will fight unarmed with
him being armed. And although I have heard many men maintain, that in
Shipping, Armor is of little profit; All men of good understanding, will
condemn such desperate ignorance. For besides, that the sleightest Armor
secureth the parts of a man's body (which it covers) from Pike, Sword, and all
hand weapons: it likewise gives boldness and courage; a man Armed, gives a
greater and a waightier blow, then a man unarmed; he stands faster, and with
greater difficulty is to be overthrown.

The use and profit of arming,
And I never read, but that the glistering of the Armor has been by Authors
observed, for that (as I imagine) his show breeds terror in his contraries,
and despair to himself if he be unarmed. And therefore in time of war, such
as devote themselves to follow the profession of Arms (by Sea or by Land)
ought to covet nothing more, then to be well Armed; for as much as it is the
second means, next Gods protection, for preserving, and prolonging many men's
lives.

exactly obs^rved by the Spanish.
Wherein the Spanish nation deserves commendation above others, every one from
the highest to the lowest, putting their greatest care in providing fair and
good Arms. He which cannot come to the price of a Corslet, will have a coat
of Mayle, a Iackett, at least, a Buffe-jerkin, or a privy Coat. And hardly
will they be found without it, albeit, they live; and serve (for the most part)
in extreme hott Countries.

Whereas I have known many bred in cold Countries, in a moment complain of
the weight of their Arms, that they smoother them, and then cast them off,
choosing rather to be shot through with a Bullet, or lanched through with a
Pike, or thrust through with a Sword, then to endure a little travail and
suffering. But let me give these lazy ones this lesson, that he that will go
a warrefare, must resolve himself to fight; and he that puts on this
resolution, must be contented to endure both heat and weight, first, for the
safeguard of his life, and next for subduing of his enemy; both which are
hazarded, and put into great danger, if he fight unarmed with an enemy armed.

Now for mine own opinion, I am resolved that Armor is more necessary by Sea,
then by Land, Arms more necessary by Sea, then at Land.
yea, rather to be excused on the shore, then in the Ship. My reason is, for
that on the shore the Bullet only hurts, but in the Ship, I have seen the
^plinters kill and hurt many at once, and yet the shor^ to have passed without
touching any person. As in the Galeon, in which I came out of the Indies, in
Anno 1597. in the rode of Tercera, when the Queens Majesty's Ships, under
the charge of the Earl of Essex* chased us into the rode, with the splinters
of one shot, were slain, maimed, and sore hurt, at the least a dozen persons,
the most part whereof had been excused, if they had been Armed.

And doubtless, if these errors had been foreseen, and remedied by us, many
of those who were slain and hurt, had been on foot, and we enabled to have
sustained and maintained the fight much better and longer; and perhaps at last
had freed our selves. For if our enemy had come to bourd with us, our close
fights were such, as we were secure, and they open unto us. And what with our
Cubridge heads, one answering the other, our hatches upon bolts, our brackes in
our Deckes, and Gunner room, it was impossible to take us as long as any
competent number of men had remained, twenty persons would have sufficed for
defense; and for this, such Ships are called Impregnable, and are not to be
taken, but by surrender, not to be overcome, but with bourding or sinking, as
in us by experience was verified: and not in us alone, but in the Revenge of
the Queens Majesty, which being compassed round about with all the Armado of
Spain, and bourded sundry times by many at once, is said, to have sunk three
of the Armado by her side.

And in this conflict, having lost all her Mastes, and being no other then a
logge in the Sea, could not be taken with all their force and policy, till
she surrendered her self by an honorable composition.

By these presidents, let Governors by Sea take special care above all, to
preserve their people, in imitation of the French; who carry many Soldiers in
their ships of War, and secure them in their holds, till they come to
entering, and to prove their forces by the dint of Sword.

But here the discreet Commanders are to put difference, A difference for
Commanders.
betwixt those which defend, and those which are to offend, and betwixt those
which assault, and those which are assaulted. For (as I have said) no
government whatsoever, better requires a perfect and experimented Commander,
then that of the Sea. And so no greater error can be committed, then to
commend such charges to men vnexperimented in this profession.

A third and last cause, of the loss of sundry of our men, most worthy of note
for all Captains, owners, and Carpenters: was the race building of our ship;
Race-ships of War disliked
the only fault she had; and now a days, held for a principal grace in any
ship: but by the experience which I have had, it seems for sundry reasons
very prejudicial for ships of War, For in such, those which tackle the
sails, of force must be upon the deckes, and are open without shelter, or any
defense: yet here it will be objected; That for this inconvenience, wast
clothes are provided, Wast-clothes not so useful,
and for want of them, it is usual to lace a bonnet, or some such shadow for
the men; worthily may it be called a shadow, and one of the most pernicious
customs, that can be used, for this shadow, or defense, being but of linen or
woollen cloth, emboldeneth many; who without it would retire to better
security, whereas now thinking themselves unseen, they become more bold,
then otherwise they would, and thereby shot through, when they least think of
it; Some Captains observing this error, have sought to remedy it, in some of
his Majesty's ships: not by altering the building, as other devises.
but by devising a certain defense, made of four or five inch planckes of
five foot high, and six foot broad, running upon wheels, and placed in such
parts of the ship, as are most open. These they name blenders, and made of
Elm for the most part; for that it shivers not with a shot, as Oak and other
Timber will do, which are now in use and service, but best it is, when the
whole side has one blender, and one armor of proof, for defense of those,
which of force must labor, and be a lost.

This race building, first came in, by overmuch homing in of our ships; and
received for good, under color of making our ships thereby the better
sea-shippes, and of better advantage to hull and try: but in my judgment, it
breeds many inconveniences, and is far from working the effect they
pretend, by disinabling them for bearing their cage work correspondent, to the
proportion and mould of the ship, making them tender sided, and unable to
carry sail in any fresh gaile of wind, and diminishing the play of their
Artillery, and the place for accommodating their people to fight, labor, or
rest.

And I am none of those, who hold opinion, that the overmuch homing in, the
more the better, is commodious and easier for the ship; and this out of the
experience, that I have learned; which with forcible reasons, I could prove to
be much rather discomodious and worthy to be reformed. But withal I hold it
not necessary to discourse here of that particulari^ie, but leave the
consequence to men of understanding, and so surcease.

SECT. LXII.
ALl this second day, and the third day and night, our Captain and company
sustained the fight, notwithstanding the disadvantage where with they fought;
The enemy being ever to wind-ward, and we to lee-ward, The disadvantage o^
Ships to lee-wa^d.
their shot much damnifying us, and ours little annoying them, for whenever
a man encountreth with his enemy at sea, in gayning the weather gage, he is
in possibilie to sink his contrary; but his enemy cannot not sink him; and
therefore he which is forced to fight with this disadvantage, is to procure by
all means possible to shoot down his contraries Masts or Yards, and to tear
or spoylr his tackling and sails; And the b^st remedy.
for which purpose, billets of some heavy wood fitted to the great Ordinance
are of great importance. And so are Arrows of fire, to be shot out of
slur-bowes, and cases of small shot joined two and two together, with pieces of
wire of five or six inches long, which also shot out of muskets are of good
effect, for tearing the sails, or cutting the tackling.

Some are of opinion, that cross bars and chaine-shot, are of moment for the
spoiling of Masts and Yards, but experience daily teaches, them not to be of
great importance, though near at hand, I confess, they work great execution:
but the round shot, is the only principal and powerful mean, to break
Mast or Yard.

And in this our fight, the Admiral of the Spaniards, had his foremast shot
through with two round shot, The Spaniards ^ore-mast thrice shot through.
some three yardes beneath the head; had either of them entered but four inches
further into the heart of the Mast, without all doubt, it had freed us, and
perhaps put them into our hands. The third day in the afternoon which was the
22. of June 1594. according to our computation, and which I follow in this my
discourse, our sails being torn, our Mastes all perished, our pumpes rent,
and shot to pieces, and our ship with fourteen short under water, and seven
or eight foot of water in hold; many of our men being slain, and the most
part of them (which remained) sore hurt, and in a manner altogether fruiteles,
and the enemy offering still to receive us a buena querra, and to give us life
and liberty, and imbarkation for our country; Our Captain, and those which
remained of our Company, were all of opinion that our best course was to
surrender our selves, before our ^hippe suncke. And so by common consent agreed
the second time, to send a servant of mine Thomas Sanders, to signify unto me
the estate of our ship and company; And that it was impossible by any other
way to expect for hope of deliverance, or life, but by the miraculous hand of
God, in using his Almighty power; or by an honorable surrender: which in every
man's opinion was thought most convenient. So was I desired by him, to give also
my consent, that the Captain might capitulate with the Spanish General, and
to compound the best partido he could by surrendering our selves into his hands:
upon condition of life and liberty. This he declared unto me, being in a
manner void of sense, and out of hope to live or recover, which considered, and
the circumstances of his relation, I answered as I could, that he might judge
of my state, ready every moment to give up the Ghost, and unable to discern
in this cause what was convenient, except I might see the present state of the
ship. And that the honor or dishonor, the welfare or misery, was for them,
which should be partakers of life; At last, for that I had satisfaction of his
valor and true dealing, in all the time, he had served me, and in
correspondence of it, had given him (as was notorious) charge and credit in
many occasions, I bound him, by the love and regard, he ought me, and by the
faith and duty to Almighty God, to tell me truly, if all were as he had
declared. Whereunto he made answer, that he had manifested unto me the
plain and naked truth, and that he took God to witness of the same truth;
with which receiving satisfaction, I forced my self what I could, to persuade
him to annimate his companions, and in my name to entreat the Captain, and
the rest to persevere in defense of their liberty, lives, and reputation,
remitting all to his discretion: not doubting, but he would be tender of his
duty, and zealous of my reputation, in preferring his liberty, and the liberty
of the Company above all respects whatsoever. As for the welfare hoped by a
surrender, I was altogether unlikely to be partaker thereof, Death threatening
to deprive me of the benefit, which the Enemy offered; but if God would be
pleased to free us, the joy and comfort I should receive, might perhaps give me
force and strength to recover health.

Which answer being delivered to the Captain, he presently caused a slagge
of truce, to be put in place of our Ensign, and began to parley of our
surrendry, with a Spaniard, which Don Beltran appointed for that purpose, from
the poope of the Admiral, to offer in his name, the conditions before
specified; with his faithful promise and oath, as the King General to take us
a buena querra, and to send us all into our own Country. The promise he
accepted, and said, that under the same, he yielded, and surrendered himself,
ship, and company. Immediately, there came unto me another servant of mine,
and told me, that our Captain had surrendered himself, and our ship; which
understood, I called unto one I^an Gomes de Pineda, a Spanish Pilote, which was
our prisoner, and in all the fight we had kept close in hold, and willed him to
go to the General Don Beltran de Castro from me, to tell him, that if he
would give us his word, and oath, as the General of the King, and some pledge
for confirmation, to receive us a buena querra, and to give us our lives and
liberty, and present passage into our own Country, that we would surrender
our selves, and ship into his hands; Otherwise, that he should never enjoy
of us, nor ours, any thing, but a resolution every man to dye fighting.

With this Message I dispatched him, and called unto me all my Company, and
encouraged them to sacrifice their lives fighting, and killing the Enemy, if
he gave but a fillip to any of our companions. The Spaniards willed us to hoise
out our boat, which was shot all to pe^^es; and so was theirs. Seeing that he
called to us to amain our sails, which we could not well do, for that they
were slung, and we had not men enough to hand them. In this parley, the
Vice Admiral coming upon our quarter, and not knowing of what had past,
discharged her two chase pieces at us, and hurt our Captain very sore in the
thigh, and maimed one of our Masters Mates, The English sur^ender.
called Hugh Maires, in one of his Arms, but after knowing us to be rendered,
he secured us: And we satisfying them that we could not hoise out our boat,
nor strike our sails the Admiral laid us abourd, bu^ before any man entered,
John Gomes went unto the General, who received him with great courtesy, and
asked him what we required; whereunto he made answer that my demand was that
in the Kings name, he should give us his faith and promise, to give us our
lives, to keep the Laws of fair wars and quarter, and to send us presently
into our country; and in confirmation hereof, that I required some pledge,
whereunto the General made answer; that in the King^ Majesty's name his
Master, he received us a buena querra, and swore by God Almighty, and by the
habit of A cautara, (whereof he had received knighthood, and in token whereof,
he wore in his breast a green cross, which is the ensign of that order)
that he would give us our lives with good entreatie, and send us as speedily as
he could, into our own country. In confirmation whereof, he took of his
glove, and sent it to me, as a pledge.

With this message John G^mes returned, and the Spaniards entered, and took
possession of our ship, every one crying buena querra, buena querra, oy p^r
in maniana porti: with which our Company began to secure themselves.

The General, was a principal Gentleman, of the ancient Nobility of Spain,
and brother to the Conde de Lemos, whose intention no doubt was according to
his promise; and therefore considering that some bad entreaty, and insolency,
might be offered unto me in my ship, by the common Soldiers, who seldom
have respect to any person in such occasions, esp^cially in the case I was,
whereof he had en^ormed himself; for prevention, he sent a principal
Captain, brought up long time in Flaunders, called Pedro Alueres de Pulgar, to
take care of me, and whilst the ships were one abourd the other, to bring me
into his ship: which he accomplished with great humanity and courtesi^;
d^spising the bars of gold which were shared before his face; which he might
alone have enjoyed, if he would; And truly he was, as after I found by
trial, a true Captain; a man worthy of any charge, and of the noblest
condition, that I have known any Spaniard.

The mildnes of a General after victory
The General received me with great courtesy and compassion even with tears
in his eyes, and words of great consolation, and commanded me to be
accommodated in his own Cabbine, where he sought to cure and comfort me the
best he could; the like he used with all our hurt men, six and thirty at
least. And doubtless as true courage, valor, and resolution, is requisite in a
General, in the time of battle. So humanity, mildnes, and courtesy, after
victory.

SECT. LXIII.
WHilst the ships were together, the maine-mast of the Dainty ^ell by the
bourd, and the people being occupied in ransacking and seeking for spoil and
Pillage, neglected the principal; whereof ensued, that within a short space
the Dain^ie grew so deep with water, which increased for want of prevention,
that all who were in her, desired to forsake her, and weaved and cried for
succor to be saved; being out of hope of her recoverie.

Whereupon, The Dainty in danger of perishing.
the General calling together the best experimented men he had, and
consulting with them what was best to be done: it was resolved, that General
Michaell Angel should go abourd the Dainty, and with him threescore
Mariners, as many Soldiers; and with them, the English men who were able to
labor to free her from water, and to put her in order, if it were possible:
and then to recover Perico, the port of Panama, for that, of those to wind
wards, it was impossible to turn up to any of them and nearer then to le-ward
was not any, that could supply our necessities and wants; which lay from us,
east north east, above two hundredth leagues.

Michaell Angel, M^^haell Archangell, ^e^o^ereth the Sh^p.
being a man of experience and care, accomplished that he took in hand,
although in clearing and bayling the water, in placing a pumpe, and in fitting,
and mending her fore-saile, he spent above six and thirty hours.

During which time, the ships lay all a hull; but this work ended, they set
sail, and directed their cours^ for the Isles of Pearls; And for that the
Dainty sailed badly, what for want of her maine-sayle, and with the advantage,
which all the south sea ships have of all those built in our-North sea: The
Admiral gave her a t^we; which notwithstanding, (the wind calming with us, as
we approached nearer to the land) twelve days were spent, before we could
fetch sight of the Islands; which lie along the coast, beginning some eight
leagues, West south-west from Panama, and run to the south-wards near thirty
leagues. They are many, and the most uninhabited, and those which have people,
have some Negroes, slaves unto the Spaniards, which occupy themselves in
labor of the land, or in fishing for Pearls,

In times past, many enriched themselves with that trade, but now it is grown
to decay. The manner of fishing for Pearls is, Fishing for Pearls.
with certain long Pinaces or small barks, in which, there go four, five,
six, or eight Negroes, expert swimmers, and great deevers, whom the Spaniards
call Busos; with tract of time, use, and continual practice, having learned to
hold their breath long under water, for the better atchieving their work.
These throwing themselves into the Sea, with certain instruments of their art,
go to the bottom, and seek the banks of the Oysters, in which the Pearls
are ingendered; and with their force and art, remove them from their
foundation, in which they spend more or less time, according to the resistance
the firmenes of the ground affords. Once loosed, they put them into a bag
under their arms, and after bring them up into their boats; having laden it,
they go to the shore: there they open them, and take out the Pearls: they
lie under the uttermost part of the circuit of the Oyster, in ranks and
proportions, under a certain part, which is of many pleights and folds, called
the Ruff, for the similitude, it has unto a Ruff.

The Pearls increase in bigness, as they be nearer the end or joint of the
Oyster: The meat of those, which have these pearls, is milkie, and not very
wholesome to be eaten.

In Anno, 1583. In the Island of Margarita, I was at the dregging of Pearl
Oysters, after the manner we dregge Oysters in England; and with mine own hands
I opened many, and took out the pearls of them; some greater, some less, and
in good quantity.

How the Pearl is engendered in the Oyster, or Mussell (for they are found in
both) diverse and sundry are the opinions; but some ridiculous; whereof, because
many famous and learned men have written largely, I will speak no more, then
has been formerly spoken, but refer their curious desires to Pliny, with
other Ancient, and modern Authors.

They are found in diverse parts of the world, as in the west Indies, The
places where pearl are found.
in the South sea, in the east Indian sea, in the Straites of Magellane, and in
the Scottish Sea.

Those found near the Pooles, are not perfect, but are of a thick color;
whereas such as are found near the line, are most orient and transparent: the
curious call it their water: and the best is a clear white shining, with
fiery flames. And those of the east India have the best reputation, though as
good are found in the west India, the the choice ones, are of great value and
estimation, but the greatest, that I have read or heard of, was found in these
Islands of Pearls; the which King Phillip the second of Spain, gave to his
daughter Elizabeth, wife to Albertus, Archduke of Austria, and Governor of
the States of Flaunders: in whose possession it remains, and is called, la
Peregrina, for the rarenes of it; being as big, as the pomell of a Poniard.

SECT. LXIIII.
IN this Navigation, after our surrender, the General took especial care for
the good entreaty of us, The General continues his honorable usage, toward
the sick and wounded.
and especially of those who were hurt. And God so blessed the hands of our
Surgians (besides that they were expert in their Art) that of all our wounded
men not one died, that was alive the day after our surrendry: The number
whereof was near forty; and many of them with eight, ten, or twelve wounds,
and some with more. The thing that ought to move us to give God Almighty
especial thanks and praises; was, that they were cured in a manner without
instruments or salues: For the chests were all broken to pieces; and many of
their simples and compounds thrown into the Sea; those which remained, were
such, as were thrown about the ship in broken pots and baggs, and such as by
the Divine providence were reserved, at the end of three days, by order from
the General, were commanded to be sought and gathered together. These with
some instruments of small moment, bought and procured from those, who had
reserved them to a different end, did not only serve for our cures, but also
for the curing of the Spaniards, being many more, then those of our Company.

For the Spanish Surgians were altogether ignorant in their profession, and had
little or nothing wherewith to cure. And I have noted, that the Spaniards in
general are nothing so curious, in accommodating themselves, with good and
careful Surgeans, nor to fit them with that which belongs to their
profession, as other Nations are, though they have greater need then any, that
I do know.

At the time of our surrender, I had not the Spanish tongue, and so was forced
to use an interpreter, or the Latin, or French; which help m^ much for the
understanding of those, which spoke unto me in Spanish; together with a little
smattering I had of the Portugal.

Through the noble proceeding of Don Beltran with us, and his particular care
toward me, in curing and comforting me, I began to gather heart, and hope of
life, and health; my servants which were on foot, advised me ordinarily of
that which past. But some of our enemies, badly inclined, repined at the
proceedings of the General; and said, he did ill to use us so well; that we
were Lutherans; and for that cause, the says which was given us, was not to be
kept nor performed: Others, that we had fought as good Soldiers, and therefore
d^served good quarter. Others, nicknamed us with the name of Corsarios, or
Pirates; not discerning thereby that they included themselves within the same
imputation. Some were of opinion, that from Panama, the General would send us
into Spain; Others said, that he durst not dispose of us, but by order from
the Viceroy of Peru, who had given him his authority. This hit the nail on
the head.

To all I gave the hearing, and laid up in the storehouse of my memory, that
which I thought to be of substance, and in the storehouse of my consideration,
endeavored to frame a proportionable resolution to all occurrants, conformable
to Gods most holy will. Withal I profitted my self of the means, which
should be offered, and bear greatest probability to work our comfort, help,
and remedy. And so, as time ministered opportunity, I began, and endeavored to
satisfy the General, and the better sort in the points I durst intermeddle.
And especially to persuade (by the best reasons I could) that we might be sent
presently from Panama: Alleging the promise given us, the cost and charges
ensuing, which doubtless would be such as deserved consideration and excuse:
besides that, now whilst he was in place, and power and authority in his
hands, to perform with us, that he would look into his honor, and profit
himself of the occasion, and not put us into the hands of a third person; who
perhaps bring more powerful then himself, he might be forced to pray and
entreat the performance of his promise; whereunto he gave us the hearing, and
bare us in hand, that he would do, what he could.

The General, and all in general, not only in the Peru, but in all Spain,
and the Kingdoms thereof (before our surrendry) held all English men of War,
to be Corsarlos, or Pirates; which I la^oured to reform, both in the Peru, and
also in the Counsels of Spain, and amongst the Chieftaines, soldiers, and
better sort, with whom I came to have conversation; Alleging that a Pirate or
Corsario, What a Pirate is.
is he, which in time of peace, or truce spoyleth, or ^^b^eth those, which have
peace or truce with them: but the Eng^ish have neither peace nor truce with
Spain, but war; and therefore not to be accounted Pirates. Besides, Spain
broke the peace with England, and not England with Spain; and that by Ymbargo,
which of all kinds of defiances, is most reproved, and of least reputation; The
ransoming of prisoners, and that by the Cannon, being more honorable, but above
all, the most honorable, is with Trumpet and Herald, to proclaim and denounce
the war by public defiance. 3. Sorts of defiances.
And so if they should condemn the English for Pirates, of force, they must
first condemn themselves.

Moreover, Pirates are those, who range the Seas without license of their
Prince; who when they are met with, are punished more severely by their own
Lords, then when they fall into the hands of strangers; which is notorious to
be more severely prosecuted in England (in time of peace) then in any the
Kingdoms of Christendom.

But the English have all license, either immediately from their Prince, or
from others thereunto authorized, and so cannot in any sense be comprehended
under the name of Pirates* for any hostility undertaken against Spain, or the
dependancies thereof.

And so the state standing as now it does; if in Spain a pa^ti^uler man should
arm a ship, The Custom of Spain ^or of war.
and go in warre-fare with it against the English, and happened to be taken by
them: I make no question, but the Company should be entreated according to
that manner, which they have ever used since the beginning of the War:
without making further Inquisition.

Then if he were rich or poor, to see if he were able to give a ransom, in
this also they are not very curious. But if this spanish ship should fall a
thwart his Kings Armado, or Galleys, I make no doubt but they would hang the
Captain and his Company for Pirates. My reason is, for that by a special
law, it is enacted: that no man, in the kingdoms of Spain, may arm any
ship, and go in warre-fare, without the Kings special license and
commission; upon pain to be reputed a Pirate, and to be chastised with the
punishment due to Corsarios. In England the case is different, The Custom of
England.
for the war once proclaimed, every man may arm that will, and has
wherewith; which makes for our greater exemption, from being comprehended
within the number of Pirates.

Wi^h these, and other like Arguments to this purpose, (to avoid tediousnes) I
omit; I convinced all those whom I heard to harp upon this string; which was
of no small importance for our good entreatie, and motives for many, to further
and favor the accomplishment of the promise lately made unto us.

SECT. LXV.
ONe day after dinner, (as was the ordinary custom) The General, his
Captains, and the better sort of his followers, being assembled in the Cabin
of the Poope in conference, an eager contention arose amongst them, touching
the capitulation of Buena Querra and the purport thereof. A disputation
concerning Buena querra.
Some said, that only life and good entreatie of ^he prisoners, was to be
comprehended therein; Others enlarged, and restrained it, according to their
humors and experience. In (...) opinion was required, and what I had seen, and
known, touching that point: wherein I pawsed a little, and suspecting the
wo^st, feared that it might be a bait laid to catch me withal, and so
excused my self; saying, that where so many experimented soldiers were joined
together, my young judgment was little to be respected; whereunto the General
replied: That knowledge was not always incident to years, (though reason
requires, that the Aged should be the wisest) but an Art, acquired by action,
and management of affairs. And therefore they would be but certified, what I
had seen, and what my judgment was in this point, unto which, seeing I could
not well excuse my self, I condiscended; and calling my wits together, holding
it better, to shoot out my boult, by yielding unto reason, (although I might
err) then to stand obstinate, my will being at war with my consent, and
fearing my denial might be taken for discourtesie, which peradventure might
also purchase me mislike with those, who seemed to wish me comfort and
restitution. I submitted to better judgment, the reformation of the present
Assembly; The Resolution etc.
saying, Sir, under the capitulation of Buena querra, (or fair wars) I have
ever understood, and so it has been observed in these, as also in former
times, that preservation of life, and good entreatie of the prisoner, have
been comprehended: and further by no means to be urged to any thing contrary
to his conscience, as touching his Religion; nor to be seduced, or menaced from
the allegiance due to his Prince and Country: but rather to ransom him for
his months pay. And this is that which I have known practiced in our times,
in gene^all amongst all civil and noble Nations. But the English, The noble
usage of the Eng^ish,
have enlarged it one point more toward the Spaniards rendered a Buena querra,
in these wars; have ever delivered them, which have been taken upon such
compositions, without ransom: but the covetousnes of our Age has brought in
many abuses, But abused in these days.
and excluded the principal Officers from partaking of the benefit of this
privilege, in leaving them to the discretion of the Victor, being many times
poorer, then the common Soldiers, their qualities considered, whereby they are
commonly put to more, then the ordinary ransom, and not being able of
themselves to accomplish it, are forgotten of their Princes, and sometimes
suffer long imprysonment, which they should not.

With this, Don Beltran said, Don Beltran satisfied

And answers.


This ambiguitie you have well resolved; And like a worthy Gentleman (with
great courtesy and liberality) added; Let not the last point trouble you: but
be of good comfort, for I here give you my word anew, that your ransom (if
any shall be thought due) shall be but a cople of Grey-ho^^d^ for me; and
other two for my Brother, the Conde de Lemes, An^ this I swear to you by the
habit of Alcantera. Provided always, that the King my Master leave you to my
dispose, as of right you belong unto me.

For amongst the Spaniards in their Armadoes, if there be an absolute
General, the tenth of all is due to him, and he is to take choice of the best:
where in other Countries, it is by lot, that the Generals tenth is given; And
if they be but two ships, he does the like, and being but one, she is of
right the Generals. This I hardly believed, until I saw a Letter, in which
the King willed his Viceroy, to give Don Beltran thanks for our ship and
Artillery, which he had given to his Majesty.

I yielded to the General, most hearty thanks for his great favor,
wherewith he bound me ever to seek how to serve him, and deserve it.

SECT. LXVI.
IN this discourse General Michaell Angel demanded, for what purpose served
the little short Arrows, which we had in our ship, and those in so great
quantity: I satisfied them, that they were for our Muskets. Short arrows for
Muskets.
They are not as yet in use amongst the Spaniards, yet of singular effect and
execution as our enemies confessed: for the upper work of their ships being
Muskets proof, in all places they passed through both sides with facility,
and wrought extraordinary disasters, which caused admiration, to see themselves
wounded with small short, where they thought themselves secure; and by no
means could find where they entered, nor come to the sight of any of the shot.

Hereof they proved to profit themselves after, but for that they wanted the
t^^p^ings, which are first to be driven home, before the arrow be put in, and
as then understood not the secret, they rejected them, as uncertain, and
therefore not to be used, but of all the shot used now a days, for the
annoying of an Enemy in ^ight by Sea, few are of greater moment for many
respects: which I hold not convenient to treat of in Public.

SECT. LXVII.
A Little to the South-wards of the Island of Pearl, betwixt seven and eight
degrees, is the great River of Saint Buena Ventura. It falls into the South
Sea with three mouths, the head of which, is but a little distant from the
North Sea. In Anno 1575. or 1576. one John Oxman of Plymouth, John Oxmans
Voyage to the South Sea.
going into the west Indies, joined with the Symarons. What the Symarons are.


These are fugitive Negroes, and for the bad entreaty which their Masters had
given them, were then retired into the mountains, and lived upon the spoil of
such Spaniards, as they could master, and could never be brought into
obedience, till by composition they had a place limmitted them for their
freedom, where they should live quietly by themselves. At this day they have a
great habitation near Panama, Their habitation.
called Saint Iago de los Negros, well peopled, with all their Officers and
Commanders of their own, save only a Spanish Governor.

By the assistance of these Symarons, Their assistance.
he brought to the head of this River, by peecemeale, and in many iourneyes a
small pinnace, he fitted it by time in warlike manner, and with the choice of
his Company, put himself into the South Sea, where his good ha^, was to meet
with a cople of ships of trade, and in the one of them a great quantity of
gold. And amongst other things two pieces of special estimation, the one a
Table of massy gold, with Emralds, sent for a present to the King; the other a
Lady of singular beauty, married, and a mother of Children. The latter grew
to be his perdition: for he had capitulated with these Symarons, John Oxman
capitulateth with them,
that their part of the booty, should be only the prisoners, to the end to
execute their malice upon them, (such was the rancor they had conceived against
them, for that they had been the Tyrants of their liberty.) But the Spaniards
not contented to have them their slaves; who lately had been their Lords,
added to their servitude, cruel entreaties. And they again to feed their
insatiable revenges, accustomed to roast and eat the hearts of all those
Spaniards, whom at any time they could lay hand upon.

John Oxman (I say) was taken with the love of this Lady, His folly,
and to win her good will, what through her tears and persuasions, and what
through fear and detestation of their barbarous inclinations; breaking promise
with the Symarons, yielded to her request, And
which was, to give the prisoners liberty with their ships; Breach of promise.
for that they were not useful for him: notwithstanding Oxman kept the Lady,
who had in one of the restored ships, either a Son, or a Nephew. This
Nephew with the rest of the Spaniards, His pursuit.
made all the have they could to Pa^am^, and they used such diligence, as
within few hours, some were dispatched to seek those, who little thought so
quickly to be overtaken. The pursuers approaching the River, were doubtful by
which of the afore-remembred three mouths, they should take their way.

In this wavering, one of the Soldiers espied certain feathers, And evil
Fortune.
of Henns, and some boughs of trees, (which they had cut off to make their
way) swmming down one of the Outlets. This was light sufficient, to guide them
in their course, they entered the River, and followed the tracke, as far as
their Frigates had water sufficient; and then with part of their Soldiers in
their boats, and the rest on the banks on either side, they marched day and
night in pursuit of their enemies; and in fine came upon them unexpected at
the head of the River, making good cheer in their Tents, and divided in two
partialities about the partition, and sharing of their gold. Thus were they
surprised, and not one escaped.

Some say that John Oxman, fled to the Symarons, He flies to the Symarons
but they utterly denied to receive, or succor him, for that he had broken his
promise; the only Objection they cast in his teeth, was, that if he had held
his word with them, he never had fallen into this extremity.

In fine he was taken; and after, his ship also was possessed by the
Spaniards; which he had hid in a certain Coue, and covered with boughs of
trees, in the guard and custody of some four or five of his followers. All
his Company, were conveyed to Panama, and there were ymbarked for Lyma; where a
process was made against them, by the Justice, and all condemned and hanged as
Pirates.

This may be a good example to others in like occasions: first, to shun such
notorious sins, which cannot escape punishment in this life, nor in the life
to come: for the breach of faith is reputed amongst the greatest faults, Breach
of faith never unpunished.
which a man can commit. Secondly, not to abuse another man's wife, much less
to force her, both being odious to God and man. Thirdly to beware of mutenies,
which seldom or never are seen to come to better ends; for where such trees
flourish, the fruit of force, must either be bitter, sweet, or very sower.
And therefore, seeing we vaunt our selves to be Christians and make
profession of his law, who forbids all such vanities; let us faithfully
shun them, that we may partake the end of that hope which our profession
teaches and promises.

SECT. LXVIII.
Coming in sight of the Islands of Pearls, the wind began to fresh in with
us, and we profited out selves of it: but coming thwart of a small Island,
which they call la Pacheta, La Pacheta
that lies within the Pearl Islands, close abourd the main, and some eight or
ten Leagues south and by west from Panama, the wind calmed again.

This Island belongs to a private man, it is a round humock, containing not a
league of ground, but most fertile. Insomuch that by the owners industry, and
the labor of some few slaves, who occupy themselves in manuring it; and two
barks, which he imployeth in bringing the fruit it gives, to Panama; it is
said to be worth him every week, one with another, a bar of silver; valued
betwixt two hundredth and fifty, or three hundredth pezos: which in English
money, may amount to fifty or threescore pounds and for that, which I saw at
my being in Panama, touching this, I hold to be true.

In our course to fetch the Port of Panama, we p^^ our selves betwixt the
Islands and the Maine: which is a goodly Chan^ell, of three, four, and five
leagues broad, and without danger; except a man come too near the shore on
any side; and that is thought the better course, then to go a sea-boord of the
Islands, because of the swift running of the tides, and the advantage to stop
the ebb: As also for succor, if a man should happen to be becalmed at any
time beyond expectation; which happens sometimes.

The seventh of July we had sight of Perico; they are two little Islands,
which cause the Port of Panama, where all the ships use to ride; It is some
two Leagues west north-west of the City, which has also a Pere in it self
for small Barks, at full sea, it may have haue^ some six or seven foot
water, but at low water it is dry.

The ninth of July we anokored under Perico, and the General presently advised
the Audiencia, of that which had succeeded in his Journey: The General
certefieth the Audiencia of his success.
which understood by them, caused bonfires to be made, and every man to put
luminaries in their houses; the fashion is much used amongst the Spaniards in
their feasts of joy, or for glad tidings; placing many lights in their
Churches, in their windows, and Galleries, and corners of their houses; which
being in the beginning of the night, The great joy of the Spaniards.
and the City close by the sea shore, showed to us (being far off) as
though the City had been on a light fire.

About eight of the clock all the Artillery of the City was shot off which
we might discern by the flashes of fire, but could not hear the report: yet
the Armando being advised thereof, and in a readiness, answered them likewise
with all their Artillery: which taking end (as all the vanities of this earth
do) The General se^led himself to dispatch advise for the King^ for the
Viceroy of Peru, and for the Viceroy of the Nova Spana, for he also had
been certified of our being in that sea, and had fitted an Armado to seek us,
and to guard his coast.

But now for a farewell, (and note it) Let me relate unto you this Secret. Note
How Don Beltran showed me a Letter from the King his Master, directed to the
Viceroy, wherein he gave him particular relation of my pretended voyage; of
the ships; their burden; their munition; their number of men, which I had in
them, as perfectly as it he had seen all with his own eyes; Saying unto me:
Hereby, may you discern, whether the King my Master have friends in England,
and good and speedy advice of all that passes.

Whereu^to I replied; It was no wonder, for that he had plenty of gold and
silver, which works this and more strange effects: for my journey was
public and notorious to all the Kingdom, whereunto he replied, that if I
thought it so convenient, leave should be given me to write into England to the
Queens Majesty my Mistress, to my Father, and to other personages, as I
thought good; and leaving the Letters open; that he would send some of them,
in the Kings Packet, others to his Uncle Don Rodrigo de Castro, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Sevill, and to other friends of his: Not making any doubt but
that they would be speedily in England. For which I thanked him, and accepted
his courtesy, and although I was my self unable to write, yet by the hands of
a servant of mine, I wrote three or four coppies of one letter to my Father,
Sir John Hawkins. In which I briefly made relation of all that had succeeded in
our voyage.

The dispatches of Spain and new Spain, went by ordinary course in ships of
advise; but that for the Peru was sent by a kinseman of the Generals, called
Don Francisco de la Cuena.

Which being dispatched, Don Beltran hasted all that ever he could, to put his
ships in order, to return to Lyma. He caus^d the Dainty to be grounded,
and trimmed, for in those Islands, it higheth and falls some fifteen or
sixteen foot water.

And the General with his Captains, and some Religious men being aboard her,
and new naming her, named her the Visitation; for that she was rendered on the
day, on which they celebrate the visitation of the blessed Virgin Mary. In that
place the ground being plain and without vantage, (whereby to help the tender
sided and sharp ships) they are forced to shore them on either side. In the
midest of their solemnity, her props and shores of one side failed and so she
fell over upon that side suddenly, entreating many of them (which were in her)
very badly, and doubtless had she bin like the ships of the South Sea, she
had broken out her bulge: but being without Mastes and empty, (for in the South
Sea, when they bring a ground a ship, they leave neither mast, balast, nor
any other thing abourd, besides the bare hull) her strength was such, as it
made no great show to have received any damage, but the fear she put them all
into was not little, and caused them to run out of her ^aster then a good
pace.

In these Islands is no succor, nor refreshing; only in the one of them, is
one house of straw, and a little spring of small moment. For the water, which
the ships use for their provision; they fetch from another Island two Leagues
west north-west of these; which they call Tabaga, having in it some fruit and
refreshing, and some few Indians to inhabit it.

What succeeded to me, and to the rest during our Imprisoment, with the
rarities and particularities of the Peru, and Tierra firm, my voyage to
Spain, and the success, with the time I spent in prison in the Peru, in the
Tercera, in Sevill, and in Madrid, with the accidents which befell me in them;
I leave for a second part of this discourse, if God give life, and convenient
place and rest, necessary for so tedious and troublesome a work: desiring God,
that is Almighty, to give his blessing to this and the rest of my intentions:
that it and they may be fruitful, to his glory, and the good of all: then
shall my desires be accomplished, and I account my self most happy. To whom
be all glory, and thanks from all eternity

FINIS.
Errata sic corrige.
FOlio 5. for recant, read recount. fol. 7. and 9. for wasters, read wa^ters.
fol. 9. line 7. for light, read last. fol. 15. for serve read save. fol. 23.
for we not, read we were not. for the River of Ieromino, read Ienero. for rose,
read nose. The litteralls are commended to favor.

The Table of the principal Observations contained in this Book.
A
Advantage of obedience. Folio. 91 Advise by Land and Sea. Folio. 117
Advertisements for Commanders. Folio. 91 For servitors. Folio. 92 Agnanapes.
Folio. 62 Noblenes of Alonso de soto. Folio. 103 Alcatrices. Folio. 44
Amber-grice. Folio. 46.47 Amity of the Indians. Folio. 116 Mending of
unserviceable Anchors. Folio. 87 Light Anchors fit for the South Sea. Folio.
102 Arica. Folio. 114 Valor of the Arawcans. Folio. 107 Much commended for all
sorts of fruit and gold. Folio. 106 Spanish Armado. Folio. 125 Arrogance of the
Spanish General. Folio. 140 Overcharging of Artillery. Folio. 115 Courses for
Artillery after bourding. Folio. 145 Donna Austria in the narrow Seas. Folio.
21
B
Backwardness of Companies. Folio. 90 Evil consequences thereof. ibid
Baldivia. Folio. 96 English Bay. Folio. 82 The Bezar stone. Folio. 47 Beef
pickled. 69. held good beyond the Equinoctial. ibid Blanches Bay. Folio. 77
Policies to avoid Bourding. Folio. 138 The Bonito. Folio. 42 Brasil known,
etc. Folio. 38 Bravo. Folio. 29 Description of Brasil. Folio. 64 Its Havens.
Folio. 64 Commodities and wants. Folio. 65 Bestial and discommodities. ibid
Loss of the Bordeaux Fleet. Folio. 9
C
FAlse Calking. Folio. 18 Prevention thereof. ibid Thomas Candish. 85.
surprised Folio. 58 Canary Islands. Folio. 24 Grand Canary. Folio. 25 Cap^
Blanco. Folio. 54 Ignobl^ Captains. Folio. 68 Disloyalties of Captains.
Folio. 112 Beverage of Cassavy. Folio. 62 Cas^avi Meal. Folio. 61 Preparing
thereof. ibid S. Catelena. Folio. 66 Parts requisite in a Chieftain. Folio. 130
Two Chieftain^ dangerous. Folio. 133 Cherries. Folio. 55 People of Chile.
Folio. 98 Their weapons. Folio. 99 And hate to the Spaniards. ^^id Civil Catts.
Folio. 31 City of Conception. Folio. 100 Unwillingness to follow covetous
Commanders. Folio. 109 A Commander not to trust his officers. Folio. 127
Admonitions to Commanders. Folio. 128. Cocos, and their kinds. Folio. 30.31
Complaints of master Thomas Candish. Folio. 14 Of master George Raymond. ibid
Company sick. 38. dismayed. Folio. 84 Loss of the Edward Cotton. Folio. 33.
Clothes made in Coquimbo. Folio. 107 Crabby Cove. Folio. 84 Care of Currants.
Folio. 33
D
DEparture from Lyma. Folio. 103 Devises in sudden accidents. Folio. 76.
Directions to be secret. Folio. 130 Discipline of the Spanish. Folio. 67 Cause
of their prosperities. ibid Discipline neglected by the English. Folio. 8 Pried
into by the Spaniards Folio. 134 And by them imitated. ibid Use of Discoueries.
Folio. 1 Discovery on the coast to be avoided. Folio. 100 The Dolphin. Folio.
42 Sir Francis Drake upon the sothermost part of the world. Folio. 9^
Providence of the Dutch. ^7 Ducks. Folio. 74
E
Elizabeth's Bay. Disvse of Engines of Antiquity. Folio. 143 The English carry
up their flag Folio. 20 English Authors of Sea Dis^ipline. Folio. 8
Carelessness of the English. Folio. 127 Exchange of trifles. Folio. 98 Of
sheep. ibid Exercise always necessary. Folio. 26
F
Ed* Fenton. Folio. 85 Iuan Fernandes. Folio. 100 Danger of Fire. 39. By
heating of Pitch. ibid. By taking Tobacco. ibid. By Candle light. ibid. By
hooping and scutling. Folio. 40 By nature of waters. ibid Strange tree in
Fiero. Folio. 25 Beginning of the Spanish Fight. 126. Their intertainment.
Folio. 122 The English. 75. The Spanish 130 ibid. pay dear for their rashness.
135. Take a new resolution. Folio. 1^6 Flying fishes. Folio. 44 French and
English salute. Folio. 20 French surprised. Folio. 57 To know wholesome fruits.
Folio. 55 Fuego. Folio. 29 End of Fugitives. Folio. 135
G
GAnnetts. Folio. 54 God propitions. Folio. 84 Therefore praised. ibid One
Ship and some Gold taken. Folio. 101 Every shower, a shower of Gold. ibid. S:
R: Greenfild at Flores. Folio. 10 Guls. Folio. 73 Deceit of the Gunner. Folio.
127
H
MAster Thomas Hampton. Folio. 20 Annoyances in Harbors. Folio. 51 Use of
Havas purgativas. Folio. 55 Master Will: Hawkins. Folio. 86 Hawkins Mayden-^and.
Folio. 70 Helm-man. Folio. 54
I
SAint Iago 29. sacked. ibid S. James Islands. Folio. 54 The Jesus of Lubeck.
Folio. 3 Ienero. Folio. 77.59 Unwholesome Islands. 27 Their heat. ibid. The
breze. ibid. The best remedy. Folio. 28 Inconvenience of Imprests. Folio. 15
Their true use. Folio. 16 Indians howsing 63. and manner of sleeping. ibid
Indians apparel. Folio. 98 Indians poligamy Folio. 63 Indians treachery.
Folio. 97 Indians foresight. Folio. 81 Indians industry. 57. dismissed 123. led
by a Mulato. Folio. 124 Consequence of Instructions. Folio. 17 Isla Graund.
Folio. 60 Planting of Iuca. Folio. 62 By women. ibid
L
Unknown Land. Folio. 69 Care of approach. ibid New devise for stopping Leakes
without Bourd. Folio. 104 Best time to pa^se the Line. Folio. 48
M
Madera* Folio. 24 Who to be accounted a Mariner. Folio. 128 His knowledge.
ibid. and materials. ibid. for navigation. ibid The Mariners revenge. Folio. 43
Wilfulness of Mariners. Folio. 100 S. Mary's. Folio. 100 Care of the Master.
Folio. 53 Unskillfulness of the Masters Mate. Folio. 52 Fittest places of
meeting. Folio. 17 Mocha. Folio. 96 Monkies, Parrots. Folio. 31 Influence of
the Moon. Folio. 28 Mutinies how to be winked at Folio. 94 Vnadvisednesse of
the multitude. Folio. 126
O
Objections resolved. Folio. 141 Office of a Master. Folio. 129 Of a Pilot.
ibid Of the Boteswaine. ibid Of the Steward. ibid Of the Carpenter. ibid Of the
Gunner. Folio. 130
Laws of Oloron. Folio. 111 Virtue of Oranges. Folio. 52 Beds of Oreweed.
Folio. 70
P
Modesty of Sir Hen: Palmer. Folio. 8 Patience of the Earl of Nottingham.
Folio. 93 Parts requisite in a Com^^nder at Sea. Folio. 8 The Palmito. Folio.
29.55 Palmito Island. Folio. 59 Pearls. Folio. 88 Island of Pengwins. Folio. 72
Described ibid Hunting of Pengwins. Folio. 73 Kept for store. ibid
Care of the Pentagones. Folio. 63 King Philips coming into England. Folio. 21
Pilats Fishes. Folio. 44 Challenging of pillage. Folio. 110 Prevention of undue
pillage. Folio. 113 What to be reputed pillage. Folio. 112 Placentia. Folio. 30
The Plaintai^. Folio. 30 Duty of Pynaces. Folio. 24 Pynace lost. Folio. 13
Porke good four year old. Folio. 96 Danger of open Ports. Folio. 5 Providence
of God. Folio. 53 Corrupt; or scantie Provisio^s. Folio. 109 Provisions, better
provided at Pli^^^outh. Folio. 5 Puerto Viejo. Folio. 122 Puma. Folio. 121
Purgatiues. Folio. 5^ Purflain. Folio. 55
Q.
BAy of Quintera. Folio. 105
R.
PRevention of Ratts. Folio. 89 Calamities they bring. ibid Long Reach. Folio.
81 The Repentance. Folio. 3 Reasons of return dangerous. Folio. 87 The
Revenge. Folio. 2 Spare R^dders. Folio. 105 Runnawayes. Folio. 68
S
Sabbath reserved for holy exercises. Folio. 27 Sails of Cotton cloth. Folio.
102 Islands of Solomon. Folio. 1^0 Arrival at Santos. Folio. 49 Forbidden to
trade. Folio. 50
Pedro Sarmiento. Folio. 71 The Scurvy. 35. The signs. ibid The causes. ibid
Seething Meat in Salt water. Folio. 36 Corruption of Victual. ibid Vapors of
the Sea. ibid The remedies, By Diet. ibid By Shift. ibid By labor. ibid By
early eating and drinking ibid. By sower Oranges and Lemmons. ibid By Doctor
Stevens water ibid By oil of ^itry: ibid By air of the Land. ibid
Abuses of Seafaring men. Folio. 14 Seals. Folio. 75 Setting the Ship upon a
Rock. 83. diligence to free it. ibid Shething of Ships. Folio. 78 In Spain
and Portingall. Folio. 79 With double Plankes. ibid. With Canvas, ibidem With
burnt Planks. ibid With Varnish in Chi^^. ibid In England. Folio. 80
Best manner of Shething. Folio. 80 The Sharke. Folio. 43 What requisite in
Shipping. Folio. 2 The honor of his Majesty's Ships. Folio. 20 Ships of trade.
Folio. 138 The Prince his Ships. ibid All Ships of war are not to be low
built. Folio. 139 Four Ships taken. Folio. 10^ Duty of a small Ship against a
greater. Folio. 141 Shooting at Sea 19. Mischances thereupon ensuing. ibid
Sloth cause of fancies. Folio. 82 Care of sounding. Folio. 32 Spanish
discipline. Folio. 132.133.134 Spanish officers. Folio. 134 Spanish Admiral
comes to Leeward. Folio. 131 Spaniards parley. Folio. 134 Inexperience of the
Spaniards. Folio. 126. Weakness of the Spaniards. Folio. 9 Vainglory of the
Spaniards. Folio. 142 Severitie of Spain. Folio. 144 Care of Steerage. Folio.
53 Exquisite in the Spaniards and Portingals. ibid
The Straights. Folio. 70 Second peopling of the Straights Folio. 76. South
part of the Straights Islands. Folio. 95 Effects of courage in Storms. Folio.
10 A cruel Storm. Folio. 99 Birds like Swans. 68. how caught, good
refreshment. Folio. 69 Swearing remedied. Folio. 41
T
DEscription of Tenerif. Folio. 25 The Thunderbolt of London. Folio. 3. Tobias
Cove. Folio. 83 Concealment hinders Trading. Folio. 113 Point Tremontame.
Folio. 70 Entertainment of Time. Folio. 88
V
Captain Vavisor. Folio. 10 Importance of a small Vessel. Folio. 100. Place
of Vice Admiral. Folio. 9 Considerations for Voyages. Folio. 4 Voyages
overthrown by pretenses. Folio. 95 Overthrow of the Voyage. Folio. 66 The
cause. ibid Infidelity. ibid

W
ORder of the Flemish Wafters. Folio. 8. Deteyning of Wages. Folio. 110
Warehouses sacked. Folio. 101 Objection of wast. Folio. 78 answered. ibid
Wast of men. Folio. 57 Distilling of Salt- water. Folio. 52 Contagious Waters.
Folio. 56 Care of Watches. Folio. 34 Fruits of good Watch. Folio. 58
Concealment of Weakness. Folio. 103 Wilfulness of Mariners. Folio. 6 Wine
more dangerous, then the enemy. Folio. 103 Spanish Wines and Fevers unknown in
England. Folio. 103 Wine consumes treasure. Folio. 104 Fight of the Whale.
Folio. 45 With the Sword fish. ibid With the Thresher. ibid
Taking of the Whale. Folio. 46 By the Indians. Folio. 47
Warning against Worms. Folio. 78
Y
YOnkers ever necessary in the top. Folio. 26
FINIS.

