QVODLIBETS, LATELY COME OVER FROM NEW BRITANIOLA, OLD NEWFOVND-LAND.

Epigrams and other small parcels, both Moral and Divine.

The first four Books being the Authors own: the rest translated out of that
Excellent E^igrammatist, Mr. John Owen, and other rare Authors.

With two Epistles of that excellently witty Doctor, Francis Rablais:
Translated out of his French at large.

All of them Composed and done at Harbor-Grace in Britaniola, anciently called
Newfound-Land.

By R. H. Sometimes Governor of the Plantation there.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth All-de, for Roger Michell, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bulls-head. 1628.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES, by Gods especial mercy, King
of Great-Britaine, France, and Ireland, etc. Emperor of South, and North
Virginia, King of Britaniola, or Newfound-land, and the Isles adjacent, Father,
Favorer, and Furtherer of all his loyal Subjects right Honorable and worthy
Plantations.
MAY it please your most Excellent Majesty, this last right worthy attribute
of yours (no way insinuated, but justly affixed to your more ancient style)
persuades these unworthy papers to presume (with your gracious leave and
permission) to take the hardines to kiss your sacred hands; hoping of the like
success, that some unripe ears of corn, brought by me from the cold Country
of Newfound-land, received from some honest, well-minded lovers of that action
when they saw them: who with much-affected joy often beholding them, took much
comfort in what they saw: but more, when they supposed it might be bettered, by
industry, care, and honesty. These few bad unripe Rimes of mine (coming from
thence) are in all humility presented with the like intendiment to your
Majesty, to testify that the Air there is not so dull, or maleuolent, but
that if better wits were transplanted thither, neither the Summers heat would
dilate them, nor the Winters cold benumme them, but that they might in full
vigor flourish to good purpose. For if I now grown dull and aged, could do
somewhat, what will not sharper, younger, freer inventions perform there? They
would not walk as I here do, with short turns, leaning sometimes on others
inventions, skipping weakly from bough to bough; but with large walks, with
long, and strong flights. I suppose it not fit at this time (but attending the
success of this presumption) in some other larger manner to make known unto
your Majesty, the inestimable riches of the Seas circuling that Island: The
hopeful improuements of the maine Land thereof: The more then probable,
invaluable hidden treasures therein: The infinite abundance of combustible
fierce materials fit for such an employment. It is only the Air at this time I
desire to dignifie, and that which is within that Horizon: Yet is my proof
rather in hope of others, then in any actuated performance of mine own. If
your Majesty will be pleased to give credit to your meanest subject, I may
engage my self on this asseueration, That not only in this unprofitable
(though not unpleasant) Art, better wits would thrive there: but all other
sollid learning would walk uprightly without conuulsions. I cannot but know,
how almost all your Royal hours are taken up in most Real, serious, sollid
imploiments: did I therefore imagine, that either your Majesty could, or
graciously would vouchsafe the reading of these; they would be found some mine
own, the rest, Translations. Mean and unworthy though they are, yet because
some of them were borne, and the rest did first speak English, in that Land
whereof your gracious Majesty is the right, and lawful Sovereign, and King,
by ancient descent and primary possession, and being the first fruits of this
kind, that ever visited this Land, out of that Dominion of yours; I thought it
my duty, to present and to prostrate these with my self at your Royal feet:
For what I have mistakingly offended herein, or shall hereafter, I humbly
beseech your Majesty's gracious, merciful, general, indulgence and pardon,
unfeignedly beseeching God to bless your Majesty with abundance of all Earthly
and Heavenly blessings. And that you may see an happy success of all your
Foreign Plantations, especially of that of Newfound-land, I remain

Your Majesty's well meaning and loyal Subject, ROBERT HAYMAN.

My humble Muse, desires likewise to kiss your sacred hands.
Fair, Bright, Illustrious Day Star of our times!
Cast a fair aspect on my short breathed Rymes:
If these to kiss your hands, are found unmeet,
I throw my self down at your Royal feet.
Humbly kisseth your sacred hands, the short-breathed Muse of ROBERT HAYMAN.

To my dear Friend and Fellow-Planter, Master Robert Hayman, who with Pen and
Person prepares more room for Christians in the Newfound-World.
WHilst worldlings most build Castles in the Air,
Nibbling on baytes, like Orpheus and Sems heir:
You spend your time both with your Muse and hand,
To edify our hopeful Newfound-Land.
To tame the rude, does argue a brave spirit:
But to save souls, are works of greatest merit.
To plant and fish, from sloth you those persuade:
From errors these, to a more heavenly trade.
Thus whilst but dorsse some raking slaves ingrose,
You dig new grounds, and root up Trees and Moss.
You show the means to cut off suites and strife;
Means for good men, to lead a pleasant life.
You search the Seas, and anchour with strong cables:
Which deeds you build on faith, as those on Babels.
Thus he who borrowed twice sweet Orpheus name;
Poor Cambriols Lord, adds to your rising fame.
Your true friend William Vaughan.

To the Facetious Epigrammatist, my loving Kinsman, Mr. Robert Hayman, who
composed these quaint Quodlibets at Harbor-grace, in Newfound-Land.
YOur modest lines begot in Harbor-Grace,
Do grace that Harbor in old Newfound-Land,
Your witty lines the Muses do embrace.
Pernassus Nymphs admiring, mutely stand,
Seeing such sweet flowers from that barren soil,
As your neat Quodlibets which there did spring,
To Owens Genius you have given the foil.
By your sweet Epigrams, you there did sing.
I would you had the grace with our great King;
To do there your desires: A greater thing.
Your loving Kinsman, Richard Spicer.

To the Lovers of the Muses, upon these Quodlibets.
WHy do so many fondly dote upon
Parnassus Tempe, and that Helison
Renowned by the Greeks? why praise they so
The Muses haunting Tiber, Them, and Po;
As if no other Hill, or Grove, or Spring,
Should yield such Raptures, as these forth did bring?
Behold, even from these uncouth shores, among
Unpeopled woods, and hills, these strains were sung:
And most of theirs they seem to parallel,
Who boast to drink of Aganippe's well.
Despair not therefore, you that love the Muses,
If any Tyrant, you, or yours abuses:
For these will follow you, and make you mirth,
Even at the furthest Angles of the Earth,
And those contentments which at home ye leese,
They shall restore you among Beasts and Trees.
Yours, George Wither.

An Acrostick-Sonnet. To his learned and well-beloved friend, Mr.
Recreated with sweet savors
Of thy various curious Labors,
Beautified with Arts trim Treasures,
Ex'lent for Poeticke-Measures;
Rapt (I say) with so rare view,
Thanks (me thinks) at least, was due.
Here, I found such fragrant flowers,
As, best dressed Vranias Bowers;
Yelding Sents and Sights admired,
Meet, the Muses Brows to have tired:
As, They (then) are, thus graced by Thee,
Never, may They, Grace, deny Thee.
Ad eundem: Per eundem.
IF Newfound-Land yield such commodities,
I Would thither trade, for so rare Merchandise.
Yours, John Vicars.

Upon this Anagram of my name, and the device of the West-Indian Guane.
.Harm I bare not.
depiction of iguana

IF some should meet this Beast upon the way,
Would not their hearts-blood thrill for great affray?
Yet the West-Indian that best knows his nature,
Says, there is not any more harmless Creature.
So though my lines have much deformity,
Their end mine Anagram shall verify.
AA


THE FIRST BOOK OF QVODLIBETS, DONE AND COMPOSED BY THE AVTHOR himself.
1. Of mine own Quodlibets.
THough my best lines no dainty things affords,
My worst have in them some thing else then words.
2. To my Readers.
I kept these closely by me some few years,
Restrained by my knowledge, and my fears:
I fear they are too shallow for the Schools,
I know they are too deep for shallow fools,
Yet there are many of a middle breeding
May think them good: nay richly worth the reading.
3. To the perpetual renown of our learned King JAMES, King of Great
Britain, etc. of famous memory.
Wales, England, Scotland long did disagree,
Yet like a threefoldcord accord in Thee,
Such a cord hardly breaks, being wisely twist:
These three combind, may the whole world resist.
4. Old Lelius to his wise friend Scipio.
Let us sit down and by the fires light,
Let our discourse be without saucy spite,
We Will tell old tooth-lesse tales, which cannot bite,
Whilst young Fools to talk Treason take delight.
5. Why God gives some Fools riches, and some wise men none. To a discreet
friend.
Why fretst thou so, and art so sullen grown?
Thy neighbor Fool gets wealth, and thou getst none.
Wise, merciful, and just is God in it:
For he has given him riches, and thee wit.
Alas poor Fool, if that he had no wealth,
He has not wit to comfort his sad self.
6. An old Apothecary made a new Doctor.
He killed by others warrant formerly,
He kills now by his own authority.
7. God does all in all.
It Is held, The Stars govern the works of Men:
It Is likewise held, Wisemen may govern them:
I hold, God ouer-rules Wise, Ways, and Stars:
It Is He that humbles, and its He preferres.
8. A worldly Man will have it by hook or by crook.
If wealth I cannot catch with Virtues hook,
I Will haule it to me, by my crafty Crook.
9. Thrifty Charity, to a namelesse Friend.
On this Text thou do seize, with griping hold,
Who gives the Poor, he shall receive fourefold.
This Text thou do some pretty room afford,
Who gives the Poor, does lend unto the Lord:
But this hard Text does go against thy grain,
Give cheerfully, looking for naught again.
10. Borrowing on Time, is worse then Bird-lime.
As Fowlers use to take their Foul with Lime:
So Usurers take borrowing Fools with Time.
Great danger'tis, for Birds, Bird-lime to touch*
Not to keep Touch with Usurers it is as much.
11. To a kind Fool.
Often into Bonds for others thou have run,
But by those Bonds, thy self thou have undone.
No luggler ever showed us such a cast,
To be undone by being bound so fast.
So Drunkards do with a like Iugling trick,
By gulping others healths, themselves make sick.
12. Traveling in England.
The traveling fashion of our Nation,
To pay without examination:
What our hard-rented Oasts may get thereby,
Is Noble, Loose, Brave, Prodigality.
13. A persuasion to Humility.
As when the Moon after the Sun does go,
She daily does, fairer, and fuller grow;
But when that She does go before the Sun,
Her light grows less, and less, till she have none:
So whilst we follow God in humble fear,
His Grace in us, will beauteously appear:
But if we go before God in presumption,
His Grace in us will soon have a consumption.
14. Why there are so few Hospitals built.
It us has Will, but wants good Means to do it.
Croesus has Means, but wants a Will unto it.
15. Lawyers profitable pastime.
Lawyers do call Plaintifes Defense, their Plea:
It rather might be called Lawyers Play.
16. The Polycie of the Whore of Babylon.
As common Queanes have several quaint devices,
To hook all kind of men, by their intices:
So the spiritual Whore of Babylon
Has several ginnes to entrap every one:
For Villains, Wantons, easy Indulgences:
For Zealous, Wise, Angelical pretenses;
For High-mindes, Spenders, honor she dispences;
For Women, Fools, fine shows to please their senses.
17. To Bald-pate.
Though I want years, yet hoare I am through cares:
But Whores have made thy head white, without hairs.
18. Worse then naught.
Thou art not worthy of a Satyrs quill:
An Epigram's too short to show thine ill.
19. Two filthy fashions.
Of all fond fashions, that were worn by Men,
These two (I hope) will never be worn again:
Great Codpist Doublets, and great Codpist britch,
At several times worn both by mean and rich:
These two had been, had they been worn together,
Like two Fools, pointing, mocking each the other.
20. Fools are more masters of their wives then wise men. Scarce a Paradoxe.
Wise men for shame mildly away will go,
Fools will stand stiffly to it and have it so:
Wise men for quietness will sometimes yield.
Though Fools be beaten, they will not quit the field.
22. To a Pardon-Buyer.
The Pope gives thee a sweeping Indulgence,
But thou must give him good store of thy pence:
So my Lord Mayor gives spoones all gilded over,
Every Lord Mayor of London does yearly give a gilded spoon to most of his
Company, and at a solemn Feast, each guest gives him 4. or 5. l. or more
toward his charge.
Receives for each four or five pounds therefore.
22. Worse then a Whore.
Our common Whores turn Roman Catholics,
By that means they get Pardons for tricks:
These wandering Stars of common occupation,
Are rightly sphear'd in this large Constellation:
I envy not that Church, that us so spites,
For fingring such notorious Procelites.
23. Why Kings speak in the Plural.
Princes speak in the plural Us, and We:
It is their charge, from wrongs to keep Us free,
And We are wronged when They wronged be:
Thus Plurals with their Plural charge agree.
24. The effects of Gods Word.
Gods Word, to Sheep is grass; to Swine, hard stones;
Unto Believers, Flesh; to others, Bones.
25. A Scottish Honest Man. A Londoners Good Man.
An Honest man, as Scot'shmen understand,
Is one, that mickle gudes has, at command.
A Good man, in the Londoners account,
Is one, whose wealth to some Sum does amount.
Lord, make me Honest, Good by thy instruction:
Then Good and Honest after their construction.
26. How and whereof to jest.
Jest fairly, freely: but exempt from it,
Men's misery, State business, Holy writ.
27. The Worlds Whirlegigge.
Plenty breeds Pride; Pride, Envy, Envy, War,
War, Poverty, Poverty humble Care.
Humility breeds Peace, and Peace breeds Plenty;
Thus round this World does roll alternatly.
28. On a Good fellow Papist, who makes no bones to eat Flesh on Fasting days.
Thou holdst, thou say, the old Religion,
Yet I know, the new Diet best likes thee.
That which thou call'st the new opinion,
I hold, yet the old Diet best likes me.
29. Poperies Pedigree.
Papistry is an old Religion,
Some part more old then Circumcision,
And some as ancient as are Moses Laws,
From whose Lees she some Ceremonies draws,
Which she will hold, by old tradition.
It is indeed a new hodg-podgerie,
Of Jewish rites, elder Idolatry:
Of these old simples a new composition.
30. The Married, to the Chaste.
It would this World quickly depopulate,
If every one should dye in your estate.
31. The Chaste, to the Married.
Therein you have the odds, herein wee'r even:
You fill the world, but we do people heaven.
32. A Description of a Puritan, out of this part of the Letany, From
Blindness of Heart, Pride, Vain glory, etc.
Though Puritanes the Letany deride,
Yet out of it they best may be descride:
They are blind-hearted, Proud, Vainglorious,
Deep Hypocrites, Hateful and Envious,
Malicious, in a full high excess,
And full of all Uncharitableness.
A Prayer hereupon.
Since all tart Puritanes are furnished thus,
From such false Knaves (Good Lord deliver us.)
33. Love is betwixt Equals.
Rich friends for rich friends, will ride, run and row,
Through dirt and dangers, cheerfully they will go:
If poor friends come home to them, for a pleasure,
They cannot find the Gentleman at leisure.
34. The difference betwixt good men and bad, is best seen after death.
Good men like waxe-lights blow'n out, savor well:
Bad men like tallow, leave a stinking smell.
Bad men's Fame may flame more while they have breath,
But Good men's Name, smell sweeter after death.
35. To Sir Pierce Penny-lesse.
He walks out his dinner in Paul's, and his supper in ^^e Excha^ge.
Though little coin thy purse-lesse pocket line,
Yet with great company thou art taken up,
For often with Duke Humfrey thou do dyne,
And often with Sir Thomas Gresham sup.
36 The reward of Charity. To a rich Friend.
Would thou be pitied after thou art dead?
Be pitiful whilst thou thy life do lead:
If whilst thou live, the poor thou do relieve,
Fearing the like supply for thee they will grieve:
If now thou give them naught, when thou art gone,
They will be glad, hoping for a new gown.
37. What have Foolish men to do with Princes Secrets? Thought upon, on the
preparation of a great Fleet, and may serve for all such actions hereafter.
Fond men do wonder where this Fleet shall go:
I should more wonder, if that I should know.
38. A Secret of State.
Though Peace be love liar, honourabler then War,
Yet warlike Kings most loved, and honored are.
39. Kings Paramount Subjection.
What ways Kings walk, Subjects the same will go.
And many Kings, expect they should do so:
Therefore should Kings follow the King Almighty:
Kings are Gods Romans 6. ver. 16.
Subjects, if they govern rightly.
40. Why Women are longer attyring of themselves then Men.
Women tyring themselves have many lets,
Their Fillets, Frontlets, Partlets, and Bracelets:
Whilst downe-right-neatlesse-plaine men have but one,
A Duoblet double-let in putting on.
41 Christ and Antichrist.
Christ in the Temple shopboords overthrew,
Whipped thence the buying and the selling crew.
The Pope In the year of Iubile.
in his Church, sets up his free Fair,
And whips all those, that will not buy his Ware.
42. Wise men may be mistaken. Puritanes ragged Reason of the rag of Popery,
and Papists rotten Reason of threadbare Antiquity.
Some too precize, will not some customs use,
Because that Papists did them once abuse:
As good a reason in sincerity,
As Papists oldnesse without verity.
Though these deserve to be hist off the Schools,
Yet they are held by those that are no Fools.
42 Unrighteous Mammon.
Poets faind Pluto, God of wealth, and Hell:
For they perceived few got their riches well.
44. A Dialogue betwixt a Wise King and a good Christian. The Wise King.
My neighbors secrets I desire to know,
That I their private plots may overthrow.
The good Christian.
I do neglect my Neighbors words, and deeds,
I carefully survey mine own proceeds.
The Wise King.
If that my friends offer to do me harm,
I smite them first, and seek them to disarme.
The good Christian.
Though that my Foes do wrong me every hour,
I do them all the good lies in my power.
The Wise King.
By these and Justice, I shall wisely reign.
The Good Christian.
By this and faith, Heavens Kingdom I shall gain.
45. Sad-Mens lives are longer then Merry-Mens A Paradox.
To him, whose heavy grief has no allay
Of lightning comfort, three hours is a day:
But unto him, that has his hearts content,
Friday is come, ere he thinks Tuesday spent.
46. Poperies principal Absurdities.
In Papisticall Churches, they both read the Scripture and sing and pray to
Images, and all in Lattaine.
Of all the hud-winkt tricks in Popery,
This is the lamentablest foppery:
When God is made to speak, and to command
Men, in a tongue they do not understand,
And Men commanded are to Sing and Pray
To such fond things that know not what they say,
And these men having madly, sadly prayed,
Themselves do not know, what themselves have said.
47. Of those who are too Kind, too Courteous, etc. Who ouerdoe good things.
Exuberant goodness, good men's names have stained,
Their too rank Virtue is by some disdained.
Yet it is not Vice, but Virtue over strained.
48. Some Men's Testament is not their Will.
He that will nothing spare whilst he does live,
And when he dies, unwillingly does give,
Bequeathing what he gladly would keep still,
Makes a good Testament, but an ill Will.
49. Why Wives can make no Wills.
Men, dying make their Will^: why cannot Wives?
Because, Wives have their wills, during their lives.
50. A just Retaliation.
Dead Men bite not: great reason is there then,
That we which now do live, should not bite them.
51. A Prayer.
Lord, send me Patience and Humility,
And then send Plenty, or Adversity:
So if I be observed, or disrespected,
I shall not be puffed up, nor yet dejected.
52. Reverent Grave Preachers.
On holy days, I would hear such a Man,
Grave, holy, full of good instruction.
53 Neat, quaint, nimble Pulpit Wits.
These nimble Lads are fit for working days,
Their witty Sermons may keep some from plays.
54. Diverse complections, and diverse Conditions.
A quiet, chaste mind, in flesh fair, and neat,
Is like to dainty sauce, and dainty meat.
A hansome body, with a mind debaust,
Is like to dainty meat sluttishly saust.
A good wise mind, in flesh ill-fauoured,
Is course meat, sweetly saust, well-sauoured.
A froward, lewd mind in an ill shaped seat,
Is scuruy-scuruy sauce, and scuruy meat.
55. Our Births, and Deaths, Rejoicing, and Mourning.
When we are borne, our friends rejoice, we cry:
But we rejoice, our friends mourn when we dye.
56. The Vanity of a Papisticall Shift.
You say you worship not the wood, nor stone,
For that is but the representation.
Wise Heathen used this Fine Distinction.
Millions that know not this subtility,
Commit plain, palpable Idolatry.
Which you in them, do take some pains to breed,
That on their offerings you may fatly feed:
Why cause you else your Saints to weep, sweat, bleed?
57. Curious barley Brethren.
Those that will have all Names out of Gods book,
And hold all other Names in detest^tion:
Poor begging Lazarus Name, these never took,
They more fear poverty, then Profanation.
58. A Scriuener on a Trotter.
Scriueners get most by riding trotting horses,
Copper-Ars, and Gall, for Ink toward their losses.
59 Women's wise Tears.
Disburthening tears breeds sad hearts some relief,
And that is one cause, few Women dye of grief.
60. To my Reader.
If breuity my Reader do displease.
I use it more for his, then for my ease.
62. Youths conceit, and Ages knowledge.
I thought my self wise when I was at School,
But now I know, I was, and am a Fool.
63. Hearbe-grace commonly called Rewe.
Chaste men with name of Herb of Grace this graced,
Because thereby, they thought they were kept chaste.
Some women hereupon did name it Rue.
Because thereby they thought they lost their Due.
64. To Writers of Heretical, and Keepers of false Books.
When ye before Gods Iudgemen Seat shall come,
Out of your own books, ye shall read your doom:
God need not to produce his own True Book,
For He does daily on your False books look.
65. To a Periwiggian, who hopes to gain by some friends death.
Thou may well hope to be some dead-mans heir,
For thou already wear'st some dead-mens hair.
66. Gossipes and Good-wiues.
Whither go these Good wives so neat and trim?
They go a sipping, or a gossiping.
Come hither, Boy, wipe clean my Spectacles,
I shall see none of these Good-women else.
67. A young Saint, an old Devil, to a Contous old Man.
Thou changed art of late (as I am told)
Less charitable grown, as thou grow'st old;
Thy former good was heat of youth in thee,
For grace once rooted, will grow like a Tree.
Which never can eradicated be.
68. A mad Wenches Justice.
Since not to be thy wives head thou do scorn.
Think this as just, The head must wear the Horn.
69. We are Gods Husbandry, or Gods crop out of a fortile Christian Soul.
A good Soul dressed with Zeal, plowed up with fear,
Watered with Gods grace, a large crop will bear,
The root firm Faith, Hope, the blade spreading fair,
From these springs Love, into a large full ear:
The root is sure, the blade endures the storm,
With sheaues of Love we must fill full Gods Barn.
70. To a fair Whore.
When we do see a woman sweetly fair,
We say that God has done his part in her,
Thou passing fair, but passing wicked art,
In thee therefore Satan has played his part.
71. Riches is now a days the House upon Men's heads.
In elder times good Manners made a Man:
In our wise age, good Manors makes one.
72. Monyes Etymology.
Money that's Moan I: for when I have none,
I pensive am, and sad, and sigh, and moan.
73. The Treasure of the Church, or the Popes Exchequor.
Were not for the huge, large, imagined chest,
The Key whereof hangs at the Popes own breast,
Where ouer-doers works, are ranged for buyers,
For profane Traitors, Gripers, Leachers, Liars,
The Popes strong-bard-chest would be lined but thin,
A bag would serve to keep his treasure in.
74. A wicked, contentious man's Epitaph.
None living loved him, for his death none grieved,
Save some say, Grief it was he so long lived.
75. An Epitaph. On every well meaning man undone by his kindness.
My rich heart made me Poor, comforting Sad,
My helping, Impotent, my Goodness Bad.
76. To one of Fortunes white Sons.
Thou have lived many years in perfect health,
Great friends thou have, for thou have got much wealth,
All things fall pat with thee, which thou would have,
Were it not pity thou should be a Knave?
77. Death, and War.
War begets Famine, famine, Plague, plague Death,
War breathes forth woes, but Death stops all woes breath,
War is great A of ills, and Death is Z.
In wars red Letters, Deaths feast-dayes are read.
78. The Popish Legend. The Jewish Talmoud. Mahomets Alcheron.
The Legend, Talmoud, and the Alcheron,
Are differing lies, for one intention,
They work for differing works framed on one frame,
Like, lewd, large lies, fit for the whet-stone game:
One way they tend, though several ways proceed,
He well believes, who makes them not his Creed.
79. To an Armenian Canary Bird.
Thou that think good works in Gods nose so sauory,
What savor think thou smells he in thy knavery?
80. Faith without Works, Works without Faith.
To believe and live ill, is but to think,
Without Faiths salt, Good-works will quickly-stinke.
81. Ungirt, Unblessed.
Ungirt, unblessed: a Proverb old, and good,
A true one too, if rightly understood:
Unblessed he shall be everlastingly,
Who is not girt with Christian Ephesians. 6.14.
verily.
82. True Chastity.
Not, who does not, yet gladly would go to it,
Is Chaste, but he that may, and will not do it.
83. From hardness of heart, good Lord deliver us.
Its God alone that makes a tender heart.
To make hearts hard, ours and the Devils part*
84. A persuasion to Heaven.
Where Heaven is, all our Divines agree,
They cannot well tell, where Hells seat should be.
Why should we not, to known Heaven bend our race?
Rather then by sin seek an unknown place?
85. To a namelesse Religious Friend.
Why do thou every Sermon Gods Word call,
Since Preachers broach damned errors, flatter, brawle?
Indeed thou may Sermons this praise afford,
It is, or should be, Gods own holy Word.
86. To King JAMES, King of Great Britain, etc. of blessed memory.
Our Ministers in their Euangeling,
Praying for thee, style thee Great Britains King:
Our Lawyers pleading in Westminster Hall,
Of England, and of Scotland King thee call.
For what great mystery, I cannot see,
Why Law, and Gospel should thus disagree.
Only I judge, that Preachers give thee thine,
By their Law its as lawful as Divine.
87. The most Catholic King of Spain.
The Spanish King is styled Most Catholic:
In it is hid a quaint mysterious trick,
His meaning is not in Religion,
But he intends it in Dominion.
88. What use old Moons are put to.
What does become of old Moons thou do ask,
And where her borrowed influence she shades?
For me to tell thee, twere too hard a task,
A witty Wagge says, They fill Women's heads.
89. Little Legs, and less wit.
At first me thought a wise man thou should be,
For Calfe about thee I could no where see:
It Is thought thy Calfes are walked into thy brain,
For all thy talk is in a Caluish vain.
90. Problematically proving, that the City of Rome is not the seat of CHRIST'S
Vicar General.
Since Christ his old choice City ruined,
'Cause it despised Him, and his Saints blood shed,
Why should He Rome, with supreme Grace enable?
Who killed him, and of his innumerable?
91. I prove it thus.
Our Lord was Crucified by Pilats doom,
His death was Roman, and his Judge of Rome,
And of his death the chief pretended cause, John 19.1^.

Was for the breach of Romes Imperial Laws:
And the ten bloody persecutions,
Was by the authority of Romes great ones.
92. Two Proverbs coupled.
As those that get goods ill, do them ill spend,
So an ill life makes an ungodly end.
93. Good Counsel, ill Example.
Those that persuade others to Godliness,
And live themselves ungodly nerethelesse:
Are like a ships Cook, that calls all to prayer,
And yet the greazie Carle will net come there.
94. To an Vpstart.
Thine old friends thou forget'st, having got wealth:
No marvel, for thou have forgot thy self.
95. Christ in the midst.
He that on earth with low humility,
Betwixt two Thieves upon Mount Caluary,
Acted his Passiue-actiue Passion,
In highest heaven in supreme dignity,
Seating himself betwixt the Deity,
Acts his Actiue-passiue compassion.
O let me bear what thou do act in me,
And act what may be suffered by Thee!
96. Gods Word is a two-edged Sword.
Gods Word wounds both ways like a two-edged Sword,
The Preachers, and the Hearers of the Word:
The fore edge wounds the Hearers on the pate,
The backe-edge on the Preachers does rebate.
97. To the admirably witty, and excellently learned Sir Nicholas Smith,
Knight, of Lorkbeare near Exeter, my ancient friend. Taking occasion of an
Anigram of his. N. S. Tulaus mihi cos es.
Praises on duller wits a sharp edge breeds,
Your Wit's all edge, he no such whet-stone needs.
Yet your steeld Judgment, sharp invention,
Temperd with learning, and discretion,
Millions of praises merits as their due:
Who knows you well, knows well that I speak true.
98. To the right worshipful William Noy, Esquire, one of the Benchers of
Lincolnes Inue, long since of my acquaintance both in Oxford and London.
Noah the second father of all souls.
Had in his Arc all beasts, and feathered fowls.
You in your Arc, as in a plenteous hoord,
Have stored what Wit, or Learning can afford:
For all Laws, Common, Civil, or Divine,
For Histories of old, or of our time,
For Moral Learning, or Philosophy,
You are an exact, living Library.
But your rich mind mixed with no base allay,
Is ancient Opher of the old assay.
I may fear drowing, lanch I further forth,
In the large, full, deep Deluge of your worth.
99. To the right worshipful Nicholas Ducke, Esquire, one of the Benchers of
Lincolnes Inn, and Recorder of the City of Exeter, my Cousin German.
Although those Creatures, called by your name,
For their delight in dirt, deserve much blame*
And though that some of your profession,
Are glad when they have got possession.
Of the foul end, or will dirt a clear case:
You in your Circuittread a cleaner pase.
I know it, you abhor those sordid things,
And where 'twas foul before, you clear the springs:
For which, wise honest men you high esteems,
May your young Duckling paddle in like streams.
100. To the right worshipful Arthur Ducke, Doctor of the Civil Law, and
Chancellor of London, Bath and Wells, my Cousin German.
To correct Sin and Folly to disgrace,
To find out Truth, and Cunning steps to trace,
To do this mildly, with an upright pace.
Are virtues in you fitted for your place.
101. An Epithalamium. On the Marriage of Doctor Arthur Ducke, with one of the
Daughters and Coheires of Henry Southworth Esquire.
Amongst your best friends I am not ingrate
To God, who has you given so good a mate,
Fair, Virtuous, Loving, with a great estate.
Would I had such another at the rate.
102. To the right worshipful William Hackwell Esquire, one of the Benehers of
Lincolnes Inn, my ancient kind friend.
Your large, complete, sollid, sufficiency,
Hid in the veil of your wise modesty,
Your quaint, neat learning, your acute quick wit,
And sincere heart, for great employments fit:
Beside your Law, wherein you do excel,
Because you little show of your great deal,
None can know well, except they know you well.
103. To the Reverend George Hackwell, Doctor in Divinity, Archdeacon of Surry,
my ancient and kind friend.
Should I dilate all your great gifts at large,
Which for my weak Muse were too hard a charge,
An Epigram would to a volume grow,
If I their large particulars should show.
You have your brothers whole sufficiency:
Save for his Law, you have Divinity:
This may I add, and with great joy relate:
For which to you obliged is our whole State,
In our blessed best plot, you have sowed good seeds,
Which do out-grow Natures quick-growing weeds.
104. To the right worshipful John Barker Esquire, late Mayor of the City of
Bristoll, my loving and kind brother in Law.
Bristoll, your Birth place (where you have augmented
Much, your much left you) is well recompensed.
In Counsel Office, and in Parliament,
For her good you have showed your good intent:
As you do grace the place that did you breed,
I pray, your Sons sons may there so succeed.
105 To the wise and learned S. B. K. Knight.
A Poet rich, a Judge, and a Just man,
In few but you, are all these found in one.
106 To the right worshipful John Doughty, Alderman of Bristoll, of his right
worthy wife, my especial good friends.
I have heard many say they would not remarry,
If before them their kind wives should miscarry,
I fear, some of them from their words would vary.
Should your wife dye, sad sole you would remain.
I have sufficient reason for my aim,
You cannot find so good a wife again.
107. To the worshipful, Richard Long of Bristoll, Merchant, and his good
wife, my kind and loving friends.
Unthankfulness is the great Sin of Sins,
But Thankefulnes to Kindness, kindness winnes.
For your dear love accept my thanks therefore.
An honest heart is grieved he can no more.
108 To the Reverend Doctor, Thomas Winnife, Deane of Gloucester, Prebend of
Paul's, and Chaplain to King CHARLES, anciently of my acquaintance in Exceter
College in Oxford.
Your sollid learning, and sincere behavior,
Have worthily brought you into great favor,
And you are Deane of Gloria Caesaris,
Such Chaplains our great Caesar's glory is. Some derive Gloucester from Gloria
Caesari, others from Claudius Caesar.

109 To the right worshipful Richard Spicer, Doctor of Physic, my loving and
kind Kinsman.
Apollo, first Inuentor of your Art,
His hidden secrets does to you impart,
Old Galen, Auicen, and all the rest,
Have with their knowledge your grave judgment blessed,
You are both wise and happy in your skill,
Doing continual good, and no man ill.
110. To the right worshipful Robert Viluain, Doctor of Physic, my ancient
friend, in Exeter College in Oxford.
Let me change your Paternall name Vilvaine,
Somewhat more aptly, and call you Feele-vaine,
In Physic still you are as good as any,
And with your Recipe's you have holp't many,
Wherefore in troops the to sick you repair,
Who has your help, need not of health despair.
111. To the Reverend, learned, acute, and witty, Master Charles Fitz-Geoffery,
Bachelor in Divinity, my especial kind friend, most excellent Poet.
Blind Poet Homer you do equalize,
Though he saw more with none, then most with eyes.
Our Geoffery Chaucer, who wrote quaintly, neat,
In verse you match equal, him in conceit,
Featured you are like Homer in one eye.
Rightly surnamed the Son of Geoffery.
112. To a right worshipful, discreet, sober Gentleman, a Justice of Peace,
who of a wild demeand young Gentlman, is now become a Reverend Minister, a
painful Preacher, and a worthy Example.
You know, I know, what kind of man you were;
Not like to make the man that now you are:
Your buds of Grace, were ouer-growne with folly,
These weeds plucked up, you are grown wholly holy,
From a strange, loose, wild, waggish Libertine,
A Doctor learned, Preacher sweet, Divine.
Many take Orders, Livings to obtain.
Plenty you had, Christ's glory was your aim,
Your Friends joyed much, when they saw you so given,
Ineffable's the joy that was in heaven.
113. To the same Reverend Doctor.
You are turned old Saint, leaving your young evils,
Whilst many young Saints, do become old Devils.
114. To my honest Bedfellow the privately Charitable, discreetly Beneficial,
Master Edward Pain, Merchant of Bristoll.
Piein is Greek, to drink: Pain, French, for bread:
With Pain (God says) with these we shall be fed,
Yet without Pain, many these needfuls gain,
Only by thanking God, and Master Pain.
115. To squint-eyed, envious Momus.
For praising These, do not thou dispraise me;
If thou will be as these are, I Will praise thee.
116. A little of my unworthy Self.
Many of these were my familiars,
Much good, and goods has fallen unto their shares,
They have gone fairly on in their affairs:
Good God, why have I not so much good lent!
It is thy will, I am obedient:
What thou have, what thou will, I am content,
Only this breeds in me much heaviness,
My love to this Land I cannot express,
Lord grant me power unto my willingness.
117. A Skeltonicall continued ryme, in praise of my New Foundland.
Although in clothes, company, buildings fair,
With England, New Foundland cannot compare:
Did some know what contentment I found there,
Always enough, most times somewhat to spare,
With little pains, less toil, and lesser care,
Exempt from taxings, ill news, Lawing, fear,
If clean, and warm, no matter what you wear,
Healthy, and wealthy, if men careful are,
With much-much more, then I will now declare,
(I say) if some wise men knew what this were,
(I do believe) they would live no other where.
118. A Napkin to wipe his mouth that waters at these deserved Commendations.
Thus for this hopeful Country at this Time,
As it grows better, I Will have better Ryme.
The end of the first Book.
1. To the Reader of my reprehending general Epigrams.
I Do not, nor I dare not squib the State:
Such oultrequidant sawcines I hate:
Nor do I mean any one Man herein;
In private terms, I lash a public sin;
If any guilty think I him do mean,
He judges right: for I at him do aim.
2. Of the like Epigrams. To the right worshipful and learned, Simon
Baskeruile, Doctor of Physic.
Epigrams are much like to Oxymell,
Honey and Vinegar compounded well:
Honey, and sweet in their invention,
Vinegar in their reprehension.
As sour, sweet Oxymell, does purge though fleagme:
These are to purge Vice, take them as they mean.
3. A Problem of Children.
Since God complains of too few Children,
And Satan has for Gods One, more then ten,
Yet still would have more. Why should Man alone
Repine at some, nay? wish that they had none?
4. To a close Sinner, more fearful of shame, then Sin. David says, Stand
in awe, and do not sin
Thou standst in awe, but it is, lest thou be seen:
5. To Curious Critic Wit, Head-Constable.
Search close, thou may some Felony find here:
From all Foole-hardy Treason these are clear.
6. On Erra Pater and his Almanacke.
The often Printed Gull-foole Erra Pater,
Is in conclusion but an erring prater.
7 To Baldpate.
Surely, Paldpate, thou some times had a brow
Before thou lost thy hair; No man knows how.
Thy brow does now reach home unto thy crown,
But vncrown'd thou art, he comes further down;
How far he comes, now cannot be descride:
For he comes down, down, down to thy backeside.
8. To a Paultry Acquaintance.
Thou do accuse me, and condemn my Rymes,
Because to thee I dedicate no lines.
Thou do as well deserve an Epigram,
As Baldpate, who is trimmed with many a one.
9. To a certain Periwiggian.
Thy smooth, sleeke head-haire, daily settled on,
Though some say not, I say it is thine own,
Thou paid'st for it: yet the hair thou have lost,
When thou did lose it, did thee much more cost.
10. Of the Antiquity of the true Church, to a Jesuit.
Thou do demand, and acclamations raise,
Where our belief was, before Luthers days?
As Christ did answer to a question,
By such a like expostulation:
So do I ask, answer me when thou please,
Where was your Faith, long since the Apostles days?
11. To the same Jesuit.
Art thou a Jesuit, yet do us reproach
With want of Faith, ere Luther his did broach?
Your race was raiz'd, since he preached: your new errors
Are odious to your own, to others terrors.
A hated race, spewed in these latter days,
Though Fathers called, you are the Popes Roaring boys.
12. To a sober, sly, Penurious, Usurious Companion.
Godliness is great gain, God says no less,
But thou say, thou can make gain godliness:
What thou have got by craft, and Usury,
Thou will bequeath in deeds of Charity.
Such distribution I do emulate;
The way unto it, I abominate.
13. The Indefatigability of a Shrews Tongue.
What long wants natural rest, cannot endure:
In all things, but a Shrewes Tongue, this is sure.
14. The goe-out and the Gout.
Thou grieved art with the goe-out, and the Gout;
For if thy wife does chide thee out of door:
Which of these ills is worst, some make a doubt:
I think the goe-out, is the greater sore.
The Gout does ostnest but the great Toe pain:
The goe-out does afflict both heart, and brain.
15. To Father Tailor Jesuit, sometimes my familiar friend in Oxford.
You say that Images are Laymens Books.
He learnes most error, that most on them looks.
As the Egyptians Hierogliphicks.
And to say truth, what-euer you do say,
They Are fit Books for the Learned, not the Lay,
16. To an Idol worshipper, or an obstinate Recusant.
Psalm. 135. ver. 15.16, 17, 18.
Idols are senseless, speak them foul or fair;
And those that trust in them, as senseless are.
Trusting in them, thou art obdurate made,
That Law nor Gospel can thee not persuade.
17. A Meditation for such simple innocent people as I am.
Since thou All-wise have made me not so wise,
With subtle Serpents for to subtilize;
Accept my plainness, and my good intent,
That with thy Dove I may be innocent;
From subtle tricks guard my simplicity.
And make me simple in subtility.
18. The force of Repentance.
Our sin enforces God to raise his hand:
But our Repentance does the stroke withstand.
19. Most men want somewhat.
Some honest well-bent minds their strength is slack;
Strong men have strength, some of them wisdom lack;
Wisemen have wit; But some want honesty;
Some men are neither honest, strong, nor witty.
20. Too much, too little, hurts.
Light Corn bears ground that's not with dressing dight;
Without some learning, wit grows vain and light;
As too much dressing cause weeds, rank, and bad:
So too much Learning makes a quick wit mad.
21. Greatness and Love move not in one Sphere.
Greatness soars upward; Love is downward moved;
Hence it is that Greatness Loves not, nor is Loved.
22. To an envied Favorite, right worthy of his preferment.
Envious, and bad, against virtue, goodness fight;
Would Good, and wise, did understand you right.
23. To a casheard Favorite, who has deserved his disgrace.
I grieve at thy disgrace, blush at thy shame,
But this draws tears; Thou have deserved the same.
24. How Little, how Great.
The least of all the fixed Stars, they say,
Is some times bigger then the earth and Sea.
Poor little I that from earth have my birth,
Am but a clod, compared to the Earth.
How little now, how great shall I be then,
When I in Heaven, like to a Star shall shine?
25. On Young weekly Newes-writers and old Chroniclers.
Currantiers lie by Vbiquity;
But Chroniclers lie by Authority.
Newes-writers, Travelers are, Historians old:
Travelers and old men to lie may be bold.
Not then, Not there, cannot their lies unfold.
26. Conscience.
Whilst concious men of smallest sins have ruth,
Bold sinners count great Sins, but tricks of youth.
27. To a weak braind Good Fellow.
Thy brain is weak, strong drink thou can not bear:
Follow my Rule, Strong drink do thou forbear.
28. The only Foundation Rock of Christ's Church, To the Divines of Rome.
Out of the Creed, wherein we both consent,
Peter, I prove is not the Rock Christ meant.
Do we believe in God of all the maker?
In that, the Jew with us is a partaker.
Do we believe, that Christ was borne and died,
And that he was unjustly Crucified?
The Turk beleues so, and says he did stand,
Till theirs came mediating at Gods right hand.
That he shall Judge all that believe in him,
Both Jew and Turk, Forgiveness of all sin
Believe; the fleshes Resurrection,
The blessed Saints holy Communion,
And life eternal almost as we do,
And that their Church is Catholic, and true.
They do believe the Spirits influence,
Though not like us, but in a larger sense.
But all within our Creed, which does conduce,
To prove Christ Jesus is the only sluice
Of our Salvation, and Gods only Son;
In that, we Christians do believe alone.
This is the Rock whereon Christ's Church is built.
Take away this, all our Faiths frame will tylt.
And this was Peter's wise confession:
Whence I deduce this firm conclusion;
Not Peter his confession the Rock is,
And Christ said not, On Thee, but, Upon This.
29. An honest wronged Man's Meditations.
Since for my Love, Friends me unkindly serve,
God will not use me, as I do deserve.
30. The good effects of Corrections.
Seawater, though it be salt, salt meats makes fresh;
So does correction our ill lives redress.
31. Preachers Fame, and Aim.
Young Preachers, to do well, do take much pain,
That all may do well, is old Preachers aim.
32. To the Reader.
This one fault (Reader) pardon, and endure,
If striving to be brief, I grow obscure.
33. A Christian Meditation.
I hope, and I do faithfully believe,
That God in love will me Salvation give:
I hope, and my assured firm faith is,
God will accept my Love to him and his.
I hope, by faith his Love will me afford
All this only, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
34. A Mess of Mistakers.
Lewd, loose, large lust, is love with Familists.
Papists chief Hope in their own works consists.
Some Protestants on barren Faith rely.
Atheists have no Faith, Hope, nor Charity.
35. An Appendix to this Epigram.
Love is the fruit; Hope the leaves; Faith the tree.
Who has a perfect Faith, has all these three.
Only by such a Faith men saved be.
36. A Guilty Conscience.
When God did call to Adam, Where art thou?
He meant not thereby, where, or in what place?
God knew in which bush he was well enough:
But, Where art, Adam? that is, In what case?
37. To give the Church of Rome her due. To a Separatist.
Though thou art loath to put it in thy Creed,
The Church of Rome is a true Church indeed:
So is a Thief a true, truly a man,
Although he be not truly a true one.
How is it else that Children there baptizde,
By other Christians Christians are agnizde?
38. To Quick silver headded Innouators.
Because of the uncertainty of Wits,
Our Law commands a certainty in Writs:
For as good cause is our Church Lythurgie
Wisly reduced to a certainty.
If that were yielded to that some men seek,
We should have new Church-Seruice every week.
39. Fair Good Wives.
Cleare-skind, true colored Wives, with exact features,
With wise, mild, chaste Souls, are the best of Creatures.
40. Fair Shrewes.
Cleare-skind, fair colored Wives, with exact features,
With shrewd, lewd, wild minds, are the worst of creatures,
41. A Problem hereupon.
If fine flesh be so ill with an ill mind,
What is a foul outside thus inward lined?
42. A Trestick to these three, Disticks by way of Answer. To all constant
Batchelers, especially to my Good Friend Mr. Roger Michell.
Caribdis one, the other Sylla is;
And though the first an harbor be of bliss,
You steare the safest course, these Rocks to miss.
43. To an honest old doting Man, such as I may be, if I live a little longer.
A Liar should have a good memory;
For want of it thou vtterest many a Lie,
Thou do remember many things in great:
But the particulars thou do forget.
Thou tell thy Lies without ill- thought or pain;
They Are no malicious Lies, nor Lies for gain.
44. A Crew of Cursing Companions. To the Bishop of Rome.
With Bell, Book, Candle, each Ascension day,
Thou cursest us Vide, the collect on good-Fryday. Nicholas de Nichola. lib. 4.
cap. 36.
who for thee yearly pray.
But on good Friday the Greek Vide, the collect on good-Fryday. Nicholas de
Nichola. lib. 4. cap. 36.
Patriark,
Does banne thee, branding thee, with this lewd mark,
He styles thee, Father of Corruption,
Of Ancient Fathers the corrupting One:
They saw long since thy knauish forgery,
As we now see thy Purging Knavery.
45. To the same man.
He that does dead Saints Relics Idolize,
Their living writings lewdly falsifies.
46. Enuies Diet.
Old wits have several ways dressed Enuies food;
Each has his sauce (if rightly understood)
Her own heart, her own flesh, A Toade, A Bone,
Which she deuoureth sitting all alone:
Though these are fair, This dish does me best please,
When I find her gnawing a wreathe of Bays:
For her chief food, Is well deserved praise.
47. To a hansome Whore.
One told me, what a pretty face thou have;
And it is great pity that thou art not chaste.
But I did tell him, that did tell it me,
That if thou were not Fair, thou chaste would be.
48. The mad life of a mad Seaman of War.
He lives, and thriues by death, and by decay,
He drinks, swears, curses, sometimes he does pray,
That he may meet somewhat to be his prey,
And spends the rest in sleep, at meat, at play.
49. Of the Gunpowder Holly-day, the 5. of November.
The Powder-Traytors, Guy Vaux, and his mates,
Who by a Hellish plot sought Saints estates,
Have in our Calendar unto their shame,
A joyful Holy Day called by their Name.
50. On these black Saints.
The first day of November is always,
All- Saints feast: and the fifth, all- Devils day.
51. To a great Gamester.
Saint Paul does bid us Pray continually,
But thou would rather Play continually.
52. Most men are mistaken. To Mr. Robert Grimes.
Good, bad, rich, poor, the foolish, and the sage,
Do all cry out against the present age,
Ignorance made us think our young Times good;
Our elder days are better understood;
Besides, griefs past we easily forget;
Present displeasures make us sad, or fret.
53. The Tree of Sanctification.
First grows the Tree, and then the Leaves do grow;
These two must spring before the fruit can show:
Faith is a firm Tree, Hope, like shaking Leaves,
From these two, Charity her Fruits receives.
Faith without Hope, and Love, is a dead Tree,
Hope without Love, and Faith, green cannot be.
Love without Hope and firm Faith is no more
Then hansome Fruit without, rotten at core.
54. Real presence Praying to Saints. Each contradict the other.
If Christ be real, corporal in the bread,
After the Consecrating words are said:
What need you go to Saints, since you may take him
And use him as you please like them that bake him?
55. An Antidote for Drunkards.
If that your heads would ache before you drink
As afterward, you would never be drunk, I think.
56. Women's Tyers.
Women's head-laces and high towering wyres,
Significantly, rightly are called tyres;
They tire them and their Maids in putting on,
Tire Tyremakers, with variation.
I think to pay for them, does tire some men;
I hope they will tire the Devil that inuents them.
57. The Grant.
I Am but a man, though I in length exceed.
The Dwarf.
Though I want length, a Man I am indeed.
The Giant to the Dwarf.
My Sire out-shot the mark, begetting me.
Thy Father shot too short, when he made thee.
The Dwarf to the Giant.
Although short shooting often lose the game,
To ouer-shoot the mark, is as much shame.
58. To a namelesse Friend, whose head is said to be full of Proclamations.
To fill the head with Proclamations,
Is no disgrace, so they be well penned ones.
59. The good of punishment.
Plagues make proud, big, swollen hearts, fall low again:
As Causticks bate proud flesh, though with much pain.
60. A Chyrurgions good qualities. To my good friend Mr. P.S. Chyrurgion.
A Surgion should have, well to use his art,
Ladies hands, Eagles eyes, A Lions heart.
Not one of these good properties you lack,
But when you hide them in the white strong Sack.
61. A Pill to purge Bribery.
Those that do live here by Corruption,
Shall dye in the next generation.
62. Papisticall faith.
What a strange doubtful blind no-Faith you hold,
Which cannot be imagind, held, or told?
What Laymen know not, Clarks do think they know,
Says the Pope otherwise, It is not so.
The Weather-Cocke of your Religion
Is in the Popes shifting Opinion.
63. Some poor comfort for these Multifidians.
If this Pope, Millions draws with him to Hell, Boniface Arch-Bi. of Mentz.
apud Gratian. Dig. 40.

The next wise Pope may reset all things well.
64. Spiritual weapons to encounter with Satan. To my loving and good Aunt,
Mistress Elizabeth Spicer of Exceter, mother to Doctor Richard Spicer Physician.
These are strong Arms to buckle with the Devil,
Fasting, Faith, Prayer, bearing, forbearing evil:
If with these weapons God do us assist,
Satan will never stand to it, nor resist.
65. Confidence ill used, and Confidence abused.
Cursed is he that puts his confidence
In Man: Only in man is the right sense. Ierem. 17.5.

And that Man shall like punishment receive,
Who does an honest Confidence deceive.
66. A Caveat for buyers and sellers.
In this world silly buyers must beware:
In the next world, dear sellers of bad ware.
67. To Politic Bankerupt.
Thou have broke five times; thou will break once more:
What a brave Tilter thou would make therefore!
68. A mad answer of a Madman.
One asked a Madman, if a wife he had?
A Wife (quoth he) I never was so mad.
69. A lusty Widow, to one of her Suitors.
To have me, thou tel'st me, on me thou wilt dote.
I tell thee, Who has me, on me must do it,
I may be coozen'd; but sure if I can,
I Will have no doting, but a doing man.
70. To Mammonnists, who put their trust in uncertain Riches.
Some have too many goods: some would have none:
You have too many, though you have but one;
For yellow Mammon is your God alone.
71. God and Mammon.
Service to God, and Mammon none can do:
Yet we may serve God, and have Mammon too:
72. There is no fooling with Edge-tooles. To a Friend.
Thou have sped well in many a former plot,
Thou vndertook'st a great one, fail'st in that,
Men must have Mittons on, to shoo a Cat.
73. My Judgment on Men of Judgment. To a kind Friend.
Thou talk of men of Judgment. Who are they?
Those, whose conceits success does still obey.
Wise men's, wise counsel, is but their conceits;
If they speed ill, they are sad wise deceits.
74. To all the shrewd Wives that are, or shall be planted in New Foundland.
If madmen, Drunkards, Children, or a Fool,
Wrong sober, discreet men with tongue or tool,
We say, Such things are to be borne withal.
We say so too, if Women fight, or brawle.
75. Some prevention for some of these misdooers.
Mad men are bound; Drunkards are laid to sleep:
Fools beaten are; Toys Children quiet keep:
I wish unruly Shrewes were turned to Sheep.
76. Masters Behavior. To my good Friend Master Thomas Mil-ware, of
Harbor-Grace in Newfound-land.
Stern, cruel usage may bad servants fetter:
Wise gentle usage, keeps good servants better.
77. Too much Familiarity breeds contempt.
Though some wise men this Proverb do apply,
For a defense of their austerity;
I think this way this Proverb might be meant,
Chiding too often, brings Chiding in contempt.
79. The four Elements in Newfound-land. To the Worshipful Captain John
Mason, who did wisely and worthily govern there diverse years.
The Air, in Newfound-Land is wholesome, good;
The Fire, as sweet as any made of wood;
The Waters, very rich, both salt and fresh;
The Earth more rich, you know it is no less.
Where all are good, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air,
What man made of these four would not live there?
80. To all those worthy Women, who have any desire to live in Newfound-Land,
specially to the modest and discreet Gentlewoman Mistress Mason, wife to
Captain Mason, who lived there diverse years.
Sweet Creatures, did you truly understand
The pleasant life you would live in Newfound-land,
You would with tears desire to be brought thither:
I wish you, when you go, fair wind, fair weather:
For if you with the passage can dispense,
When you are there, I know you will never come thence.
81. To a worthy Friend, who often objects the coldness of the Winter in
Newfound-Land, and may serve for all those that have the like conceit.
You say that you would live in Newfound-land,
Did not this one thing your conceit withstand;
You fear the Winters cold, sharp, piercing air.
They love it best, that have once winterd there.
Winter is there, short, wholesome, constant, clear,
Not thick, unwholesome, shuffling, as it is here.
82. To the right worshipful John Slany, Treasurer to the Newfound-land
Company, and to all the rest of that Honorable Corporation.
I know, that wise you are, and wise you were:
So was he who this Action did prefer:
Yet some wise men do argue otherwise,
And say you were not, or you are not wise:
They say, you were not wise to undertake it:
Or that you are not wise thus to forsake it.
83. Of the same Honorable Company.
Diverse well-minded men, wise, rich, and able,
Did undertake a plot inestimable,
The hopefull'st, easiest, healthi'st, just plantation,
That ere was undertaken by our Nation.
When they had wisely, worthily begun,
For a few errors that athwart did run,
(As every action first is full of errors)
They fell off flat, retired at the first terrors.
As it is lamentably strange to me:
In the next age incredible 'twill be.
84. To the right Honorable Sir George Calvert, Knight, late Principal
Secretary to King JAMES, Baron of Baltomore, and Lord of Aualon in
Newfound-land.
Your worrh has got you Honor in your days.
It is my honor, you my verses praise.
O let your Honor cheerfully go on;
End well your well begun Plantation.
This holy hopeful work you have half done,
For best of any, you have well begun.
If you give over what has so well sped,
Your sollid wisdom will be questioned.
86. To the same Nobleman.
Yours is a holy just Plantation,
And not a iustling supplantation.
86. To the right worthy, learned and wise, Master William Vaughan, chief
Undertaker for the Plantation in Cambrioll, the Southermost part of
Newfound-Land, who with pen, purse, and Person has, and will prove the
worthiness of that enterprise.
It joyed my heart, when I did understand
That your self would your Colonie command;
It grieved me much, when as I heard it told,
Sickness had laid on you an unkind hold.
Believe me, Sir, your Colchos Cambrioll
Is a sweet, pleasant, wholesome, gainefull soil.
You shall find there what you do want; Sweet health:
And what you do not want, as sweet; Sweet wealth.
87. To the same industrious Gentleman, who in his golden golden-fleece styles
himself Orpheus Junior.
Your noble humor indefatigable,
More virtuous, constant yet, then profitable,
Striving to do good, you have lost your part,
Whilst lesser loss has broke some Tradesmens heart:
Yet you proceed with person, purse and pen,
Fitly attended with laborious men.
Go on, wise Sir, with your old, bold, brave Nation
To your new Cambriolls rich Plantation,
Let Dolphins dance before you in the floods,
And play you, Orpheus Junior, in her woods.
88. Some Diseases were never in Newfound-land. To the right worthy Mistres,
Anne Vaughan, wife to Doctor Vaughan, who has an honorable desire to live in
that Land.
Those that live here, how young, or old soever,
Were never vexed with Cough, nor Aguish Fever,
Nor ever was the Plague, nor small Pox here;
The Air is so salubrious, constant, clear:
Yet scuruy Death stalks here with theeuish pace,
Knocks one down here, two in another place.
89. To Sir Richard Whitborne, Knight, my dear friend, Sometime Lieutenant to
Doctor Vaughan for his Plantation in Newfound-Land, who has since published a
worthy book of that most hopeful Country.
Who preaching well, does do, and live as well,
His doing makes his preaching to excel:
For your wise, well-pend Book this Land's your debtor;
Do as you write, you will be believed the better.
90. To my good Friend Mr. Thomas Rowley, who from the first Plantation has
lived in Newfound-Land little to his profit.
When some demand, Why rich you do not grow?
I tell them, Your kind nature makes it so.
They say, that here you might have gotten wealth.
Adam in Paradise undid himself.
91 There is more gain in an honest Enemy, then in a flattering Friend.
A flattering Friend in's Commendations halts:
An honest Foe will tell me all my faults.
92. To the right Honorable, Sir Henry Carry, Knight, Viscount Faukeland, Lord
Deputy of Ireland.
I joyed when you took part of Newfound-Land;
I grieved, to see it lie dead in your hand:
I joyed when you sent people to that Coast;
I grieved, when I saw all that great charge lost.
Yet let your Honor try it once again,
With wise, stayed, careful honest-harted men,
I am to blame, you boldly to advise:
For all that know you, know you wondrous wise:
Yet neere-hand, Dull bleare-ey'd may better see,
Then quicker cleare-ey'd, that a far off be.
93. To the Honorable Knight, Sir Perciuall Willoughbie, who, to his great
cost, and loss, aduentur'd in this action of Newfound-Land.
Wise men, wise Sir, do not the fire abhor,
For once being findg'd, more wary grow therefore.
Shall one disaster breed in you a terror?
With honest, meet, wise men mend your first error.
If with such men you would begin again,
Honor and profit you would quickly gain.
Believe him, who with grief has seen your share,
'Twould do you good, were such men planted there.
94. To my very good Friend, Mr. John Poyntz, Esquire, one of the Planters of
Newfound-Land in Doctor Vaughans Plantation.
It Is said, wise Socrates looked like an Ass;
Yet he with wondrous sapience filled was;
So though our Newfound-Land look wild, saluage,
She has much wealth penned in her rustie Cage.
So have I seen a leane-cheekes, bare, and ragged,
Who of his private thousands could have bragged.
Indeed she now looks rude, untowardly;
She must be decked with neat husbandry.
So have I seen a plain swarth, sluttish Ione,
Look pretty pert, and neat with good clothes on.
95. To the right Honorable Knight, Sir William Alexander, Principal, and
prime Planter in New-Scotland: To whom the King has given a Royal gift to
defray his great charges in that worthy business.
Great Alexander wept, and made sad moan,
Because there was but one World to be won.
It joys my heart, when such wise men as you,
Conquer new Worlds which that Youth never knew.
The King of Kings assist, bless you from Heaven;
For our King has you wise assistance given.
Wisely our King did aid on you bestow:
Wise are all Kings who all their gifts give so.
It Is well given, that is given to such a One,
For service done, or service to be done.
By all that know you, it is well understood,
You will dispend it for your Countries good.
Old Scotland you made happy by your birth.
New-Scotland you will make a happy earth.
96. To the same Wise, Learned, Religious Patriot, most Excellent Poet.
You are a Poet, better there is not any,
You have one super-vertue amongst your many;
I wish I were your equal in the one,
And in the other your Companion.
With one I Would give you your deserved due,
And with the other, serve and follow you.
97. To the right Honorable, Sir George Caluert, Knight, Baron of Baltamore,
and Lord of Aualon in Britaniola, who came over to see his Land there, 1627.
Great Shebae's wise Queen traueld far to see,
Whether the truth did with report agree.
You by report persuaded, laid out much,
Then wisely came to see, if it were such:
You came, and saw, admired what you had seen,
With like success as the wise Sheba Queen.
If every Sharer here would take like pain,
This Land would soon be peopled to their gain.
98. To the same right wise, and right worthy Nobleman.
This shall be said whilst that the world does stand,
Your Honor 'twas first honored this Land.
99. To the right worshipful Planters of Bristoll-Hope in the new Kingdom of
Britaniola.
When I to you your Bristoll-Hope commend,
Reckoning your gain, if you would thither send,
What you can spare: You little credit me:
The mischief is, you will not come here and see.
Here you would quickly see more then my self:
Then would you style it, Bristols-Hope of wealth.
100. To the right worshipful William Robinson of Tinwell, in Rutland shire
Esquire, come over to see Newfound-Land with my Lord of Baltamore. 1627.
Strange, not to see stones here above the ground,
Large vntrencht bottomes under water drowned.
Hills, and Plains full of trees, both small, and great,
And dryer bottomes deep of Turfe, and Peace.
When England was used for a Fishing place,
By Coasters only, 'twas in the same case,
And so vnlouely't had continued still:
Had not our Ancestors used pains, and skill:
How much bad ground with mattock and with spade,
Since we were borne, has there been good ground made?
You, and I rooted have Trees, Brakes, and stone:
Both for succeeding good, and for our own.
101. To the first Planters of Newfound-land.
What aim you at in your Plantation?
Sought you the Honor of our Nation?
Or did you hope to raise your own renown?
Or else to add a Kingdom to a Crown?
Or Christ's true Doctrine for to propagate?
Or draw Saluages to a blessed state?
Or our over peopled Kingdom to relieve?
Or show poor men where they may richly live?
Or poor men's children godly to maintain?
Or amy'd you at your own sweet private gain?
All these you had atchiu'd before this day,
And all these you have balk't by your delay.
102. To my Reverend kind friend, Master Erasmus Sturton, Preacher of the Word
of God, and Parson of Ferry Land in the Province of Avalon in Newfound-Land.
No man should be more welcome to this place,
Then such as you, Angels of Peace, and Grace;
As you were sent here by the Lords command,
Be you the blessed Apostle of this Land;
To Infidels do you Euangelize,
Making chose that are rude, sober and wise.
I pray that Lord that did you hither send,
You may our cursings, swearing, A word frequently used by the West-Countrymen,
and signifies muttering or murmuring
iouring mend.
103. To my very loving and discreet Friend, Master Peter Miller of Bristoll.
You asked me once, What here was our chief dish?
In Winter, Foul, in Summer choice of Fish.
But we should need good Stomachs, you may think,
To eat such kind of things which with you stink,
As Ravens, Crows, Kytes, Otters, Poxes, Bears,
Dogs, Cats, and Soyles, Eaglets, Hawks, Hounds, and Hares: Dogs and Cats are
fishes so called, and Hounds a kind of Foul

Yet we have Partriges, and store of Dear,
And that (I think) with you is pretty cheer.
Yet let me tell you, Sir, what I love best,
Its a Poore-Iohn Called in French Pour Gens, in English corruptly Poor John,
being the principal Fish brought out of this Country.
that's clean, and neatly dressed:
There Is not a meat found in the Land, or Seas,
Can Stomachs better please, or less displease,
It is a fish of profit, and of pleasure,
I Will write more of it, when I have more leisure:
There and much more are here the ancient store:
Since we came hither, we have added more.
104. To some discreet people, who think any body good enough for a Plantation.
When you do see an idle, lewd, young man,
You say he is fit for our Plantation.
Knowing your self to be rich, sober, wise,
You set your own worth at an higher price.
I say, such men as you are, were more fit,
And most convenient for first peopling it:
Such men as you would quickly profit here:
Lewd, lazy Lubbers, want wit, grace, and care.
105. To the famous, wise and learned Sisters, the two Universities of England,
Oxford and Cambridge.
The ancient Jews did take a world of pain,
And traueld far some Proselites to gain:
The busy pated Jesuits in our days,
To make some theirs, do compass Land and Seas:
The Mahumetan, Heathen, modern Jew,
Do daily strive to make some of their crew:
Yet to our shame we idly do stand still,
And suffer God, his number up to fill.
Ye worthy Sisters, raze this imputation,
Send forth your Sons unto our New Plantation;
Yet send such as are Holy, wise; and able,
That may build Christ's Church, as these do build Babel.
If you exceed not these in Mat. 5.20.
Righteousness,
I need not tell your Wisdoms the success.
106. To answer a Friend, who asked me, Why I did not compose some
Encomiasticks, in praise of Noble men and Great Courtiers, As my friend John
Owen has done.
I knew the Court well in the old Queens days;
I then knew Worthies worthy of great praise:
But now I am there such a stranger grown,
That none do know me there, there I know none.
Those few I here observe with commendation,
Are Famous Stars in our New Constellation.
The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF QVODLIBETS.
Justice Epigram.
KIngs do correct those that Rebellious are,
And their good Subjects worthily prefer:
Just Epigrams reprove those that offend,
And those that virtuous are, she does commend.
2. To my delicate Readers.
When I do read others neat, dainty lines,
I almost do despair of my rude times:
Yet I have fetched them far, they cost me dear,
Dear and far fetched (they say) is Ladies cheer.
1. To my zealous, and honest friend, Master W. B. of Bristoll.
If thou can not to thy preferrement come,
To be Christ's red Rose in best martyrdom;
With Patience, Faith, Hope, Love, and Constancy,
A pure blessed, white Rose in Christ's Garden dye.
4. Gods Love: The Devils Malice.
He that made man, only desires man's heart:
He that mard man, tempts man in every part.
5. God rewards thankful men.
What part of the Moon's body does reflect
Her borrowed beams, yields a fair prospect;
But that part of her, that does not do so,
Spotty, or dark, or not at all does show:
So what we do reflect on God the giver,
With thankefulnes: those Graces shine for ever:
But if his gifts thou challeng'st to be thine,
They Will never do thee Grace, nor make thee shine.
6. To a dissembling, sober, slye Protestor.
It Is so, or so, as I Am an honest man,
Is thy assuring Protestation,
When it is as true as thou art such a one.
7. Dissemblers coozen themselves.
Whilst in this life Dissemblers coozen some,
Themselves they coozen of the life to come.
8. On a wide-mouthed prating companion.
He prates, and talks, and railes, and no man hears.
Yet he has mouth, to make a skore of Ears.
9. Latin Prayers by number.
Christ spoke no Latin, though he could do so,
Nor any of his Twelve, for ought I know.
Why should you in that tongue pray by the skore?
It is the Language of the Mounted Whore.
Somewhat more merrily; here lies the jest:
Most of hers speak the Language of her Beast.
In such Hobgoblin words they sing, and pray,
Scaliger full-tongu'd knows not what they say.
Greg. lib. 4 Epist. 32. and 36-
10. To the Bishop of Rome.
Of Bishops I dare style you Principal,
It Is Antichristian to be General.
11. A wife more dear then sweet. To a complementing kind Husband.
Come hither, dear wife, prithee sweet wife go,
Sweet wife, do this, or dear wife, pray' do so.
She Is dear indeed, but not so sweet, I trow.
12. Plasters for a Gald-heart.
On every married man that has a Shrowe,
(As many a married man has one, I trow;)
These four, poor, pittious plasters I bestow,
Except their wives death, the best help I know.
1 Or to thy friend reveal thy woeful plight;
2 Or let her hot words thee inflame to fight;
3 Or else withdraw thy self from her by flight;
4 Or with thy patience all her wrongings flight.
13. A husbands desire to his Wife.
Laugh with me, make me laugh, whilst I do live:
When I dye, choose where thou wilt laugh or grieve.
14. To a weeping Widow.
Thy Husband's dead, and thou do weep therefore.
No: it is, cause thou can make him weep no more.
15. Ill-fauoured Huswifery. To one shrewdly married.
Though you fall out, yet you agree herein,
When as thy wife does wash, then doo'st thou wring.
16. To all Chollericke People.
Shrewdnes is like unto a Grauesend toast,
Abhorred by those that do use it most.
In us we do contentedly it bear,
We cry, Fought at it, finding it elsewhere.
If Shrewes say they cannot their Choler smother,
I say, For healths sake we must vent that other.
It Is hugged at home, abroad, at home it is abhorred,
Thence I conclude Shrewdnes is like a T.
17. To those who I fear will find fault with this Comparison.
If you will say that this is odious,
Comparisons are so; this should be thus.
18. Reasons for the taking of Tobacco.
Since most Phisicions drink Tobacco still,
And they of nature have th'exactest skill,
Why should I think it for my body ill?
And since most Preachers of our Nation,
Tobacco drink with moderation,
Why should I fear of profanation?
Yet if that I take it intemperately,
My soul and body may be hurt thereby.
19. The five Properties of good Tobacco.
Tobacco to be good, it must be strong,
Clear smoak't, white ashes, hard and lasting long.
20. A City Sheriff.
Before, and after, sparing he does live,
Bravely he spends, when he is Master Shrieue.
21. Si Sennior: Spaniard. Signore Si: Italian.
Of Spaniards and Italians thus I find,
As Arsee-versee they auerre their mind.
So one before, the other sins behind.
22. Why Astrea left the Earth.
On earth Astrea held the Balance even:
But she long since with them is fled to heaven.
Why has Astrea bid this world Adieu?
Her Lease was out, She would not buy a new.
23. On a Private, Rich, close-liuing Churl, alluding to him in Terence, who
of himself says, Populus me sibulat, etc.
Walking abroad like a great Turkie-Cocke,
Some fleere, some geere, every one does me mock:
At home amongst my puddings and my eggs,
I hug my self, looking on my full bags,
Finding my self Fortunes white son to be,
I laugh at them, that even now laugh't at me.
24. To the same fellow.
Thou ar^ deceived, selfe-flattering-golden Ass,
Whilst thou behold'st thy self in a false Glass.
25. To the Pope.
Christ said unto the people, Read and see
The Scriptures: for they testify of me.
Wherefore did thou thine reading them deny?
That thou art Antichrist, they testify;
26. Papisticall cruelty.
Were there no other argument but this,
It proves our faith, then yours the better is.
We are not cruel, bloody, envious,
(Though your late-lying Legends slander us)
We meekely seek but your Conversion,
Weep at your sought for Execution:
You bloody, slanderous, and inexorable
At all times, every where, where you are able;
Witness Mary's short Reign, French Massacre,
Which in red letters, your lewd minds declare.
Our God, though Just, his mercy's over all,
A blood-sucker, Satan was from his fall.
27. A Prayer hereupon, to the God of Justice.
When thou for blood mak'stinquisition,
Think on the bloody Inquisition.
28. To our wise Roman Divines.
Why enforce ye a blind obedience?
All else would see your Glosses enforced sense.
29. Why the fiue-footed Iambicke fits best in our English verse.
Iabicks in our language have best grace:
They with grave Spondies dance a Cinquepace:
If wanton Dactils do skip in by chance,
They well-neere mar the measure of the Dance:
To end a verse, she may a foot be lending,
Like to a round trick at a Galliards ending.
30. To the Divine soul of that excellent Epigrammatist, Master John Owen.
Let thy Celestial Manes pardon me,
If like thy shadow I have followed thee.
32. Why Preachers stand, and Auditors sit. To his loving Friend, Master Robert
Burton.
Would know why Preachers stand, and we do sit?
Because what they speak with, or without wit,
Not we, but they themselves must stand to it.
33. What Prosperity cannot persuade, Adversity will enforce.
He that in Zeal is calm, in calmes at Sea,
In storms if he have Zeal, in Zeal, he will pray;
So though our Zeal be cold whilst Fortune shines,
'Twill be more fervent in tempestuous times.
34. To a Friend.
Show such as mine to young-briske Butterflyes,
(Who have as many hearts as they have eyes,)
They Will swear to you, The best that e're they saw:
Behind your back, They are not worth a straw.
This shuffling shows, that in their Puffe-paste wit,
Momus and Guato do at random sit.
35. Talking Beasts.
When Aesop said Beasts spoke; Aesop said true.
I heard Beasts speak within this day or two.
36. The Gowte.
It Is said, that rich men only have the Gowt,
Of that old-rusty-sad saw, I make doubt.
Indeed the Gowt, the child is of rich men;
This froward Elfe, poor men nurse now and then.
37. When I was of Lincolns Inn, the fashion was, (and I think is still)
after dinner upon grand and festival days, some young Gentlemen of the house
would take the best Guest by the hand, and be the next, and so hand in hand
they did solemnly pass about the fire, the whole Company, each after other in
order; to every staff a song, (which I could never sing) the whole Company did
with a joined voice sing this burden: Some mirth and solace now let us make,
To cheer our hearts, and sorrows slake.
Upon this kind of Commencement of these Revels,
I conceited this:

When wise, rich Lawyers dance about the fire,
Making grave needless mirth sorrows to slack.
If Clyents (who do them too dearly hire,
Who want their money, and their comfort lack)
Should for their solace, dance about the Hall:
I judge their dance were more methodicall.
38. An old Proverb, though a strange one, truly exemplified.
A Proverb it is, how true I cannot tell,
Happy are those, whose fathers go to hell,
Sure, some would think, their happiness it were,
If their close-fisted fathers in hell were,
That they may of his wealth have out their share.
For whilst they live, but little they will spare.
39. To a namelesse one.
Thou marri'st one, whom thou before did know:
It is the fashion now to marry so.
40. The first Arithmeticke.
Adam at first in number Numration.
was but one;
Until God added Eve, Addition.
he was alone:
They were divided, Division.
till the Lord them ioynes,
And bade them multiply Multiplication.
out of their Loins:
And so from them subtracted Subtraction.
are all Nations,
Unto these present Generations.
41. The seeming good works of unbelievers.
The glorious deeds of unbelieving ones,
Are glittering clear abominations;
So said St. Hierom: and thus says St Paul,
They Are shining brass, and a tinkling Cymball.
For good works without faith and loving fear,
Do neither please Gods eye, nor yet his ear.
42. Heavenly, and Earthly hearts.
The Earth is firm, the Heavens mutable,
Yet Heavenly minds are firm, Earthly unstable.
43. To a superstitious Papist, fearful of Purgatory, who to his cost desires
to have a quick dispatch from that fearful place.
With faith pray fervently, religious live;
Thou need'st no money, for an Obit leave,
Thy soul in Purgatory to relieve.
44. To rich Papists.
If the Popes Sawes by his authority,
Were truer then Christ's written Verity; Contrary to Christ's saying, Mat.
19.23, 24.

Those rich men, Asses were, that went to Hell,
If they within Romes Churches limits dwell:
For though you never so lewdly spend your breath,
Your Coin will buy you Pardons after death.
45. An humble, contrite, and a double-deuided heart.
Gods favor breaks forth on a broken heart:
But in a parted one God has no part.
46. A short Dialogue betwixt two ancient Philosophers, laughing Democritus,
and weeping Heraclitus. Heraclitus.
Vain, foolish man, why do thou always laugh?
Democritus.
Man's vanity, and foolish pride I scoff,
Wherefore do thou such a strange puling keep?
Heraclitus.
For man's bad sins, sad miseries I weep.
47. Counsel to my young Cousens,
John and William Barker, Sons to my Brother Barker, and his now wife.

Abel and Matthew Rogers, Sons to my Brother Barker, and his now wife.

Ill Company is like Infection,
It soon taints a good disposition.
Take heed into what Company ye fall:
Vice is a sickness Epidemicall.
48. To one, who on his Gossips pratlings in a dangerous disease, thinks and
hopes so much of his Recovery, that he neglects the consideration of his
Mortality.
'Cause some have escaped that have been almost dead,
Thou think that thou may be recovered:
But because many healthy men do dye,
I think on that, knowing that so may I.
49. To my Reverend sick friend, W. G. of Bristoll.
Not quiet, an usual phrase for sickness in Devonshire.
When folk are sick, we say, They are not well.
My Country phrase is, That they are not quiet.
Both of these phrases fit all those that mell
With Physic Doses, and prescribed diet.
The first of these two phrases fit sick men:
The last fits best Women and Children.
50. Papisticall Miracles.
Primitive miracles were strange and true,
And did confirm the Doctrine then held new.
Yours falsely, faign'd, ridiculous, and bold,
Bolster new Doctrines, contradict the old.
Your apparitions, new-faign'd miracles,
Do overthrow the ancient Articles.
51. An Advertisement to all Tradesmen, and may serve for Soldiers, or any
others subject to Casualtie.
Who does refuse a reasonable proffer,
Had need to have good Fortune in his Coffer.
52. To a Card-Cheater.
To Cut, and shuffle, in a Horse is ill:
To shuffle, and to Cut, is thy prime skill.
53. To one that has lost both his ears.
Some that have two ears, hear not what we say:
Thou that have not an ear, hear'st more then they.
54. Whom Discretion does not, Correction will keep under.
If headstrong Iades will not Gods Bit obey,
His Rod will whippe their restines away.
55. Ne quid nimis. A meditation of too much and too little Wind at Sea,
wracking Storms, and staruing Calmes.
Man's state on shore, is like man's state at Sea;
Too much, too little, causes sad decay;
Hence Poets fained Fortune heretofore
Sailing, one foot on Sea, and one on shore.
56 Fearful Hellfire.
At sight of fire, bold Lions run away
Bold sinners, who men fearing sin, vpbray:
The sight of Hellfire will these Lads dismay.
57. To Sir Senix Fornicator.
Winter has seaz'd upon thy beard, and head,
Yet for all this, thy wild Oats are not shed.
Me thinks when Hills are ouerspred with Snow,
It should not wantonly be hot below.
But thou most like unto a Leeke do seem:
For though thy head be white, thy tail is green.
58. Some standers by see more then Gamsters. 58. Some standers by leese more
then Gamsters.

Some wise bystanders more then Gamesters sees;
Some standers by more then wise Gamesters leese.
59. To nobly descended Recusants.
It Is said, you came from noble Ancestors,
Who did strange wonders in the old French wars,
You say you are of their Religion,
And that it is the true and ancient one:
It was your Ancestors, for ought I know:
But new, untrue, Gods old true Word says so.
60. Traditions and Gods Word. To Papists.
'Twixt your belief, and our Religion,
There has been long, and strong contention:
You prove yours by men's word: but we abhor it:
Our proof is better, we have Gods Word for it.
61. To one that asked me why I do write so briefly.
What I do write of, I but only touch,
Who writes of many things cannot write much,
Or thus,
Who writes of many things, must needs write much.
62. To my kind loving bedfellow, Mr. Edward Pain, on the Gift of a Ring,
wherein there was a Poesy of Patience.
In your last gift you wish me Patience.
I know you mean it in the better sense;
Not a sad, bad, stout patience, Stoicall.
But one that knows, that God sends, and mends all.
63. Wise men's ill success, and Fools Fortune. A Paradox.
As many Wise men hurt themselves through wit,
As there are sosts grow rich, for want of it.
64. To the Pope.
Wherefore should thou blind Ignorance inhance?
(On which all Wiser times did look ascance?)
Saying it does devotion much advance?
All thy mysterious skill, is Ignorance.
65. One of the Popes titles is, Servant of Servants.
Servant of Servants, Popes themselves have named,
By that style cursed Genesis 9.25.
Canaan was defamed.
66. All things are vendible at Rome.
In Romes full shop are sold all kinds of ware,
Revel. 8.12.
Men's souls purged, fyre-new, you may buy there.
67. To fault-finding more faulty Zoilus.
When others faults thou do with spite reveal,
The Kettle twits the pot with his burnt tail.
68. To a hard-fauour'd rich Widow, who, because she has many Suitors,
thinks well of her self.
We know thee rich, and thou think thy self fine:
Thou think we love thee, we know we love thine.
69. Why Physicians thrive not in Bristoll.
In Bristoll Water-tumblers get small wealth:
There Doctor good-wine keeps them all in health.
70. To my Readers. An Arsee-versee Request, to my Friend John Owen. Owen, Lib.
1. Epig. 172.

Do not with my leaves make thy backeside bright:
Rather with them do thou Tobacco light.
I Would rather have them up in flames to fly,
Then to be stiffled basely privily.
71. Health and Wealth.
Health is a Jewel, yet though shining wealth,
Can buy rich Jewels, it cannot buy health.
72. To Inuocators of Saints.
To Saints you offer supplication,
And say, Gods face beholding, they them know.
This is a strange bold speculation.
Whence came the Doctor that first told you so?
In Gods Word we do read, that God sees all:
Of such a glass no mention made at all.
73. To those Papists, who show their ignorant Devotion in their Aue Mary's.
How long shall Ignorance lead you astray?
Whilst to our Lady you would a prayer say,
You her salute, and needless for her pray.
74. To one of the Elders of the sanctified Parlor of Amsterdam.
Though thou may call my merriments, my folly,
They are my Pills to purge my melancholy,
They would purge thine too, were not thou Foole-holy.
75. Great men's entertainment.
Though rich men's troubles, kindness are esteemed,
Yet poor men's kidnes, troubles are still deemed.
77. To a Bad-minded, Choleric, ungrateful man.
Thou soon forget'st those wrongs thou do to Men:
All small wrongs done to thee thou do remember;
Every good turn thou do, thou count'st it ten:
For good done to thee, thy record is slender.
Kindness from thee, like vomits make thee sweat;
Thou swallow'st others kindness as thy meat.
78. To Master Fabian Sanford, Master of our Ship and voyage in
Newfound-Land, and may serve for all Masters trading there.
Men wearied are with labor other-where:
But you are weary, when you want it here.
And what in England would quite tire a horse,
Here the want of it, tyres you ten times worse.
Labor was first a curse to curb man's pride;
The want of it, makes you to curse, chafe, chide.
To see you work thus, better would me please,
Did you not work thus upon Sabbath Days.
79. Goodness and Greatness. To my good and loving Cousin, Mistress Thomasin
Spicer, wife to Doctor Richard Spicer, Physicion.
Goodness and Greatness falling at debate,
Which should be highest in men's estimate;
After much strife, they upon this did rest,
Great-goodnes and Good-greatnes is the best.
80. Mary Magdalens Tears. To my pretty Niece, Marie Barker.
To wash Christ's feet, Mary's Bath was her tears,
To wipe them dry, her Towell was her hairs:
What her tears could not cleanse, nor hairs makes dry,
Her Corrall lips did wipe, and mundifie.
She did anoint him with a sweet, rich oil,
And spared for no cost, nor for no toil:
This Story merits to be Registered,
And to be practiced as well as read.
81. To my Niece and God-daughter, Grace Barks.
I promised, you should do good, and fly ill,
Before that you had power, or will, or skill.
Lame Nature I knew could not walk that pace,
Without Gods Grace: therefore I named you Grace.
Let mild Grace so sway Nature in you then,
That you may obtain Grace with God and Men.
82. To a namelesse, wise, modest, fair Gentlewoman, my loving and kind
Friend, whom reciprocally I love as heartily.
Juno is wealth, Pallas is virtue, wit,
Venus Love, beauty is in Poets writ:
Pallas, and Venus have in you their treasure,
Why should hard Juno offer us such measure?
83. To our most Royal Queen MARY, Wife, Daughter, and Sister to three Famous
Kings.
Venus, and Pallas, at your birth conspired,
To make a work, of all to be admired:
Venus with admired feature did you grace,
Divine complexion, an Angellike face.
Pallas inspired a quick, sweet, nimble spirit,
Virtue, and wit, of admirable merit,
But I admire them most, how they could place
So much; so admirable in so small space:
And they themselves admired when they had ended,
A Piece which they knew could not be amended.
84. To the same most Royal Queen.
When wise Columbus offered his New-land,
To Wise men, they him held, vain, foolish, fond,
Yet a wise Woman, of an happy wit,
With god success aduentur'd upon it:
Then the wisemen their wisdoms did repent,
And their heirs since their follies do lament.
My New-land (Madam) is already known,
The way the air, the earth, all therein grown,
It only wants a Woman of your spirit,
To mak't a Land fit for your Heirs t'inherit.
Sweet, dreaded Queen, your help here will do well:
Be here a Famous second Isabell.
85. A Newfound-land Poetical Picture, of the admirable exactly featured young
Gentlewoman, Mistress Anne Low, eldest Daughter to Sir Gabriel Low, Knight, my
delicate Mistress. The Preface to her Picture.
At sight, Love drew your picture on my heart,
In Newfound-Land I limm'd it by my Art.
86, The Pourtraite.
If Paris upon Ida hill had seen
You amongst the Three, the Apple yours had been.
Zeuxis drawing this picture had all the choice beauties of Greece naked before
him.
Had curious Zeuxis seen your-all-excelling,
Whilst Iunoes Picture he was pencelling;
You had him eased in his various collection:
For Beauty has in you a full Connection.
87. To the fair and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress Mary Winter, the younger,
worthy of all love.
Your budding beauty, wit, grace, modesty,
I did admire, even in your infancy,
These blessed buds, each grown to a fair flower,
Much have I loved, since my first lawful hour.
Whom few crosse-Winters have made old and sad,
One such fair Winter would make young and glad.
88. To the same beauteous modest Virgin, an Aenigma.
Had not false shuffling Fortune paltered,
Hymen had Hyems long since altered.
88. To a fair modest Creature, who deserves a worthy name, though she desires
here to be namelesse.
Niggardly Venus beauty does impart
To diverse diversely, and but in part.
To one a dainty Eye, a cherry Cheek:
To some, a tempting Lip, Breasts white and sleeke:
To diverse ill-shap'd bodies, a sweet face:
Clean made Legs, or a white hand, does some grace,
On Thee more free her gifts She does bestow;
For She has set Thee out in Folio.
90. To my outwardly fair, and inwardly virtuous kind friend, Mistress Marie
Rogers, widow, since married to Master John Barker of Bristoll, Merchant, my
kind and loving Brother in Law.
Lillies, and Roses on your face are spread,
Yet trust not too much to your white and red:
Lillies will fade, Roses their leaves will shed:
These flowers may dye, long before you are dead.
Your inward beauty (which all do not see)
Then white and red, and you, more lasting be.
91. To the fair, virtuous, witty widow, Mistress Sara Smeyths.
If it be true, (as some do know too well;)
To Lovers Heaven, we pass through Lovers Hell:
Be confident, you shall enjoy Earths glory,
For you on Earth are past your Purgatory.
92. To my kind and worthy Friend, Mistress E. B. wife to Captain H. B. By my
Captains leave.
Your outward, and your inward graces move
My tongue to praise you, and my heart to love.
I hope, it will not God, nor man offend,
If that in Love your virtues I commend:
And by his Leave who is yours in possession,
He love, and praise your goodness in reuersion.
93. To my perpetual Valentine, worthy Mistress Mary Tailor, wife to Master
John Tailor Merchant of Bristoll.
My sweet discreet perpetual Valentine,
In your fair breast virtue has built a Shrine,
Bedecking it with flowers, amongst the rest,
Mild bearing your not-bearing is not least.
You know the worthy husband that you have,
Is worth more children then some fondlings crave;
Besides the blessed babes begot by good,
More comforts bring then some of flesh and blood.
Kind Valentine, still let our comfort be,
Children there are ynow for you and me.
94. To my best Cousin, Mistress Elizabeth Flea, wife to Master Thomas Flea, of
Exeter Merchant.
If one were safely lodged at his long rest,
I could wish you a Flea in my warm nest.
Who writes this, loves Ye both so well, he prays,
Long may ye skip from Death, like nimble Fleas.
95. To the fair modest, Maid, pretty Mrs. Martha Morris, and of her hansome
sister, Mistress Marie Philips, both of Bristoll.
Though Martha were with Mary angry for it,
Yet Christ told her, Luke 10.42.
She chose the better part.
Fair, chaste maid Martha, you have chose the best:
Your sister Mary, a life 1. Cor. 7.34.
of less rest.
96. Another to the same, being since married.
But since I hear that you have changed your state,
I wish your choice may prove kind, fortunate,
And that he may deserve you every deal;
He well deserves, that does deserve you well.
97. To the pretty, pert, forward green, Mistress L. B.
Nature took time your pretty parts to form,
She hastes her work in you, since you were borne,
Your buds are forward, though your leaves are green:
I think you will be ripe at Eleuenteene.
98. To the modest, and virtuous Widow, Mistress Elizabeth Gye of Bristoll,
whose dead Husband Master Philip Gye, was sometimes Governor of the Plantation
in Newfound-Land, where he, and she lived many years happily and contentedly.
Though Fortune press you with too hard a hand,
I hear, your heart is here, in Newfound-Land.
99. To a debausht University. A Complaint against Drunkenness.
Thy Sons (most famous Mother) in old time,
To quench their thirst, Pernassus hill did clime.
Some of thy Sons, now think that hill too steep,
Their Holliconian springs do lie more deep.
Their study now is, where there is good drink,
The Spigot is their Pen, strong beer their Ink,
I could with Democrit' laugh at this sin,
If it in any other place had bin:
But in a place where all should be decent,
A sin so nastie, inconvenient,
So beastly, so absurd, worthy disdain,
It strains me quite out of my merry strain.
I could with Heraclit' lament, and cry,
Or write complaints with woeful Jeremy:
Nay, much-much more, if that would expiate
What Is past, or following follies extirpate.
Many rare wits has it infatued,
Their climbing merits quite precipited,
And hopes of ancient houses ruined.
Fools and base sots this sin has made of them,
That by sobriety had been brave men:
Yea I do know, many wise men there be,
Which for this dare not trust their Sons with thee,
Fearing this Cerberus, this Dog of Hell,
Within whose Ward all other follies dwell.
I hope, thy Sister better looks to hers,
Indulgent Elies are thy Officers,
If they will not assist my motion,
To apply Causticks, and no Lotium;
Dear Mother, on my knees I beg this boon,
Afford this inconvenient Vice no room,
But whip it in thy Convocation,
Or strip it of Matriculation.
100. A short Iigge after this long Lachrymae Pauin.
As drunk as an old Beggar, once 'twas said.
As drunk as a young Scholar, now we read.
101. To the Reverend, Learned, Sober, and wise Governors in this Famous
University.
I hear, this sin you will shut out of door:
It joys me so, that I can write no more.
102. That every one may take his. To my worthy Readers.
Fair, modest, learned, sober, wise, and witty,
Praising I praise you, if those praises fit ye.
103. To my unworthy Reader.
Fond, wicked, misse-led, if thou guilty be,
Although I name thee not, yet I mean thee.
The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF QVODLIBETS. An vnfinisht Book.
1. To the Reader.
SErmons and Epigrams have a like end,
To improve, to reprove, and to amend:
Some pass without this use, 'cause they are witty;
And so do many Sermons, more's the pity.
2. To the Reader.
Of my small course, poor wares I cannot boast:
Owen and others have the choice ingrost:
And if that I on trust have taken up any;
Owen has done so too, and so have many.
3. Redargution or paid with his own money.
When Pontius called his neighbor, Cuckold Ass,
Being mad to see him blinded, as he was,
His Wife him standing by, replied anon:
Fie, Husband, fie, you are such another man.
Nay, I do know (quoth Pontius) that there be
Nine more in Town, in as bad case as he.
Then you know ten, if you (quoth she) say true.
Fie, Husband, fie, what an odd man are you?
4. Catholic, Apostolic Roman faith. To Papists.
If the word Catholic yea truly strain,
To neither of us does it appertain.
Apostolic we dare our selves afford,
And prove it by their practice, and their word.
The now new Roman Faith ye stiffly hold,
And brag of it, as if it were the old.
5. To elder Pelagians, more fine later Papists and our refined Arminians.
Though seu'rall ways you one opinion twine,
'Twixt your conceits there is but a little line:
For all of you with free grace are too bold,
Withgood works laying on presumptuous hold.
With your weak works, binding your boundless Maker,
Without whom, none can be an undertaker.
Whilst God ties us by Faith to do good deeds,
You will tie God to you by your fond Creeds.
Satan, that lowres at faithful, fearful works,
Likes your good deed, because he knows your querks.
At weak, faith-propt, due works Satan does grieve:
At tip-toe good works, he laughs in his sleeue.
It Is God that gives us grace, and makes us able,
Having all done, we are unprofitable.
Work, and work on with fond credulity,
Mercy with faith is our security.
6. A Chronagram of the year wherein Queen Elizabeth dyed, and King James
came to the Crown of England: both of blessed memory. We MaDe a Happy Change
thIs Year. MDC III.
This year of Grace, by Gods especial grace,
When all our foes expected our disgrace,
God crushed their malice, and allai'd our fear:
We made a happy Change this Present year:
A Change we made, but yet no Alteration;
Of former happiness a transmigration:
Two froward Sisters long at enmity,
Became the birth-twinnes of Virginity,
From a chaste, virtuous, blessed barren womb,
From the ill-boding North, our Spring did come;
Whilst many wise foreseeing men did fear,
Who should with quietness be the next Heir,
Our fears, so suddenly to joys did pass,
We cannot well tell in what year it was.
This year our just victorious War did cease,
And we enjoyed a sought-for proff'red Peace.
As Soon as our wise Debora was gont,
God sent this Land a Peaceful Solomon.
Our warlike Pallas having ruled her days,
Apollo came, adorned with learned Bays.
Lastly herein our Chronogram does hold,
This year we changed our Silver into Gold.
Silver a female is, Gold masculine:
Good God lengthen, strengthen this golden Line.
If any wise man judge it otherwise,
I may well judge that Wiseman ouerwise.
7. Of the Great and Famous, ever to be honored Knight, Sir Francis Drake,
and of my little-little self.
The Dragon, that our Seas did raise his Crest,
And brought back heaps of gold unto his nest,
Unto his Foes more terrible then Thunder,
Glory of his age, After-ages wonder,
Excelling all those that excelled before;
It Is feared we shall have none such any more;
Effecting all, he sole did undertake,
Valiant, just, wise, mild, honest, godly Drake.
This man when I was little, I did meet,
As he was walking up Totnes long Street,
He asked me whose I was? I answered him.
He asked me if his good friend were within?
A fair red Orange in his hand he had,
He gave it me, whereof I was right glad,
Takes and kissed me, and prays, God bless my boy:
Which I record with comfort to this day.
Could he on me have breathed with his breath,
His gifts Elias-like, after his death,
Then had I been enabled for to do
Many brave things I have a heart unto.
I have as great desire, as e're had he
To joy; annoy; friends; foes: but 'twill not be.
8. To the right Reverend Father in God, Joseph Hall, by Gods especial
providence, Lord Bishop of Exceter.
Borne in a Christian new Plantation,
These kneel to you for Confirmation;
To you they come, that you might them adorn:
Their Father in your Diocese was borne:
9. To the Reverend and divinely witty, John Dun, Doctor in Divinity, Deane of
Saint Paul's, London.
As my John Owen Owen, Lib. 4. Epig. 40.
Seneca did praise,
So might I for you a like pillar raise,
His Epigrams did nothing want but verse;
You can yours (if you list) that way rehearse:
His were neat, fine, divine morality;
But yours, pure, faithful, true Divinity.
10. Aristotle's ten Predicaments, to be reduced into questions, is an excellent
rule for examining any business for matter of justice. To the hopeful and right
worthy young Gentleman, Thomas Smith of Long- Ashton in the County of
Sommerset, Esquire.
The thing, 1
how much, 2
conditions of the men, 3

For what cause, 4
what was done, 5
who suffered then, 6

Where, 7
when; 8
their postures, 9
how clad, foul, or clean. 10

11. Their use.
Who has power of examinations,
If he desire to find out guilty ones,
Let him reduce these into questions.
So if to find out truth, be his intent,
Before that all these questions be spent,
The guilty's brought in a Predicament.
12. The cause of Dedication.
Strange not, that I these Lines to you have sent;
I know, your worth will make you eminent.
Grace, Wisdom, Learning, Virtue, you have store;
Were you not modest, I could say much more.
13. To the Reverend, Learned, and Judicious, Thomas Worall, Doctor in
Divinity, and Chapaline to the right Reave. Father in God, George, L. Bishop of
London. Of my reprehending Epigrams.
It is for one of your gifts, and your place,
To look bold-staring-black sin in the face,
To wound, and lance with the two-edged blade,
To cleanse, and heal those wounds that you have made:
Yet suffer me, with my sharp-merry pin,
To prick the blisters of some itching sin.
And though Divines, justly loose Rymes condemn,
My tart, smart, chiding Lines do not contemn.
14. To the Reverend, my worthy ingenious friend, Mr. Abel Louering, one of the
Preachers of the Word of God at Bristoll. Of my commending Epigrams.
Those I commend, you would commend them too,
If you did know them truly, as I do.
Preachers like you, may praise men at their ends,
Laymen like me, may praise wise-liuing friends.
15. To a Reverend and witty friend.
Since few years studying has improu'd your wit,
That for the place you hold, you are held fit,
When you preach, you preach sweetly and complete,
And other things you do, smooth, witty, neat.
What place in Church would you not fitly hallow;
If you your study soberly would follow?
16. Of Epigrams.
Short Epigrams relish both sweet and sour,
Like Fritters of sour Apples, and sweet flower.
17. To the wise and Learned Sir John Stradling, Knight Baronet, the Author of
diverse Divine Heroical printed Poems.
Robert Fitz-Heman drew your Ancestor
To Wales, to be his fellow Conqueror.
And Robert Hayman would draw all your worth,
If he true knowledge had, to lymme it forth.
Wise Sir, I know you not, but by relation,
Saving in this, which spreads your reputation:
Your high divine sweet strains Poetical.
Which crowns, adornes your noble virtues all.
Therein to dight a full Feast, you are able,
Whilst I fit Fritters for Apollo's Table.
18. To Master Benjamin Johnson, Witty Epigrammatist, and most excellent Poet.
My Epigrams come after yours in time;
So do they in conceit, in form, in Ryme;
My wit's in fault, the fault is none of mine:
For if my will could have inspired my wit,
There never had been better Verses writ,
As good as yours, could I have ruled it.
19. To one of my neat Readers.
Thou say, my Verses are rude, ragged, rough,
Not like some others Rymes, smooth, dainty stuff.
Epigrams are like Satyrs, rough without,
Like Chessnuts, sweet, take thou the kernel out.
Satyrs. 20. To the acute Satyrist, Master George Wither.
The efficient cause of Satyrs, are things bad,
Their matter, sharp reproves, instructions sad,
Their form sour, short, severe, sharp, roughly clad:
Their end is that amendment may be had.
21. To the same Mr. George Wither, of his own Satyrs.
What cause you had, this vein too high to strain,
I know not, but I know, it caused your pain;
Which causes others wisely to refrain:
Yet let some good cause draw you on again.
You strip and whip the will manners of the times
So hansomely, that all delight your Rymes.
22. To my right worthy friend, Mr. Michael Drayton, whose unwearied old Muse
still produces new dainties.
When I was young, I did delight your lines,
I have admyr'd them since my judging times:
Your younger muse played many a dainty fit,
And your old muse does hold out stoutly yet.
Though my old muse durst pass through frost and snow,
In wars your He wrote battle ofthe Agincourt, when he was above 60. years old
old muse dares her Colors show.
23. To my worthy and learned good friend, Mr. John Vicars, who has translated
part of Mr. Owens Epigrams.
Who has good words, and a warm brooding pate,
Shall easier hatch neat new things, then translate:
He that translates, must walk as others please:
Writing our own, we wander may at ease.
24. To my good friend, Mr. T. B. Vintner, at the sign of the Sun in
Milke-street.
Bacchus desiring an auspicious sign,
Under which he might sell his choysest wine,
Desiring much to choose one of the seven
Celestial Planets, reeled one night to heaven,
He found old Bent-brow'd Saturn melancholy,
Jove stern, Mars stout, Venus repleat with folly,
Sly Mercury full of Loquacity,
And Luna troubled with inconstancy:
Disliking these, he middle Sol espied,
Who unto sober drinkers is a guide:
He liking this, in Milk-street
via Lactea plaste it,
And with his best wines, he has e're since graste it,
And finding you no Brewer, as your due,
He does commit the charge thereof to You.
27. To a Friend, who asked me why I do not compose some particular Epigrams
to our most gracious King, as my Friend John Owen did to his famous Father,
King JAMES of blessed memory.
Thou ask'st, Why I do not spinne out my wit,
In silken threads, and fine, smooth, neat lines fit,
In special Epigrams to our wise King?
All these my self I dedicate to him.
Its all too coorse, what my wit can weaue forth,
To wrap the little finger of his worth.
28. Sins short Grammar. To my louiog Cousin Master John Gunning the younger,
of Bristoll Merchant. The Grammar.
Sins easy Grammar, our Grandmother Eve
To her sinful posterity did leave.
Sins Part.
In Speech are eight parts, in sin there are seven,
We may put Satan in, to make them even.
Satan a Noune.
Satan, Sins grandfather, stands as a Noune,
To all ill things giving an ill renown,
Enticing mildly; Roaring if withstood,
Being thereby felt, heard, and understood.
Sloth, a Pronounne.
Sloth is a Pronoune: Idle men in name
Are men, but otherwise a senseless shame.
Sloth is the Devils best son Primitive,
And from him most sins do themselves derive.
Anger, a Verb.
Anger a Verb is* for at every word,
His Active and his Passive spleen is stirred,
In Mood and Tense declined is this sin,
Moody it is, at all times full of spleen.
Covetousness, a Participle.
Covetousness may be sins participle,
To help himself, from each one takes a little,
With every Sin he will Participate,
So he thereby may better his estate.
Pride, an Aduerbe.
Pride is an Aduerbe, if you will take his word,
Nor Heaven, nor Earth the like thing does afford.
In his conceit he is the thing alone,
He holds himself beyond Comparison.
Lust, a Conjunction.
Lust is a lawless, lewd Conjunction,
For Lust desires not to act sin alone:
So joining sins his sinful days do waste,
Until they join him with the Devil at last.
Envy, a Praeposition.
Envy may be Sins Preposition,
Against things well composed showing opposition.
Ablatiues, and Accusatiues he will choose
For he loves to Detract, and to Accuse.
Gluttony, an Interiection.
Gluttony is an Interiection,
Into his paunch all his delights are thrown.
As nothing but good bits, can make him glad,
So only want of them, can make him sad.
Sins Declension.
O God! in what bad Case are we declined?
Since thou in every Case our sins may find,
In Nominative, by furious Appellations,
In Genitive, by spurious generations.
In Dative by corrupting briberie.
In the Accusative, by calumny.
In Vocative, by grudging, and exclayming.
In Ablative, by cooz'ning, rape, and stealing.
Number, and Gender.
Singular sins, and Plural we commit,
And we in every Gender vary it.
Number.
Our Single sins are wicked cogitations,
Our Plural, Ryots, Combinations
Against thee, Lord, and thy Anointed ones.
Gender.
Our Masculine, first sin's vxoriousnes,
Our Feminine, to sin's sleights yeeldingnes,
Our Neuter sin, is cold neutralitie,
Common of two, too common Venerie.
Thrice Common we commit sins against Three;
Against our selves, our Neighbors, against Thee.
Doubtful is our Dissimulation.
In all sins, He Is and She Is take delectation.
The Conclusion.
Thus we in Sin use regularitie,
Whilst We with Grace have no Congruitie.
29. To lashing, fault-finding Zoilus.
I know, thou will end, as thou have begun:
Put up thy Rod (great whipper) I have done.
30. To the ineffable, individual, ever blessed Trinity in Unity.
To one in three, three in one be all praise,
For planting in me, this small bud of Bays.
The end of the Authors Quodlibets. At this time.
To the Reader, in stead of an Epistle.
If these fail in worth, blame me, but consider from whence they came; from a
place of no helps. If in Printing, blame the Printer, and mend it. I have
omitted many of mine own and of the Translatio^s. As thou likest those, thou
may have the rest.

FAREWELL.
CERTAIN EPIGRAMS OVT OF THE FIRST FOUR BOOKS OF THE EXcellent
Epigrammatist, Master JOHN OWN:

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH AT HARBOR-GRACE IN Bristols-Hope in Britaniola,
anciently called New Foundland: By R. H.

PAX * OPVLENTIAM SAPIENTIA * PACEM
printer's or publisher's device FK



AT LONDON Imprinted for Roger Michell, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Bulls head in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

TO THE FAR ADMIRED, ADMIRABLLY FAIR, virtuous, and witty Beauties of ENGLAND.
IT was, fair, virtuous, witty, for your sake,
That I this harder task did undertake.
I grieved, such wit was out of your command,
Locked in a tongue you did not understand.
To do you service, not my self to please,
Did I at first adventure upon these.

I thought to have proceeded in this method, but the ragged, bashful slut my
Muse (having not seen your like before) is amazed, and stricken dumb at the
sight of your excellencies: I must therefore take up the speech for her, and as
She has heretofore twatled much for me, I must therefore entreat you in Her
behalf. Indeed I told Her, She should find you very loving and kind, and
should be admitted to kiss your whitest hands. She is a stranger, I humbly
therefore pray you, to take her into your protection, kindly take her into your
hands, and entertain her courteously; none can do it better then your selves;
whilst you look kindly upon her, let her with admiration, and contentment gaze
on your beauties: you may look upon her boldly with vnuailed countenances, you
shall find her every where modest, either she has vailde, or quite omitted
what She fears might offend your chaste ears, She has taken pains to let you
know what envious me^ have too long kept from your knowledge. If She speak any
thing against your sex, it is but what malicious men sometimes mutter in an
unknown language against your inferior frailties, and has answered somewhat
in your behalf: you shall find Her no importunate Companion, for you may
begin with her when you please, and leave her when you list: every small
parcel is an entire treatise, and depends upon it self; they may serve you
for pastime, if you please, for use, for embellishing in your discourse, as
spangles in your attire: The translations were the better, if they are not made
worse in the change. For our own, they are the best we can at this time. The
grace and love I received sometime from one of your sex, makes me confident of
your gracious goodness: but my Muse has a little recovered her spirits, and
requests me She may speak a little unto you.

Your beauties, wonder and amazement bred
In me, that still I am astonished:
Yet this request I pray do not deny,
Give me good words, for you have more then I.
In recompense one day I Will sing a song
Of your rich worth with my last buskins on.
The admirer of your excellencies, the short-breathed Muse of Robert Hayman.

A PRAEMONITION TO ALL KIND OF READERS of these Translations of John Owens
EPIGRAMS.
AS one into a spacious Garden led,
Which is with rare, fair flowers well garnished,
Where Argus may all his eyes satisfy;
Centimanus all his hands occupy,
He will choose some fine flowers of the best,
To make himself a Poesy at the least:
Or he will, if such favor may be found,
Entreat some Slips, to set in his own ground:
So fares it with me, when in Owens book,
At leisure times, with willing eyes I look:
I cannot choose, but choose some of his flowers,
And to translate them at my leisure hours.
But as it is not for this admitted Man,
Manners at once to gather every one,
But mildly to cull a few at a time,
I pray thee do so too, kind Reader mine:
For as a Man may surfeit on sweet meats:
So thou may ouer-read these quaint conceits.
Some at one time, some at another choose;
As Maidens do their kissing Confects use.
Read therefore these, His; by translation, Mine:
As some eat Cheese, a penny-waight at a time.
AN ENCOMIASTICK DISTICK ON MY RIGHT WORTHY AVTHOR, JOHN OWN.
THe best conceits Owens conceits have found,
Short, sharp, sweet, witty, vnforc'd, neat, profound.
PART OF MASTER JOHN OWENS EPIGRAMS TRANSLATED into ENGLISH.
THE FIRST BOOK.
Epig. 2. To the Reader.
THou that read'st these, if thou commend them all,
Thou'st too much milk; if none, thou'st too much gall.
3 To Master John Hoskins, of his Book.
My Book the World is, Verses are the Men,
You Will find as few good here, as amongst them.
8 Know thy self.
Nothing worth knowledge is in thee, I trow,
Seek some-where else, some worthier thing to know.
14 Gilberts Opinion, that the Earth goes round, and that the Heavens stand
still.
Thou sai'st, the Earth does move: that is a strange tale,
When thou did write this, thou were under sail.
15 Physicions, and Lawyers.
Our sicknesses breeds our Physicions health,
Our folly makes wise Lawyers with our wealth.
16 O Times, O Manners!
Scaliger did Times computation mend:
Who, to correct ill manners does intend?
Or thus to Scaliger.
Thou mended have the bad score of old years:
Who dares take old bad manners by the ears?
21 To a poor, bare, beggarly, fie on such a Physicion.
Thou were a poor, bare, fie on such a one,
But now thou art grown a Physicion:
Thou give us physic, we with gold thee please:
Thou cur'st not ours; but we cure thy disease.
26 Cold fire.
If that Love be a fire (as it is said)
How cold is thy Loves fire, my pretty Maid?
27 An impious Atheists pastime.
I joy in present things, and present time:
A time will come that will be none of mine:
Grammarians talk oftimes past and hereafter:
I spend time present in pastime and laughter.
28 An Atheist's Epitaph.
He lived, as if he should not feel Deaths pain,
And died, as if he would not live again.
30 Married Alanaes complaint.
All day Alana rayleth at Wedlock,
And says, it is an intolerable yoke:
At night being pleased, she alters her rage,
And says that marriage is the merriest age.
31 A Prophet and Poet.
Of things to come these make true predication,
These of things present make a false relation.
35 Free Will.
Free Will for which Christ's Church is so divided,
Though men it lose, Wives will not be denied it.
39 New Rhetoric.
Good arguments without Coin will not stick
To pay, and not say is best Rhetoric.
52 To an Atheist.
Each house, thou see here, some one does possess,
Yet thou do think the great house masterlesse.
53 A trade betwixt Physicions and Patients.
Physicions receive gold, but give none back,
Physic they will give, but none of it they will take:
Their hands write our health bills, ours greaze their fist:
Thus one man's hand, another does assist.
54 Iuris-prudentes, Wise men of Law.
Lawyers are rightly called wise men of Law,
Since to themselves, they wisely wealth do draw.
To the same purpose more largely thus.
Wise men of Law, the Latins Lawyers style,
And so they are, fools Clyents are the while:
Lawyers are wise, we see, by their affairs,
Leaving so much land to their happy heirs.
55 To Courtiers.
If good thou be at Court, thou may grow better,
But I do fear thou hardly wilt grow greater:
If great thou be, greater thou may be made:
But to grow better is no Courtiers trade.
57 A Mortal Conceit.
To eternize thy fame, thou buildst a Tomb,
As if death could not eat up such a Room.
58 A Comfort for Baldnes.
So young and bald, take comfort then in this,
Thy head will never be whiter then it is.
61 On old Alan.
Old Alan ioynes his couch to his wives bed,
And thinks himself thereby most sweetly laid.
62 New-yeeres-gifts. Some men's pride, some men's baseness.
Olus gives not to rich, to receive more;
To poor he cannot give, 'cause he is poor:
Quintus for gain gives gift with long low legs,
And what he would have given, by giving begs.
63 A Caveat for Cuckolds.
When Pontius wished all Cuckolds in the Sea,
His wife replide: First learn to swim, I pray.
71 Physicions and Lawyers.
Physicions, Lawyers, by one means do thrive,
For others harms do both of them relieve:
By sickness one, the other by contention;
Both promise help, both thrive by this pretention.
73 The Bald-pate.
Trees have new leaves, in fields there grows new grain,
But thy shed hairs will never grow again.
76 Giants and Dwarfes.
Giants and Dwarfes are men of differing grouth,
Dwarfes are shrunk men; Giants are men stretched forth.
80 A Sergeants case. To Lawyers.
If a man with a wench should make a match,
And in stead of her should his own wife catch:
Tell me if a child borne by this deceit,
Be a base bastard, or Legitimate?
84 A begging Poet.
I hear, thou in thy verses praysest me:
It is because in mine I should praise thee.
89 An old Churl.
What-euer of this friend I beg or borrow,
He puts me off, and says, You shall to morrow:
For this thy promise shall I fit thanks fit?
To morrow then, thee will I thank for it.
93 Double dealing.
Wherefore loves Venus, Mars, unlawfully?
Vulcan is lame in lawful venery.
94 Much hair, little Wit.
Thy beard grows fair and large; thy head grow's thin;
Thou have a light head, and a heavy chinne.
Addition.
Hence it is those light conceits thy head does breed,
From thy dull heavy mouth so slow proceed.
101 A dead Reckoning.
What death is, thou do often ask of me:
Come to me when I am dead, I Will tell it thee.
103 To self applying, and fault-finding Zoilus.
When I find fault at faults, thou carp'st at me:
It may be, therein thou think I mean thee:
Why should thou think I reprove thee alone?
Finding fault with faults, I do fault mine own.
105 To Bald-pate.
Surely thy brow had some dimention,
Before thy hairs were with a hoare-frost gone:
Thy hairs are all like leaves fallen from a tree,
That thy whole head a forehead now may be:
None know the length, breadth, depth of thy brow now,
Therefore there is no trust now to thy brow.
106 Plain downright bald-pate.
I cannot count my hairs, they are so thick grown,
Nor can thou number thine, for thou have none.
107 Fortunes Apology.
To all, just Fortune deals an equal Share,
To poor men she gives hope, to rich men Fear.
113 The Chyrurgion.
Whether for war or peace should I desire?
I gain by Mars his sword, and Venus fire.
115 Complainers and Flatterers.
Old Anaxagoras said, Snow was black:
Our Age such kind of people does not lack:
The Fox said, that the Rooke was white as Snow:
Many such flattering Foxes I do know.
119 A reasonable Request.
Sweet, let thy soul be smooth as is thy skin:
As thou art fair without, be so within.
120 Not seen, No sin.
Thou think all sure, when none do see thine ill,
Though with a witness, thou go to it still.
127 To a scalded Leacher.
Though thou have escaped commuting, and the sheet,
Thy head-lesse thing has had correction meet.
130 To a minsing Madam.
Thou art displeasd, and angerly do look,
'Cause a man's thing thou find'st named in my book:
For writing it, why do thou chafe at me?
A man without it would more anger thee.
131 Saturnes three sons.
Doubtful Divines, Lawyers that wrangle most,
Nasty Physicions, these three rule the roast.
132 To his married friend. Single and married lives.
Woe to th'alone says married Solomon:
Yet Paul says, There Is no life like such a one:
The married cry, Woe us: Single, Woo me.
Woo me, I Will take: Take thou, Woe us, to thee.
Addition out of his own Welsh Annotation.
And single woes better then double be.
139 Wine and Women.
Since Venery is vendible as Wine,
Why has not Venus an enticing sign?
Addition.
They need no sign to hang over the door,
Whilst in it stands the foul bawd or fine whore.
143 Rare Sarah.
A Wife to yield her bed-right to her maid,
Of none but Sarah could it e're be said.
144 To D. T.
Thy Masters master, Pupils slave the while,
I do both envy, and lament thy Style.
147 A Waggs Bolt.
Happy is he (good Sir) that has a care
Of others harms, and horns for to beware:
A son so whispered in his fathers ear.
149 An vxorious Ass.
Quintus observes his wives words, nods, and hands,
Her words are laws, and her requests commands:
She draws, she drives, she swayes her husband so,
You cannot tell where she have one or no:
Against all Grammar rules, they lead their life,
That you may say, his husband, and her wife.
151 A wary wench that stood upon her terms.
Unfaithful to her first mate, and her last,
In the vacation she lived wondrous chaste.
Shame, and not sin, made her forbear the deed,
She knew she had good ground, had she good seed:
Though she were hard beset both first and last,
Still out of Term her Checker-doore was fast.
Addition.
Yet still when she of her Terme-time was sure,
Some days before, She opened her Checker-doore.
161 A Doctor in promising, but a Dunce in performing.
Much thou do promise, nothing thou do lend,
Like Doctors that write, take, and nothing send.
162 A pretty wench scuruily Cunny-catcht.
Would the old Spartan Law were up again,
That naked maids should marry naked men:
I thought to have cockt away my maidenhead,
In naked truth, I did a Capon wed.
163 A forked Problem.
Since She defiled has the marriage bed,
Why must he wear the horns? He is the head.
164 Verses given for a New-yeeres-gift, unrewarded.
Give somewhat, or my verses back to me:
On that condition, I do give them thee.
165 Christ's Church College in Oxford.
Though men look sad at thy vnfinishing,
Which makes thee look like to a ruined thing,
Thy Quadrangle shows what thou should have binne.
166 Phillis Love.
Phillis says that she is ravished with my verses:
Verses she loves well: better she loves Tar --
167 Pastime.
I spend my time in vain and idle toys,
So fearing to lose time, my time I lose.
168 Short and sweet to the Reader.
Brand not my breuity with ill belief,
Believe me, it is my pain to be thus brief:
I speak not much, and fond, as many a one,
If I speak foolishly, I soon have done.
172 A Request to the Reader.
Rather then my leaves should Tobacco light,
I pray thee with them make thy backside bright.
173 Of his Book.
What if my Book long before me should dye?
Many a son does so unwillingly.
What if he should live some time after me?
All my brains Children frail and mortal be.
PART OF MASTER JOHN OWENS EPIGRAMS TRANSLATED into ENGLISH.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Epig. 1.
THough Fools are every where, (as there are many)
I cannot, nor I care not to please any:
Few Readers I desire, and 'twere but one,
It should not trouble me, if there were none.
5 To Sir John Harrington, most Excellent Poet.
A Poet mean I am; yet of the troop
Though thou art not, yet better thou can do it.
7 A Court Wit.
At Court, who cannot his wit nimbly fit,
To fit each humor; has at Court no wit.
8 The Spur of Knighthood.
Thou knighted art, to get thy wives good will;
She Will love her self the more, thee little still:
She'ath cost thee much, but now she will cost thee more;
She Is dearer therefore to thee, then before.
9 Chymicks folly.
Th'vnskilfull Chymick toils, and boyles, and spoils,
To make a Stone; vnstones himself the whiles.
10 A true Trojan.
When all was lost, the Trojans then grew wise:
Who is not a true Trojan in this wise?
11 The Remedy of Love.
Pray much, fast often, fly women as the fire,
Think not on earthly things, but think on higher:
If these work not this, medicine does excel,
The fire of marriage will lust-fire expel.
12 London, anciently called Troynouant.
As from the old Phoenix ashes anew springs:
So from Troyes ashes, London her birth brings.
37 To Master Adam Newton, Tutor to King Charles, when he was Prince of Wales.
The hopefull'st Prince that ever this Land breed,
Is from thy learned mouth so discipleed,
That times hereafter will be arguing,
Which he was; Greater, More learned, Better King?
Addition. To the same Master Newton, to whom for kindness received, I am
further indebted.
I know thou art as learned as Arist'le,
Thy Pupil will his far surpass in battle,
In goodness, good Josiah, David rather;
In learning Tresmegist, or his own Our late most learned King James.
Father.
39 Sir Francis Drake.
Drake like a Dragon through the world did fly,
And every Coast thereof he did descrie:
Should envious men be dumb, the Spheres will show,
And the two Poles, his iourneys which they saw:
Beyond Cades Pillars far, Fame steerd his way;
Great Hercules on shore, but Drake by Sea.
43 The Divine.
Though thou know much, thy knowledge is but lost,
Unless that other men know what thou know.
The Politician.
Though thou know much, thy knowledge is but lost,
If any other man know what thou know.
47 Women would have their Will.
A Papist maid marrying a Lutheran;
Two sects much differing in opinion,
She said, Sweet heart, be not unkind to me;
All shall be well, for I Will be kind to thee:
Let me of my old Faith hold but free will;
In other points I shall your mind fulfill.
54 An English Wife.
Let me set always uppermost at board,
The uppermost in bed I Will you afford:
Thus we will divide our rule; I rule all day,
All night, kind Husband, you shall ouer-sway.
57 A prating Companion.
Thou still ask'st leave, that still thy tongue may walk:
Thou need'st no leave, if thou would leave to talk.
64 The Order of the Golden Fleece.
Philip of Burgundy did first ordain
The Order of the Golden Fleece of Spain,
He prophised, when he this Order made:
For his heirs since have got the golden Trade.
68 To Mistress Jane Owen, a very learned Woman.
Of thy five sisters, Jane, I know but thee,
I only have heard what their number be:
I cannot one of them by their names call;
Yet if they be like thee, I know them all.
Addition.
Fair, modest, learned, wise, beyond my praise:
Happy is he shall marry one of these.
71 To one like neither of his Parents.
Why art thou so unlike either of those
Who thee begot, with a joint willing close?
Whilst each did strive hard, who should form thee most,
Ill-fauouredly their favors thou have lost.
72 Two Gallants that went to Venice upon Return.
Toward fair Venice both of ye are gone,
At your return, to receive four for one:
And now you are returned to your own Coast,
Your friends welcome you home unto their cost.
80 To a Drunken Rimer.
Thou drink'st, and think, drink makes a man a Poet,
Thou think, and drink'st, thou art one by that diet.
Add but two letters unto Versifier,
And then thou art a drunken Vers-defiler.
81 More Epistle then Gospel.
Full often thy Epistles I receive,
Thou seldom writest Gospel, I perceive.
88 Naked Love.
Natures preserve, from cold as with a freeze,
The ground with grass and corn, with bark green trees,
With feathers, birds; and beasts, with wool, and hair:
Where Nature wants, Art covering does prepare.
Why then loves Love her naked to unfold?
The nakeder she is, she is the less cold.
89 The Exchequer.
Collected Coin into the Exchequer flows;
As fresh streams daily to the salt Sea goes:
From thence coin is dispersed by secret veins,
As through the Earth the Sea refils up streams;
Yet never will this Sea be satisfide,
These rivers by their tribute never dride.
94 This Worlds Wisdom.
Who Is rich? The wise. Who Is poor? The foolish man.
If I were wise, I should have riches than.
Who Is wise? The rich. And who is a fool? The poor.
If I were rich, I should be wise therefore.
102 To play and study together.
When I handle a grave and serious thing,
Lightly, and slightly, I play studying:
When I light and slight triuiall matters way,
Too seriously I study in my play.
104 To fault-finding and envious Zoilus.
Praises are praised, Lovers loved are:
If thou commend us, we will speak thee fair;
Love us hereafter, we will for thee care.
111 The Covetous Man.
Thy gold is locked up in thy iron chest:
Thy love is blockt up in thy iron breast.
115 The Plague in England, 1603.
This hungry lean Plague did so many eat,
That we shall hardly find a new plague meat.
116 To a very fair Woman.
If that thou were as rich as thou art fair,
Then no one living could with thee compare.
If thou had lived in time of Trojan wars,
For thee more justly had been all those iarres.
Addition on my Author.
Rare, fair was She to whom he this affords,
Or he disposed to give her fair words.
122 A fantastical Courtier.
Of wise men thou art thought a foolish Elfe:
Fools think thee wise: what think thou of thy self?
124 A hansome Whore.
Would' thou were not so fair, or better given:
Then a fair Whore there is naught worse under heaven.
126 To Bald-pate.
Thou have lost all thy hair upon thy pate,
Thy faithless forhead is in the same state,
Before, behind, all thy hairs being fled;
What have thou bald-pate for to lose? Thy head.
127 Nolens volens.
Claudius might soon be honest, if he would:
Lynus would be dishonest, if he could.
131 On a covetous Gowty-fist.
If thou a gift give to this Clung-fist man,
He Will find a hundred hands, though he have none:
But if thou for thy gift, a gift do crave,
No hand he has, though hundred hands he have.
132 Kings Misery.
Whilst some dares not tell him the truth of things.
And those that may, naught but placebo sings,
How miserable is the state of Kings?
133 Might and Right.
Might ouercomes Right, and Right masters Might,
Yet change one letter, Right makes Might, Might, Right.
137 On a Scalded ill-fauored Knave.
In a known part, hot Venus branded thee,
That thou some where might in her livery heel.
138 To Adr. V.
Thy laughing Epigrams ridiculous,
Make us not smile, but laughter cause in us.
They have no jests: the Reader laughs at that,
Because there is nothing worth the laughing at.
148 Sir Francis Drakes Epitaph.
If Romish bloody superstition
Should for our sins into our Land return,
And that they should use their vile fashion,
Their adversaries bodies for to burn;
Brave Drake, thy body in the Sea lies free
From their bold, beastly, bloody cruelty:
Addition, Alluding to the Legend of the floating Lady of Loretto.
Except some Loret Miracle do float thee.
157 Of Virgils Georgicks.
Thy verses, Maro, Husbandry express,
Thou do thy Readers grounds and his wit dress.
158 To Poet Persius.
Persius, when I sometimes thy verses touch,
Thy sense I see not, thy dark lines are such,
Thou do neglect thy Reader too-too much.
160 To Poet Martial.
Thou iest'st at things, yet men thou do not wrong,
No gall, much honey flows from thy salt tongue.
161 To excellent Poet Petrack of his Laura.
As often as thy Laura shall be read,
Amongst thy Readers 'twill be questioned,
Whether thy Laura, Laurel does deserve
Better then thou, that did her so well serve.
172 On his own Epigrams to Samuel Daniel, most witty Poet.
It Is not strange, if my Epigrams be mean,
I do not bite my nails, nor beat my brain.
177 Hunger makes meat taste sweetest.
If with much pleasure thou would eat thy meat,
Be hungry then, before the meat thou eat.
181 Satyrs and Epigrams.
Satyrs are Epigrams; but larger drouen,
Epigrams Satyrs are, but closer wouen:
An Epigram must be Satyricall,
A Satyr must be Epigrammicall.
183 Deaf and Blind.
Deaf men look wild: blind men thrust out their ear:
Blind with ears see: Deaf with their eyes do hear.
189 Sunday.
Sunday I Will call that day, spite of precise,
In which the glorious Son of God did rise.
191 Fashions in Clothes.
Old out-worne fashions young men's fashion grows:
And old men wear late strange new fashion clothes.
193 The commodity of a silly Sheep.
If leather, flesh, milk, compost, dice, or cords,
Or wool you want; all this a Sheep affords.
An Egg, which though it be mine own, I Will add to this, because it goes to
the same tune.
If flesh, or skin, or bones, feathers, or strings,
Or blood you want; all this one round Egg brings.
To mine Author, a little to be merry with him.
When I did write this, I did think upon
The Egg, sup't up by thine own Countryman.
196 Parret, and Prater.
Parret and Prater, iumpe just in their names,
One to the other are right Anagrams.
200 Satyrs and good Laws have one original cause.
Good Laws and Satyrs from one cause proceed;
Wicked behavior both of them does breed.
Addition. These ends are alike.
Tart, biting Satyrs have the selfsame end,
That good Laws have, bad manners to amend.
203 A Merchants account.
Or rich, or poor, account my self I may,
Whilst with my goods I trust the Bankrout Sea.
204 Lust.
In the dark, foul Sluts are esteemed fair:
Blind lust is cause thereof, not the dark air.
213 Echo.
Caruing, nor painting, cannot express words;
Yet prating Echo that quaint-art affords.
214 Looking-glass.
To express Motion, Painting is naught worth;
My Looking-glass can lively set it forth.
215 Echo, and Looking-glass.
Nothing of man but voice Echo affords;
My Looking-glass wants nothing else but words.
217 A good Chapman.
I gave thee three books, three pounds thou gave me;
No man has bought my books as dear as thee.
218 To the blessed Memory of King James, the happy Uniter of this so
long-diuided Island of Great Britain.
Great Britain seuer'd from the World by Sea,
Was in it self divided many a day,
In many Kingdoms, and in many parts,
Which did divide her people, and their hearts:
Unhappy then was parted Albion,
Happy in Thee, for in Thee All-be-on.
Addition to King James.
Often have I wished (O pardon my wishing*)
That thou had styled thy self All-be-ons King.
PART OF MASTER JOHN OWENS EPIGRAMS TRANSLATED into ENGLISH.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Epig. 4. The happy Virgin-issue of Blessed Queen Elizabeth.
SCotland with England was twinn'd happily,
In the blessed birth of thy Virginity:
To unite, is more blessed then to breed,
From thy not-bearing this birth did proceed.
9 To the virtuous Lady, Mary Neuil, Daughter to the Earl of Dorset, his
worthy Patroness.
Thy glass presents thee fair, Fame Chaste thee styles:
Neither thy Glass nor Fame do lie the whiles.
Loud-wide-mouth'd Fame swifter then Eagles wing,
Dares not report against thee any thing.
10 To the same right worthy Lady, of her little Daughter, Cicill.
To limme souls beauty, painting is nought-worth:
This pretty Image lively sets thine forth.
11 To the white-handed Reader.
My good excel: my bad ones well may pass:
Such grace (white Reader) thy kind judgment has.
12 To the black-mouthed Reader.
My mean are naught, my bad intolerable:
Thy envy does (black Reader) them disable.
18 Dives and Lazarus.
The rich man has in Gods Book but his shame:
Poor Lazarus in Gods Book has his Name.
22 The Spirit and Flesh.
The Spirit this, the Flesh draws me that way:
Caesar and Jove in me bear several sway:
If there were once a good Peace 'twixt these two,
In Earth there would not be so much ado.
24 Gods Sight, and man's ouer-sight.
Men few things see, God all things does foresee:
God seldom speaks, but men still prating be.
25 The broad and narrow Way.
Heavens Way is narrow: but Heavens Rooms are broad*
Hells way is large: but narrow his aboade.
Who goes not the strait Way to the broad place,
The broad will bring him in a narrow case.
30 A Catechism.
We must believe twelve, and we must do ten,
And pray for seven; if we'll be godly men.
31 Rich men's Repentance.
Why are so many rich men to Hell sent?
They repent nothing but their Money spent.
35 Wisdom, Justice, and Fortitude.
He Is wise, who knows much: just, who just does deal:
He valiant is, who knows, and dares do well.
37 To Camber-Brittone.
Wales, Scotland, England, now are joined in one:
Henceforth Wales is not Brittany alone.
41 Christ Jesus God and Man.
Because the purer Godhead could not dye,
Nor could the impure Manhood satisfy:
Therefore our wise God suffered bodily.
45 Adams fall was our thrall.
Since our first Parent, Father Adams fall,
Our bodies goods, and souls are thus in thrall:
Divines have got the sway over our souls,
Physicions, bodies, Lawyers goods controwle.
47 A good Preacher.
The mornings trusty Herald Chantecleare,
Before he tells us that the day is near,
Russels himself, stretching forth every wing,
And then his good news lowdly he does sing:
So a good Preacher shoud rouse himself then,
When he intends to stir up other men.
65 Niggard and prodigal.
Niggards nothing will give, whilst they have breath:
Unthrifts have nothing to give after death.
76 Old Critics. New Phantasticks.
His envy is too gross, who likes no new diuice:
And he that likes nothing but new, his envy is too nice.
77 A Christians Death.
As in a way Death does us to life bring:
Death's no enterring, but an entering.
80 Holiness is better then Learning.
To read Saints lives, and not live like them holy,
Does not respect, but does neglect them wholly.
82 An Atheists godliness.
Thou have no Faith on any thing that is past,
Nor do thou hope on any thing at last,
But on the present all thy Love is plast.
84 The diverse effects of praise.
Praise does improve the Good man, hurts the Bad,
Infatuates Fools, makes wise the crafty Lad.
86 The Envious and the Foolish man.
The fool wants wit, the envious a good mind,
Whilst this sees not, the other will be blind.
96 Divine Virtue.
Virtue an act is, not an idle breath,
In works, not words, are found Love, Hope, and Faith*
105 Young Days.
Then now time was, when first of all time was,
When the new world was framed out of the mass,
Now tell me, Reader, of Antiquities,
Are these the elder or the newer days?
106 Desire, and have.
Would thou do good? continue thy good will,
He that gave thee desire, will give thee skill.
108 Good men are better then wise men.
Wise men are wiser then good men. What then?
It Is better to be better then wise men.
110 Much Preaching. To Preachers.
It Is sign of much ill, where much preaching needs,
For what needs preaching, where you see good deeds?
A reply to mine Author.
Yes, preaching may do good, where goodness grows,
T'incourage, to confirm, to comfort those.
112 Eloquence.
Not he that prates, and takes a foul great deal.
Is eloquent: but he that talks well:
As that is not good ground that rank weeds bears,
But that which breeds good grass; or great full ears.
116 Love comes by seeing: Faith comes by hearing. To Princes.
Now out alas! Zeal, and the ancient Faith
You do pretend, and warm her with your breath:
Religion you pretend to increase your honor,
Not to restore Religions honor on her.
117 O Times, O Manners!
With our faults we do times and manners blame,
Accusing times and manners with the same:
Neither in times nor manners is the crime,
By times we are not viced, but in time.
118 Knowledge-hunters. Philosophers of our time.
Most would know all, little believe, but such
Do know but little, and believe too much.
120 More Zeal then Godliness.
Divines strive, and their case is in the Judge:
Would God till he did bid, they would not budge:
Divines strive, and who is Judge, they do contend.
Would God that that were all they did pretend,
That strife of love were their intention,
Not love of strife, and of contention.
123 A quiet and a temperate life frees a man from Lawyers and Physicions.
If men would temperate be in thought and diet,
Eating that is good, and keeping themselves quiet:
If men would patient be, and not be stird,
With couetice, and every testy word:
Those that now plead in Gowns, might then part Lice,
And Velvet Caps go poison Rats and Mice.
124 The vicissitude of Marriage.
One bed can hold a loving man and wife:
A great house cannot hold them being at strife.
125 Death sudden and sure.
Death has his day, which he will not for-slow:
To morrow is that day, for ought we know.
128 A Prayer.
Good God that do all wills to thy will tie:
Give me a will to live, a will to dye.
129 Good Counsel without a Fee.
If that the Judge be deaf, then hear thou me,
Good Counsel I Will thee give without a Fee:
Study thy Judge more then thou do thy case,
So in that case thou shall have no disgrace.
130 To a Belly-god.
Fasting was first ordained as a Rod,
To awe flesh to the spirit, the spirit to God:
But Fasting-dayes most of thy Feast days be,
Thy spirit serves thy flesh, both of them thee.
132 It is no marvel that we have no Miracles.
Is Gods arm short, that Miracles are gone?
No: Our short-arm'd Faith now can reach us none.
138 Grief and Pleasure.
Bodies and soule-griefes vex, till they are past,
Griefs vex us first, they comfort us at last:
But present pleasures please, though bought with pain:
Their present pleasures future sorrows gain.
140 An argument against sleeping.
If dying sleeping, be sleeping to die:
Why, then the more I sleep, the less live I.
143 Contrary to the Prayer of the Apostles, Luke 17.5. The multiplicitie of
beliefes in our days, does rather require this prayer.
Decrease our Faiths, Lord, it is increast too far:
As many men, so many Faithes there are;
And each one dotes on his fond Misteres,
Never more faiths, nor more unfaithfulness.
146 Vanity of vanities.
Heraclitus, that shed so much salt brine,
For those few small ills of his better time:
If he did see, and know the best of our,
He Would weep out both his eyes in half an hour.
And did Democritus laugh out his life
In his days, when folly was not so rise?
If he dip see those parts that we do play,
He Would laugh out all his Spleen in half a day.
148 Works Consequence.
Their works do follow them, that still do well:
Those that do ill, follow their works to Hell.
149 Fear begets zeal.
We shall desire Heaven, if we fear Hell fire:
Cold fear of Hell, inflames heavens hot desire.
161 Owens Bracelet.
Our senses without Reason, are naught worth;
Nor Reason, unless Faith do set it forth:
Neither is Faith without Love to be deemed;
Nor is Love without God to be esteemed.
164 Wisdom and Valor.
Wise men fear harms, but valiant men do bear them:
So wise men bear them not, nor brave men fear them.
165 In the sweat of thy brows.
Our blessed God, that bade us for to get
Our daily maintnance, by our daily swet;
Did never promise us, without our pain,
We should our everlasting maint'nance gain.
170 Retaliation. To an ignoble Nobleman.
Thy Ancestors did many glorious acts;
But thou never read'st the Record of their facts:
Justice 'twill be in those, who thee succeeds,
If they read not thy vile ignoble deeds.
173 John against all.
Though all men argue against thee in the right,
Thou have one answer for them; I deny it.
174 Justification.
Does Faith or good works justify the just?
Neither, except God justify them first.
181. A strange wish. To a poor friend.
It Is bad enough; yet worser God thee send:
For when it is at the worst, then it will mend.
182 The Earths division.
Cosmographers the Earth in four parts share.
As many parts, so many Creeds there are.
Addition.
Asia, Afric, America, Europe.
Jewish, Mametan, Pagan, Christian hope.
183. The cause of quarrels.
All savor their own sense, their reasons sway;
All will have their own will, and their own way:
This is the cause of quarrels, and debate;
For if will would be still, we should not hate.
185 A wise Man.
Who knows the cause of things, can temporize,
Rule passions, order actions; he is wise.
186 Wisdoms souerainty.
Fate gouernes fools, wise men o're-rule the stars:
Not Fate, but their pate orders their affairs.
187 A Chrisoms Epitaph.
Ask not the name of him that here does lie;
Namelesse, and blameless, I poor child did dye:
Without a name, O Christ, I am ingrau'd,
That only in thy Name I might be saved.
191 Socrates knowledge.
Nothing thou know, yet that thing thou do know;
Thou know some thing, and that is nothing I trow
This something's nothing, nothing's something tho.
193 A General Epitaph.
Thou were borne with not one ragge on thy back;
When thou went hence, a sheet thou did not lack:
Therefore thou carriedst more unto thy Mother,
Then thou did bring with thee, when thou came hither.
196 The two Eyes of the world.
Law and Religion do herein agree;
Good and bad minds and hands; they tie and free.
192 Death, better then life.
We cry, being borne: from thence thus argue I,
If to be borne be bad, it is good to dye.
197 To Doctor John Gifford, a learned Physicion.
In Physic still thou art exactly seen;
Thy self thou know both without, and within:
Whilst Gallen shows thee rules for others health
Apollo teaches thee to know thy self.
200 Saint Paul's in London, and Saint Peter's in Westminster.
Saint Peter's Church is by the Exchequor placed.
Hard by White Hall with the Kings presence graced:
But by Saint Paul's learned Divines do preach,
And there are sold those books which learning teach.
They Are fitly placed, Paul's here, Saint Peter's there;
Peter the richer, Paul the learneder.
199 Miserable Job.
God gave the Devil leave to spoil Jobs wealth,
To kill his Children, and impair his health:
His friends vpbray'd him with his wretched life,
Yet had he one worse plague; he had a wife.
201 On those Traitors, who the fifth of November, 1605. intended to blow up the
Parliament house with Gunpowder.
These* like the old feigned Gyant-Generation,
Would pluck the Gods out of their habitation,
With raising Pelion upon Ossa hill.
And Babel tower build with a strange new skill,
Burn Troy to ashes, and her peace disquiet,
And bring all things unto a second Fiat.
Addition. On this never the like heard of Treason, and never to be forgotten
Deliverance.
Never did the like report sound in man's ear:
God blessed us, that That sound we did not hear.
202. To the Reader. To those Gunpowder Traitors, who on a Tuesday intended to
blow up the Parliament House.
Traitors, would you with fire New-Troy destroy,
'Cause Traiterous Greeks with fire destroyed old Troy?
Tuesday is Mars his day, the God of War,
A day fit for a plot of Gunpowder.
207. To the Reader.
Thou that readst these, shall find them shor and few,
Were these few many, they would larger grow.
Thou that read'st these, shall find them few, and short:
Were these few long, they would be the larger for it.
208 Voice and Writing.
Though voice be living, writing a Lead better,
Yet voice soon dies, writing lives long and etter.
PART OF MASTER JOHN OWENS EPIGRAMS TRANSLATED into ENGLISH.
THE FOVRTH BOOK, WHICH HE CALL HIS SOLE BOOK.
Epig. 3. To his Book.
THou now must pass even through a world of hands,
Thy censure under diverse judgments stands:
Who does not read thee, may thee discommend;
More fault-finders then Readers thou will find.
4 To the Inhabitants of Great Britain.
As bad, as mad, we well That man may hold,
Who does despise needful free-proferd gold:
He worthy were to wear a Bedlam fetter;
You did despise the Union that was better.
10 The three Dimensions to a prating Jack.
In thy talk are but two dimensions found;
It Is large, it is long, but not at all profound;
16 To a great Courtier.
If the King smile on thee, all will do so;
As shaddows do after our bodies go:
If the King frown, all the Court will look black;
As when the Sun is set, we shaddows Jack.
17 Baldness through Vice.
Though not one hair can on thy head be seen:
On that white table all may read thy sin.
18 To Pontilian.
Calls he thee into Law, Pontilian?
He calls not thee, he calls thy money, man.
Addition.
He hopes to work on thee by bribery,
By thy fear, comprimise, or forgery.
20 Enuies Genealogy. To the admirably-vertuous, Sir John Harrington, then
Heir to the Lord Harrington.
Fair Virtue, foul-mouthed Envy breeds, and feeds;
From Virtue only this foul Vice proceeds:
Wonder not that I this to you indite:
Against your rare Virtues, Envy bends her spite.
23 A rich Promiser, but a poor Performer.
We should perform more, then we promise can;
For God has given one tongue, two hands to man:
Nothing thou give, yet grantest each demand,
As if thou had two tongues, but not a hand.
26 Every man flatters himself.
Of all the Planets betwixt us and Heaven,
The Moon, though least, seems greatest of the seven:
To best conceits that other ways do know,
Because she is nearest us, she seems so.
So though I am a Poet small, and bad;
To my near self, I seem the finest Lad.
29 Thy shadow in thy Looking-glass.
When thou do laugh, thy shadow seems to smile;
Whilst thou do weep, he mourns all the while:
Sleeping he winks, all postures he will afford;
Yet when thou speak, he speaks not a word.
31 To a sleeping talker.
In sleep thou speak vnfore-thought mysteries,
And vtt'rest vnfore-seene things with closed eyes:
How well would thou discourse, if thou were dead,
Since sleep, Deaths image, such fine talk has bred?
33 Man's misery.
Angels want bodies, and are never sick;
Beasts wanting souls, their conscience never prick:
Only poor man, of soul and body made,
Their bodies pains; sadness their souls invade:
Reason that should rule passion, is not able;
She only shows men they are miserable.
35 To an unmarried friend.
Good doers deserve Heaven after this life:
Thou have thy deserved heaven, thou have no wife.
36 Woe to the alone. To a married friend, proposing God for an example.
God made him Angels to attend his Throne:
And why? because God would not live alone.
Addition.
Having made Man, makes Woman of his bone:
And why? because man should not live alone.
38 An Atheists Inheritance.
When any man of Heaven does talk to thee;
Thou say, they vain, and idle prattlers be:
What Is above us, to us does not belong,
Hell is below thee to burn such a tongue.
40 To the Readers.
Do thou ask me, Why I take so much pain,
To be thus brief? Reader, it is for thy gain.
As travelers find gold less cumbersome
Then silver, such is breuity to some.
41 The New Roman Computation.
Rome that says, she holds all points without change;
Why does she old feast, from the old rank range?
50 To an envious Momus, who found fault with his three first Books.
Had five just men amongst a wicked brood
Been found, Gomorah to this day had stood:
For a few bad, loose verses thou findst here,
My whole book thou (black Reader) would casheere.
53 The poor Cuckolds Complaint.
For my wives close-stolne sports, why am I blamed?
And of the common vulgar, Cuckold named,
And pointed at? For what I did not act,
But you, I know not who; called not my fact.
69 Cardinal Wolseys Ego and Rex men's: I and my King.
Grammarians will allow I, and my King:
The Courtier says, it was a saucy thing:
Grammarians teach words; Courtiers words well sort:
This phrase might pass in Schools, but not at Court.
75 Deaths Trouer.
Death finds some, as Ulysses found his wife,
With care and sorrow spinning out her life.
Addition.
To her, Ulysses was a welcome guest,
To some as welcome is Deaths sad arrest.
80 A bad Debtor.
I know, thou take great care both night and day,
Not how thou may, but how thou may not pay:
Thou payst me nothing, that is thy wickedness:
But payst thy Lawyer, that is thy foolishness.
82 The deriuatiue Church.
There is but one true Church, as one true Faith,
Which from The Eternal Spirit has her breath:
From Primitive all would themselves derive,
To prove it, they strange arguments contriue.
84 The good of want.
If how good things are, by want best are known,
I should know mony's good, for I have none.
87 Democrates many Worlds.
If all those Worlds were, those innumerable,
Which fond Democrates did erst believe:
I do believe, that amongst all that rabble,
This world would be the worst wherein we live.
88 Of Epigrams.
An Epigram that is new, quick, tart, sharp, witty,
Is like a Wench that is new, fair, smooth, neat, pretty:
Whilst they are new and fresh, they are respected:
Once commnon (though still good) they are neglected.
91 A covetous man's bounty: or a sure marke-man.
He gives to take, takes not to give again:
Giving his arrows are, his mark is gain.
93 Penelope's Patience.
Penelope's patient Fidelity
Was once a Proverb, now a Prodigy.
94 To Anetta.
Nature ('it is said) with little is content:
That saying of thy Nature is not meant.
95 To an one-eyed Soldier.
Of thy two eyes, thou now have left but one,
Which by his moistness always seems to moan:
One eye being lost, why always weeps the other?
Because that in the wars he lost his brother.
96 Why there is no peace in Europe.
Princes make war, and soon their wars do cease,
Often times they war to have the better peace:
Divines strive, and with Venom fill their veins,
With gall their stomachs, and with spite their brains:
Longer and worse they war with quills and words,
Then Princes use to do with fire and swords.
97 An Antidote, lest women should be proud.
When thou thy fair face see in thy fine glass,
Be not puffed up, because it beauty has:
Brittle and frail is thy fair, fine, neat feature:
How like thy fine glass art thou pretty Creature?
100 Natures Horizon.
Two Elements we see not, fire and air;
Water and Earth we see, 'cause they are near:
So we know men and beasts that are below;
High Angels, highest God, we do not know.
105 An ambo dexter. A Fencer with a two-hand Scabberd.
If Pompey overcome, I am his man:
If Caesar win, I Am a Caesarian.
113 A Kings behavior. To King James.
All subjects in their manners follow Kings,
What they do; bids: forbearing, forbids things:
A Kings behavior swayes his subjects lives:
As the first moouer all the fixed stars drives.
114 The head is worth all the body besides. To King James.
Reason and senses in the head resides:
Nothing in man worth any thing besides.
115 Kings fear Death.
What Kings fear most, what men fear them to tell:
Fame boldly tells them, and the passing Bell.
118 A Losing Gain.
Adam did lose a rib, to get a wife.
Poor gain! by her he lost eternal Life.
119 Head Tyres.
Huge, high-topt-wyres and tyres with toys bespred,
Do rather build, then beautify the head.
121 The East and Western Churches.
The right hand Faith is in the worlds left Coast:
The right hand of the world has left faith most.
127 To his Reader.
Thirsty those are that do eat salt meats first,
Would my salt lines might cause in thee such thirst.
128 How to rule a wife.
Who begs not, nor commands what he would have:
His wife is not his Mistress, nor his slave.
Addition. A Problem.
Yet some are so ill-natured, or ill bred,
With whom request commands; threats have ill sped:
What bit is fit for beasts that so take head?
131 To Anabaptists and such kind of mealy Brethren.
You build no Churches, Churches you destroy:
This Zeal does not heal, but Christ's Church annoy:
The Spirit (you say) does press you fiercely on.
What spirit is your spirit then? Revel. 9.11.
A-badd-on.
132 Alchymists folly.
God at the first of nothing all things wrought:
Our Alchymists reduce all things to naught.
136 The Cross in Cheapside over against Saint Peter's, and Paul's Cross in the
Booke-row.
Why is Saint Peter's guilt? Paul's cross of lead:
Under Paul's Cross are golden Lectures read.
140 Seneca the Philosopher.
Thy writings are fine Epigrams in face,
They nothing want but Poets cinquepace.
141 To the honorable, wise, judicious Knight, Sir Henry Neuil, Son and
Heir to the Lord of Aberguenny.
I think I heard you once say at your board,
That your taste, the sharp taste of salt abhord.
Wise Sir, you need not to eat salt: Wherefore?
All your wise talk has salt in it good store.
144 Contention is fit to dwell no where.
In heaven or Hell is no dissension,
In Heaven all good, in Hell ill every one:
In earth men's diverse dispositions
Do cause both long, and strong divisions.
Therefore the earth shall be quite emptied,
And heaven and hell be fully peopled.
147 The poor man's poor comfort. To a rich man.
Unconstant Fortune quickly changes cheer:
Hence springs my future Hope, thy present Fear.
149 The Heart.
Why is the right side of the Heart bereft?
And on the left placed? Wisdom it has left.
156 The Worlds black Saunts: or Music for the Devil.
The World's so full of shrill-voyc'd iangling,
Of deep repyning, and base murmuring:
The Base so deep, the Treble is so high,
That Mean and Tenor we cannot discry.
159 The world grows worse and worse.
Our Syres were worse then theirs: we worse then they:
For still the World grows worser every day.
If our posterity grow worse then we,
A worser race then theirs there cannot be.
160 Londons Loadstone.
As Thames deuoures many small brooks and rills:
So smaller Towns with their wealth London fills:
But though that Thames empts it self in the Sea,
Wealth once at London, never runs a way.
162 Fools and Dwarfes.
Though wit or virtue have in us no treasure,
Yet we are Great men's sports, and Great men's pleasure.
163 Every man is full of care.
Poor men have care, because that they are poor:
Rich men have wealth, and have much care therefore:
Who has no wife, takes great care to have one;
Who has a wife, has more then who has none.
171 The blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ Jesus.
A blessed Virgin, that is thy common Name;
Above all Women blessed, that is thy fame:
Thy Virgins blessed State had me naught won,
Had thou not been the Mother of thy Son.
173 New fashions in words.
Old words are new revived, and those shall dye,
Which now are in discoursing prized high,
And with bold flights in our set speeches fly.
Our now new pleasant words will not please long,
Because they cannot still continue young:
And other newer words will them out-throng.
180 To an Old Churl.
Thou that did never do good any way,
When wilt begin to do good? Thou do say,
When I dye, to the poor I Will leave my state:
Who Is not wise till he dies, is wise too late.
182 A fearful Souls flesh-farewell.
Why should the immortal soul fear bodies death?
Fears she to expire with the bodies breath?
Or fears she going hence, she must resort
To long long punishment, but judgment short?
Cold, shaking fear of the hot fire of hell,
Makes this sad soul loath bid the flesh farewell.
Addition. A good Christians Souls Flesh-farewell.
A thought so base has not that soul surpised,
Who knows the flesh shall be immortalized:
He fears no punishment, who is assured
Before he dye, his pardon is procured.
Body and soul thus cheered by Gods grace,
Part like friends, pointing a new meeting place:
Therefore who hopes for Heaven, and fears not Hell,
May chearefully bid the frail flesh farewell.
An Epigram on both these.
He fears not death, who hopes for Heavens glory;
He may fear Death, that fears purgatory,
Or he that thinks this life shall end his story.
A Prayer hereupon.
Good dreadful God, though I live Phil. 2.12.
fearfully;
Yet when I dye, make me dye cheerfully.
183 A woman may be too proud.
If I should praise thee, thou would prouder grow:
And thou already art too proud, I trow.
184 A muck-Worme.
Heaven still views thee, and thou should it still view,
God gave Heaven lights, and has given eyes to you:
Thou can at once little of this earth see,
But with one turn, half Heaven observed may be.
Since Heaven is lovely, why love thou Earth rather?
Wantons do love their Mam more then the father.
188 Cor vnum, via vna. To King James, the first King of Great Britain.
Two Scepters in thy two hands thou do hold:
Thy Subjects languages are just fourfold:
Though Britain folk in tongues divided be,
Yet all their hearts united are in thee.
The Devil it was that first divided hearts:
Speech God divided into many parts.
189 A King and a Prophet.
A King out of his Country has no place:
A Prophet in his Country has no grace.
190 Virtues Attendance.
These two like Genij follow Virtue still:
A good one, and a bad; Glory, Ill Will.
192 To a foolish inquisitiue vain prattler.
Many fond questions thou do ask of me,
To all I answer little unto thee:
It Is not because thy questioning is much,
But because thy fond questions are such.
193 Sleep is the image of Death.
When I do sleep, I seem as I were dead;
Yet no part of my life's more sweetened:
Therefore 'twere strange that death should bitter be,
Since sleep, deaths image is so sweet to me.
194 How worldly men range their cares.
First, we send for the Lawyer in all haste;
For our first care is, to care for our wealth:
Next, the Physicion with request is graste,
The second care is, to care for our health:
Divines that should be first, may come at leisure*
If vnbid they come, they may go at pleasure.
206 A Lawyers life.
To plead thy Clyents cause, and please thy wife;
Little for thy self thou do spend thy life.
Addition.
In little quietness, but in much strife.
207 Preachers and Players.
Preachers like Heraclite, mourn for our sin;
Prayers like Democrite, at our faults grinne:
One always laughs, the other mournes always;
One tells our faults, the other our sins ways.
215 Schoole-boyes study.
When I was young, I was a studying boy;
My study was, when 'twould be playing Day.
216 Every thing is as it takes.
If Archy should one foolishly advise,
And it speed well; he shall be judged wise:
If wise advice should come to an ill pass;
Though Cato's 'twere, he should be judged an ass.
217 How to handle grief.
Grieve only for those griefs which now thou have;
It Is too late for to grieve griefs that are past;
To grieve for griefs to come, 'twill too long last.
223 The Poet, of his Maecenas.
Not words for words, good coin he me affords.
Maecenas to his Poet.
Having no coin for coin, thou coynest words.
225 Blind Homer.
Whe'r it be true that men do write of thee,
That thou never saw; I Am sure thy writings see.
227 To go about, worse then the Gout.
Thou have two diffring griefs (I understand:)
One in thy feet, the other in thy wives hand:
For when thy feet are fett'red with the gout,
Thy wives sore nimble hand ferkes thee about.
235 Pride is woman's Colloquintida.
Learned, neat, young, fair, modest, and bening;
Were thou not proud, thou were a pretty thing.
24 Of King Brute. To Master Camden.
Books may be burnt, and monuments decay;
My lines may dye, and so in time thine may:
Yet whilst some of the Britain blood shall live,
The story of King Brute some will believe.
246 To a covetous Carle.
Wealth thou have scraped up for a thousand years;
A hundred years is more then thou can live:
Yet to scrape up more wealth thou bendst thy cares,
And think a short life will long comfort give.
Thou say, If I live long, I shall be rich:
Live I long, I must dye, should be thy speech.
247 Death and life are near Neighbors.
One Natures skreene Death and life hang so near,
As does the muddy Earth to waters clear:
Of life's white Death, black Nature makes one robe,
Even as the Earth and Water makes one Globe.
248 Moors Eutopia, and Mercurius Brittanicus.
Moore showed the best; the worst world's showed by thee:
Thou show what is; and he shows what should be.
259. Vide ad Cor. verse. HOPE FAITH CHARITY Epist. 1. cap. 13.8, 13.
We have three ladders to help us to heaven;
One has four steps, one five, and one has seven:
Hope reaches to the Moon, Faith to the Sun;
But Charity does reach up to Gods Throne.
Addition.
Hope, as the Moon, is always variable;
Faith, as the Sun, more constant, yet unstable:
When both these with the World shall be consumed,
Love into endless joys shall be assumed.
249 Of himself.
Some men do say, I am a Poet no way:
They do say true, because the truth I say.
254 The nullity of our Laws.
How many laws are made, or rather none?
Not kept, or not made, we may count all one:
That former laws be kept, if an Act were;
That would be kept as all the others are.
257 Besides women and children.
In holy Bible it is somewhere read;
Women and children were not reckoned:
And by the Civil, and the Common Law,
Women's and childrens gifts are worth a straw.
Women and children are exempt from war;
Women and children long-side coats do wear,
And on the chins neither of them have hair.
Women and children shead tears with much ease;
Fair words and toys, women and children please:
And last, of Love and Dallyance we may say,
Venus a Woman was; Cupid a Boy.
Addition. A disparison between these.
Children fondly blab truth, and fools their brothers;
Women have learned more wisdom from their mothers.
258 Of those that make the Scripture a Nose of Wax.
Does holy Writ promise us any good?
It Is easily believed, and understood:
Does it require ought, or reprove our sin?
It Is a hard speech; we have no faith therein.
262 The Harp and Harrow of the Court. An envious and a flattering knave.
These agree not, though in one place they dwell;
Momus of none, Gnatho of all speaks well.
263 The four efficient causes of man.
What is man's form? Only a garish toy;
What is his matter? Frailty and annoy:
though for this cause, we may these two neglect,
Making, and final cause we must respect.
64 Deaths sweet and sour.
To those that have their lives in much mirth spent;
Death's sadness is to sad men, merriment.
Or thus.
To those that live in sin, Death is good night;
Good morrow it is to those that live upright.
266 Death and life.
One way we live, Death many ways is had:
All Is for the best; Death is good, life is bad.
267 An old decrepit man, A Builder.
Old, and weak, thou build'st many a fair room:
What build'st thou now? A house, or else a Tomb?
269 An Envious man's Charity.
The dead thou spar'st, the living thou do bite:
Yet rather then I Would dye, I Will bear thy spite.
273 Great Britain united everlastingly.
As in beginning 'twas, is now again;
Ever shall be, till this world ends. Amen.
FINIS.
An excellent Anagram on this excellent Poets name, with the verses annexed,
translated.
Johannes Audoenus. Ad annos Noe vives.
ALthough that this cannot be said of you:
Yet of your book, this Anagram is true.
D.Du.Tr.Med.
This of thee, and thy book, auerd may be;
Thou make thy book live, and thy book makes thee.
John Rosse. I.C.

D.Du.Med. his Latin Distick to the Readers, translated.
Art thou a Clerk, or Layman? Read thou these;
They will both profit you, and you both please.
One of mine own, to the same purpose.
Art thou a merry man, or art thou sad?
To suit you both, fit stuff may hence be had.
Praiseworthy verses of Learned Mistress Jane Owens of Oxford, in praise of my
John Owen, translated out of her Latin.
It was, and is Poets quaint property,
To carpe at men, and women's vanity:
Yet this I judge, Thy salt lines merit it;
Both men and women will commend thy wit.
To the same learned Woman, whose virtues I reverence; I dedicate this
Encomiastick.
I Would rather have thy praises on my side,
Then any Woman's I do know beside:
Thy wit and judgment is more just and able,
Then many miriads of the unlearned rabble.
FINIS.
SEVERAL SENTENTIOVS EPIGRAMS, AND WITTY SAYINGS OVT of sundry Authors both
Ancient and Modern:

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH AT HARBOR-Grace, in Bristols-Hope, in Brittaniola,

Anciently called, New Foundland; By R. H.

PAX OPVLENTIAM. SAPIENTIA PACEM.
printer's or publisher's device FK



LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Roger Michell, and are to be sold at the
Buls-head in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

A WEAK APOLOGY FOR MY WEAKNESS in these following Translations.
WE think it no strange thing; nor do we laugh,
To see an old, weak man walk with a staff:
I that could with strong legs run a large fit,
Must now with short turns, rest on others wit.
TRANSLATIONS OVT OF SEVERAL AVTHORS.
Beauties Excellency.
Virtue to all complections gives Grace:
But Virtue graced is by a good face. Pulchrior est virtus veniens e corpore
pulchro.

The Devils hospitality.
Satan keeps open house; though sorry cheer:
His blacke-wicket stands open all the year. Patet atri ianua Ditis.

A Rule for perjured lecherous Votaries.
If that against your Oaths you must needs do:
To 't closely then that none may swear 'twas you. Si non cast tamen caute.

Cares Birth.
In younger years black melancholy Cares Cura facit canos, etiam si nesciat
annos.

Breeds with hard throws, hoare, white, abortiue hairs.
A scuruy comfort.
It is a comfort, though a scuruy one, Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.

To have companions in affliction.
Women's leuity.
What Is lighter then the wind? Thunder, you know. Quid vento Ieuius? Fulmen.

What Is lighter then that crack? Lightning, I trow.
What Is lighter then that flame? Why sure a Woman. Quid fulmine? Flamma.

What Is lighter now then that? Nay that knows no man. Quid flamma? Mulier.

To answer him who wrought this in defense of those women who can well enough
defend themselves. Quid Muliere* Nihil.

Good wives, I think, the man that made this Jest,
Never felt the weight of your words, nor your fist.
Dangerous Weapons.
There are not killed so many by the sword, Plures gula quam gladio.

As by the throat, by meat, drink, and the cord.
A merry Mate.
Comes facundus pro vehiculo est.
A merry Way-mate that can tale and skoch,
With a tired horse, is better then a C'roach.
Patience provoked.
Laesa patientia fit furor.
If doubled wrongs inflame cold Patience blood:
Her mildness will convert to a mad mood.
Women's properties.
Fallere, flere, nere: haec tria sunt muliere.
To weep often, still to flatter, sometimes spin;
Are properties women excel men in.
To this women may answer.
We weep for pity, and we speak men fair,
And of their household thrift we have great care:
Yet envious men our credits would impair.
Froward nature.
Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimusque negata.
Deny a thing, fond men the more will crave it:
Deny a woman, and she will cry, or have it.
In defense of these soft Creatures.
Alas, good Creatures, tears are all their Arms;
To beat back grief, and to revenge their harms.
Miserable want.
Luxuriae desunt multa, auaritiae omnia.
Luxurious men may want particulars:
But misers all things want (except their cares.)
Impatible wrong.
Qui faciunt, oderunt iniuriam.
Those that wrong other men beyond all measure,
Will take wrongs done to them in great displeasure.
Law and Fortunes difference.
Legem nocens veretur, Fortuna innocens.
Wise Law corrects those that commit offense:
Blind giddie Fortune plagueth innocence.
A miserable Comforter.
Prodesse qui vult, nec potest, aeque est miser.
He that can help his friend but with his breath;
Is in the case of him he comfort.
A Rule for Travelers.
Cum fueris Romae, Romano viuito more.
Being at Rome, I hold it good discretion
In manners, and in clothes to use their fashion:
Cum fueris alibi, viuito more loci.
And when that thou art any other-where,
It Is fit to use the fashion thou find'st there.
A Riddle.
My Mother got me, I beget my Mother: Matter me genuit, eadem mox gigniter ex me.

Alternately thus we beget each other.
Women's Tears.
When women weep in their dissembling Art, Muliebris lacrima condimentum
malitiae.

Their tears are sauce to their malicious heart.
I answer for women.
He that wrote this, was sure some saucy Jack:
Against your Sex, malice he did not lack.
Necessity.
Necessity has no law, no, not any; Necessitat dat legem, non ipsa accipit.

Yet she the Mother is to a great many.
Doubly-guilty.
He that commits a shameful heinous fact, In turpi re peccare, bis delinquere
est.

Is doubly-guilty, by that single act.
Necessary Restitution.
Thy sins, be sure, will on thy back remain, Non tollitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur oblatum.

Till thy ill-got goods thou give back again.
Rank covetousness.
The rank desire of money grows always, Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit.

Faster then money's coined now adays.
Natures frailty.
I see, and do allow the better way: Video meliora, prob^^quee;, deteriora
sequor.

Yet still I know not how I go astray.
Miserable misery of miseries.
Three times unhappy is that man at least, Quam miser est, cui ingrata
misericordia est?

To whom mild Mercie's an unwelcome guest.
Innocencies Comfort.
For a good cause to dye, is honest shame: Est honesta turpitudo pro bona causa
mori.

Although a halter should procure the same.
Preachers principal properties.
That Preacher with a lively voice does preach, Viua voce docet, qui vita and
voce docet.

That with his life as well as voice does teach.
How to end well.
He surely has his business half well done, Dimidium facti, qui been caepit,
habet.

Who has at first his business well begun.
On a pretty Virgins Virginal Posie.
Musica mentis.
Music is a sad minds Physicion,
Medicina moestae.
If a fair maid be the Musicion.
Blind Ignorance.
Ignoti nulla cupido.
Blinder then Cupid is he in desire,
In whom blind ignorance puts out the fire.
Women's Credit.
Mulieri ne credas ne mortuae quidem.
A woman is not to be credited:
If you will credit me, though she be dead.
That women be not angry with me, nor my Author.
Mine Author makes a man speak this in snuff:
Himself was wise, he knew you well enough.
Tears Vanity.
Gemitus dolores indicat, non vindicat.
Our outward Tears may show our inward woes:
They are a poor revenge against our foes.
Fortunes Flowers.
Dum fueris foelix, multos numera bis amicos:
Whilst wealth does last, great store of friends thou have:
If thou it waste; thou soon may tell the last.
Nullus ad amiss^s ib^^ amicus opes.
Armor against lust.
If thou from idle thoughts can guard thy heart:
Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus.
Thou make it Musket-proofe against Cupids dart.
Anger.
Habet and Musca splenem, and Formicae sua bilis inest.
The sting-taild small Muscheeto has his spleen:
The busy Ant sometimes is angry seen.
A Builders Humor.
Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.
He builds up what he threw to the ground;
And changes former foure-squares into round.
Truths and flatteries effects.
Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
Flattery gets Friends, and Truth gets Enemies:
Soft and proud fools this Adage verifies.
Exemplified.
Flatter an easy fool, on you he will doat:
Tell a proud fool his faults, he will cut your throat.
Refractory nature.
Optat Ephippia bos piger arare cuballus.
Dull Oxen long for saddles and the dorses;
Whilst chains and yoakes, desires hot stomackt horses.
Addition.
Dull people need the spurs, more then the saddle;
Yet Id est, marrying.
yoaking may young hot-spurres better bridle.
Three wild Coach-horses.
Wine, Venus, Dice, fit Iades for such a feat; Alea, vina, Venus, tribus his
sum factus egenus.

Draw men to Beggers-bush without a bait.
From the frying pan into the fire.
From Vshing coveting himself to free, Incidit in Syllam, cupiens vitare
Charibdem.

On Sillaes Bishop and his Clerks fell he.
Women's extreme passions.
Women do fondly love, or foulely hate; Aut amat, aut odit Mulier, nihil est
tertium.

Their extreme passion has no middle state.
To reform this error in this man.
Why should thou their goodness thus decline?
Virtue is of the Gender Foeminine.
A Citizens Thrift.
O Citizens, learn first your bags to fill! O Clues Ciues, quaerenda pecunia
primum:

And then ofhonesty go learn the skill.
Hels Highway. Virtus post nummos --

There is an easy downe-descent to Hell:
Those that go there, do know it too-too well. Facilis descensus Auerni.

Coozening knaves.
To coozen coozeners, is no cooz'ning: Fallere fallentem non est Fraus:

To coozen any, it is a knauish thing. Fallere quenquam, non est Laus.

No penny, no Pater Noster.
Homer, if thou nothing with thee do bring; Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere
for as.

Thou may without reward without door sing.
A wicked Vbiquitary.
The wicked does his wickedness declare Nequam nequitiam monstrat vbique suam.

At all times, against all, and every where.
A wise choice.
Rail at me rather, till thou break thy guts; Mallem me vituperari quam
frigide laudari.

Then coldly praise me with thy Ifs and Buts.
Customs inconvenience.
What sins thou use often to commit: Consuetudo peccandi tolb't sensum
peccati.

Will flow from thee, without sense, fear, or wit.
As for example.
Reprove a swearer, who does use to tear
Gods holy Name: he will swear, he did not swear,
Or for your love, or that sin will not care.
Nothing new.
Nil est iam dictum quod non fuit dictum prius.
Speak old words, or coin new words by the score:
What-e're thou speak, has spoken been before.
A true inquisition.
Nec me quaesiveris extra.
Not of my outside, nor of those that dwell
With me, nor the report my neighbors tell:
Come to me, into me, to know me well.
Painters and Poets properties. -- Pictoribus atque Poe^tis,

Quodlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
Painters and Poets have like power and skill;
To add, to foist, to feign even what they will.
Wicked Women.
Foeminium servile genus, crudele, superbum.
Women are of the gender feminine;
Proud, cruel, servile (in mine Authors time.)
Addition. A Claw.
Although of women he could say so then;
Women may say so now of naughty men.
Perfect patience.
Optima spero, quaecunque feram.
What-euer comes, I always hope the best:
And till that come, I mildly bear the rest.
A good woman's reward.
Foemina nulla bona, sed si bona, digna Corona.
There is not one good woman to be found:
And if one were, she merits to be crowned.
In the behalf of good women, who cannot speak for themselves.
Good women, he that blurred you with this blot,
Deserves a crowning with your chamberpot:
With envious eyes he sought for you; or else
He might have found you with my spectacles.
A Churles good.
Auarus nisi cum moritur, nihil recti facit.
The covetous does nothing as he should,
Till lavish death does spread abroad his gold.
Light of belief.
Let the wide-throated circumcised Jew Credat Iudaeus apella.

Swallow it, and believe that it is true.
Addition.
The baptized Papist, circumcised Turk,
If for their Church advantage it may work;
One swallows all, Vid. The Legend printed in Hen 8. time. I think the
conformity Press has suppressed it.
the other all save Whilst stigmaticall Francis in the Legend dares eat a
Capon on a Friday at supper; to work a ridiculous miracle the next Sunday: yet
to satisfy his canonical host, can urge our blessed Saviors words, Mat.
15.11. I believe a Turk would not swallow a miracle in his own behalf, if it
were done by Pigs-flesh.
Porke.
Sweet Gain.
The smell of gain smells pleasantly indeed, Lucri bonus est odor, ex re
qualibet.

Although from stinking parcels it proceed.
Hunger breaks stone walls.
Of Gold the holy hunger, who can tell, Quid non mortalia pectora cogit Auri
sacra fames*

To what will it not mortal minds compel?
Addition.
Gold makes bad men to do what good is:
Too often it makes good men do amiss.
Complaints out of Spanish.
The old man weeps, for want of love, being grieved:
His young wife weeps, 'cause he so long has lived.
Addition.
Sad reverence (he says) should affection move:
Sir reverence (she says) has out-liu'd his love.
Virgils Cloze.
Come on, my Boys, stop-vp the water-groofe, Cludite iam riuos pueri, sat
prata biberunt.

The thirsty Meddowes now have drunk enough.
FINIS.
A railing Epistle, written in French by that excellently witty Doctor, Francis
Rabalais:
Wherein though I follow him not verbatim; yet whosoever can compare them, shall
find I have done him no wrong.
THou toothlesse withered Hagge, defamed, accursed;
Empty of Gods grace, by the Devil nursed:
Thou that didd'st never deed of Charity;
But art the pattern of all villainy:
Thou, in whose hairelesse brains ill thoughts do throng,
And take chief joy to hear a bawdie song:
Thou that didd'st never drink water with wine,
Senting each bed with lust, where thou have line:
Thou that do weep at every draught thou drink'st:
But have dry eyes, when on thy sins thou think:
Thou that ador'st no bed, but Priapus:
Thou that did never, but for inticement blush:
Thou that have pissed away thy unknown shame:
Thou that have entertained each one that came:
Thou martyrer of men, it is not the pose,
That causes thee to speak thus through the nose.
Thou that art slow to Churchward as the louse;
But quick as lightning to a bawdy house:
Thou with whose age hot lust does not declyne,
Thou more insatiate then tired Messaline.
Thou stinking, withered, stale; thou past a whore;
Thou lust procurer, keeper of the door:
Thou that do tempt fair Maidens to their shame,
And for gains sake, rob'st wives of their fair name:
Thou damned damned Bawd, that do procure thy meals,
By tempting wenches to turn up their --
Thou that did never take delight to work;
Thou in whose bosom snarling quarrels lurk;
Thou that in angry mood do never stay;
Worse then Megera or Tesiphonee,
Until thine anger be with blood appeased;
Like a Shee-wolfe, that her mild prey has seaz'd,
Lions, and Bears, and Griffins gentle be,
And free from rage, being compared with thee.
In thee, mercy is pent; but rage has scope:
Thou fitter for the fire, then for the rope.
Thou witch that do delight foul Toads to foster;
And always say the Devils Pater Noster.
Thou that excell'st Medea in vile charms:
Thou that kill'st children in their Mothers arms;
Thou that from Heaven can call the crooked Moon,
And make the Sun dark at the brightest noone.
For these good parts, a secret mark unknown,
Satan has marked thee with, to be his own:
And he to think on thee, for joy does swell,
Hoping ere long to fry thy bones in Hell.
Thou soon wilt kill his joy with future sorrow,
When he shall know the Pox has eat thy marrow.
Thou whore, thou witch, thou bawd, crusted in evil,
Thou that may be Schoolemistres to the Devil,
Thou that with stinking breath speak ill of many,
Were never heard speak good words of any:
And though thy toothlesse gummes can do no wrong,
Those slanders bite, that flow from thy lewd tongue.
Thou Hag, from whose blaspheming wide mouth goes
Worse then rank poison to a fasting nose:
Thy dugs by thine own bastard brats defiled,
Are yet thought fit to nurse the Devils child:
Thy head hangs down through thy sins weightines,
Thy body doubles with thy wickedness:
Thou Treuet, had thou but one mite of grace,
Thou would forethinke thy miserable case.
What hope have thou, continuing as thou do,
To escape hell fire? Hope not: to Hell thou must.
Thy soul as wise, I do repute her for it;
(Although her pureness did at first abhor it)
Keeps still her loathsome Cabinet; foreseeing,
If she leave this, her worser place of being,
She needs among the damned souls must throng:
And that is the reason that thou live so long.
What have thou good in thee, but only this,
That thy loathed outside a true pattern is
Of thy vile living? Sin, and want of grace,
Are ditched in the wrinkles of thy face:
Thou bunch-back-bug-beare-fac'd, splay-foot, Cat-hand;
Thou rough-bark'd-stinking Elder, worse then damned;
Thou, about whose scurse-head the Devils flutter;
Thou viler vild, then I have words to utter:
Amend thy lewd life; or I swear to thee,
For one ill-fauour'd word, I Will give thee three.
120 Another Epistle of the same witty Author, Francis Rabelais, in praise of a
grave Matrone; translated as the former.
THou reverend Matrone, whose sweet grace and form,
Would a young, fair, sweet, hansome face adorn;
Thy modest carrying, and thy reverend wit,
Shows that Gods grace within thy heart does sit:
Thou in whose hands are always found good books;
But on loue-toyes thy chaste eyes never looks:
Thou that have in thy brains imprinted deep
Christ Jesus, who from thence ill thoughts does keep:
In thy mild soul rich virtue has her store;
As God gives wealth to thee, thou give the poor.
Thy heart is always open to relieve,
And comfort those whom miseries do grieve:
And with thine own white hands do not disdain
To plaster those poor folks, whom sores do pain.
The hungry thou do feed with thine own meat;
The naked, cold, with thine own clothes do heat;
Thy poor sick neighbors thou do kindly visit;
Thou give them counsel, make them kitchen physic:
Thou free'st poor prisoners with thine own estate:
The fatherless thou do compassionate,
And do so many godly deeds withal,
That Jesus Christ may thee his Sister call.
From foolish vanities thou turn'st thine eyes,
And shutt'st thy ears against malicious lies.
Although foul sluttish smells thou do abhor;
Perfumers get nothing by thee therefore.
Thy table's furnished with clean, wholesome fare;
But for luxurious cates thou do not care:
And when thou drink'st, it is pure unmixed wine;
Not those hot drinks that unto lust incline.
Thy heart did never feel th'vnlawfull flame,
Which has drawn looser wives to public shame:
Thou never lay'st on any amorous bed;
But where thy husband had thy mayden-head;
And only there for procreation,
And for thy Husbands recreation:
Thou art so zealous, godly, merciful,
And with such heavenly, goodly graces full;
That we may style thee, The rich Christian Palace,
Wherein the Holy Ghost does take his solace.
Thy outward graces have such Excellence,
That all salute thee with grave reverence:
Thy head is fraught with holy meditations;
Thy heart is filled with heavenly consolations;
Thy ears are open to the poores sad cries,
And from them thou do never turn thine eyes:
Thy hands are open to each godly deed,
And feet are swift, when of thy help there is need.
Thou art so fair, so virtuous, and so good;
Thou seem an Angel clad in flesh, and blood.
Thou art so hansome, proper, neat, and fair,
As if but yet thou a young maiden were:
(Sweetheart believe) all honest men with me,
Are truly, heartily in love with thee.
Thou often have the Bible in thy hand,
And humbly pray'st, thou may it understand;
And what with sober knowledge thou do read,
Thou putt'st in practice, or into thy Creed.
Thou peerless Paragon! thou past compare!
Such as thou art, I wish all women were.
Thou Extract of good women now adays;
Thy worthiness so far exceeds my praise;
To write it, I do want an Angels quill;
And I as much do need an Angels skill.
If thou be living, may thou never dye,
I humbly pray the blessed Trinity:
And that thou may in honor, health, and rest,
Live in this World, and in the next be blessed.
FINIS.

