ENGLISHMEN For my Money: OR, A pleasant Comedy, called, A Woman will have her
Will.



Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane. 1616.

The Actors names.
Pisaro, a Portingale. Pisaros Daughters.
Laurentia, Marina, Mathea,
Anthony, a Schoolemaister to them. Suitors to Pisaros Daughters.
Haruie, Ferdinand, or Heigham, Ned, or Walgraue,
Suitors also to the 3. daughters.
Delion, a Frenchman, Aluaro, an Italian, Vandalle, a Dutchman,
Frisco a Clown, Pisaros man. M. Moore. Towerson a Merchant. Balsaro. Brown a
Clothier A Post. A Belman.
Enter PISARO. Pisaro. HOw smugge this gray-eyde Morning seems to be,
A pleasant sight; but yet more pleasure have I
To think upon this moystning Southwest Wind,
That drives my laden Ships from fertile Spain:
But come what will, no Wind can come amiss,
For two and thirty Winds that rules the Seas,
And blows about this ayerie Region;
Thirty two Ships have I to equal them:
Whose wealthy fraughts do make Pisaro rich:
Thus every Soil to me is natural:
Indeed by birth, I am a Portingale,
Who driven by Western winds on English shore,
Here liking of the soil, I married,
And have Three Daughters: But impartial Death
Long since, depriude me of her dearest life:
Since whose discease, in London I have dwelt:
And by the sweet loud trade of Usury,
Letting for Interest, and on Morgages.
Do I wax rich, though many Gentlemen
By my extortion comes to misery:
Amongst the rest, three English Gentlemen,
Have pawnde to me their Livings and their Lands:
Each several hoping, though their hopes are vain,
By marriage of my Daughters, to possess
Their Patrimonies and their Lands again:
But Gold is sweet, and they deceive themselves;
For though I guild my Temples with a smile,
It is but Iudas-like, to work their ends.
But soft, What noise of footing do I hear?

Enter Laurentia, Marina, Mathea, and Anthony. Laur. Now Master, what intend
you to read to us?


Anth. Pisaro your Father would have me read moral Philosophy.


Mari. What Is that?


Anth. First tell me how you like it?


Math. First tell us what it is.


Pisa. They be my Daughters and their Schoole-maister, Pisaro, not a word, but
list their talk.


Anth. Gentlewomen, to paint Philosophy,
Is to present youth with so sour a dish,
As their abhorring stomachs nill digestes.
When first my mother Oxford (Englands pride)
Fostred me puple-like, with her rich store,
My study was to read Philosophy:
But since, my headstrong youths unbridled will,
Scorning the leaden fetters of restraint,
Has prunde my feahers to a higher pitch.
Gentlewomen, Moral Philosophy is a kind of art,
The most contrary to your tender sexes;
It teaches to be grave: and on that brow,
Where Beawtie in her rarest glory shines,
Plants the sad semblance of decayed age:
Those Weeds that with their riches should adorn,
And grace fair Natures curious workmanship,
Must be converted to a black faced veil,
Griefs liuerie, and Sorrows semblance:
Your food must be your hearts abundant sighs,
Steeped in the brinish licquor of your tears:
Daylight as darke-night, darke-night spent in prayer:
Thoughts your companions, and repentant minds,
The recreation of your tired spirits:
Gentlewomen, if you can like this modesty,
Then will I read to you Philosophy.

Laur. Not I.


Mari. Fie upon it.


Math. Hang up Philosophy, I Will none of it.


Pisar. A Tutor said I; a Tutor for the Devil.


Anth. No Gentlewomen, Anthony has learned
To read a Lector of more pleasing worth.
Marina, read these lines, young Haruie sent them,
There every line repugnes Philosophy:
Then love him, for he hates the thing thou hates.
Laurentia, this is thine from Ferdinande:
Think every golden circle that thou see,
The rich unvalued circle of his worth.
Mathea, with these Gloves thy Ned salutes thee;
As often as these, hide these from the Sun,
And Wanton steals a kiss from thy fair hand,
Presents his serviceable true hearts zeal,
Which waits upon the censure of thy doom:
What though their Lands be morgag'd to your Father;
Yet may your Dowries redeem that debt:
Think they are Gentlemen, and think they love;
And be that thought, their true loves advocate.
Say you should wed for Wealth; for to that scope
Your Fathers greedy disposition tendes,
The world would say, that you were had for Wealth,
And so fair Beawties honor quite distinct:
A mass of Wealth being powrde upon another,
Little augments the show, although the sum;
But being lightly scattred by it self,
It doubles what it seemed, although but one:
Even so your selves, for wedded to the Rich,
His style was as it was, a Rich man still:
But wedding these, to wed true Love, is duty:
You make them rich in Wealth, but more in Beawtie:
I need not plead that smile, that smile shows hearts consent,
That kiss showed love, that on that gift was lent:
And last thine Eyes, that tears of true joy sendes,
As comfortable tidings for my friends.

Mari. Have done, have done; what need'st thou more procure,
When long ere this I stooped to that fair lure:
Thy ever loving Haruie I delight it:
Marina ever loving shall requite it young.
Teach us Philosphy? I Will be no Nun;
Age scorns Delight, I love it being:
There Is not a word of this, not a words part,
But shall be stamped, sealed, printed on my heart;
On this I Will read, on this my senses ply:
All Arts being vain, but this Philosophy.

Laur. Why was I made a Maid, but for a Man?
And why Laurentia, but for Ferdinand?
The chastest Soul these Angels could entice?
Much more himself, an Angel of more price:
were it thy self present, as my heart could wish,
Such usage thou should have, as I give this.

Anth. Then you would kiss him?


Laur. If I did, how then?


Anth. Nay I say nothing to it, but Amen.


Pisa. The Clarke must have his fees, I Will pay you them.


Math. Good God, how abject is this single life,
I Will not abide it; Father, Friends, nor Kin,
Shall once dissuade me from affecting:
A man's a man; and Ned is more then one:
Y faith I Will have thee Ned, or I Will have none;
Do what they can, chafe, chide, or storm their fill,
Mathea is resolved to have her will.

Pisa. I can no longer hold my patience.
Impudent villainy, and laciuious Girls,
I have ore-heard your vild conuersions:
You scorn Philosophy: You Will be no Nun,
You must needs kiss the Pursse, because he sent it.
And you forsooth, you flurgill, minion,
A brat scant folded in the dozens at most,
You Will have your will forsooth; What will you have?

Math. But twelve year old? nay Father that is not so,
Our Sexton told me I was three years mo.

Pisa. I say but twelve: you are best tell me I lie.
What sir Anthony.

Anth. Here sir.


Pisa. Come here sir, and you light huswiues get you in:
Stare not upon me, move me not to ire: Exeunt sisters.
Nay sir stay you here, I Will talk with you:
Did I retain thee (villain) in my house,
Gave thee a stipend twenty Marks by year,
And have thou thus infected my three Girls,
Urging the love of those, I most abhord;
Unthrifts, Beggars; what is worse,
And all because they are your Countrymen?

Anth. Why sir, I taught them not to keep a Merchants Book, or cast account:
yet to a word much like that word Accounte.


Pisa. A Knave past grace, is past recovery.
Why sir Frisco, Villain, Loggerhead, where art thou?

Enter Frisco, the Clown. Frisc. Here Is a calling indeed; a man were better
to live a Lords life and do nothing, then a Serving creature, and never be
idle. Oh Master, what a mess of Brewesse stands now upon the point of
spoiling by your hastiness; why they were able to have got a good Stomach
with child even with the sight of them; and for a Vapor, oh precious Vapor,
let but a Wench come near them with a Painted face, and you should see the
Paint drop and curdle on her Cheeks, like a piece of dry Essex Cheese toasted
at the fire.


Pisa. Well sir, leave this thought, and mind my words,
Give diligence, inquire about
For one that is expert in Languages,
A good Musician, and a Frenchman borne;
And bring him hither to instruct my Daughters,
I Will nere trust more a smooth-faced Englishman.

Frisc. What, must I bring one that can speak Languages? what an old Ass is
my Master; why he may speak flaunte taunte as well as French, for I cannot
understand him.


Pisa. If he speak French, thus he will say, Awee awee:
What, can thou remember it?

Frisc. Oh, I have it now, for I remember my great Grandfathers Grandmothers
sisters coosen told me, that Pigges and Frenchmen, speak one Language, awee
awee; I am Dog at this: But what must he speak else?


Pisa. Dutch.


Frisc. Let Us hear it?


Pisa. Haunce butterkin slowpin.


Fris. Oh this is nothing, for I can speak perfect Dutch when I list.


Pisa. Can you, I pray let us hear some?


Frisc. Nay I must have my mouth full of Meat first, and then you shall hear
me grumble it forth full mouth, as Haunce Butterkin slowpin frokin: No, I am a
simple Dutchman: Well, I Will about it.


Pisa. Stay sir, you are too hasty; for he must speak one Language more.


Frisc. More Languages? I trust he shall have Tongues enough for one mouth: But
what is the third?


Pisa. Italian.


Fris. Why that is the easiest of all, for I can tell whether he have any
Italian in him even by looking on him.


Pisa. Can you so, as how?


Frisc. Marry by these three points; a Wanton Eye. Pride in his Apparel, and
the Devil in his Countenance. Well, God keep me from the Devil in seeking
this Frenchman: But do you hear me Master, what shall my fellow Anthony
do, it seems he shall serve for nothing but to put Lattin into my young
Mistresses.


Exit Frisco. Pisa. Hence ass, hence loggerhead, begone I say.
And now to you that reads Philosophy,
Pack from my house, I do discharge thy service,
And come not near my doors; for if thou do,
I Will make thee a public example to the world.

Antho. Well crafty Fox, you that work by wit,
It may be, I may live to fit you yet.

Exit Antho. Pisa. Ah sir, this trick was spide in time,
For if but two such Lectures more they would heard,
For ever had their honest names been marde:
I Will in and rate them: yet that is not best,
The Girls are wilful, and severity
May make them careless, mad, or desperate.
What shall I do? Oh! I have found it now,
There are three wealthy Merchants in the Town,
All Strangers, and my very special friends,
The one of them is an Italian:
A Frenchman, and a Dutchman, be the other:
These three intyrely do affect my Daughters,
And therefore mean I, they shall have the tongues,
That they may answer in their several Language:
But what helps that? they must not stay so long,
For whiles they are a learning Languages,
My English Youths, both wed, and bed them too:
Which to prevent, I Will seek the Strangers out,
Let Us look: it is past aleauen, Exchange time full,
There shall I meet them, and confer with them,
This work craves have, my Daughters must be Wedde,
For one Months stay, says farrewell Maiden head.

Exit. Enter Haruie, Heigham, and Walgraue. Heigh. Come Gentlemen, we are almost
at the house,
I promise you this walk ore Tower Hill,
Of all the places London can afforde,
Has sweetest Air, and fitting our desires.

Haru. Good reason, so it leads to Croched-Fryers
Where old Pisaro, and his Daughters dwell,
Look to your feet, the broad way leads to Hell:
They say Hell stands below, down in the deep,
I Will down that Hill, where such good Wenches keep,
But sir Ned, what says Mathea to thee?
Wilt fadge? wilt fadge? What, will it be a match?

Walg. A match say you? a mischief twill as soon:
Should I can scarce begin to speak to her,
But I am interrupted by her father.
Ha, what say you? and then put ore his snoute,
Able to shadow Powles, it is so great.
Well, it is no matter, sirrs, this is his House,
Knock for the Churl bid him bring out his Daughter;
I Will, god's blood I will, though I be hanged for it,

Heigh. Hoyda, hoyda, nothing with you but up and ride,
You Will be within, ere you can reach the Door,
And have the Wench, before you compass her:
You are too hasty, Pisaro is a man,
Not to be fed with Words, but won with Gold.
But who comes here?

Enter Anthony. Walg. Whom, Anthony our friend?
Say man, how fares our Loves? How does Mathea?
Can she love Ned? how does she like my suit?
Will old Pisaro take me for his Son;
For I thank God, he kindly takes our Lands,
Swearing, Good Gentlemen you shall not want,
Whilst old Pisaro, and his credit holds:
He will be damned the Roage, before he do it?

Haru. Prethy talk milder: let but thee alone,
And thou in one bare hour will ask him more,
Then heel remember in a hundred years:
Come from him Anthony, and say what news?

Antho. The news for me is badd; and this it is:
Pisaro has discharged me of his service.

Heigh. Discharged thee of his service; for what cause?


Anth. Nothing, but that his Daughters learn Philosophy.


Haru. Maids should read, that it teaches modesty.


Antho. I, but I left out mediocritie,
And with effectual reasons, vrgd your loves.

Walg. The fault was small, we three will to thy Master
And beg thy pardon.

Antho. Oh, that cannot be,
He hates you far worser, then he hates me;
For all the love he shows, is for your Lands,
Which he hopes sure will fall into his hands:
Yet Gentlemen, this comfort take of me,
His Daughters to your loves affected be:
Their father is abroad, they three at home,
Go chearely in, and cease that is your own:
And for my self, but grace what I intend,
I Will ouerreach the Churl, and help my Friend.

Heigh. Build on our helps, and but devise the means.


Antho. Pisaro did command Frisco his man,
(A simple sotte, kept only but for mirth)
To inquire about in London for a man,
That were a Frenchman and Musician,
To be (as I suppose) his Daughters Tutor:
Him if you meet, as like enough you shall,
He will inquire of you of his affairs;
Then make him answer, you three came from Paul's,
And in the middle walk, one you espide,
Fit for his purpose; then discribe this Cloak,
This Beard and Hatte: for in this borrowed shape,
Must I beguile and ouer-reach the Fool:
The Maids must be acquainted with this drift.
The Door does open, I dare not stay reply,
Least being discride: Gentlemen adue,
And help him now, that often has helped you.

Exit. Enter Frisco the Clown. Wall. How now sir, whither are you going?


Fris. Whither am I going, how shall I tell you, when I do not know my self,
nor understand my self?


Heigh. What do thou mean by that?


Frisc. Marry sir, I am seeking a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, a Monster in the
liknesse of a Man: one that in stead of good morrow, asks what Porrage you
have to Dinner, Parley vous signiour? one that never washes his fingers, but
lickes them clean with kisses; a clipper of the Kings English: and to
conclude, an eternal enemy to all good Language.


Haru. What Is this? what is this?


Fris. Do not you smell me? Well, I perceive that wit does not always dwell
in a Satten-dublet: why, it is a Frenchman, Bassimon cue, how do you?


Haru. I thank you sir, but tell me what would thou do with a Frenchman:


Fris. Nay faith, I would do nothing with him, unless I set him to teach
Parrets to speak: marry the old Ass my Master, would have him to teach his
Daughters, though I trust the whole world sees, that there be such in his house
that can serve his Daughters turn, as well as the proudest Frenchman: but if
you be good laddes, tell me where I may find such a man?


Heigh. We will, go hye thee straight to Paul's,
There shall thou find one fitting thy desire;
Thou soon may know him, for his Beard is black,
Such is his raiment, if thou runn'st appace,
Thou can not miss him Frisco.

Fris. Lord, Lord, how shall poor Phrisco reward your rich tidings Gentlemen:
I am yours till Shrouetewesday, for then change I my Copy, and look like
nothing but Red-Herring Cobbes, and Stock Fish; yet I Will do somewhat for you in
the mean time: my Master is abroad, and my young Mistresses at home: if you
can do any good on them before the Frenchman corn, why so? Ah Gentlemen, do
not suffer a litter of Languages to spring up amongst us: I must to the Walk
in Paul's, you to the Vestrie. Gentlemen, as to my self, and so forth.


Exit Frisco, Haru. Fools tell the truth men say, and so may he:
Wenches we come now, Love our conduct be.
Ned, knock at the door: but soft forbear;
Enter Lawrentia, Marina, and Mathea. The Cloud breaks up, and our three
Suns appear.
To this I fly, shine bright my lives sole stay,
And make griefs night a glorious summers day.

Mari. Gentlemen, how welcome you are here,
Guess by our looks, for other means by fear
Prevented is: our fathers quick return
Forbidds the welcome, else we would have done.

Walg. Mathea, How these faithful thoughts obey,

Mat. No more sweet love, I know what thou would say:
You say you love me, so I wish you still,
Love has loves hier, being ballancst with good will:
But say; come you to us, or come you rather
To pawn more Lands for money to our father?
I know it is so, a Gods name spend at large:
What man? our marriage day will all discharge;
Our father (by his leave) must pardon us,
Age save of age, of nothing can discuss:
But in our loves, the proverb we will fulfill*
Women and Maids, must always have their will.

Heigh. Say thou as much, and add life to this Coarse,

Law. Your self and your good news does more enforce:
How these have set forth love by all their wit,
I swear in heart, I more then double it.
Sisters be glad, for he has made it plain,
The means to get our Schoole-maister again:
But Gentlemen, for this time cease our loves,
This open street perhaps suspicion moves,
Feign we would stay, bid you walk in more rather,
But that we fear the coming of our father:
Go to the Exchange, crave Gold as you intend,
Pisaro scrapes for us; for us you spend:
We say farewell, more sadlier be bold,
Then would my greedy father to his Gold:
We here, you there, ask Gold; and Gold you shall:
We Will pay the intrest, and the principal. Exeunt Sisters

Walg. That Is my good Girls, and I Will pay you for all.


Haru. Come to the Exchange, and when I feel decay,
Send me such Wenches, Heavens I still shall pray.

Exeunt. Enter Pisaro, Delion the Frenchman, Vandalle the Dutchman, Aluaro the
Italian, and other Merchants, at several doors. Pisa. Good morrow, M.
Strangers.


Strange. Good morrow sir.


Pisaro. This (loving friends) has thus emboldned me,
For knowing the affection and the love
Master Vandalle, that you bear my Daughter:
Likewise, and that with joy considering too,
you Mounsier Delion, would feign dispatch*
I promise you, me thinks the time did fit,
And does bir-Lady too, in mine advice,
This day to clap a full conclusion up:
And therefore made I bold to call on you,
Meaning (our business done here at the Burse)
That you at mine entreaty should walk home,
And take in worth such Viands as I have:
And then we would, and so I hope we shall,
Loosely tie up the knot that you desire,
But for a day or two; and then Church rites
Shall sure conform, confirm, and make all fast.

Vand. Seker Mester Pisaro, me do so groterly dancke you, dat you macke me so
sure of de Wench, datt ic can neit dancke you genough.


Delio. Monsieur Pisaro, mon pere, mon Vadere, Oh de grande joy you give me
(oconte) me sal go home to your House, sal eat your Bakon, sal eat your Beef,
and shall tacke de Wench, de fine Damoysella.


Pisa. You shall, and welcome* welcome as my soul:
But were my third Son sweet Aluaro here,
We would not stay at the Exchange to day,
But hye us home and there end our affairs.

Enter Moore, and Towerson. Moore. Good day master Pisaro.


Pisa. Master Moore, marry with all my heart good morrow sir; What news? What
news?


Moore. This Merchant here my friend, would speak with you.


Tower. Sir, this jolly South-west wind with gentle blast,
Has driven home our long expected Ships,
All laden with the wealth of ample Spain,
And but a day is past since they ariude
Safely at Plimmouth, where they yet abide.

Pisa. Thanks is too small a guerdon for such news.
How like you this News friends? Master Vandalle,
Here Is somewhat toward for my Daughters Dowry:
Here Is somewhat more then we did yet expect.

Tower. But hear you sir, my business is not done;
From these same Ships I did receive these lines,
And there inclosde this same Bill of exchange,
To pay at sight; if so you please accept it.

Pisa. Accept it, why? What sir should I accept,
Have you received Letters, and not I?
Where is this lazy villain, this slow Poast:
What, brings he every man his Letters home,
And makes me no body; does he, does he?
I would not have you bring me counterfeit;
And if you do, assure you I shall smell it:
I know my Factors writing well enough.

Tower. You do sir; then see your Factors writing:
I scorn as much as you, to counterfeite,

Pisa. It Is well you do sir.
Enter Haruie, Walgraue, and Heighun. What Master Walgraue, and my other
frindes:
You are grown strangers to Pisaros house,
I pray make bold with me.

Walsg. I, with your Daughters
You may be sworn, we will be as bold as may be.

Pisa. Would you have ought with me, I pray now speak.


Heigh. Sir, I think you understand our suit,
By the repayring we have had to you:
Gentlemen you know, must want no Coin,
Nor are they slaves unto it, when they have:
You may perceive our minds; What say you to it?

Pisa. Gentlemen all* I love you all:
Which more to manifest, this after noone
Between the hours of two and three repair to me;
And were it half the substance that I have,
Whilst it is mine, it is yours to command.
But Gentlemen, as I have regard to you,
So do I wish you will have respect to me:
You know that all of us are mortal men,
Subject to change and mutabilitie;
You may, or I may, soon pitch ore the Perch*
Or so, or so, have contrary crosses:
Wherefore I deem but mere equity,
That some thing may betwixt us be to show.

Heigh. M. Pisaro, within this two months without fail,
We will repay.

Enter Brown. Brown. God save you Gentlemen.


Gentlemen. Good morrow sin.


Pisa. What M. Brown, the only man I wished for,
Does your price fall? what shall I have these Clothes?
For I would ship them straight away for Stoade:
I do wish you my Money fore another.

Brow. Faith you know my price sir, if you have them.


Pisa. You are to dear in sadness, master Heigham:
You were about to say somewhat, pray proceed.

Heigh. Then this it was: those Lands that are not morgag'd

Enter Post. Post. God bless your worship.


Pisaro. I must crave pardon; Oh sir, are you come?


Walg. Hoyda, hoyda; What Is the matter now;
Sure, yonder fellow will be torn in pieces.

Haru. What Is he, sweet youths; that so they flock about:
What old Pisaro tainted with this madness?

Heigh. Upon my life, it is some body bringes news;
The Court breaks up, and we shall know their Counsel:
Look, look, how busely they fall to reading.

Pisa. I am the last* you should have kept it still:
Well, we shall see what news you bring with you;
Our duty premised, and we have sent unto your worship Sack, civil Oils,
Pepper, Barbery sugar, and such other commodities as we thought most requisite,
we wanted money therefore we are feign to take up 200. l. of Master Towersons
man, which by a bill of Exchange sent to him, we would request your worship pay
accordingly. You shall command sir, you shall command sir, The news here
is, that the English shipes, the Fortune, your shipe, the adventure and good
luck of London coasting along by Italy Toward Turkey, were set upon by to
Spanish-galleis, what became of them we know not, but doubt much by reason of
the weathers calmnesse.


Pisa How is it six to one the weather calm,
Now before God who would not doubt their safety,
A plague upon these Spanish-galli Pirattes,
Roaring Caribdis, or deuowring Scilla,
Were half such terror to the anticke world,
As these same anticke Villains now of late,
Have made the Straights twixt Spain and Barbary.

Tower Now sir, what does your Factors letters say?


Pisa. Marry he says, these witless lucklesse doults,
Have met, and are beset with Spanish Galleys,
As they did sail along by Italy:
What a bots made the dolts near Italy,
Could they not keep the coast of Barbary,
Or having past it, gone for Tripoly,
Being on the other side of Sicily,
As near, as where they were unto the Straights:
For by the Gloabe, both Tripoly and it,
Lie from the Straights some twenty five degrees;
And each degree makes threescore english miles?

Tower. Very true sir: But it makes nothing to my Bill of exchange: this
dealing fits not one of your account.


Pisa. And what fits yours? a prating wrangling tongue,
A woman's ceaselesse and incessant babbling,
That sees the world turned topsie turuie with me;
Yet has not so much wit to stay a while,
Till I bemone my late excessive loss.

Walg. S'wounds it is dinner time, I Will stay no longer:
Hark you a word sir.

Pisa. I tell you sir, it would have made you whine
Worse then if shooles of lucklesse croking Ravens,
Had ceasd on you to feed their famisht paunches:
Had you heard news of such a ravenous rout,
Ready to cease on half the wealth you have.

Wall. God's Blood you might have kept at home and be hanged,
What a pox care I.

Enter a Post. Post. God save your worship, a littlemony and so forth.


Pisa. But men are senseless now of others woe,
This stony age is grown so stony hearted,
That none respects their neighbors miseries,
I wish (as Poets do) that Saturnes times
The long out worn world wear in use again,
That men might sail without impediment.

Post. I marry sir that were a merry world indeed, I would hope to get more
money of your worship in one quarter of a year, then I can do now in a whole
twelue-moneth.


Enter Balsaro. Balsa. Master Pisaro how I have run about,
How I have toyld to day to find you out,
At home, abroad, at this man's house, at that,
Why I was here an hour ago and more,
Where I was told you were, but could not find you.

Pisa. Faith sir I was here but was driven home,
Here Is such a common hant of Crack-rope boys,
That what for fear to have m'apparell spoyld,
Or my Ruffes durted, or Eyes struck out:
I dare not walk where people do expect me:
Well, things (I think) might be better looked unto,
And such Coin to, which is bestowde on Knaves,
Which should, but do not see things be reformd,
Might be imployde to many better uses:
But what of beardlesse Boys, or such like trash;
The Spanish Galleys: Oh, a vengeance on them.

Post. Mass, this man has the luck on it, I think I can scarce ever come to
him for money, but this a vengeance on, and that a vengeance on it, does so
trouble him, that I can get no Coin: Well, a vengeance on it for my part; for
he shall fetch the next Letters him self.


Brown. I prithee, when think thou the Ships will be come about from
Plimmouth?


Post. Next week, sir.


Heigh. Came you sir from Spain lately?


Post. I sir; Why ask you that?


Ha. Marry sir, thou seems to have bin in the hot countries, thy face looks so
like a piece of rusty Bacon: had thy Host at Plimmoth meat enough in the house,
when thou were there?


Post. What though he had not sir? but he had, how then?


Haru. Marry thank God for it; for otherwise, he would doubtless have Cut thee
out in Rashers to have eaten thee; thou look as thou weart through broyld
already.


Post. You have said sir; but I am no meare for his moing, nor yours neither:
If I had you in place where, you should find me tough enough in disgestion, I
warrant you.


Walgr, What will you swagger sir, will ye swagger?


Brow. I beseech you Sir, hold your hand; Get home ye patch, cannot you
suffer Gentlemen Jest with you?


Post. I Would teach him a Gentle trick and I had him of the burse; but I Will watch
him a good turn I warrant him.


Moor. Assure ye master Towerson, I cannot blame him,
I warrant you it is no easy loss;
How think you master Stranger? by my faith sir,
There Is twenty Merchants will be sorry for it,
That shall be partners with him in his loss.

Stra. Why sir, what is the matter.


Moor. The Spanish-gallies have besette our ships,
That lately were bound out for Siria.

March. What not? I promise you I am sorry for it.


Walg. What an old Ass is this to keep us here:
Master Pisaro, pray dispatch us hence.

Pisa. Master Vandalle I confess I wrong you;
But I Will but talk a word or two with him, and straight turn to you.
Ah sir, and how then y faith?

Heigh. Turn to us, turn to the Gallows if you will,

Haru. It Is Midsomer-Moone with him: let him alone,
He call's Ned Walgraue, Master Vandalle.

Walg. Let it be shrouetide, I Will not stay an ynche master Pisaro.


Pisa. What should you fear: end as I have vowed before,
So now again; my Daughters shall be yours:
And therefore I beseech you and your friends,
Defer your business till Dinner time;
And what youd say, keep it for table talk.

Haru. Marry and shall; a right good motion:
Sirrs, old Pisaro is grown kind of late,
And in pure love, has bid us home to dinner.

Heigh. Good news in truth: But wherefore art thou sad?


Walg. For fear the slave ere it be dinner time,
Remembering what he did, recall his word:
For by his idle speeches, you may swear,
His heart was not confederat with his tongue.

Haru. Tut never doubt, keep stomachs till anon,
And then we shall have cates to feed upon.

Pisa. Well sir, since things do fall so crosely out,
I must dispose my self to patience:
But for your business, do you assure your self,
At my repayring home from the Exchange,
I Will set a helping hand unto the same.

Enter Aluaro the Jtalian. Alua. Bon iurno signeour Padre, why be de
malancollie so much, and grave in you a: wat News make you look so naught?


Pisa. Naught is too good an epithet by much,
For to distinguish such contrariousnesse:
Has not swift Fame told you our slow sailde Ships
Have been ore-taken by the swift sail Galleys,
And all my cared-for goods within the lurch
Of that same Catterpiller brood of Spain.

Alua. Signor si, how de Spaniola have almost tacke de Ship dat go for Turkey:
my Pader, hark you me on word, I have receive un lettre from my Factor de
Vennise, dat after un piculo battalion, for un half hour de come a Wind fra
de North, and de Sea go tumble here, and tumble dare, dat make de Galleys run
away for fear be almost drownde.


Pisa. How sir; did the Wind rise at North, and Seas wax rough: and were the
Galleys therefore glad to fly?


Alu. Signior si, and de Ship go drite on de Iscola de Candy.


Pisa. Were thou not my Aluaro my beloved,
One whom I know does dearly count of me,
Much should I doubt me that some scoffing lack,
Had sent thee in the midst of all my griefs,
To tell a feigned tale of happy luck.

Alua. Will you no beleuue me? see dare dan, see de lettre.


Pisa. What is this world? or what this state of man,
How in a moment cursed, in a trice blessed?
But even now my happy state began fade,
And now again, my state is happy made,
My Goods all safe, my Ships all escaped away,
And none to bring me news of such good luck,
But whom the Heavens have marked to be my Son:
Were I a Lord as great as Alexander,
None should more willingly be made mine Heir
Then thee thou golden tongue, thou good-newes teller
Joy stops my mouth.

The Exchange Bell rings. Balsa. M. Pisaro, the day is late, the Bell does ring:
Wilt please you hasten to perform this business?

Pisa. What business sir? Gods me, I cry you mercy:
Do it, yes sir, you shall command me more.

Tower. But sir, What do you mean, do you intend
To pay this Bill, or else to palter with me?

Pisa. Marry God shield, that I should palter with you:
I do accept it, and come when you please;
You shall have money, you shall have your money due.

Post. I beseech your worship to consider me.


Pisa. Oh, you cannot cogge: Go to, take that,
Pray for my life: pray that I have good luck,
And thou shall see, I will not be thy worst master.

Post. Marry God bless your Worship; I came in happy time: What, a French
crown? sure he knows not what he does: Well, I Will begone, least he remember
himself, and take it from me again.


Exit Post. Pisa Come on my lads, M. Vandalle, sweet son Aluaro:
Come don Balsaro, lets be iogging home
Bir laken sirs, I think it is one a clock.

Extt Pisaro, Balsaro, Aluaro, Delion, and Vandalle. Brow. Come M. Moore,
The Exchange is waxen thin,
I think it best we get us home to dinner.

Moor. I know that I am looked for long ere this:
Come master Towerson, let us walk along.

Exit Moore, Brown, Tovverson, Strangers, and Merchant. Heigh. And if you be
so hot upon your dinner,
Your best way is, to haste Pisaro on,
For he is cold enough, and slow enough;
He has so late digested such cold news.

Walg. Mary and shall: Hear you master Pisaro.


Haru. Many Pisaros here: Why how now Ned;
Where is your Matt 'your welcome, and good cheer?

Walg. Swounds, lets follow him; why stay we here?


Heigh. Nay prithee Ned Walg. lets bethink our selves,
There Is no such haste, we may come time enough:
At first Pisaro bade us come to him
Twixt two or three a clock at after noone?
Then was he old Pisaro: but since then,
What with his grief for loss, and joy for finding,
He quite forgot himself, when he did bid us,
And afterward forgot, that he had bade us.

Walg. I care not, I remember't well enough:
He bade us home; and I will go, that is flat,
To teach him better wit another time.

Haru. Heer'le be a gallantiest, when we come there,
To see how mazed the greedy chuffe will look
Upon the nations, sects, and factions,
That now have borne him company to dinner:
But hark you, lets not go to vex the man;
Prithee sweet Ned lets tarry, do not go.

Walg. Not go? indeed you may do what you please;
I Will go, that is flat: nay, I am gone already,
Stay you two, and consider further of it.

Heigh. Nay all will go, if one: I prithee stay;
You Are such a rash and giddie headed youth,
Each Stone's a Thorn: Hoyda, he skips for haste;
Young Haruie did but jest; I know heel go.

Walg. Nay, he may choose for me: But if he will,
Why does he not? why stands he prating still?
If you will go, come: if not, farewell?

Haru. Hier a Poast-horse for him (gentle Francke)
Here Is haste, and more haste then a hasty Pudding:
You madman, mad-cap, wild-oates; we are for you,
It boots not stay, when you intend to go.

Walg. Come away then.


Exeunt. Enter Pisaro, Aluaro, Delion, and Vandalle. Pisa. A thousand welcomes
friends: Monsier Delion,
Ten thousand Ben-venues unto your self.
Signior Aluaro, Master Vandalle;
Proud am I, that my roof contains such Friends.
Why Mall, Larentia, Matthew; Where be these Girls?
Enter the three Sisters. Lively my Girls, and bid these Strangers welcome;
They are my friends, your friends, and our wel-willers:
You cannot tell what good you may have on them.
Gods me, Why stir you not? Hark in your ear,
These be the men the choice of many millions,
That I your careful Father have provided
To be your Husbands: therefore bid them welcome.

Math. Nay by my troth, it is not the guyse of maids,
To give a slauering Salute to men: aside,
If these sweet youths have not the wit to do it,
We have the honesty to let them stand.

Vanda. Gods sekerlin, dats vn-fra meskin, Monsieur Delion dare de Grote
freisler, dare wode ic zene, it is vn-fra Daughter, dare heb ic so long loud,
dare Heb my desire so long gewest.


Alua. Ah Venice, Roma, Italia* Frauncia, Anglitera, nor all dis orb can show
so much belliza, veremante de secunda, Madonade granda beauty.


Delio Certes me dincke de mine depeteta de little Angloise, de me Matresse
Pisaro is un net, un becues, un fra, et un tendra Damosella.


Pisa. What Stocks, what stones, what senceles Truncks be these?
When as I bid you speak, you hold your tongue:
When I bid peace, then can you prate, and chat,
And gossip: But go too, speak and bid welcome;
Or (as I live) you were as good you did.

Mari. I cannot tell what Language I should speak:
If I speak English (as I can none other)
They cannot understand me, nor my welcome.

Alua. Bella Madona, dare is no language so dulce; dulce, dat is sweet, as de
language, dat you shall speak, and de vell come dat you sal say, sal be well
know perfaytemente.


Mari. Pray sir, What is all this in English?


Alua. De vsa sal vell teash you vat dat is; and if you sal please, I will
teash you to parler Italiano.


Pisa. And that me thinks sir, not without need:
And with Italian, to a Childs obedience,
With such desire to seek to please their Parents,
As others far more virtuous then them selves,
Do daily strive to do: But it is no matter,
I Will shortly pull your haughty stomachs down:
I Will teach you urge your Father; make you run,
When I bid run: and speak, when I bid speak:
What greater cross can careful parents have knock within
Then careless Children. Stir and see who knocks?

Enter Haruie, Walgraue, and Heigham. Walgr. Good morrow to my good Mistress
Mathea.


Mathe. As good a morrow, to the morrow giver.


Pisa. A murren, what make these? What do they here?


Heigh. You see master Pisaro, we are bold guestes*
You could have bid no surer men then we.

Pisa. Hark you Gentlemen; I did expect you
At after noone, not before two a clock.

Haru, Why sir, if you please, you shall have us here at two a clock, at
three a clock, at four a clock; nay till to morrow this time: yet I assure
you* sir, we came not to your house without inuiting.


Pisa. Why Gentlemen, I pray who bade you now?
Who ever did it, sure has done you wrong:
For scarcely could you come to worser cheer.

Heigh. It was your own self bade us to your cheer,
When you were busy with Balsaro talking;
You bade us cease our suites till dinner time,
And then to use it for our table talk:
And we I warrant you, are as sure as Steel.

Pisa. A murren on your selves, and surenes too:
How am I crossed: Gods me, what shall I do,
This was that ill news of the Spanish Pirates,
That so disturbed me: well, I must dissemble,
And bid them welcome; but for my Daughters
I Will send them hence, they shall not stand and prate.
Well my Masters, Gentlemen, and Friends,
Though unexpected, yet most heartily welcome;
(Welcome with a vengeance) but for your cheer,
That will be small: yet too too much for you.
Mall, in and get things ready.
Laurentia, bid Maudlin lay the Cloth, take up the Meat:
Look how she stirs; you sullen Elfe, you Callet,
Is this the haste you make?

Exeunt Marina and Laurentia. Alua. Signor Pisaro, ne soiat so malcontento de
Gentlewoman your filigola did parler but a litella to, de gentle homa y our
graunde amico.


Pisa. But that graunde amico, is your graunde inimico:
One, if they be suffered to parlar,
Will poll you, I and pill you of your Wife:
They love together: and the other two,
Loves her two Sisters: but it is only you
Shall crop the flower, that they esteem so much.

Alua. Do dey so; vell let me lone, sal see me give them de such graund mock,
sal be shame of them selves.


Pisa. Do sir, I pray you do; set lustily upon them,
And I Will be ready still to second you.

Walg. But Matt, art thou so mad as to turn French?


Math. Yes marry when two Sundays come together;
Think you I Will learn to speak this gibberidge,
Or the Pigges language? Why, if I fall sick,
They Will say, the French (et-cetera) infected me.

Pisa. Why how now Minion; what, is this your service?
Your other Sisters busy are imployde,
And you stand idle: get you in, or.

Exit Mathea. Walg. If you chide her, chide me (M. Pisaro:
For but for me, she had gone in long since.

Pisa. I think she had: for we are sprights to scare her;
But er't belong, I Will drive that humor from her.

Alua. Signor, me thincks you soud no macke de wen she so hardee, so
disobedient to de padre as ditt madona Matt.


Walg. Signor, me thinks you should learn to speak, before you should be so
foole-hardy, as to woe such a Maiden as that Madona Matt?


Delio. Warrent you Monsieur, he sal parle wen you sal stand out the doure.


Haru. Hark you Monsieur, you would wish your self half hanged, you were as
sure to be let in as he.


Van. Macke no doubt de signor Alua. sal do vel enough

Heigh. perhaps so: but me thinks your best way were to ship your self for
Stoad, and there to batter your self for a commodity; for I can tell you, you
are here out of liking.


Pisa. The worst perhaps dislike him, but the best esteem him best.


Haru. But by your patience sir, me thinks none should know better who is Lord,
then the Lady.


Alua. Den de Lady, vat Lady?


Haru. Marry sir, the Lady let her alone: one that means to let you alone for
fear of trouble.


Pisa. Every man as he may: yet sometimes the blind may katch a Hare.


Heigh. I sir, but he will first eat many a Fly:
You know it must be a wonder, if a Crab catch a Foul.

Vand. Maer hortens; if he and ic and monsier Delion be de Crab, we sal kash de
Foul well genough, I warrent you.


Walg. I, and the Fool well enough I warrant you;
And much good may it do ye.

Alua. Me dincke such a piculo man as you be, sal have no de such grande luck
madere.


Delio. Non da Monsieur, and he be so granda amorous op de Damosella, he sal
have Mawdlyn de wit Wenshe in de Kichine by maiter Pisaros leave.


Walg. By M. Pisaros leave, Monsieur I Will mumble you, except you learn to know,
whom you speak to: I tell thee Francois, I Will have (maugre thy teeth) her that
shall make thee gnash thy teeth to want.


Pisa. Yet a man may want of his will, and bate an Ace of his wish: But
Gentlemen, every man as his luck serves, and so agree we; I would not have
you fall out in my house: Come, come, all this was in jest, now lets to it in
earnest; I mean with our teeth, and try who is the best Trencher-man.


Exeunt. Enter Frisco. Frisc. Ah sir, now I know, what manner of thing Powles
is; I did so marle before what it was out of all count: For my master would
say, Would I had Powles full of Gold. My young Mistresses, and Grimkin our
Tailor, would wish they had Powles full of Needles: I, one asked my master
half a yard of Freeze to make me a Coat and he cride whoope holly-day, it
was big enough to make Powles a Night-gowne. I have been told, that Duke
Humfrie dwelles here, and that he keeps open house, and that a brave sort of
Cammileres dine with him every day; now if I could see any vision in the world
toward dinner, I would set in a foot: But the best is, a the ancient English
roman Orator says, So-lame-men, Misers, Howsewiues, and so forth: the best
is, that I have great store of company that do nothing but go up and down,
and go up and down, and make a grumbling together, that the meat is so long
making ready: Well, if I could meet this scuruie Frenchman, they should stay
me, for I would be gone home.


Enter Anthony. Antho. I beseech you Monsieur, give me audience.


Frisc. What would you have? What should I give you?


Antho. Pardon, sir mine uncivil and presumptuous intrusion, who endeavor
nothing less, then to provoke or exasperat you against me.


Frisc. They say, a word to the Wise is enough: so by this little French that he
speaks, I see he is the very man I seek for: Sir, I pray what is your name?


Antho. I am nominated Monsieur Le Mouche, and rest at your bon service.


Frisc. I understand him partly; yea, and partly nay: Can you speak French?
Content pore vous monsieur Madomo.


Antho. If I could not sir, I should ill understand you: you speak the best
French that ever trod upon Shoe of Leather.


Frisc. Nay, I can speak more Languages then that: This is Italian, is it not?
Nella slurde Curte zana.


Antho. Yes sir, and you speak it like a very Natural.


Frisc. I believe you well* now for Dutch:
Ducky de do watt heb ye ge brought.

Antho. I pray stop your mouth, fot I never heard such Dutch before brocht.


Frsc. Nay I think you have not met with no pezant: Hear you M. Mouse, (so
your name is I take it) I have considered of your learning in these aforesaid
Languages, and find you reasonable: So, so, now this is the matter; Can you
take the ease to teach these Tongues to two or three Gentlewomen of mine
acquaintance, and I will see you paid for your labor.


Antho. Yes sir, and that most willingly.


Fris. Why then M. Mouse, to their use, I entertain ye, which had not been
but for the troubles of the world, that I my self have no leisure to show my
skill: Well sir, if you will please to walk with me, I Will bring you to them.


Exeunt. Enter Laurentia, Marina, and Mathea. Lauren. Sit till dinners done;
not I, I swear:
Shall I stay? till he belch into mine ears
Those rusticke Phrases, and those Dutch French terms,
Stammering half Sentences dogbolt Elloquence:
And when he has no love for-sooth, why then
He tells me Cloth is dear at Anwerpe, and the men
Of Amsterdam have lately made a law,
That none but Dutch as he, may traffic there:
Then stands he still and studies what to say;
And after some half hour, because the Ass
Hopes (as he thinks) I shall not contradict him.
He tells me that my Father brought him to me,
And that I must perform my Fathers will.
Well good man Goose-cap, when thou woest again,
Thou shall have simple ease, for thy Loves pain.

Mathe. Alas poor Wench, I sorrow for thy hap,
To see how thou art clogged with such a Dunce:
Forsooth my Sire has fitted me far better,
My Frenchman comes upon me with the Sa, sa, sa;
Sweet Madam pardone moye I pra^:
And then out goes his Hand, down goes his Head,
Swallows his Spittle, frissles his Beard; and then to me:
Pardone moy mistress Mathea,
If I be bold, to macke so bold met you,
Think it go will dat spurs me dus up you.
Dan cast neit off so good ande true Lover,
Madama celestura de la, (I know not what)
Do often pray to God dat me would love her:
And then he reckons a catalogue of names
of such as love him, and yet cannot get him.

Mari. Nay, but your Monsieur's but a Mouse in cheese,
Compard with my Signor; he can tell
Of Lady Venus, and her Son blind Cupid:
Of the fair Scilla that was loved of Glaucus,
And yet scornd Glaucus, and yet loved King Minos;
Yet Minos hated her, and yet she holp'd him;
And yet he scorned her, yet she killed her Father
To do her good; yet he could not abide her:
Nay, hele be bawdy too in his discourse;
And when he is so, he will take my Hand,
And tickle the Palm, wincke with his one Eye,
Gape with his Mouth, and

Laur. And, hold thy tongue I prithee: here is my father.


Enter Pisaro, Aluaro, Vandalle, Delion, Haruie, Walgraue, and Heigham. Pisa.
Unmannerly, untaught, vnnurtred Girls,
Do I bring Gentlemen, my very friends
To feast with me, to revel at my House,
That their good likings, may be set on you,
And you like misbehaud and sullen Girls,
Turn tail to such, as may advance your states:
I shall remembert, when you think I do not.
I am sorry Gentlemen, your cheare's no better;
But what did want at Board, excuse me for,
And you shall have amends be made in Bed.
To them friends, to them; they are none but yours:
For you I bred them, for you brought them up:
For you I kept them, and you shall have them:
I hate all others that resort to them:
Then rouse your bloods* be bold with what is your own:
For I and mine (my friends) be yours, or none.

Enter Frisco and Anthony. Frisc. God-gee god-morrow sir, I have brought you
M. Mouse here to teach my young Mistresses: I assure you (for-sooth) he is a
brave Frenchman.


Pisa. Welcome friend, welcome: my man (I think)
Has at the full, resolved thee of my will.
Monsieur Delion, I pray question him:
I tell you sir, it is only for your sake,
That I do mean to entertain this fellow,

Antho. A bots of all ill luck, how came these here?
Now am I posde except the Wenches help me:
I have no French to flap them in the mouth,

Haru. To see the luck of a good fellow, poor Anthony
Could nere have sorted out a worser time:
Now will the pack of all our sly devises
Be quite laid open, as one undoes an Oyster:
Francke, Heigham, and mad Ned, fall to your muses,
To help poor Anthony now at a pinch,
Or all our market will be spoyld and marde.

Walg. Tut man, let us alone, I warrant you.


Delio. Monsieur, Vous estes tresbien venu, de quell pais estes vous.


Anth. Vous, that's you: sure he says, how do men call you Monsieur le Mouche?


Mari. Sister, help sister; that is honest Anthony,
And he answers, your woer cuius contrarium.

Delio. Monsieur, Vous n'entens pas, Je ne demand puit, vostre nom?


Math. Monsieur Delion, he that made your Shoes, made them not in fashion:
they should have been cut square at the toe.


Delio. Madame, my Sho met de square toe, vat be dat?


Pisa. Why sauce-box; how now you vnreuerent mincks
Why? in whose Stable have thou been brought up,
To interrupt a man in midst of speech?
Monsieur Delion, disquiet not your self,
But as you have begun, I pray proceed
To question with this Countriman of yours.

Delio. Dat me sal do tres beien, but de bella Madona de june Gentlewoman do
monstre some singe of amor to speak lot me, epurce monsieur, me sal say but
two tree four five word to di^ francois: or sus Monsieur Le mouche en quelle
party de France esties vous ne?


Haru. France.


Heigh. Ned.


Walg. God's Blood, let me come.
Master Pisaro, we have occasion of affairs,
Which calls us hence with speed; wherefore I pray
Defer this business till some fitter time,
And to perform what at the Exchange we spoke of.

Antho. A blessing on that tongue, says Anthony.


Pisa. Yes marry Gentlemen, I will, I will.
Aluaro to your task, fall to your task,
I Will bear away those three, who being here,
Would set my Daughters on a merry pin:
Then chearely try your luckes; but speak, and speed,
For you alone (say I) shall do the deed.

Exeunt Pisaro, Haruy, Walgraue, and Higham. Frisc. Hear you M. Mouse, did you
dine to day at Paul's with the rest of the Gentlemen there?


Antho. No sir, I am yet vndined.


Frisc. Me thinks you should have a reasonable good stomach then by this
time, as for me I can sell nothing within me from my mouth to my Cod-peece but
all Empty, wherefore I think a piece of wisdom to go in and see what
Maudelin has provided for our Dinner master Mouse will you go in?


Antho. With as good a stomach and desire as your self.


Frisc. Lett's pass in then

Exeunt Frisco, and Anthony. Vanda. Han seg you Dochtor, vor vat cause, voer
why bid also much grooterlie strange, Ic seg you wat, if datt ghy speak to
me, is datt ghy love me.


Lauren. Is It that I care not for you, is it that your breath stinckes, if that
your breath stinckes not, you must learn sweeter English or I shall never
understand your suite.


Delion. Pardone moy Madame.


Math. Withal my heart so you offend no more.


Delio. Is dat an offense to be amorous di one belle Gentleawoman.


Math. I sir see your Belle Gentlewoman cannot be amorous of you.


Mar. Then if I were as that belle Gentlewomans lover,
I would trouble her no further, nor be amorous any longer.

Aluar. Madona yet de Belleza of de face beutie deforme of all de Corpo may be
such datt no perriculo, nor all de mal shaunce, can make him leave her dulce
visage.


Laur. But signor Aluaro if the periculo or mal shaunce were such, that she
should love and live with an other, then the dulce visage must be left in
spite of the lovers teeth, whilst he may whine at his own ill fortune.


Vanda. Datts waer matresse, for it is untrue saying, dey wint he taught dey
verleift lie scrat sin gatt.


Math. And I think to are like to scratch there but never to claw any of my
Sisters love away.


Vand. Dan sal your sistree do against her vaders will, or your vader segt dat
ick sal heb har vor mine wife.


Laur. I think not so sir, for I never heard him say so* but I Will go in and
ask him if his meaning be so.


Mari. Hark sister signor Aluaro says, that I am the fairest of all us three,


Laur. Believe him not for heel tell any lie.
If so he thinks thou may be pleased thereby,
Come go with me and near stand pratinge here,
I have a jest to tell thee in thine ear,
Shall make you laugh: come let your signor stand,
I know there is not a Wench in all this Town,
Scoffs at him more, or loves him less then thou.
Master Vandalle, as much I say for you;
If needs you marry with an English Less,
Woe her in English, or she will call you Ass.

Math. Tut that is a French cogge; sure I think,
There Is nere a Wench in France not half so fond,
To woe and sue so for your Mounsership.

Delio. Par may foy Madame, she does tincke dare is no Wenche so dure as you:
for de Fillee was cree dulce, tender, and amarous for me to love her; now me
tincke dat I being such a fine man, you should loua me.


Mathe. So think not I, sir.


Delio. But so tincke esh oder Damosellas.


Mathe. Nay I Will lay my love to your command,
That my Sisters think not so: How say you sister Mall?
Why how now Gentlemen, is this your talk?
What beaten in plain field: where be your Maids?
Nay then I see their loving humor fades,
And they resign their intrest up to me;
And yet I cannot serve for all you three:
But least two should be madd, that I love one,
You shall be all alike, and I Will love none:
The world is scant, when so many Jack Dawes,
Houer about one Coarse with greedy paws:
If needs you will have me stay till I am dead,
Carrion for Crows, Mathea for her Ned:
And so farewell, we Sisters do agree,
To have our wills, but nere to have you three.

Exeunt. Delio. Madama attendez, Madama: is she all? do she mockque de nows
in such sort?


Vand. Oh de pestilence, noe if datick can neite dese Englese spreake vel, it
shall her Fader seg how dit is to pass gecomen.


Enter Pisaro. Aluar. Ne parlate, see here signors de Fader.


Pisa. Now Friends, now Gentlemen, how speedes your work; have you not found
them shrewd unhappy girls?


Vand. Mester Pisaro, de Dochter maistris Laurentia call me de Dyel, den Ass,
for that ic can neit englesh spreken.


Alua. Ande dat we sal no parler, dat we sal no hauar den for de wiue.


Pisa. Are they so lusty? Dare they be so proud?
Well, I shall find a time to meet with them:
In the mean season, pray frequent my house.
Enter Frisco running. Ho now sir, whither are you running?

Frisc. About a little tiny business.


Pisa. What business, Ass?


Frisc. Indeed I was not sent to you: and yet I was sent after the three
Gen-men that dined here, to bid them come to our house at ten a clock at
night, when you were abed.


Pisa. Ha, what is this? Can this be true?
What, art thou sure the Wenches bade them come?

Frisc. So they said, unless their minds be changed since: for a Woman is
like a Weather-cocke they say, and I am sure of no more then I am certain of:
but I Will go in and bid them send you word, whether they shall come or no.


Pisa. No sir, stay you here; but one word more: Did they appoint the^ come
one by one, or else al together?


Frisc. Altogether: Lord that such a young man as you should have no more wit:
why if they should come together, one could not make rome for them; but coming
one by one, they will stand there if there were twenty of them.


Pisa. How this news glads me, and reuiues my soul: How say you sirs, what
will you have a jest worth the telling; nay worth the acting: I have it
Gentlemen, I have it Friends.


Alua. Signor Pisaro, I prey de gratia watte maneire sal we have? wat will the
parler? wat bon do you know Signor Pisaro, dicheti noi signor Pisaro.


Pisa. Oh that youth so sweet, so soon should turn to age; were I as you,
why this were sport alone for me to do.

Hark ye, hark ye; here my man,
Says, that the Girls have sent for Master Heigham
And his two friends; I know they love them dear,
And therefore wish them late at night be here
To revel with them: Will you have a jest,
To work my will, and give your longings rest:
Why then M. Vandalle, and you two,
Shall soon at midnight come, as they should do,
And court the Wenches; and to be unknown,
And taken for the men, whom they alone
So much affect; each one shall change his name:
Master Vandalle, you shall take Heigham, and you
Young Haruie, and monsieur Delion Ned,
And under shadows be of substance sped:
How like you this device? how think you of it?

Delio. Oh de brave de galliarde devise: me sal come by de nite and contier
fair de Anglois Gentlehomes dictenous ainsi monsieur Pisaro.


Pisa. You are in the right sir.


Alua. And I sall name me de signor Haruy, end monsicur Delion sall be de
piculo signor Ned, end when madona Laurentia sall say, who be dare? mister
Vandalle sall say, Oh my sout Laid, hier be your love Mestro Heigham: Is no
dis de brauissime, master Vandalle?


Vanda. Slact up den tromele, van ick sall come
Up to de camerken, wan my new Wincken
Slact up den tromele, van ick sall come.

Pisa. Ha, ha, ha, master Vandalle,
I trow you will be merry soon at night,
When you shall do in deed, what now you hope of.

Vanda. I sall v seg vader, Ick sall tesh your Daughrer such a ting, make her
laugh too.


Pisa. Well my Sons all, (for so I count you shall)
What we have here devised, provide me for:
But above all, do not (I pray) forget
To come but one by one, as they did wish.

Vanda. Mar hortens vader, ick veite neite de wecke to your houis, hort ens
sall master Frisco your manneken come to call de me, and bring me to v house.


Pisa. Yes marry shall he: see that you be ready,
And at the hour of eleven sone at night:
Hie you to Bucklersburie to his Chamber,
And so direct him straight unto my house:
My Son Aluaro, and monsieur Delion,
I know, does know the way exceeding well:
Well, we will to the Rose in Barken for an hour:
And sir Frisco, see you prove no blabbe.

Exeunt Pisaro, Aluaro, Delion, and Vandalle. Frisc. Oh monstrous, who would
think my Master had so much wit in his old rotten budget: and yet yfayth he
is not much troubled with it neither. Why what wise man in a kingdom would
send me for the Dutchman? Does he think I Will not cosen him: Oh fine, I Will
have the brauest sport: Oh brave, I Will have the gallentest sport: Oh come; now
if I can hold behind, while I may laugh a while, I care not: Ha, ha, ha.


Enter Anthony. Antho. Why how now Frisco, why laughest thou so heartily?


Frisc. Laugh M. Mouse: Laugh, ha, ha, ha.


Antho Laugh, why should I laugh? or why art thou so merry?


Frisc. Oh master Mouse, master Mouse, it would make any Mouse, Ratte, Catte,
or Dog, laugh to think, what sport we shall have at our house sone at night:
I Will tell you, all, my young Mistresses sent me after M. Heigham and his
friends, to pray them come to our house after my old Master was a bed: Now I
went, and I went; and I run, and I went: and whom should I meet, but my
Master and M. Pisaro and the Strangers; so my Master very worshipfully (I
must needs say) examined me whither I went now? I durst not tell him an
untruth, for fear of lying, but told him plainly and honestly mine arrande:
Now who would think my Master had such a monstrous plaguie wit, he was as
glad as could be; out of all scotch and notch glad, out of all count glad? and
so firra he bid the three Vplandish-men come in their steades and woe my young
Mistresses: Now it made me so laugh to think how they will be cousend, that I
could not follow my Master: But I Will follow him, I know he is gone to the
Tavern in his merry humor: Now if you will keep this as secret as I have done
hitherto, we shall have the brauest sport soon, as can be. I must be gone,
say nothing.


Antho. Well it is so:
And we will have good sport, or it shall go hard;
This must the Wenches know, or all is marde.
Enter the three Sisters. Hark you Mis. Moll, Mis. Laurentia, Mis. Matt,
I have such news (my Girls) will make you smile.

Mari. What be they Master, how I long to hear it?


Antho. A Woman right, still longing, and with child,
For every thing they hear, or light upon:
Well* if you be mad Wenches, hear it now,
Now may your knaueries give the deadliest blow
To night-walkers, eauese-droppers, or outlandish love,
That ere was stristen.

Math. Anthony Mowche,
Move but the matter; tell us but the jest,
And if you find us slack to execute,
Never give credence, or believe us more.

Antho. Then know: The Strangers your Outlandish loves,
Appointed by your Father, comes this night
In stead of Haruie, Heigham, and young Ned,
Under their shadows to get to your bed:
For Frisco simply told him why he went:
I need not to instruct, you can conceive,
You are not Stocks nor Stones, but have some store
Of wit and knauerie too.

Mathe. Anthony, thanks
Is too too small a guerdon for this news;
You must be English: Well sir signor sowse,
I Will teach you tricks for coming to our house.

Laur. Are you so crafty, oh that night were come,
That I might hear my Dutchman how he would swear
In his own mother Language, that he loves me:
Well, if I quit him not, I here pray God,
I may lead Apes in Hell, and die a Maid;
And that were worser to me then a hanging.

Antho. Well said old honest huddles; here is a heap
Of merry Lasses: Well, for my self,
I Will hie me to your Lovers, bid them mask
With us at night, and in some corner stay
Near to our house, where they may make some play
Upon your riuals, and when they are gone,
Come to your windows.

Mari. Do so good Master.


Antho. Peace, begone; for this our sport,
Some body soon will moorne.

Exeunt. Enter Pisaro. Pisa. How favorable Heaven and Earth is seen,
To grace the mirthfull complot that is laid,
Nights Candles burn obscure, and the pale Moon
Favoring our drift, lies buried in a Cloud:
I can but smile to see the simple Girls,
Hoping to have their sweete-hearts here to night,
Tickled with extreme joy, laugh in my face:
But when they find, the Strangers in their steades,
They Will change their note, and sing an other song.
Where be these Girls here? what, to bed, to bed:
Mawdlin make fast the Doors, rake up the Fire;
Gods me, it is nine a clock, hark Bow-bell rings: Knock.
Some look down below, and see who knockes:
And hark you Girls, settle your hearts at rest,
And full resolve you, that to morrow morn,
You must be wedd to such as I prefer;
I mean Aluaro and his other friends:
Let me no more be troubled with your nayes.
You shall do what I Will have, and so resolve.
Enter Moore. Welcome M. Moore, welcome,
What wind a-gods name drives you forth so late?

Moore. Faith sir, I am come to trouble you,
My wife this present night is brought to bed.

Pisa. To bed, and what has God sent you?


Moor. A jolly Girl, sir.


Pisa. And God bless her: But what is your will sir?


Moor. Faith sir, my house being full of Friends,
Such as (I thank them) came to see my wife?
I would request you, that for this one night,
My daughter Susan might be lodged here.

Pisa. Lodge in my house, welcome withal my heart,
Matt hark you, she shall lie with you,
Trust me she could not come in fitter time.
For here you sir, to morrow in the morning.
All my three Daughters must be married,
Good master Moore lets have your company,
What say you sir; Welcome honest friend.

Enter a Servant. Moor. How now sir what is the news with you?


Pisa. Mowche hear you, stir betimes to morrow,
For then I mean your Scholars shall be wed:
What news, what news man that you look so sad,

Moor. He brings me word my wife is new fallen sick,
And that my daughter cannot come to night:
Or if she does, it will be very late.

Pisa, Believe me I am then more sorry for it.
But for your daughter come she soon or late,
Some of us will be up to let her in,
For here be three means not to sleep to night:
Well you must be gone? commend me to your wife,
Take heed how you go down, the stairs are bad,
Bring here a light.

Moor. It Is well I thank you sir.


Exit. Pisa. Good night master Moore farewell honest friend,
Come, come to bed, to bed it is nine and past,
Do not stand prating here to make me fetch you,
But get you to your Chambers. Exit Pisaro.

Antho. Birlady here is short work, hark you Girls,
Will you to morrow marry with the strangers.

Mall. Y faith sir no I Will first leap out at window,
Before Marina marry with a stranger,

Antho. Yes but your father swears, you shall have one.


Ma. Yes but his daughters, swears they shall have none,
These horeson Canniballs, these Philistines,
These tango mongoes shall not rule Ore me,
I Will have my will and Ned, or I Will have none.

Antho. How will you get him? how will you get him?
I know no other way except it be this,
That when your fathers in his soundest sleep,
You open the Door and run away with them,

All sisters. So we will rather then miss of them.


Antho. It Is well resolude yfayth and like your selves,
But hear you? to your Chambers presently,
Least that your father do discry our drift, Exeunt Sisters.
Mistres Susan should come but she cannot,
Nor perhaps shall not, yet perhaps she shall,
Might not a man conceit a pretty jest?
And make as mad a Riddle as this is,
If all things fadge not, as all things should do,
We shall be sped y'fayth, Matt shall have hue.

Enter Vandalle and Frisco. Vand. Wear be you mester Frisco.


Frisc. Here sir, here sir, now if I could cosen him, take heed sir hers a
post.


Vand. Ick be so groterly hot, datt ick swette, Oh wen sal we come dare.


Frisc. Be you so hot sir, let me carry your Cloak, I assure you it will
ease you much.


Vand. Dare here, dare, it is so Dark ey can neit see.


Frisc. I, so so: now you may travel in your Hose and Doublet: now look I as
like the Dutchman, as if I were spit out of his mouth: I Will straight home, and
speak groote and brood, and toot and gibrish; and in the dark I Will have a
fling at the Wenches. Well, I say no more; farewell M. Mendall, I must go
seek my fortune.


Exit Frisco. Vanda. Mester Frisco, mester Frisco, wat sal you no speak; make
you de Fool? Why mester Frisco; Oh de skellum, he be ga met de Cloak, me sal
seg his mester, han mester Frisco, waer sidy mester Frisco.


Exit Vandal. Enter Haruie, Heigham, and Walgraue* Haruy. Goes the case so well
signor bottle-nose*
It may be we shall ouerreach your drift;
This is the time the Wenches sent us word
Our bumbast Dutchman and his mates will come.
Well neat Italian, you must don my shape:
Play your part well, or I may haps pay you.
What, speechless Ned? faith whereon musest thou?
It Is on your French coriuall, for my life:
He come ete vostre, and so forth,
Till he has foysted in a Brat or two?
How then, how then?

Walg. Swounds I Will geld him first,
Ere that infestious loszell revel there.
Well Matt, I think thou know what Ned can do;
Should thou change Ned for Noddy, me for him,
Thou did not know thy loss, yfayth thou did not.

Heigh. Come leave this idle chatte, and lets provide
Which of us shall be scar-crow to these Fools,
And set them out the way?

Walg. Why that will I.


Haru. Then put a Sword into a mad-mans hand:
Thou art so hasty, that but cross thy humor,
And thou't be ready cross them ore the pates:
Therefore for this time, I Will supply the rome.

Heigh. And so we shall be sure of chatt enough;
You Will hold them with your sloutes and gulles so long,
That all the night will scarcely be enough
To put in practice, what we have deuisde:
Come, come, I Will be the man shall do the deed.

Haru. Well, I am content to save your longing.
But soft, where are we? Ha, here is the house,
Come let us take our stands: France stand you there,
And Ned and I will cross the other side.

Heigh. Do so: But hush, I hear one passing hither.


Enter Aluaro. Aluar. Oh de favorable aspect of de heaven, it is so obscure, so
dark, so black dat no mortalle creature can know de me: I pray a Dio I sal
have de reight Wench: Ah si I be recht, here be de huis of signor Pisaro, I
sall have de madona Marina, and daruor I sall knock to de door.

He knockes.
Heigh. What a pox are you mad or druncke;
What, do you mean to break my Glasses?

Alua. Wat be dat Glass? Wat druncke, wat mad?


Heigh. What Glasses sir; why my Glasses: and if you be so crancke, I Will call
the Constable; you will not enter into a man's house (I hope) in spite of him?


Haru. Nor durst you be so bold as to stand there,
If once the Master of the House did know it.

Alua. Is dit your House? be you de Signor of dis Cassa?


Heigh. Signor me no signors, nor cassa me no cassas: but get you hence, or you
are like to taste of the Bastinado.


Heigh. Do, do, good Ferdinand, pummell the logerhead.


Alua. Is this neit the House of mester Pisaro?


Heigh. Yes marry when? can you tell: how do you?
I thank you heartily, my finger in your mouth.

Alua. Wat be dat?


Heigh. Marry that you are an Ass and a Logerhead,
To seek master Pisaros house here.

Alua. I prey de gratia, wat be dis plashe?
Wat do ye call dit street?

Heigh. What sir; why Leaden Hall, could you not see the four Spoutes as you
came along?


Alua. Certenemento Leden hall, I hit my head by de way, dare may be de voer
Spouts: I prey de gratia, wish be de wey to Crochefriers?


Heigh. How, to Croched-friers? Marry you must go along till you come to the
Pumpe, and then turn on your right hand.


Alua. Signor, adio.


Exit Aluaro. Haru. Farewell and be hanged Signor:
Now for your fellow, if the Ass would come.

Enter Delion. Delio. By my trot me do so mush tincke of dit Gentlewoman de
fine Wenshe, dat me tincke esh houer ten day, and esh day ten year, till I
come to her: Here be de huise of sin vader, sall all and knock. He knocks.


Heigh. What a bots ayle you, are you madd?
Will you run over me and break my Glasses?

Delio. Glasses, wat Glasses? Prey is monsieur Pisaro to de mayson?


Haru. Hark Ned, there is thy substance

Walg. Nay by the Mass, the substaunce's here,
The shaddow's but an Ass.

Heigh. What Master Pisaro?
Logerhead, here is none of your Pisaros?

Delio. Yes but dit is the houis of mester Pisaro.


Walg. Will not this monsieur Motley take his answer?
I Will go and knock the ass about the pate.

Har. Nay by your leave sir, but I Will hold your worship.
This stir we should have had, had you stood there.

Walg. Why, would it not vex one to hear the ass,
Stand prating here of dit and dan, and den and dog?

Haru. One of thy mettle Ned, would surely do it:
But peace, and hark to the rest.

Delio. Do no de fine Gentlewoman matresse Mathea dwell in d^t Plashe?


Heigh. No sir, here dwells none of your fine Gantle-woman* Twere a good deed
sir, to see who you are;

You come hither to steal my Glasses.
And then counterfeite you are going to your Queanes.

Delio. I be deceu dis dark neight; here be no Wenshe, I be no in de right
plashe: I prey Monsieur, wat be name dis Street, and wish be de way to
Croshe-friers?


Heigh. Marry this is Fanchurch-streete,
And the best way to Crotched-friers, is to follow your nose

Delio. Vanshe, street, how shaunce me come to Vanshe street? vell monsieur,
me must all to Croche-friers.


Exit Delion. Walg. Farewell fortipence, go seek your Signor,
I hope you will find your selves two Dolts anon:
Hush Fredinand, I hear the last come stamping hither.

Enter Frisco. Frise. Ha sir, I have left my fat Dutchman, and run my
self almost out of breath too: now to my young mistresses go I, some body
cast an old shoe after me: but soft, how shall I do to counterfeite the
Dutchman, be cause I speak English so like a natural; Tush, take you no
thought for that, let me alone for Squintum squantum: soft, here is my Masters
house,


High. Whose there.


Frisc. Whose there, why sir here is: Nay that's too good English; Why here be
de growtte Dutchman.


Heigh. Then there is not only a growte head, but an Ass also.


Frisc. What be yoo, yoo be an English Ox to call a gentle moan Ass.


Haru. Hark Ned yonder is good greeting.


Frisc. But yoo, and yoo be Master Mouse that dwell here, tell your matressa
Laurentia datt her sweet heart Master Vandall would speak with horde,


Heigh. Master Mendall, get you gone, least you get a broken Pate and so
mar all: here is no entrance for misstres Laurentios sweet heart.


Frisc. Gods sacaren watt is the luck now.
Shall not I come to my friend master Pisar Hoose?

Heigh. Yes and to master Pisaros Shoes too, if he or they were here.


Frisc. Why my groute friend, M. Pisaro does dwell here.


Heigh. Sir, you lie, here dwells no body but I, that have dwelt here this
one and forty years, and sold Glasses.


Walg. Lie farther, one and fifty at the least.


Fris. Hoo, hoo, hoo; do you give the Gentleman the ly?


Haru. I sir, and will give you a lick of my Cudgel, if ye stay long and
trouble the whole street with your bawling: hence dolt, and go seek M.
Pisaros House.


Frisc. Go seek M. Pisaros House;
Where shall I go seek it?

Hegh. Why, you shall go seek it where it is.


Frisc. That is here in Crodched-friers.


Heigh. How Loger-head, is Croched-friers here?
I thought you were some such drunken Ass,
That come to seek Croched-friers in Tower-streete:
But get you along on your left hand, and be hanged;
You have kept me out of my Bed with your bangling,
A good while longer then I would have been.

Frisc. Ah, ah, How is this? Is not this Croched-friers? Tell me, I Will hold a
Crown they gave me so much Wine at the Tavern, that I am druncke, and know
not out.


Haru. My Dutchman's out his Compass and his Card;
He Is reckning what Wind has drove him hither:
I Will swear he thinks never to see Pisaros.

Frisc. Nay it is so, I am sure druncke: Soft let me see, what was I about? Oh
now I have it, I must go to my Masters house and counterfeite the Dutchman,
and get my young Mistress: well, and I must turn on my left hand, for I have
forgot the way quite and clean: Fare de well good friend, I am a simple
Dutchman I.


Exit Frisco. Heigh. Fair weather after you. And now my Laddes,
Have I not plide my part as I should do?

Haru. It Was well, it was well: But now let us cast about,
To set these Woodcocks farther from the House,
And afterward return unto our Girls.

Walg. Content, content; come, come make haste.


Exeunt. Enter Aluaro. Alua. I go and turn, and dan I come to dis plashe, I
can no tell watt, and sall do I can no tell watt, turn by the Pumpe; I pumpe
it fair.


Enter Delion. Delio. Me all, end all and can no come to Croche-friers.


Enter Frisco. Frisc. Oh miserable Blacke-pudding, if I can tell which is the
way to my Masters house, I am a Red-herring, and no honest Gentleman.


Alua. Who parlato daer?


Delio. Who be der? who all der?


Frisc. How Is this? For my life here are the Strangers: Oh that I had the
Dutchmans Hose, that I might creep into the Pockets; they will all three fall
upon me and beat me.


Alua. Who do der ander?


Delio. Amiss?


Frisc. Oh brave; it is no body but M. Pharoo and the Frenchman going to our
House, on my life: well, I Will have some sport with them, if the Watch hinder me
not. Who goes there?


Delio. Who parle der, in wat plashe, in wat streat be you?


Frisc. Why sir, I can tell where I am; I am in Tower-streete: Where a Devil
be you?


Delio. Io be here in Lede-hall.


Frisc. In Leaden Hall? I trow I shall meet with you anon: in Leaden Hall?
What a simple Ass is this Frenchman. Some more of this: Where are you sir?


Alua. Moy I be here in Vanshe-streete.


Frisc. This is excellent ynfayth, as fit as a Fiddle: I in Tower-streete, you
in Leaden Hall, and the third in Fanchurch-streete; and yet all three hear one
another, and all three speak together: either we must be all three in
Leaden Hall, or all three in Tower-streete, or all three in Fanchurch-streete;
or all three Fools.


Alua. Monsieur Gentle-home, can you well tesh de wey to Croshe-frier?


Frisc* How to Croched-friers? I, I sir, passing well if you will follow me.


Delio. I dat me sal monsier Gentle-home, and give you tanks.


Frisc. And monsiur Pharo, I shall lead you such a iaunt, that you shall scarce
give me thanks for. Come sirrs follow me: now for a durtie Puddle, the
pissing Condit, or a great Post, that might turn these two from Asses to Oxen
by knocking their Horns to their Foreheads.


Alua. Whaer be de now signor?


Frisc. Even where you will signor, for I know not:
Soft I smell: Oh pure Nose.

Delio. VVat do you smell?


Frisc. I have the scent of London-stone as full in my nose, as Abchurch-lane
of mother Walls Pasties: Sirrs feel about, I smell London-stone.


Alua. Wat be dis?


Frisc. Soft let me see; feel I should say, for I cannot see: Oh lads pray for
my life, for we are almost at Croched-friers.


Delio. Dats good: but watt be dis Post?


Frisc. This Post; why it is the May Pole on Iuie-bridge going to Westminster.


Delio. Ho Wesmistere, how come we tol Wesmistere?


Frisc. Why on your Legs fools, how should you go? Soft, here is an other:
Oh now I know in deed where I am; we are now at the fardest end of Shoredich,
for this is the May Pole.


Delo. Sordiche; O dio, dear be some nautie tinge, some Spirit do lead us.


Frisc. You say true sir, for I am afeard your French spirt is up so far
already, that you brought me this way, because you would find a Charm for it
at the Blew Bore in the Spittle: But soft, who comes here?


Enter a Belman. Bell. Maids in your Smocks, look well to your Locks, Your Fire
and your Light; and God give you good night.


Delia. Monsieur Gentle-home, I prey parle one, too, tree, fore, words vore us
to dis oull man.


Frisc. Yes marry shall I sir. I pray honest Fellow, in what Street be we?


Bell. Ho Frisco, whither friske you at this time of night?


Delio. What, Monsieur Frisco?


Alua. Signor Frisco?


Frisc. The same, the same: Hark ye honesty, me thinks you might do well
to have an M. under your Girdle, considering how Signor Pifaro, and this other
Monsieur do hold of me.


Bell. Oh sir, I cry you mercy; pardon this fault, and I Will do as much for you
the next time.


Fris. Well, passing over superfluicall talk, I pray what Street is this; for
it is so dark, I know not where I am?


Bell. Why art thou druncke, Do thou not know Fanchurch-streete?


Frisc. I sir, a good Fellow may sometimes be ouerseene among Friends; I was
drinking with my Master and these Gentlemen, and therefore no marvel though
I be none of the wisest at this present: But I pray thee Goodman Buttericke,
bring me to my Masters House.


Bell. Why I will, I will, push that you are so strange now adays: but it is an
old said saw, Honors change Manners.


Frisc. Good Man Buttericke will you walk before:
Come honest Friends, will ye go to our House?

Delio. Ouy monsieur Frisco.


Alua. Si signor Frisco.


Enter Vandalle. Vand. Oh de skellam Frisco, ic weit neit waer dat ic be, ic
go and hit my nose op dit post, and ic go and hit my nose op danden post; Oh
de villain: Well, waer ben ic now? Haw laet syen is dut neit croshe vrier, ya
seker so is it and dit M. Pisaros huis: Oh de good shaunce, well ic sall now have
de Wenshe Laurentia, mestris Laurentia.


Enter Laurentia, Marina, Mathea, above. Mari. Who Is there, Master Haruie?


Math. Master Walgraue?


Laur. Master Heigham?


Vand. Ya my Louue, here be mester Heigham your groot frinde.


Mari. How, Master Heigham my grot vrinde?
Out alas, here is one of the Strangers.

Lauren. Peace you Mammet, let us see which it is; we may chance teach him a
strange trick for his learning: M. Heigham, what wind drives you to our house
so late?


Vand. Oh my leif Mesken, de love tol v be so groot, dat het bring me out my
bed voor you.


Math. Ha, ha, we know the Ass by his ears; it is the Dutchman: what shall we
do with him?


Laure. Peace, let him not know, that you are here: M. Heigham, if you will
stay awhile that I may se, if my Father be a sleep, and I Will make means we may
come together


Vand. Dat sal ick my Loua. Is dit no well counterfett I speak so like mester
Heigham as it is possible.


Laure. Well, what shall we do with this Lubber? (Lover I should say.)


Math. What shall we do with him?
Why crown him with a --

Mart. Fie Slutt: No, well use him clenlier; you know we have never a Sign at
the door, would not the jest prove current, to make the Dutchman supply that
want.


Laure. Nay, the fool will cry out, and so wake my father.


Mat. Why, then well cut the Rope and cast him down.


Laur. And so jest out a hanging; let us rather draw him up in the Basket, and
so starve him to death this frosty night.


Mari. In sadness, well aduisde: Sister, do you hold him in talk, and we will
provide it whilst.


Laur. Go to then. M. Heigham, oh sweet M Higham, does my Father think that
his unkindness can part you and poor Laurentia? No, no, I have found a drift to
bring you to my Chamber, if you have but the heart to venture it.


Vand. Ventre, salick go to de see, and be de see, and ore de see and in de
see voer my sweet Louue.


Laur. Then you dare go into a Basket; for I know no other means to enjoy
your company, then so: for my Father has the Keys of the Door.


Vand. Salick climb up tot you? sal ick fly up tot you? salick, wat segdy?


Math. Bid him do it Sister, we shall see his cunning.


Laur. Oh no, so you may catch a fall. There M. Heigham, Put your self into
that Basket, and I will draw you up: But no words I pray you, for fear my
Sister hear you.


Vand. No, no; no word: Oh de seete Wenshe, Ick come, Ick come.


Laur. Are you ready master Heigham?


Vand. Ia ick my sout Lady.


Mari. Merrily then my Wenches.


Laur How heavy the Ass is: Master Heigham, is there any in the Basket but
your self?


Vand. Neit, neit, dare be no man.


Laur. Are you up sir?


Vand. Neit, neit.


Mari Nor never are you like to climb more higher: Sisters, the Woodcock's
caught, the Fool is cag'd.


Vand. My sout Lady I be nuc neit up, pull me totv.


Math. When can you tell; what master Vandalle,
A wether beaten soldier an old wencher,
Thus to be over reached by three young Girls:
Ah sir now we will brag with Mistres Moore,
To have as fine a Parret as she has,
Look sisters what a pretty fool it is:
What a green greasy shyning Coat he has,
An Almonde for Parret, a Rope for Parret.

Vand. Do you moc que me seger seger,
I sal seg your vader.

Laur. Do and you dare, you see here is your fortune,
Disquiet not my father; if you do,
I Will send you with a vengeance to the ground,
Well we must confess we trouble you,
And over watching makes a wiseman mad,
Much more a fool, there is a Cusshon for you.

Mar. To bore you through the nose.


Laur. To lay your head on.
Couch in your Kennell sleep and fall to rest,
And so good night for London maids skorne still,
A Dutchman should be seen to curb their will.

Vand. Hort ye Daughter, hort ye* gods se ker kin? will ye no let me come tot
you? ick bid you let me come tot you watt sal ick don, ick would neit vor un
hundred pound Aluaro and Delion, should see me open dit manner, well wat sal ick
don, ick mout neit call: vor de Wenshes will cut de rope and break my neck; ick
sal here bleauen til de morning, and dan ick sal call to mester Pisaro, and make
him shafe and shite his dauctors: Oh de skellum Frisco, Oh des cruel Hores.


Enter Pisaro. Pisa. I Will put the Light out, least I be espied,
For closely I have stolen me forth a doares,
That I might know, how my three Sons have sped.
Now (before God) my heart is passing light,
That I have ouerreach'd the Englishmen:
Ha, ha, Master Vandalle, many such nights
Will swage your bigg swollen bulk, and make it lancke:
When I was young; yet though my Hairs be gray,
I have a Young man's spirit to the death,
And can as nimbly trip it with a Girl,
As those which fold the springtide in their Beards:
Lord how the very thought of former times,
Supples these near dried limbs with actiuenesse:
Well, thoughts are shadows, sooner lost then seen,
Now to my Daughters, and their merry night,
I hope Aluaro and his company,
Have read to them morrall Philosophy,
And they are full with it: Here I Will stay,
And tarry till my gallant youths come forth.

Enter Haruie, Walgraue, and Heigham. Heigh. You madman, wild-oats, mad-cap,
where art thou?


Walg. Here before.


Haru. Oh ware what love is? Ned has found the scent;
And if the Connie chance to miss her Borough,
She Is ouer-borne y faith, she cannot stand it.

Pisa. I know that voice, or I am much deceived.


Heigh. Come, why loyter we? this is the Door:
But soft, here is one asleep.

Walg. Come, let me feel:
Oh it is some Rogue or other; spurn him, spurn him.

Haru. Be not so wilful, prithee let him lie.


Heigh. Come back, come back, for we are past the house
Yonder Is Matheas Chamber with the light.

Pisa. Well fare a head, or I had been discride.
Gods me, what make the Youngsters here so late?
I am a Rouge, and spurn him: well Jack sauce,
The Rogue is waking yet, to mar your sport.

Walg. Matt, Mistress Mathea; where be these Girls?


Enter Mathea alone. Math. Who's there below?


Walg. Thy Ned, kind Ned, thine honest trusty Ned.


Math. No, no, it is the Frenchman in his stead,
That Mounsieur motlicoate that can dissemble:
Hear you Frenchman, pack to your Whores in France;
Though I am Portingale by the Fathers side,
And therefore should be lustful, wanton, light;
Yet goodman Goosecap, I will let you know,
That I have so much English by the Mother,
That no bace slauering French shall make me stoop:
And so, sir Dan-delion fare you well.

Walg. What speachlesse, not a word: why how now Ned?


Har. The Wench has taken him down,
He hanges his head.

Walg. You Dan-de-lion, you that talk so well:
Hark you a word or two good Mistress Matt,
Did you appoint your Friends to meet you here,
And being come, tell us of Whores in France,
A Spanish lennet, and an English Mare,
A Mongrill, half a Dog and half a Bitch;
With Tran-dido, Dil-dido, and I know not what?
Hear you, if you will run away with Ned,
And be content to take me as you find me,
Why so law, I am yours: if otherwise,
You Will change your Ned, to be a Frenchmans Trull?
Why then, Madame Delion, Ie vous lassera a Di^, et la bon fortune.

Math. That voice assures me, that it is my Love:
Say truly, Art thou my Ned? art thou my Love?

Walg. Swounds who should I be but Ned?
You make me swear.

Enter above Marina. Mari. Who speak you to? Mathea who is below?


Haru. Marina.


Mari. Young master Haruy? for that voice says so.


Enter Laurentia. Alua. Speak sister Matt, is not my true Love there?


Math. Ned is.


Laur. Not master Heigham?


Heigh. Laurentia, here.


Laur. Yfayth you are welcome.


Heigh. Better cannot Fall.


Math. Sweet, so art thou.


Mari. As much to mine.


Laur. Nay Gentles, welcome all.


Pisa. Here Is cunning harlotries, they feed these off
With welcome, and kind words, whilst other Lads.
Revel in that delight they should possess:
Good Girls, I promise you I like you well.

Mari. Say master Haruy, saw you, as you came,
That Leacher, which my Sire appoynts my man;
I mean that wanton base Italian,
That Spannish-leather spruce companion:
That anticke Ape trickt up in fashion?
Had the Ass come, I Would learn him, difference been
Betwixt an English Gentleman and him.

Heigh. How would you use him. (sweet).
If he should come?

Mari. Nay nothing (sweet) but only wash his crown:
Why the Ass wooes in such an amorous key,
That he presumes no Wench should say him nay:
He slauers not his Fingers, wipes his Bill,
And swears in faith you shall, in faith I will;
That I am almost madd to bide his wocing.

Heigh. Look what he said in word, I Will act in doing.


Walg. Leave thought of him, for day steals on apace,
And to our Loves: Will you perform your words;
All things are ready, and the Parson stands,
'To join as hearts in hearts, our hands in hands,
Night favors us, the thing is quickly done,
Then trusse up bagg and Bagages, and be gone:
And ere the morninge, to augment your joys,
We Will make you mothers of six goodly Boys.

Heigh. Promise them three good Ned, and say no more.


Walg. But I Will get three, and if I get not four.


Pisa. There Is a sound Card at Maw, a lusty lad,
Your father thought him well, when one he had,

Heigh. What say you sweetes, will you perform your words?


Matt. Love to true love, no lesser meede affordes?
We say we love you, and that loves fair breath
Shall lead us with you round about the Earth:
And that our loves, vows, words, may all prove true,
Prepare your Arms, for thus we fly to you. they Embrace.

Walg. This works like wax, now ere to morrow day,
If you two ply it but as well as I,
We Will work our lands out of Pisaros Daughters:
And cansell all our bonds in their great Bellies,
When the slave knows it, how the Roge will curse.

Matt. Sweet heart.


Walg. Matt.


Mathe. Where art thou.


Pisa. Here.


Mathe. Oh Jesus here is our father.


Walg. The Devil he is.


Haru Master Pisaro, twenty times God morrow*


Pisa, Good morrow? now I tell you Gentlem^n,
You wrong and move my patience overmuch,
What will you Rob me, Kill me, Cut my Throat:
And set mine own blood here against me too,
You huswifes? Baggages? or what is worse,
Wilful, stoubborne, disobedient:
Use it not Gentlemen, abuse me not,
Newgate has rome, there is law enough in England,

Heigh. Be not so testie, hear what we can say.


Pisa. Will you be wiu'de? first learn to keep a wife,
Learn to be thriftie, learn to keep your Lands,
And learn to pay your debts to, I advise, else.

Walg. What else, what Lands, what Debts, what will you do?
Have you not Land in Morgage for your money,
Nay since it is so, we owe you not a Penny,
Frette not, Fume not, never bend the Browe:
You take Tenn in the hundred more then Law,
We can complain, extortion, simony,
Newgate has Rome, there is Law enough in England.

Heigh. Prithee have done.


Walg. Prethy me no Prethies.
Here is my wife, God's Blood touch her, if thou dare,
Hearst thou, I Will lie with her before thy face,
Against the Cross in Cheap, here, any where.
What you old crafty Fox you.

Heigh. Ned, stop there.


Pisa. Nay, nay speak out, bear witness Gentlemen,
Whers Mowche, charge my Musket, bring me my Bill,
For here are some that mean to Rob thy master.
Enter Anthony. I am a Fox with you, well Jack sauce,
Beware least for a Goose, I pray on you.
Exeunt Pisaro and Daughters. In baggages, Mowche make fast the door.

Walg. A vengeance on ill luck,

Antho. What never storm,
But bridle anger with wise government.

Heigh. Whom? Anthony our friend, Ah now our hopes,
Are found too light to balance our ill happes.

Antho. Tut nere say so, for Anthony
Is not deuoyde of means to help his Friends.

Walg. Swounds, what a devil made he forth so late
I Will lay my life it was he that fainde to sleep,
And we all vnsuspitious, tearmde a Roage:
Oh God, had I but known him; if I had,
I would have writ such Letters with my Sword
Upon the bald skin of his parching pate,
That he should nere have liude to cross us more.

Antho. These menaces are vain, and helps naught:
But I have in the deapth of my conceit
Found out a more material stratagem:
Hark Master Walgraue, yours craves quick dispatch,
About it straight, stay not to say farewell. Exit Walgraue.
You Master Heigham, hie you to your Chamber,
And stir not forth, my shadow, or my self,
Will in the morning early visit you;
Build on my promise sir, and good night. Exit Heigham.
Last, yet as great in love, as to the first:
If you remember, once I told a jest,
How feigning to be sick, a Friend of mine
Possessed the happy issue of his Love:
That counterfeited humor must you play;
I need not to instruct, you can conceive,
Use master Brown your Host, as chief in this:
But first, to make the matter seem more true,
Sickly and sadly bid the churl good night;
I hear him at the Window, there he is.
Enter Pisaro above. Now for a trick to ouerreach the Devil.
I tell you sir, you wrong my master much,
And then to make amends, you give hard words:
H'ath been a friend to you; nay more, a Father:
I promise you, it is most ungently done.

Pisa. I, well said Mouche, now I see thy love,
And thou shall see mine, one day if I live.
None but my Daughters sir, hanges for your tooth:
I Would rather see them hanged first, ere you get them.

Haru. Master Pisaro, hear a dead man speak,
Who singes the woeful accents of his end.
I do confess I love; then let not love
Prove the sad engine of my lives remove:
Marinaes rich Possession was my bliss?
Then in her loss, all joy eclipsed is:
As every Plant takes virtue of the Sun;
So from her Eyes, this life and being sprung:
But now debard of those clear shyning Rays,
Death for Earth gapes, and Earth to Death obeyes:
Each word thou spakst, (oh speak not so again)
Bore Deaths true image on the Word engraven;
Which as it flue mixed with Heavens ayerie breath,
Summond the dreadful Sessions of my death:
I leave thee to thy wish, and may the event
Prove equal to thy hope and hearts content.
Marina to that hap, that happiest is;
My Body to the Grave, my Soul to bliss.
Have I done well?

Exit Haruie. Antho. Excellent well in troth.


Pisar. I, go; I, go: your words move me as much,
As does a Stone being cast against the air.
But soft, What Light is that? What Folks be those? Oh it is Aluaro and his
other Friends, I Will down and let them in.


Exit. Enter Belman, Frisco, Vandalle, Delion, and Aluaro. Frisc. Where are we
now gaffer Buttericke?


Bell. Why know you not Croched-friers, where be your wits?


Aluar. Wat be it is Crosh-viers? vidite padre dare; tacke you dat, me fall troble
you no far.


Bell. I thank you Gentlemen, good night:
Good night Frisco.

Exit Belman. Frisc. Farewell Buttericke, what a Clown it is:
Come on my masters merrily, I Will knock at the door.

Antho. Who Is theere, our three wise Woers,
Blockhead our man? had he not been,
They might have hanged them selves,
For any Wenches they had hit upon:
Good morrow, or good den, I know not whether.

Delio. Monsieur de Mowche, wat macke you out de Houis so late?


Enter Pisaro below. Pisa. What, what, young men and sluggards fie for shame
You trifle time at home about vain toys,
Whilst others in the mean time, steal your Brides:
I tell you sir, the English Gentlemen
Had wel-ny mated you, and me, and all;
The Doors were open, and the Girls abroad,
Their Sweet-hearts ready to receive them to:
And gone forsooth they had been, had not I
(I think by revelation) stopped their flight:
But I have coopt them up, and so will keep them.
But sir Frisco, where is the man I sent for?
Whose Cloak have you got there?
How now, where is Vandalle?

Frisc. For-sooth he is not here:
Master Mendall you mean, do you not?

Pisar. Why logerhead, him I sent for, where is he?
Where have thou been? How have thou spent thy time?
Did I not send thee to my Son Vandalle?

Frisc. I M. Mendall; why forsooth I was at his Chamber, and we were coming
hitherward, and he was very hot, and bade me carry his Cloak; and I no sooner
had it, but he (being very light) sirkes me down on the left hand, and I turned
down on the left hand, and so lost him.


Pisa. Why then you turned together, Ass.


Frisc. No sir, we never saw one another since.


Pisa. Why, turned you not both on the left hand?


Frisc. No for-sooth we turned both on the left hand.


Pisa. Hoyda, why yet you went both together.


Fris. Ah no, we went clean contrary one from another.


Pisa. Why Dolt, why Patch, why Ass,
On which hand turned ye?

Frisc. Alas, alas, I cannot tell for-sooth, it was so dark I could not see,
on which hand we turned: But I am sure we turned one way.


Pisa. Was ever creature plagud with such a Dolt?
My Son Vandalle now has lost himself,
And shall all night go straying bout the Town;
Or meet with some strange Watch that knows him not;
And all by such an arrant Ass as this.

Anth. No, no, you may soon smell the Dutchmans lodging: Now for a Figure: Out
alas, what is yonder?


Pisa. Where?


Fris. Hoyda, hoyda, a Basket: it turns, hoe.


Pisa. Peace ye Villain, and let us see who is there? Go look about the House;
where are our weapons? What might this mean?


Frisc. Look, look, look; there is one in it, he peeps out: Is there nere a
Stone here to hurl at his Nose.


Pisa. What, would thou break my VVindowes with a Stone? How now, who is
there, who are you sir?


Frisc. Look, he peepes out again: Oh it is M. Mendall, it is M. Mendall: how
got he up thither?


Pisa. What, my Son Vandalle, how comes this to pass?


Alua. Signor Vandalle, wat do yo go to de wenshe in de Basket?


Vand. Oh Vadere, Vadere, here be sush cruel Dochterkens, ick ben also weary,
also weary, also cold; for be in dit little Basket: lo prey help dene.


Frisc. He looks like the sign of the Mouth without Bishops gate, gaping, and
a great Face, and a great Head, and no Body.


Pisa. Why how now Son, what have your Adamants
Drawn you up so far, and there left you hanging
Twixt Heaven and Earth like Mahomets Sepulcher?

Antho. They did unkindly, who so ere they were,
That plagued him here, like Tantalus in Hell,
To touch his Lips like the desired Fruit,
And then to snatch it from his gaping Chappes.

Alua. A little farther signor Vandalle, and dan you may put v head into de windo
and cash de Wensh.


Vand. Ick prey Vader dat you help de me, Ick prey Goddie Vader.


Pisa. Help you, but how?


Frisc. Cut the Rope.


Antho. Sir, I Will go in and see,
And if I can, I Will let him down to you.

Exit Anthony. Pisa. Do gentle Mouche: Why but here is a jest;
They say, high climers have the greatest falls:
If you should fall; as how you will do I know not,
Birlady I should doubt me of my Son:
Pray to the Rope to hold: Art thou there Mouche?

Enter Anthony above. Antho. Yes sir, now you may choose, whether you will stay
till I let him down, or whether I shall cut him down?


Frisc. Cut him down master Mowse, cut him down And let us see, how hele
tumble.


Pisa. Why sauce, who asked your counsel?
Let him down.
What, with a Cusshion too? why you provided
To lead your life as did Diogines;
And for a Tubb, to creep into a Basket.

Vanda. Ick sall seg v Vader, Ick quame here to your Huise and spreake tol de
Dochterken.


Frisc. M. Mendall, you are welcome out of the Basket: I smell a Ratt it was
not for nothing, that you lost me.


Vand. Oh skellum, you run away from me.


Pisa. I thought so sir, you gave him the flip.


Frisc. Faw, no for-sooth; I Will tell you how it was: when we come from
Bucklers-Burie into Corn-Wale, and I had taken the Cloak, then you should have
turned down on your left hand and so have gone right forward, and so turned up
again, and so have crossed the streate; and you like an Ass.


Pisa. Why how now Rascal; is your manners such?
You ass, you Dolt, why led you him through Cornhill,
Your way had been to come through Canning street.

Frisc. Why so I did sir.


Pisa. Why thou see ye were in Cornhill.


Fris. Indeed sir there was three faults, the Night was dark, Master Mendall
drunk, and I sleepy, that we could not tell very well, which way we went.


Pisa. Sir I owe for this a Cudgelling:
But Gentlemen, since things have faulne out so,
And for I see Vandalle quakes for cold,
This night accept your Lodginges in my house,
And in the morning forward with your marriage,
Come on my sons, sir fetch up more wood.

Exeunt. Enter the three Sisters. Laur. Nay never weep Marina for the matter,
Tears are but signs of sorrow, helping not.

Mari. Would it not mad one to be crossed as I,
Being in the very hight of my desire?
The strangers frustrate all: our true love's come,
Nay more, even at the door, and Haruies arms
Spread as a Rayne-bow ready to receive me,
And then my Father meet us: Oh God, oh God.

Math. Weep who that list for me, y faith not I,
Though I am youngest yet my stomack's great:
Nor it is not father, friends, nor any one,
Shall make me wed the man I cannot love:
I Will have my will ynfayth, y'fayth I will.

Laur. Let us determine Sisters what to do,
My father means to wed us in the morning,
And therefore something must be thought upon.

Mari. We Will to our father and so know his mind,
I and his reason too, we are no fools,
Or Babes neither, to be fed with words.

Laur. Agreede, agreede: but who shall speak for all?


Math. I will.


Mari. No I.


Laur. Thou will not speak for crying.


Mari. Yes* yes I warrant you, that humors left,
Be I but mou'de a little, I shall speak,
And anger him I fear, ere I have done.

Enter Anthony. All. Whom Anthony our friend, our Schoole-maister?
Now help us Gentle Anthony, or never.

Antho. What is your hasty running changed to prayer,
Say, where were you going?

Laur. Even to our father,
To know what he intendes to do with us.

Antho. It Is bootlesse trust me, for he is resolved
To marry you to.

Mari. The Strangers.


Antho. Y faith he is.


Math. Y faith he shall not.
Frenchman, be sure we will pluck a Crow together,
Before you force me give my hand at Church.

Mari. Come to our Father speech this comfort finds,
That we may scould out grief, and ease our minds.

Anth. Stay, Stay Marina, and advise you better,
It is not Force, but Policy must serve:
The Doors are locked, your Father keeps the Keye,
Wherefore impossible to escape away:
Yet have I plotted, and devised a drift,
To frustrate your intended marriages,
And give you full possession of your joys:
Laurentia, ere the mornings light appear,
You must play Anthony in my disguise.

Math. Anthony, what of us? What shall we wear?


Mari. Anthony, what of us? What shall we wear?


Anth. Soft, soft, you are too forward Girls, I swear,
For you some other drift deuisd must be?
One shadow for a substance: this is she.
Nay weep not sweetes, repose upon my care,
For all alike, or good or bad shall share:
You will have Haruie, you Heigham, and you Ned;
You shall have all your wish, or be I dead:
For sooner may one day the Sea lie still,
Then once restrain a Woman of her will.

All. Sweet Anthony, how shall we quit thy hire?


Anth. Not gifts, but your contentments I desire:
To help my Countrymen I cast about,
For Strangers loves blase fresh, but soon burn out:
Sweet rest dwell here, and frightfull fear obiure,
These eyes shall wake to make your rest secure:
For ere again dull night the dull eyes charms,
Each one shall fould her Husband in her arms:
Which if it chance, we may avouch it still,
Women and Maids will always have their will.

Exeunt. Enter Pisaro and Frisco. Pisa. Are Wood and Coals brought up to make
a fire?
Is the Meat spitted ready to lie down:
For Bakemeates I Will have none, the world's too hard:
There Is Geese too, now I remember me;
Bid Mawdlin lay the Giblets in Past,
Here Is nothing thought upon, but what I do.
Stay Frisco, see who ringes: look to the Door,
Let none come in I charge, were he my Father,
I Will keep them whilst I have them: Frisco, who is it?

Frisc. She is come ynfayth.


Pisa. Who is come?


Frisc. Mistress Sushaunce, Mistress Moors daughter.


Pisa. Mistress Susan, Ass? Oh she must come in.


Frisc. Hang him, if he keep out a Wench:
If the Wench keep not out him, so it is.

Enter Walgraue in Woman's attire. Pisa. Welcome Mistress Susan, welcome;
I little thought you would have come to night;
But welcome (trust me) are you to my house:
What, does your Mother mende? does she recover?
I promise you I am sorry for her sickness.

Walg. She Is better then she was, I thank God for it,

Pisa. Now before God she is a sweet smugge Girl,
One might do good on her; the flesh is frail,
Man has infirmity, and such a Bride,
Were able to change Age to hot desire:
Hark you Sweetheart,
To morrow are my Daughters to be wedde,
I pray you take the pains to go with them.

Walg. If sir you will give me leave, I Will weight on them.


Pisa. Yes marry shall you, and a thousand thanks,
Such company as you my Daughters want,
Maids must grace Maids, when they are married:
Is It not a merry life (thinks thou) to wed,
For to embrace, and be embraced abed.

Walg. I know not what you mean sir.
Here Is an old Ferret Pol-cat.

Pisa. You may do, if you will follow mine advice;
I tell thee Mouse, I knew a Wench as nice:
Well, she is at rest poor soul, I mean my Wife,
That thought (alas good heart) Love was a toy,
Until (well, that time is gone and past away)
But why speak I of this: Hark ye Sweeting,
There Is more in Wedlock, then the name can show;
And now (birlady) you are ripe in years:
And yet take heed Wench, there lies a Pad in Straw;

Walg. Old Fornicator, had I my Dagger,
I Would break his Costard.

Pisa. Young men are slippery, fickle, wavering;
Constant abiding graceth none but Age:
Then Maids should now wax wise, and do so,
As to choose constant men, let fickle go,
Youth's unregarded, and vnhonoured:
An ancient Man does make a Maid a Matron:
And is not that an Honor, how say you? how say you?

Walg. Yes forsooth.
(Oh old lust will you never let me go.)

Pisa. You say right well, and do but think thereon,
How Husbands, honored years, long card-for wealth,
Wise stayednesse, Experient government,
Does grace the Maid, that thus is made a Wise,
And you will wish your self such, on my life.

Walg. I think I must turn womankind altogether,
And scratch out his eyes:
For as long as he can see me, hele nere let me go.

Pisa. But go (sweetheart) to bed, I do thee wrong,
The latenesse now, makes all our talk seem long.
Enter Anthony. How now Mowche, be the Girls abed?

Anth. Mathea (and it like you) feign would sleep, but only tarrieth for her
bedfellow.


Pisa. Ha, you say well: come, light her to her Chamber,
Good rest wish I to thee; wish so to me,
Then Susan and Pisaro shall agree:
Think but what joy is near your bedfellow,
Such may be yours; take counsel of your Pillow:
To morrow we will talk more; and so good night,
Think what is said, may be, if all hit right.

Walg. What, have I past the Pikes: knows he not Ned?
I think I have deserved his Daughters bed.

Anth. It Is well, it is well: but this let me request,
You keep unknown, till you be laid to rest:
And then a good hand speed you.

Walg. Tut, nere fear me,
We two abed shall never disagree.

Exeunt Antho. and Walg. Frisc. I have stood still all this while, and could
not speak for laughing: Lord what a Dialogue has there bin between Age and
Youth. You do good on her? even as much as my Dutchman will do on my young
Mistress: Master, follow my counsel; then send for M. Heigham to help him,
for I Will lay my Cappe to two Pence, that he will be asleep to morrow at night,
when he should go to bed to her: Marry for the Italian, he is of an other
humor, for there le be no dealings with him, till midnight; for he must slauer
all the Wenches in the house at parting, or he is no body: he has been but a
little while at our House, yet in that small time, he has lickt more Grease
from our Mawdlins lips, then would have served London Kitchin-stuffe this
tweluemonth. Yet for my money, well fare the Frenchman, Oh he is a forward
Lad, for heel no sooner come from the Church, but heel fly to the Chamber;
why heel read his Lesson so often in the day time, that at night like an apt
Scholar, heel be ready to sell his old Book to buy him a new. Oh the
generation of Languages that our House will bring forth: why every Bed will
have a propper speech to himself, and have the Founders name written upon it
in fair Cappitall letters, Here lay, and so forth.


Pisa. You Will be a villain still: Look who is at door?


Frisc. Nay by the Mass, you are M. Porter, for I Will be hanged if you loose
that office, having so pretty a morsel under your keeping: I go (old huddle)
for the best Nose at smelling out a Pin-fold, that I know: well, take heed,
you may happes pick up Worms so long, that at length some of them get into
your Nose, and never out after: But what an Ass am I to think so, considering
all the Lodginges are taken up already, and there is not a Dog-kennell empty for
a strange Worm to breed in.


Enter Anthony. Antho. The day is broke; Mathea and young Ned,
By this time, are so surely linckt together,
That none in London can forbid the Banes.
Laurentia she is near provided for:
So that if Haruies policy but hold,
Elce-wheare the Strangers may go seek them Wives:
But here they come.

Enter Pisaro and Brown. Pisa. Six a clock say you; trust me, forward days:
Hark you Mowche, hic you to Church,
Bid M Bewford be in readiness:
Where go you, that way?

Anth. For my Cloak, sir.


Pisa. Oh it is well: and M. Brown,
Trust me, your early stirring makes me muse,
Is it to me your business?

Brown. Even to your self:
I come (I think) to bring you welcome news,

Pisa. And welcome news,
More welcome makes the bringer:
Speak, speak, good M. Brown, I long to hear them.

Brow. Then this it is. Young Haruie late last night,
Full weak and sickly came unto his lodging,
From whence this sudden mallady proceeds:
It Is all uncertain, the Doctors and his Friends
Affirm his health is unrecoverable:
Young Heigham and Ned Walgraue lately left him,
And I came hither to inform you of it.

Pisa. Young M. Haruie sick; now before God
The news bites near the Bone: for should he die,
His Living morgaged would be redeemed,
For not these three months does the Bond bear date:
Die now, marry God in heaven defend it;
Oh my sweet Lands, loose thee, nay loose my life:
And which is worst, I dare not ask mine own,
For I take two and twenty in the hundred,
When the Law gives but ten: But should he live,
He careless would have left the debt unpaid,
Then had the Lands been mine Pisaros own,
Mine, mine own Land, mine own Possession.

Brow. Nay hear me out.


Pisa. You Are out too much already,
Unless you give him life, and me his Land.

Brow. Whether it is love to you, or to your Daughter,
I know not certain; but the Gentleman
Has made a deed of gift of all his Lands,
Unto your beauteous Daughter fair Marina.

Pesa. Ha, say that word again, say it again,
A good thing cannot be too often spoken:
Marina say you, are you sure it was she,
Or Mary, Margery; or some other Maid?

Brow. To none but your Daughter fair Marina*
And for the gift might be more forcible,
Your neighbor master Moore advised us,
(Who is a witness of young Haruies Will)
Sick as he is, to bring him to your house:
I know they are not far, but do attend,
That they may know, what welcome they shall have.

Pisa. What welcome sir; as welcome as new life
Given to the poor condemned Prisoner:
Return (good master Brown) assure their welcome,
Say it, nay swear it; for they are welcome truly:
For welcome are they to me which bring Gold.
See down who knockes; it may be there they are:
Frisco, call down my Sons, bid the Girls rise:
Where Is Mowche; what, is he gone or no?
Enter Laurentia in Anthonies attire. Oh hear you siera, bring along with you
Master Balsaro the Spanish Merchant.

Laur. Many Balsaros I; I Will to my Love:
And thanks to Anthony for this escape.

Pisa. Stay, take us with you. Hark, they knock again,
Come my souls comfort, thou good news bringer,
I must needs hug thee even for pure affection.

Enter Haruie brought in a Chair, Moore, Brown, Aluaro, Vandalle, Delion, and
Frisco. Pisa. Lift softly (good my friends) for hurting him.
Look chearely sir, you are welcome to my house.
Hark M. Vandalle, and my other Sons,
Seem to be sad as grieuing for his sickness,
But inwardly rejoice. Master Vandalle,
Signor Aluaro, Monsieur Delion,
Bid my Friend welcome, pray bid him welcome:
Take a good heart; I doubt not (by Gods leave)
You shall recover and do well enough:
(If I should think so, I should hang my self.)
Frisco, go bid Marina come to me. Exit Frisco.
You are a Witness sir, of this man's Will:
What think you M. Moore, what say you to it?

Moor. Master Pisaro, follow mine advice:
You see the Gentleman cannot escape,
Then let him straight be wedded to your Daughter;
So during life time, she shall hold his Land,
When now (being nor kith nor kin to him)
For all the deed of Gift, that he has sealed,
His younger Brother will enjoy the Land.

Pisa. Marry my Daughter: no birlady.
Hear you Aluaro, my Friend counsel me,
Seeing young M. Haruie is so sick,
To marry him incontinent to my Daughter.
Or else the gift he has bestowde, is vain:
Marry and he recover; no my Son,
I will not loose thy love, for all his Land.

Alua. Here you padre, do no lose his Lands, his hundred pont per anno it is wort
to hauar; let him have de matresse Marina in de marriage, it is but vor me to
attendre vne day more: if he will no die, I sal give him sush a Drink, sush a
Potion sal make him give de Bonos noches to all de world.


Pisa. Aluaro, here is my Keys, take all I have,
My Money, Plate, Wealth, Jewels, Daughter too:
Now God be thanked, that I have a Daughter, worthy to be Aluaroes bed fellow:
Oh how I do admire and praise thy wit,
I Will straight about it: Hear you Master Moore.

Enter Marina and Frisco. Frisc. Nay says he is sick, therefore though he be
come, yet he can do you no good; there is no remedy but even to put your self
into the hands of the Italian, that by that time that he has past his grouth,
young Haruie will be in case to come upon it with a sise of fresh force.


Mari. Is my Love come, and sick? I, now thou love me,
How my heart joys: Oh God, get I my will,
I Will drive away that Sickness with a kiss:
I need not feign, for I could weep for joy.

Pisa. It shall be so; come hither Daughter.
Master Haruie, that you may see my love
Comes from a single heart unfeignedly,
See here my Daughter, her I make thine own:
Nay look not strange, before these Gentlemen,
I freely yield Marina for thy Wife.

Haru. Stay, stay good sir, forbear this idle work,
My soul, is laboring for a higher place,
Then this vain transitory world can yield:
What, would you wed your Daughter to a Grave?
For this is but Deaths model in man's shape:
You and Aluaro happy live together:
Happy were I, to see you live together.

Pisa. Come sir, I trust you shall do well again:
Here, here, it must be so; God give you joy,
And bless you (not a day to live together.)

Vand. Hort ye brother, will ye let den ander heb your Wiue? nempt haer, nempt
haer your selue?


Alua. No, no; tush you be de fool, here be dat sal spoil de marriage of hem:
you have deceue me of de fine Wensh signor Haruey, but I sal deceue you of de
mush Land.


Haru. Are all things sure Father, is all dispatched?


Pisa. What intrest we have, we yield it you:
Are you now satisfied, or restes there ought?

Haru. Nay Father, nothing does remain, but thanks:
Thanks to your self first, that disdayning me,
Yet loud my Lands, and for them gave a Wife.
But next, unto Aluaro let me turn,
To courtious gentle loving kind Aluaro,
That rather then to see me die for love,
For very love, would loose his beawtious Love.

Vand. Ha, ha, ha.


Deli. Signor Aluaro, give him de ting quickly sal make hem die, autremant you
sal lose de fine Wensh.


Alua. Oyime che hauesse allhora appressata la mano al mio core, o suen curato
ate, I che longo sei tu arriuato, o cieli, o terra.


Pisa. Am I awake? or do deluding Dreams
Make that seem true, which most my soul did fear?

Haru Nay faith Father, it is very certain true,
I am as well as any man on earth:
Am I sick sirres? Look here, is Haruie sick?

Pisa. What shall I do? What shall I say?
Did not you counsel me to wed my Child?
What Potion? Where Is your help, your remedy.

Haru. I hope more happy Stars will reign to day,
And don Aluaro have more company.

Enter Anthony. Antho. Now Anthony, this cottens as it should,
And every thing sorts to his wished effect:
Haruie joys Moll: my Dutchman and the French,
Thinking all sure, laughs at Aluaros hap;
But quickly I shall mar that merry vain,
And make your Fortunes equal with your Friends.

Pisa. Sir Mowche, what answer brought you back?
Will master Balsaro come, as I requested?

Anth. Master Balsaro; I know not who you mean.


Pisa. Know you not Ass, did I not send thee for him?
Did not I bid thee bring him, with the Parson?
What answer made he, will he come or no?

Anth. Sent me for him: why sir, you sent not me,
I neither went for him, nor for the Parson:
I am glad to see your Worship is so merry. Knock.

Pisa. Hence you forgetful dolt:
Look down who knockes?

Exit Antho. Enter Frisco. Frisco. Oh Master, hang your self: nay never stay
for a Sessions: Master Vandalle confess your self, desire the people to pray
for you; for your Bride she is gone: Laurentia is run away.


Vanda. Oh de Diabolo, de mal-fortune: is matresse Laurentia gaen awech?


Pisa. First tell me that I am a liuelesse coarse;
Tell me of Doomes-day, tell me what you will,
Before you say Laurentia is gone.

Mari. Master Vandalle, how do you feel your self?
What, hang the head? fie man for shame I say,
Look not so heavy on your marriage day.

Haru. Oh blame him not, his grief is quickly spide,
That is a Bridegroom, and yet wants his Bride.

Enter Heigham, Laurentia, Balsaro, and Anthony. Bals. Master Pisaro, and
Gentlemen, good day to all:
According sir, as you requested me,
This morn I made repair unto the Tower,
Where as Laurentia now was married:
And sir, I did expect your coming thither;
Yet in your absence, we performed the rites:
Therefore I pray sir, bid God give them joy.

Heigh. He tells you true, Laurentia is my Wife;
Who knowing that her Sisters must be wed;
Presuming also, that you will bid her welcome,
Are come to bear them company to Church.

Haru. You come too late, the Marriage rites are done:
Yet welcome twenty-fold unto the Feast.
How say you sirs, did not I tell you true,
These Wenches would have us, and none of you.

Laur. I cannot say for these; but on my life,
This loves a Cusshion better then a Wife.

Mall. And reason too, that Cusshion fell out right,
Else hard had been his lodging all last night.

Bals. Master Pisaro, why stand you speachlesse thus?


Pisa. Anger, and extreme grief enforces me.
Pray sir, who bade you meet me at the Tower?

Bals. Who sir; your man sir, Mowche; here he is.


Anth. Who I sir, mean you me? you are a jesting man.


Pisa. Thou art a Villain, a dissembling Wretch,
Worser then Anthony whom I kept last:
Fetch me an Officer, I Will hamper you,
And make you sing at Bride-well for this trick:
For well he has deserude it, that would swear
He went not forth a doors at my appointment.

Anth. So swear I still, I went not forth to day.


Bals. Why arrant liar, were thou not with me?


Pisa. How say you master Brown, went he not forth?


Brow. He, or his likeness did, I know not whether.


Pisa. What likeness can there be besides himself?


Laur. My self (forsooth) that took his shape upon me,
I was that Mowche that you sent from home:
And that same Mowche that deceived you,
Effected to possess this Gentleman:
Which to attain, I thus be guil'd you all.

Frisc. This is excellent, this is as fine as a Fiddle: you M. Heigham got the
Wench in Mowches apparel; now let Mowche put on her apparel, and be married
to the Dutchman: How think you, is it not a good vize?


Moor. Master Pisaro, shake off melancholy,
When things are helpelesse, patience must be used.

Pisa. Talk of Patience? I Will not bear these wrongs:
Go call down Matt, and mistress Susan Moore,
It Is well that of all three, we have one sure.

Moor. Mistress Susan Moore, who do you mean sir?


Pisa. Whom should I mean sir, but your Daughter?


Moor. You Are very pleasant sir: but tell me this,
When did you see her, that you speak of her?

Pisa. I, late yester-night, when she came here to bed.


Moor. You are deceived, my Daughter lay not here,
But watched with her sick mother all last night.

Pisa. I am glad you are so pleasant M Moore,
You Are loath that Susan should be held a sluggard:
What man, it was late before she went to bed,
And therefore time enough to rise again.

Moor. Master Pisaro, do you floute your friends;
I well perceive if I had troubled you,
I should have had it in my dish ere now:
Susan lie here? 'am sure when I came forth,
I left her fast asleep in bed at home;
It Is more then neighborhood to use me thus.

Pisa. A bed at your house? tell me I am madd,
Did not I let her in adores my self,
Spoke to her, talked with her, and canuast with her;
And yet she lay not here? What say you sir?

Antho. She did, she did; I brought her to her Chamber.


Moor. I say he lies (that says so) in his throat.


Antho. Mass now I remember me, I lie indeed.


Pisa. Oh how this frets me: Frisco, what say you?


Frisc. What say I? Marry I say, if she lay not here, there was a familiar in
her likeness; for I am sure my Master and she were so familiar together,
that he had almost shot the Gout out of his Toes ends, to make the Wench
believe he had one trick of youth in him. Yet now I remember me she did not
lie here; and the reason is, because she does lie here, and is now abed with
mistress Mathea; witness whereof, I have set to my Hand and Seal, and mean
presently to fetch her.


Exit Frisco. Pisa. Do so Frisco. Gentlemen and Friends,
Now shall you see how I am wronged by him.
Lay she not here? I think the world's grown wise,
Plain folks (as I) shall not know how to live.

Enter Frisco. Frisc. She comes, she comes: a Hall, a Hall.


Enter Mat^ea and Walgraue in Woman's attire. Walg. Nay blush not wench, fear
not, look cheerfully.
Good morrow Father; Good morrow Gentlemen:
Nay stare not, look you here, no monster I,
But even plain Ned: and here stands Matt my Wife.
Know you her Frenchman? But she knows me better.
Father, pray Father, let me have your blessing,
For I have blessed you with a goodly Son;
It Is breeding here yfayth, a jolly Boy.

Pisa. I am undone, a reprobate, a slave;
A scorn, a laughter, and a jesting stock:
Give me my Child, give me my Daughter from you.

Moor. Master Pisaro, it is in vain to fret,
And fume, and storm, it little now auayles:
These Gentlemen have with your Daughters help,
Outstript you in your subtle enterprises:
And therefore, seeing they are well descended,
Turn hate to love, and let them have their Loves,

Pisa. Is it even so; why then I see that still,
Do what we can, Women will have their Will.
Gentlemen, you have outreacht me now,
Which nere before you, any yet could do:
You, that I thought should be my Sons indeed,
Must be content, since there is no hope to speed:
Others have got, what you did think to gain;
And yet believe me, they have took some pain.
Well, take them, there; and with them, God give joy.
And Gentlemen, I do entreat to morrow,
That you will Feast with me, for all this sorrow:
Though you are wedded, yet the Feast's not made:
Come let us in, for all the storms are past,
And heaps of joy will follow on as fast.

FINIS.

