A TREATISE OF UNION OF The two Realms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND.

By I. H.

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for C. B. and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Swanne. 1604.

This treatise consists of two parts, A commendation of Union, General, Chap.
1. Particular, of the two Realms of England and Scotland, wherein is
considered, the Utility, viz. The extinguishing of wars, between the two
Nations, whereby 1. Our victories have been hindered. 2. Invasions have been
occasioned. 3. The borders between both Realms have always been laid waste.
4. The inner parts have been often distressed.
Enlargement of Dominion from whence will proceed 1. The Dignity and
repatation of the State. 2. ^ssurance of Defense. 3. Strength to enterprise. 4.
Ease in sustaining the public charge of affairs. Cap. 2.


Necessity, Cap. 3.

The means whereby this Union may be assuredly effected, and this consists
in two points, 1. By incorporating both people into one politic body: and
this is done, by binding them together with the same Laws, (particular
customs always reserved) which are the very nerves of a politic body,
Chap. 4. Here two opinions are considered. 1. That the Laws of England since
the time of Brutus, were never changed, which is fabulous. 2. That change of
Laws traineth many disorders with it: But this fails in two cases, 1. Where
the change is not great. 2. Where it is not sudden, but in time, and by
degrees. Cap. 5.



2. By knitting their minds in one contentment and desire, Chap. 6. Herein two
circumstances are principally considered, Equality in Liberty and Privilege
Capacity of office and charge Cap. 7:

Conformity or Similitude, Cap. 8. especially in Habit and behavior, Cap. 9.
Language, Cap. 10. Name, Cap. 11. wherein is further considered. What common
name is most fit, and whether the like change in name has been usual or ^.
Cap. 12. Certain objections, concerning Matters of State inward, or matters of
Law. Cap. 13. Matters of State foreign, or matters of intercourse, Cap. 14.
Matters of honor and reputation. Cap. 15.





The Preface.
I Am not ignorant, how aduenturous it is to entermeddle in those
controversies, wherein the minds of men being stiffened in conceit, and
possessed with prejudice of opinion, they esteem a man in that degree learned
or unlearned, wise or weak, according as he does either iump or jar with
them in judgment. But in these high controversies of state, it is dangerous
also for a private man to deal; partly, for that he may be assured not to
escape the blows of them, whose envious disposition cannot look right upon
any thing, nor endure the burden of another man's deserving well; but
especially, for that diverse times he engages his safety upon uncertain
events, wherein his hazards do very far surmount his hopes.

And yet, because in civil differences we cannot but hold such for enemies,
as, either through negligence, which is ill, or through fear, which is worse,
stand in show of Neuters, expecting the issue with an idle eye; for that it
often happens, that by withdrawing our selves in the beginning of
dissentions, we are afterward able to afford no other either comfort or
relief, but to mourn with the rest in the public misery; I have advised,
and thereupon adventured to thrust my self into the common throng: being
rather assured than in hope, that howsoever I be both private and mean, Opera
^^nesti (...).
yet the pains of an honest Citizen is never unprofitable.

And hereof I have the more reason to presume, for that I find not my self
carried by any peevish humor of coffeehouse, which will ruinate so many as it
does rule; nor by any seruill desire of pleasing or flattering, which I have
always esteemed more base than begging; nor by any false and foolish
ouerweening, whereby many do conceive that nothing can be well either
determined or done, except they have a finger in it: but first, for love to the
good of the state, whereto we are by all true rules most nearly tied; and
next, in duty toward his Majesty, to whom we are not only in conscience but
in necessity bound to be loyal. Touching whom, it concerns us also to
consider, in what state of reputation he shall stand, and how others will be
encouraged to use insolency against him; (the thoughts of men advancing by
degrees) if in his first purposes, having reason and equity concurring with
his power, he shall not find the means to prevail.

It behooves us to be, as resolute and constant for the good of the state, so
wise in discerning what is good; otherwise we are not resolute but rash, and
our constancy is no other than an ill grounded obstinacy. It behooves us
again, not to be more witty to frame fears, than wise to judge them,
assuring our selves, that those things which seem dangerous and are not, do
daily decline and deminish by degrees; and that those counsels which
proceed, not from judgment well grounded, but from some distemperature of
affection, after they have a little thrown up their fume and fire, do
suddenly dissolve, and vanish as vain. Lastly it behooves us to foresee, that
a time may come, which will manifest how profitable it might be, not to have
been negligent in things which seemed to be small: for that oftentimes upon
matters appearing of little weight, things of great consequence do depend.

A TREATISE OF UNION.
CHAP. I. A commendation of Union in general.
I Will not write generally of the nature of union, whereof diverse have
diversely made discourse. And concerning the excellency thereof, I know not
what need there is to add any thing to that which S. Augustine says: Lib. de
Parad so.
not only that it represents unto us the soul of man, which is a most pure
and simple substance, not distracted by communicating it self to every part of
the body; but also that it is the very image of God, who both perfectly
contains, Lib. de quaest. vet. and noutest.
and infinitely exceeds the excellencies and perfections of all creatures;
who being the only true one, loves this similitude of himself in all his
creatures. And of this point the Philosophers also seemed to have attained a
taste: In some. Scip.
for Macrobius refers perfect union only unto God, terming it the beginning
and end of all things, being altogether free from beginning, change or end.
The more ancient Philosophers have likewise held, that from unity, which they
call (...), all things do proceed, and are again resolved into the same. In
Princ. lib. De^itis senten^^^sq^e Philos.
Of which opinion Laertius writes that Musaeus of Athens the son of Eumolpus
was author, who lived long before the time of Homer: but afterward it was
renewed and followed by Pythagoras, Plut lib. de dogmat. Philos.
as Plutarch, Alexander and Laertius do report; who added thereunto, that
unity is the original of good, Alexan succession. Philos. Laer. de vit. Philo
lib. 8. H^er. 1. co co^tra Iouin. C. (...). 32. di. 1. Desan. tu. lib. 6
and dualitie of evil. And this opinion was maintained also by S. Hierome,
whose sentence is to this purpose repeated in the Canonical decrees, but under
the title and name of S. Ambrose. Hereupon Homer does often call good (...);
and the affection to do good (...): applying the term (...) to vexation and
trouble. Hereupon Galen also the Prince of Physicians writes, that the best in
every kind is one, but the vicious or defective are many. Plato produces all
things from one In Timaeo.
; measures all things by one In Philebo.
: and reduces all things into one In Epinomide.
. And generally all true testimonies do agree, that the greatest perfection of
glory, beauty, stabilitie or strength, is either occasioned by union, or
therein found.

CHAP. II. More particularly of the Union of the two Realms of England and
Scotland: and first of the utility thereof.
But to descend into particular consideration, touching the union of these two
Realms of England and Scotland, the benefits which are presented thereby are
so many and manifest, that the chiefest impugners thereof are not able, even in
the greatest tempest of their judgment, directly to deny them, only they
seek either in silence or generalities to pass them over, or else by
propounding many difficulties, to qualify our wills from pursuing them by
desire. For, whereas there are two respects which combine and knit people
together, the one a vehement fear, either in preventing or in removing of some
evil; the other (which is the weaker) an urgent hope and desire, in attaining
of some good: both these do present themselves most lively unto us; and from
these two principal respects, two principal benefits do infallibly ensue.
The first is, the extinguishing of wars between the two nations: the second
is, the enlargement both of dominion and power.

Touching the first, it always falls, that the breaking Ireland. And how
great have been the miseries and mischiefs, which have heretofore proceeded
from the wars between England and Scotland, it may evidently appear, by
several consideration of the effects thereof.

First therefore the course of our conquests, especially in France, Victories
hindered.
has by this means been often interrupted. For to this end the French have
always held correspondencie with Scotland, as the only way to divert the
enterprises of the English against them. So that if this gap be closed past
their entrance, we have taken from them their surest defense. Invasions
occasioned.
Secondly, opportunities have bin opened to foreign invasion; the people of
both Realms being hereby weakened, the store and treasure wasted, matters of
themselves sufficient to beat open their gates to any one that would attempt
upon them. And in truth, it was upon no other advantage that the Saxons, and
after them the Danes found so easy entrance into this Realm: calamities
lamentable even for strangers to hear of, much more for those wretches to
endure, upon whose necks the law of destiny had laid so hard and heavy a
yoke. Thirdly, by means of these wars, Confines laid waste.
the confines of both nations have continually been held under the cruel
calamity of the sword; they have bin a nurserie of rapines, robberies and
murders; they have bin not only unprofitable, but very chargeable to the
State, by continual maintenance of many garrisons. Inner parts distressed.
Lastly, the inner parts of both Realms have been often pierced, and made a
wretched spectacle to all eyes of humanity and pity: wherein notwithstanding
the English stood upon the disadvantage, in that they fought against them who
had least to lose.

it. The country is if not plentiful, yet sufficient to furnish, not only
the necessities, but the moderate pleasures of this life: wherein, whosoever is
brought up and bred, he will never be grieved to abide. The people are, great
in multitude, resolute in mind, for service apt, in faith assured, in wills
tr^etable, moderate in hopes, bearing one common desire to commit their lives
to any adventure, not only for the safety, but for the glory of their state:
and generally their conditions so well furnished, as they did never better than
now flourish in all mortal felicities. By addition of such both people and
place, many particular benefits will inseparably ensue.

And first, it will be a greater increase of dignity (...)
and reputation to the common state, than our highest thoughts can easily
imagine. For, that which is more general, is more generous also and honorable
as Decius teaches us; for that it compriseth (...) particulars within it:
which is aduowed also by that which Baldus says; that by reason of
universality a thing may be esteemed of greater worth. Hereto agrees that
sentence of Solomon; The honor of a King is in the multitude of people. And
therefore the Scripture reports it as a great part of his glory; that he
reigned over all kingdoms from the river (Euphrates) to the land of the
Philistims, 1. (...) 24.
and unto the border of Egypt; and in all the region on the other side the
river.

And if in our hearts may be any desires more violent than of glory, there are
other effects of this increase of dominion and power, more mighty to move us,
or at the least more necessary. For hereby also our defense will be the more
assured; Defense.
because against the forces and felicities of these two Nations, it will be so
hard, as almost impossible, either for foreign enemy or domestical rebel to
have power to prevail. And whereas heretofore the ports of either nation have
been so many gates for invasion of the other; the borders also between them
have been a place of assured retreit to the rebels of both countries, in case
their enterprises did not succeed: these passages being now closed, all secret
supportance withdrawn, and both people knit in a common defense, it will not
only frustrate the end, but cut off the hope of any such attempts.

Further, Enterprise.
we shall be strengthened hereby in any foreign enterprise, whenever time
shall cut out occasions favorable to our desires. Whereas in a people rather
confederated than united, is seldom seen, either a conformity in will, or a
joint readiness in power, whether to pursue resolutely the favor of fortune,
or constantly to resist the storms of distress: because in such enterprises
as are occasioned by diversity of interest, and draw with them diversity of
ends; disdaines, distrusts, and all kind of disorders are easily kindled.

Lastly, Ease.
both our liberty and our plenty by this means will increase; and we shall
with far greater both alacrity and ease sustain the defraiments of public
affairs. For generally, in small principalities, the people are more wronged
in person and wrung in purse; their estates are more nearly raked and gleaned;
they have less advantage both by traffic and trade, then they who live in
large dominions. And this will be the accomplishment of our felicity, if by
our evil either fortune or advice, we suffer not the occasion to be lost.

CHAP. III.Of the necessity of this Union, and by what means it may be
perfected.
I Will not further enlarge upon these several benefits; partly because I
address not my speech to such sick judgments, as esteem nothing sound which
does not bear a beautiful show; partly because they appear unto me so
certain and plain, that I hold it not reasonable to stand and dispute them:
but chiefly for that this utility of union is seconded also with a kind of
necessity; which is mighty to bend those minds that are invincible against
all other means. For, if people reduced under one government be not therein
united; if they be set together, and not into one; they are like sand without
lime, subject to dissipation by every wind: they are like unto stones, heaped,
but not compacted together, easily severed by their proper weight. Hereupon
Liuie says: Toll vnitatem, and omnes imperij contextus in multas parts
dissident: Take away unity and all the frame of the Empire will separate into
many parts. Which is also confirmed by that saying of Christ; A kingdom
divided cannot continue. So that if any man, either blinded by adverse and
perverse destiny, or else carried, whether by fear, the underminer of all
determinations, or by envy, the rebel to all reason, shall now make offer,
directly or by circumstance to oppose against this Union, and to encounter the
benefits thereof with private respects; we have just cause, not only to deny
him audience, but to bear a hard opinion of him; as not knowing to what ends
his thoughts are disposed.

It remains only that we consider, by what means these benefits may be
best assured; that is, by what means both nations may be reduced to an
inseparable imbracement. To this purpose we are to respect the two parts of
perfect Union of diverse states; The first is, by incorporating the people into
one politic body; the second, by knitting their minds in one contentment and
desire: even according to that which Sant Paul says: Pphes. 4.
one body, and one spirit. Of these two parts of Union, the first may be
termed of law, and the second of love; whereof I will speak now in order, so
briefly as I may not be obscure; and so fully as the avoiding of tediousnes
will permit.

CHAP. IIII. Of the bodily Union, or Union by law.
THe bodily or politic Union is no other thing, but the collecting of both
people under one common government and command, and the joining of them in
obedience unto one head. For these two points of commanding and obeying are
the very soul of a commonwealth, the absolute offices of civil society, the
only objects of a perfect stateseman: for as without command there is no
direction, so without obedience there is no strength: as direction needs
strength, so is strength unprofitable without direction. Of the first of these
two Seneca speaks: De Clem. lib. 1 Istud est vinculum, per quod resp.
cohaeret; ille spiritus vitalis. quem haec tot mili^trabunt; nihil ipsa per se
futura nisi o^us and sraeda, si m^^s illa imperij subtrahatur.
This is the band of coherence in a commonwealth; this is the vital spirit
which these so many thousands do breath; who would become nothing by
themselves but a burden and a pray, if this soul of command be taken from
them: Of the second Liuie: Lib. 3. Vires imperij in conssersu obedientium sunt.
The strength of the Empire consists in consent of those that obey: Sophocles
of both: (...).
There is no greater evil than want of government: but obedience of Subjects
saves many lives. These are the two legs to support, the two arms both to
feed and defend the commonwealth: if one of these be taken away, both do
perish, the unity of state dissolueth, Idemque dominandi finis erit, qui
parendi fuerit: and there will be (says Seneca) the same period of ruling
which shall be of obeying.

But, because there is no form of government now but by laws; because laws
are the instrument and mean both of obedience and rule; if follows, that
there is no firm connection in one form of government, that there is not one
entire and undivided subjection and command, where the people are not bound
together by one common law. But as, how cunningly soever a painter lays on
his colors to make two bordes seem one, yet if they be not made firm in the
joints, they will always remain, and in short time appear to be two: so,
whatsoever apparances are used to make two states seem one, if they have not
one community of laws, they remain notwithstanding, and upon small occasions
will show themselves disioynted, Lib 10. Eiusdem iuris esse del ent qui sub
todem rege victu^i sunt.
even in the noblest and strongest limbs of government. Hereupon Curtius
says: They ought to be of one law, who are to live under one King. And Tacitus
lkewise affirms, Quicquid est authoritatis crebris destiuitur
contradictionibus.
that upon such diversities: All authority is overthrown by continual
contradicting. And this is manifest by that which happened in the infancy of
the popular state of Rome, when the Senate made laws for themselves, Theoph.
just. de iur. gent. not. and ciu. Plcbiscitum.
which they called Senatus consulta: and again, the common people made laws
for themselves, which they termed Plebiscita: but herewith they were divided in
company, which was more dangerous unto them, than the invasions of their best
appointed enemies. Neither could those disorders be ranged into any tolerable
form, until by the law Hortensia, the laws of both were extended equally
unto all. Afterward for avoiding the like inconveniences, the Romans permitted
(...), propriety of laws, to no province which they did absolutely subdue;
but reduced them under government of the Roman laws. According to which
example King John also planted in Ireland the laws which were then the laws
of this realm.

And this made the Union of all the kingdoms of Spain, and likewise of little
Britain with France both more easy, and also more sure, because they had
commonly received the same civil laws. For laws are the common bands of all
cities and societies of men; the very ligaments and nerves of every politic
body: and therefore in those countries that are ruled by different laws,
though other differences may be quieted, composed they cannot be. This is
plainly confirmed by that which Cicero says: (...) Pa^^^. lus (...) In
supply. (...)
Law and equity are the bands of cities: whereto that of Euripides is
agreeable in sense.

(...)
(...).
This is that which holds cities together,
When men do well observe the Laws.
CHAP. V. Whether all change of Laws be dangerous to a State.
THIS streine peradventure will sound harsh unto many, in whose ears suspicion
does sit, to beat back the creadit of any kind whether of persuasion or
proof. From these I expect two principal objections. The first is, that the
laws of England were never changed since the time of Brutus; not only in the
peaceable state of the realm, but not by any of the several conquerors
thereof: not by the Normanes, Danes, Saxones; no not by the Romans, who
usually changed the laws of all other countries which they brought under the
sway of their sword: but that in all other changes, whether of inhabitants, or
of state, the laws do still remain the same, which Brutus compiled out of
the Trojan laws; and therefore it is not fit they should in any point be
altered. I will not now spend time upon this opinion; partly because it is not
commonly received, but especially for that I have in a particular treatise
examined at large, the parts and proofs of this assertion. Not as derogating
any thing from the true dignity of the common law; but as esteeming
hyperbolicall praises now out of season; as never suitable but with artlesse
times.

The second objection will be, that change of laws always traineth so many
disorders, as are sufficient to shake the whole frame of a state, if not to
dissolve it. Tacitus says: (...).
In all affairs the provision of former (...) is best, and every conn^^sion is
a change to the worse. Whereupon Valerius has written: (...) Se^ answer to
Dol. man. p. g. 23.
Even in least things we must not alter the least point of ancient custom.
This may be further fortified by the great care and severity which many
nations have used; and most especially the Spartanes, Athenians, Epidaurians,
^^rians and Scythians, as well to prevent as to punish al attempts of
innovation; as taking the same, either for a cause or presage of some confusion.

For my part, I do utterly condemn either light or often alterations of
laws; knowing that so reverent respect is borne to antiquity, that ancient
laws are oftentimes of force without help of magistrates to maintain
themselves: but new laws are so far from this gravity and grace, that many
times they draw the residue into contempt. The plant thriueth not (says
Seneca) which is often removed. (...).
For who can stand long that will not stand still? but every day change the
form of their government, as lightly as they do the fashion of their
garments? yea, it is a rule of policy generally approved in that state which
has long flourished under one kind of government, (...). Senc. (...). Lib. 2.
not to admit alteration, although it bears a fair face of profit. And this
was the counsel which Dio reports that Augustus gave in the Senate of Rome:
(...).
Keep the laws which you have strongly; change not any of them, for those
things that abide in the same state, although they be worse, are more
profitable than those that are always changed, although in appearance they
seem better: Which was also the opinion of Alcibiades in Thucidides; Thucid.
lib. 6. (...).
that those men remain most safe, who are governed by their present customs
and laws without change, although the^ be worse.

And yet on the other side, I am as far from allowing a strict and severe
tenacitie of laws; which (being another extreme) is many times more either
hurtful or unprofitable, than the light change of them. For who will commend
the counsel of the Epidaurians, who for fear of attracting innovation,
interdicted their people from all foreign both travail and trade? or that of
the Locrians, who to keep their laws both from change and increase, erected
an use, that whosoever would have a new law established, he should propound
the same, his neck girt in a halter, that if it were not esteemed necessary,
his law and life might end together. Sometimes entire alteration of government
is necessary. For so Plutarch writes, In Pomp.
that Cratippus declared to Pompey, being cast into flight, and complaining of
the providence of his Gods, that the perverse state of Rome stood in great
necessity of the government of one man: Annal. 1.
and so Tacitus likewise reports, that certain wisemen discoursing of the
life of Augustus after his death, affirmed rightly, that there was no other
means to appease the disorders of the state, but by reducing it under the
principality of one. But the change of some particular laws is many times
grounded upon so great respects, that all nations do usually vary them, as
occasions do alter: and sometimes as Tacitus says; Hist. 1. Necet priscus
rigor and (...).
Old rigor and too great severity is hurtful unto us, because we are not
able to match. Neither is any inconvenience by such particular change of laws
either feared or felt, if two circumstances be therein observed. One, that the
change be not great; the other, that it be not sudden, but at leisure and by
degrees.

Now, to reduce the laws of England and Scotland into one body, it seems
the change will not be great. First, for that customs and privileges of
particular places are not to be impeached; for these are diverse in every
nation, without any notable inconvenience, so that conformity be held in one
common law. Secondly, the fundamental laws (as they are termed) of both
kingdoms and Crowns do well agree. In other laws of government they hold
good conformity, as having heretofore bin under one scepter; but now by long
seuerance the laws of either nation are like a shoe worn long upon one
foot, and thereby made rather unseemly than unserviceable for the other. Of
these laws, they that are diverse but not contrary, may still be retained and
communicated to both people: (...).
for so Alexander said, that his great Empire could not aptly be governed, but
by delivering to the Persians some laws and customs of the Macedonians, and
by receiving likewise some things from them: and even so among the Romans,
those laws which the common people made only for themselves, and those also
which the Senators had made, only to bind themselves, were by the law
Hortensia made common unto all. So then, the change shall be only where the
laws are contrary; which will not be either great or unprofitable, if it be
not laid only upon the laws of one people, but indifferently divided between
them both.

Examples are obuious of the like commission of laws: but I will insist only
upon one; which is most memorable, and most properly concerns both our
country and our case. When King Edward surnamed the Confessor was advanced to
the Crown, he found the realm governed by three different laws; the
West Saxon law, the Mercian law, and the Dane law. Out of these three laws,
partly moderated, and partly supplied, he composed one body of law, commonly
called S. Edwards laws: which were of so great equity, that when they were
abrogated by the Conqueror, and the Crown fell into controversy between
Mawd the Empress and King Stephen, the people always inclined to favor that
part, who put them in fairest hope of restitution of those laws. And
afterward in many civil contentions, the greatest demand of the people
appears to have been, the restitution of King Edwards laws.

And yet these alterations are most safely wrought in some mean course and
compass of time; Ad Attic. lib. 11 Epist. 19. Dio. 52.
and as Cicero says: Et quam minimo sonitu orbis ille in rep. conuertatur:
That this circle may be turned in the state, (...).
without any great sound. And so Dio writes, that Augustus did not presently
put all things in practice which were decreed: Fearing that he should err, if
he would suddenly apply men unto them; but some things he redressed presently,
and the rest afterward: upon which manner of proceeding Tacitus also reports
of him, that he did by degrees advance himself and draw the offices both of
laws and Magistrates into his hands. l^s^gere pa^la^^m, (...) s^tr^h^^e.
For, as in a natural body, no sudden change is without some peril; so in a
politic body it is so much the greater, as there are more humors to receive
a hurtful impression. And in this regard the proceeding of Alaricus King of
the Goths is fully to be equalled, C^ia. Ap ad R^n^onem.
if not preferred before that of Augustus. For Alaricus finding the Romans in
other points tractable, but unwilling to be governed by the laws of the
Goths, he permitted them the use of the Roman laws, but by interpretation
in a short space he drew them, to bear the same sense with the laws of the
Goths.

For, if it be true that Zenophon says: 2. P^ri. (...).
It is easier to rule all other creatures than man: and which Seneca affirms;
De clem. lib. 1. Nullum animal morosiu^ (...), nullum ma^ori artetractandum.
No living creature is of harder conditions, none to be handled with greater
art: If it be true also which Liuie says: Excellentibus ingeniis ^tius
d^^fuerit ars qua ciuem regant, quam qua (...) superent.
Excellent wits shall sooner fail in the art to govern subjects, than to
vanquish enemies: it follows, that oftentimes a people may be ruled, more
fitly by following, than by striving or opposing: even as nature drives not
violently at any effect, but enfoulding her ends in the desires of her
creatures, has her purposes pursued, not as hers, but as their own. And as
the Sun is continually carried with the sway of the first moveable Sphere,
and yet performs his proper motion in a contrary course: so a Prince may
oftentimes yield to the violent minds of the multitude, Ad Lentul. ep. 9 Si
recta portum tenere nequea^, idipsum mutata velificatione assequi.
and yet effect his own purposes and desires; even as Cicero counseled: When
we cannot bear into the haven with a full and fair wind, to do the same by
changing sail.

CHAP. VI. Of union of minds or of love.
I Will proceed now to the union of minds, without which the bodily union is of
little strength, either for present use, or for continuance. For all forced
governments are both weak and momentany, because they leave out the will of
man, without which it is impossible there should be either any firm or long
coherence. For although other creatures may be enforced beyond their wills, yet
the will of man is not subject to constraint; because it a ways follows the
direction of reason; (though sometimes darkened or abused by a^^ections) which
having a most high and eminent liberty, it must be persuaded and not
enforced: the understanding must first be wrought and won, and that is the
only means to bring the will into obedience.

This union of will and of mind Seneca terms, De Clem. lib. 1. cap. 4.
the common band of states, the vital spirit, the very soul and life of an
Empire: Rege incolumi men's omnibus vna. And herein the first Christians were
commended, Act. 4. 32.
for that they were of one heart and soul; that is, retained one mind, will
and desire. This union S. Paul calls, the band of peace: Ephesians. 4. 3.
and therefore desired in his prayer for the Romans; Romans 15. 5.
that they might be like minded: 1 (...). 1. 10.
and requested the Corinthians, to knit together in one mind and judgment:
Ephesians. 4. 3.
The Ephesians also; to keep the unity of spirit in the band of peace: Phil.
2. 2. 3. 17. 4. 2.
and likewise the Philippians; to mind one thing, and to proceed by one rule.
And with him agrees S. 1. Pet. 3. 8.
Peter also, in exhorting us all to be of one mind.

But this union of minds between the English and the Scots is not to be
esteemed a matter which may easily be effected; by reason of the great
differences which have been between them. For in old enmities it is hard to
establish both a present and perfect reconciliation; because either suspicion,
or contempt, or desire of revenge are proper and assured means, either always
to continue, or readily to renew the ancient hate. And yet this will prove
most easy and plain, if industry be applied to the opportunity present. And
the rather, for that it has pleased God to open the way to this Union in such
a time as there is almost no memory of any war between the two nations:
insomuch as the long peace which has now continued more than fifty years,
and the mutual offices which in the mean time have been showed, have now
either worn out, or at least much weakened the hate, which in former times, by
reason of continual war, was almost grown to be natural. Only some
circumstances must be considered, without which it is always hard, and whereby
it is never impossible, to work the wills and desires of diverse people into
one. These circumstances may be reduced to two principal heads: the first is
equality; the second, conformity or similitude in all things whereby any
notable difference should be maintained or made.

CHAP. VII. Of Equity.
I Do not speak of Arithmeticall equality, which is equal in the thing,
giving to all alike; but not in the persons (as is Geometrical) allowing unto
every man according to his due: I speak not of equality in degree, or in
estate, for that were the greatest inequality that could be; but in liberty
and privilege, (which is the maine supporter of peace) and in capacity both
of office and charge. That as the Sun rises and shines to all alike, so the
law should comprehend all in one equal and impartial equity. Of this
equality Plato says; De legib. li. ^. (...).
Equality makes friendship, and is the very mother of friendship: which he
cites as an old saying of Pythagoras, and does exceedingly both allow and
commend the same. Polit. 5. cap. 1. and 2.
Aristotle does esteem inequality the ground of suspicion; which the 16. q.
7. l. cum oportet C. de bo. quae lib.
law also accounts the fuel of discord: but of equality he says; Ethic.
8. ca. 6. (...). In Phoeniss.
All these friendships are by equality. And to the same purpose Euripides has
written; -- (...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).


Equality binds friends to friends, cities to cities, and confederates to
confederates. For equality is law to men. But the less is always enemy to the
greater, and forthwith enters into hate.

Hereto agrees that of Theognis:
(...)
(...).
Omnes hisese venerantur, amantque vicis^im,
Vicini, aequa ^is viribus, atque s^ncs.
Among the Latin writers Seneca, says: All these bear reverence one to
others, equal neighbors, and aged persons.
Equality is the principal part of equity. (...).
And this right is ^ermed by Cicer^par: as being equal unto all, and
proceeding from nature, and held in use by common consent whereby it is often
familiar unto men (as Tacitus says) To make other men's aduantag^ as gri^u^ is
unto them, as their proper iniuri^s. And his was one principal mean, whereby
the Roman state received both continuance and (...); because the people did so
easily impart the libertie^ of their city almost unto all. A^^t Platarch. in
ag^l.
For Epaminondas (...) that peace is then firm, when equality is observed:
according to which sentence Liuie writes, Lib. 8.
that when the Romans demanded of the Ambassadors of the Princrnates,
whether peace should be durable if it were granted unto them, they returned
answer; that it should be perpetual if the conditions were equal, otherwise
for so long time as their necessity should endure. For let us not bel^eue that
any people will bear unequal conditions, any longer time than necessity does
continue. To these I will add that which Saint Ambrose says: De Offic. lib.
1. V^^im as p^^es paribus maxim (...). In P^adro. lib. de les. Patria^ c. cap
2. (...) aequalis gratia etc.
We see that equals do best joy together: which sentence seems to be taken
out of Plato, and is by him in another place in this sort confirmed: Let them
be joined in equal favor who are joined in equal nature. What do you
marvel if strife rise among brethren for house and for ground, when because
of a coat the children of holy Jacob did burn in envy?

Hereupon the law does always incline to maintain equality among brethren,
in case of succession; and that whether we respect the pretorian L. 1. C. vnde
lib. l. si post.. si. d. de bon. (...).
, or civil law L. inter fil^os. C. (...).
, or else the imperial constitutions I. pen. C. com. d^u. l. vlt. C. com.
(...). iudi^. C de collat. per to tot. t^t.
. And Baldus notes, that all statutes which admit children unequally to
succeed, are against natural equity In d. l. inter filios.
. Generally, not only the interpreters, but the authors also of the civil
law, do so favor equality among brethren, that for this cause they extend or
restrain the disposition of a testator I. Cum Pater. cuictis D. de l^g. 2. l.
vlt. C. com. vtr. (...). and ibidem Dd.
; insomuch as sometimes that is intended to be comprised in a legacy which
otherwise should not L. Quaesuu.. sed and ipse. D. de fund. instr.
: and a doubtful word shall also receive a forced construction Franc. (...).
in l. filiabus. D. leg. 1. Bald. Angel. Sali. in l. in testamento. C. de test.
mili.
. Further, the privileges that are granted to those testaments which parents
make among their children, do then take place, when the testator does equally
dispose among them. To. con. 179. Phil. Dec. in l. 1 in 2. no. C. vnde lib. and
cons. 349. and 361.
. And when many testaments are extant of such nature, that is adjudged of force
which does equally dispose Pau. ca. in Auth hoc inter. C. de te^^a. Pau. Paris.
cons. 24 lib. 2.
. And in conflict and opposition of opinions that is to be followed, which
maintains equality among brethren Soct. in rep. l. cum. mus. D. de cond. and
(...). and co^s. 1^8. libr. 3. Marcia pater ipsius. con. 4. ia si.
. In a word, brothers do so nearly affect equality, that thereupon was
formed an ancient Greek proverb; (...) whereby is signified that brothers will
go so near in departing the goods of their auncester, that they will not
leave a few figs undivided. Of this proverb Martial writes.

Calliodorus habet censum, quis nescit? equestrem,
Sexte, sed and fratrem Calliodorus habet;
Quadraginta secat, qui di^it (...)
Vno credis equo posse sedere duos?
So that it is little marvel which other authors do report, Epi^r. lib. ^.
a^ Calliodorum.
. that Charicles and Antiochus two brothers in Pontus, when they divided their
fathers goods, caused a silver cup to be cut in the midst, because neither
should have any more than the other. In Pyrrho.
From hence also was taken that tragical exclamation which Plutarch uses but
borrowed out of Euripides. In Phvniss.


(...). And yet howsoever capacity of offices or preferments should be equal
to both people, To divide this house with a sharp iron.
a moderation must be used for a time, that either nation be governed by
officers of the same: otherwise the advantages and aduancements of the one,
would work both grieuance and prejudice to the other. For first, no people
will easily digest, that more should be attributed within their state to
others, either in trust or in authority than unto them: secondly, they are not
the most fit, either to counsel or contriue the affairs of a state, who are
but newly acquainted with the government thereof; even as Cicero said Ad
consilium de rep. dandum caput esse, nosse rempublicam: ^. De orat.
To give advise in affairs of a commonwealth, it is a principal point, to
have knowledge of the same. Officers and employments of state are in the hands
of the King as grains, to make the balances equal; and must not
promiscuously be bestowed, until by benefit of time, the band of Union be
made fast and indissoluble. For as things in nature excellent ripe not hastily,
so commonwealths least of all; which rise not to the period of their
perfection in many ages, moving leasurely, and by insensible degrees: and the
more slowly they do rise, the more surely for the most part do they stand. In
a small compass of time, how little distastefull it will be, that the men of
one nation should bear office and authority in the other, we have a fair
example by them of Wales; who, so far from envy, as without any note; do
many times enjoy very high places of preferment in England. And I make little
doubt but that this respect has dazzled the judgment of some persons, by whom
whatsoever is pretended, either against the whole Union, or against any part of
the perfection thereof, the surmise is (as men entered into suspicion are prone,
both to interpret and conjecture all things to the worst) that all the sweet
of the land will hereby be drawn from the ancient inhabitants of the same.
Hereof all laboring in one common doubt, and one increasing the fear of
another, they minister occasion of boldness unto such, who suppose, by
aduanceing popular advise, to raise some reputation to themselves. But it
cannot be coniectured that a King, ripe in age, full of experience, holding
much of himself, yet not rejecting the advice of others, will give so confused
form to these affairs; and that he will kindle such a fire of emulation,
between both people, as cannot but cast forth dangerous sparks.

CHAP. VIII. Of conformity or similitude.
ANother principal means of affection and good will is similitude or
likeness; which is the fittest reconciler and surest knitter of minds, the
mother of all faithful familiarity and friendship; and the more true and
perfect the similitude is, the more firm is the friendship which thereupon
does arise. To this purpose Siracides says: Ca. 13. 16, 17.
Every beast loves his like, and every man loves his like. All flesh will
resort to their like; and every man will accompany such as are like himself:
Which seems to be more briefly comprised in that speech of Melanthus in
Homer. Odiss. lib. 17.


(...).

Of which sentence Plato makes mention; Always God guides like unto like.
and adds thereto, In (...) and in (...) and de (...) li 6. Deleg. lib. 8.
that every thing does necessarily love, and naturally both incline and adhere
to that whereto it is like. Again he affirms, that a friend is one like unto
a man's self; and that therefore dissimilitude makes friendship hard, rough
and easy to be changed. Ethic. lib. 8.
Wherein he is also followed by Arist^tle, who accounts friendship a kind of
similitude; from whence the common saying did proceed; (...): Like unto like:
to which purpose he cites also a saying of Empedocles; (...); Like desires
the like. And generally he concludes thus: Likeness seems to be the ground
of friendship. (...).


Alcinous, one of Platoes followers says, that friendship is nothing else but
a mutual goodwill, whereby we equal others to our selves; Iab. de duct. Plat.
ca. 32.
which equality is neither begun nor held but by similitude. Chalcidius,
another of the same school delivers as an opinion of Pythagoras, In comment.
in (...) P^at. ad Osum.
that nothing is comprehended but by the like; and to that purpose he alleges
certain verses of Empedocles.

Cicero, In 1. Cicero D. de P^n. se pro. Aul. Cl^ento.
in that oration which Triphonius, one of the authors of the civil law does
cite, uses these words; Hoc fere scitis omnes, qu inta^ vim habeat ad
coniungendas amicitias studioru^ ac naturae similitudo; This all of you do
know, of what fo^ce is similitude of studies and of nature, to join
friendship. Again he writes: De amic. (...).
Nothing does so allure and draw to anything, as similitude does to friendship.
Hereto agrees also that of Pliny: Iah. 4. Epist. ad Fandanum. E^t ad
connectend^s animos vel t^^atissinium vinculum similitudo.
Similitude is a most firm band, to knit and fasten minds together. Iab. 7.
rei rust.
Columella accounts this band to be natural: So does Symmachus Sym. in Epist.
: And Pliny, an excellent interpreter of nature, does teach, Lib. 56. ca. 42.
that insensible creatures which have no similitude by nature, as stone and
wood, iron and clay, are never firmly joined together. All this is confirmed
by express sentence of the Canon law C. Nerui.. quod melius. 13 di. c.
transmissam. de elect.
. This the ancient wisemen did also shadow, by the fable of an earthen pot,
which refused to join in help with a brass pot in laboring against the
stream: and again by the fable of a fuller, who denied that he could dwell in
one house with a Colier. This did the poets also signify, when they fained
Narcissus to be in love with his image. For what is more like unto us then our
own image? and whosoever loves another man, what else does he love but his
own image in him?

From hence it proceeds, I. cum qui. C. de Ep. and Cle. c. inter
solicitudines. de pur. ca. c. clericus di. 81. c. peruenit. 2. q. 7. c. di
dici. 1. q. 7.
that a man is judged like unto those, with whom he holds familiarity and
friendship. And Angelus says, Ang. in auth. de mona.. cogitandum.
that a witness deposes well, when he testifies that a man is good or evil,
because he sees him converse with men of good or evil fame and report. Which
is also confirmed by Baldus Bald. in l. dat. C. qui acca. ^po.
and by the Glossographer Glo. in ^cum oportet. de acc. and in c. definimus 18.
q. 2.
, and generally by all interpreters both of the Canon and Civil law. To whose
sentence we may add that which Cice has most elegantly written: De offic li.
2. Facillim: aut^m and in meliorem partem cognoscuntur adolescentes. etc.
Young men are most easily known, and for the better part, who join themselves
to men famous, and wise, and of good advise for the common wealth: with whom if
they be often conversant, they raise an opinion among the people, that they
will be like unto those whom they chose to imitate. Suetonius reports of
Claudius Caesar, In Claud.
that by conuersing with base men, to his old note of negligence and sloth, he
added the infamy of drunkenness and dicing. Pliny speaking of a certain young
man says: He lives with Spurma, Epist. lib. 4. ad Falconem. Viuit cum Spurma,
viuit, etc.
he lives with Antonie, hereby you may conjecture how his youth is reformed,
seeing he is so loved of grave old men. For that is a most true saying: (...):
Every man is like unto those, Ad Cleomacham, and ad Nesum.
in whose company he does delight. Libanius Antiochenus in like manner
writes: We are commonly esteemed like unto those who are joined with us in
friendship and society. Ad Demetriadem.
Here hence. S. Hierome advises Demetriades, to have always grave women in
her company: because the quality and disposition of women is commonly judged,
by the behauior of those that do either accompany or attend them. And
therefore Baldus does not unfitly put Judges in mind that they enquire with what
persons he did usually converse, In tract. quaestio.
who is accused of any crime. Which before him Albert. Tract. de mases. tit de
praes. and ind. d^bit. and tit. de qu. and tor.
Gand. did think worthy to be often given in advise.

So then, seeing likeness is a great cause of liking and of love, it
follows, that to make a perfect Union and amity between two diverse nations,
all differences must be removed, and both people reduced to one common
conformity; and that especially in three things. First, in habit and
behavior; secondly in language; thirdly in name.

CHAP. IX. Of conformity in habit and behavior.
COncerning habit and attire, Lib. 4. (...)
Herodian writes, that Antoninus, to make the Germans assured unto him, would
often apparel himself after their fashion: wearing a cassocke according to
their use embroidered with silver, and putting upon his head a peruque of
yealow hair, cut after the Germane manner: wherein the Barbarians taking
pleasure, they did thereupon exceedingly affect him. For the same cause when
he went into Thracia and Macedonia, he suited himself in Macedonian attire.
Herod. lib. 4.
And this he did (very like) in imitation of Alexander the Great, who, as well
to vanquish the affections of the Persians, Q. Curt. lib. 3.
as he had subdued their power, accommodated himself to the fashion of their
attire. For Antoninus did ambitiously aspire to the imitation of Alexander: to
whose virtues he either supposed himself, or would be thought, to have
attained so near, that he caused diverse ridiculous pictures to be made, (...).
having one body and two faces; one representing Alexander, and the other
himself.

In ancient times in Rome, and afterward in Constantinople, certain games of
running were used, with Chariot and upon horse; which continuing until the
time of Phocas the Emperor, the runners began to cloathe themselves in
different colors; some in green, and some in gray. The common people which
beheld these games began to be divided in affection, some applauding the one
color, and some the other: hereupon was kindled, first emul^tion, and then
^n^ie, watch did use by degrees to such violence and extremity. that the games
ceasing, the colors were for a long time maintained; and infinite murders
were thereupon committed in Syria, Egypt, Graecia, and diverse other provinces,
which the Emperors by their letters were not able to repress. Hereupon so
many laws have been occasioned against liueries and badges, the mischiefs
whereof were most famous with us, in the late badges of the white Rose and the
red. And for this cause I do not only allow but commend the policy of King
William of Normandy, by whom (as most industrious Master Stow has noted) the
English were compelled to imitate the Normanes, in habit of apparel, shauing
of their beards, service at the table, and all other outward gestures; as
supposing by outward similitude to draw both people to similitude in minds.
D. (...). 41.. si.
Gratian advises, to conform our selves in the fashion of attire, with those
with whom we do converse: affirming that whosoever does otherwise, either he
is intemperate, or else superstitious. The Glossographer (...)
also aduertiseth, that for the manner of our apparel, we respect the custom
of the country wherein we do abide. And in this he is seconded by Panormitane,
Benedict, Caprea (...)
, Speculator (...)
and Baldus (...)
: by S. Thomas also (...)
, and Astensanus (...)
: and lastly by S. Hierome (...)
, who commends Nepotianus for observing this rule.

As for conformity in behavior and manner of life, Josephus writes (...).
, that it is the chiefest means to cause concord and agreement in a city.
Herodian declares, that when Antoninus desired the daughter of Artabanus,
Hero. li. 4.
King of Parthia in marriage, and therewith an association to be made between
the two Empires; (...).
Artabanus returned answer, that there could be no true concord between
them, as neither agreeing in language and differing both in apparel, and in
their manners and customs of life. Our late trauailers do report, that the
inhabitants of the Island Iapan hold immortal and merciless variance with the
people of China: I0. Hui^h^n Van (...). lib. 1. ca. 26
and the rather to manifest the same, they differ from them in all the
ceremonies of their behavior. As namely, where the men of China use the
courtesy of salutation by uncovering the head, they of Iapan do the like by
putting off their shoes: where the men of China stand up in giving
entertainment, they of Iapan sit themselves down. And upon the same desire of
difference, they use all means to have their teeth and hair black; they sit
in house with cloakes upon their shoulders, and lay them aside when they go
abroad; their daughters and maid-seruants go before their women, and their
men-seruants come behind. By which and diverse other contrarieties in
behavior, the opposition of their minds is mightily maintained. De doctrina
Christ. lib. 3.
For this cause S. Augustine advises us, that in transitory matters we
separate not from the custom of those, with whom we live. And again, by the
authority of S. Ambrose, he concludes it to be convenient, that into what
place soever we come, we apply our selves to the fashions thereof; if we will
not be offensive to any man, Si cuiquam ne^ (...) esse scandal^m (...) quam
tibl.
nor have any man offensive unto us.

CHAP. X. Of conformity in language.
Conformity of language and of speech, was very general under the Empire of
Rome: which, whether it were enforced by the Romans, upon the provinces which
they did subdue, or whether the people did voluntarily fall into it, 19. De
ciuit.
many make a question. S. Augustine accounts it the fact of the imperious
City; which word imperious, whether he used in the best sense, for bearing
rule, or in the worst, for sharp and severe, it is not material: for many
things are severe, which are not unjust, which are not unprofitable. Assuredly,
this change of speech is no ways contrary to natural equity; because one
language does no more proceed from nature than another. It may seem hard (I
grant) to impose a change of language upon any people; but it seems more
hard, to be joined with men of a strange tongue: such as are unto us the
Spaniards and French. This does God threaten as a plague to those that obey not
his commandments: The Lord shall bring a nation upon thee, Deuteronomy. 28. 49.
whose tongue thou shall not understand. And again, by the Prophet Jeremy he
menaced the Jews, ler. 5. 15.
that he would bring a nation upon them, whose language they knew not, neither
understood what they did say. Likewise he threatens by the Prophet Esaias, Esa.
28. 11.
that with a stamm^ring tongue, and in a strange language he will speak unto
his people. And to the contrary, it is reputed by the Prophet David, Psalm ^.
114.
as a great blessing and benefit of God, that the Jews were brought from among
a people of a strange language. And howsoever S. Augustine terms Rome
Imperious, for changing of languages, Ianguarum diuersitas ^ominem alienat ab
homine.
yet otherwhere he says; Diversity of tongues makes one man a stranger to
another. For, as Philo Phi. de sp. le.
witnesses, society of men is maintained by speech, as being the interpreter
or rather expresser of the mind: to which purpose he has wrote many things,
in his book which is entitled of the confusion of tongues. To these I will
adioyne the oracle of Philosophy, Plato, who does truly determine those to be
Barbarians, who in the manner both of their language and life hold no
community or resemblance together.

But all these differences do little concern the case in question. They are
rather considerable in regard of the Irish, touching whom, the report is both
constant and of credit, that being Henry the eighth if not endeavored, yet
purposed to reduce them, to one form both of habit and language with the
English: But if we compare together the English and the Scots, in regard of
habit (as Sosia said in Plautus) non lac lacti magis est simile; milk is not
liker to milk than one of them is to the other. In amphit.
Concerning behauior and manner of life, we may truly say of both people as
Aristotle said of the Persians; Pic. 10. and Ph. 31.
We cannot possibly change their hearts, except we also change their heaven.
For they are both of one climate, not only annexed entirely together, but
separated from all the world besides, which joined with daily society and
commerce, will necessarily maintain conformity in conditions. And as for
language, even in Zetland, and in the most distant islands inhabited by Scots,
English preachers are well understood of the common people: so that it
seems, that if the two nations were reduced under one common name, there
should remain between them very little general, either note of difference,
or provocation of dislike.

CHAP. XI. Of conformity in name.
FOr, that the bearing of one name does both cause and increase affection and
favor, it may appear by a case which Papinian does form; In Leum silius.
pater. D. de l. g. 2.
wherein a certain testator deuiseth the greatest portion of his estate to
Sempronius his nephew, for the honor of his name: because (as Accursius there
notes) Sempronius did bear the testators name. Laertius in like sort writes,
that Lycon Astianax, a cerraine philosopher, in his testament among other
things disposed thus. Whatsoever I have in the city or in Aegina, I do
principally give to Lycon my brother; because he bears my name.

When Iunius Brutus had expelled the government of Kings out of Rome, being
stirred thereto, as well upon hatred as desire to be chief, two respects which
lead men easily into desperate adventures, Liuie writes, Lib. 1.
that he banished Tarquinus Collatinus, who had been husband to Lucrece, and
was his fellow Consul, as one that had been very forward in advancing the
enterprise: and this he did for no other cause, but for that he bare the same
name with Tarquinus Superbus the expelled King.

Upon variances which began between Frederick the second Emperor, and Pope
Gregory the ninth, all Italy except Venice, was divided into the two factions
of Guelphes and Gebelines. Afterward when the contentions ceased between the
Emperors and the Popes, these factions continued, or rather increased, without
any other foundation, either of suspicion or of hate, (most mighty passions to
drive on disordered thoughts) but only for diversity of name. Hereupon many
insolences, many murders and parricides were daily committed. Neither was the
cruelty discharged upon the persons of men only, but houses were ruined,
towns were ransacked, fields were wasted, all extremities were pursued with a
greater heat of hate, than if it had been against infidels or traitors. And to
so high a pitch did this enmity rise, that they could not endure any
conformity; not in ensigns, not in colors, not in fashion of their apparel;
in disports, in feasts, in the manner of their going, riding, speaking,
feeding, and generally in all things they affected a difference.

The like cruelties have been exercised between diverse families of Italy,
France, England, Scotland, and many other Christian countries: the beginning
whereof has commonly risen upon some private either interest or revenge; but
growing into faction, they have been prosecuted and continued either only or
principally upon difference in name. Hereupon Dio writes, that Maecenas
counseled Augustus, (...). Dio. lib. 52. Hail. lib. 2.
that it was the fairest means to cut off emulation and hate, not to permit
vain names, or any other thing that might hold men in difference. And so D.
Haillan notes that to make a perfect reconcilement between the Dukes of
Burgundy and Orleans, in the time of Jews the cleuenth, the factious names of
Burguignion and Orleannois were taken away. So likewise the Adorni and Fregosi,
two families in Genoa, after they had wearied and almost wasted themselves with
mutual cruelties, left their old names, as the only means both to draw on
and hold their reconcilement. And this did S. Paul in good time foresee, when
he blamed the Corinthians for dividing in name; some holding of Paul, some of
Apollos, and some of Cephas.

Seeing then that the bearing of one name is a mean to knit men in affection
and friendship; seeing also that difference in name does often maintain men in
division of mind; what shall we say of them, who more contemning the benefit of
Union, than examining the parts and circumstances thereof, do openly object,
that they see neither urgent necessity, nor evident utility in comprehending
the English and the Scots under one common name? that they find no grief in
their present state, and can foresee no advancement to a better condition by
this change? Shall we say that their judgment is captiuated by affection? I
cannot, I dare not, I will not hold that opinion of them. I rather fear that
some evil destiny drives them on. For it is an ordinary thing, that when
any hard adventure approaches, it blinds the eyes of men that they cannot
discern, it binds their hands that they cannot help, making them oftentimes
both contriuers and executioners of their own mishap. Assuredly, in regard of
amity there is manifest profit in community of name; in regard of perfect
Union it seems necessary.. Si. quis in nomine Inst. de l^gat.
For seeing (as Justinian says) names do serve to discern and distinguish
one thing from another; it is a rule commonly received, that one thing should
not principally bear two diverse names. Re^ eadem non d^^^t diuerso romine
cons^^l.
Hereupon Baldus concludes, that upon diversity of names we are to presume
diversity of bodies: For every thing is to be distinguished by the proper
name. Res enim singulae singulis sunt nominibus distinguendae.. Alio. inst.
qu^b mod. test. in firm.


So then the bodily Union (as it seems) is not perfect, where there is a
seuerance and distinction in name: much less can two people be perfectly knit
in affection and will, so long as they stand divided in those names, whereby
one of them has lately been very odious to the other. So long as they stand
divided in those names of hostility and hate, not having any common name to
comprise them both, every small accident (as it often happens) may be an
occasion to sort them into sides: and the combining of them otherwise under one
dominion, may prove to be like an imperfect cure, whose fore may afterward more
dangerously break forth.

CHAP. XII. What common name is most fit to comprehend the English and the
Scots: and whether the like change of name has been usual or no.
But no common name can be so fit to comprise as well the people as the
countries of England and Scotland, as is the name of Britain. First, for that
it has been heretofore the ancient common name of all the inhabitants within
this I Will: L. si. vnus.. pactus. D. de pact. and ib. Bar.
and a thing may easily be reduced to the first condition and state.

Secondly, for that since this part of the Island was called England, by
appointment of King Egbert, yet was not the name of Britain altogether cast
off; but was often applied, as well to the kingdom as to the inhabitants, and
by them willingly acknowledged, and sometimes assumed. King Alfred was
entitled, Governor of the Christians of all Britain. King Eldred did write
himself Magnae Britanniae temporale gerens Imperium. King Edgar was styled
Monarch of all Britain. King Henry the second was entitled King of all
Britain, Duke of Gaescoine, Guienne and Normandy. King John had his coin
stamped with this inscription: Johannes Rex Britonum; John King of Britains.
And generally in all ages, but chiefly since learning began last to lift up the
head, the best writers of all nations have termed the inhabitants of this
realm, as well Britains as English.

Thirdly, for that howsoever the parts of this Island have changed name, one
part being called England, another Scotland, and the third Wales; yet the whole
Island, from before the invasion of the Romans until this present time, has
always held the name of Britain, In L. Alc^and^^^ n. 2. C. de decu. and cor.
fill. Assamptio specialis nomi^^s non extinguit nomen generale.
according to that which Bartolus teaches; By assuming a special name, the
general name is not extinguished. So that it seems reasonable, that as by
seuerance of the sovereignty of the whole Island, the kingdoms thereof grew
into difference of name; so the same kingdoms being now drawn into one, it
now bear the name of the whole Island again. And that especially for two
respects. The first is a ground of the civil law: Nomina debent esse
consequentia rebus;. Est and aliud inst. de dona. L. decernimus. C. de ep. and
cl^. L. 1. C de effic. paef vrb. L. defenso^is. C. defens. ciuit.
Names must follow the nature of things. The second is a custom commonly
received whereof Bartolus makes mention: Bar. in L. falsi.. 1. D. de ^al^.
Quando quis mutat statum, semper mutatio nominis fit; Change of state is
always accompanied with change of name.

And chiefly in this change of state, when diverse kingdoms are contracted into
one, the change of name does usually ensue: and that without distinction,
whether the Union has grown by conquest, or by marriage, or by blood, or else
by mutual confederation and consent. De consu. ad Alb. 6.
Hereupon Seneca says: Assiduus humani generis discursus est, quotidie aliquid
in tam magno orb mutatur noua vrbium fundamenta iaciuntur; noua gentium
nomina, extinctis nominibus prioribus, aut in accessionem validioris conuersis
oriuntur: Mankind is in continual motion, every day something is changed in
this great world; new foundations of cities are laid, new names of nations are
raised, the first names being extinguished, or else made an addition to a
greater.

So Tacitus writes, De mor. Germ. 1
that diverse people beyond the Rhene, joining together upon occasion of
enterprise, left their ancient names, and were called Germans, being a new
name of their own invention. Nomine a s^ipsis inuento.
The same people are now also called Almans; not upon any conquest, but either
because of their courage and strength, or else (which I esteem more probable)
because they were a confluence of all sorts of people.

Those Germans who bordered upon the Ocean between the mouths of the rivers
Elbe and Rhene, where the Chauci, and the Cananifates were placed by Tacitus,
joining together in arms to recover their liberty against the Romans, Belli
Goth. li. 1.
Precopius writes, that upon event of diverse victories they changed name, and
called themselves Franci, which in the Germane language signifies free men.
Whereto agrees that which Tacitus says, in describing their first victory
against the Romans: ^ Magna per Italias Galli^^^^ fama, (...) lib^ (...)
celebrantur.
They are honored with great fame through Germany and Gallia for authors of
liberty. These French in course and compass of time seated themselves in
Gallia, and gave name to the kingdom of that place. But after the death of
Clodoueus the first, this kingdom of France was divided among his four
sons; whereupon new titles were erected: Childebert being King of Paris,
Clodomir of Orleans, Clotair of Soissons, and Theodoric a bastard being King of
Metz. After the death of Clotharius, the like division was made among his sons,
none of them being entitled King of France. Both these divisions were united
again by right of blood; whereupon these particular titles did cease, and were
changed into the ancient and general name of France.

In Italy, Aeneas having attained a state by marriage, and collecting diverse
people into one; Lib. 1. Omnes eodem nomine and ^odem iure Latins vocauit.
Liuie says; He joined them in one law, and called them by one name, Latins.
Afterward, when the Romans and the Sabines did knit together into one people,
it was under one common name, Quirites.

The country of Spain by means of diverse conquests, of the Goths, Vandals,
and Moors, was divided into many several kingdoms, not one of them bearing
the name of Spain. These being united again, part by conquest, and part by
inheritance, Charles the fifth comprehended them all under the ancient and
general name of Spain.

I omit the Agarens, who changed their name and would be called Saracens, as
bearing themselves descended from Sara the freewoman, and not from the
bondwoman Hagar. I omit the Heluetians, who now by confederation are called
Suitzers, which name was occasioned by the little village Suitz; for that the
inhabitants thereof were the first attempters of popular liberty. I omit many
other both voluntary and casual changes of name, and will conclude this
matter with one example of our own nation.

When Egbert King of the West Saxons had brought the Heptarchie of the Saxons
under one scepter, he changed not the names of the subdued kingdoms only, he
respected not that he was possessed of the kingdoms of West Saxons and of
Sussex by right of blood; whereof the first had continued in the progenic of
Cerdicius (from whom he was descended) about 300. years, the other had been
annexed thereto almost 200 years before: but changed the names as well of them
as of the rest into one common name of England. So that if we free our minds
from rashness and dullness, the two plagues of judging right; if we esteem
these and the like proceedings by their naked nature and not by apparances
only and shifts, we shall clearly discern, that it is so far from wanting
example, that there is scarce any example to the contrary, that diverse people
have perfectly and for long continuance combined together, whether by conquest,
confederation, or right of blood, but it has been under one common name. But
howsoever the tried truth does stand, it cannot be made so plainly to appear,
but an itching tongue may rub against it. To men fearful or suspicious all
fancies and conjectures seem matters of truth; and words do easily slide into
minds that are inclined to believe.

CHAP. XIII. Of certain objections concerning matters of state inward, or
matters of law.
But, because we have ears as well as tongues, and the lightest reasons will
seem to weigh greatly, if nothing be put in the balance against them, let us
consider what other objections are made against this Union of name, and whether
they be worthy either of yielding or of answering. It is said, that this
alteration of name will ineuitably and infallibly draw on an erection of a new
kingdom or state, and a dissolution and extinguishment of the old; and that no
explanation limitation or reservation can clear or avoid that inconueniencie,
but it will be full of repugnancie or ambiguitie, and subject to much variety
and danger of construction. That diverse special and several confusions
incongruities and mischiefs will necessarily and incidently follow in the
present time. As in sommoning of Parliaments and recital of the acts of
Parliament. In the seals of the kingdom. In the great offices of the
kingdom. In the laws, customs, liberties, and privileges of the kingdom. In
the residence and holding of such courts as follow the Kings person, which by
the generality of name may be held in Scotland. In the several and reciproque
oaths, the one of his Majesty at his coronation, which is never iterated; the
other in the oaths of allegiance homage or obedience, made and renewed from
time to time by the subjects. All which acts instruments and forms of
government, with a multitude of other forms of records, writs, pleadings, and
instruments of a meaner nature run now in the name of England, and upon the
change would be drawn into incertaintie and question.

In truth this is much, if there be much truth in it. But, for my part, I will
not take upon me, either to determine or dispute what the law of the realm is,
concerning either this general point of erection of a new state by alteration
of name, or the particular inconveniences which for the present will ensue;
referring my self herein to the learned Judges and professors of the same.
Yet, under the favor and leave of their judgments, I will propound only two
or three doubts, which will serve much to the clearing of this question;
protesting therewith, that I bear herein rather a desire to be satisfied, than
a purpose to contend.

The first is, how we may be assured, that by the common laws of England the
change of name does infallibly infer, an erection of a new kingdom, and a
dissolution of the old. For, the Common law is commonly taken for the common
custom of the realm: and therefore in making proof thereof we usually hear
alleged, either Judgments and presidents in cases of the same nature, or else
arguments drawn from cases somewhat like. But this case in question has not
hitherto been thus determined by the common laws of England; because the name
of a kingdom has not bin changed since our common laws were therein planted.
Or if it were changed by King Henry the second, and by King John, who styled
themselves Kings of Britain, then was it without dissolution of the state. As
for arguments a similibus, I do not see of what force they can be in case of
the Crown; because by the laws of this realm, the Crown is not touched,
much less ruled and ordered either by general terms or by implication;
neither does any act concern the same, if express mention be not thereof
made. Again, if the change of name does infallibly infer the erection of a
new kingdom, it seems that the King has power by virtue of his Proclamation
to dissolve the whole state and erect a new. Lastly, the little alteration
which ensued the change of the Kings title in Ireland, makes this point more
questionable and suspect.

The second doubt is concerning one of the principal inconveniences which are
alleged, namely an evasion from the reciproque oaths between the King and
the people. For, seeing oaths do altogether concern the soul and
conscience, and therefore are understood and ruled only by the laws of
religion; I do not see how they should receive construction from any nice
point of positive law.

The third is, how all these inconveniences should be, either so certain, or
of such nature and quality, that no provision can clear or avoid them. What?
shall we suspect either the weakness of laws, or the weak wisdom of the
state? Shall we suspect either the wisdom of the state in making of laws, or
the justice thereof in maintaining them? Are laws now of force to hold these
matters in form, and shall they not hereafter be able to do the like? Are
there any such inward difficulties which laws and policies cannot combat and
overcome? For my part I think (and think that I think true) that the wisdom
of the state is far above these or any other inward incommodities: especially
in a Monarchy, where civil matters are easily redressed, by reason of the
supreme authority of the Prince. Neither must we look to enjoy any notable
benefit without some difficulty and inconvenience. When did the clouds make
flourishing fields, without trouble of moisture? when did the Sun yield
plentiful harvest, without annoyance of heat? Such is the weakness of man,
that it cannot bear either good or evil simply, without temperature or allay.

And yet (me think) although all other means to clear these inconveniences
should be perplexed and hard, it should be not difficult and direct to avoid
the same, by changing the Common law in that point only; and by new decree to
establish, that the change of name in the King should not draw on an erection
of a new kingdom, and a dissolution of the old; and that whatsoever has been
done or spoken by the one name, should be received by the other. And this I do
the rather hold not to be unreasonable, for that then the Common law should
herein agree with the Canon and Civil laws; the substance of which laws
(although they be often abased by abuse) is the common practice of all the
world.

Concerning the Canon law Panormitane witnesses: (...)
The Canons attribute no force unto names. Pan. tit. de (...) qui al. nom. Id.
in. li. intern. in si
The Civil law is herein more plentiful and plain: for although it be true
which Bartolus says; (...)
Change of name does usually follow change of state; yet it holds not in
conversion, that change of name does likewise draw with it change of state, but
it is plainly decided to the contrary; (...)
Although the name be changed, yet does the condition thereby receive no
change. And this did Dioclesian and Maximinian (...) nom. Nallo ex hoc preiud
cio futura.
by their imperial constitution decree, or rather they declared it to have
been often decreed before, that as names were freely imposed at the first, so
the change of them is not dangerous, if it be done without deceit. And
therefore they that are free may lawfully change name, as it has been often
ordained, without any prejudice thereby to themselves. The reason hereof is
plain: first in nature; because by change of accidents the substance does not
change Mutatio in non substantialibus, non d^tur nouum constitucre. Decia. 5.
pr. 4.
: secondly in law, because names are imposed at pleasure and do serve for
signification of things only. Si quis in nomine. (...). de leg. (...) D. si.
cer. pet. l. 6. D. de reb. (...).
, which, so as they may be understood, it is little material what either name
or means be therein used. It suffices only that they be known, whether by
one name, or by another, or by any description or demonstration, which are
equivalent to a name. And sometimes it happens (as Cicero says (...). b. 1.
(...). and epist. lib. 9. ad (...) Patum.
) that things are better understood by other names, than by their own.
Hereupon the interpreters of the Civil law do agree Glo. (...). and (...) D.
fol. (...) n^min^us, pert^^bus relin suitur.
, that so long as there is no question of the body, we are not to have regard
to the name; and that disputation about names, is to be left unto them who are
obstinately contentious.

And this either declaration or change of this point of Common law, would not
be much unlike to that which was done in the beginning of Queen Mary's
reign. For, because in many ages before the invasion of the Normans, the
souereigntie of state had not been borne by a woman, some curious conceits,
having learned doubts out of leisure, brought into question, whether the laws
which had passed before under the name of King, should then be of force under
the name of Queen. Whereupon a declaration was made; 2. Mar. 2. Par. 1.
that whatsoever statute or law does appoint, that the King of this realm
shall or may have, execute and do, as King, or does give any commodity to the
King, or does appoint any punishment of offenders, against the dignity of the
King, the same, the Queen, being supreme gouernesse, may by the same
authority likewise have, exercise, execute, correct and do, to all intents.

By this means also another doubt may be sufficiently secured, and that is, a
possibility of alienation of the Crown of England to the line of Scotland in
case his Majesty's line should determine: for that, being a new erected kingdom
it must go in the nature of a purchase to y^ next heir of his Majesty's
fathers side. Which, besides that it is against the natural order of
succession, which is observed by all nations, in questions for descent of
Crowns; besides that it is contrary to the Civil laws, whereby the law of
nations is chiefly declared; besides that the peculiar law of England in this
point, if it be clear from question, is neither hard nor inco^uenient to be
changed, seems also so unlike to come to pass, that it appears a vain
thing to busy our thoughts with fear of it. But to men settled in suspicion,
doubts do daily multiply; and nothing is considered and cast, nothing
nourished with more sweet delight than difficulties and dangers. All those
inconveniences are set in view, which jealousy or fear can any ways stir
up, which suffers not them to see, much less to expect or hope for those
benefits, whereof in reason they might stand assured. In their minds lie
vanquished that forwardness and force which men in counsel should especially
express; and whatsoever their travailing thoughts do suspect, the same do
they most certainly expect.

CHAP. XIIII. Of other objections concerning matter of state foreign, or
matter of intercourse.
THe objections which concern matter of contract or commerce with other
Princes and Commonwealths, are more easy to be answered; because they are not
ruled by the peculiar law of any country, but by the common law of Nations.
Bald. 1. cons. 263. 372. 2. 14. 3. 218. 5. 188. 352. Alc. 3. cons. 36. 5. 12.
18. 105. 8. 49. 54.
For so do Baldus and Alciate affirm, that contracts between Princes are not
stricti iuris, but bonae fidei; that they do altogether reject scrupulous
interpretations, and are not to be taken, either in rigorous or strict terms,
or else in subtle sense of positive law, (under which color we do often
err) but according to the law of Nations, according to natural equity, boni
viri arbitrio, according to a good man's conscience, according to plain and
direct meaning, according to right and upright judgment: that they are far
from all fine fetches and streines, much more from malice and plain deceit:
that they intend no subtlety, but simplicity, which Baldus says, Bald. L. 5.
de just.
is the best interpreter of the law of nations. For the law of nations
observes only the simple truth; Bar. C. de his qui in pit. lo. ord su. Ceph.
cons. 713.
the simple truth only is followed by good and faithful meaning: Ceph. cons.
10.
and no interpretation in this case is taken for good, which does not sound
well to common men's ears. This same is by diverse others also very largely
affirmed. Dec. cons. 4. 147 Hott. cons. 15. Decian. 3. cons. 11. chas. ca. p.
5. 10. 27.
Decius, Hottoman, Decianus and Chassaneus do write, that all contracts with
princes and commonwealths are bonae fidei. c. Iurisgentium. did. 1. Cic. 1.
de offic. and 2. de orat.
The Canon law forteth contracts of leagues, of truce and of peace, as
pertaining to the law of nations. Cicero says, that equity is the object of
Foecial law; that it pertains to lawyers to weigh words and syllables, and
not to the professors of military simplicity, which is so many ways favored
by the law. Tac. Agric. Alci. 5. consil. 40. ^ Guic. 5. Sleid. 19.
It is free and secure (says Tacitus, and after him Alciate) and far from
the cunning practices of courts of Plea. And therefore Guicciardine and Sleidan
do worthily blame Charles the fifth, and Jews King of France, because they
brought interpretations of words, and of contracts, which were more fit for
Lawyers, than for a Prince.

So then, by these opinions thus grounded it cannot hold true, that upon change
of name, leagues, treaties, foreign freedoms of trade and traffic, foreign
contracts may be drawn into question, and made subject to quarrel and
cauillation: which is further expressly denied by Panormitane in these words.
In C. tuanos. n. 3 de spons.
Contrahens in propria persona, efficaciter obligatur, licet mutauerit sibi
nomen; and est ratio, quia nomina sunt inuenta significandorum hominum gratia.
Sed ex quo constat de corpore non est curandum de nomine. He that contracteth
in his proper person is effectually bound, although he shall change his name:
the reason is, because names were invented to signify men. But where the body
is certain, we must not have regard to the name. And Vlpian, (...) D. de
conlia^. (...).
one of the authors of the Civil law in like manner aduoweth: If we disagree
about the name, but the body is certain, there is no doubt but the contract
holds good.

And therefore if any Prince shall use pretense of change in name, as a leap
from his contract, whether of consederation or commerce, he exposes himself
thereby both to the hatred and revenge of other Princes, as one that violateth
the law of nations. His fact shall be no more either allowed or followed, than
was that of Pericles; ^ront. 4. ca. 7.
who, having passed a promise of safety to his enemies, Si ferrum deponerent,
slew them for that they had iron buttons upon their caslocks. Or that of the
Plataeenses; who, Thucid. lib. 2.
having couenanted to restore certain prisoners, delivered them slain. Or
that of Alexander, Diod. 17. Polye. 4. At. 4. ^lut. Ale^. Lon.
who, having conditioned safe departure to certain soldiers which had held a
city against him, slew them when they were a little upon their way. Or that of
the Romans; who, V^len. Max. 7. ca. ^.
having couenanted that they should take half the ships of Antioc^us, brake
all his ships in pieces, and took half of every ship. Or that of those
Romans; who, (...)
being discharged by Anniball upon oath to return, if other captives should
not be delivered for them, supposed themselves to be free of their says, for
that presently after they were departed out of the camp, they returned again,
as having forgotten to take something with them. Stro. ^. Poly. 6. 7. (...).
Or that of Agnon, Cleomenes, and of the Thracians; who, having made a surcease
of arms for certain days, attempted hostility against their enemies in the
night. Polye. 6.
Or that of the Graecians; who, having bound themselves for delivery of ships,
delivered them without ruthers, oars or sails. Or that of the Locrians; who,
having contracted perpetual peace, so long as they should tread upon that
earth, and bear those heads upon their shoulders, shaking forth some earth
which they had privily put within their shoes, and casting away those heads of
onions, which they had laid upon their shoulders, they brake suddenly into
war against those who by this abuse had been made secure. Herod. 4. Polye. 7.
Or that of Ariandes and the Persians; who, having couena^ed friendship so long
as that earth should stand, by sincking the earth whereupon they stood, which
had been of purpose made hollow before, they did bear themselves discharged of
their oath. Pont. li. de. V. O.
Or that of the Perusini in Italy; who, having made peace with the Pope so long
as they should bear de vite in their bodies, which word in the Italian
language signifies both life, and vine, having cast away certain vinebranches
which they did bear secretly in their bosoms, they surprised the Pope with
unexpected arms.

These and the like subtle and sophistical sleights have always been
equalled to flat falsehood and violation of faith; they have always been
esteemed beneath the degree of any base railing or reproach. And whosoever does
use such auoydances and shifts, they are never to be held assured in faith;
because they will not want one evasion or other, when occasion shall serve for
their advantage. But (as I said before) in contracts of this high nature, Bald.
5. cons. 305.
it is both dishonorable and unjust not only to infer fraudulent
interpretations, but to enforce contentio^s upon any strict points of law, 3.
Cons. 102.
which (as Decianus says) in favorable contracts are never regarded: because
by too much subtlety they do often overthrow the truth of meaning. Dec. 3.
con. 84.
For, nothing is more contrary unto truth, than over sharp subtlety upon
words.

Of no less truth can it be that the Kings precedence before other Christian
kings (which is governed by antiquity of kingdoms and not by greatness) may
by this change of laws be endaungered, and place turned last, because it is
the newest. For, by the common law of nations (the equity whereof is held to
be most lively expressed in the Civil law) so long as the people do remain
the same, and loose no point of their liberty and honor, there can be no
inward change, whether of name, of seat, of title, or of form of government,
whereby the dignity of their state may be endaungered. Of name I have
sufficiently written before. And concerning change of state, it was the same
Empire whose principal seat was at Rome, and at Constantinople, and at
Rauenna, and at Prage. And although it loses in one part and gains on the
other; although it be removed thereby out of the original seat, yet does it
remain the same Empire. L. 64. D. de euict.
Even as a field remains the same which loses upon one part by alluuion of
waters, and wins upon the other: or as it remains the same sea, which
leaves one part of earth, and possesses another: or as it remains the same
river which does altogether change the channel.

For change of title we have an eui^ent example in the country of Bohemia.
For, when that form of election of the German Emperor was established which
is yet in use, the Duke of Bohemia had authority to give his voice, in case
the other six Electors should be equally divided. Afterward, the Duke was
advanced to the title of a King; which was held no such alteration in that
state, that his priuiledg should be thereby either renewed or lost.

The greatest doubt is concerning change in form of government; because upon
change in form, L. 9.. si quis. D. ad exhib.
the substance is always esteemed diverse. But this is not true in accidental
forms; it is true in that thing only whereof the substantial form does
perish. When the Kings were expelled out of Rome, the Monarchical form of
that government did change, and thereupon the Monarchical Empire of Rome did
cease; but the Empire of Rome did not therefore cease. The Roman Empire did
always remain, although the government thereof was sometimes regal, sometimes
popular, and sometimes mixed: although the sovereignty was transferred, from
Kings to Consuls, and from Consuls to Emperors; and although these Emperors
did hold, sometimes by succession, and sometimes by election; and that
sometimes of the soldiers, and sometimes of the Senate, and now of the seven
Electors. The form of government which was accidental, did change; but the
substantial form of Empire did remain.

But then does a kingdom or Empire dissolve, when it loses the liberty; and
then is a state newly erected, when it begins to be held free, either from
subjection or dependancie upon any other. Of the first Vlpian speaks: L. 209.
D. de in. reg.
Seruitutem mortalitati comparamus; We compare servitude unto death. Of the
second Modestinus: L. 4. D. de ca. mi.
Eo die incipit statum habere, cum manumittitur; State and liberty begin
together. So did all those kingdoms and commonwealths cease, says Decianus,
Dec. 3. con. 19.
which were oppressed by the arms of the Romans: and so were those states
newly erected, which could free themselves from that subjection.

And in truth by no other means a state can be said to perish or cease,
according to the law of Nations, but either by yielding it self into
subjection, or else by being possessed with the power and arms of external
enemies. But this fails again in three cases. Arg. l. 1. de flu. and l. 1.
de riu. Alc. 5. cons. 69.
First, when any part is retained free. For that kingdom or Empire cease
not, whereof any parcel is held at liberty; because the least part of a
kingdom (either for hope of restitution, or for some other favorable respect)
does conserve both the name and right of the whole: even as the right of a
College or of an University may be retained in one, Bald. in Prooem. D. and
l. 9. de leg^. ^. ^an. Ca. l. 22. de leg. 1.
although in one it cannot be erected. Another is, if a kingdom be ouerrunne
and spoiled by enemies, but they depart again, not holding the same in their
possession and power. For this is as if a field should be surrounded with
waters, Inst. de rer. diu.
which in short time falling away, leaves it in the same condition and state
as it was before. ^lin. lib. 2. cap. 103.
And so the rivers Niger and Tigris do remain the same, although they run
many miles under ground. The third is, when the Victorer pretends title to
the state, and intends only to reign as King.

CHAP. XV. Of other objections which concern honor and reputation.
NOw, the last sort of objections which concern honor and reputation, are
full of very empty easiness: and seem to serve rather for show, than for
strength; to supply number, but nothing at all to increase weight. These are,
that by this change, the glory and good acceptance of the English name and
nation, will be in foreign parts obscured: that no worldly thing is deerer to
men than their name, as we see in great families, that men disinherit their
daughters to continue their name; much more in states, where the name has been
famous and honorable: that the contracted name of Britain, will bring into
oblivion the names of England and Scotland: that whereas England in the style
is now placed before Scotland, in the name of Britain, that degree of
prioritie and precedence will be lost: and that the change of name will be
harsh in the popular opinion, and unpleasing to the country.

Of all these objections, the more I think, the less I know what to think.
For as I can suspect nothing less than want of judgment in those that cast
these inconveniences, so do they appear unto me neither so certain, nor of
such quality, that for avoiding of them we should omit an advantage, both
present, and of great consequence and weight. Although the 7. kingdoms of the
Saxons were comprised under the name of England, yet their several names do
still, and are still like to remain: and can we imagine that the names of
England and of Scotland, both more famous and of longer continuance, will
suddenly be either worn out or obscured? Cannot the name be altered, but it
must also be forgotten? Or can we account the name of Britain either so new
or so harsh, which has continued to be the name, generally of the whole
Island, but more specially of the parts of England and Wales, ever since before
the invasion of the Romans? Or shall we contend for general precedence with
them, with whom we intend, or at least pretend desire to be one? Can prioritie
and unity stand together? Some (I grant) upon fond affection to their name
have disinherited their daughters; but they were never allowed therein, by any
well grounded opinion. S. Augustine says, If any man disinheriteth his
daughter and makes another his heir, Alium quaerat consultorem, non
Augustinum.
let him seek what Counsailer he can, he shall never be advised thereto by
Augustine. Assuredly, I fear that it is with us, as with some good women, who
are often sick, forsooth, but in faith they cannot well tell where. Our fancies
run, that something will be amiss; but neither can it be well discerned by
others, neither is it fully perhaps resolved by our selves. Things of greatest
surety breed many doubts in minds that are determined to believe the
contrary; whereas, in matters of this nature, all points are not always cast
into question which may possibly happen; for that many inconveniences are in
imagination only; many are, either dissolved by time, or by industry avoided:
much less are we bound to listen unto those, who confounding fear with
discretion, or else covering some corrupt conceit under the name of foresight
and prevention, do stretch their thoughts beyond probability, and make all
doubtful accidents as if they were certain. Liu. c. lib. 22.
Agendo audendoque res Romana creuit, non his segnibus consilijs, quae timidi
cauta vocant: By doing and by daring (says Liuie) the affairs of Rome took
increase; not by these dull and heavy counsels which timorous men do term
wary. A wit too curious in casting of doubts for the most part hurts; and
he that omitteth an opportunity present upon supposed dangers (if they be not
both certain and also near) shall never advance his own advantage.

King Henry the seventh aimed at this Union, when he married his eldest
daughter Margaret into Scotland. King Henry the eight and all the chief
Nobility of the realm expressly desired it, when they labored to have a
marriage knit between Edward and Mary, the two young Princes of both the
kingdoms. In soliciting this marriage, the English made offer to communicate to
the Scots the liberties and privileges of their state, and to be joined with
them in the common name of Britain; as appears by a letter of the Duke of
Somerset yet extant. For not obtaining this marriage, they led an Army into
Scotland, and joined fight with the Scots in Muscelborough fields. These
attempts not succeeding; our evil fortune having frustrated these good
endeavors; lo here, our felicity now offers us to kiss her cheeks; our
wish, lo here; and that which lately neither by amity nor by arms we were
able to effect, lo here, is freely presented unto us. Seeing therefore our
good fortune has now concurred with the good favor and inclination of men, in
opening this opportunity unto us, shall we deal so far against all good
office and expectation, as not to seem content with our bliss? Shall we all
shut, or rather pull out our eyes, because a few do not seem to see? Or shall
we, like some men, when a great good happens unto them, think our selves in
a dream, and not have power to taste our good? Shall we bury benefits with
suspicions? Shall we labor, with counsels fearful and broken to obscure,
or with dregs of doubts and iealousies to defile our own glory? Must we be
entreated (like mad men) to be good to our selves?

I fear nothing less in us, than such want of wisdom; I fear nothing
less, than that in minds so well instructed, Pessimum very affectus venenum
sua cuique vtilitas. Ta. Histo.
particular respects (the bane, as Tacitus speaks, of true affection) should
not be far inferior to the consideration of common greatness and glory.
Only I wish by way of warning, that we be not too much amazed at every
accidental change, fearing we know not what, like a Dear, which then looks
most about when he comes to the best feed. Or that we be not more regardfull
of light harms that are but in show, than mindful to foresee, least with
loss of assured benefits, great dangers also resolve into effects; least by
obstinate confirmation of our first advice such firebrands of faction be
kindled amongst us, as cannot be quenched but in the blood of the state. It is
good to join action to opportunity. Time is thankful to such as will
apprehend it, and favors them with occasions convenient: but it was not
unfitly portrayed by Lycippus, with Hindes feet, and Eagles wings, hairie
before, and smooth behind; in token that if it be not taken when it comes, it
cannot be overtaken when it is gone. Fortune is serviceable to those that are
forward: but they that are either careless or slow when advantage is offered,
do seldom manage their affairs to an honorable issue.

For this cause confidence for the most part is less hurtful to affairs,
than faint fear, which under the fair names of foresight and prevention,
loses many benefits, which either our own felicity, or the industry of
other men presents unto us. It bears show of slow and sober wariness; but
it is often supported with the insolency and rashness of turbulent spirits,
which partly by incapacitie, and partly by particular respects, hold all things
in confusion. For timorousness and insolency are commonly joined in the same
subject. It is not foresight but fear to provide beyond probability: but to
cast many inconveniences, either contemptible, or but in show, does savor of
some other passion of worse nature.

I will not proceed to charge any man with artificial doubling, first in
casting forth a light labor for Union, and then in disposing and dispersing
these objections against it: I will not (howsoever provoked) either aggrauate
or apply the quality of this dealing. But again I will advise (for I think
it not unfit to be repeated) that we show not our selves too subtle in
suspicions; making our own fantasies the true measure of all our actions. That
by moderation of mind we rather seek increase of friends, than by new attempts
to procure daily new enemies; by reason whereof in the end we must be, either
masters of all, or scourged by all: and which of these is likest to happen it
may be easily coniectured, if we be not set to deceive our selves.

FINIS.

