FLY FROM EVEL DO GOOD



DAVID'S tears By Sr John Hayward knight, Doc. of Law

LONDON Printed by John Bill. 1623.



TO THE READER.
Having finished my SANCTVARIE, and finding it to have taken root and life for
some continuance; I could not conceive any better employment of those hours,
which I have resolved to sequester for exercises in this kind; then in making
my conceptions legible upon those Psalms of DAVID, which lively describe, both
the form and the force of true repentance. Partly in regard of the general
dignity of the whole Book of Psalms, largely extolled by many; but chiefly in
regard of the eminent excellency of these Penitential Psalms, which
hereafter I entend particularly to declare. And herein I aim at no private
end, but design, and resign my endeavors wholly to the Glory of the
All-powerfull GOD: to whom Glory is so proper, that nothing is more repugnant
to reason, then either not to attribute it to him, or to seek to draw it to
our selves.

For albeit GOD, who is all fullness and perf^ction, cannot receive access or
increase; yet by praising and blessing his exterior works, we enlarge and
spread his glory to others. This praise and glory, because we cannot
incorporate into his essence, whereto no addition can be made: we are said to
attribute to his NAME. For the NAME of a thing is separate, and external from
the thing which it serves to signify; and neither a part nor of the substance
thereof.

But we on the other side, are inwardly hollow and empty, and always wanting
some amendment. Wherefore we have enough to do to labor in repairing that. We
must not play our part for exterior shows; but inwardly, within our selves,
where no eyes shine but our own. Otherwise we shall be like to an Egg long
covered with salt; the shell whereof will be fair and sound, but the inward
substance altogether consumed. Or like an unwise hunger-starued beggar; more
desirous of a fair garment, then of necessary meat. He who seeks himself
abroad; who regardes more what he is to to others, then to himself; who does
honestly, because he would be so esteemed; shall never produce profitable
effect. As the intention is vain, so will be the event. But if constantly we
pursue reason and piety, let approbation of others follow if it please: as
neither vainly desired, so not rigidly to be contemned.

Much less must they expect any benefit by their travails, who retire
themselves to private studies. For they live not out of themselves, they study
not other men's humors, they apply not their thoughts to the time. And this is
the reason wherefore many well esteemed for sufficiency, whose virtue forbids
them to be base, hang under the wheel, and cannot advance. Yea, sometimes it
happens, that whilst they are most honestly busied, men of scornful and
beggarly ignorance, separate from all imitable qualities or endeauours, will be
nimble to nippe from them such small matters as they have.

I confess I have been bitten by some such Vipers; who think nothing
sufficient that they have, nothing dishonest that they do. But I envy not the
gravel in any man's throat. It suffices for me that I have attained a quiet
contented life, free either from anguish in my self, or envy at others: free
either from wishing great matters, or wanting some small: a life fit for
serious cogitations.

The rich compositions of Ancient times, I reverence and admire; they do not
only satisfy, but astonish me. I see them not to the depth, but I see them so
far, that I conceive the farthest reach of our age cannot nearly approach
them. Of my own productions, never any did fully content me, and the
approbation of others is no warrant to my own judgment; tender and severe in
what I do. They may happily be somewhat sprinkled over, but thoroughly died, I
conceive they are not. And in case any thing be excusable in them, it is not in
regard of themselves, but in comparison of some other form-lesse vnsinewie
writings; whereto notwithstanding I find good allowance to be given.
Assuredly, knowing my own ignorance and defects, I wonder much at the constant
assurance of many others.

But modesty forbids us to speak good or ill of our selves. I have here
undertaken a difficult task, in writing upon these high parts of Scripture. I
did put forth two of these psalms at the first, for an assay, as before I did
the like in my Sanctuary. And finding some acceptance I have now added a
third: and intend to proceed in some of the rest. And wherein I find no
encouragement from others, I will remain satisfied with my own contentments
For by entertayning my thoughts in these sweet retreits, how many tedious and
frivolous cogitations have I avoided? How many indignities and discontentments
have I therein buried? Let others hungerly hunt after favor and wealth, the
common drudgery of the world: let them spend their spirit and honesty in
uncivil underminings. I desire and pray, that this heavenly harmony may
always ring in my ears; that I may close the last period of my life with one
of these songs of Sion.

Nunquid Zimri pax etc. HOM. Il. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
TAM grauis ille mihi nigri
quam limina ditis.
Ore aliud qut fert, aliud sub
pectore celat.
AS dale of death,
so do I hate that kind;
whose tongue from thought,
whose mouth dissents from mind.
DAVID'S TEARS.
PSALM VI.
O LORD rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2 Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am weak: O LORD heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

3 My soul is also sore troubled: but LORD how long will thou punish me?

4 Turn thee, O LORD, and deliver my soul: Oh save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with
my tears.

7 My beauty is (...) for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

8 Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the LORD has heard the voice of
my weeping.

9 The LORD has heard my petition: the LORD will receive my prayer.

10 All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.


Of the title and parts of this PSALM. 1 THE inscription of this Psalm. 2.
The Author thereof. 3. Wherefore David watered his bed with tears. 4 Our
conflicts in this life, and the weapons thereof. 5 Wherefore the just are said
to flourish like a palm tree. 6 Wherefore this Psalm is entitled, To him
that vanquisheth. 7. The parts of this Psalm.


THis is the first of those Psalms which are called Penitential; and according
to the version of Saint Hierome and of Felix, bears this inscription or
title, A Psalm of (pro octaua) for an instrument of eight strings.

For, that David was the Author of this Psalm, it both anciently and
generally so received, but because diverse passages of the Psalm do plainly
seem to import no less. For therein is lively expressed a most exquisite
sense of sorrow and grief; agreeable, as well to the greatness both of the
person and sin of David, as to the large measure of grace, which afterward he
did obtain. It makes mention also of ( stratum) a kind of couch used by men
of eminent David had defiled with adulterous embracements, so did he there
chiefly exercise his sorrow, so did he there plentifully power forth his
tears. Verily, as the sins of Princes are never small; so their great sins
require a great and high degree of repentance.

the just shall flourish as a Palm tree. Psalm. 92.11
For as the Palm tree does flourish best under greatest weight; so under many
difficulties and oppressions the just must mount to their highest hopes. And
therefore because by these arms David did prevail, not only against his
outward enemies, not only against his inward troubles and perplexities, but
against the wrath and vengeance of Almighty GOD: because by these means
triumph: this Psalm is entitled, To him that vanquisheth: therefore also it
was appointed to be sung upon an instrument of eight strings, called Octaua;
upon which, as S. Hierome says, Super paral. ca. 15. In Ci^haris pro Octaua,
can^bant Epinicion.
they used to sing Psalms of triumph and joy. And so this Psalm falls
naturally into two principal parts, as in the Table following does appear.

In this Psalm of David is contained his sorrow and conflict, wherein is
expressed a fearful apprehension of GODS Justice, verse. 1. an humble petition
for his mercy, and that under many reasons, whereof some are drawn from
himself; and namely from his weakness, v. 2. troubles in body v. 2. soul,
v. 3.

GOD: and namely from his mercy, ver. 4. wisdom, ver. 5. justice, ver. 6.
power, ver. 7.


Victory and Joy, in regard of his reconciliation with GOD, ver. 8. and 9. the
confusion of his enemies, ver. 10.


VERSE. 1. O LORD rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chastise me in thy
displeasure.


1 EVery sin is infinite, and wherefore. 2. Punishments in this life not to
be feared, and wherefore. 3 Eternal wrath how fearful it is. 4 The pain of
loss. 5 The pain of sense. 6 The fearful representations of a guilty
conscience. 7 Which turns the trembling soul to GOD.
O Most glorious GOD! infinite in Majesty, to be both honored and obeyed;
infinite also in might, to be feared: The greater thy Majesty greater
punishment may thy Almightinesse inflict. As thy Majesty is infinite, so is
every offense against it infinite; so is infinite punishment due to such
offense. This infinite Majesty have I many ways most grievously offended; and
therefore have just cause to fear thy grievous displeasure, thy grievous
punishment: even equal to my sin, and that is infinite.

Verebar omnia opera mea sciens quod non parceres delinquenti. Job. 9.
If thy Justice punishes only in this life, then is it fatherly, then
merciful, then is it justice tempered with mercy: but if it punishes in the
life to come, then is it extreme Justice; then extreme rigor and revenge; then
is it as a rod of iron, upon a potters vessel. Psalm* 2.
The one is among men, and oftentimes by them; the other is in the company and
by the office of Devils. Sicut erudit homo fi^ium suu^, sic Dominus Deus crudit
te, vt custodias mandata sua. Deuteronomy. 8.5. Heb. 12.6.
The first is a gentle instruction, a chasticement, a correction; the last a
severe and final execution. This rod of thy correction I kiss, I embrace
thy chasticements upon my knees; If I were exempt from thy Fatherly
chasticement, then were I exempt from being thy child, For thou scourgest
every child whom thou receiuest. But I fear thy fury, I tremble at thy
extreme displeasure. I desire to feel thee as a loving Father, but not as an
angry and inflexible Judge.

Rebuke me not, O LORD, with thy violent voice, let not thy angry arm beat
stiffely upon me. It will consume me, as a flaming furnace; It will swallow me,
as a devouring gulf; It will drive me as a torrent, into the headlong descent
of eternal death and damnation. What strength can stand under thy Almighty
arm? What courage can behold thy fierce bended brow, and not be astonished,
not stroke down with terror? LORD, I now feel thy anger in a moderate
measure, I now feel thy temporary and temperate wrath, which I am not able to
endure; but hereby I am further led to esteem the full charge of thy fury, how
unable I shall be to endure thy eternal indignation. How little a portion have
we of him? Job 26.14.
but who can understand his fearful power? Assuredly, the general flood, the
destruction of Sodom, all thy punishments which have been, shall be, or can
be inflicted in this life, are to be deemed but as a few gentle drops, in
regard of the full tempest of thy eternal wrath.

In that day of thy wrath, when we shall stand forth at the bar of thy
Judgment; What soul can sustain thy angry eye; whose sight will pierce to
the very center of our hearts, and rippe up every festred corner of our
consciences? What other accusers? What other evidence will thy justice require?
certainly if thy voice was terrible when thou gave thy Law, if thy chosen
people were then afraid; Exo. 20.13
how terrible will it be when thou shall demand an account of thy Law? when
thou shall give sentence for the breach thereof against thine enemies? Depart
from me ye cursed. Out alas! What a punishment Poenadamni.
whose beauty cannot be expressed, which the Angels insatiably desire to
behold; the sight whereof is the full perfection of all pleasure and abundance,
the true joy and rest of our souls. What death is so grievous as this
departing? But whither (O LORD) do thou command to depart? Into everlasting
fire. Out alas! Poenasensus. Isa. 33.
What? Into everlasting fire? without either intermission or end? Alas! Who
can abide with the devouring fire? Who can dwell with the everlasting flames?

This is the very habitation of thy wrath, in this place thy fury does reign.
Our abominable sins inflame thy wrath, and thy wrath inflameth this fire
against us. Here thou have no presence of compassion, none of comfort; none
but simply of indignation and wrath. Here thy wrath will be so inexorable,
that if all the Angels, if the whole court of heaven should entreat thee
prostrate upon their faces, for one drop of water, to refresh one part of a
tormented sinner, for a very short moment of time; they should not obtain,
thou would not be entreated. LORD, let me never hear this terrible voice,
let me never feel this weight of thy wrath; albeit I have just cause to fear
it. For I have been overcome, I have yielded to the sway of my sottish
sensuality; I have disobeyed thee, I have rebelled against thee, I have
deserved, I have provoked thy displeasure against wrath (me thinks) is even
now ready to strike. But stay, patient LORD, hold thy hand, forbear a while:
erect my soul, and direct it to thee. Before thou come in justice to
ouerwhelme me with thy wrath, In Justice hear what I have to say for my
self. Regard the silent sobs which my feeble soul, surprised with fear,
sends forth: regard the broken voice, which my trembling tongue addresseth
to thee.

VERSE. II. Have mercy upon me O LORD, for I am weak: heal me LORD for my
bones are troubled.


1 THe first weakness of a sinner. 2 Wherefore the fall of man repaired, and
not of Angels. 3 A second weakness. 4 A third weakness. 5 When misery may
sue to Justice, when to Mercy. 6 The mind works bodily effects. 7 How the
goodness of GOD is said to hurt. 8 A prayer.
Have mercy upon me, O LORD, Have mercy upon me: Hold thy hand, O merciful
LORD! Oh my GOD! What will thou do? What? Will thou make proof of thy
prowess against my weakness? think thou that I am come to combat with
thee? to defy thy fury? to wrestle with thy wrath? LORD I am weak; I am
wretchedly weak; because my 1. Weakness
I am weak in resisting outward prouocations, weak in resisting the pleasures
of mine own appetites and desires. This weakness is miserable in me, but
has always been Adame, whose nature was entire; forgive me also I beseech
thee, whose nature is corrupt and enclineable to evil: seeing also thou were
merciful to him who charged his fault upon another; be fauouable, O LORD, to
me who accuse and condemn only my self. Genesis 18.27.
For this cause therefore I will speak unto my LORD, albeit I am but dust and
ashes.

LORD, thou have, made me, and thou know of what temper I am made: For no
man is ignorant of his proper work. Thou have not made my nature of brass, my
sinews are not of iron, nor my strength of steel; but thou have made me of
frail flesh, yeeldable to all occasions of evil. My soul thou have placed in
this case of clay, as in a boat, driven with the strong tide of sensual
appetites; which cannot be carried against that stream, but by great labor, by
strong striving with arms and with Oars. LORD, I do not lay forth this
weakness of mine, to excuse my sin, but to incline thee to mercy. For the LORD
is merciful to them that fear him; Psalm. 103.
because he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust. I
have sinned indeed, but rather through weakness, then either malice or proud
presumption: rather through a vicious and corrupt disposition infused as an
inheritance from my ancestors, then through hellish either haughtiness or hate
originally in my self. Job 13.24 25.
Wherefore then hidest thou thy face and take me for thine enemy? Will thou
use thy strength against a leaf? against dry stubble? Will thou pursue a
smoke, a shadow, a thing of nothing? Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am
weak. Not only to fall, 2. Weakness.
but much more in rising from my fall; in repairing my state, in recovering thy
Perditio tua ex te Israel, tantummodo in me auxilium tuum. Hos. 13.
This I can no ways do by my natural strength, no ways without thy special
power. I am able to offend thee, to fetter my feet in the snares of sin, to
bring my self into danger of thy wrath; but to appease thee, to free and
relieve my self, I am altogether unable. I can cast my self into the deep
pit of perdition; but come forth and return back, by my own forces, I
cannot. And therefore I still strain my voice unto thee: Have mercy upon me, O
LORD, for I am weak. Weak in falling; weak in rising; but most weak I am,
either to encounter or endure thy wrath.

Gracious GOD, I prostrate my self at the feet of thy mercy, 3. Weakness.
I creep under the wing of thy compassion. I deal not with thy justice, I
tremble to think of it; It is with thy mercy and compassion that I have to
do. Correct me in favor, but not in fury: to my instruction scourge me, but
not to my destruction. Alas! my weakness has made me sinful, and my sins
have made me miserable; and my Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am weak^: I
am not able to bear thy justice, I am not able to behold it; I am so far
unable to endure the force of thy wrath, that the fear thereof has almost
undone me. It has possessed every part of my body, It makes my feeble flesh
to communicated to the other: Cor meum and caro mea exultanerunt in Deum vitium.
even as in two rooms joined together, whatsoever motion or stir is in the
one, it is easily sensible in the other.

Blessed LORD, thou art always good; thou hurtest no man, unless himself be
in the blame, unless weakness, but in power remove it; that I may be strong
and able to enjoy thy goodness; that thy goodness be not grievous unto me.
LORD! I resort weakness has taken a deep surfeit of sin, and it is now
grown to a desperate disease. All the faculties of my soul are infected, and
the poison is dispersed through all the members of my body. I can feel no
strength, I can feel no quiet: not only my feeble parts, but they that are
most strong are troubled alike. Have mercy upon me, and heal me. O GOD! Have
mercy upon my imperfection, and heal my infection, I humbly entreat thee. Let
thy mercy extend not only to pardon me, but to heal me: not only to pardon
my sins that are past, but to make me strong and able against sins
hereafter. For what good will pardon do me, if presently I return to my
sin again? What will it avail that I be washed, if forthwith I plunge my
self in the mire? LORD, I present my self unto thee in the lowest degree of
humility and grief; my eyes charged with tears, my breast with sighs, my
tongue with complaints, my whole body with disquiet: Let thine indignation now
cease, look upon me with a more calm countenance. Help me up and I will
rise, hold me up and I will stand: comfort and confirm my sin-oppressed
senses. Have mercy upon me and heal me: give me thy health and strength, that
under confidence of thy mercy I may boldly look thy justice in the face.

VERSE. III. My soul is also sore troubled; but LORD how long will thou delay.


1 THE torments of the soul how great they are. 2 The effects of unfeigned
contrition. 3 A resort to GOD. 4 How offensive sin is to GOD. 5 Whe^efore sin
is the cause of trouble. 6 A prayer. 7 The cause of GODS delay. 8 The remedy.
AND yet, the trouble of the body might be borne well enough: a man's courage
may suffice to bear out any bodily grief; but who can bear the vexation of
the soul? The pain of the body, is but the likeness, has no liking, no
power to sustain thy presence. The love thereof is extinguished with fear; it
has neither room nor respite to hope in thee. In thee it dares not rest
assured, in any other thing it cannot. For takes away pleasure in any thing
but tears; it permits not to think on any thing but what is terrible. And
as they who are in danger of shipwreck, cast over board their rich and best
esteemed Merchandises, to save their lives: so they who are tossed with the
tempest of GODS anger, Reuertimini ad me in ieiunio* ^letu and planctu;
s^indite corda vestra. etc. Joel. 2.
to save their souls, do not only abandon, but hate those things which
formerly were either most delightful or dear unto them.

Out alas! how am I oppressed? into what perplexities is my poor sorrow-beaten
soul plunged? how is it abandoned? how are all the powers thereof laid waste?
The understanding is darkened, the will dazzled, the memory confounded, the
courage broken and beaten down: dread and amazement have dulled my senses. But
above all, my conscience is goared with the sting of sin. It anguisheth, it
lanceth, it stretches, it teareth, it crucifieth the very heart of my soul;
It stirs all vpside down. Cor Impij quasi m^re feruens quiescere non potest.
Verily, I find it to be very true, That the heart of a sinner is as the
raging sea, which never has rest: The waves whereof are always in motion, and
one always dashing against another. I lead a life ever dying, and I feel a
death never ending: all my choice is concluded in this; whether I will stand
still without help, or stir any ways without hope.

And as a fearful Dove shakes at the roaring of thunder, and shrinketh into
some obscure hole, supposing it self most safe when it is least seen: so my
amazed soul, trembling at the dreadful sound of thy threats, looks about
for some place of retreit, either to defend or to hide it from thy furious
face. It would fly from thee, but it knows not whither: it would be
protected against thee, but it knows not by whom. O my GOD! I cannot fly
from thee, but by flying to thee. And therefore I fly from thee loving and
lovely look.

For sin is so offensive, so odious unto thee, that

And this is the cause why we are so troubled: For when thou turnest away thy
face they shall be troubled. Auertente te faciem tuam turbabuntur.
Assuredly, the vexation of my soul can have neither end nor ease, until
thou turnest to me thy appeased countenance. All other appliancies are as the
handling of ulcers and wounds; they do but draw more humors to my sore; they
rather inflame then any ways assuage it.



on more fuel; I will not cease blowing until it rise to a full and constant
flame; I will not entreat only, but I will importune thee; I will wrestle with
thee as Jacob did with the Angel: I will not let thee go until thou bless me.

VERSE. IIII. Turn thee, O LORD, and deliver my soul: Oh save me for thy
mercies sake.


1 A Prayer. 2 The pleasures of this life how unprofitable they are. 3 The
great distance between GOD and a sinner. 4 How brought together. 5 How
grievous it is to be separate from GOD. 6 An earnest desire of the soul after
GOD. 7 The absence of GOD worse then his anger. 8 How GOD is to be desired. 9
What moves GOD to pity and relieve. 10 The great mercy of GOD. 11 To whom
his mercy is properly due. 12 Mercy to sinners is a due. 13 GOD is most
liberal, and wherefore. 14 How we should desire GOD to turn to us his face.
him; thou must first call him, before he be able to Convert me Domine and
conuert^r. Iere. 31. Cecidi in faciem meam, and ingresfus est in me spiritus,
and and posuit me super pedes meos. Ezech. 3.
The beginning of our conversion must be from thee, from thy preventing and
inciting grace. And therefore turn to me, and then shall I be turned to thee:
Turn unto me, not by any change in thy self, for thou art immutable: but
turn to me by thy goodness and grace: and I will turn to thee by repentance
and amendment of life.

Oh! how grievous is it to be separated and estranged from thee? what good can
comfort? what evil will not annoy when thou art turned away? Vide quantum
malum and quantum amarum est dereliquisse te Dominum Deum tuu^. Ierem. 2. Job.
13.24
the anchor of my wavering hope, the center of my languishing desire and love.
In thee I trust, upon thee I rely: I am so Wherefore hidest thou thy face and
take me for thine enemy? Albeit Deus de reliquit cum pe^sequimini and
comprehendite, quia non est qui eripiat? Psalm. 71.9.
because thou art most extremely angry when thou turnest from us. When thou
art angry and present, then do thou instruct us, then reform us: but when
thou turnest from us, then thou give us over, then thou leauest us to
innumerable and unavoidable evils. Albeit my friends forsake me, albeit my
enemies persecute me, albeit all the societies of men and of Devils tumult
against me, yet do not thou forsake me, do not thou depart from me. Hos.
9.12.
For woe to them from whom thou departest.

But take heed, O troubled soul! and consider well Job. 10.6.
a grievous sinner? is not GOD a searcher of sins? a grievous punisher of
grievous sins? Do thou not pray to him to turn away his face from thy
sins? Ps. 51. Vbi abscondam me a vultu irae tuae, quia peccaui ni mis. Job. 13
Did not holy Job say, where shall I hide me from thy countenance because I
have sinned? And would thou have him turn his face to thee, being a most
heinous sinner? Yes, yes: I know well enough what I desire. I know that GOD
has more faces then one. Exo. 33.20
He has a face of Majesty which no man can see and live. This face I cannot
see. He has a face of justice. Vultus Domini surefacientes mola, vt perdat de
terra memoriam eo^um. ps. 23. Apoc. 1. Ier. 33.5.
This face I would not see. It is terrible to sinners: this face is upon them
who do evil, to destroy their memorial from the earth. But he has another
face of compassion and mercy. And this face is like the Sun: exceeding full
both of beauty and of virtue. This face he hides from sinners. This face I
desire to be displayed upon me, be it never so cloudie, never so angry: the
anger of this face, is to make sinners pure. Ier. 50.20. Number. 6.25
LORD make this face to shine upon me, and be merciful to me. LORD, this
face do I seek: ps. 27.9.10.
oh hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure.

Come, come, gracious LORD: withold no longer. O water of life! O shower of
our salvation! distill thing, nothing for thee, nothing with thee, nothing
beside thee. Come, deliver my soul from the chains of sin, wherewith I am
bound to satisfy the rigor of thy justice, by eternal death and damnation.
Deliver me from long custom of sin: deliver me both from the pleasures and
cares of this world; which are cables to tie me, fetters to hold me captive
from turning to thee. Deliver my soul and save me. First, deliver my soul
from present distress, then address me in the right way of thy salvation.

It is true, that there is no desert, no goodness in me, for thy mercies sake I
beseech thee, to save me. LORD I cry to thee in the confidence of thy
mercies, and not of my merits: whereto no salvation, but eternal death and
destruction is due. And if thou will not absolutely be entreated, yet this word
mercy is a maine argument to move thee, or to assure me at the least that
thou will save me.

For thou art merciful, both inwardly in thy self, and outwardly to others. It
is thy proper nature to be Misericors and miserator Dominus. Psalm. 115.
to impart thy self to al things, then it is for the Sun to enlighten, then
for the fire to give heat: thou can not but exercise the actions of mercy.
But upon whom? upon righteous persons? what needs that? For they have no
misery, because they have no sin, which only is misery, which only needs
mercy. Is it then upon small offenders? is it to a certain degree and measure
of sin? Patiens and mu^tum misericors. ibid.
Why, but thou art exceeding merciful; infinite in mercy; no less infinite
in mercy, then in nature: for thou art mercy. Verily, as mercies are, the more
must thou exercise the same upon miserable sinners; and the more miserable and
sinful a man is, the more boldly may he come to thee for mercy. The miserable
sinner, ouercharged with sins, may confidently make his suit unto thee; to
do thy duty, to exercise thy action, to take away his misery, to impart to him
thy mercy: that where sin abounds, Vbi abundauit delictum superabundauit and
gratia.
grace also may more then abound.

Men do therefore give sparingly, or at the least in some measure, because the
more they give, the less they retain: but thy treasure cannot be either
exhausted or diminished; thou departest with nothing imparting to others; by
giving abundantly, thou have nothing the less. Thou art a fountain of pity
and mercy, from whence innumerable streams proceed: the waters whereof are
infinite, both in quantity and in virtue; as well to cure our wounds and
infirmities, as to wash away our filthiness, and refresh our weakness. O
infinite fountain! how can thou be dried? O sweetness! O sacietie of
desires! what languishing soul came ever to thee, and was not both cured, and
cleansed and fully refreshed? Doubtless O Lord! thou art exceeding merciful;
and wilt both readily and largely distribute thy mercies among offenders. Thou will deliver them and save them, if they turn unto thee; if with penitent
hearts they desire thy mercy. Thou art more liberal to give, then they can be
either desirous or willing to receive.

VERSE. V. For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks
in the pit?


THE wisdom of GOD binds our assurance. 2. To what end man was created. 3.
The time of life limited for repentance. 4 Pain causes forgetfulness of any
thing but of it self. 5. As after death repentance is unprofitable, so at the
instant of death it is very doubtful. 6. The discommodities of late
repentance.
AND it is not only thy mercy which binds my reason, but also thy wisdom.



But in case I die thus charged with sin, before thou turnest thy mercy to
me, before I turn to thee by repentance; what honor will thereby rise to thee?
and incite others to blazon thy praise; but in the dungeon of death, who will
thank thee? who will think on thee? who will sing thy praises in the bosom
of Hell? This is not a proper place for the sweet harmony of thy praise, for
the joyful memorial of thy name. Thy praise consists in a thankful
publication of thy grace, goodness and mercy. But this is the house of
horror, here thy full fury and vengeance inhabit: here can be neither
thankful nor joyful remembrance of thee.

It is familiar to the pleasures of this life (if they be Conuertere ad Dominu^
and de relinque peccata tua, and precareante faciem domini. Eccles. 17.


For this cause the wiseman exhorts us, to turn to thee, to forsake our
sins, and to make our prayers before thy face. But what is it to do all these
things before thy face? even in this life: in which time thy face shines upon
us, in which time we walk before thy face, and may easily obtain thy
mercy. But the wicked after death are cast behind thy back, they are drowned
in perpetual oblivion never to be remembered, either for pardon or forbearance.
They are as the handful behind the back of the Mower, Ier. 9.22.
which no man gathers. When hay falls before the face of the Mower, it may
be gathered up again: but when it falls behind his back, it is not
regarded, it is cast away and perishes. During this life, whilst we are
before thy face, we may easily be recovered and restored to mercy: but
afterdeath, no hope of relief, no expectation but of judgment. Leuit. 25.
The LORD commanded that if any man had sold a house in a walled city, within a
year he should have power to redeem it: But after the year his power to buy it
again was cut off. Now, if for the pleasures of sin we have sold our eternal
habitatio^, Domum habemus non manu factam eternam in coelis. 1. Cor. 5. Psalm.
88.
not made with hands: we have power to redeem it by repentance, during the year
of our life: that term expired, we have no ability to recover it again. Then
shall that of the Prophet take place, Do thou show wonders among the dead?
or shall the dead rise again and praise thee? shall thy loving kindness be
showed in the grave, or thy faithfulness in ^estruction? shall thy wondrous
works be shown in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land where all
things are forgotten? Assuredly, as after death tears are fruitless,
repentance unprofitable; as after death no mercy is to be expected, nothing but
misery, nothing but wrath: so is it doubtful and very dangerous that our
tears, sighs and groans, are of little force at the very near approach of
death; whether by age, or by extremities of disease. For at that time, when our
powers are either distracted or spent; when we lie either struggling, or
panting under the arrest of death; when no part is free, either from the sense
or fear of his cruel gripe; we may well be said to be in death; or at least
wise in such a condition and state, as does less participate of life then of
death. And therefore it is doubtful at the least, lest at that time we shall
not remember thee; lest our repentance at that time shall be too late. A good
husband will repair his house whilst the weather is fair, and not defer
until Winter shall approach: a careful Pilote will furnish his ship whilst
the seas are calm, and not stay till tempests are in rage; and a provident
man will repent his sins in the seasonable time of health and strength, and
not protract until he be in the very arms and embracements of death; when
many occasions may cut from him, either his mind, or power, or time to repent.
For we have just cause to fear, that if we would not when we might, we shall
not be able when we would: that by our will to do evil, we may happily
loose the power to do good: that in trouble and necessity we shall not find
that help, which in prosperity and peace we did not endeavor to provide.

This has our Savior declared by a familiar example: Luke 14.
For that no king making war with one stronger then himself, but will
endeavor to have peace whilst his enemy is far off; And not expect until
the sword shall threaten his throat. Dare thou, then, O unfortunate worm! O
improuident sinner! Who make war against the omnipotent LORD, who has all
the powers in heaven earth and hell at his command; dare thou (I say) defer
the making of thy peace with him, until the point of his furious approach?
Until the very hour of his encounter? How vain is thy confidence? How
sottish thy sense? Wherefore wilt not thou make thy peace in time, whilst he
is far off? Wherefore will thou not entreat his mercy before thou co^mest to
feel his power. Assuredly, 3. Paralip. 18.24.
the day will come when thou shall go from chamber to chamber (from one
auoidance to another) to hide thee, and yet shall find neither covert nor
defense.

Heb. 12.17
For if Esau could not find repentance, albeit he sought it with Tears; how
reasonable may we suspect our extreme late seeking for repentance? Not
because true repentance is ever too late, but because late repentance is
seldom true; as proceeding rather from fear, then from love; from necessity
rather then from willingness and desire; rather outwardly pretended, then
intended from the heart. LORD turn to me and deliver my soul; Enlighten my
understanding from this gross darkness; free my desires from these massy
iron fetters of ^inne. That I may turn to thee in the seasonable time of
sanity and strength; and not defer the weighty work of my repentance, until
either by long custom of sin, or by debilitie of body and mind, I shall
not be able to think on thee.

VERSE. VI. I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed, and water my
couch with my tears.


1. ASsurance from the Justice and power of GOD. 2 Justice requires not a
double condemnation. 3 The arraignment of a conscious soul. 4 When sins hurt
us. 5 A true resolution. 6 The virtue of perseverance. 7 Repentance must be
answerable to our fall. 8 Tears a precious liquor, and wherein chiefly to be
bestowed. 9 An incitement for tears. 10 When tears are profitable. 11 A
prayer addressed with tears.
NOT only thy mercy and wisdom may move thee to save me, not only do I
rely and rest upon them, but I have found a honey comb in the mouth of a Lion:
thy Si nosmet ipsus dijudicarimus, nen vtique dijudicaremur.
I have prevented thy judgment by judging my self. Behold, O searcher of
hearts, how my sinful soul has been arraigned at the bar of mine own
judgment; how by the evidence of my conscience it is found guilty of many In
quacunque hora peccator ing^muerit saluus erit.
until it has procured thy pardon. Lo now I am come to thy presence, and put
up my penitent petition to thee. O thou, who have promised to save sinners,
when they mourn and lament; save me now, speak comfortablie to my sobbing
soul, relieve and release my distressed state. Behold how I languish under
this leaden load of grief! behold how I sink under this sad charge of sorrow!
that as sin is caused by unlawful pleasures, so by true and unfeigned sorrow
these pleasures may be extinguished, and the sins done away. For our sins
never hurt us, if

Alas! my soul is torn in pieces with remembrance of my sins; my strength
is broken both with the greatness and continuance of my grief. I and yet will
I not cease to redouble my groans. On the one side, these penitent pressures
have vowed never to forsake me, until they have reconciled me to thee; On the
other side, my earnest prayers have vowed never to leave thee, until they have
reconciled thee to me. Many streams of tears have gushed also out of my eyes;
and yet will I not close them in one dry sleep, until I have obtained thy
favor. For in vain did I begin to repent, if I persevere not in a constant
course: In vain did I attempt to knock at heaven gates, if I should give over
before they be opened.

Perseverance is so necessary a virtue to all penitents; Qui perseuerauerit
vsque in fine, hic saluut erit.
the justice of the righteous, the glory of their sufferings, the triumph of
their troubles, the accomplishment of their hopes. Without this, neither he
that sighteth shall have victory, nor the victorious glory: without this, no
action is acceptable to GOD. For where the desire of perfection does end, there
does the sin of defection begin: which not only defaceth, but depraueth all
the good that went before: not only makes it to be no good, but turns it to
odious evil. A debtor is not discharged by paying much, but by paying all: nor
he crowned who runs well, but he who holds out well to the end. They
only shall attain the end of their endeavors, who turn not their feet back,
like the children of Ephraim; Psalm. 78.10 Genesis 19.
who turn not their eyes back, like Lots wife; who turn not their thoughts
back, like the people of Israel, Number. 11. Quae retro sunt obliuiscens, ad ea
quae priora sunt extendens me ip. sum, addestinatum persequor branium. Phil. 3.
when they departed out of Egypt. Only they shall be crowned, who with a
constant courage pursue their designs, and neither fail nor faint until
attainement.

Well then; I will not remit, not intermit the labors of repentance; my
weariness shall not cause me to give over my groaning; day and night I will
not forbear to weep. Repentance is a baptism of tears; and the greater that
our fall has been, the Quid prodest homini si mundum vniuersum lucretur,
animae vero suae detrimentum pattatur. Matthew. Cautarizaetam habentes
conscientia^. 1. Tim. 4
But my loss has been so great, that no tears are sufficient to lament
them. I have lost the grace and favor of GOD; I have lost his righteousness,
I have lost both his fear and his love, I have lost GOD himself, I have lost
mine own soul. Out wretch! What can I be said to have, when I have lost both
GOD and my self. How obdurate is my heart? how dull, how dead is my soul? how
is my conscience cauterized and seared, if for so great losses I cannot weep?
The soul which is sensible of a needels point? shall it not bleed at the
strokes of lances and swords? I can weep for losses in my temporal estate,
for loss of worldly kindred or friends I easily fall to immoderat weeping: and
can I not open a vein of tears when I have lost the riches of heaven? when I
have lost both GOD and my self? Assuredly, tears are so precious a liquor,
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. Luke 27.
If for nothing else I may weep, yet it is lawful to weep for my self. For
in all other matters tears are lost, in case they be not spent for our selves.

Oh! that I could weep an Ocean of tears; to

Favorable LORD, receive the groans which my grief sends to thee; winged
with sighs, and poysed with tears. Tears which are able to quench hell fire,
let them appease thy fiery fury; thou who art by terrors invincible, yield thy
self to be vanquished with tears. Ah my GOD! thou have oftentimes heard my
groans, my tears have often prevailed with thee: hear now my groans, be
again entreated with tears. Let not those faults seem foul unto thee, which
I have so often washed with my tears.

VERSE. VII. My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all
mine enemies.


1 INSVLTING enemies how grievous they are. 2. Pity in distress is naturally
desired. 3. The malice of enemies moves GOD to be merciful. 4. Sin is the
first cause of hostility and hate. 5 Our sins stir up store of enemies both
without and within us. 6 Which should draw us to humility. 7. A defiance to our
flesh. 8 Our misery is a good assurance of GODS compassion. 9 A prayer to that
end.
Immortal and immutable GOD! Thou see how I am cast down, how low I am
fallen; even beneath the base condition of contempt. I am as a withered flower,
without either beauty or sap; I am so consumed with grief, that there
remains in me neither favor nor form. For I lie under the severe hand of
thy wrath; I am assailed with outward calamities, I am disquieted with inward
anguishes.

thy anger further execute upon me? What? will thou exercise thy strength
against so dejected a person? Against a worm? against a leaf? against a
shadow? against nothing? Will a Giant make proof of his prowess against a
Gnat? Or if he do, shall he ever attain glory by his atchieuement? Consider,
O LORD, first my troubles, then both the multitude and malice of mine enemies,
and then see in what sort it may best beseem thy Almighty Majesty to deal
with me.

For, as generally sin is the first cause of hostility Genesis 3.15.
as enmity is the curse of sinne^ as by sin man has lost, not only the
obedience of other creatures, but amity both among themselves,

For this cause I have composed my voice to the tunes of mourning, I have cast
down my countenance with trembling and shame; all my behavior is attired in
the vnlouelie liuerie of sadness. I go as one unseen, or unknown, or
unregarded; I walk as senseless of any thing but only of sorrow. I have not
only neglected, but evil entreated my filthy flesh, for conspiring to betray
my soul to the slavery of sin; for drawing my soul down into hell, which
should have soared up with my flesh into heaven.

Flesh^, thou corrupt case of flesh and blood; wherein my soul is pent, as a
prisoner in a loathsome Iaile. Thou have shamefully abused and abased that
guest, which has hitherto supported thee, hitherto preserved thee from
putrefaction and stincke. I have therefore challenged the combat of thee, I am
fully resolved to beat thee down. I will also complain of thee to the
omnipotent Judge, in the high Court of his Star Chamber; I will prove thee a
deceiuer, a traitor; I will prove thee a combiner, a riotour with the world
and the Devil: I will prove thee a forger of false assurances.

is endued both with magnanimity and power; the more prone is he, not only to
forbear, but to erect and relieve those that are dejected. For true valor and
compassion are always chained together. And therefore thou who art most
magnanimous, must also of ne^essity be most compassionate; Thou who art most
powerful and most magnanimious; must also of necessity be most inclinable,
most forward, most desirous to save.

O my GOD! whose pity is equal to thy power; save for thy name, Et saluauit
propter nomen suum, vt notam fatoret potentiam suam.
that thy power might be known. For assuredly, thy power may now be shown more
by relieuing, then by further oppressing; thy power shall this way work to thy
greatest praise. This will best beseem thy most excellent Majesty, this is
most agreeable to the greatness of thy power; this is most agreeable to the
goodness of thy will; this will best sort to the glory of thy Name.

VERSE. VIII. Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the LORD has heard
the voice of my weeping.


1. HOW GOD is changed and yet remains immutable. 2. Good drawn from the
contrary evil. 3 Society of the wicked is to be avoided, and wherefore. 4. A
resolution to avoid such society. 5. The hate of the wicked is empty of harm,
and wherefore. 6. The force of Tears. 7. How beautiful they are. 8. A
resolution not to give over weeping.
BUT lo, this stiff storm is suddenly blown over: the tempest which did
drive so bitterly in my face, is suddenly turned to a quiet calm: the
clouds of displeasure which were wrapped about my head, are broken and
dispersed; and the sweet Sunshine of mercy has cleared her comfortable beams
upon me. GOD is now appeased with me; he has now changed his countenance
toward me; and yet remains immutable in himself. For as natural causes
work according to the disposition of the subject (as the same Sun hardens
Clay, and melts Wax; comfort some bodies, and scorcheth others) So the
cause of all causes, being always one, works diversely in us, accordingly as
we are differentlie disposed toward him.

Come hither now all ye that are oppressed with

Away from me all ye workers of iniquity: I will have nothing to do with you:
your iniquity is contagious, it shall not come near me, I am now reconciled to
GOD, I am restored to his friendship: I will no more be familiar with you, I
can take no pleasure in your society. I am newly cleansed, I will not defile
my self with your impure conversation; your wickedness shall have no
opportunity to undermine my weakness. If a building be weak, and the walls
decline, a small force is su^ficient to prostrate it to the ground. But our
weak nature detorted from original Justice, and much empaired by frequencie
of sin, is always prone and enclinable to evil: the Imagination of man's
heart is evil even from his youth. Genesis 8.21.
And therefore I will avoid all outward occasions that may attract me to evil;
among which, familiar conuersing with evil men is the chief. Cum sancto
sanctus eris, and cum peruerso peruerteris. Psa. 18.25.
For if two contraries be applied together, the stronger must necessarily
destroy the weaker. But as we are more enclinable to vice then to virtue; so
vice is more strong in the wicked, then virtue in the good: whereby it
follows, that the society of evil men is most dangerous to the good; and
that as an hundred sound men shall sooner take the plague from one infected
person, Egredimini de Babylone, fugite a Chaldaeis. Es. 48. Ier. 50. Recedite a
Tabernaculu impi^^um, Number. 10.
then he recover his health by them; so the good are more often perverted by
the wicked, then the wicked converted by the good.

For this cause GOD loves nor to see his children among the wicked. For this
cause he commanded his people that they should not join in marriage with the
Gentiles. Exo. 34. For this cause also he commanded them to destroy the
inhabitants of the country, which they were to possess; lest by society in
their conversation, Number. 33. Psalm. 105.
they should be drawn into society of their sins; as afterward they were
indeed. Elihu marueiled at Job; Job 31. Phil. 2.
and the Apostle at the Philippians, that among the wicked they could live
well. Lot who lived in Sodom, Genesis 19.
needed the hand of an Angel to draw him forth. Saint Peter being in the
company of the other Apostles, confessed the LORD to be the Son of GOD: but
denied him in Caiphas house, when he stood among the wicked by the fire. Matthew.
26.
GOD commanded that no man should touch any creature that was unclean; Deuteronomy.
15.
and that whosoever touched a dead body, he shoud be unclean. But no creature
is so unclean as a sinner: no death is like to the death of sin.

And therefore I will avoid wicked men, as the most unclean of living
creatures, and the most loathsome of those that are dead. I will not regard
either kindred or kind acquaintance; Semper aliquid mali propter vicinum malu^
I will esteem all the wicked alike. I will cast off my near friends; I will
pull out my eyes, I will cut off my hands, rather then they shall draw me to
evil.

I will rather live in deserts and caves, Matthew. 26.
rather with dragons and vipers, Qui tetigerit picem inquinabitur obea. Eccles.
13.
then in the society of those that are evil. I will not touch these pitchy
companions, I will not in the least matters have to deal with them. If a small
rupture in a bancke be not timely stopped, it will wear greater, and all the
valley will be surrownded thereby. Esaias 14.
Of the seed of a serpent comes the cockatrice: and of small beginnings
dangerous effects may ensue. I will not therefore be negligent in smallest
matters: I will not contemn any enemy: He that despises small things, by
l^ttle and little shall decay. Eccles. 19. Esaias 1.
The wine (says the Prophet) is mixed with water. Verily as wine mingled with
water, loses both sweetness and strength, so the good loose credit and virtue
by society with the evil.

But as a man who stands upon firm ground will cast forth boords and lines
to save such as are in danger of drowning, and yet will not approach so near
as to be drowned with them: so I will afford the wicked what helps I can, for
their safety; but will have an eye that they fasten not upon me, that they
draw me not into their destruction.

vanity, but iniquity which now you shall contriue against me. You shall never
effect your evil intentions. Hate me you may, but harm me you cannot. You
shall never prevail against him, who has prevailed against the Almighty.

his love. True tears are the language of heaven; they speak strongly to GOD,
he hears them well. No voice has more free and familiar access to him; none
is more acceptable, none better understood. He who often regards not the
voice of the tongue, will always hear the voice of our tears. The voice of
the tongue is framed in the mouth, but the voice of tears proceeds from a
heart, surprised either with joy or with grief. He who regards only the
heart, does much regard this language of the heart. Therefore in all the
anguishes of my soul, I will use few words hereafter, but power forth my
sorrow in silent tears; whenever I sin, I will write my supplication for
pardon with tears: whenever I would obtain any courtesy or favor from GOD,
I will address my desire with tears. Tears are too mighty Orators to let any
suit fall. When tears cry unto GOD, when he is importuned by tears, he will
presently grow familiar with us. They have so persuading a silence, so
conquering a complaint; that by entreating they command, by yielding they
overcome. When they seem most pitiful, then are they most powerful: when
they seem most forsaken, then are they most victorious.

This dew of devotion never falls, but it is an these streams of my eyes:
until death damme up the springs they shall not cease running.

Power out your hearts before him. Ps. 62.8.
but thou must power forth thy very heart in tears. They must not proceed
from any worldly respect, not from fear of death or of hell, not absolutely
from love of thy self: but from love toward GOD, and from grief for
offending so good a Father, so great a Lord, so pure a perfection and glory.
This love is the fire, wherewith these silver drops are melted in the furnace;
wherewith the flowers of devotion and grace are distilled into tears. This
love is the sun which resolves dark pitchie clouds into rain, which resolves
thick foggie mists into dew, and makes the air pleasant and clear. Without
this love, tears are nothing but excrementall water; they are nothing worth if
they be not warmed and melted with this heat of love. For as water taken from
pits and wells upon the earth, is not so fruitful to make herbs thrive, as
rain water which falls from heaven; Insomuch as some plants growing in the
midst of waters, will wither and die for want of rain: so tears which
proceed from terrene respects, make not the soul so flourishing and fruitful
in grace, as tears which fall for the love of GOD. Such were the tears of the
sinful woman, who watered her masters feet with her tears, who with the
tears of her body cleansed her soul. For to her many sins were forgiven,
not principally in regard of her tears, but because she loved much.

VERSE. IX. The LORD has heard my petition: the LORD will receive my prayer.


1 HOW easy GOD is to hear and to pardon. 2. No sooner can we dispose our
selves to ask, but we receive from GOD some taste of his favor. 3. Wherefore
sometimes GOD deferreth for a time. 4. Inequality between GODS disposition and
ours. 6. The trophee of repentant Tears. 7. Our miseries turned to medicines.
8. The world how to be esteemed. 9. The experience of GODS liberality and love,
what it works. 10. Experience surmounteth reason. 11 The condition of our
assurance. 12. When GOD cannot be entreated. 13. What gives wings to our
prayers, what weighs them down.


and great desire, should make thy presence the more esteemed. O infinite
inequality between my disposition maze of troubles, under a Mass of dangers;
when I was at the very point to perish, in a moment thou did pierce the
heavens, and come down for my deliverance. Thou did not only deliver me
and set me free, but thou did comfort and revive my languishing soul; even
as a hot Bath refreshes the limbs of a poor tired traveler.

Behold now the Trophee of my repentant tears; The LORD has heard my
petition. I have not sorrowed and prayed in vain; I have obtained pardon, I
have received grace; he has not been strange of his favor, he has not been
sparing of his mercy toward me. All my former discomforts Aloes and
VVormewood, to weane me from the tea^es of this world. O world! which have
bewitched so many, thy light is but a shadow, thou art but a smoke in thy
greatest height; in show somewhat, but in substance nothing. Thou art sweet to
fools, thou art either bitter, or without relish to wise men. Whosoever
loves thee, never knew thee; whosoever knows thee, does either loath or
contemn thee.

the LORD will receive my prayer. Albeit, I see nothing but punishments, and
the worst of punishments, fears: albeit I find no comfort, yet will I hope. I
will rather think that all my senses are mistaken, then fail in hope; I will
first let go my life, before I will let go my hope. My reason may be
vanquished, but by experience is stronger then reason, my experience cannot be
overcome.

waters, and the sweeter their taste.

All this is under one condition, if we abandon our

GOD is never inexorable, but when man is incorrigible; We have sinned, Though
you make many prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. Wash
you clean, and though your sins were as crimson, they shall be white as snow.
Esaias 1.15. etc.
and provoked thee to wrath; therefore thou have covered thy self with a
cloud, that our prayers should not pass through. Lam. 3. For when we come to
entreat him, armed, with those weapons wherewith we did offend him; when our
hearts are bathed in uncleanness, when our hands smoke with the blood of our
sins; how should he hear our prayers? how should he not abhor them? So
long as the broken Iron remains in a wound, it is but a vain labor to
apply plasters to cure it. Of no greater force a^e our prayers, and all other
religious actions or endeauours, so long as sin remains in the wounds of
our will, so long as the pleasure of sin sticks fast in our purposes and
desires. For as we can never qualify our thirst with drink, whilst our
stomach is stuffed with such bilious humors, as by drinking inflame the
greater thirst; so our souls shall never be refreshed with the goodness and
mercy of GOD, whilst it is full of the poisonous purpose of sin.

Such a soul is a soil, which the more dew it receives, the more weeds it
brings forth. But if we be grieved for our sins; If we groan under their
weight, if we wrestle against their malice and power; albeit the clouds were of
Iron, and the heavens of brass, our penitent prayers will pierce them. The
Verelie, a religious life gives spiritual wings to our prayers; It makes
them fly like lightning to the presence of GOD. But ^inne weighs them down;
and so much the more, by how much the more our life is reprooueable.

VERSE. X. All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be
turned back, and put to shame suddenly.


1 OUR enemies shall be confounded, and how. 2. The wicked when chiefly vexed
at the prosperity of the godly. 3. They shall be extremely confounded at the
mercy of GOD, and wherefore. 4. Delay in sin, makes the conversion to grace
more hard. 5. GOD turns to the wicked and to the godly in a different sort.
6. A short prayer. 7. How sinners must seek. 8. And what they shall find. 9.
A resolution not to stay one hour in sin.
AND what now shall mine enemies First, with vexation at my happy estate;
afterward, with shame at their own repulse, at their sudden overthrow, at
their perpetual deiection. They shall be anguished to see their hopes and
expectations fail; to see my misery changed to felicity; to see their injury
so much the more cruel, because unjust, turn to my honor; to see him whom
they thought to ruinate, whom they had fully destined to death, more highly
advanced then ever he was before.

They are generally vexed with the prosperous condition of any man; but more
especially if he be be to all men, the more shameful will it be to
themselves.

confound them. For the more gracious and merciful the LORD is, in hearing and
receiving sinners, the more they shall be confounded, if they continue
obstinate in their evil, if they will not repent and turn unto him.

They shall be confounded (I say) because when they nothing doubt of the
goodness of GOD, yet do they either not esteem it, or suppose to have it at
pleasure and will. For nothing shall more confound sinners, then that knowing,
as well the riches of GODS mercies, Accedite ad me and illuminamini, and facies
vestrae non confundentur. Psalm. 34.
as his gracious goodness; which opens to all, which inuiteth all, which
entreats all to participate thereof; Yet they remain either altogether
careless, or heavy and dull in coming to him: they either proudly contemn,
or with

For as a brand newly quenched, will readily take fire, but the longer it
remains extinguished, the more hardly can it be kindled again; so in a
sinner, the first decaying and dying of grace may easily be quickened; but the
longer he continues dead in sin, the harder will he be revived to Grace.

Alas! they ioyed at my grief, and iested at my groaning; they made themselves
merry with my misery, and built the trophies of their victory upon my ruins
and disgrace. They did swim in the delights of this world, whilst I bathed my
self with tears, whilst I chastised and evil entreated my rebellious flesh:
But now (Oh shame!) they shall be turned to turned to smart and sorrow, their
pride to contempt, their insolency to ignominy and reproach. And as the LORD
has suddenly turned his favor to me, so his fury shall suddenly be turned
to them. The wrath of the LORD like a sudden tempest will strike in their
faces; It will astonish them, it will cast them down, it will consume them.

Before thunder goes lightning (says the wiseman) and no less truly may it
be said, Eccles. 22.11.
that after lightning comes thunder. What is lightning but the flashes of
pleasure in this life? beautiful, but short. The pleasures of this life are
like the momentary flashes of lightning; suddenly gone, and serving for
nothing but to increase the terror of ensuing darkness. And the more bright
the lightning is, the more deep is the darkness, the more dreadful the
thunder which is suddenly to ensue.

Assuredly they shall be turned indeed. For if they will not turn unto thee,
thou will turn them to confusion and shame.

O most merciful, most just GOD! most powerful, gifts, not by their
worthiness; but by thine own goodness. Come hither all feeble sinners, whose
consciences are afraid of your own suspicions, who ever think you shall be
damned: come learn of me what sinners may find, and how sinners must seek;
learn by my affections to obtain the like effects.





contrary course; so my reason enabled by grace, shall draw all my appetites,
the whole frame of my inward man; albeit they have properly a contrary
inclination. Gracious GOD! address all the instruments of my voice to sing
praises to thee; instruct all the faculties of my mind to love thee, to fear
thee, to place my full felicity in the knowledge and obedience of thy will.

Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and strength, dominion, riches, and power,
be unto our GOD for evermore.
A SVMMARY PRAYER.
OMnipotent and eternal GOD! whose justice cannot suffer sins unpunished;
whose mercy would not suffer sins unpardoned: I beseech thee, so to moderate
thy scourges with mercy, that I may be able to abide them. For if thou openest
the floud-gates of thy fury upon me, the force thereof must needs ouer-beare
me, and drive me down headlong to death. I know, O LORD, that thy
chastisements are necessary for us in this life; I decline them not; I crave no
forbearance at thy hand; I rather crave that thou will not forbear me. Deal
herein according to thy wisdom, not to my will; not as shall be most for
mine ease, but as thou esteemest best for my good. This only I desire; that in
all thy punishments, I may not find thee an angry Judge, but a most kind and
careful Father; that thou will correct me, but not give me over to death;
Ps. 118.18.
That I may find both comfort and strength in thy stripes: and that as thy
rod does chastise me, Thy (...) and thy staff comfort me. Ps. 23.4.
so thy staff may sustain me.

For I am weak, O Almighty GOD I am so weak that I am altogether unable
either not to deserve thy wrath, or to endure it. My offenses have proceeded
from my weakness, and they again have made me more weak: they have made so
many mortal wounds in my soul, that I approach near unto death. I languish
under my imminent danger, my own putrefaction is loathsome to my self; and
the very sight of thy frown does terribly torment me. My weak soul is so
ouercharged, both with fear and with grief; that it can neither lift up it
self, nor quietly lie still: neither lift up it self against the power of thy
wrath, nor lie still under the weight thereof; more horribly heavy then the
flaming Mountain Aetna. But have mercy upon me and heal me, O gracious
LORD! O my GOD! open to me the ouer-flowing Fountain of thy euer-flowing
mercy; from whence always stream, both the safe, and present, and only
remedy against the malice and maladies of sin. If thou do not this, I am
undone; I must presently perish. I am so far from standing against thy wrath,
that my own weakness will draw me down.

Ah my GOD! wherefore do thou so long hold back thy help? Wherefore have
thou cut off thy comforts from me? Wherefore art thou so angry? Wherefore so
severe? Will thou turn away thy face forever? Return, O most merciful
Father! for thy infinite mercies sake, I beseech thee, return to thy
accustomed clemency again. Turn to me the appeased eyes of thy mercy, let me
again behold thy gracious and quiet countenance, which my offenses have
caused thee to turn away. Deliver my soul from these miseries; deliver it
from the importable burden, both of thy severity and of my sins. Save me,
for I lie quaking under the cruel gripes of destruction: Save me, LORD, or of
necessity I must perish. Which if I do, if unseasonable death seize upon me;
then shall I no more praise thy Name, then shall I never make a thankful
memorial of thy blessed benefits. But give me, O good Father! time to repent:
as thou have given me a purpose to praise thee, so give me power and
opportunity for the same. If needs thou will exercise the rigor of thy
Justice; why then do it upon those whose hearts are hardened with obstinate
impiety, who willingly and wilfully persevere in their sins; who are nothing
touched, either with reverence of thy Majesty, or with regard of their own
safety. But I heavily labor under the load of my sins; I refuse not to
undergo the hard task of repentance for them. It displeases me much, that
ever I displeased thy Majesty by my sins: my grievous sins torment and
tear the most inward senses of my soul: they are most grievous, most
intolerable to me. This is not unknown to thee, who know our secrets better
then our selves. This appears by the sad groans which break from my pained
soul: this appears by the plenty of tears, which my heart boiling in
anguish and grief, does euaporate and distill through the conduicts of my
eyes. But especially this appears, by the unlovely state of my body; which is
become like a withered weed; so wasted with sorrow, that it has neither beauty
to please others, nor strength to sustain it self.

But howsoever it is with me, I will never lay down my hope; I will never
despair or distrust in thy mercies. I have always had so good trial of thy
favorable hearing, of thy liberal relief; that in all my temptations, in all
the anguishes of my soul, I will rest upon thy goodness and grace; with
assured confidence, that thou will hear my prayer: if not so soon as I
desire, yet at such time as shall be most expedient for me. For oftentimes it
is more expedient that I should be exercised for a time, then presently eased.
I will also rest assured, that my malicious enemies, who unjustly work or wish
my destruction, shall never prevail against me. That their Counsels shall
be confounded, their practices disappointed, and themselves turned to ignominy
and reproach.

Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches, and Power be
unto our GOD for evermore.
PSALM XXXII.
DAVID'S TEARS.
PSALM XXXII.
BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD imputes no sin: and in whose spirit
there is no guile.

3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drought in Summer.

5 I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not
hid.

6 I said, I will confess my sins unto the LORD: and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin.

7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water floods they shall not come
nigh him.

8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

9 I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

10 Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no understanding: whose
mouths must be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

11 Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but who so puts his trust in the
LORD, mercy embraces him on every side.

12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the LORD: and be joyful all ye
that are true of heart.


Of the title and parts of this PSALM.

1 THe title of this Psalm and the reason thereof. 2 All worldly knowledges
are both troublesome and imperfect. 3 The excellency of the knowledge of GOD. 4
We are most ignorant of our selves. 5 Wherefore this word know thy self, was
written upon the gates of Apolloes Temple. 6 How excellent and difficult it is
to know our selves. 7 The good which GOD works out of our sins. 8 He that
is sinful and secure is doubly miserable. 9 Some things are absoultely good,
but nothing absolutely evil. 10 The LORD is said to be a hard man, and
wherefore. 11 The appellation and parts of this Psalm.
THIS is the second penitential The understanding; by others, The instruction
of David. Partly for that he instructed others thereby, but chiefllie, for that
he declared that he had received instruction, and was brought to understand
both GOD and himself: Which is the perfection of all other as well divine as
humane knowledge.

But the knowledge of GOD, is the foundation of our Spiritual building; the
first wheel of the clock;

But this done the knowledge of his goodness will make us to love him; of his
Justice, to fear him; of his Majesty, to honor him; of his Mercy, to hope
in him; of his Wisdom, to obey him. My eye sees thee (says Job) and
therefore I repent in dust and ashes. Job. 42.
As the Philistines did first put out Sampsons eyes, and then took him forth
to sport with him: so the devil first labors, either to extinguish, or to
shadow this our Spiritual fight, and then plays at pleasure with us.

And now again, Albeit nothing be so near us as our selves; yet the
knowledge of our selves is furthest from us. There is nothing almost that we
less understand, then our selves. For as our bodily eyes behold other objects,
but not themselves; so the eye of our mind, namely our understanding, is apt
to apprehend other things, but not it self. It is nimble to discover, strong
and bold to judge other matters; but is defective both in sight to discern,
and in judgment to esteem it self: For this cause the ancient Philosophers
affirm, that this voice (...); Know thy self; Apollo's Temple; either because
it is proper only to GOD; or because it is the highest wisdom whereto man
can aspire; or because it is the only entrance to the knowledge and service of
GOD. For albeit GOD may be seen in all his creatures, yet especially in our
selves who bear his Image. Thou seek GOD abroad, but enter the secret
chambers of thy soul, and there he may most readily be found. The better thou
know thy self, the better thou know GOD; because the knowledge of thy
self will lead thee to the knowledge of GOD.

^f I were perfect (says Job) yet know I not my own soul. Job. 21.
Man has no brighter glass, no learneder book to look on then himself. The
true study of man is man: All other knowledge without this is defective. He
that spends his spirits to attain the knowledge of other things, and never
collecteth them to search, know and judge himself, remains the most
senseless Sott in the world. Other knowledge puffs up: but this humbles and
pulls down. For hum^litie is nothing else but a true contempt of our selves,
which proceeds from the knowledge of our selves: so as the knowledge of our
selves is the form of humility, and consequently of all other virtues which
are derived from humility.

And this great benefit did the mercy of GOD bring to David, by reason of his
sin; To understand his own weaknesses and wants; to understand by whom he
must be supported in the one, and supplied in the other; To understand (I say)
both GOD and himself. The fall of David did extinguish in him all puffie
pride; it shaked up his sensual, or rather senseless security; it made him
never to presume upon his own strength; but in all temptations and
afflictions, to trust truly to the power and goodness of GOD; and to hope for
no help, no stay, but only from his all-powerfull grace. He that is sinful
and yet secure, is doubly miserable; miserable in his sin, Moses had said: Vt
sugeret mel de petra, and oleum de saxo durissimo.
He caused him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the hardest
stone. O the infinite wisdom and power of GOD! out of the dry and ragged
rock of our sins, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
he draws the sweet sap of humility from us, and of mercy from himself;
to the sweet safety and felicity of our

And hence it is that the LORD calls himself a But, Quiadurus homo sum, etc.
Matthew. 25
most righteous and upright LORD! How stands this with the square of Justice?
It is hard indeed; but how is it just? to reap where thou did not sow, and
gather where thou did not disperse? Verily, thou sowest not the seeds of
our sins; our sins are the tares which the Devil sows among the wheat:
and yet thou reapest out of them, both good to thy servants, and glory to thy
self. By our sins thou do bring us to understand our selves, and to
search after thee: to know our own exceeding weakness and misery, and to
acknowledge thine infinite goodness, wisdom and power: to abandon and
renounce the one, and to trust entirely to the other.

Now this Psalm is most fitly termed a Penitential

This Psalm declares The power and dignity of repentance, in that it makes a
man blessed, ver. 1. The manner, namely, that it be without hypocrisy, ver. 2.
with trouble, sorrow, and contrition, ver. 3. and 4. confession, ver. 5. and 6.

The effects in regard of the godly: namely encouragement to call upon GOD,
ver. 7. the penitents themselves, viz. safety ver. 8. joy ver. 8.
the wicked viz. instruction to be guided by understanding ver. 9. and 10. to
whom is also assured great plagues for sinners. ver. 11. mercy for the
righteous. ver. 12.



VERSE. I. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is
covered.


1 RIches, honor, power, etc. make not men happy by their own nature. 2
Because they do not satisfy. 3 Because they are deceitful. 4 Because they
are inconstant. 5 They make not Blessed in regard of indisposition in our
selves. 6 How they are blessings, and to whom. 7 How and to whom they are heavy
curses. 8 Worldly matters more often hinder then help for attayning felicity.
9 Who only is blessed in this life. 10 Whether it be not a greater
Blessedness not to sin, then to have sin pardoned. 11 Wherefore happiness
consists in forgiveness of sins. 12 Another reason. 13 The difference
between the blessedness of Saints in heaven, and of repentant sinners upon
earth. 14 Forgiveness of sin is no ordinary blessing, and wherefore. 15 It
is a very great blessing to have our sins covered, and wherefore. 16 How hard
it is to hide sin, and wherefore. 17 Only repentance covers sin, and
wherefore.
blessed in this life? The rich? the honorable? the mighty? the politic and
wise? Alas! miserable are they who esteem themselves happy, by being any or
all of these. There is neither trust nor taste in these false felicities;
whether we regard their own nature, or whether many indispositions in our
selves.

until they have made us like drunkards the next day after a riotous feast;
dull and heavy, unable to speak or think of our surfeit without loathing.

Again, they are deceitful; fayrer in show, then in

Lastly, they are not constant; for they often

In regard of indisposition of our selves, if we be Esther 3.5
if disquieted in mind; we can find no felicity in them. But especially, if
we endure the combat of conscience; If our conscience be crushed with the
weight, if stung with the malice of sin; they are so far from yielding
either comfort or quiet, that they are like oil cast into the fire, to
extinguish or abate the flame: They are like the drinking of hot wines, to
qualify a burning fever; or like the eating of honey, to assuage the boiling of
a chollericke stomach: a little pleasing in the taste, but much increasing
both the pain and danger of the disease.

These are blessings indeed; but not in themselves, blessed without them.

blessed, never to have known them. Art thou wicked and yet wise? But GOD
takes the wise in their craftiness, Job 5.13. Psa. 33.10.
and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish. Do thou bear thy self
proud upon confidence of thy power? Luke 1.51. and 52.
GOD scatters the proud, and puts down the mighty. Art thou ungodly and
yet honorable and rich? But the glory of the wicked turns to their shame.
Phil. 3.19.
And what hope has the hypocrite, when he has heaped up riches, Job 27.8.
if GOD takes away his soul? Doubtless, the riches of the wicked are rackes
and torments; their honors, heavy vanities; their power a tempestuous puff;
their pleasures, sharp fevers of the mind; their serious exercises, childrens
plays. They dazel ignorant eyes with exernall shows; but inwardly they endure
many grievous gripes: they are attended and resorted to by many; but no
otherwise then flies flock to honey, mice to corn, vultures to a carcass: The
multitude pursue their own prey; they follow the fortunes of men, not their
persons.

Well then, let worldly matters go and come: blessed in this life, whose
wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is buried in the tomb of oblivion.

But stay (my soul) and pawse here a while: gather a flower or two in thy
way; pownd these spices blessed, or is he chiefly blessed whose sins are
forgiven? Is not he more blessed who sins not at all? Is it not a greater
blessing never to sin, then to have sins pardoned? Yes verily. But this is
beyond the nature of man: It is the cursed condition of man to offend. I will
never esteem him blessed, I will never believe him who says he has no sin:
Iam. 3.2.
For in many things we offend all. We deceive our selves, we are senseless of
our sins (and being senceles we are immovable) we are desperately sinful
if we say we have no sin. And therefore he only is blessed whose
transgressions are forgiven, and whose sin is covered. None other in this
world can truly and directly be termed blessed.

For this is a principal property of true happiness, has this mouthfull, he
is fully satisfied; he does not hunger after other things; he no more regards
either the favors or persecutions of this life, then does a dead lump of
flesh. This is both truly and aptly termed A stood of peace. I will send down
upon him a flood of peace. Esaias There is great peace to them who love thy Name.
Psalm. 119.
A very flood, indeed; in regard both of the quality, and of the abundance. For
it quenches the flames of our appetites and desires; then which we have none
more deadly enemies, none which more torture and tear our hearts; especially
if they be of such things, as either possibly or easily we cannot attain. But
these appetites are drowned and extinguished in this flood: they are either
satisfied or silenced by the justice of this peace. This peace can no man
understand, I will give hidden Manna: which no man knows, but he that
receives it Apoc. 2.17.
but he that enjoys it; because it exceeds whatsoever the understanding is
able of it self to comprehend.

Blessed are they who are in this sorrowful way, for only they travail to
eternal happiness. They are blessed I say by faith, and by hope. For they
have not the full fruition of felicity, but they enjoy it by faith and by
hope; and therefore by faith and by hope they are blessed. This only is the
difference between Saints in heaven, and sinners blessed estate in possession,
these in election. Nevertheless they are truly blessed: even as a Bishop
elect has both the title and honor of a Bishop, albeit he be not stalled in
his place.

Verily, as sin is no small or ordinary matter, so

It is a very great blessing to have our sins covered; covered by cunning
contriuance, not with the vain veil of colorable excuses: the more we
endeavor by these means to cover it, the more does it manifest and bewray it
self.

Adam did hide himself, but his sin he could not hide: he covered his
body with fig tree leaves, but could find no covering for his sin. The
more he endeauored to hide himself, the more did his transgression appear;
the very hiding of himself did bewray his sin. For if he had not sinned, he
would never have shrunk aside; he should never have been attached, either
with shame, or with fear. For this cause also GOD said to Cain; Genesis 4.7.
If thou do evil, sin lies at the door. For assuredly, sin will not
keep house; It will not lie quiet in a corner; It will abroad, It will stand
at the door; It will manifest it self to all that go by. At the first it is
discovered by our own fears, and by our great diligence to conceal it:
afterward, by our loose carelessness: Lastly, by our boldness and impudency in
committing evil. Besides, it is of nature to multiply and increase; until it
cannot be contained in secret; until it can no more be hidden then the Sun;
until by the tumorous turpitude thereof, it does first manifest, and then
ruin and destroy it self.

cover sins. First, because it cutteth off the increase, it dries up the
springs, from whence it swells and ouerflowes, and whereby especially it
bewrayes it self. Secondly, because it is always accompanied with love: for
Love covers the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Love makes the penitent and the innocent of like condition.

VERSE. II. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin; and in whose
spirit there is no guile.


1 IT seems that Repentance is a deity, and wherefore. 2 Wherefore Angels
after sin, cannot be blessed. 3 Man may, and wherefore. 4 The greatest praise
and power of Repentance. 5 without Repentance GOD cannot be merciful, and
wherefore. 6 Wherefore GOD imputes no sin to the penitent. 7 How a penitent
sinner may expostulate with GOD. 8 In what sort we must judge our selves. 9
Hypocrites the worst of all sinners. 10 Confession, how necessary it is. 11 GOD
is merciful in forgiving, yet hard and severe in taking accounts. 12
Dissimulation doubleth our sin. 13 One sin sufficient to ensnare us. 14 A
true account of our sins required.
Divine Repentance! What shall I say of thee? How shall I worthily either
extol or esteem thee? Shall I say thou art a virtue? or shall I term thee
some Deity? Assuredly it seems that thou art a Deity, and that GOD has
imparted a part of his Dominion unto thee. It seems that thou art his
Lieutenant upon earth, and that he has invested thee with his own authority:
because the same power which GOD exercises in heaven, the same do thou
exercise upon Earth. For as GOD makes blessed in Heaven, Nisi p^nitentiam
egeritis, omnes similiter peribitis. Luke 13.3
so does Repentance upon Earth. Only GOD makes the just blessed in Heaven, and
Repentance makes sinners blessed upon Earth: because after sin, no man is
blessed, but by Repentance.

blessed; because they cannot repent. Their will is inflexible, they are
immovable from that which once they apprehend: Job. 41.15
his heart is as strong as stone, and as the Smithes stithe: broken it may be,
but it will never bend. That which death is to man, the very same is sin to
Angels: As man after death cannot profitably repent, so cannot Angels repent
after works in heaven; by making men happy; by delivering them from eternal
perdition; and by bringing them to unspeakable and endless joy.

And herein it is singular, and eminently alone: herein all other virtues are
but handmaides to attend it. For albeit love be exceeding powerful, Many sins
are forgiven her for she loved much. Luke 7.47.
albeit the fire of love be of merueilous force to consume sins; yet does it
never attain this effect, but by virtue of Repentance. In this action of love,
Repentance is the principal worker; love is a testimony and declaration, not
a proper cause of remission of sins. Remission of sins is rather the cause
of love, To whom a little is forgiven he does love a little. Luke 7.47.
then love the cause of remission of sins.

It is a very hard thing which GOD cannot do. But herein has GOD restrained
his power. GOD cannot be merciful, unless sinners repent: without repentance
it is impossible that sinners should be pardoned, auersion from GOD, and a
conversion to creatures; an auersion from an inestimable and immutable good,
and a conversion to a vain and variable evil. This sin is never pardoned,
Quis est homo qui vult vitam, etc. diuerte a malo and fac bonum. Psalm. 33.
but by forsaking creatures, and by applying our selves again to GOD; by
turning again from evil to good; by inward loathing the transitory evil,
whereto by pleasure we did adhere; and by fixing our delight upon that
infinite good, which will never either vary or fail.

But this is a proper work of repentance, this is repentance it self.
Whosoever is thus converted in soul, he is truly penitent; he is blessed in
this life, the LORD will impute no sin unto him. And the reason is, because
he imputes sin to himself; he

For a superior Judge will never examine that offense, which he knows to be
both examined and iusticed by his commission. But GOD has given to sinners,
not only commission, but command, to examine and judge themselves: which if
they will impartially do, he has promised that he will never judge them,
that he will never impute sin to their charge. The Justice of GOD requires
that sin should be examined, condemned and punished: but the great mercy of
GOD has made sinners their own Judges, their own executioners and
tormentors: It puts them in choice, either to judge and condemn their
sin, or to be judged and condemned for their sin: either to put sin to
death in this world, or to die for sin in the world to come. But blessed is
he who embraces this mercy; who does examine and condemn his sins; who
does impute sin to himself, that GOD may not impute his sins unto him.

Blessed is he (I say) who having sincerely judged himself may boldly look
GOD in the face, and say unto him: Job. 10.2.
Condemn me not: tell me wherefore do thou thus judge me? Will thou proceed
against thine own appointment? Will thou violate the direct rule of thy
justice? Thy justice requires but one condemnation; and thy mercy has given
me power to condemn my self. This I have already done; I did daily judge my
self before thee, and now I did securely expect thee; I expect not now to be
judged by thee. For fear of thy judgment, I have judged my self; I have not
stayed for thy sentence, I have prevented it, in giving sentence against my
self. Wherefore (then) do thou thus judge me? Thou may judge my
judgment, if thou think meet, Iudica iudicium meum.
how truly and triely I have examined my cause before thee, and thy
causeagainst me; What good I have received from thee, and what evil I have
returned to thee: Judge my judgment (I say) if thou will, but do not judge (I
pray thee) my sins.

For herein especially we must be regardfull, that we judge vprightlie, that we
give no false sentence, whether by negligence, or by partiality and
self-love: that our judgment be not either muzled by the one, or misse-led by
the other. For he only is in this blessed estate, who makes a serious search
in his soul; who is not deceived in making his search, who dissembleth not
what there he finds: Blessed is he, who deceives not himself, who
dissembleth not with GOD. Who deceives not himself, in blinding or abusing
his own judgment; either by a stupendous stupiditie that he has no sin,
or by a negligent inquiry after them, or by a favorable estimation of them;
or lastly, by a false conceit that he may at leisure and in good time repent.
Who dissembleth not with GOD, either in concealing or extenuating any part of
his evil; but humbling himself before his presence, lays open to his view
every unclean corner within him: and as a poor petitioner, as one who beggeth
for a piece of bread, as one who sueth for his very life; rather aggrauate then
extenuate his wretched condition.

For it is in singleness and sincerity of soul, It is by true sense and
acknowledgement of our sins, that we must both invoke and obtain GODS
mercy. If we flatter our selves that we are innocent; If knowing our sins, we
cancel or conceal them, as if we could deceive GOD, so easily as we can
blind the world: If (to win opinion) we compose our behavior to an outward
fashion of piety, and not with the most inward senses of our soul, not with
the very heart of our heart acknowledge and bewail our fault; If we do not
rather seek after righteousness, then make show thereof: If we do not both
promise and purpose and endeavor to amend; If our mind Malus vbi bonum esse
simulat, tunc pessimus.
we are but hypocrites, the worst of all sinners: We increase wrath, we shall
never come to the presence of GOD. Wolves are never more wolves, then when
they are apparrelled like sheep: It is extreme wickedness to be empty of all
goodness, The hypocrite shall not come before God. Job 13.16. Nu. 5.6.7. Leu
5.5. Le. 18.18.22.


GOD requires in his Law confession of sin, before the sinner could be
purged: He commanded also that the high Priest should confess his own sins
and the sins of the people upon the head of a Goare, and then permit it to
escape. For assuredly, albeit yet is he hard and severe in taking our
accounts. Quia durus homo sum.
That which in deed we cannot, in desire we are obliged to perform; we must
by acknowledgement make tender of that debt, which otherwise we are unable to
discharge. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses
and forsakes them shall obtain mercy. 1. Ioh. 1.9.


If we dissemble our sins, we double our punishment, Act. 5.3.
which is a most fearful and heavy sin.

One hook sufficieth to take the fish; one snare to fetter the soul: But the
Devil is a most cunning angler, a very expert fowler; he casts many
baits, he pitcheth many snares in our paths. If we

If we acknowledge not our sins, we acknowledge

VERSE. III. Whilst I held my tongue, my bones consumed through my daily
complaining.


1. WE cannot be ignorant of our sins. 2. Original sin the seed of all
actual sin. 3. Dull sense of sin makes us slow and heavy to confess them.
4. Whereby the soul is more deeply soyled. 5. Too much sense of sin makes us
either fearful or ashamed to confess them. 6. The sottery of sinners in
concealing their sin. 7. Want of confession how dangerous it is. 8. It
draws variety of punishments upon us. 9. We often complain, but not as we
should. 10. Punishments to what end they are sent. 11 Wherefore GOD called
Adam, and not the Devil. 12. GODS violent voice in calling sinners. 13.
Whereto sinners may be compared. 14. It is a great mercy of GOD to be
trauayled in this life, and wherefore. 15. Troubles are GODS husbandry, etc.
I MY self have heretofore been



beset and besot my soul, that he stopped all the ways by which repentance
might relieve it. I was easily persuaded not to stir the unsavory puddle, not
to dig the filthy dunghill of my sins to the bottom. For who can answer
the just charge? Who dares think upon the just punishment for his offenses? In
this life he may expect whole armies of evils; and death which is to others
the port of their tempestuous navigations, to him will seem a gulf both of
intolerable and eternal torments.

So I sottishly sought to hide my sins in my own

But as fire, the less vent it has, the more furiously it burns: And as a
festred and rotten sore, not opened and cleansed, which the Patient does not
unfold to the Chyrurgian, and both desire and endure his help; putrefieth and
enflameth the more, and the more does the corruption both penetrate and
spread: So my sins, whilst they were smothered within my own conscience,
whilst they were not by confession laid open to thee, did not only more
terribly anguish and torment me, but did deeply infect the very substance of my
soul. The contagion of sin did spread like a leprosy over every part; the
strongest virtues were infected therewith; all the faculties were drawn to a
habit of evil. They did not only anguish me, but they did waste and consume
me, they drew thy heavy judgments upon me; the dangers which they brought
upon me, were no less then was the disquiet.

For I felt in my soul, besides the sharp sting of threats of thine
indignation. Many calamities thou did also cast upon my body, and upon the
issue of my affairs. And so sharply did thou visit me, both outwardly
and within; that failing, or at least fainting in body and mind, I sunk down
under the charge, and melted my languishing soul into moan. My calamities
daily increased, and therewith also my complaints: I complained daily, but duly
and rightly I did not complain. For I saw into what miseries

I did not search into the state of my soul, I did not understand it, I did
not lay it open before thee. I did not blame, I did not accuse my self unto
thee. I did not return to thee, I did not put my self into thy hands for
help. I complained for my calamities; but not for the cause of my calamities.
I complained for the punishment of my sins; but I never thought of my sins
themselves. I had only so much good left, as to see my present evil, and to
languish in my distress: my consuming increased my complaints, and my
complaints increased my consuming; but I could not spy any spark of comfort.

flow. And therefore thou do often press us with a heavy hand, that we
should understand our rebellion against thee, that we should both know and
confess our offenses, that we should disburthen our consciences of that
loathsome load, which otherwise would poison our souls to death. This is the
cause of our calamities; and from hence must begin our relief.

So thou did send fiery Serpents among thy people, in their passage through
the deserts, Numb. 21.
which ceased not to sling them to death, until they did confess their
sins. And for this cause thou did call Adam

But assuredly, the most powerful means, the I called upon the Lord in
trouble, and he heard me at large. Ps. 118.
are like to the spring of the Sun in Sicilie, which at midday is very cold,
and at midnight exceeding hot. We grow cold by prosperity; but by calamities
our devotion is enflamed. As much feeding upon sweet meats, makes the body
drowsy and dull; so the mind pastured with pleasures, becomes pestered and
heavy in the actions of understanding, and yeeldable to the command of
sensuality and sloth.

pressed with wants, to be oppressed with wrongs, to have our life perpetually
run in a rugged way; are good assurances, or rather effects, both of his love
and of his care. They are the whips which make mad sinners sober: they are
the battery which enforce obstinate and rebellious hearts, to yield to the
service and subjection of GOD: they are the arrows which GOD has taken out of
the quiver of his mercy, and winged with the fire of his Love. To pierce and to
warm our hard icie hearts, he has tempered his arrows of tribulation with
mercy, and enflamed them with his Love.

VERSE. IIII. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is
like the drought in Summer.


1 GODS heavy hand upon sinners. 2 Fear how terrible an enemy it is. 3 Her
innumerable forces. 4 Her cruel charge. 5 The sinner vanquished and ready to
yield. 6 But is relieved by Faith. 7 Her encouragements. 8 Fear not to be
feared. 9 Hell fire created not only for punishment, but for terror. 10. Who
have greatest cause to fear. 11 The number of the Elect not small. 12 Wherein
the works of Mercy exceed the works of Justice. 13 The multitude and
grieuousnesse of sins, no cause to dismay us. 14 Mercy not only preserves us
from the harm of sin, but turns the harm of sin to our good. 15 Sorrow
expels fear, and begets joy. 16 A sinner ouercharged with sorrow. 17 Her
sad encounter. 18 Ingratitude an odious offense. 19 The sinner ready to sink
under sorrow. 20 But is erected by Faith and by Hope. 21 Their comforts. 22
Contrition is the bruising of a soul between fear and grief. 23 The
multitude of GODS benefits may much assure us. 24 We must not leave our
repentance imperfect. 25 Sins are like a burning ague.
TO this end did thou bear a heavy hand over me; thy punishments did press
me very sore; thou did multiply many miseries without intermission dolours
and fears; whereof I was unable, either to sustain the weight or endure the
grief.

Before me were the multitude of my sins; behind me, the hideous horror of
them; on the one side, fears approaching; on the other, hopes abandoning;
above, Justice threatening; beneath, vengeance expecting: within, agony and
anguish of soul; without, terrors, disconsolation, dread, and almost a
hellish darkness of despair. For thou did not only enuiron and assail
me with furious fears; but thou did heap discomforts upon me: thou
did cut off the supply of thy sweet consolations; thou did dry up or
restrain the influence of thy grace, whereby I should have been both animated
and aided in my distress; thou would not afford me one beam of favor.

Oh! what a cruel enemy is fear? She marches

Come forth thou fugitive! Come thou dejected, thou rejected traitor! tell
me, Wretch! Where now is thy assurance? Who shall defend thee? whither will thou retire? Go too now; Go seek for some mantle to veil thy obscene
darkness: For thou can not with any conscience (in case thou have any)
approach into the presence of the LORD. What? expectest thou to be relieved by
him? Think thou he will favor thee? Nay, Is it possible that he should
forbear thee? See thou not that he also is set against thee? That his hand
is rigorous upon thee? And how can it be otherwise? For GOD is just; a hard
dealer; a severe exacter of accounts. Look into the examples of his justice:
How he condemned his angels irreuocablie, for one only sin; how for one only
sin, not only Adam but all his posterity, and in a manner all creatures
were cursed.

If thou conceiuest comfort by reason of some mercy which followed this
justice; then compare this justice and mercy together, by the continual course
of their effects. See how in all ages, both the greatest and most flourishing
parts of the world, have lien buried in infidelity. See how in those few parts,
over which the light of truth has displaied her beams, many millions have
bin blinded, either by ignorance, or by superstition and error. See how many,
yea how most of those, who have received true knowledge; either by delicacie,
or other viciousness of life, reap no benefit thereby. So as it is
apparantlie true, that many are called, and few are chosen: that the way to
salvation is so difficult, and the gate so strait, that it is passable for very
few.

Few indeed: For how many were in the whole world, when it was overwhelmed with
waters? How many in Sodom and the cities adioining to it, when they perished
with fire? How many among the chosen people of GOD, when Elias could not epsy
one? How many, when they were often captiuated, and finally ruined, and
dispersed? Yea, see thou not the justice of GOD to be so implacable, that
when flourishing nations are utterly rooted out, infants and innocents, who
have not actually offended, are swallowed in the common calamity, for the
offenses of their progenitors? Compare (I say) these effects of justice and
mercy together, and thou shall plainly find, that the first has far
exceeded the last; that there are many vessels of the one, and few of the other.

Now if thou hopest to be one of those few; then consult with thine own
conscience, how clear and vncorrupt thou find thy actions; how severely
thou have restrained thy evil inclinations; how strongly, how violently thou
have endeavored to mainetaine a virtuous and religious life. No, no; thou art
none of those few, who with perpetual strong striving shall wrestle through
that narrow passage. Thou have been unconstant, both in thy judgment, and in
thy actions: like a loose tooth; not only vselesse, but troublesome and
painful. Thou have been a slander to the Church, and a stain to thy
profession: Thou have been a derision to the evil, a shame and sorrow to the
good, an offensive example to the weak. The earth casts thee up, heaven
receives thee not; GOD is displeased with thee, and all creatures are bent to
oppress thee. Go to then, abandon hope, and yield thy self captive to
despair. Thou have no other remedy against thy fears but to relinquish hope:
Cease to hope, and fear will no longer torment thee; for whosoever hops for
no good, he fears no evil.

These words she doubled with a terrible voice, and all the host cried aloud,
Despair and Die.





What? (said she) Art thou such a nouice in my School? such a faint and raw
soldier in spiritual combat? Have thou no more dexterity in handling thy
weapons? Come, stand up, take courage; I will teach thee both thy fence and thy
fight. Come, (I say) and look thy terror in the face: It seems a Serpent to
devour thee, but be not dismayed, step Ps. 103.13 and 128.1. prou 10.27. and
14 27. and 19.23 and 22 4. and 28.14. Ecclus. 1. and 2. and 3. and 40.^6.17.
Gen 22.
? which is so straitely commanded to thee I^os. 24.14. Deuteronomy. 4.10 and 14.23.
Exodus 20.18, ^c. Phil. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.17.
? God loves fear Deuteronomy. 5.29.
; He accepts, Deuteronomy. 17.8 19. Act. 10.35. Luke 1.52 Exodus 9.10.
he preserves Ecclus. 31.1
, he honors Eccles. 19.20.
, he blesses Ps. 112.1.
, he never forsakes Ecclus. 2 11
them that fear him. Fear is the beginning of righteousness, the first step
to wisdom Ps. 111.10. Ecclus. 43.33
: It brings with it judgment and righteousness Es 5.7.
, It expels sins Leu. 19.14. 1. Sam. 11.7. Ier. 32.40. Ecclus. 21.6. Pro.
1.2. and 14 16. Job. 1.1, 8.
: It is the bridle of sins; it is the sword that cutteth in sunder, not only
the sinews, but the very hartstrings of sin.

What? deemest thou that GOD has created hell fire only to punish damned
sinners and the Devil? No verily: but rather to keep sinners from damnation;
to raise them to repentance, and to restrain Non cito perjt ruina, qui ruinam
timet. Senec.
He that fears ruin is neither easily nor often oppressed therewith. They
have greatest cause of fear who fear least; who walk in their own ways
with a sober security; who loosely and licentiously pursue vanities; who are
flintie hearted, without trembling or touch of the threatenings of GOD; who
persevere in sin, either boldly or sencelesly; and then say, What evil have
I done? Let these fear: It is fearful for these to fall into the hands of
the living GOD. Over the necks of these hangs a terrible sword, always
shaking, always bent and ready to strike; the less they fear it, the more
sure, the more sore and heavy will it fall. These are objects to GODS justice
and wrath; these are abiects from his mercy and grace.

But repentant sinners, who rise with fear, and run with grief to the LORD of
mercy and say unto him; LORD be merciful to me a sinner: Let such be
confident; For he who has in mercy called them, will assuredly in mercy
receive them. They are not a few all the ways of the Besides, mercy bestows
so many and so great good things upon the righteous, that her works far
exceed the works of justice. Never trouble thy self about the small number of
the elect: Assuredly they are not a few, but almost innumerable, whom the LORD
will receive to mercy. Mercy will be no less mild, then justice rigorous:
mercy will no less find a means to save, then justice to condemn. As the
number of the elect is known only to GOD, so both the time and manner of their
calling must only be referred to him.

But what moves thee to doubt and distrust thine estate? the multitude and
grieuousnesse of thy sins? Trouble not thy self for the multitude and
grieuousnesse

But lo, she has already applied her self: She hasted to meet thee; she
has already kissed thee; she holds thee close in her embracements. Yea, when
thou did fall she was present with thee (albeit thou did not discern so
much) she laid her hand under thee, to keep thee from harm, and to raise
thee again. Thou art a vessel both brittle and weak; thou must needs have
been dashed to pieces, or much bruised with thy fall; unless mercy had laid
under her hand. This is a great sign that thou

Arise therefore, and strengthen thy heart: thou have found how weak thine
own forces are; humble thy self under the Almighty arm of the LORD. For
humility is the foundation of all virtues; the lowest groundwork of
repentance. Humble thy self therefore with sorrow for thy sins past, and
circumspection for thy life to come. If thou can so

how my most meek GOD, by the goodness of his own nature was moved, was
provoked, was enforced by my ingratitude to be wroth; I was forth with
ouercharged with heaviness, which did trouble and torment me day and night;
which bereaved me of all joy, and was extremely burdensome to me. She rushed
upon me with her sad troops; she cried out most bitterly and said;

How now! presumptuous wretch, Wither art Abraham's bosom? Alas! deceived
caitiffe; thy faith is but a fantasy; thy hope a proud presumption of spirit;
thy comforts but a dream of a deluded imagination. Thou conceiuest that GOD is
merciful: it is true; exceeding merciful; infinite in his mercies. But
know the most merciful GOD, that he has threatened by his holy spirit,
Pro. 17.13.
that Evil shall never depart from his house, Sap. 16.19.
who reward^th evil for good: And that the hope of the unthankful shall melt
away as the winter ye.

Consider then how ungraciously ungrateful thou have been: consider this, I
say, and if thy own heart shall condemn thee, think what he will do who is
greater then thy heart, and who has even already opened his mouth to pronounce
his arrest. He has created thee according to his own image: he has placed
thee in the paradise of his blessed Church: with the water of baptism he
sanctified thee; he furnished thee with the knowledge of his truth, putting
his word in thy mouth, and his will in thy mind: with many temporal benefits
he did enrich thee; not only for necessity, but for an ornament and delight.

But thou in the leuitie and vanity of thy brain, did run headlong
after thine unbridled lusts, and plunge thy self in many deep sins. Many
outward callings he bestowed upon thee; with many sweet instructions he did
aduertize thee; but albeit all the floor was moistened with his heavenly dew,
yet thou (like Gedeons fleece) remainedst dry: thou did keep thy self
(like the river Nilus) within thy banks, when all other rivers did ouerflow.
He invited thee, and thou did excuse thy self; he sent to compel thee,
but thou did resist. At the last he called thee with a violent voice, and
his unspeakable goodness broke open the gates of thy obstinacy. He raised
thee from thy fall by his power; he instructed, he enlightened thee with his
wisdom; he brought thee from the tempestuous sea of this world, to the port of
a calm conscience, and planted thee in a land of religious conversation. Yet
thou notwithstanding, either unmindful, or unkind, have exalted thy heart, and
thereby lost that wisdom, which should have made thy worship and service
acceptable to the LORD.

Thou knowing his will, have been negligent in performing the same; albeit
thou know, that, Cursed is he who does the work of the LORD negligently.
Yea, thou have not done it at all; thou have manifestly and manifoldly
transgressed his will; and therefore art most worthy to be beaten with many
stripes. Thou have forsaken his service, who is so bountiful, that he rewards
a cup of cold water with eternal life; and thou have served sin, which
gives no wages but death, but eternal death. Oh woeful wages! it were far
better to go unpaid and serve for nothing.

O Lucifer! who saidest in thy heart, I will climb up into heaven: Thou must
humble thy self so low as hell, or else never look to encounter mercy.
Know thou not that rebellious ingratitude gives limits to mercy? where else
were justice? Who should receive judgment, if mercy did always wait upon
sinners? Go to then deiect thy self, abject wretch; creep among moathes and
worms; abase thy self to the very gates of despair, in regard of this thy
obstinate unkindness. Open thy understanding; draw all pensive conceits
greedily into thy soul, and pine away in a consuming langour. Since thou have
lost thy joy, make much of thy sorrow; since thou have no comfort but in
complaints, bestow them largely.

Faith, and her sweet sister Hope come to my relief, and with most comfortable
countenance and speech thus sustained me.

of this poison. At these you make a sour face; you can no ways enforce them
down. Whereas a soul once infected with sin, cannot possibly be recovered
to the state of Grace, but it must first be bruised a broken and contrite
heart, which he does never despise. And this is that contrition which is the
first part of true Repentance.

O lovely fear! O sweet sorrow! O happy hand which was so heavy upon thee,
Secundum duritiam tuam and cor impoeniteus thesaurisas tibi iram in die irae.
and suffered thee not to lie senseless in thy sins, heaping to thy self
wrath against the day of wrath. Let it be a comfort, a great joy unto thee,
that this heavy hand has raised and pulled thee out of the ordure of thy
sins. If heretofore thou have been unthankful, be thankful now, and thy
former vnthankefullnesse shall not be remembered. The multitude of his benefits
is so To them who have, more shall be given?

Again, what natural cause begins a work, and leaves the same
unfinished? The virtue of seed cease not in the leaf, not in the flower,
until it has brought forth seed to a perfect ripeness. The bird never
forsakes her young, until she see them able both to fly, and to provide for
themselves. Does nature compel inferior causes to perfect their effects, and
shall not the cause of all causes be moved by his most infinite goodness and
love, to finish the work which he has begun? Are not all the works of the
mighty GOD perfect? Dei perfecta sunt opera, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Has not the same infinite goodness and love said? It is my work to do the
will of him that sent me, that I should make perfect his work. Fear not
then: he who has begun to love thee, will never change, but will persist to
love thee to the end: the same goodness that moved him to confer many gifts
and blessings upon thee, will move him to perfect all by giving thee
everlasting life. For wherefore did he turn thy heart from sin? wherefore
did he provoke thee to Repentance? but because he purposed to make thee
clean?

thee before his presence. Acknowledge there thy sins; Hide none of thy
transgressions from him. Leave fear behind; for mild and merciful is the
LORD, he turns to those who turn unto him: but take sorrow with thee, and
season thy confession, therewith, Sorrow will make thy confession not only not
offensive, but pleasing to him.

VERSE. V. I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness
have I not hid.


1 The second form of Repentance. 2 The cause of GODS severity against us. 3
How we should present our selves to GOD. 4 A Confession. 5 Between great and
infinite there stands no proportion. 6 Faith and hope our guides and companions
to GOD. 7 Whereto a sinner is like. 8 How offensive sin is to GOD. 9 How we
must satisfy. 10 How we commonly extenuate our sins. 11 How we excuse them.
12 Temptations cannot excuse us, and wherefore. 13 To whom we are obliged to
confess. 14 The conscience of man is GODS Kingdom and Consistory. 15 We
should not be ashamed, that men take knowledge that we have sinned. 16
Pleasures of the body, what they are like. 17 Our confession must be entire. 18
Our lightest sins must be confessed. 19 Our sweetest sins must be
confessed. 20 One sin sufficient to undo us.
THen I advanced my self to the second form of repentance; From turn to my
GOD, and to turn forth my heart unto him; to power out all the putrefaction of
my soul before his pure eyes; to open my Conscience, and give a vent to those
filthy fumes, which had almost stifeled my soul; which were more loathsome,
more infectious, then is the damp of dead putrified bodies: In a word, to say
with holy Job; If I have hid my sin, as Adam, concealing my iniquity within
my bosom.

Job. 31.33
So I presented my self before his divine Majesty, with the same countenance,
wherewith a poor distressed patient, full of impostumes, Fistulaes, and ugly
ulcers, presents himself to an expert Chyrurgian: And being prepared to
endure, both the pain of the corosiue, and point of the lance, I thus
addressed my speech unto him.

Seraphims, with thy eyes far brighter then the Sun, piercest all depthes,
and discouerest all things naked and open to thy view: Thou, O LORD, who art so
powerful, and yet so pitiful to that which thou have made, that thou hear
and regardest miserable sinners; Graciously behold, be favorably attentive to
me, I beseech thee. Behold me thy miserable creature, not in anger, not in
justice, but in compassion and mercy; not as a severe Judge, but as a skillful
and careful Physician; not to punish my infirmities, but graciously to cure
them. O merciful GOD! no less infinite in Mercy then in Majesty; In
goodness and in greatness unmeasurable alike; Behold, my exceeding great
miseries; my exceeding great, but not infinite miseries: not such as can bear
any proportion

O infinite goodness and mercy! I am in a most miserable estate, and yet how to
better it cannot tell. My doubtful and perplexed thoughts do wildely wander in
a maze of amazement: And this is nothing else in effect, but to beat out, with
what torments I am likest to perish. Alas! O my GOD, wilt not thou relieve me
in these extremities? wilt not thou release me? O infinite goodness! With all
humility I entreat thy aid, not upon any confidence in my self, but faith
and hope, two twins of thy breast (who never yet have either let

O thou who art both liberal and rich! relieve my poverty. O most merciful
and powerful LORD, release my miseries. Hear my distressed soul, full of
wretchedness, but fuller of guiltiness, groaning at thy gate of mercy: See
how fowlie it is defiled with evil: how deeply corruption has tainted the
very substance thereof: how the stamps of sin, by reason of long custom,
are so firmly imprinted therein, as it is a hard matter to deface them. I am
like an unclean beast, that has long wallowed in the proper and is drawn
down with the leaden weights of sin.

O GOD of my salvation! my impure soul has hitherto been much troubled, much
endangered, and almost stifeled by enclosing her corruptions, and not giving a
free passage for them to break forth. But now I confess my sins, I
confess how grievously I have offended thy majesty. I have broken all thy
commandments, as if they had been cobwebs; and my very best thoughts have
been poisoned with

I will never go about, either to abuse, or to avoid thee, by denying or
^uppressing my sins; I will no by casting the blame upon any other; upon the
malice The woman gave it me, the serpent deceived me: But they cannot suffice
to shadow our sins. For

And therefore I will never endeavor to excuse that, which my own conscience
conuinceth. I will sincerely acknowledge my sins; I will take the whole blame
upon my self; I will not transfer any part thereof to any other. For my
conscience is so torn with the bitings of sin, my soul is so stretched upon
the rack of sorrow; that I am enforced to cry nothing else, but, O my sins!
I charge, I accuse, I condemn only my self. O my GOD! I have grieuouslie
sinned; my sins have deeply provoked thy heavy wrath; I acknowledge them
to thee with a free confession. LORD, I appear before thee no other then I am;
even a most poor desolate and distressed sinner: I can neither boast nor take
comfort in any goodness in my self; but I lay open before thee my sins.

And it is unto thee that I will confess my sins; unto thee, against whom
only I have sinned; unto thee, who only art able to forgive my sins; unto
thee, who only art able to judge of my confession. For it is not always thy
pleasure, that we blazon our own blame, that our sins be rung out to the
ears of all men; that they be set forth upon the stage of the world. If
penitentlie we confess our sins unto thee, thy compassion will cover them.
It will cover them from thy justice, it will cover them both from the scandal
and scorn of other men: thou will freely forgive both the sin and the shame.
depart, thou will not impart it to any other. None can know the secrets of the
soul; none can absolutely, either discern or command the inward working
thereof but thy self. Whosoever will presume, either to know, or command the
working of the spirit; whosoever will determine of the last end and state of
souls (further then thou have plainly revealed) he usurps thy throne; he
wresteth thy scepter out of thy hand. As thou only art able to judge of our
confession; as thou only both know and forgiuest sins; so unto thee will
I ever acknowledge my sins.

against thee, by whose power it was made, by whole providence it does
consist; for conspiring the destruction of my soul, which keeps it from
stinking, from turning to most course and loathsome carrion. I will never
bear the world in hand, that my offenses are either few or light; I will by
confession make them known to thee; I will by sorrow, and some measure of
satisfaction, make them known to the world. No shamefastness shall retain me
from mourning at any time, from making a sad and severe reckoning with my body,
from holding a sharp hand upon it. For assuredly, either we must lament in
this life with profitable tears for a time, or else with fruitless and
endless tears in the life to come: either in this world we must tie our
selves to some moderate pain, or else be chained both to intolerable and
eternal pains in the world to come.

Neither will I acknowledge my offenees in part, sins, but my
unrighteousness, which seem of lesser moment; not only the evil which I
have done, but the good which in duty I should have done: I will discover all
my unrighteousness unto thee. I will do Leu. 14.8.
even my lightest and loosest offenses. That thou who numbrest our hairs, when
thou shall take a view of my sins, shall not find one hair of them, which I
have not run over with the razor of confession.

1. Sam. 15.
I will not do as Saul did, who being commanded to slay all the Amalekites, and
all the cattle that pertained to them; destroyed all that was vile and naught
Agag, and the fattest sheep and oxen alive. I will not make away my vulgar and
unprofitable sins only, and save the principal and aduantageable alive; but
I will set the sword of confession to them all. I will not make reservation of
some sweet sin, and then say with Naaman the Syrian; 2. Reg. 5.18.
The LORD be merciful to me in this. But I will sweep the house clean, or
Lam. 2.19
I will power forth my heart as water before thee.

VERSE. VI. I said, I will confess my sins unto the LORD: and so thou
forgauest the wickedness of my sins.


1. PArticular enumeration of our sins is impossible. 2 How sharp sins
are, and how heavy of digestion. 3 Secret sins are most dangerous, and
wherefore. 4 The readiness of GOD to accept our confession. 5 GOD often
accepts our purpose for performance. 6 Which makes our want of repentance
vnexcuseable. 7 Contrition joined with a will to confess is sufficient. 8 The
necessity of a contrite heart, and wherefore. 9 For remission of sins, what
is required from us, what from GOD. 10 Neither of which require any long trace
of time. 11 How plentiful GOD is in mercy. 12 A thanksgiving for the same. 13
The soul cheereth by means of confession. 14 The joyful effects of sorrow
and troubles to penitent sinners. 15 A life without adversities whereto it is
like. 16 Many benefits that we receive by troubles. 17 How ready GOD is to
receive to mercy.
BUT what a maze do I begin to tread? How shall I ever wind my self out of
this knotty labyrinth? Judas, I have sinned; but either number, or truly
estimate my sins, I cannot. If I could number the stars of Heaven, or the
sands of the earth, or the drops of water that are in the Sea, or the moments
of time since time began; yet am I out of hope to enumerate my sins: because
they are no fewer in variety then they are in number: in number equal to those
which I have said, but far exceeding them in variety. The sum of them is,
the manifold breach of every branch of thy Commandments; whereof many of the
most heinous my Soul, like sweet meats of extreme hard digestion. The most
especial of these are, either blasphemous and profane, or light and vain
using of thy most blessed Name: vile and vain behavior and speech,
unthankfulness, covetousness, cruelty, pride, ambition, anger, malice, envy,
riot, sloth, violence, hypocrisy, flattery, etc.

These particulars I unfold before thee; in every of these I have many times
offended; yea, many times whereof I was never sensible: For what man knows
how often he offends. More also would I acknowledge to thee, if more I could
call to my remembrance; and therefore, O cleanse thou me from my secret Which
assuredly are so much the more dangerous, in that they lurk within me secret
and unseen; awaiting advantage always to entrap me, and finally to break
forth to my destruction.

But see the mild mercies of our GOD; see the greatness of his goodness
toward us; see how prone he is to pardon our sins, how ready to reconcile us
to his favor. For I did but say, I will confess my sins; and so he forgave
the wickedness of my sin. I said I will confess my sins, and thou
forgauest the wickedness of my sin. Oh! that we were such servants to thee,
as thou art to us a LORD; so ready, so willing to confess our sins, as thou
art favorable to forgive extension, but the intension; not how ceremonious it
is, but how sincere. Our purposes thou take oftentimes for full performances:
oftentimes thou acceptest our designments for deeds: thou who art a spirit,
regardest only the spirit; the outward actions are many times supplied by thy
grace.

Son give me thy heart. Nothing offends GOD but the heart; take away the
will and intention of the heart, and all our actions are indifferent: and
therefore from the heart must satisfaction proceed. The medicine must be applied
where the disease is settled; the sinner must use justice upon the same part
where sin was first hatched, and where it reigns: Even as offenders are
commonly punished, or branded upon the same parts of their bodies, wherewith
they did offend. Because we sin with the heart, GOD requires the punishment
of the heart; which is done by full and true contrition.

To obtain remission of our sins, something is In quacunque hora ingemueris
peccator omnium iniquitatum cius amplius non recordabor. Ez^k. 18.
and that at what time soever a sinner does truly mourn, he should not be
relieved.

As for the grace which proceeds from GOD, much less does it either require
or bear the very least protraction of time. For, because his virtue is
infinite, it is not included, it is not excluded by any compass or measure of
time. If there be no defect of sorrow in us, there is never defect of grace in
him; he does justify a sinner, and restore him to his favor in a very
instant, even whenever he is rightly disposed by sorrow to receive his
grace. Aperi os tutum, etc.
The Grace of GOD is so far from defect, Ecce ego fio ante ostium, and pulso,
si quis au lierit vo^em me^m, and aperuerit, intrabo ad eum, and cae nabo cum
illo and ipse mecum.
that it preuenteth our dull desires, it knocks at our heavy hearts, it
works in our sluggish spirits; we can never be so ready to entertain it,
as that is to enter. When our sins expel GOD out of our souls, he will not
go far, he will stand at the door; he will there knock, and hourly expect
to be received again.

Blessed be thou, O omnipotent GOD! who so aboundest in mercy and in love;
who art so plenty, or rather plenitude and fullness, we may easily again be
stored.

O searcher of souls! I have so far as my weakness suffices, confessed my
sins unto thee; I have disgorged my stomach, stuffed with loathsome and
dangerous humors; I have discovered those unseemly soars, which heretofore
I endeavored to conceal. And now (me think) thee, as a sharp searcher, as a
severe iusticer of my offenses; so now I run after thee, and cast my self
into thy arms, as my only assured refuge and defense. Blessed be the hour
wherein I was first enlightened, first emboldned to acknowledge my sins. In
this hour have I received a singular testimony, a sweet taste, both of thy
love, and care, and liberality toward me. Let others bless the time of their
birth, the time wherein some prosperous adventure did befall, the time wherein
either they achieved some great advantage, or else escaped some disastrous
evil: But I will bless this happy hour, the most happy that possibly could
happen to me. O my GOD! increase the pleasure which I have conceived, in being
displeased with my self, for displeasing thee: Let me take so great
contentment and delight in repentance, as ever I did in committing sin. So
shall my felicity approach, if not equal the felicity of thine Angels: So
shall I be advanced from the low condition of my grief, to the high and
glorious state of thy grace.

O eternal GOD! O true light of our eyes! If this a dead sea: as tempests
preserve water and air from

O most loving, most rich, most liberal LORD! How can we be able, I will not
say to express; but to understand, to imagine thy sweet gentleness and love?
I did no sooner think to return unto much more ready to grant thy pardon,
then we to desire it? Verelie, no loving father can so graciously receive his
child, cast down at his feet, and in the lowest descent of submission craving
his favor; as thou have graciously received me.

VERSE. VII. For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in
a time when thou may be found: but in the great water floodes they shall
not come nigh him.


1 THE effect of Repentance in regard of the godly. 2 All creatures to be
entreated to aid us in praising GOD. 3 Especially all the Saints in heaven,
who have been sinners upon earth. 4 Also all the godly upon earth. 5 Who by
examples of Mercy, shall be encouraged to resort to GOD. 6 Remission of
sins, is a case reserved only to GOD. 7 Remission of the least sin,
requires no less virtue, then the creation of the world. 8 Resort to GOD must
be in a seasonable time. 9 The seasonable time in regard of GOD. 10 The great
difference between the seasonable time, and the time ensuing. 11 The
seasonable time in regard of our selves. 12 The dangers which we incur by
deferring repentance. 13 The doubtful estate of those who repent very late. 14
Late repentance little auailable, not by any change in GOD, but by defects in
our selves. 15 It is little better then desperation, to sin upon confidence
of repentance.
FOR this cause my heart hoppeth soon as it was requisite, yet before it was
altogether too late. Although I have lost much time, yet has he not suffered
me to lose all; although I did not apprehend the first offers of occasion, yet
did not he permit it wholly to slip away. Praise the LORD; O ^y soul! Psalm.
146.
whilst I live will I praise the LORD; yea so long as I have any being will I
sing praises to my God, etc.

Let every thing that has breath praise the LORD. Psalm. 150.


which of you can reprove me of sin? They all needed thy grace to repent, they
all received thy gift to be forgiven. Let them all be examined, Let them
answer freely, by whose power they are saved, they will all acknowledge; It
was not our sword, and our bow, but thy hand and the strength of thy arm that
has gotten us the victory.

Also all the godly upon earth shall praise thee, for this example of thy
compassion and love: For that thou have declared thy self so prone to pardon,
so ready to relieve, so rich and plentiful in thy relief: For that thou art
not only easily entreated to remit our sins, but prone and bountiful in
heaping thy graces and favors upon us. They shall also be encouraged Adam, but
his necessities require that he pray often to thee; both for pardon and
relief. Ecce quiseruiunt ei non sunt stabiles and in Angelis suis reperis
prauitatem, quant^m magis hi qui habitant domos luteas, and terrenum habens
fundamentum. Job. 40.
Whosoever thinks that he has no need, deceives himself, and in very truth
stands most in need. Then do we begin to be just, when we begin to see our
own unrighteousness; and the further we proceed in the one, the more shall
we increase in the other.

And they shall pray unto thee, and only unto thee: because thou only
forgiuest sin. Remission of sins is so great a work, that it is a case
reserved only to thee: thou only forgiuest sin, who only art offended by
sin. No creature whether in heaven Ego sum, Ego sum ipse qui deleo
iniquitates tuas propter me. Es. 43.
has privilege to pardon the least sin: the forgiveness of the least sin
requires no less virtue, then the creation of all the world. In creation
nature is given, in justification grace; which in many degrees exceeds
nature. If no man be of Quis potest facera mundum de immundo conceptis semine
monne
much less is any man of ability to give grace. When the king of Syria sent
Naaman his servant to the king of Israel, that he should cure him of his
leprosy; the king of Israel tore his garments and said: Am I a GOD that I
should cure a man of his leprosy? t^ qui solus es? Job. 14.
But assuredly, if no power but of GOD was able to cure a bodily leprosy, no
inferior power can cleanse the loathsome leprosy of the soul: For this cure
must all men resort to GOD.

unto thee, Iustitia tu^ sicut gurgites maris Isai. 48.
the flood of thy fury shall not inuolue them; they shall not be swallowed in
the ravenous gulf of thine indignation.

But if they suffer this time to slip; if they be so held down with sensual
either pleasure or sloth, that they will not awake out of the slumber of
sin; that they will not arise and pray unto thee: another time shall then
succeed; when the full streams and storms of thy displeasure shall violently
break forth, and suddenly enwrappe all those, who either through negligence,
which is ill; or through obstinacy, which is worse, persevere in their
licentious life. And the longer it be before these floods come upon them, with
the greater fury will they fall: Even as rivers, the greater distance they
run from their springs, the more waters they gather, and with the greater
violence they run. Or as the longer a man to be drawing a bow, the nearer he
draws the arrow to the head, and with the greater strength it flies from his
hand.

At that time, they who now may have easy access, depart from thee. Thou who
now keep open house, will then perpetually shut up doors: thou who now
artfull of pity, plentiful in relief; wilt then finally judge, and afterward
eternally punish. Pharaoh did hardly oppress and detain the people of Israel
a long time; no entreaty, no punishment could move him to permit them to
depart; he pursued them with an army even into the sea: But when he saw the
waters coming upon him, he acknowledged the power of GOD, and said: Exodus 14.
Let us fly, for the LORD fights for them. Then he repented, then he would
have gone back; but it was too late. The water floods came upon him too fast;
sentence of death had then passed against him; then GODS wrath and the waters
came upon him together. When the floud-gates of GODS fury are opened upon us,
it will so violently drive us both from his favor and face, that it will be
impossible for us to approach him.

Again, they who let slip the time of their youth, weak; until they arrive
to the last period of their

VERSE. IIII. Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from
trouble: thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.


1. THe effects of repentance in regard of the penitents. 2 The protection of
GODS Mercy. 3 The protection of his power. 4 The protection of his providence.
5 As GOD has manifested himself to us, three of his attributes are most
excellent, his goodness, his wisdom and his power. 6 And of these his
goodness is most excellent and glorious. 7 GOD communicates his goodness, and
wherefore. 8 A thanksgiving. 9 The goodness of GOD an assured defense. 10 The
debility of humane forces. 11 How sustained* 12 The goodness of GOD not only
defends, but makes victorious. 13 A short prayer. 14 The godly are free from
the delights of this world. 15 Free also from the dangers. 16 They cannot
perish, and wherefore.
a place To hide me under thy mercy, both from the stroke, and from the search
of thy justice. When I am assailed by mine own evil inclinations, When my
spiritual enemy does either urge or allure set upon me; when molestations,
troubles, dangers, do beset me; when entrapments of all sorts are spread
abroad, either particularly against my self, or more generally against
preserved. Let others run whither they please. Let them trust to their
friends, to their riches, to their wisdom, to their power, or to any other
thing which in the view of the world seems able to defend them: I will shroud
my self under thee. Thou art my refuge, thou art the place to hide and
preserve me: In all my necessities thou art my retreit. When Satan assaulteth,
when the world enticeth, when my own filthy flesh enclineth and betraieth me;
when temptations, when adversities and dangers enuiron and oppress me; this is
my only comfort, that thou art good, and that I may have resort to thy
goodness; which is the most excellent attribute and perfection that thou have.

True it is, that among all thy perfections, one is not greater or less then
another: because every one comprehends the most high and simple nature of thy
divinity, whereinto no comparison can fall. Yet as thou do manifest thy
self to us, three of them are most excellent: thy goodness, thy wisdom and
thy power. These are the three fingers which sustain the earth. Of these, thy
goodness moves thee to be bountiful to thy creatures; thy wisdom
contriueth how this may most beneficially be done: thy power brings the work
to effect. And albeit these are equal in thy self, comprised together in thy
divine providence; yet as thou declarest thy self to goodness is most
excellent and glorious, from whence thy mercy does proceed. This thou most
extollest in thy self; this thou most expressest in thy works, whereof
always thy goodness is the cause. For thy goodness draws thy infinite
wisdom and power to concur with it, in bringing thy benefits to effect.

And because it is the nature of Goodness to communicate and dilate it self;
thou who art the original Goodness, have imparted many good things to thy
Creatures. Not for any necessity to thy self, not for any increase of thy
glory: for neither art thou defective in any thing, neither can any thing
enlarge thy glory: but because thou will not be good alone. Because thy
goodness is of nature to extend it self, it has made other creatures to
participate thereof. Thy goodness and thy glory thou have imparted to other
creatures; that as thou enioyest thine own essence and beauty, so they also
should behold, love and enjoy the same: albeit not in the same degree with thy
self: because they cannot comprehend thee, as thou comprehendest thy self.
This is the felicity and glory which fills the capacity of our souls, and
makes them happy. And to this end it pleased thy infinite goodness to
create, not only Angels, but also men: That so abject a creature, in one part
nearest to beasts, should sit at thy table, and feed of thine own dish.

Blessed be this noble Goodness, which has so Goodness is the contentment
and delight of my heart; this only is able, not only to refresh, but to
revive the soul with inward consolation: There is no solid, either comfort or
assurance, but in this Goodness.

And therefore whenever I am environed and Goodness: thy Goodness shall
then be not only a buckler, but a bulwark to defend me. Under the defense of
thy Goodness, I shall not only be safe, but secure: Not only safe from
dangers, but secure also and free from fear. Although the earth tremble, and
the mountains be carried into the bosom of the sea; yet under this protection
I will not fear. For among other things, this is one of thy chief endeavors
and cares, to deliver thy servants and friends from dangers; to appease their
minds from disquiet; because thou know what we are, and whereof we are
made. Thou know how feeble our forces are; feeble by nature, but by often
transgressions altogether disabled Perditio tua ex te Israel, in me auxilium
tuum. Hos. 13.9.
he may cast himself into an Ocean of misery without thee; but save and
relieve himself without thee he cannot; this is a special work of thy
goodness and grace. In this work all power without thee is Pone me iuxta te
and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me. Job. 17.
with thee death it self is alive. All power is weak against him who is under
thy power; If thou be at my hand, no hand is of force against me: my weakness
shall be supported by thine omnipotent power.

goodness, I shall not only be delivered and preserved against mine enemies;
but I shall prevail and be victorious against them. As I was before beset with
dangers, so shall I be there environed with joy: I shall not only be free
from fear, but filled with unspeakable joy. Oh happy souls! who are arrived
in so sure custody; who in all the trauerses of this life, are guarded by the
puissant hand of GOD. What evil can either assail or approach you? What
good do you not enjoy? No evil can approach you; because you always fly
from evil: you enjoy all good, because you enjoy that goodness which makes you
always doing of good. Fly from evil and do good.


O good GOD! give me a taste of the plentiful

They soar above the sphere of earthly delights; they never stoop upon so
course carrion, but aspire to prey upon Angels food. And they are no less that
soul which sins shall die. Eze. 18.4.
But nothing is sin unless it be voluntary; Take away the will and all
actions are equal: and therefore a soul does not perish, unless it will,
unless voluntarily it commits evil. So it follows, that they cannot
perish, because they will not: Because they will not return

VERSE. IX. I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall
go; and I will guide thee with mine eye.


THE effects of Repentance in regard of the wicked. 2 GOD is most intelligible,
yet hardest to be understood. 3 GOD directs the understanding. 4 Corrects
the will. 5 Not only instructs, but leads with his hand. 6 Enlightneth and
guides with his eye. 7 To what end GOD fixes his eyes upon the righteous. 8
The eyes of the LORD are working eyes. 9 They make a soul both beautiful and
rich. 10 The incredible goodness of GOD. 11 The eyes of the LORD not only
teach, but enable. 12 A heavenly voice. 13 Our eyes must also be firmly fixed
upon GOD. 14 But first they must be made clean.
COME hither now all ye who want truth; all ye who wander out of the right
way, come hither to me: come all ye who are desirous to attain a happy life,
whereto all the passage of our life is nothing else but a toylesome travail. I
will inform you in the pure truth, which experience of mine own errors has
taught me; I will direct you in the right way, which after long wandering I
have beaten out; I will point unto you the clear Sun of Life, which after
many stiff storms has disclosed to me a most lovely light: whose bright
beams have dispelled all dark pitchie clouds of despair, and reduced my
thoughts to a quiet calm. All ye who would taste the great goodness of GOD,
who would be made happy by remission of your sins; ye who would obtain his
aid in your necessities, his comfort in your distress; hear me whom
experience has taught; Or rather hear the LORD himself: Listen well what he
says unto you, and lodge up his words carefully in your breasts.

Come unto me, thou miserable man; If thou have any care of thine own estate;
If thou have any love and desire of thine own safety, come unto me; and thou
shall see what I will do for thee. I will inform

But because men do not commonly offend through want of understanding, but
through perverseness of will: For that the knowledge may well be furnished,
partly by the benefit of nature, and partly by instructions from other men; but
both these are not of power to rectify the will and restrain the appetite.
They may point out the way, but they cannot give either appetite or strength to
travail therein: they may set good meat before thee, but they cannot give
direct thy understanding, but I will correct the appetites and inclinations of
thy will: I will not only inform thy judgment to discern what is best, but I
will conform thy will to embrace and execute what thou do discern. I will
not only remove errors from thy knowledge, but disorders also and dullness
from thy desires.

And because the way which thou pacest is both Israel, in the day by a pillar
of a cloud, and in the night by a pillar of fire; so day and night I will be
thy guide. In the day of prosperity, with my grace of moderation; in the night
of adversity, with my grace of comfort: these two pillars shall never forsake
thee. I will remove all impediments from before thee: I will make thy passage
both straight and smooth.

Let great persons of the world send their harbengers before them, Thou shall
make equal the righteous path of the just, Psalm. 26.7.
to make their iournalls both easy and safe. But I my self will level thy
way; I will remove and avoid all hindrances, I will make thy walk both
pleasant and plain. Anchore not thy mind to things of this world; Crooked
things shall be made straight, and rough ways be made plain, Luke 3.5.
Let not thy thoughts be troubled either with hope or with fear; Arrest thy
self wholly upon me, and I will take the charge into my hands: I will have a
care over thee, as a father has over his child. I will never turn my
countenance from thee, thou shall walk always in my sight, I will firmly
fix mine eyes upon thee: I will watch over thee, so as nothing shall fail
which may advance thee to a happy life. Mine eye shall enlighten thee, mine eye
shall direct thee, mine eye shall furnish thee with all supplies; until thou
arrive at the place, where thou shall want nothing but what thou would not
have: where thy abundance shall equal thy desires.

O sweet words! and what frozen heart can receive them, and not be melted
into delight? and not be enflamed with the love of his creator? What? Will thou fix thine eyes upon us indeed? Yes verily; Psalm. 34.14 Psalm. 33.17
The eyes of the LORD are over the righteous: The eyes of the LORD are upon
them that fear him, and put But to what end? To deliver their souls from
death, and to feed them in the time of dearth. Psalm. 33.18
Good: And so it seems, that they shall neither perish nor want. For they
shall be delivered from death, and fed in the time of dearth. Thine eye is
so fixed upon them, that whosoever touches them to harm them, he touches
the apple of thine eye. All sweet saciety is plentifully powered from thine
eyes.

sweet is thy Spirit? What comforts and delights breathe hourly from thee?
How art thou so enamoured with our sinful souls, that thou will not turn
the eyes of thy Majesty from them? How come they so dear unto thee, that
neither danger nor want can seize upon them? LORD, I am astonished at Ps. 141.3.
What is man that thou have such respect unto him? or the son of man that
thou so regardest him?

I did once go astray, over carried with the company

Fear not, behold, as I have infused a soul into thy body, going in places,
where it is both easy and dangerous to receive a fall.

observe those lovely and lively looks, which do so carefully preserve me.

VERSE. X. Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no understanding:
whose mouths must be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.


1 OUR nature requires, that we be guided by GOD. 2 Other creatures have some
likeness of GOD, and wherein. 3 Man bears his image, and how. 4 This should
move us to apply our selves to GOD. 5 Wherein we should declare a difference
between us and bruit beasts. 6 To be a man to halfes is the worst condition,
and wherefore. 7 Four degrees of Sin. 8 Contempt not pardonable, and
wherefore. 9 The first motions of Grace to be embraced. 10 No creatures
degenerate from their proper nature, but man. 11 The cause thereof. 12
Wherefore in the creation no mention is made of the goodness of man. 13 How
man transformeth himself into a beast. 14 The deformity of Sin, in that it
transformeth us into beasts. 15 What we are if we use not reason, and what if
we abuse it. 16 How we may be best transformed. 17 The services which commonly
we pursue. 18 The love of our selves should move us to goodness. 19 The love
of misery is worse then misery it self.
BE ruled by me then, and do as I have done, (O my friend) take it from my
experience for the best. Range thy self in order, and be guided by his Grace.
Have recourse to him in due time, whilst he permits, whilst he inuiteth,
whilst he entreats thee to come. Now he gently calls thee into the
right-way of salvation, now he courteously offers both his direction and
aid: Hear him, as thou art, and as the nature of thy being requires.

Thou art a man, endued with reason and understanding, wherein GOD has
engraven his lively image. In other creatures there is some likeness of him,
some footsteps of his divine nature; but in man, he has stamped his image.
Some things are like to

Seeing then that thou art of so noble a nature, and that thou bear in thine
understanding the image of GOD; so govern thy self as is fit for a creature
of understanding. Be not a man only in name, and in outward feature, but in
conditions of mind a beast; plunging thy self in those brutish pleasures and
desires, whereby the flesh vanquisheth and destroys the spirit. Be not like
the brute beasts which want tempestuous rage of thy sensuality, without any
discourse, without any rule, or restraint of reason.

Think that thou art a more excellent creature, then to be anchored like a
beast, to earthly thoughts:

Above all, be not half a man, be not careful and

Thou may happily observe four degrees of which is not pardonable; because
so long as Insanabilis est fractura tua. Ier. 30.
it is not possible that the sin should be remitted. Obstinate impenitencie
is said to be impardonable, for that thereby a sinner disesteemeth and
despises the mercy of GOD: which if he would entertain and embrace, then is
he not obstinate, then are his sins both possible and easy to be forgiven.
For no sin is unpardonable with GOD, when with sincerity and humility of
heart, the sinner desires mercy; which contempt will never permit him to do.

And therefore at the very first summons that GOD which we can possible do.

Proteus, into

into beasts? Cap. 5.1.
Run to and fro (says the Prophet Jeremy) by the streets of Jerusalem, and
behold now, and know and enquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a
man. And again the same Prophet says: Cap. 10. Cap. 21.
Every man is a beast by his own knowledge. And again: The Pastors are become
beasts, and have not sought the LORD; therefore have they no understanding.

And hereby thou may discern (O man) the deformity Psalm. 18. alias 19.
and transformeth it into the image of beasts. For Man being in honor, and
without understanding, is compared to the foolish beasts, and is made like unto
them.

O sons of Adam! created after the image of GOD; adorned with many natural
and supernatural gifts. Do not abandon your selves, Do not abandon reason to
embrace sensuality; do not cast off the dignity of your condition and state,
to follow the base fashion of beasts. Every thing naturally loves the life.
You have no similitude with beasts; but GOD has created you to his own image,
to the end you should love him. GOD has endued you with reason, to make you
differ from beasts: use it, and use it well. If you do not use it, then are
you beasts; If you use it not well, but abuse it, then are you be ye holy, as I
am holy. This is a blessed change; this is the greatest perfection that can be
either wrought or wished to a reasonable creature.



You are now in your passage through a wide and wild forest, wherein you may
be easily lost, wherein easily you may lose the use of that sun, which should
both enlighten and direct you to your iourneyes end. You are traversing through
an intricate labyrinth, out of whose entaglements you can never wind, never
free your feet, unless you follow that pathe which GOD has lined forth unto
you. You a^e sailingin a dangrous sea; beneath paued with shelues, on every
side walled with rocks, above beaten with terrible tempests. You must be not
only skillful, but careful of your course; you must always bear your hand
on the helm, your eye on the compass; lest it come to pass that you never
escape.

far worse then misery it self. Assuredly, in case you continue in this
careless course; in case you still bear your selves, either desperate in
running from GOD, or dull and heavy in coming to him; in case neither his
benefits can allure, nor his chasticements enforce you to a change of life: he
will cast his plagues upon you so thick as hail; which will make you more
miserable then you can imagine.

VERSE. XI. Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but who so puts his trust
in the LORD, mercy embraces him on every side.


1. GODS heavy hammers upon obstinate sinners. 2 The multitude of GODS
punishments. 3 The severity of them. 4 It is most easy for GOD to pardon
sins, and wherefore. 5 It is not possible but that penitent persons should be
forgiven. 6 The confidence of true penitents. 7 Their saciety. 8 Their joy. 9
Albeit the contray appears. 10 Penitents enjoy most perfect pleasure in this
life, and wherefore. 11 The pleasures of the wicked are worse then brutish. 12
Penitents a^e blessed in their chasticements. 13 The first reason hereof. 14
The second reason. 15 The afflictions of this life are both momentany and
light. 16 A short prayer.
Certainly if you will not embrace this friendly advice; If you esteem these
warnings to be of no weight; If blinded, either with dullness, or with malice,
you persevere in your sins; If neither benefits nor scourges can hold you in
obedience; If neither promises nor threats can any deal move you; If you can
be retained in order, neither by hope nor by fear; If, like untamed beasts,
you still wildlie run through the thorny thickets of all vices, and esteem
every lustful thing lawful to be done: he has heavier hammers to break
your obstinacy, to bridle your

Here the most pleasant retreits are full of hideous without remedy, complaint
without, pity, repentance without mercy. Here death always lives, and life
always dies; death here and life are immortal together: life in dying and
death in enduring. Here both body and soul shall eternally live in eternal
death: they shall live together in a double death, and both eternal: the death
of sin, and the death of punishment due to sin.

On the other side, they who contemn the vanity of the world, and apply
themselves only to GOD; they who repent them of their sins, be they never so
great (if they do not despair) shall undoubtedly abolish his sins. Verelie
if a good man will be merciful to his beast; our good GOD will much more be
merciful to his creature, will forthwith enter, because the impediment is
removed; because nothing then remains in the soul, which may resist or
repel mercy. If the window be opened, the room will be light; and if the
floudgates be vnbarred, the streams will presently ouerflow.

But they who have received mercy, who are under all wickedness is full of
fear; Sap. 5. Prou. 28.1
so the just is confident as a Lion.

And whosoever receives mercy, they shall be with what delight do they
either remove or surmount all difficulties which lie before them? Howsoever
their travail seems troublesome and hard, yet the love of their iourneyes
end makes it, not only tolerable, but delightful: The only thought of the
end of their travail, seasoneth all the means with sweetness, through which
they are enforced to wrestle to that end.



As the inward virtues and faculties of the soul

But penitent persons whose sins are forgiven, have the inward capacity of
their souls more perfect and clear then other men: Because nothing either
defiles or defaceth the inward virtues of the soul, but only sin; neither
is there any means to purge the one, or repair the other, but by repentance.

Heerehence it follows, that penitents only enjoy pure pleasure in this life;
as proceeding from the purest and highest faculties of the soul; much cleansed
by repentance from corruptions of sin.

But the pleasures of the wicked proceed only

It cannot be denied, that many penitents are almost Blessed is the man who is
chasticed of the LORD. Job. 5.7.
The reasons whereof are mainelie two. First, for that this correction
proceeds from the love of GOD; either as a gentle bridle, to restrain them
from licentiousness of sin: or as a forge, hammer and file, to consume the
consuming rust of sin. For as a man will file and scour that instrument or
vessel which he regards, to make it bright; as beat and brush that garment
which he affects, to make it clean: So GOD chastises that person whom he
loves; either to purge, or to preserve him from the soil of sin. Quem liligit
Dominus, cast^gat, flagel las omn^m filium quem recipis. Heb. 12.6
If GOD scourges the just; if he debarreth, if he depriueth them of health,
riches, honor, or any other favor of the world; it is only for love unto
them: It is to make them only to love him. For GOD is a jealous GOD, and so
loves those that are his; that he will not endure them to love any thing but
himself, unless it be for his sake. GOD esteems not himself loved enough,
if the love of any other thing be joined with the love of him. The sense of
this love of GOD does so inflame their love toward him, as they become
senseless of any worldly accidents or affairs.

Tribulationem patimur, sed non destituimur, 2. Cor. 4.8.
yet are they never forsaken: but in the midst of their miseries, mercy shall
encompasse them. They are never cast off, never cast away; but are always
guarded by the mercies of GOD: the mercies of GOD will defend them for the
present, and deliver them in very good time. For the present it does enable
them, not only willingly, but ioifully and desirously to suffer the momentany
afflictions of this life: For the future it prepares for them an eternal
crown of glory; to which the short afflictions of this life, are an ordinary
and almost necessary passage. The afflictions of this life, are both naturally
momentany, and by grace light; Id enim quod in prae senti est momentaneum, and
leave, aeternum gloriae pondus operatur. 2. Cor. 4.17
but the glory whereto they lead, is both eternal, and of exceeding weight. As
the grace of GOD makes the afflictions of this life light; so without that
special grace, the nature of man is altogether unable, either to bear, or to
behold the weight of glory which shall succeed. We have a natural inclination
to it, but all our natural abilities and forces are insufficient, either to
attain, or to sustain it.

O LORD of this eternal weight of glory! Let Hic ure, (...) seca, bit non
parcas, vt in aeternum parcas. Aug.
and burnings in this life, so that I be both comforted and defended by thy
mercy; so that I may be prepared and guided to thy glory; so that I may be
delivered from the great plagues which the wicked shall endure. The more bitter
the potion is, the more medicinable and healthful will it be: the more sharp
the file is, the less rust will it leave behind. The more a garment be brushed
and beaten with rods, the less it remains defiled with dust.

VERSE. XII. Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the LORD: and be joyful
all ye that are true of heart.


1. TO whom it is proper to judge of the pleasure of the righteous. 2 A true
Judgment touching worldly pleasures. 3 Pleasures of the soul dilated often to
the body. 4 They who have the favor of GOD, have GOD himself. 5 Who are
invited to rejoice. 6 For what causes. 7 How gloriously the souls of them who
love GOD, sort out of the miseries of this world. 8 Who are forbidden to
rejoice. 9 The joy of the wicked no true joy, and wherefore. 10 The joy of the
righteous must not be placed in worldly matters, and wherefore. 11 But it must
be lodged only in GOD. 12 No limits to be prescribed to this joy. 13
Theological virtues consist not in a mediocritie, like Moral virtues. 14 The
attaining worldly felicities is laboursome, the enjoying often loathsome. 15 We
cannot joy in earthly, and in heavenly things together. 16 A short prayer. 17
Fear and joy, how combined.
I Suppose there are not many, who have not often tasted the joy and pleasure
of the soul, after some measure of repentance; but happily not sufficient to
arrest a just Judgment of them. For when two affected with vicious humors,
cannot well judge of the taste and relish of meats; so wicked men, whose
minds are infected with the poison of sin, cannot rightly judge of the
pleasure of the righteous. This is proper to them whose souls have a true
taste, not any ways depraved.

Now, many have had good experience of the disposition and state of the soul,
both in fruition of the Vanity; Et vili quod hoc quoque esset vanitas. Eccl.
1.2.
by others no better then dunge. All esteem the felicities of this world, not
only vain, but exceeding vile and base, in regard of the joys which succeed
and proceed from true repentance. Arbitror vt stercora. Phil. 3.8.
Their thoughts being once acquainted with this real truth, they neither
desire, nor regard the supply of shadows: They cannot but be strangers to
worldly delights; I have taken greater pleasure in the ways of thy
commandments, then in all manner of riches. Psalm. 119.
in which they see nothing but some scattered crummes, and hungry morsels of
the heavenly banquet. O LORD of hosts! how great are the pleasures which they
enjoy, who are reconciled by repentance to thee? which albeit they be properly
received into the soul, yet sometimes they are so great; that, as rivers
increased by the fall of rain Anima mea, and caro mea exultaue^unt, etc. Psalm.
83.


I will therefore rejoice in the mercies of my GOD: I will place all my
pleasure in the contemplation of those felicities, which he reserueth in his
treasury of heaven, to enrich, to adorn, to crown the just. This shall be the
food of my thoughts; the ambition of my highest hopes and desires. Upon
confidence that I am in the favor of GOD, I will account GOD which he has:
unless I have the party, I can never have his love.

To this joy I inuit you all, who stand sworn to First, that you rejoice;
Secondly, that you rejoice not in your selves, Exulsaslo iusti in Domino. Ps.
32.
not in any thing that the world affoords, but only in the LORD.

You (I say) who walk not in the crooked and craggie ways of sin, but in
the right path of righteousness; who in this passage commit your selves
altogether to the power and goodness of GOD. All you I inuit to rejoice, to
power forth your spirits into joy; and that for two causes. First, because you
a perpetual feast. Secondly, Prou. 15.
because you expect both an end, and a reward of all your travails. You expect
that in short time you shall exchange the thorns and thistles of this wretched
life, for the flowers of eternal felicity; that the sweat of afflictions
shall be wiped from your faces; and that you shall be both clothed and
crowned with heavenly honor. Assuredly,

But all the wicked I forbid to rejoice; Away hence* Noli latatari Israel quia
fornicatus es a Deo tuo. Prou. 2.14.
you may freely depart, because you have no part in this joy: you have time
little enough to lament. For albeit sinners rejoice in doing ill, and take most
delight in worst things; yet is not this the First, because it proceeds from
an evil conscience, which has so many thorns as it has thoughts: always
pricking, Sub sentibus delicias esse computabunt. Job. 30.
sometimes tearing the soul, and crying out in the midst of their mirth. Oh
impure pleasure! Oh unlawful joy! Oh just revenge that must ensue! Secondly,
because it is both short, and the symptom of a deadly disease. For they joy
at their sins, which will eternally ruin both their bodies and souls; they
joy in that condition of life, for which they cannot sufficiently lament.
Therefore the joy of sinners is like the witless laughter of fools, when they
are lashed; like the senseless laughter of mad men, when they either do or
suffer some mischief; like the sick laughter of some diseased persons, even
when they lie at the point of death. When Dolphins leap and play in the sea,
it is a sure sign of tempests approaching; and when the wicked sport and
solace in their sins, it is an infallible argument of their ruin at hand. If
Epicures rejoice, who deny that GOD does either order or regard the affairs of
this world; If Athiests rejoice, who are of opinion that the soul and body
determine together; It may bear some appearance of joy: But when they rejoice
in their sins, who believe the immortality of the soul, who know both the
justice and power of GOD, who know how horrible it is to fall into his hands
after separation from him by sin; It bears no shadow of joy; It is a plain
token of a mind, either senseless or mad.

So then, it is proper to you onel^e (O ye righteous)

Go too then, rejoice only in GOD, who forgiueth your iniquities, who does
tolerate and conceal your weaknesses, who liberally imparteth his goodness:
For he imbraceth you with a fatherly love; and will then chiefly stand by
you, when all other comforts and supports will forsake you* Join no partener
with him in the small possession of your joy: Joy only in him, whom you shall
always find, above you powerful, beneath you plentiful, before you
watchful, behind you careful, on this side bountiful, on that side
merciful, on all sides wonderful.

Rejoice not in your own worthiness, but in his infinite goodness, who drives
all dangers from your bodies and souls; who so provides for you, that you
want nothing necessary for this life, and do assuredly expect blessed
abundance in the life to come. Rejoice only in him, who does comfort and
relieve you in your passage through this world, and will conduct you to the joy
of his heavenly kingdom, whereof you shall never be disposse^sed. Et gaudium
vestrum nemo tollet a vobis.
Rejoice I say, in him, who is the very Ocean of joy, from whom all joys of
the soul are derived: who only gives true joy, and full joy, and perfect
joy; and joy which shall neither end nor abate. Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus
tuae, and torrente volaptatis suae potabis cos. Psalm. 36.
Of which joy, the only hope is sufficient both to refresh and sustain us, in
all the trauerses of this life; which incomparably exceeds, not only all
humane joy that can be found, but whatsoever can be either guessed or imagined.

whence it proceeds. All moral virtues consist in a mediocritie, which is
limited by prudence: But it is

Wherefore then do we not with a holy scorn, cast behind us the base
vanishing pleasures of this world, and bend all our endeauours after these
heavenly felicities? Or rather wherefore do we, with a sleepie sensuality,
cast behind us these heavenly felicities, and bend all our endeavors after the
base vanishing pleasures of this world? Alas! Me dell querunt fontem aequae
viuae, and foderunt sibi cisternas: cisternas dissipatas, quae no^ valent
tener^ aquas, Iere 2.13.
Wherefore do we forsake the living springs, and dig broken pits that will
hold no water? Is it out of opinion of safety? or is it for idle ease? Go we
then to the dead sea of this world, let us draw of their muddie waters of
honor, riches, authority, or any other witcherie of the world: Certainly it
will be with great pain, with great care, and many times with great danger.
And then what follows? the atteining Haurietis ^quas in gaudio de fontibus
Saluatoris, Isa. 12.3.
as they are loathsome (many times) when they are achieved. Only out of these
living springs, out of these saving waters we may always draw, both with
safety, and with joy.

Away then ye painted pleasures of this world: mine eyes are dazeled with the
blaze of too bright a Sun, to admit the beams of your pale light: I am
wholly inherited by a higher joy, which has taken so absolute a conquest over
all my powers; that neither my sense can discern, nor my mind conceive any
other object. As a man cannot look with one eye upon heaven, and another upon
the earth; so

Lord, take from me all pleasure, take away all patience deplore my weakness,
and to implore thy grace; to compose my behavior, and d^spose all my abilities
to do thee service. O my GOD! marshall my unruly appetites, train them in thy
discipline, bind them under the command of reason and grace. Let not my soul
be chained in me, but let it aspire to thee: For in me it is but in a prison,
in thee it is in paradise.

Reconcile and combine in me two contrary affections;

Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches, and Power be
unto our GOD for evermore.
A SVMMARY PRAYER.
O Omnipotent GOD! most manifest and yet most secret and hid: O bountiful
Giver! and yet severe exacter! Thou, O LORD, who sitting above the Seraphims
see all things, and in all things may be seen: Thou who art most
powerful, and yet so pitiful, that thou releeuest miserable and vile sinners:
O most glorious and incomprehensible GOD! incline thine eye favorably to my
distress; favorably regard my poor petition, which breaking from a broken
soul, must needs make an untunable sound.

There is nothing, O LORD, which my soul more desires: nothing is more due and
delightful to thee, then that I should Love thee. Thou have created me to
love thee, thou have commanded me to love thee; in this love thou have placed
my felicity and my peace: In this love consist all good things, which we enjoy
upon earth, and the greatest part of those which we hope for in heaven. But no
man can love thee unless he know thee: the knowledge of thee is necessary to
beget this love; because we cannot truly love thee, unless we understand
that all causes of love are perfectly in thee. O true delight of our hearts! I
cannot live, unless I love thee: and I cannot love thee unless I know thee.
What then shall I do to atteine this knowledge.

The knowledge that we have comes by our senses; which are as gates, through
which the representation of things sensible enter into our understanding. But
neither can thy greatness enter through so narrow passages, neither can we
imagine any representation, whereby our understanding may apprehend thee. Thou
have formed all creatures, in number, weight, and measure; their nature and
virtues are limited; thou have given them their bounds which they cannot
exceed: and therefore our understanding is able to embrace them. But thou art
infinite: thy being is boundless. Nothing is above thee, nothing beyond thee,
nothing wide of thee, nothing without thee: our understanding cannot comprehend
the confines of thy being. As thou art infinite in power, so art thou in
nature: thy nature is no less infinite in extent, then eternal in continuance.

No man has hitherto been able to understand the essence and nature of his
own soul, whose offices and operations he daily discernes: and this is
because it bears thy Image. And how then shall I be able to understand thee?
If my ignorance be so dull and heavy in my self, how shall I be of capacity
to know thee? O noble nature! O infinite essence! O incomprehensible Majesty!
How shall I know thee? For I cannot see thee. My sight is dim, and thou art a
light which can not be approached. Thou art most high, and so must he be
whosoever shall attain thee. Who then will give me the eyes of an Eagle, that
I may behold this Sun? Who will give me wings, that as a Dove I may
approach this height?

But yet will I not thus give over the chase: the more hard it is, the more
hardly will I pursue it. There is no wisdom but in knowledge of thee: there
is no rest but in loving thee: there is no joy but from beholding thy beauty. I
will not live without this knowledge, which is the original both of love and
of joy. My eyes are dim, yea dark and blind: but grace will enlighten me,
Grace will effect that which Nature cannot. And albeit I know thee very little
and obscurely at the first, yet is it better so to know thee, then perfectly to
know all things besides. Albeit I cannot fully know thee, yet will I aspire to
such measure as I may, and this will I love, and heerewith my soul shall rest
content: even as a bird is content with the water which she takes in her bill,
albeit she be not able to take the whole fountain. Yea, thy grace will
assist me, that if I shall but begin to love thee a little, thou will discover
thy self more plainly to my knowledge, even as thou have said, He that loves
me, shall be loved of the Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self
unto him.

And to this end thou have opened two books, to the two eyes of my
understanding: Faith and Reason. To the eye of my Faith thou have opened the
book of the sacred Scriptures; wherein thou do manifest thy merueiles, and
unfold thy mysteries; to beget in us a love and reverence of thy Majesty.

To the eye of my Reason thou have opened the book of thy creatures; which in
their perfections manifest thy beauty, and thy goodness in their use. For this
visible world, this fabricature of creatures is a fair Book, wherein all men
may read, and thereby learn, what thou art; every creature being so many
letters, to declare the excellency of their maker. Some declare thy beauty,
some thy greatness, some thy power, some thy wisdom, some thy providence; all
with different sweet sounds, in a well tuned harmony, set forth thy goodness
and glory. They are as a bright glass, wherein we may behold thee: that as
thou art a glass in heaven, wherein all thy creatures are seen, so are thy
creatures a glass upon earth, wherein we may behold and know thee.

They are trumpets of thy honor, witnesses of thy worth; bellows of our love,
spurs to our dulnes, and Judges of our unthankfulness. They always beat at
our understanding, to instruct us some part of thy perfections: and shall we be
so senceles, that we cannot behold in them the Majesty of their Creator? Shall
we be like witless children, who turn over books to please their fantasy,
in viewing pictures and colors; but neither can read one letter, nor
understand what the pictures represent? O wasters of time! we take pleasure
only in beholding thy signs, but nothing regard what is signified and taught.
Assuredly, we have good cause to fear, that which the Wise man threatens:
that all creatures shall rise in arms against them who will not understand.
Sap. 5.


O Father of light! suffer not, I beseech thee, such an Egyptian mist to
enwrap my head, that in neither of these books; that neither by Faith, nor by
Reason I can discern thee. Enlighten my eyes that I may see thee; enlarge my
heart that I may know thee, love thee and adore thee: not only by Faith, as
thou have revealed thy self in thy word; but by evidence of nature, by plain
invincible demonstration of Reason, as thou art declared by thy works. That I
may praise thee, not only for the use of thy creatures, but for attayning by
them to some knowledge of thee.

We cannot now see thee, but covered with the veil of thy greatness: The dampie
fogges of my sins wherein hitherto I have lived, do altogether obscure thee.
No less then it happens upon the first eruptions of fire from the mountain
Aetna; the smoke whereof so darkeneth the confining countries, that one man
cannot see another. But O fountain of light! dispell these filthy fumes, with
a gracious cast of thy countenance; and then I shall be both able and desirous
to behold thee. Make me blessed by forgiveness of my offenses; Cover my
^innes, O LORD, and thereby thou shall Discover thy self.

To this end remove both from my tongue, and from the most secret retreates of
my soul, all odious hypocrisy; that by thy grace I may sincerely, without
faining or fainting in spirit, repent my sins: that I may apply my self to
thy worship and service; not in outward show of piety only, but with all the
most inward senses and forces of my soul: that I may not wilfully endeavor,
either to cover my sins by dissimulation, or to extenuate them by excuse;
whence intolerable anguishes, tortures, gripes of conscience will certainly
ensue. But that casting away both unseasoned pride, and unseasonable shame (two
great impediments to repentance) I may freely lay open the very bowels of my
soul, and truly touch every untuned string of my heart before thee: knowing
right well, that the more ready we are to confess our offenses, the more ready
thou will be to forgive them; and the more diligent we are to conceal our
sins, the more powerful thou will declare thy self, both openly to publish,
and sharply to punish them.

In all temptations, inward or outward (wherewith my soul is daily trauayled)
defend me with thy invincible aid; especially when furiously they assail me,
when tempestuously they break upon me. Then O LORD, stand firmly by me, then
cover me with thy mighty arm; lest ouerflowing the banks of thy protection,
they ragingly oppress me, and drive me, like waterfloods, from all sight and
sense of thee. For thou LORD, art my relief in all my necessities: in all my
dangers thou only art able, both powerfully to deliver, and safely to place
me. And therefore so season my soul with thy heavenly Grace, that it settle
neither confidence nor delight in any of thy creatures; but that it be fixed
only upon thee; in whom it shall perpetually find both secure rest, and
perfect joy.

Inform my understanding to know thee; Conform my will to obey thee; Confirm
my steps in the way of thy Commandments, which will lead me to eternal
blessedness. Set thy eye of favor upon me; that by the gracious influence
thereof, I may be both directed and strengthened in that way; and neither turn
aside, nor make stay upon any desires or delights of the world; like bruit
beasts, empty of understanding.

Have mercy upon all miserable men, who stiffely stick in the mire, either of
ignorance, or of false opinions, or else of worldly pleasures or cares;
thinking very seldom and little, either of thee, or of their own deplorable
estate; and stopping their ears to all advice, which sounds against their
sensuality. If they will not be guided by thy gentle hand, If thy fatherly
benefits or promises can nothing avail, use some severity upon them. Put a
sharp bitte between their teeth; bind their jaws with iron hooks; lay the
whippes of chastisement upon their backs: Tame their unbridled wantonness,
break their obstinate either fury or dullness; that by repentance they may
turn unto thee.

Deliver me from the innumerable and insupportable plagues, which thy Justice
has addressed for the wicked; partly in this life, but most especially in the
life to ensue. And because I have reposed my confidence in thee, enuiron me
with thy mercies: that being free both from dangers and fears, I may rejoice
only in thee; and with purity and integrity of heart, adore and praise thee
all the days of my life.

Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches, and Power be
unto our GOD for evermore.
PSALM C. XXX.
DAVID'S TEARS.
PSALM CXXX.
OVt of the deep have I called unto thee, O LORD: LORD hear my voice.

2 Oh let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint.

3 If thou LORD wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O LORD, who may
abide it?

4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

5 I looked for the LORD, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

6 My soul flees unto the LORD: before the morning watch, I say, before the
morning watch.

7 O Israel trust in the LORD, for with the LORD there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins.


Of the title and parts of this PSALM. 1 THe title given to this Psalm is
common to fifteen Psalms together. 2 Wherefore these fifteen Psalms are
entitled Psalms of degrees. 3 The most followed opinion. 4 What was figured by
the stepps of the Temple, and consequently by these Psalms of degrees. 5 Many
excellencies of this Psalm. 6 The more deep we are suncke into sin, the
more forceably we must cry. 7 The degrees or steps of a sinner falling and
sincking from GOD. 8 This Psalm contains a plain prophecy of the Messiah. 9
It is a Penitential Psalm and wherefore. 10 The parts thereof.


Psalm of degrees, or of ascending. A title not proper to this Psalm alone,
but common to fifteen together: whereof the first is the 120. the last the
134. But wherefore they are termed Psalms of degrees, as writers do much vary
in their opinions, so all agree that it is not much material to know: for that
it pertains not to any point of doctrine, but to some ceremony in singing
them, whatsoever it was.

Sanctum Sanctorum.

Now, because (as Saint Paul says) all things happened to the Jews in
figures: 1. Cor. 10.
these steps of the Temple, Temple and habitation of GOD: which is not by a
start, but by many degrees; rising always from one virtue to another, until
we arrive at the happy end of our hope; even to the vision of Almighty GOD.
The same also was figured by the ascent to the glorious seat of Solomon, which
consisted of six steps or degrees. 3. Reg. 10.
And likewise by the ladder which the strong wrestler Jacob saw in a vision,
extending from earth to heaven, Genesis 28.
which could not but consist of very many steps: whereby we are given to
understand, that no man can attain this happy height, no man can climb the
ladder, at the top whereof the LORD does stand; but by degrees of many virtues,
whereof every one has many steps. But hereof more shall be said upon the sixth
verse of this Psalm.

This is an excellent Psalm for any man who is charged with crosses and
calamities of this life. For it leads us to the true cause of our calamities;
namely our sins. And thereby directs us to the true remedy; by crying to GOD.
Not upon trust of any worthiness or worth in our selves; but upon humble
acknowledgement of our miserable weakness; and trusting only in the mercy of
GOD (whereof he has made many liberal promises) and in the unmeasurable
merits of our Redemption. It further teaches us, to expect the LORD patiently;
never to suspect him, never to respect any other thing. And albeit he defer
his relief, yet we must still prefer our complaints, and both early and
earnestly address our selves to him: nothing doubting, but that with him is
mercy, that his redemption is plenteous, and largly sufficient for all our sins.





sin, and endeavor to make others to be of his manner; and whosoever falls
into this profunditie, he falls thereby into contempt. He contemns GOD;
Impius cum in profunc^ malorum venerit, contemnit. Pro. 18.
he contemns his own soul, he contemns al remedies, he contemns all
means of his safety: he will not suffer on any condition the grievous sores
of his soul to be touched. This sinner the Devil claspeth close in his arms;
he holds him fast locked in his power, imprisoned under his straight arrest.
This sin requires a hideous cry. Out of this depth the next Non credit quod de
tenel^is riuersi possit in lucem, circum^pectans vndique glatium.
so as any cry can hardly be heard. Of all sins this makes us most of the
condition of Devils, who ever despair to be forgiven. This is the very mouth
of hell: from hence there is no fall but into the inward entrails of hell, out
of which no cry shall ever be heard.

This Psalm contains an evident prophecy of the Math. 1.
that the child's name should be JESUS: because he should save his people from
their sins. It is rightly ranged among the penitentialls; and is fit to be
seriously said Judgment; let them out of the depth of their miseries, out of
the depth of their sins, and from the depth of their hea^ts implore GODS
mercy; without any confiden^e in themselves* but only in his goodness, and in
his plentiful redemption. For albeit the Psalm beg^nneth with extreme anguish
and anxiety of mind, yet it ends with cheerful assurance and trust.

The whole Psalm falls into two principal parts, and those again into
others, as in the Table following appears.

In this Psalm is contained a deep sinking under the charge of sin whence
are drawn crying complaints to GOD, ver. 1. and 2. Reasons which should move
GOD to hear and those taken 1. From the general weakness and corruption of
man, ver. 3. 2. From the mercy which is with GOD, ver. 4.

a rising into confidence and trust; whereby occasioned in the complaynant
patient awaiting with trust in GODS promise, ver. 5. timely and swift resort to
GOD, ver. 6.
to others an exhortation to trust in GOD, with reasons for the same viz. his
mercy, v. 7. his plenteous redemption v. 7.
A promise to be delivered from sin, v. 8.



VERSE. I. Out of the deep have I called unto thee, O LORD: LORD hear my voice.


1 THE depth of sin. 2 By impure thoughts. 3 By wicked words. 4 By sinful
actions. 5 What holds us in the depth of sin. 6 The depth of afflictions
and miseries. 7 The depth of astonishment and fear. 8 The depth of humility
and sorrow. 9 The depth of the heart. 10 The depths out of which a sinner must
cry. 11 The comforts of the world. 12 To whom we must call for comfort. 13 A
sinner offends GOD. 14 He offends other men. 15 He offends the Angels and
Saints. 16 He offends against Hell. 17 He offends all creatures. 18
Especially he offends his own soul. 19 A prayer. 20 The loss that a sinner
incurres. 21 A complaint for the same. 22 An incitement to tears. 23 Godly
tears how esteemed by GOD. 24 When we must give over weeping.
O Just GOD! no less terrible in thy justice, then irresistable in thy power
and will: when I descend into the secrets of my conscience, and call my memory
to an account; I find my self plunged very deep in sin, and the yoke of
the Devil so heavy upon me, that I am not able to lift up my laden head;
scarce able to advance my voice unto

thoughts day and night, as swine take pleasure to wallow in mire, or dogs in
carrion: insomuch as nothing else has been delightful; nothing else easy for
me to do. But I have found this liquerice liquor to resemble milk; which is
sweet in taste, but soon grows sour, and readily conuerteth into hurtful
humors. These beginnings were neglected, and happily contemned at the first;
but since they have proved the sparks of that flame wherein I consume, the
seeds of all my huge harvest of sin.

As for my words, I will not say with the Prophet, Woe is me that I have been
silent: Vae mihi quia tacui. Es. 6.
but woe is me that I have spoken; because I am a man of unclean lips. But oh!
that a coal, or rather a ball of fire would flame from thy Altar, to scour
the rotten rust which has deeply ouergrowne all the instruments of my
speech. Alas! how many vain and foolish, how many false, how many foul
things have I belched forth of this unsavory mouth, wherewith I now offer to
speak unto thee? How has my tongue galloped to destruction, even upon
credit? even for company and fellowshippe of others? without any sensible
pleasure or profit to my self? O my GOD! who will endure the breath from a
man, whose stomach has bin stuffed with onions or garlic? or if it were
possible the fountain were pure, yet the poisonous passage must infect the
waters. I know not how to speak unto thee, either pleasinglie or without
offense; but (me thinks) I hear thee hourelie thundering against me:
Wherefore do thou presume to assume my Name within thy leprous lips. Psalm.
50.


stumbling and tumbling from sin to sin; I have so descended the steps of
sin, from one degree to another; from foolishness and leuity, to
carelessenesse; from carelessenesse, to boldness; from boldness, to contempt;
from contempt, to a bravery and boasting in my sin: I am so fallen from
frequency of actions, to custom; from custom to habit; from habit, to
nature: that I am now plunged in the deep gulf of sin, which has no
bottom, but the bottomless pit of hell.

Dalilah, even the whorish daliancies and pleasures of this life, have cut away
the hairs of my strength. And now the infernal Philistines have made me
captive; they have put out the eyes of my understanding, they have fettered me
with many cords and chains of wilful transgressions; they have thrown me
into the dungeon of habit and nature; Insomuch as I have not more naturally
desired to eat drink and rest, then to sin: they have made me scornful
and odious to all the world.

Impiety and impunitie go seldom together; thy wrath will not permit them
quietly to concur in one subject. Punishment is so natural for sin, that
if sin be not smitten with the sword of chasticement in this life, it is in
danger to be smitten in the life to come, with the sword which guardeth the
passage into paradise.

For this cause thy hand has been exceeding heavy upon me. My indignity has
stirred thine indignation: I have sinned and thou have smi^^en. I am inuolued
in troubles, as in a deluge; the storms of disquiet beat stiffly upon me. I am
so deeply drowned in adversities and miseries, that I am scarce either bold or
able to look toward thee. Psalm. 42.
And yet One depth calls another.

For these depths of sin and of calamities, have external affairs, but the
internal and eternal state of my soul. Against external calamities some
remedies may be found; but against internal biting of unjust sins, and
expectation of thy just and eternal revenge, there can be found neither
remedy nor rest. This wound is incurable but by thy hand.

depth of humility; and sorrow that I cry unto thee. A little sorrow is not
sufficient for me, my sorrow must be great; so great as it may make a great
sound in thy ears Whosoever cries to thee with great sorrow and grief, may
well be said to cry, Out of the depth. But this cry must be soft, without noise
of words; it must be in the secret retreits ofthe heart; no voice, no sound in
any wise added. Contrition is an inward grief, seated in the heart, it never
breaks forth before confession; confession must open a passage for it. This
sorrow has depressed my sincking soul down so low, as it seems to be led
through all the torments which unrepentant sinners must endure: So as out of
this depth also I cry unto thee. Oh! that I could meet thine Angel in this
fiery valley, as the children of Israel did in the valley of weeping; I^dic. 2.
that I might extinguish these flames with my tears, that I might turn them
into rivers of tears.

honor thee with their lips but their heart is far from thee) but out of the
depth of my heart, Es. 22.
from the very bottom of a troubled soul I cry unto thee. Assuredly,
Profundum est cor hominus. LORD purge me from my secret sins. Psalm. 25.
the heart of man is exceeding deep, it has many hidden rooms and retreits.
It contains many secret matters, whereto the understanding can never
approach; it chambreth many secret sins: whosoever cries from this depth
unto thee, he fetches his cry far; he cannot but make a forceable battery
against thine ears.

Out of these depths, of sin, of afflictions, of astonishment depth of
humility and sorrow; and out of the very depth of my heart, I cry unto thee. As
Jonas cried to thee, not only out of the depth of the sea, but out of the depth
of the whales belly; so out of all these depths I stretch forth my voice to
thee for help. I cry not for help to the world, I want no external comforts;
and none can give internal but thou. Alas! who will ask an Pharao did the
children of Israel; and scourges us when we have done. I will not cast the
Anchor of my rest in the stormy unstable sea of the world. It is like a
beautiful flower, but stinking: like a fair reed, but of no strength. It is
rightly termed an hypocrite: without fair, but within full of corruption and
vanity: In sensual matters it seems good, but all is nothing but painting
and lies. Caine who was the first builder of a city upon earth, was the first
man who lost his habitation in heaven.

unto thee do I call, who art both enclinable to hear, and able to help.
Being buried and lost in these bottomless depths, I find nothing in the world,
but terrors and despair of relief; nothing in my self, but trembling and
dismay: no hope of help but only from thee. And therefore with all deiection of
soul I address my spirit to call upon thee. I beseech thee most gentle
Father, hear my voice: Let my humble prayer ascend, from the low vale of
misery and tears, to thy high throne of majesty and glory: let the secret
groans of my soul, and the open cries of my voice have access to thy
presence: hear (I say) the inward sorrow and grief of my heart, and the
outward confession of my mouth.

exposing my self to all evil, and opposing my self against any good. When
thou were to me as the sun is to the earth, infusing heat light and life into
it; I was to thee as the earth is to the sun, sending up gross vapors,
whereby tempests wronging some in their estates or estimations, and by wringing
and inclining others by my example to evil; or else priuatiuelie, in not
affoording them that good, which both by actions and examples I might and
should. conversion of sinners, so are they sorrowful at their conversation in
sin. I have (which is strange) offended hell. For the more the multitude of
the damned are, the Abraham to send Lazarus to convert his brethren: Luke 16.
not for any love to them, but that his own torments by their damnation should
not be enlarged. I have offended all creatures, by diuerting all creatures
expect when the sons of GOD shall be revealed: and that they groan with us
and travail in pain.

But especially I have offended against my own of whom it is said: that his
hand was against all, and the hands of all against him. Genesis 16.


Therefore O LORD, sweet and gentle to all them who call upon thee, I have great
cause to call to thee alowde: but in vain shall I call unless thou hear me;
unless thou incline thy merciful ear. Hear me O LORD, Exo. 22.23. 2. Sam.
22.7.
Who hear the afflicted and troubled calling upon thee; hear my voice; give
me strength so to cry to thee, that my voice may be heard. For as all the
drops of rain which fall upon the earth, are originally drawn out of the
sea, which is both the fountain and receipt of all waters: so all the
goodness which is in man is derived from thee; who art the foundation and
receipt of all goodness. O Infinite goodness, infuse thy self into me:
Breath forth thy spirit, and the waters will flow. LORD, the desiring of thy
graces is the beginning of obteyning them: and therefore with fie^ie and
inflamed sighs I entreat thee. Breath forth thy spirit, to move me to send
to thee a full flood of boiling tears; and to cry to thee with unspeakable
groans.

Depart from me ye cursed, etc.
whose departure is the most grievous punishment in Hell. And now, mine eyes
tell me, that every thing is attired in sorrow; mine ears persuade me, that
all sounds are tuned to mournful notes: all things seem to inuit me to
weep. If I see any thing that bears some resemblance of joy; it is to me
like the spoils of a vanquished kingdom, in the eye of a captive prince;
scorns of his misery, and whetstones of his sorrow.

O my LORD! I cannot hide me from thee, but I have hid thee from me. Thou see
me, but I see not thee. Thou see all my actions, both light, and yet dark;
but I see no beam of thy beauty; no spark of thy favor appears to me. O my
GOD! Why out of this depth (like a most miserable prisoner) never to cease
calling upon thee, never to cease crying and craving for thy pardon.

O my soul! weep bloody tears, if it be possible: sighs: plunge thy self
into a sea of tears; to wash thy sins, and to extinguish the wrath of GOD
against them: for what anger is so fiery, that tears cannot quench? as Pharao
and all his host was drowned in the waters, so may the Devil and all thy sins
be stifled with tears. Qui dolet delet.
The weeping for sin is the wiping them away. Dry earth brings forth
unprofitable weeds and hurtful Serpents: and a soul never watered with
tears, brings forth much vanity and uncleanness. As rain fructifieth the
earth, so tears make a barren soul fruitful.



But be not satisfied, O my soul, with once or twice weeping; Be not weary of
bewayling thy sins, cease not to weep, Io. 16. Hier. 31.
until GOD shall wipe away tears from thy eyes. O happy eyes which shall be
wiped with that heavenly hand. Not only their tears shall be perpetually
dried, but their sorrow shall be turned into joy. And according to the
multitude of their sorrows, his comforts will refresh their souls. Ps. 93.
Go too then, unfruitful soul! write all thy sins with tears, in the
large volume of thy heart, read them over again, and again: wash them with a
few more drops of devotion: let thy words be watered with tears, and warmed
with sighs: and again address to thy suite, and say.

VERSE. II. Oh let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint.


1 INgemination of our prayers often requisite, and wherefore. 2 A complaint. 3
A most cruel combat. 4 How a sinner flattereth himself. 5 Until he be able
to break loose. 6 A confession. 7 The most miserable state of a sinner. 8 It
nothing avails that our sins are known only to our selves. 9 In what sense
a man may be said a greater sinner then the Devil. 10 The sinner deeply
dejected. 11 He resumeth hope in the LORD. 12 The despair of Cain was a
greater sin then the murder of his brother. 13 An unreasonable reasoning
with GOD. 14 An objection answered. 15 The cry of our sins is the greatest
obstacle against the cry of our complaint. 16 The condition whereon we may be
heard. 17 An humble complaint and confession. 18 No distance can hinder the
hearing of GOD, and wherefore. 19 A resolution to persevere. 20 How pleasing
petitions of sinners are to GOD.
LORD, I do often ingeminate this countenance, but cast me off, and away for
ever. Great are my external oppressions, but these are the terrors which
thunder upon me; this is the load under which I labor, this is the labor
wherein I sweat: even the threats of thy Law, and guiltines of my grievous
sins.



I have linked together the chain of my own miseries: I have voluntarily run
into the awaitments of death. The enemy pitched snares in my paths: but I
despised them, and walked secure: I was violently swaied with the inclination
of my appetites. and I may hereafter convert when I will. Thus I thought,
until custom challenged me for her slave. I strugled to break from her, but
she held me fast: I could not shake off the yoke, which had been long
buckled about my neck: I could not be rid of the bridle, which I had
willingly taken between my

Whither then shall I fly? for I am fast bound, and my refuge is far off.
How shall I free my self from the jaws of death? from the gripes of hell? For,
Ezekiel. 16.
The silver and gold which I have given thee, thou did convert to serve
Baal.

What has been all the course of my life, but a net of errors, a confused
Babylonian building of treasons, pride, avarice, riot, lust, swearing, lying,
hate, envy, murmuring, flattering, detracting, disobedience, blasphemy, and
other innumerable evils. I have been ouerborne with the violent storm of my
passions, which I have let loose without any limits: never endeavoring either
to abate or divert their fury. I have been laced and buckled in the snares of
the Devil. I have pursued my inordinate appetites in all things like a beast,
without respect to the Law of justice or of reason. I have lived worse then an
Ethnic; as if I were persuaded either that there is no GOD, or that he neither
regards us in this present life, nor rekoneth with us in the life to come.



I have often worn a burdened conscience, and yet felt no tortures within me;
and therein was I miserable indeed: For therein I was either stupid or dead, I
carried a senseless soul in a living body; even as it must needs be a dead
and senceles hand, which can hold fire without feeling any sting of heat. None
are more dead then they who can bear fire in their hand or sin in their
conscience without sense of smart. But out wretches! the hour will come, when
the remembrance of sin will so much the more sharply tear, by how much it
was less grievous before. Assuredly, if we could conceive the terror of our
general account, we would not fail to account every day.

O dead senseless soul! where are thy complaining cries? where are thy
tears, to bath the bruises which thy sins have made? wherefore does not thy
leaden heart melt? wherefore does not thy iron eyes break forth into rivers
of tears, as did the rock which Moses smote with his rod? O LORD GOD! sweet
and gentle to all those who call upon thee. Remember that I am but dust, and
supply (I beseech thee) my dry defects. Psalm. 147.18.
Breath forth thy spirit that the waters may flow: that tears of true
contrition, accompanied with the saddest groans of my soul, may plentifully
breath forth. Or if by thy just judgment I can find no passage for tears of
my eyes; let me not be deprived of groans of my heart, let my heart sweat
bloody tears. Or if I be unworthy of that; yet let me love groans and
tears; let me earnestly desire them; let me ardently sue to thee in my prayers
for them.

Alas! what avails it that many of my sins are not known to others, when
they are well known to my self. Miserable that I am, if I lightly regard this
bosom witness: this witness that cannot keep counsel long, but will
discover my secrets to all the world. The longer time I have lived the more I
find my life covered and ouergrowen with sin; even as a river, the further
it runs from the head, the more waters it gathers and the greater does
the stream increase: or as a man riding in dustie ways, the further he
rides the more dust he gathers upon him. I can find in my self no light of
goodness no calm of righteousness. I have bin so laden with the iron yoke
of the Devil, the troops of my sins so muster upon me; that out of the
depth of my miserable estate I am enforced with sighs groans and tears to
cry unto thee.

Oh! I am a most grievous sinner. I think my self the most grievous sinner in
the world: I think my self (which I tremble to speak) a more grievous sinner
pride, in being disobedient to a superior, and in affecting a singular
excellency. But consequently envy may ensue, by envying the good of others,
whether in GOD or in man, as a hindrance to their proper ends. But so envy must
not be taken for a passion, but for a will wrestling against another good. And
hereby it appears, that the Devil properly and in his own nature sins
only in pride and in envy; which only are pure spiritual sins. But
besides these, I have committed so many other sins, that I am both unable
and unworthy particularly to confess them; much more unworthy to receive
pardone for them. I have made so great ruin and waste in all the faculties of
my soul, that it seems impossible they should be repaired.

clean are they who will not ruminate and consider, either the condition of
their present state, or what in future is either necessary or in adventure to
ensue. But alas! I never thought on my danger, until all hope of remedy was
past: I never regarded my steps, until I was in the snares of hell. And now,
what death can I fear, when I have lost the life of my soul? without which
any other life is death? and which makes death a pleasant passage to life?
Being deeply wounded with the greatest grief, what sense can I have of
ordinary evil? my deep miseries have drowned both my mind and my memory in
so deep sorrow, that all hope of relief is overwhelmed with the thick throng
of present discomforts.

And yet I will not cast down my hope in the cast me down to cast me away:
he has not thus terrified me, to the end I should abandone all hope, to the
end I should be swallowed up in the monstrous mouth of despair; but rather he
calls me to him, to the end that I should call upon him. The first work
that the LORD did in the conversion of Saint Paul, was the casting of him to
the ground; Act. 9.
whereby thou do instruct us (O LORD) that our deiection in our selves, is
the first step of our advancing to thee. And assuredly, thou would never
have given me this grace to be sorrowful, if thou had not therewith
intended to give me life.

And therefo^^ albeit I be cast down to the very gates of hell, yet will I
call upon thee to raise me again: albeit I be crushed and broken to pieces,
yet will I call upon thee to heal me: I can never be so low driven, never so
ouercharged with sorrow or with fear, but still I will call upon thee for
comfort. For what other remedy have we feeble wretches? tossed in the vaste
gustie sea of this world; beaten with most raging tempests; driven among so
many rocks and shelues, so many infernal monsters gaping to devour us; what
other remedy have we I say, but to call and cry to thee with the distressed
disciples? awake LORD least we perish. Assuredly, if out of these depths of
danger and distress we cry not out to thee for help, then are we near the
greatest depth that can be; then are we slipping into the depth wherein Cain
was eternally swallowed: then are we ready to roar out his cursed complaint:
my sins are greater then can be forgiven.



The same trace followed they whom the Prophet Our sins are upon us, Ezekiel. 33.
and in them we consume, how then should we live? But O Omnipotent GOD! is
this a good reasoning with thy goodness? My sins are upon me how then shall
I live? Desire thou then the death of a sinner? desire not thou rather that
sinners should live? I know rightwell that my sins are upon me: But I expect
again thy mercy upon my sins. My iniquities, I know, are gone over my head:
but they have not ouergone thy goodness. Pal. 38. Come to me all ye that are
laden, and I will ease you.
They are a burden too heavy for me to bear: and therefore I resort to thee,
who have promised to ease me. My sins shall never drive me to despair, but
rather to repair to thee for relief.

But is it not usual that GOD listneth not to sinners? provoke thy justice,
but help to inuoke thy mercies for me.

Assuredly, O my soul! the cry of thy complaint the voice of thy complaint,
first drown thy sins with tears of repentance, then cast away their dead
carcasses from thee. Away with all the trumperies of the world; away with the
vanities of pride, avarice, surfeit, revenge; away with all impediments of
sin. For unless thou abandon thy vanities, thou shall vainly implore the
Omnipotent to hear thee. He cannot hear a voice proceeding from a heart and
lips laden with iniquities: he cannot be merciful Hear the condition
whereupon thou may be heard. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
ungodly man his cogitations, and turn to

Why so the^ favorable LORD, So now I here present my self before thee; not
proudly standing upon my iustifications; but with a sad broken spirit, from a
low dejected heart, I humbly turn, and breath forth my complaints before thee.
Hitherto my days have I unprofitably wasted; I have hitherto spent my time in
purposing, but never beginning to pursue. But now I turn and come unto thee,
stooping and staggering under the importable fardage of my flesh: every where
I find enemies, I am grievous to my self both within and without. I have many
complaints to present to thee, and now sue for a fauouble hearing. Shut not
thine ears, neither hold them as indifferent, but inclineable and favorable
to my petitions. LORD I acknowledge to thee all my impurities, and earnestly
entreat both thy comfort and cure. Behold how the necessity of my miserable
estate draws sighs from my heart, tears from my eyes, and complaints from
my tongue, Yield LORD, a favorable ear; declare thy self so far from
dispising, as attentively to listen voice of my complaint. And albeit thou
be in the highest seat of glory, and I in the lowest center of sin, yet be
pleased to hear; for no distance can hinder thy hearing, who by thy goodness
in all places art present. The prayers of those who call upon thee with their
heart, shall never resolve into wind, by reason of any distance of place;
because near to all those who call upon thee faithfully.

And if my sins still thrust themselves between thy hearing and my
complaint; If still they step forth to stop thy ears against my voice; if they
still make a hideous cry, to awake thy justice, to quicken thy wrath, to make
my prayers not only unacceptable, but hateful to thee; chase them awhile with
one glorious glance of thy eye; close a little thy eye of justice, until I
have once again confessed them to thee, and presented to thy gentle hearing my
petition for grace. For I know rightwell, that the petitions

VERSE. III. If thou LORD wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O
LORD, who may abide it?


1. GOD is in all places present, and how. 2 How after a singular manner he is
present. 3 The cords which hold us captive to Hell. 4 A confession. 5 The
torments of Hell not sufficient to punish all our sins. 6 GOD is not only a
Father, but a LORD: and what kind of LORD. 7 The sinner addresseth himself to
mercy. 8 To the Father of mercy. 9 All reasonable creatures may sin, and the
reason why* 10 Wherefore some Angels did not sin. 11 Wherefore all men are
obnoxious to sin. 12 Wherefore man was redeemed rather then Angels. 13 All
men are sinners by nature. 14 GODS court of mercy is higher then his court of
Justice. 15 Wherefore a sinner is said to be unprofitable. 16 Two ways to
attain felicity. 17 Our Savior only has gone the way of Justice. 18 No man
can pass but by the way of mercy. 19 GOD delights to spare sinners. 20 We
are enjoined to imitate GOD in his mercy. 21 The readiest way to attain mercy.
22 A petition for mercy.
Heavenly LORD! Albeit my oppressed soul lies buried in the deep loathsome
den of sin, yet is there no center so deep, but thou may easily afford
thy hearing. For thou fillest heaven Moses does in these words assure: What
nation is so great, to whom the GODS come so near, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
as the LORD our GOD is near unto us, in whatsoever we call for to him.

What then shall I say now I am in so near distance before thee? Alas! I am
come to speak for my self; but I can speak nothing but that which is
against me. If the holy Patriarch Abraham in speaking to thee, did call to mind
that he was but dust and ashes; If he was so humble, If he bare such awful
reverence to thy Majesty when he entreated for others; what shall I poor
miserable sinner do, when I am about to entreat for my self? Dust and Ashes?
Nay, a bottomless depth of sins and of miseries: to whom delight in sin,
the power of the devil and the violence of custom, have been in stead of
three cords, or rather cables, to hold me captive to hell.



Thou have spared me, but I have not spared thee: thou have spared to strike
me with the sword of Justice, but I have not spared to smite thee with the
fist of iniquity. Thou have showed thy self a Father to me; but I have not
behaved my self as a child. How shall I look so good a Father in the face,
being so lewd a child as would disthrone and destroy that good Father if I
could? Suppose the Father will be content to forgive; yet it is doubtful that
the LORD will not. He that forbeareth his unruly child, will he also
forbear his ungracious servant? But thou art not only a LORD but a LORD of
Majesty.

Therefore seeing I have displeased so good a Father, so great a LORD, seeing I
have so lewdly wasted all the parts of my life, so notably ruined all the
powers of my soul, that I am no ways able either to recover the one, or to
repair the other: Whither shall I turn me? What shall I say? If I look upon
Mercy I think my self unworthy of the least of her favors: If upon upon
Justice, I condemn my self to the most severe sentence that it can pronounce.
But then again I return to Mercy, and prostrating my self at het feet, with
sorrow in my heart and tears in my eyes, I thus address my desires unto her.

Paralip. 2. vlt.
Alas! I have sinned above the number of the sands of the sea. My iniquities
are multiplied, and I am not worthy to behold the height of heaven, by reason
of the multitude of my iniquities.

intend to contend with thee in Judgment; but I lay hold upon the horn of thy
Altar of grace. Here I rest, here only I repose my assurance. For if thou
should keep a true registrie of our sins, If thou should exactly
examine them according to the severe law of thy Justice; If thou should
perpetually retain in mind the offenses for which we are sorrowful, and
which thy goodness has promised to forgive: If thou should cast them into
the balance of thy Justice, and weigh them to a grain; or if thou should
heap them together against the trial of thy inflexible Judgment: What then
shall become of us? Who can stand before thee? Who can endure thy heavy charge?

For assuredly, all reasonable creatures, as well

Now in that some Angels never sinned, they had so obnoxious to infinite
infirmities, that we daily slip, we daily fall; that nothing is more
natural to us then daily to fall; that the Just fall seven times a day. Yea,
if the best of our actions should be exactly examined, they will appear so
full, either of stains or of defectes, that we rather merit reproof and
punishment thereby, then either courtesy or reward. All our actions are evil,
and the best seem better then they are.



And again; The Angels fell merely by malice of their will; but the first man
was tempted and provoked, and his posterity daily fall by inclination of their
Nature. Nothing is imputed to Angels but their proper sin: but to man is
imputed the sin of another. And therefore O LORD of infinite goodness! Let
these reasons which moved thee to redeem me, move thee also to hear me;
let sin no more hinder thee from hearing, then it did from redeeming. For if
sin be an impediment that prayers cannot be heard, never shall any man's
prayer approach thine ear.

For we are all borne sinners, we live and we shall I am innocent. Wherefore
we decline from thy court of justice, and desire to be heard in thy court of
mercy: we stand before thy mercy: for if mercy were not with thee, sinners
could hope for nothing from thee, which is a higher court then thy court of
justice. For otherwise we All have gone out of the way, we are all become
unprofitable: Inutiles facti sunt. ps. 13.
there is none that does good, no not one.

But wherefore is a sinner said to be unprofitable? Verily all things are
unprofitable which serve not to the end for which they were created. Now man
was created to the glory of GOD: but a sinner so long as he remains in sin,
is altogether unprofitable for that end. And how should man be pure, who
springs from a rotten root? How should there not be sin in man, apparelled
with filthy flesh, when his servants were not stable, and when he charged his
Angels with folly. Job. 4.


All the ways of the LORD are mercy and Justice. No other way has hitherto
been known to attain felicity. By the way of justice our great Savior only
Which of you could reprove me of sin? By the way of Justice he has merited
for himself and for us: for himself the glory of his humanity; for us, Grace
Salomons temple, ^. Reg. 6.
was made of wood of the Olive tree: which being a type of mercy, did shadow to
us, that no man can enter the holiest place, but through the door of mercy.

And albeit GOD holds in his hand both justice and mercy, yet by his
antecedent will, he desires all Indulsisti genti Domine, indulsisti: nunquid
glorificatus es? Es. 26. Ps. 145.9.
he delights to spare sinners, he rejoices at occasions to show his mercy;
he esteems himself more glorious by showing mercy, then by exercising his
power. In his mercy (if I may so speak) he seems to go beyond himself, for
his mercy is over all his works. In mercy he would have us like unto him.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful. He enioynes us not to
imitate Lucifer proudly aspiring was dejected into hell. Nor his wisdom;
Luc. 6.36.
which Adam vainlie affecting, was elected out of Paradise: but his mercy,
which we humbly practicing may be erected into heaven. As it is mercy
whereof we stand most in need, so is mercy chiefly required of us.

But the readiest way to attain mercy, is by acknowledgement Hier. 2.23.
How can thou say that I am not polluted? neither have I followed Baalim?
Behold thy ways in the valley, and know what thou have done. O blind and
foolish man! who wilt endeavor to justify thy self? open thy eyes which the
devil has closed; and behold thy ways in the valley of thy life. Assuredly
thou shall find it full, of contempt against GOD, of injuries against others,
of impurities and vanities in thy self. Thou shall epsy many grievous sins,
which others happily have espied before: thou shall find many Monsters lurking
in thy bosom, which awaite opportunity, sharply to assail thee. Verily, it
is a greater fault to conceal or defend a fault, then it is to commit it.



VERSE IIII. For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.


1 THe greatness of GODS mercy. 2 He is desirous to pardon. 3 The very thought
of mercy has a powerful operation. 4 The power of hope. 5 Her encouragement
to the sinner. 6 The sinners dullness. 7 Hope gives assurance of mercy. 8
Three things most like to hinder mercy. 9 Sins can be no impediment. 10
Justice can be no impediment. 11 The ordinance of the Law is no hinderance to
mercy. 12 The goodness of GOD assures his mercy. 13 The same is assured by
his Love. 14 His promise does bind him to be merciful. 15 His power does
also assure his mercy. 16 Albeit we often sin, yet GOD is bound by his
promise to be merciful. 17 By reason of our sins, we are rather capable,
then unworthy of mercy. 18 Wherefore GOD has commanded us to trust in him. 19
A praise of GOD for his mercies. 20 One caution to be respected, if we expect
mercy. 21 A second caution. 22 Wherefore GOD is to be feared. 23 Hope and fear
how conjoined. 24 Fear a temperature between despair and presumption. 25 A
prayer for fear.
O Mild Father! how sweet is thy spirit? who will not love? who displeasure be
daily provoked; yet it is thy pleasure, it is thy glory, not only to forbear
but to forgive sinners: thy mercy is so great, that thou never desire the
death of a sinner. Thou knowing how weak we are, how inclineable to evil,
wilt not try all our actions by the try touch of thy justice; but like a
gracious Father wilt dissemble many of our imperfections, and power forth large
streams from the euer-flowing and ouer-flowing fountain of thy mercy, both
to cleanse and to cure them. Thy nature is goodness; thy property is to have
mercy; thou art easy, thou art ready, thou art desirous to pardon. No man is
so ready to entreat thee, as thou give and to forgive; to give us thy
goodness, and forgive us our evil. Thou can not deny us thy mercy,
whenever we repent and turn to thee.

This Ocean of mercy has neither bottom nor bound; it cannot be fathomed, it
cannot be surmounted. No sooner can a sinner call mercy to his

O heavenly hope! whose face heaviness cannot place thee before his
mercie-seate. Come, I say, enter bouldly, I will excuse thee. Thou shall find
him alone expecting thy coming. Away with all worldly comforts; it is no less
dangerous for a soul to be pestred with them in time of troubles, then it is
for a ship to be ouerburthened with rich merchandise in a tempestuous sea. It
is he only who knows how to deliver thee, how to save thee: cast thy self
on him, and he will help thee.







his mercy, in case thou be penitent, and bear a constant mind to amend.
Otherwise the condition of all men were dangerous. For when men offend, if GOD
were not merciful, if he were hard and unwilling to exercise his mercy, what
should they do? how should they order themselves to avoid despair? For
despair is nothing else but want of true trust in the mercy of GOD to remit
sins. But doubtless it is not so: he is merciful, and always ready to
forgive. Sunes are so far from being an impediment to mercy, that they are
the proper object thereof, without which mercy has no action: for take away
sins, and where then is pardoning mercy. Omnes peccauerunt and eguerunt
gratia and miseri^ordia Ion. 4.2.
Many glorious Saints in heaven are witnesses hereof, who were once grievous
sinners upon earth. This also did Jonas know rightwell; and for this cause he
was unwilling to be a messenger from GOD of his wrath against the Nineuites.
For I knew (said he) that thou art a gracious GOD and merciful, slow to anger
and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. And observe, weak
sinner, whosoever thou art, who for the greatness of thy sins art carried
down to the gates of despair; observe how GOD dealt with these condemned
Nineuites. He suspended his sentence of condemnation, and could not proceed
to execution thereof, so soon as they manifested their repentance. Fear not
then the greatness of thy sins, for they are not near so great as his
mercy: his mercy is far above thy need.

2. The justice of GOD can be no impediment. For and forthwith the offense to
be forgiven. But an eternal redemption; Epist ad Heb.
because by it all true penitents are redeemed for ever. All therefore who are
penitent, and have a full purpose never to offend, Ipse est propitiatio pro
peecatis nostris, non pro nostris tantum, sed and totius mundi. Io. Epist. 1.
and a trust by GODS grace to continue in that purpose; may be assured that by
this redemption they shall be forgiven. This redemption is the very strength of
repentance: hereby the justice of GOD is no obstacle to his mercy.

3. Now touching his ordinance of the law: Of a every soul that sins shall
die. But this severity is past and done. A new law is made; the law of grace,
the law of mercy and of life. Repent and the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
This is a mild law; but in any case the condition must be performed. Thou
must apply thy self to repentance in any case: GOD will not be merciful,
unless sinners repent. Notwithstanding, if at any time through weakness thou
offend, do not fall from him into despair; but trust in him: stick stiffelie
and constantly to him: and so shall thy trust support his mercy in thee, and
again his mercy shall support thy trust: even like a proppe against a wall,
which holds up the wall, and is again sustained by the wall.

The impediments of mercy being thus removed, it remains plain, that mercy
may easily be obtained, and that for diverse respects; and especially these:

First, for that the goodness of GOD assures his Why call thou me good,
etc.
all goodness is attributed only to him. And therefore the more he exceeds
in goodness, the more desirous is he to communicate himself. As he has made
himself like unto thee, so will he make thee like unto him: he will not cease
to inform, to reform, conform, transform thee daily, until he has united
thee to him. He communicates himself to all creatures in their degree, but in
most especial manner to man. Assuredly, it is not so natural for light things
to mount upwards, for heavy things to draw downward, for the heavens to move
round; as it is for the goodness of GOD to do good. For the property of all
creatures is accidentally in them; but the property to good is essentially in
GOD. GOD is an essential goodness. So simple, pure and immutable is his
substance, that no accident can adhere unto it: whatsoever is in GOD, is GOD.

In charitate perpetua dilexite, ideo attraxi te miserans.
His love to thee is no less ancient, then the ancient of days; even then
himself: Who as he is from eternity, so from eternity has he loved his
elect. When his natural Son was begotten, then were thou adopted for his
Son; and ever since he has cast upon thee a fatherly eye; always
remembering what glory he has appointed for thee. The Scriptures much commend
an ancient friend. Lo here is an ancient Friend indeed: a friend who has
loved thee from all eternity. Verily if immemoriall possession makes a right,
thou have now a good title to his love; thou have now prescribed it for thine
own: and hereby thou have a good claim to his mercy. And because likeness
is not only a sign, but a cause of liking and love; he has formed thy soul
according to his Image: for as nothing upon earth resembles him more, by
nothing he can more easily be known. And hence it is that the substance or
essence of the soul cannot be understood; because it is like the divine
substance, which no man in this life can understand. Hence also proceeds the
admirable capacity thereof, which all the creatures and riches of this world
can no more fill, then a grain of mustard can fill the world.

And further, he has bound himself by his Conuertimini and agite poeni.
temiam ab om^i^us iniquitatibus vestris, and non erit vobis in ruinam iniquitas.
that in case thou convert and repent; thou shall never be ruined by thy
sin. And therefore seeing GOD has made so large a promise, seeing he is now
become a debtor of mercy, seeing he has made his gift his debt; Dare any
sinner despair? Say, I pray thee: What is the worst that a sinner can fear?
Eternal damnation. By whose appointment? By the authority and command of
Almighty GOD. But the same GOD who inflicteth this pain, has given a
supersedeas; he has given thee his warrant, that if thou repent, thou shall
not be damned. Take heed; they be his words; they are spoken to all sinners,
be they never so great. Will thou not believe them? will thou not give credit
to Almighty GOD? verily thou must: Fidelis Dominus us ^mnious (...) sui^.
For GOD is faithf^ll in all his words.

By these three: by the goodness, by the love, and by the promise of GOD, thou
may rest assured of will to show mercy. Add hereto that he is omnip^tent,
that his will is his power, Quis resistit voluntati eius.
that no man can re^ist his w^ll, that he can as easily do as will; and there
can be nothing added to thy assurance. Men do often fail in their word,
because they either change in will, or are defective in power: but because GOD
can be neither changed nor resisted, he will assuredly make good his word.
Sc^o ^ui credidi, and certus sum quia potens est, depositum meurn setuar^.


Remittite and remitetur vobis,
that if we be not weary to forgive others, GOD will never be weary in
forgiving us: that by enioyning reuengfull man to forgive others, he has
therereby enjoined himself to forgive them. What? Do thou think that GOD
will not be more merciful then man? Shall man forgive sooner and oftener then
GOD? It cannot be. For, because mercy proceeds from goodness, and
goodness is originally in GOD; who can be so merciful as he? He who forgave
10000. talents, what may we think he will not forgive?

turn to the LORD, who has promised mercy, and who has commanded thee to
trust in his promise.

O the great virtue of hope! As the sun spreads light and heat to all the
earth, so grace streameth from her countenance to all who behold her. O sacred
hope! to whose presence heaviness dares not approach. Although the weight of
sin does grievously oppress me, yet will I trust in the mercy of the
LORD, because hope has emboldned me, and because he has commanded me so to
do. But wherefore has he so commanded! Verily because Because he trusted in
me, I will deliver him. Saluabit eos quia sperauerun^ in eo. Psalm. 37. in fine.
O most merciful LORD! With what words shall I praise thee for thy exceeding
mercies, who do deliver us for no other reason but because we trust in
thee. LORD, thou art in greatness infinite, in virtue Omnipotent, O give thanks
unto the LORD, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. Ps. Vid.
O give thanks unto the GOD of all GODS, for his mercy endures for ever. O
thank the LORD of all LORDS, for his mercy endu^eth for ever: which only
does great wonders, for his Ps. 136.

But take heed, O my soul! For reverence of the dreadful majesty of GOD,
beware of two things, whereof hope has not forgotten to give thee warning. One
is, that thou expect mercy only from the LORD: for with him is mercy. Trust
not in any worthiness in thy self, who art a dunghill covered with snow; a
filthy vessel, which corrupts all liquors that are powered into it; a bark
set in the gustie sea of this world, beaten with all storms and incursions of
weather. Trust not in any trumperies of the world: for no quiet can be expected
from that which is always in motion and change; which is always busied like
the spider, in making artificial nets to take flies. If thou pursuest the
comforts of the world, thou art one of those of who^ the Prophet Jeremy
speaks, Ser^ietis dijs a^ienis qui nec nocte nec interdi^ pati^^tur te
qui^scere.
that they should serve strange gods, who would not suffer the^ to rest day nor
night. Assuredly, the conscience shall never find comfort nor rest, but when
altogether stripped of all other confidence, it commits it self naked to
the mercy of GOD.

mercy. Fear to offend thy judge: fear to offend him who only is able to
pardon thy offense. Prostrate thy self, and live in awe of that majesty, in
whose mercy thou have placed thy hope; respect him with duty, from whom thou
expectest all thy good. As thy desires are guided by hope, so let them be
followed with fear. The more thou hopest, fear the more; both at one time,
and without measure in both. Neither fear abating hope, nor hope enfeebling
fear: But maugre all fear, let thy hope mount to the highest pitch; and
maugre all hope, let fear stoop to the lowest down come.

If any other could forgive sins, then thou might Qui^ potest facere mundum
de immundo? tu quisolus (...)? Io^. 14.
but because this judiciary power rests only in GOD, because he has shut up
all within mercy; thou must needs fear him, and tremble to offend him. If a
soldier has offended one captain, he may serve under the colors of another:
He who has lost the favor of his king, may live under protection of another,
even as when the Gentiles conceived that one of their gods was offended with
them, they endeavored to reconcile the favor of others. But when thou shall
offend thy only omnipotent GOD, to whom will thou resort for relief? Who will
not fear the king of nations? who, Hier. 10.
albeit he abounds with mercy, yet is not he disarmed of justice. Albeit
grace reigns with him, Ego sum, ego sum ipse qui deleo iniquitates tuas
propter me. Es. 53.
yet is not the law abolished. Thou must live in fear not to offend the Law,
but to trust to be saved only by mercy. The Law must continue for a holy
obedience,

Of the righteousness of the Law, nothing can follow but either despair or
presumption; in the first whereof the devil was plunged, but the nature of man
is most inclineable to the second: fear is a temperature Icarus to thy deadly
downfall. To fear GOD is to reverence and worship him: to acknowledge that he
is plentiful in mercy and goodness. Take away mercy, and take away fear:
for he that expects not good, fears no evil.

in my heart, that I may fear thee; for the height of thy justice, for the
depth of thy judgments, for the glory of thy majesty, for the immensitie of
thy greatness and power; for the multitude of my sins, for my inconsiderate
boldness in sinning; and above all, for my rebellion in resisting thy holy
inspirations.

VERSE. V. I look for the LORD, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my
trust.


1 THe hungry desire of a penitent sinner. 2 A bridle upon that violent desire.
3 Sudden repentance not always sincere. 4 The causes wherefore GOD deferreth
to hear us. 5 We are often deceived in thinking GOD slow. 6 How strongly GOD
knocks and calls. 7 Wherefore he is not heard. 8 How he may be heard. 9 How
GOD feasteth those who entertain him. 10 We must patiently look and wait for
the LORD. 11 To the very last end of our life. 12 Injuries to be quietly taken.
13 Troubles to be contemned. 14 A short praise of patience. 15 It must be
joined with trust. 16 Trust must be accompanied with faith, and then is it most
assured. 17 Whereon this Trust must be grounded. 18 That the word of GOD cannot
fail nor deceive. 19 A Caution what to do that we may boldly trust. 20 An
assured laying hold upon GODS word. 21 A prayer and resolution for patience and
trust.
But how long will thou suspend thy with some crummes of thy love, whereto with
all my soul I aspire.

Egypt, no habitation of sinners, but had rung with loud lamentation for
their dead: and would thou have all his graces at pleasure and command?
Justice has proceeded slowly, that sinners might have time to repent; and
must mercy

Hope deferred is a fainting to the soul, but when the desire comes, it is a
tree of life. Pro. 13.12.
Either to make his gifts more highly esteemed: or else because he delights
in thy company; because he takes pleasure, that thou should converse with
him, talk with him, sue to him; because he so delights in thy resort to him,
as he will not loose it by a speedy dispatch. Or else it is because he
entendeth to give to thee in a larger measure. He stops the streams that
the waters may swell: but in the end he will power them forth; not as it is
fit for thee to ask, but as it is fit for him to give.

Or happily thou art deceived (O blind soul) await, until thou be ready
to receive. Assuredly, GOD is so merciful, that he does not only hear
sinners who wait for him; but he calls upon them, he awayteth to be
entreated by them. Observe what he says, Behold, I stand at the door and
knock; If any man hear my voice and open the gate unto me, I will enter into
him and suppe with him, and he with me. Listen, I pray thee, waiting at thy
door? List: list. Out upon thee! there calling, silence these hagges, quiet
thy disordered desires, banish the choking cares of this world; resign thy
will, keep silence and peace within doors; and then thou may say with holy
Job: Vocabis me and ego resp^ndebo tibi. Job. 15
Thou shall call me, and I will answer thee.

Never fear that he will prove a chargeable guest; Open thy mouth wide, and he
will fill it. Not the mouth of thy body, for a small thing may fill that: but
the mouth of thy soul, namely thy desire; which nothing can fill but GOD.
When GOD had created man according to his Image, the Scripture says, that he
rested from his work; having finished his perfectest piece: in whom it seems
that heaven and earth were knit together. And certainly, a reasonable soul
created after the image of GOD, has no rest but in GOD; Who fills thy mouth
with good things, Ps. 103.
the appetite thereof will never rest in any other thing. The vessel which is
capable of GOD cannot be filled with any other substance. A soul is no more
satisfied with bodily matters, then a body can be satisfied with wind: because
there is no conueniency between the one and the other.

wait for the LORD, as he has looked and waited for thee. 4. Reg. 2.
Do not as Heliseus did, when he smote the waters with the mantle of Elias:
and because they divided not at the very first stroke, he began to distrust
and said, Where is the GOD of Elias? Be not like the Leopard, which if it
takes not his prey at two or three leapes, gives over the pursuit. This is a
common disease of the sons of Adam, if they have not relief presently from
GOD, they resort to the world, and sometimes (with Saul) to the Devil for
help. But thou, O my soul, persevere with patience: fasten thy thoughts upon
the end, Si moram fecerit expecto cum, quoniam veniens veniet, and non
tardabit, Habbac. 2.
without regard what happens by the way. What avails it to have a goodly
hope of harvest in the blade, if it be blasted or otherwise destroyed in the
ear? What profit is it that trees blossom fairly, if they never atteine
perfection in the fruit? The Crabbe is easily taken, because it creeps
forward, and backward, and every way: so they who sometimes sin, sometime
repent, then sin again, are easily made a prey to the Devil. But they who
wayt on the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles: they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint.
Esaias 40. in fi.

Wait therefore, and look for the LORD, with constancy As the eyes of servants
look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her mistress: even so our eyes wayt upon the LORD our GOD, until he have
mercy upon us. Ps. 123.

If any man wrong thee, swallow it with patience, for vengeance is the LORDS:
In case thou revenge, Romans 12.
the LORD shall find nothing to chastise. When Mary Magdalene was unjustly
reproved by a censorious pharisee; she held silence; but what lost look and
wait for the LORD.

An impatient sick man makes a cruel Physician. It is a preservative of
other virtues: as ashes preserve fire from extinguishing, so patience
preserves other virtues from languishing and decay. Other virtues without
patience are like desolate and friendlesse widows. Patience is a hid treasure,
deeply covered with silence; It is a most acceptable sacrifice to GOD. Heb.
10.36.
without patience we shall not enjoy the promises of GOD: without patience we
enjoy not our selves: Ye have need of patience, that ye may enjoy the promise.
Luke. 21.19
For without it we have neither dominion nor possession in our own souls:
because by patience we possess our souls.

But patience must be coupled with trust: which rightly laid upon GOD has
ever been in stead understanding in this present life Wisd. 3.9.
; and the holy mountain of GOD, Esa. 57.13
even eternal life in the world to come. But this trust is not a naked
expectation of somewhat to ensue, it rests not only upon the verity of the
promises of GOD, but upon the interest that we have in them; and so it is
accompanied with faith. For as Amber has no smell of it self, but mingled
with musk smells most sweetly; so trust of it self is altogether unsavory,
but put faith to it, and nothing is either more pleasant or more assured. Who
soever is well Daniel in the Lions den; albeit with Jonas in the Whales
belly; yet would he trust. Of this trust the Wise man has made a kind of
general Proclamation in these words: Be it known to all nations and people,
that no man ever trusted in GOD, Respicite filij, nationes hominum, and
scitote, etc.
and was confounded.

O GOD! most faithful in thy promise. O most merciful LORD! was never man
hitherto confounded who trusted in thee? And shall I (most meek GOD) be the
first? It cannot be. Peradventure I am not so sorrowful for my sins, as
others have bin; peradventure I am not so assured in trust: yet my desire is to
be no less sorrowful, no less assured then they. My will is good; I would
feign be an unfeigned penitent. Blessed LORD! If neither my sorrow, nor my
trust be so perfect as they should be, thy goodness may easily either
increase them, or supply their defect. Humiliatu^ sum and liberauit me.
And therefore most lowly I entreat thee, to sincke my soul more deep into
sorrow, that thereby I may more strongly rise into true trust: and then I shall
not be confounded.

trust must not be grounded upon any imaginary or seeming power; not upon
riches, honor or any other vanishing vanity of the world; but upon the word
of GOD, which abides for ever. All things under the Moon are like the Moon
it self, Esa. 40.
inconstant and changing every day: yea, heaven and earth shall pass, but the
word of the LORD shall never pass. Luke 20.
And therefore O distressed soul! forsake not the verity to follow vanity.
Trust not to the course comforts of the world, more bitter then the waters of
Hiericho. Such bitter waters make barren land, the ground will never be
fruitful that is watered with them. Fidelis Deus in verbis su^s, and sanctus
in omu^bus operibus suis. Ps. 44.
But trust in his word; even in the infallible promises of GOD, which will
never deceive. So surely as thou find sanctity in his wo^kes, so surely
shall thou find verity in his words.

If GODS word could deceive, then could GOD lie: but this is repugnant to his
nature, this he cannot do. As he cannot die, as he cannot err, so he cannot
GOD is truth. Neither is he thereby the less Omnipotent: it i^ impotencie and
not Omnipotency to lie. If he could lie by his messengers, then some
contrariety might be espied in the holy Scriptures, which hitherto could not
be found. Assuredly, the word of the LORD is more immovable then the poles of
heaven, then the center of the earth. Let the heavens be foulded together, let
the earth dissipate into dust, let the nature of all things dissolve: the word
of the LORD shall constantly remain.

O infallible! O irresistable verity! without either active or passive deceit?
O true GOD! O essential verity! who can no less cease to be true, then to
be: whose divine words can never fall without effect. As they give the
wound, so also the salve to cure it, be it never so deadly. LORD thou have
promised remission of sins, if unfeignedly we abhor them: thou have
promised thy grace, if by grief and sorrow we be truly disposed to receive
it. I have thy word, and that is thy self. GOD is the word. Io. 1.
I here arrest thy gracious word, and therewith thy self. I will never release
this debt; I will never discharge thee without performance.

Wherefore, O redeemed soul! approach with trust to the throne of grace:
approach without fear, albeit thou have offended, albeit thy sins have
provoked wrath. He has obliged himself by his word; he has made himself
thy debtor by his promise: never doubt but he will truly discharge his
credit; but he will faithfully perform, whatsoever

Offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and put thy trust in the LORD. Psa. 4.
First offer the sacrifice of righteousness; which cannot be done so long as
thou continuest in sin; and then put thy trust in the LORD. But what is this
sacrifice of righteousness? It is thus described by the Apostle. Romans 12.
I beseech you brethren, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy
acceptable unto GOD: which is your reasonable serving of GOD. Many persisting
in sin do pray, fast, give alms, and exercise other works of devotion. But
those are dead offerings, they want the life of grace. These men prefer
matters of devotion, before those which perteine to obedience and band: a most
dangerous and frequent error in religion. First, offer thy self a living
sacrifice of righteousness, then may thou safely trust in the LORD. I will
speak this plainly in a word: sacrifice thy will, and trust in the LORD. The
will is a most inward faculty of the soul: a mistress, a Queen. Whosoever
offers this, he offers the best and highest thing in his kingdom. He
sacrifices his son Isaac; even that which he most deerly loves. This does
the Chaldee paraph^ase, in these words declare: Tame your concupiscences, and
it shall be reputed to you as a sacrifice of righteousness. Do thou trust
in GOD? expectest thou salvation by him? Tame thy concupiscencies, and then thy
trust is pure, and truly grounded: then fear nothing, hope then in the great
mercies of GOD: this trust will then procure thee present grace and glory in
the end. Otherwise, thou have no true ground of thy trust; otherwise thy trust
is a dangerous security: even as Job says: The hope of the wicked is an
abomination of the soul. Job. 11


O GOD! faithful in thy promise, and fearful sins, I pant and tremble
under thy wrath; help LORD with thy powerful hand, for I am unable to stand
under this heavy charge. But touching my afflictions, according to the measure
of stripes which storm upon my back, I will look back always to thee, and
say;

O most merciful, most Just GOD! in whom mercy word, I fix thy promises both
liberal and sweet before the eye of my understanding. This is the proppe
whereto I lean, this is the pillar whereon I stand; by this all the forces of
my soul are sustained. All the forces of my soul embrace thy word, even as
the iuie embraces a tree, by fastening roots into the body thereof. From hence
I will assuredly expect, to be released from all these evils. I have no trust
but in thy goodness and truth. So long as this anchore holds, I shall be
safe from shipwreck, in all the tempests of temptations in this life.

All the reasons which bind me to love thee, compel me also to trust in
thee. For in whom should I trust, but in him, who so loved me? in him who has
heaped so many benefits upon me? in him who has suffered so grievously for
me? In him who has so often called, so long expected, so carefully persuaded
me? In him who is so merciful, pitiful, loving, gentle, patient, and ready
to forgive,? In him who is a Father, an Almighty Father? A Father to love me,
Almighty to help me? A Father that he will, Almighty that he can do good
unto me? A Father that has greater care and providence over his spiritual
children, then any Father can have over his carnal? Lastly, in whom should I
trust but in him, who has commanded me to approach to him, to trust in him? And
has promised me many favors and rewards, if I will so do?

VERSE. VI. My soul flies to the LORD before the morning watch, I say before
the morning watch.


1 TWO lights of our understanding. 2 Our weakness not so great as we
pretend. 3 Our own endeavor must be added to the working of the LORD, and that
in two points. 4 In swiftness. 5 In timelinesse. 6 We are not perfect at the
first, and wherefore. 7 A prayer. 8 Wherefore we are to resort to GOD. 9 Joy
answers desire, as rest answers motion. 10 In afflictions we must
especially address our selves to GOD, and wherefore. 11 Also whenever we
sin, and wherefore. 12 How dangerous it is to persevere in sin. 13 Examples
and reasons proouing the same. 14 A sinner upon hope is little better then a
sinner upon despair. 15 Times not well employed are often shortened. 16
Deferring of repentance will hearden our hearts. 17 How GOD may answer late
repenting sinners. 18 How fearful it is to trust to late repentance. 19 It is
a long walk to happiness, and by many steps. 20 The cause of the fall of
Angels. 21 We find rest only in GOD, and wherefore.
BUT do not so look for the LORD, O my soul, that thou remain without motion
in thy self; stand not looking like a senseless statue, but apply the forces
wherewith GOD has originally endowed thee: for he that made thee without thy
self, without thy self will not save thee. Thou have two lights, two eyes of
thy understanding, faith and reason. Faith is wrought in thee by his word;
reason is naturally planted in thee: as he works extraordinarily by his word,
so nature is his ordinary power. But nothing is more comfortable and
contenting, then when both concur and agree together. Thou do often
complain of weakness: but examine thy self well, and thou shall not find
so great cause to complain of thy weakness, as of thy will; thy weakness
will not appear so great, if thy endeavor be an^werable to thy power.

look for the LORD, so look that thou add thy own endeavor. Especially
look that thou be diligent, and that in two points: in swiftness, Fly to
the LORD: and in before the morning watch. It was commanded in the Law that the
Paschall Lamb should be eaten in haste. Whereby is signified, with what
fervor of spirit, with what hungry have, we must apply our desires to our
heavenly repast: otherwise it will never either fill or content us. Do not
linger lazily as Lot did in Sodom: be not slow paced to forsake the world;
which is no better then a den of thieves, a stable of beasts, a puddle with
swine, a dunghill with snakes; yea, a part of Hell: be not heavy and dull to
resort to GOD. Break off all to fly to the LORD. Be not taken sleeping, as
was the slothful servant; but address thy self to the LORD. As GOD does
help right early, so right early seek for his help: even before the
morning watch: Psa. 46.5.
I say before the morning watch.

All effects convert to their cause, to receive from thence their last
perfections. The chicken so soon as it creeps forth of the shell, will
resort under the wings of the hen. The Lamb so soon as it is brought forth,
will apply it self to the teats of the damme; it will know her, it will follow
her among all the flock. But tell me, reasonable man; what reason have thou
not to do that, which thou see unreasonable beasts perform? Thou art not
perfect; thou fearfully and wonderfully, but not perfectly made. Thy hands
have made me and fashioned me: but stay not here, gracious LORD, Psalm. 119.
proceed still to perfect thy work; O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments. I was created imperfect, like a blind whelpe; but
open thou the eyes of my soul, and therewith infuse thy light; that I may
discern my defects, and resort to thee daily, to add something toward
perfecting thy work. For of whom should I desire that which I want, but of him
who has given me that which I have? There is no doubt, but he who has given
the beginning, will also knit up and finish the end.

LORD, If thou be my beginning and my end, hand, upon whom else should I
depend? if thou be my Father, my king, my Lord, my creator, my preserver, my
governor, my redeemer; if I daily receive, not my preservation only, but
some part of perfection from thee; to whom else should I hastily fly? Servants
follow their masters for a small reward; and wherefore am not I diligent and
ready both to serve and observe thee, who have deserved so much, and reserved
far greater matters for me? O my LORD! since I have so just causes and
reasons, to resort unto thee, wherefore is not my soul and all the abilities
thereof enflamed with desire of thee? wherefore do I not take the wings of the
morning and fly unto thee? O my hope! my glory! my delight! O my beginning! my
perfection! my end! O my GOD! when shall I truly long after thee? when shall I
hasten to approach thee? when shall I find all impediments removed which hold
me from thee? when shall I find all that dead in me, which is not delightful
to thee? when will the hour come, wherein nothing shall live in me but thy
self? when will thou violently ravish me? When inebriate me with desire of
thee? when shall I be wholly thine? when will thou transform me wholly into
thee? when shall I see the day, wherein I shall be one spirit with thee, and
never after be divided from thee?

I beseech thee, O my GOD! give me wherewith to pay that which I owe thee; that
albeit I cannot thus enjoy thee, yet with all my heart I desire thee, and with
all my endeauours aspire unto thee: because, as in no other thing there is
perfect joy, so our desires and endeauours should aim at nothing else. For joy
answers desire, as rest answers motion; Sa^^abor cum apparueris gloria
tuae. Ps. 16.
it follows, that it has in them no perfect joy: but as thou only fillest
our desires, so in thee only is perfect joy. And therefore grant to my soul,
I humbly entreat thee, such large proportion of joy in thee, that my joy may
inflame my desire to be with thee, and my desire may draw my endeauours to fly
unto thee. That my joy in thee may be such, that I propound nothing interially
to my desires, nothing exterially to my endeauoures, but only to enjoy thee.

Especially, O my soul, when thou art whipped fly unto him. For assuredly,
at these times he works upon thee, to advance thee toward thy perfection; at
these times he contriueth thee to some special end for himself. 1. Pet. 2.5
The godly are termed lively stones for a spiritual building, but a stone
must be squared and hewn, and by many sad strokes made fit, or else will not
serve for a beautiful building. No doubt is made of the salvation of David,
who lived always under the rode; but of the salvation of Solomon, who lived
always in prosperity and peace, much question is made. For doubtless as it is
more dangerous sailing in fresh waters then in salt, so a prosperous life is
more obnoxious to perils, then a life trauersed with many troubles. The more
the people of Israel were oppressed, the more they increased: the more the
waters of the deluge swelled, the nearer was the Arc elevated toward heaven:
and calamities of this life are not only sure signs of the favor of GOD, but
means also to procure the same. Tribul^tionem and dolorem inveni, and
invocavinomen Domini, Psalm. 114. De tribulatione invocani Dominum, and ex
audivit me. Ps. 117
For they stir men to resort to GOD, and never to give over their swift
pursuit, until the dawning of divine comforts open upon them; as well to
dispell the thick damps and mists of their miseries, as both to enlighten and
refresh their souls, ouerclouded with heaviness, and to erect them by hope to
secure quiet and joy.

fly to the LORD: haste thee presently; rather cut the knot, then stay to
untie it. Seek the LORD whilst he may be found, Es. 55.6.
call upon him whilst he is near. But when is he more near then at the
present Now? When may he more easily be found? when better called upon, then
at the very Now even Now when he calls to thee. Now is the acceptable time,
Now is the day of Salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2.


All agree, that after sin there is no hope of felicity; no hope of eternal
life but by repentance. Herein all are agreed, but wherein then lies the
difference? Not in the sum of the debt, but in the days of payment. All
agree that repentance is due; but most persuade themselves that the payment may
be made at leisure. But assuredly there is no time so fit as the present. For
what stupendous time may be taken from thee, thou shall daily grow more
unfit to repent. For by reason of long continuance and frequencie of acts,
custom will grow strong and invincible; whereby, nature is corrupted, grace
estranged, and the power and tyranny of the Devil much confirmed.

Observe hereof a familiar example. If a child

He who has a great estate may well endure some wast expense: but he who owes
more then he is worth, had need be a good husband of that which he has. Thou
art not well assured to live one hour, and dare thou make to thy self a
prodigal promise of many years? Repromissio nequissima mulr^s perdidit.
Eccles. 29.
Such promises have bin ^he destruction of many: a sinner upon such hope is
little better then a sinner upon despair: for both sin he has put times and
seasons in his own power; Act. 1.7.
and will assuredly shorten them if they

Thou art careful to cure the least hurts of thy body forthwith: and will thou neglect or defer to remedy the mortal and immortal wounds of thy
soul? When every day thy miserable soul is hewn, burnt, poisoned,
precipitated, torn in pieces; when every day it perishes a thousand ways;
will thou be nothing sensible thereof? Exodus 8.10.
will thou be like Pharao, who when all Egypt, as well in the fields, as in the
houses, swarmed with frogs, yet would have prayer deferred until to morrow.
O mad delay! nay verily, To day hear his voice, and harden not your hearts.
Defer not repentance until to morrow: Psa. 2.
for this will harden hearts indeed.

Et ficus mercenarij dies eius. Job 14.
Our life is compared by Job, to the day of a hireling. A labourer works from
morning until night, and then takes his rest. So thou, O sinner, labor hard
in the works of repentance whilst thy day lasts; suffer not the darkness
of death, the night of nature to steal upon thee: Veniet nex quando nemo
potest operari. Io.
but early in the morning of thy health, strength and age, fly to the LORD:
attend seriously thy work and do not loiter, for the night will come when no
man can labor. If the world calls thee aside, to riches, honor, pleasures,
or any other of her entising harlotries, tell her thou can not come; thou
have a great important business in hand, and but a small time to perform it:
thou have neither leisure nor lust to listen to her.

When Ioab had defeated Abner, 2. Sam. 2.
and chased his army with a long execution, Abner cried to him; Shall the
sword devour for ever? to whom Ioab answered: As GOD lives, if thou had
spoken in the morning, the people had gone away, every one from following his
brother. The like may GOD answer to sinners, who consciences, and cast up your
pleasures: but if the fear blow over, if you recover your former estate, you
will forthwith return to your former life.

Thus may GOD say, and thus for the most part it happens. We never examine
our great account, we never address our selves to be at peace with GOD, so
long as we have one vanity unspent. But when time has beaten from us both
youth, pleasure and health; when it has made us both insociable to others, and
burdensome to our selves; when our attendants are variable sickenesses and
pains; when the soul loathes her ruinous and excrementall lodging: then
looking into our consciences, which pleasure and sloth had locked before, we
behold therein the fearful images of our actions past, and withal this
terrible sentence engraven: that, GOD will bring Eccl. 12.14.
But how dare we trust to our repentance at that time, when the will by long
custom is stiff, and almost inflexible; when the understanding partly
weakened, partly amazed, is unable to behold diverse objects perfectly.
Assuredly, to neglect GOD, to offend him willingly, casting our hopes on the
peace which we trust to make at our parting, is a high presumption, or (which
is worse) a scornful con^^mpt.

Of all things that can be desired, eternal felicity is the chief. No man but
does naturally desire it. No man with deliberate reason would lose it for the
empire of all the world; no merchant is so foolish, who would exchange the hope
thereof, for any advantage that can be set forth: no man upon any condition
would be quite cast out of that hope. Now the ordinary way which GOD has
appointed to attain felicity, is a long and laboursome walk, a great
journey, from virtue to virtue, from strength to strength, until we appear
before GOD in Sion. This was figured by the ladder which Jacob saw in a vision;
extending from earth to heaven, and consisting (doubtless) of many steps.
Signifying, that no man can attain that happy height, no man can approach him
who stands at the top, but by many degrees of virtues, whereof every one
also has many steps. Consider with me but a few of these, and namely the
mortifying of all affections, either vicious or impertinent and vain: then the
treading in all the steps of humility, patience, meekness, mercifulness,
temperance, obedience, fear, fortitude, true discretion, pure intention,
sobriety, modesty, external composition, sweetness to others, severity
against our selves, and all other virtues required; and verily thou shall find
it a long ladder indeed, and that which will require a long time to climb.
This climbing or walking is otherwise termed an edification or building. For as
a great building cannot be mowlded up in an instant; but first the foundation
must be laid, then the walls erected, and lastly the roof and floores
framed: so in this spiritual building, a sure foundation must be laid upon
earth, if we intend to raise it to reach into heaven.

And therefore it is a point of extreme either blindness or madness, to aim
at this end, this happy end, this last end, and not to observe the means
appointed to attain it. This is thought to be the cause of the fall of
Angels; Bernh. su^er Psalm. Qui habitat in adiut^^io.
even because they aspired to their highest end, without due observing the
means. For as sparks struck from a flint, if they fly upward, they
extinguish; but if they be carried downward, they take fire and burn: so
those Angels which humbled themselves and embraced the means, attained to
glory; but they who proudly presumed by their own abilities suddenly to
attain it, not only failed thereof, but were dejected into hell. In like
manner we all desire happiness, there is not any who would not be happy: but
we regard not the means appointed for that end. We will not work, we will
not walk; we will not address our forces to the works, nor our feet to the
ways which bring to happiness. We will not take either time or pains; but
think to mount to heaven, at a leap, at a iumpe; at the last time of our age,
at the last minute of our life; by a few short wishes rather then prayers. But
blessed is the man (O LORD) whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy
ways. They shall go from strength to strength, and unto the GOD of gods
appears every one of them in Sion.

Wherefore, O my soul! howsoever others either linger or give over; betake
thou thy self speedily to the LORD. For to whom else should thou resort? he
is thy prefection, thy last end, the rest and satisfaction of all thy desires.
Thou do naturally desire nothing but him; the desire of worldly things is
but a disease. Go too then, tumble upon the bed of honor, riches, or
pleasure; thou shall never find rest, GOD formed man, and breathed into him the
breath of life.
because thou cariest thy disease within thee: rid thee of thy sickness,
and thou shall find rest only in GOD. The reason is plain. GOD made thee
only for himself; and therefore being thy last end, thou can not find quiet,
but only in him. Again, GOD only is agreeable to thy nature: Genesis 2.7.
thou art his image, thou art breathed from him. No worldly thing has any
proportion with thy nature, and therefore can not give thee true satisfaction.
A horse is not satisfied with flesh, nor a Lion with grass; because such food
agrees not with the nature of those beasts. No less can a spirit be satisfied
with corporal things, because they are not conformable thereto. The gifts and
graces of GOD are conformable to thy nature, they only give thee both
nourishment and delight. Pride and envy are spiritual things; but they no more
nourish a soul, then poison nourishes a body. God only is agreeable to thy
Nature, GOD only fills thy desire. And yet neither by filling thy desire he
does extinguish it; neither by enflaming thy desire he cease to fill it.
Wherefore (O my soul) Loose not time, but since he has created thee: Remember
thy maker in the days of thy youth. Since thou have no satisfaction but from
him, take the wings of the morning, and fly unto him.

VERSE. VII. O Israel trust in the LORD, for with the LORD there is mercy, and
with him is plenteous redemption.


1. THe invincible force of hope. 2 GOD uses to lay adversities on his
servants and seems little to regard them, and wherefore. 3 It is a fearful
slate to live free from troubles. 4 The secret thoughts of diverse princes. 5
Worldly things are like shadows, and wherefore. 6 Whereon our trust must be
grounded. 7 How the mercies of GOD may be esteemed. 8 In two respects, mercy in
GOD is preferred before Justice. 9 GOD is most rich in his works of mercy. 10
Wherefore mercy is said to be natural and proper to GOD. 11 What we shall do
that we may not fear. 12 To whom there is nothing but mercy from GOD. 13 How
ready GOD is to impart himself to sinners. 14 The plenty and riches of our
redemption. 15 The treasure and ransom of sinners. 16 In whom is the default
that sinners are damned. 17 The benefits of our redemption. 18 An example of
our right to these benefits. 19 What our Savior is to us. 20 Our title to the
merits of our redeemer.
O Heavenly hope! there is no labor, Noah's Arc, which was made above toward
heaven; signifying, that in that cruel calamity, relief was to be expected
only from thence. Death triumphs over all earthly things, but thou
triumphest over death; thou art more victorious then death. And therefore
albeit Jacob was dying, yet his hope died not when he said: Expectabo tuum
salutar^ domine
I will look for thy salvation, O LORD. Here hence holy Job also in his
greatest extremities said: Genesis 40. Job 19.25 26.
I know that my Redeemer lives: and though worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh I shall see GOD. Wherefore, O my soul! do not only fly to the LORD
upon the wings of thy hope, do not thou only rest assured upon confidence in
his word, but persuade all others to do the like.

O my friends, O all ye of the house and Church of GOD! Trust in the LORD.
Attend for succors only from him: for he is both ready and most assured.
Albeit your distress be great and fearful; albeit you be not presently
heard, albeit you seem to be forsaken, yet trust in the LORD. Against all
hope, hope in him: even when your case seems desperate and forlorn, even
unto death stand steadie as a rock, trust in the LORD. It is a familiar
fashion with our LORD, to suffer his friends and faithful servants to sweat
under the sad burdens of adversities, and to seem as if he neither heard
their prayers, nor regarded their griefs. And this he does only to exercise
them; that their faith, patience, constancy, and other virtues may more
gloriously appear: for that which the file is to iron, and fire to gold; the
same is trouble to the friends of GOD. He loadeth them with labors, because
thereby arises their reward; which in no case he will suffer them to loose.

If GOD has not hitherto thus dealt with some, it is because he knows their
weakness, he knows their cowardice, he knows how unfit they are to
be his soldiers; he will not take them into his pay. they who never tasted
troubles, have great cause to fear, that they are under no favorable hand.
For it is a property of the devil to blind men by living in prosperity, as
men are blinded by walking in the snow. He leads his servants like a
hangman, by the broad and fair way of false pleasures and comforts, to the
place of their execution: he mounteth them upon high scaffolds, to the end to
dispatch them with the greater grief and shame. So was the rich man advanced,
when he boasted of his wealth: but the same night he lost both his riches and
his soul. When the devil most flattereth, then he hunteth; then you are most
in danger of his snares.

And therefore (O my friends) In all your troubles trust in the LORD; for this
is one of the principal conditions of obtaining your desires. So soon as he
hears the faithful cry of his faithful servants, so soon as he perceives
their true intention; so soon shall they find their deliverance at hand.
Turn not from the LORD to put your trust in Princes, or in the sons of men.
And good cause why? Ps. 146.
For when the breath of man goes forth, all his thoughts perish. Oh! that we
could discern the secret thoughts of diverse princes, what stately towers they
build in the wind; what walls, what palaces they frame, as it were by art of
Incantation. Such kingdoms they will overcome; such cities they will beat
down; such spoils their soldiers shall have; such treasures shall rise to
themselves: all which is puffed away with a breath. Even as when Pharaoh said:
I will pursue, I will overtake, Exodus 15.
I will divide the spoil, I will draw my sword, my hand shall consume them:
the wind blew, and the sea covered them.

Trustnot also in worldly things, of which the wise man says; that they pass
away like a shadow. A shadow is the counterfeit of a body, it represents a
body in every point. It seems to have head, arms, legs; to move, to rest:
when in very truth it is nothing. So all matters of the world are full of
deceit. They are somewhat in appearance, but in truth nothing: nothing in the
world but a mere aperie. They are presented to our eyes, but they do not
continue: they are carried as a ship under sail, which has not one moment of
rest: as the world turns round, so are all who trust in it, turned as in a
wheel. This raises in them a spirit of giddiness or error, Es. 10.14
which tosseth them forward, and backward, and turning, as a man rapt with a
whirlewind; or as a drunken man in a dance. It is a proper name of GOD, to be:
He that is (says Moses) has sent me: but nothing is more strange to worldly
things then to be. Exodus 3.
And therefore Cursed is he that trusts in man, Hier. 17.
or any worldly means. But, Blessed is he who trusts in the LORD. Ps. 84.
and 146.


Never conceive that you cannot trust in him, because you are sinners, because
you are obnoxious to many infirmities, because you have not performed obedience
to him: Verily, you are most unworthy to be regarded of GOD, when you most
respect your own worthiness and merits. What? would you ground your trust
upon such a false foundation? Nay, it must have a more firm footing then so.
It must rest upon two steadie stays. One is, the goodness and mercy of GOD:
the Other is, the plentiful merittes of our redemption. These are the
immovable pillars whereon our trust must be grounded. For with thee there is
mercy, and plenteous redemption. And therefore be not dismayed at your own
unworthiness, but direct your thoughts to his unmeasurable mercies, and to his
plentiful redemption; and therein advance your hope to him and say; we have
sinned and done wickedly, Dan. 9.
we have rebelled and departed from thy Judgments. O LORD, Righteousness
belongs to thee, and unto us open shame. O LORD, unto us pertains open
shame, because we have sinned against thee: yet compassion and forgiveness is
with thee, O LORD our GOD; albeit we have rebelled against thee.

If you will settle a true judgment upon his mercy, as his greatness is,
Eccl. 2.21
so is his mercy. And therefore as he is infinitely great, so is he
infinitely merciful: and as he has infinite riches to be distributed, so is
he infinitely liberal to distribute the same. Otherwise there shall be a
defect and disproportion in the divine substance; If having infinite goods to
be distributed, he should not have an infinite mind and will for
distribution. This great mercy of GOD was not unknown to the idolatrous
Philistims; 1. Chr. 6.3
who upon presenting their offerings to him, assured themselves that they
should be healed. O the bowels of his mercy! he so loves his creatures, that
it grieueth him to see them perish: scarce do his eyes behold their miseries,
but he is forthwith moved to mercy. LORD, they who know thy Name will trust in
thee: for thou have never failed them who seek thee. Psalm. 9.10.

There are two perfections in GOD, Mercy and Justice, both cut by the same
measure and compass: neither can be greater nor less then the other,
because both are infinite. Yet in two points they differ; in two points mercy
is preferred before Justice. Indignatio non est mihi. Es. 27.4.
For his essential goodness leads him to mercy: but he proceeds not to
vengeance unless he be provoked by our sins. And therefore when he
scourged sinners out of the temple, he brought no whippe with him, but made it
of cords which he found amongst them: he takes both the cause and the matter
of the scourge only from our selves. The second is because he offers his
mercy generally to all: but his punitiue Justice remains only for those who
contemn his mercy. All they who embrace his mercy, shall never taste the smart
of his justice.

Exodus 34.6
O! the LORD, the LORD; strong, merciful and gracious; slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth: reserving mercy for thousands, and forgiving
iniquity and sin.

And therefore (O distressed men!) whenever you approach to GOD for mercy,
never distrust: never think your importunity displeasing, or the opportunity
not fit. Never think that you offer him a matter, which either he will be
unwilling, or has been unaccustomed to do; but rather that you present him
with occasion of acquiring praise, and to do that which is most agreeable,
both to his glory and to his nature. It is his nature and property to have
mercy. with him is mercy:

The fountain of his mercy and grace which springs from his fatherly heart,
can never be either stopped or spent: the waters thereof are of singular
virtue, not only to cleanse the filthiness of sin, but to enrich souls with
heavenly beauty. Never fear trust in the LORD, and his mercies will ouerflow,
he will be infinitely succourable to you. His goodness will wipe away all
sorrow that you have been ^^^ners, and make you rejoice that ever you fell: as
having made trial that as your offenses surmount all measure, so his mercies
and grace exceed your offenses: yea, it is not possible that GOD should deny
his mercy to penitent sinners, who trust in him; for then he should not make
good his word, then he should deny himself, which is not possible for him to
do. But if they trust without repentance, they do not then trust, but presume.

trust in him: and then persuade your selves that with GOD is no anger: nothing
but mercy and love: because he cannot but love those who believe in him. And
therefore if any calamity fall upon you, it is in mercy; endure it patiently,
and hope to be delivered when GOD shall think fit. If you have committed any
sin, yet, with GOD is mercy; trust to this mercy, and you shall never be
indamaged by your sins. Albeit to your sense he appears to be angry,
regard not your sense, but steadfastly believe, that in heaven and upon earth,
there is nothing but mercy: if you should die for it, never suffer this trust
to be wrested from you. Believe not your sense, but believe the word which has
said, that with the LORD is mercy, for those who trust in him. Write this
promise in your heart; that if you truly trust in his mercy, you shall not
perish, albeit all sense, reason and experience should persuade the contrary.
In your selves you shall find nothing but wrath, in the Devil nothing but
malice, in the world nothing ^ut either dullness or madness: but firmly
believe that with thy LORD there is nothing but mercy.

O merciful GOD! be sinners never so ungentle, Quis inuoca^^t eum and
dispexit illum.
thou did never despise any who called upon thee. O comfortable words! Give
me grace (gracious GOD) to taste once again the sweetness of them. Never did
any call upon him and was despised. Blessed LORD! is not this thy word? will thou not make it good? will thou not do as thou have said? LORD, thou have made
us of nothing, we are feeble flesh. We daily sin, we daily ask pardon.
Shall we now be despised, and never any despised before? Our sins indeed are
great; but thy mercies exceed all greatness and measure. Our sins are many:
but there is no number of thy mercies. Our sins after forgiveness are many
times renewed: but thy mercies are not limited either to number or time. For
with the LORD IS mercy. At all times mercy; nothing but mercy; mercy never
either exhausted or with held.

The second foundation of your trust must be upon the merits of our Redeemer.
For with GOD there is not only mercy, but plenteous redemption. The plenty
power depends upon his will; and his will is guided by his love, wherewith he
offered his blood for our redemption. This love enforces his will; and his
will is always followed by his power. So as being largely assured of his love,
we must nothing doubt, either of his will, or of his power. And the better to
assure us hereof, he was not sparing, but rather seemed prodigal, in expense
of his most blessed blood. Physicians prescribe bleeding in a moderate measure;
but our redeemer out of his unmeasurable love made a profuse effusion of all
that he had. One drop of his blood in regard of the inestimable value thereof,
might have sufficed for redeeming many worlds: but to make our redemption
plentiful, he did not reserve one drop to himself. His blood, his precious
blood, every drop of his precious blood, was poured forth for our redemption.
After that his external parts were emptied of blood, by sweating, scourging,
crowning and nailing: His internal and vital parts were also drayned by the
stroke of a spear. For in that water flowed forth, without any tincture of
blood, it was an evident proof that all the blood was spent. A little blood
will give color to much water: and therefore if any little blood had remained,
the water must have been somewhat colored thereby.

When GOD of his own will has so plentifully redeemed us. Who can suspect
that he will be less willing to distribute this treasure, then he was to
amasse it? Assuredly there is no default in provoke his justice, then to inuoke
his mercy.

By this redemption we are not only delivered Adam is no less ours, then was
the transgression of the first Adam: we no less participate of the innocence
and sanctity of the one, for our salvation, then of the disobedience of the
other for our damnation. And therefore as Jacob being apparelled with the
garments of his elder brother Esau, procured a blessing which by right of birth
was not his due; so if we be clothed with the righteousness of our Redeemer,
we shall obtain a blessing, whereto we can otherwise pretend no right. In
offering this sacrifice, and in presenting these merits, what can we fear? GOD
is our Redeemer: it is GOD who justifies, who can condemn? Romans 8.31. and 33.
GOD is our patron and Advocate: If GOD be on our side who can be against us?
This is he to whom all the Prophets witness: Act. 10.
That through his name all that believe in him should receive remission of
sins. Destroy this Temple, etc. John 2.19. Their sacrifices I will accept upon
my Altar.
This is the true living Temple of GOD; of whom the Temple of Solomon was but a
figure. This is the Altar, whereon all the prayers which we offer to GOD are
acceptable to him. This is our only Priest, our only Sacrifice, our only
Temple, our only Altar whereby we are made acceptable to GOD.

Adam; they are his sons, Filius? ergo Here Is.
and consequently his lawful heirs. Not as if he had died intestate; but by
his last will and testament, which he made the evening before his death, at
his last supper, and soon after confirmed it with his blood. Hic est sanguis
meus qui pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Matthew. 26.
By this testament he gave us his blood: and thereby has made us heirs of all
the merits for shedding his blood. Hereby we have good right to demand the
reward due to all his labors, Justice, which thereby is largely satisfied. For
whatsoever he either did or endured in this world, all the sharp stony steps
which he trod, was in no part for himself, but altogether for us. For us he
was incarnate and borne; for us he sustained many contemptible both indignities
and wants; for us he fasted, watched and prayed; for us he did groan, weep
and bleed: Lastly, for us he died, Consummatum est. 10.19.30.
which was the accomplishment of our redemption. Of all this he has made us
heirs in his last will and testament; and that by his free goodness and
grace. For he was innocent, and needed not to discharge any thing for himself:
neither had he any need of us, to increase by that means either his
greatness or his glory.

VERSE. VIII. And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.


1 A contemplation of GOD in his divine Majesty. 2 A contemplation of him in
his humane abasement. 3 How pleasing the obedience of our Redeemer was to the
Father, and for what cause. 4 Two sacrifices obserueable in our Redeemer, and
which was most acceptable. 5 The merit of these oblations perteine to us, and
wherefore. 6 Of the Priesthood and intercession of our Redeemer. 7 Of the
narrow capacity of our hearts, and GODS inestimable abundance. 8 Our redemption
extends to all people, and to all sins. 9 How this is true. 10 How sins
are said to be impardonable. 11 How GOD is said to blind men. 12 GOD confineth
sinners within certain limits. 13 How notwithstanding our sins, we may be
assured of pardon. 14 To whom the rich treasure of redemption pertains. 15
Our redemption discharges not only from sin and eternal punishment; but
from miseries of this life. 16 GOD conuerteth our miseries to good. 17 How
calamities may be broken and a glorious conquest obtained. 18 He who commandes
his will is more powerful then many kings, and wherefore. 19 We cannot justly
complain of external accidents, and wherefore. 20 A Prayer. 21 An oblation.
22 A thanksgiving.
COme with me then, and I will carry you to the top of a high watchtower,
where you may behold marvelous things. Here with great humility and reverence
of your souls lift up your eyes above the clouds, and above all the heavens,
surmount all the companies of Cherubin and Seraphin, and advance to the highest
throne of Majesty. There fasten your thoughts upon the most pure divine
substance, which there keeps state: that beautiful light, that
vnapproachable light, which no mortal eye did ever behold. That glorious LORD,
in whom are the beauties and perfections of all creatures, in far greater
excellency then in themselves: Him who with the bare inclination of his will
created all things: Him whose bright Majesty as we are unable to behold, so
without the light thereof we are blind: Him whose wisdom, power, beauty,
Majesty, greatness, cannot be expressed, cannot be comprehended. Who
remaining immovable gives motion to all things; who governs all things, yet
applies himself to nothing; who uses all things, and needs nothing; who
changes his works, and yet remains constant in his counsels: whom all the
stars, all the Saints and Angels praise and adore. At whose presence the
pillars of heaven tremble, Quis appendit iti bus digitis molem terra? Es. 40.
who poiseth the whole mass of the earth with three fingers; and in whose
sight all nations are as if they were not. Him whose happiness is such, that
it cannot be either increased or diminished: Insomuch as his glory will be
nothing the more, if all men should be saved and praise him: nor any deal the
less, if all should be damned and curse him.

Jacobs ladder) and behold the same substance covered and disguised, not only
with humane flesh, but with all the miseries incident to humane flesh: not
only as a servant, the basest sort of men; but as a most contemptible servant,
suffering both such miseries, and such indignities as greater could not be
endured; and offering himself in love to us, and obedience to his father, even
to death; even to the most painful and ignominious death of the cross.

This obedience of the Son, was far more pleasing Barabbas? what of his
most perfect patience, both in injuries and in torments? what of his admirable
fortitude and perseverance, wherewith as a giant without stop or stay he
performed his enterprise? But above all his love was most illustrious; his
love, I say, both of the salvation of man, and of his Fathers glory. This love
made his will so ready and his desire so great; that he was prepared to endure
not only the cross, but a thousand deaths beside, in case the justice of his
Father had so required. He loved much more then he suffered; and was ready to
have suffered much outwardly both act and endure.

who are grievous debtors, and for whom he has undertaken payment? Assuredly,
the father will drive no man from him, who comes to him in the glori^^ name
of this redeemer: he shall always find redemption far above his debt. Our
redeem^r so loves (...), that he makes perpetual interce^sion for us: the
father so loves him, that he is never wearied, never molested with his
intercession. This is he to whom the LORD swear and will not repent, thou art
a Priest for ever.

But stay a while, and pound these spices somewhat more O my soul; dwell a
little upon perusal of this rich the LORD swear? was it not sufficient for
him who is truth, to have given his word? wherefore also does he add that he
will not repent? can the LORD repent of any thing that he says or does?
Assuredly no. But all this is to confirm our confidence: that whatsoever
petitions and importunities are offered in that sacred name, the eternal
Father will never be weary to hear them, never unwilling to grant them. Men
do often repent of their promises, when the performance of them is either
above their power, or to their disadvantage. But the high wisdom of the
father cannot be overtaken with such oversight: he will never repent him of
his promise; as knowing right well, both what he promised, and for whose sake.
He has consecrated his son to be a Priest for ever. He is always in his
sight, he always shows that holy humanity, those deep and wide wounds
which he received for our sake. This is his perpetual representation, this the
perpetual intercession which he makes for us: LORD open my mouth to praise
thee, who have opened so many mouths as thou have received wounds, to pray to
thy father for me.

Blessed be such a redeemer, blessed be such an intercessour; blessed be such
providence and such power, either to prevent our miseries, or to prevail
against them. Cursed be our distrust, cursed our negligence whereby the benefit
of our redemption is often lost. The father has delivered the keys of his
infinite treasure to his son, and our brother; to our flesh and blood. He
has opened them, he has power to dispose them so largely as he please, and is
pleased to do it so largely as he can: but we often fail, either in will to
desire, or in capacity to receive them.

poor sparks of our prayers; and if we can awaite the time, will recompense
our stay with inestimable abundance. GOD is the first who loves, and the last
who leaves: he never forsakes us, unless we ^^rst give over to trust in
him, and pray unto him. This it is to be GOD; even to redeem and deliver: and
that with greater Majesty and glory then can be conceived. GOD is plenteous
in all his works; but in none so plenteous as in his great work of redemption.

It was a merueilous redemption whereby the people of Israel was freed from the
severe servitude of Egypt: but it was not like this whereof I speak, it was
but a type and figure thereof. This redemption is universal; it has
discharged not one people alone, but all the world: There is no sin, not
only committed, but possible to be committed, which by this redemption is not
discharged. And this is true in regard of sufficiency; but in regard of
efficacy it pertains only to the elect; who are the Church, the true house
and family of Israel. But there can be no offenses, either for number so
great, or for quality so grievous, but this redemption is sufficient for them.
Can this redemption which is of infinite value, be restreined to any limits of
offenses? Shall not he whose arm is never shortened, be always able to
forgive? Shall not he who forgave to one debtor 10000. talents, be always
willing to forgive? verily in case that debtor had owed more talents, upon his
submission more had bin forgiven. Such is the pity of almighty GOD toward
miserable men; that he never rejects their unfeigned repentance: albeit a
sinner be at the height of evil, let him in singleness and sincerity of
soul turn to the LORD, and he shall be embraced.

unpardonable; as the sin against the holy Ghost: the sin unto death: 1.
John 5.
for which we are forbidden to pray: you must not understand it as if they
could not be pardoned, Sect. in 2. d. q. 3.
in case the sinner did unfeignedly repent; for this were no better then bitter
blasphemy. Psalm. 65. v. 24. and 28.
But such sins are said to be unpardonable, because they deserve blindness
and hardness of heart, and to be deprived of the effectual aid of Grace:
because the sinner never either turns or stops, but always runs
forward, from badde to worse. Psa. 69.24.28.
Let their eyes be blinded that they see not, and ever bow down their
backs. Let them fall from one wickedness to another, and not come into thy
Not that GOD does positiuely blind any man, or bow down their backs; but
priuatiuelie; in that he does not enlighten and direct them. His sufficient
aid he denies to none; but by reason of some, e^ther heinousness, or
obstinacy in sin, he denies his most special and effectual aid to some.
Hereupon their sins are said to be unpardonable; because, albeit they might
repent, yet they did not.

Aug. de vita Christi. c. 3. and 4
understand that there are certain periods and bounds, which when sinners
exceed, GOD leaves them destitute; sometimes by denying his effectual aid,
sometimes by abridging the term of their life: Psalm. 55.
For the bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half their days. When
the number of sins prefixed by GOD are once exceeded, when the measure
runs over, super tribus sceleribus Dam^sci, and super quatu^r non conuertam
eum.
when the sinner has dug his own pit; Death shall come hastily upon him,
and take from him both the present and future life at once. Verily he that
has appointed bars for the proud waves of the sea, has also set limits and
terms to thy sins: he has prefixed limits for his effectual grace, but
his abundant redemption is always sufficient.

And therefore (O feeble sinner) albeit thou have sufficient but effectual for
all thy sins. For then thy Redeemer by his inualuable blood will free thee
from the servitude of sin, whereto thou had voluntary sold thy self;
then will he take upon him the pain which thou had incurred; then
discharge the obligation which thou had forfeited.

But herewith thou must be incorporate into the family of Israel, namely the
Church of GOD; thou must with Nathaniel be an Israelite indeed, Io. 1.
in whom is no guile: for to these only this redemption pertains. Thou must
earnestly endeavor first to bridle thy sensual appetites, and by degrees to
mortify them. Thou must serve GOD in righteousness, and both constantly and
closely adhere to him by love. So shall thou be rightly disposed to
participate of thy redemption: so shall rivers of heavenly riches flow into
thy soul. But whosoever is a stranger to this house of GOD, or living therein
is no part thereof: whosoever (I say) does either obstinately or carelessly
persevere in sin, and never regard to disingage himself by repentance; he
shall never participate of the infinite treasure of this redemption; the
floudes of GODS mercies and of the merits of his Redeemer, shall never enter or
approach his soul; they are sufficient, but not effectual for his discharge.

life, as the calamities of their life, not only tolerable, but sweet. For
they who believe, although they be faint and feeble hearted; yet they know,
that neither death nor the devil shall prevail against them; because GOD is
their Redeemer. This is the office of GOD, thus will he have to do with
sinners: to abolish their sins, to abolish either their miseries, or the
sense of their miseries; and to create in them rig^teousnesse and life.

And furth^^ the LORD does not only either end or ease our miseries, but he
does more: he conuerteth pascimur and patimur) we are so nourished with the
blessings of GOD, that therewith also we are nurtured with his crosses.

And shall I tell thee, O my friend? shall I acquaint They are so contrary, as
the life of the one, is the death of the other; the raising up of the one, is
the ruin of the other: whereupon the Scripture says; that he who loses his
life shall save it. That is, he who loses his sensual life, shall save his
spiritual life. Between these two men there is such a perpetual combat, that
thereupon the life of man is termed a warfare: between these two men, all the
maine business of this life consistes.

Now then, beat down this mortal and bodily man, break thy unbridled
appetites, set aside thy carnal pleasures and desires; and thou shall live
peaceably and at sweet content: no worldly troubles shall molest thee. Thou
complainest of external oppositions; but thy enemies are within, thy proper
passions make war against thee: Vanquish these enemies, and thy complaints
will cease. He is a great LORD who commandes himself; he who commandes, his
own will, is more powerful then many worldly thing. Complain of thy inward
desires

Open my lips, O LORD my GOD, that

LORD, I have nothing in my self to offer to to thy service. And not only all
that I have, but I offer my self to be thy perpetual servant. That
hereafter I no more bend or bind my self to accomplish my will, but thine:
that I seek not my own pleasure or advantage, but what is pleasing and
acceptable to thee. LORD, I prostrate my self before thy feet, I yield my
self wholly into thy holy hands: deal with me as a Lord deals with his
vassal or slave, dispose of me even as thou will.

But because all this is no more then nothing, I approach with trust to thy
throne of grace, and present to thee the most precious oblation, the most rich
treasure that can be found in heaven or in earth; namely, the life, death,
blood, labors, virtues, and merits of my Redeemer: which albeit they were
proper to him, in regard of his passion; yet in regard of his satisfaction,
they are more mine then his. I offer to thee, I say, his base birth, his
extreme poverty, his travails and banishment, his precious tears, his blessed
blood, his baptism, his temptation, all the contradictions and rude reuilings
of his enemies, all the sour sorrows and torments of his passion: the
whippes, the crown of thorns, the nails, the spear, the cross and the
tomb. I offer to thee his infinite zeal of thy glory, his perfect obedience
to thy will, his ardent love toward us. I offer to thee, his incredible
humility, his invincible patience and gentleness, and all other glorious
virtues which sparkled in him, as stars in the firmament, as precious stones
in a princes crown. I offer to thee all his merits; not as a treasure of
others, but as my own riches by inheritance. His works were finite, but the
merits of his works are infinite. I offer him wholly to thee; he is wholly
mine, in that his love is mine. For when he gave me his love, he gave me
himself: since love is no gift unless the giver be given with it: yea it is no
love unless it be as liberal of that which it is, as of that which it has.

O holy CHRIST! the repayrer of our life, the

And blessed be thou, O All-powerfull, and All-mercifull GOD! who have given us
such right and interest in him, that we may make this oblation to thee, both
in thankfulness for ALL thy benefits, and in full satisfaction for ALL our
sins. I beseech thee, O LORD, for his sake, forgive ALL my sins, who for
our sake endured ALL the punishments of my sins. I will not enquire into the
depth of this mystery, but I will embrace it with the love of my will. The more
incomprehensible it is, the more worthy is it the LORD who is incomprehensible;
not only in himself, but in his works. He has so loved us, that he has
done many things for us, which far exceed the faculty of our understanding:
by which he has much more deserved our love, then by those things which we
are able to understand.

Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches, and Power be
unto our GOD for evermore.
A SVMMARY PRAYER.
O Almighty GOD! the beginning and the end; in whom the beginning and the end
are one: when thou did fashion and create man, his soul thou did frame
as of a most divine matter; He breathed in his face breath of life. Genesis 2.7.
thy proper breath; so in a most divine form; even in thy own Image. For this
glorious guest, thou did prepare the palace of his body, Gen 1.27.
not only commodious for use, but curiously both framed, and furnished for
delight. But afterward by reason of his transgression, this palace was turned
to a prison: whereby it was much changed in condition. For as if a man for some
offense be committed prisoner to his own house, he becomes soon weary of
the place, wherein he took much pleasure before; especially if not only in
regard of himself, but in the proper nature his house be turned to a prison:
so albeit the body of man was once a pleasant habitation, yet when by sin it
was turned to a prison; the soul finds therein, many miserable molestations.

A prison is a place horrid and unclean; wherein the companions are thieves,
murderers, and other malefactors: the place commonly a sink, whither all the
filth of a city does draine. And albeit a child born^ and brought up in a
prison, and never acquainted with other life, will laugh and desport, and not
only take contentment, but delight in that place; yet if an honest man who
knows liberty, chance to come there, how is he annoyed with the filth? How
with the vile society which he is constrained to endure? What friends, what
suit will he make for his discharge? So they who never looked out of their
body, are well pleased with the evil qualities thereof. But they who have
conuersed in a heavenly life, and yet are gayled in this prison of mud, and
tied to the society of a thousand disordred appetites, as so many malefactors,
how unquiet are they? how wary? how desirous to be at liberty? Hereupon one
cried, Psalm. 142 vlt.
Bring my soul out of prison, and I will praise thy name. Philip. 1
And another: I desire to be dissolved. Romans 7.
And again: Who shall deliver me from this body of death.

Out of the deepest dungeon of this prison (O LORD) I cry unto thee: deeply
covered with natural corruption, deeply overwhelmed with actual
transgressions, deeply charged both with sense and fear of thy wrath, I
streine forth my voice unto thee. LORD, thou art always far distant from
sinners, and now out of this deep distance, I do not weakly desire thee, but
with deep sighs and groans from the depth of my heart, I call unto thee. I
have sinned, and thou have punished: I have displeased thee, and thou have
disquieted me; according to the greatness of my sins, thy punishments have
been great upon me. Out of this depth both of infirmities and of calamities,
with an inflamed spirit, I lift up my voice, hands, eyes, and soul unto thee.
Hear me (O LORD) who do no sooner hear then help: Oh! let the complaint
of my sobbing soul have access to thy gentle audience. Look not upon my
sins and upon thy justice; but look upon my miseries, and upon thy mercies:
turn away thy face from me, as I am sinful, but regard me as I am sorrowful
for my sins. Despise not (O LORD!) the work of thy hands.

For thou know of what metal we are made, thou know the bad temper
thereof; thou know, not only our weakness, but our prone inclination to
evil. Insomuch as if thou should examine our actions by the exact balance,
and then smite them by the severe sword of thy Justice; all must despair; we
must all be damned. For there is none so innocent under heaven, who can
either answer thy Justice or endure it. Not one can stand before thee in
Judgment; not one can answer one for a thousand.

But thou will not be so rigid and severe against thy feeble creatures. For
with thee abides not only Justice, but also Mercy; not only Justice, for
obstinate sinners, but Mercy for the penitent. Thou art above measure mild
and favorable to all that repent; thou can not deny thy Mercy from any who
desire it from an humble heart. And therefore albeit my sins press heavy
upon me, albeit they trouble my soul with many terrors; yet will I worship
thee, with a dutiful and obedient fear. I will hope in thee, but not cease to
fear: I will hope, but not presume, and therefore must I fear. I will hope,
in regard of thy goodness; I will fear, in regard of my own evil: I will
hope in thee for thy mercies, and I will fear thee for thy justice.

Upon these two wings will I fly unto thee; with these two eyes will I look
for thee: but my trust addresseth it self especially to thy mercy. ^f this
mercy thy word has given assurance: thy word expresses much fatherly
affection; thy word is full of many sweet promises of remission of sins: and
therefore my trust lays hold upon thy word. For were it not a dishonor to a
King? would not people speak shrewdly of him, if having promised his pardon,
he would execute men for the same offense? Assuredly, whatsoever some Kings
may do, thou can not: thou can not deny thy word, because thou can not
deny thy self. Thy justice will not suffer thee, either to revoke, or lightly
to regard the promises of thy mercy, in case we apprehend them in seasonable
time.

And therefore I will not be either betrayed by pleasures, or benumbed by
sluggish sloth: I will not suffer time to pass, until time shall be
altogether past: When there cannot possibly be any harm in haste, I will not
adventure upon the dangers of delay. O LORD my maker! Quicken me with thy
inciting grace, that I may with all speed address my self both to entreat and
to embrace thy mercy; that I may timely begin to attend upon thee. For albeit
no part of my life should be either shortened or misspent; Albeit I should be
most couetously careful to employ every minute thereof: yet is man too mortal
to attain performance of the least part of his duty to thee. And although I
be not presently relieved, although for a long time thou with-holdest thy
help; let not my hope be wearied in waiting for thee; let me both patiently
and constantly expect thy pleasure.

And so must all do who sincerely serve thee; who put their trust in thy word:
and so they shall never be disappointed of their hope. For not only thy Mercy
is most faithfully assured by thy word; but thy Justice also is plentifully
satisfied, by the inualuable blood of our Redeemer: which is so noble and
precious in thy sight, that there neither are, nor can be any sins, for
expiation of which it does not suffice. It opens the gate of grace to all
that repent; it excludes none, it suffices for all. Let no man fear the
multitude of his sins; this Mercy and this Redemption do infinitely surmount
them: they infinitely ouerballance the sins of all men, in case they repent.
LORD! thou art a great Physician; thou know all our sicknesses, and art most
expert in all sorts of remedies. Whatsoever our diseases are, never so
grievous, never so desperate; thou have variety of remedies in store, and
know right well how to apply them: thy Mercy and thy Redemption thou have
always at hand.

Wherefore with all fear and reverence which my weakness is able to
apprehend, I resort now to thy throne of Grace; most humbly entreating thy
Mercy, and the benefit of thy plentiful redemption. Repel me not from thy
presence, I beseech thee; until I be reconciled to thy favor. For I am no
stranger to thy house; I am one of thy people, a citizen and member of that
Church, which thou have so abundantly redeemed. Grant me (O gracious GOD!) a
longing desire to be with thee; for whosoever desires to be with thee, shall
be welcome to thee; whosoever desires not to be with thee, shall never
approach thee. Deliver me from all my sins; deliver me from all the
calamities which I suffer in this life: and enroll me for the life to come,
among thy blessed elect Citizens of Heaven. That as here with sinners I pray
unto thee, so there with thy Saints I may eternally praise thee.

AMEN.
Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches, and Power be
unto our GOD for evermore. Amen.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M. DC. XXIII.


