AN Ethiopian History written in Greek by Helidorus: very witty and
pleasant, Englished by Thomas Vnderdoune.

With the Argument of every Book, set before the whole Work.

Jmprinted at London, by Henry VVykes, for Fraunces Goldocke, dwellinge in
Powles Churcheyarde, at the sign of the green Dragon.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Edward Deuiere, Lord Boulbecke, Earl of Oxenford, Lord
great Chamberlayne of England: Thomas Vnderdowne, wishes long and blessed
life, with increase of Honor.
AS they somewhat be more precise, than I (right Honorable Earl) which
would have noble men, and such as bear sway, and rule in the weal
Public, to be in all manner of Sciences great Artistes, and altogether
Bookishe: so do I far dissent from them, that would contrarily have them
utterly unlettered, and flat idiotes: for the Bookishe man busily attendinge
his own study, cannot carefully yenough tender the state. For such is the
property of knowledge, that it breadeth a contempt of all other things in
respect of it self. As for the ignorant, it is most evident and plain, that
he can have no manner of Governance, or skill of Regiment in his head. The
Greeks in all manner of knowledge, and Learning, did far surmounte the
Romans, but the Romans in administringe their state, in warlike factes, and
in common sense were much their Superiors: for the Greeks were wedded to
their learning alone, the Romans content with a mediocritie, applied them
selves to greater things. I do not deny, but that in many matters, I mean
matters of learning, a Noble man ought to have a sight: but to be to much
addicted that way, I think is not good. Now of all knowledge fit for a
Noble Gentelman, I suppose the knowledge of Histories is most seeminge. For
furtheringe whereof, I have Englished a passing fine, and witty History,
written in Greek by Heliodorus, and for right good cause consecrated the same
to your Honorable Lordshippe. For such virtues be in your Honor, so hautie
courage joined with great skill, such sufficiency in learning, so good nature,
and common sense, that in your Honor is, I think, expressed the right
pattern of a Noble Gentelman, which in my head I have conceived. It nothing
did dismay me, or for that I was not known to your Honor, neither may it
seem any rash attempt for that cause. For such is the force of virtue, that
she makes us to love, not only our own Country men by sight unknown, but
also Strangers, which by Land and Sea be severed from us. Therefore I
beseech your Honor, favorably to accept this my small travail in
translatinge Heliodorus, whom, if I have so well translated as he is worthy,
I am persuaded, that your Honor will like very well of. Sure I am that of
other translatours he has benne dedicated to mighty Kings, and Princes.
Therefore accept my good will (Honorable Earl) and if opportunity shall serve
hereafter, there shall greater things appear under your Honors name.
Almighty God give you increase of Honor, and keep, and defend, you for ever
and ever.

Your Honors most humble to command, Thomas Vnderdowne.

The Contents of the first Book. In it is declared the taking of Theagenes
and Cariclia, by Thiamis Captain of the Thieves of Aegipte, and how they were
brought into their Country, which is called the Pasture, where, in Thiamis
his house they fell acquainted with Cnemon a Grecian, who tells an excellent
tale of his estate. After this is declared the taking of Thyamis by Mitranes,
and the burninge of the Island, and this did Nausicles by a great sum of
monye, procure Mitranes Captain of the watches to do, because Thermutes one
of Thiamis his men, had taken from him a Lover of his named Thisbe, which he
brought from Athens.

The Contents of the Second Book. In this second Book is contained the
councelles of Theagenes and Cariclia, and the journey of Cnemon, and Thermutes
to seek Thiamis. And how by composition Cnemon came to Chemmis, where he
met with Calasiris very sorrowful, who tells him a notable tale of his own
ill hap, and annexeth thereto the beginning of the story of the whole Book,
how Caricles came by Cariclia, and how Theagenes was sent out of Thessalia,
to perform the Funeral of Pirrhus, Achilles his Son.

The Contents of the Third Book. In the third Book is contained the manner
of the Funeralles, and how Theagenes fell in Love with Cariclia, and she with
him, and the moan that Caricles made for her to Calasiris.

The Contents of the Fourth Book. In this fourth Book, is contained the
victory of Theagenes against Ormenes, and how by council of Calasiris he
took Cariclia away, and what adoo was thereaboute in Delphi.

The Contents of the fifthe Book. In this fifthe Book is contained the
separation of Theagenes and Cariclia, and how that Nausicles the Merchante
got her of Mitranes in steed of Thysbe, and after he had brought her to his
house, he desired Calasiris to tell him the Story of her and Theagenes, who
prosequuteth it so far, until he comes to the great Slaughter, whereof
mention is made in the first Book.

The Contents of the sixte Book. The sixte Book contains the Marriage of
Cnemon to Nausiclia, Nausicles Daughter, and the viage of Calasiris and
Cariclia to seek Theagenes at Bessa: where they hear of an old woman, that
the Inhabitants thereof had slain Mitranes, and rescued Thiamis and Theagenes,
and were gonne with them to Memphis, to help Thiamis to recover again his
Priestehoode. The same old woman that told them this tale, was a VVitche, and
showed before them part of her cunninge by raisinge again her own Son: and
after, in their sight, received such end, as all her former life had
deserved.

The Contents of the seventh Book. In the seuenthe Book is set forth the
Battle between the two Brethren, Thiamis and Petosiris for the Priesthood,
and how the end was made between them by their Father Calasiris. At this
Battle Cariclia found her Theagenes again. Arsace falls in love with
Theagenes, and is almost mad for desire toward him. Calasiris dies, and
his Son Thiamis succeeds him. Achemenes is Espoused to Cariclia: but he is
defeated of the Marriage by Theagenes.

The Contents of the eighte Book. This Book contains the war, and cause
thereof between Hidaspes King of Aethiopia, and Oroondates Lieutenante of
Aegypte. Also the complainte that Achemenes made to Oroondates of Arsace, with
a commendation of Cariclia, and Theagenes to him: who sends for them Bagoas,
one of his Eunuchs. But before he came, Theagenes was sore tormented because
he would not consent to Arsaces unlawful desire. Cariclia also because she was
thought to hinder Arsaces purpose, should have been privily poisoned by
Cybele, Arsaces Bawd: but the mischief fell upon her self. Mary Cariclia was
accused therefore, and should have benne burned, but is woonderfully delivered
by virtue of a Precious stoane called Pantarbe. Then comes Bagoas, and takes
them away: for sorrow whereof, Arsace hangs her self. After this, Bagoas,
and they fall into the Foreriders of the Ethiopian Army, and are taken
Prisoners, and carried to Hidaspes.

The Contents of the ninthe Book. This Book contains the siege of Syene,
in which was Oroondates, and the drowninge of the Country round about it by
Hydaspes, and the courtesy showed to them which were in it when the Town was
given up: then the falshed of Oroondates by stealinge suddenly away to
Elyphantina. After this is described the great Battle between Hydaspes and
Oroondates, in which, Oroondates was ouercomme, and taken prisoner, and yet in
the end pardoned. After this Hydaspes viewethe the Prisoners, and disposes
them diversely.

The Contents of the tenth Book. This last Book declares how Hydaspes was
received into his own Country, and the manner of the Sacrifices which he
did: then the acknowledginge of Cariclia to be his Daughter, and the
enterteining of the strange Ambassadors, with certain Active feats of
Theagenes. After this is Theagenes assured to Cariclia by Hydaspes, and they
are made Priests, he the Suns, and she the Moons, and do Sacrifice. Then
go they to Meroe, where the secreter things apperteininge to the Marriage are
finished.

FINIS.
The Ethiopian History of Heliodorus.
The first Book.
AS soon as the day appeared, and the Sun began to shine on the tops of
the Hills, Men, whose custom was to live by rapine and violence, ran to
the top of a Hill that strecheth toward the mouth of Nylus, called Heracleot:
where standing a while, they vewed the Sea underneath them, and when they had
looked a good season a far of into the same, and could see nothing that
might put them in hope of pray, they cast there eyes somewhat near the
shore: where as a ship, tied with Cables to the maine land, lay at road,
without sailors, and full fraughted: which thing, they who were a far of
might easily conjecture: for the burden caused the ship to draw water within
the bourdes of the deck. But on the shore every place was full of men, some
quite dead, some half dead, some whose bodies yet panted, and plainly
declared that there had benne a battle fought of late. But there could be
seen no signs or tokens of any just quarrel, but there seemed to be an ill
and unlucky banquet, and those that remained, obtained such end. For the
tables were furnished with delicate dishes, some whereof lay in the hands of
those that were slain, being in steed of weapons to some of them in the
battle, so suddenly begun. Other covered such as crope under them to hide
them selves, as they thought. Besides the cups were overthrown and fell out
of the hands, either of them that drank, or those, who had in stead of
stones used them. For that sudden mischief wrought new devises, and taught
them in stead of weapons, to use there pottes. Of those who lay there, one was
wounded with an Axe, an other was hurt with the shelles of Fishes, whereof on
the shoore there was great ple^tie: another was all to crushed with a lever,
many burnte with fire, and the rest by diverse other means, but most of all
were slain with arrows. To be brief, God showed, a wonderful sight in so
short time, bruynge blood with wine, ioyninge battle with banketting,
minglinge indifferently slaughters with drinkinges, and killing with
quaffinges, prouidinge such a sight for the Thieves of Egypt to pause at. For
they when they had given these things the lookinge on a good while from the
Hill, could not understand what that sight meante, for as much as they saw
some slain there, but the Conquerours could they see no where, a manifest
Victory but no spoils taken away a ship without Mariners only, but as
concerning other things untouched, as if she had been kept with a guard of
many men, and lay at road in a saulfe Harbor. But for all that they knew
not what that thing meante, yet they had respect to their Lucre and gain.
When therefore they had determined that them selves were the Victors, they
drew near unto the same: and not being now far from the ship, and those
that were slain, they saw a sight more perplexed then the rest a great
deal. A maid endued with excellent beawtie, which also might be supposed a
Goddess, satte upon a Rock, who seemed not a littell to be grieved with that
present mischance, but for all that of excellent courage: she had a garlande of
Laurel on her head, a Quiver on her back, and in her left hand a Bow,
leaninge upon her Thighe with her other hand, and lookinge downewarde, without
mouinge of her head, beholdinge a certain young Man a good way of, the which
was sore wounded, and seemed to lift up him self, as if he had be wakened out
of a dead sleep almost of death it self? yet was he in this case of
Singular beawtie, and for all that his cheeks were be sprinkled with blood,
his whitenes did appear so much the more. He was constrained for grief to
weep, yet caused he the maid to look steadfastly upon him, and these things
must they needs see because they saw her. But as soon as he came to him
self a littel, he uttered these words very faintly. And art thou safe in
deed my sweet heart, quod he? or else haste thou with thy death by any
mischaunce augmented this slaughter? thou can not, no not by death be
separated from me. But of the fruition of thy sight and thy life, does al
mine estate depend. Yea in you (answered the Maid) does my whole Fortune
consiste, whether I shall live or die, and for this cause, you see (shewinge a
knife in her hand) this was hitherto ready. But only for your recovering was
restrained, and as soon as she had said thus, she lepte from the stoane, and
they who wear on the Hill, as well for wonder, as also for the fear they had,
as if they had benne stricken with lightninge, ran every man to hide them in
the busshes there beside. For she seemed to them a thing of greater price, and
more heavenly, when she stood vprighte, and her Arrows with the sudden
mouinge of her body, gave a clashe on her shoulders, her apparel wrought with
Goulde glistered against the Sun, and her hear under her Garlande, blown
about with the wind, covered a great part of her back. The Thieves were
greatly afraid of these things, the rather for that they understood not what
that should mean which they saw. Some of them said in deed that it was a
Goddess and Diana, other said it was Isis, which was honored there: but some
of them said it was some Priest of the Gods, that replenished with divine
fury had made the great slaughter which there appeared, and thus every man
gave his verdite, because they knew not the trothe. But she hastily runninge
to the young man, embraced him, wept for sorrow, kissed him, and made
pitiful moan, being very careful for his sauftie, which thing when the
Egyptians had seen, they turned there opinions: And are these, said they, the
works of a Goddess? would a Goddess kiss a dead man with such
compassion? they determined therefore with them selves, that it was best to
take heart of grace, and go know what the matter was in deed. When they had
therefore encouraged each other a little, they ran down, and found the
Maid busy in dressinge the young man's wounds, and cominge behind her
suddenly stood still, and durst neither speak nor do any thing more for
there lives. When she hard the sound of somewhat about her, and their
shadows before her eyes, she lifted her self up a little, and looked back,
but stouped again straight, no whitte abashed to see the Thieves in harnes,
but applied her self only to bind up his wounds that lay before her. Such
is the force of earnest desire and true love, it despises all outward
chances, be they pleasant or otherwise, only beholdinge that which it
loves, and thereaboute bestows all diligence and travel. But when the
Thieves passed by, and stood before her, and seemed that they would enterprise
somewhat, she lifted her self up again, and beholdinge them black colored,
and evil favored, said, if (quod she) you be the Spirits of those who are
slain here, you trouble us wrongfully, for most of you were slain with yo^^
own hands. As for us, if we flewe any, we did it (...) in our own defense,
to repelle the violence which was proffered to my Virginity, but if you be men
alive, it seems you are Thieves, as may be deemed by the time you come in,
you may do us a pleasure to rid us from these present miseries, and by
death to finishe this our unhappy Tragedy. Thus did she sorrowfully
lamente, but they not understanding what she said, leafte them there,
accountinge their own inu^rmitie, a sufficient guard to keep them, and hasted
to the Ship, and brought out that which was in the same: every man bearinge
out as much as he could of Gould, Silver, Precious stoanes, and Silk, not
regarding other things whereof therein was great stoare. And when they
thought, they had enough, and there was such plentye as might seem to
satisfy the Thieves desire, layinge their pray on the shore, fell to
division of the same, not according to the woorthe and value of that they had,
but contented them selves with equality of weight. As for the young Man and
the Maid, they would take order for them afterward. In the mean time an other
company of Thieves, whereof two Horsemen were Captains, came toward them:
which thing as soon as those saw that had benne there before, not of courage
to stir against the^, ran away as fast as they could, without taking with
the^ any part of the Pray, that they might give their enemy no occasion to
pursue them. For they were in number but ten, and those who came upon them,
were three times as many. And now was the Maid a prisoner again, but yet,
not in durance at all. The Robbers, although they hasted to the spoil: yet
partly, because they knew not what those things signified which they saw,
and partly also for fear stayed them selves a while, thinkinge that the
former slaughter had benne made, by the Thieves that had benne there before.
But when they beheld the Maid, though straungly, yet seemly apparailled,
which despised those dangers that hanged over her head, as though they had
benne none, and altogether employed her travel, to ease the young Man's
wounds, and took his grief as heavily as her own sorrow, they were not
only stricken with her beawtie and hawtines of mind, but wonderfully moved
with the cumlines of the wounded Man's person. Such was the seemelines of his
countenance, and talenesse of his stature, even as he lay along before them.
For by this time was he a little amended, and his personage had recovered his
old handsomeness again. At length after they had beheld them a good while,
and he drew near who was their Master, he laid hand on the Maid, and bad
her arise and follow him. She, although she understood not what he said,
yet coniecturinge what he willed her to do, drew the young Man with her,
otherwise she would not only not depart from him, but pointinge with a
knife to her heart, threatened that she would kill her self, if they carried
them not both togeathers. Which thing, when the Master partly by her talk,
but more plainly by her gesture, understood, hoping also to use his further
help in great affairs if he might recover his health again, alighted himself
from his Horse, and commanded his hranesbearer likewise so to do, and set
his prisoners on them, Commaundinge the rest when they had gathered up the
pray to follow them, him self like a lackie ran by their side and stayed
them upright, if by means of their infirmity they were in danger to fall.
Surely this deed was not without much glory, for he, who was their Master,
waited upon them, and he who took them prisoners, was content to serve them.
Such is the appearance of very Nobility, and the force of cumlines, which
can subdue the disposition of Thieves, and bring under the wild and savage.
When they had gone about a sixtene furlonges, by the Sea side, they turned
down straight to the foot of the Hill, and left the Sea, on their right
hand. And having gone over the top of the said Hill, they hasted to a Poole
that lay on the other side thereof, the manner whereof was thus. The whole
place is called the Pasture of the Egyptians, about the which is a low
Valeye, which receives certain exundations of Nylus, by means whereof it
becomes a Poole, and is in the midste very deape, about the brimmes whereof
are marshes, or sennes. For look, as the shore is to the Sea, such is the
fennes to every great Poole. In that place have the Thieves of Egypt, how
many so ever they be, their common Wealth. And for as much as there is but a
little land without the water, some live in small Cotages, other in Boats, that
they use as well for their house, as also for passage over the Poole. In these
do their women serve them, and if need require, be also brought to bed.
When a Child is borne first, they let him suck his mothers milk awhyle: but
after they feed him with Fishes taken in the Lake, and roasted in the hoate
Sun. And when they perceive that he begins to go, they tie a cord about
his legs, and su^him but only to go about the Boat, teachinge him even at
the first after a new fashion to go by a haulter. And thus what rudesbie so
ever is borne and bred in the Poole, accounts the same his country, and a
sufficient defense, for the saftie of Thieves. And for that cause all such
people come thither very fast, for they all do use the water in steed of a
wall. Moreover the great plenty of Reed that grows there in the moorie
ground, is in manner as good as a Bulwark unto them. For by deuisinge many
crooked: and comberous ways, thorough which the passages to them by often use
are very easy, but to others hard, they have made it a sure defense, that by
no sodeine invasion they may be endamaged. And thus much as touching the
Lake, and those Roges that inhabit the same. About the sun setting comes
home their Captain with all his retinew. Then took they the young couple
from their Horses, and laid their pray aboorde. Certain Boats, and the
rest of the Robbers that tarried at home which was a great sort, ran to
meet the Captain from out every part of the Fenne, and welcomed him as if he
had benne their King. But when they considered the multitude of the spoils
that they had won, and saw the beawtie of the Maid to be so heavenly a
thing, they geassed that their companions had robbed some Church, and that
they had brought away the Priest of the Gods, or rather the lively picture
of the Goddess her self. And this they coniectured to the Maid, because they
knew not what had benne done. And therefore they gratulated their Captain
in hearty wise, for his valiante exploite, and so brought him into his own
house, which was an Island, far from the rest, separated to his only use,
and a few other, who most commonly used to keep him company. Whither after
he was brought, he commanded the other to depart every man to his own
house, charginge them the next day all to wait upon him. Him self with a
few other that tarried with him, after they had made a short supper, delivered
the young folks to the custody, of a Grecian (whom he had taken a few days
before, that he might be their Interpreter) lettinge them have a corner of his
own house, not far from his lodginge, with commandment, as well diligently
to see the wounded young Man, as curiously to look to the Maid, that she by
no means should be anoyed. But he, what with his former travel the day
before, and also with care of his present affairs, fell a fleepe. And when al
was whist in the marishe, and every man at rest, the Maid took that
occasion, and absence of men, to be a fyt time, to lament and wail, and the
rather for that in the night, she could neither see or hear any thing, that
might comfort her, but contrariewise move her to sorrow: when therefore with
her self secretly she had wailed alone (for she was by the Captains
commandment separated from company, and laid in a simple bed,) and wept
very bitterly. Apollo (said she) how much more grievous punishment do
thou take of us then we have deserved. Have thou not benne sufficiently
revenged on us, with that, that is paste? For as much as we are far from our
friends and kinsfolks, and that we were taken by Pirates, and subject to
six hundred dangers more by Sea, but that now again we must on the land
fall into the hands of Thieves and Robbers? beside who knows wither any
thing worse is like to light upon us? when will thou make an end? if in
death, that shall be void of Injury. Oh that death would like me well: but
rather then any man should filthely know me, which Theagenes never did,
truly with halter I would end my life, referringe my self pure and chaste
(as hitherto I have done) even unto death, and thereby gain a bewtifull
Epitaphe for my singular Virginity, and no Judge shall be so cruel as thou.
While she spoke thus, Theagenes willed her to be content, and said: Mine
own dear heart and only joy Eariclea, sease your mourninge, I know you
have just cause to complain, but in your thus dooinge, you displease God a
great deal more then you think, neither have we need to provoke God to
wrath, but rather to pray for that which is mightier, must with Prayers,
and not with accusacion be appeased. You give me in deed good Counsel (quod
she) but I pray thee tell me how you fare: Better (said he) then I did
yesternight, since this young man trimmed my wou^des, whereby the burninge heat
of them is well cooled. Yea (quod he who had the charge to look to them) in the
morning you shall see they shall be in better case, for I will provide such an
herb for you, that within three dressinges shall heal up your wound. And
this I have proved true by experience, for if any that were under this
Captain since I was taken prisoner, in any conflict happened to be wounded,
he never needed many days to be cured. For that I am greatly moved with your
estate, you need not marvel at al, for you seem to be in as ill case as I,
and I have the more compassion on you for that you be Grecians, because also I
my self am a Grecian borne. A Grecian, Oh immortal God, cried they out suddenly
for joy, a Grecian in deed both tongue and country. Hereafter we trust to
have some respite from our mishaps. But what must we call you, said
Theagenes? Cnemon answered he. Of what part of Greece said Theagenes? Of
Athens answered he. And how came you here, said Theagenes? Peace I pray you
(quod he) and ask me that question no more, let us leave that to such as write
Tragedies. Neither at this time would I gladly increase your sorrows, with
repeting mine, besides that, the night is so far spent, that the rest would
not serve to tell you the same, and we have great need to take rest, and
sleep after our great travel. But when they would not cease, but were still
very instant to have me tell the same, accompting it a great comfort, to hear
any man have as ill luck as they had them selves, Cnemon began in this
sort. My Fathers name was Aristippus, he was borne in Cnemon his excellent
tale.
Athens, one of the upper Senate, as rich as any Comoner in the City, he,
after the decease of my Mother applied his mind to Marry again, thinkinge it
an unreasonable thing for me, his only Sons sake, still to be of an
uncertain and doubtful mind. He does therefore bring home a little woman
somewhat fine, but passinge malicious, named Demeneta, as soon as she was
Married, she reclaimed my Father al to her own lure, and made him do what
she list, entising the old Man with her beauty, and was very curiouse in
many other points, for if any woman ever knew how to make a man mad of her,
she was better skilled in that Art, then any man would think, but
especially when my Father went forth, she would be sorrowful, and run to
him when he came home, and blame him mutche for his long tarriynge, and not
stick to tell him, that she would have died, if he had tarried never so
little longer: At every word would she embrace him, and moiste her kisses
with tears, with which means my Father was so bewitched, that he never was
well, but when he either had her in his Arms, or else looked upon her: above
all other, she would have me in her sight, as if I had benne her own
Son, by this means also making Aristippus to love her the better. Sometimes
would she kiss me, oftentimes would she wish, that she might pastime her
self with me, whereof I was well content, His honest disposition.
mistrustinge nothing less, then that she went about, maruelinge also that
she bare such a Motherly affection toward me. But when she came to me more
wantonly, and that her kisses were more hot then beseemed an honest woman, and
her countenance passed modesty, then many things caused me to suspecte her,
therefore I conveyed my self away, and would nothing regard her fair
words. I will let other things pass, which would be to long to tell, by
what means she went about to win me, what profers she made, how
sometime she would call me her Pretty boy, sometime her Sweet heart, then her
Heir, after, her own Life, last of all to these her fair names, would she
add many intisementes with especial consideration what I liked best: so that
in grave affairs she would behave her self like my Mother, but if she
list to dally, then would she manifestly declare her love. At length such a
chance befell, when Pallas high feast called Quinquatria The Athenians feast
called Quinquatria.
was celebrated, on which the Athenians were accustomed to consecrate a ship
by land, and I (for I was not then sixtene years old) had Song the usual
Hymn of her praise, and done other Ceremonies, and Kites due to the same,
eue^ as I was attyred in my robes. and my Crown on my head, I came home, she,
as soon as she espied me, was by and by distraught of her wits, and not
able with policy to cover her love any longer, but for very desire ran to
me, and took me in her Arms, and said, Oh my young Hippolitus, and my dear
Theseus? In what case was I then think you, who even now am a shamed to tell
you the same. That night my Father supped in the Castle, and as it often
happens in such company, and public resort, he determined to lie there
all night: that night she came to me, and striued to have an unlawful thing
at my hand. But I with all my power withstoode her, and regarded, neither her
flatteringe words, nor fair promises, no, nor her threateninges, wherefore,
fetching a sighe from Demeneta inuentethe how to grieve Cnemon.
the bottom of her heart, for that time departed, but within two nights
after, like a mischievous queen she sought all means possible to enterrupte
me. And first of all, she kept her bed, and when my Father came home, and
asked her how she fared, made him answer, that she was sick, but when he
was very importunate, and desirous to know what she ailed, The goodly young
man (said she) that loved me so well, Son to us both, whom I (the Gods
know) loved a great deal better then you, when he perceived by certain
tokens that I was great with child by you, which thing I conceived from you
(until I knew the certeintic my self) and waytinge for your absence, when I
counseled him, as my manner was, and persuaded him to leave hauntinge of
Harlottes, and too much drinkinge (which things I knew well enough. But
would never tell you of them, least thereby I should incur the cruel
suspicion of a Stepmother with you) while I say, I talked with him of these
things alone, no more but he and I, least he should be ashamed, I will not
tell the worse, for I am abashed so to do, nor in what manner he reviled both
you and me, lastely spurned me on the belly, and has caused me to be in such
case as ye see. As soon as he heard this, he said nothing, nor Aristippus
^rathe against Cnemon.
asked me no questions, neither gave me leave to speak for my self, but
perswadinge him self, that she, who loved me so well, would by no means
belie me, as soon as he found me in a certain corner of the house, boxed me
with his fistes, and calling his servants together, scourged me with rods,
and would not suffer me to know (which al men do) why I was cruelly
beten, when his anger was well cooled, and he came to him self again, I said
to him, Father, yet now at length I pray you tell me, why I have had thus
many stripes, wherewith he much more incensed, Oh cleanly desembler (said he)
he would know his own misdeede of me, he went in again to Demeneta, but she
not content with this, devised VVeeme^s wrath never has end.
such another shifte against me. She had a maid called Thisbe, which could
play well on the Virginalles, and was otherwise fair, and a very propre
wenche. Her she made call for me, and commanded her to love me, and by and by
she did so in deed, and where she refused, oftentimes attemptinge her
before, now allured me with countenance, beckes, and many other signs. Now
was I somewhat proud, for that of a sudden I was becomme bewtiful, and in
deed on a night, when she came to my bed, thought no scorn to make her
room, she liked her interteinement so well, that she came again, and
continually haunted my bed, at length, when I gave her counsel to use
circumspection in this matter, and take heed that her Misters found her not
with me. Cnemon (said she) you seem to be too simple, if you count it a
dangerous matter, for me being a bond maid, bought with money, to be taken a
bed with you, what pounishement think you her worthy, that professinge her
self a free woman, and lawfully married to a husband, and yet plaieth the
naughty pack? Peace (quod I) I cannnot believe that. Yes (said she) if you
will, I will deliver the Adoulteroure to you, even in the deed dooinge. If you
will so do (quod I) you shall do me a pleasure. With all my heart (said she) not
only for your own sake, who have benne injured by her tofore, but for mine
also, who for that she has me in Jealousy, am used of her very extremely:
wherefore, if thou be a man, apprehende him. I promised her I would so do, and
she for that time went her way, about three nights after, she came, and
waked me out of my sleep, that an Adulter was come in, and that my Father
upon occasion suddenly was gonne into the country, and he according to the
appointmente, was gonne to bed to Demeneta, therefore it was erpediente for
me to haste me to be revenged, and put on my swoorde, that the knave might not
escape. I did so, and taking my sword in my hand, followed those which
carried a candle before, and went to the beddechamber. When I came near the
door, and perceived the glimeringe of a candle through the sliuers, and the
doors lockte. Very angry as I was, brake up the doors, and ran in crieinge
out, where is that Cnemon decei^ed by Thisbe.
same villain, the worthy lover of this chaste Dame* Which when I had
said, I came to the bed in mind to slay them both, but there with my
Father, (O God) leapte out of the bed, and fallinge on his knees, before me,
said, my Son, have pity upon thy Father, spare his white hears, that has
brought thee up. We have done thee wrong in deed, yet not so great that
therefore with death, thou shouldeste be revenged on me. Geeue not so much to
thy wrath, neither by thy Fathers blood imbrewe thy hands, this with much
more spoke my Father, humbly upon his knees, desiringe me to save his life. But
as I had been stricken with a thonder boulte, stood still amassed, and looked
round about after Thisbe, who had, I know not how, conveyed her self
away, neither had one word to say, neither could I tell, what was best to
do, and in this case my sword fell out of my hands, which Demeneta straight
way caught up, and my Father then out of danger, laid hands upon Cnemon
bound^.
me, and commanded me to be bound. Demeneta in the mean while many ways
mouinge, and setting him on, did I not tell you this before (cried she) that
it was best to look to the princokes: which would no doubt if time served
attempt somewhat. I looked in her face, and perceived her mind well yenough.
And he answered, you told me in deed, but I believed you not. And thus was I
in bonds, and he would not geeue me leave to tell him, how the matter was
handled. As soon as it was date, he brought me bound, as I was, before the
people, and strewinge ashes on his head, said, I brought not up my Son
(Ye men of Athens) to see him come to this end, but trustinge he would be a
staff to stay mine age upon. As soon as he was borne, I brought him up
gentlemanlike, Aristippus Or^tion against his son Cnemon.
and set him to school, and when I had well placed him among our kinsfolks,
and written him in the number of other young men, his equalles, and
according to the laws of this City, made him one of our Citizens: Lastly, I
lead not a very quiet life for his sake, he has not only forgotten al these
things, but also diversely injured me, and beaten this woman, who according to
our Law is my second wife. At length he came to me by night with a sword in
his band, and was no further from being a parricide, but that Fortune hindered
him, and by a sudden fear, his sword fell out of his hand, I fly to you,
and tell you thereof. And although by the Law I might with mine own hand
slay him, yet I would not: therefore remit I my whole cause to your
discretion, thinking that I shall do better, if I pounishe my Son, rather by
public Law, then private bloudeshedde: and therewithal he weapt, so did
Demeneta also, and fained her self to be very sorrowful for my mishap.
Calling me an unhappy Creature, as truly she might, being in danger to
die before my natural time, whom evil sprites had sturred against my
Parents. Not only did she so much outwardly lament, as she testified the
same with her tears, and as though her accusation had benne true, with weeping
she confirmed the same. And when I craved license to speak for my self, the
Scribe came to me, and propounded this straight question. Whether I came to my
Father, or not, with a sword in my hand, I did (quod I). But I will tell you, how
therewith every man cried out, and said, that I ought not to speak for my
self: wherefore, ^ewe friends in extremity.
some judged me worthy to be stoned to death, other to be hanged, and some to
be cast hedlonge into the dungeon. All this while that they wear consultinge
of my punishment, I cried out, oh my cruel stepmother, alas for my Stepmothers
sake, am I thus troubled, my Stepmother kills me without Judgment, and many
marked my words very well, and began to suspecte as it was in deed, but
for all that, at that time, could I not be heard, such was the tumult, and
noise of the people, and when the voices were reckned, those, who condemned me
to die, were a thousand seven hundred, whereof the one half would have me
stoned, the other cast into the dungeon, the other, of whom was about a
thousand creditinge somewhat the suspicion that they had conceived of my
Stepmother, gave sentence that I should be bannished for ever, yet those
prevailed, for although they were fewer then the whole number of the rest, yet
forasmuch as the other voices differed, severally compared with every one
alone, a thousand was the greater number, and thus was I bannished from my
Fathers house, and Native country. And for all that, yet was not Demeneta
vnpounished, but how, you shall hereafter know. Now we must fall to sleep,
for it is far in the night, and you have need to take a great deal of
ease. Nay said Theagenes, you shall more grieve us, if you tell us not how
this mischiefous woman was pounished. Since you will needs know, then said
Cnemon, give ear, I in such case as I was, after I was absolved, came to the
haven, He tells forth
and findinge a ship ready to depart, sailed to Egnia, for I knew I had
some kinnesfolkes there by my mothers side, when I arrived there and had found
those I sought for, at the first, I lived pleasantly enough there, about a
twenty days after, runninge about as I was woonte to do, I walked down to
the haven, and behold a bark was within kenninge. I stayed there a little,
and devised with my self whence that bark should come, and what manner of
people should be in her. The bridge was scante well placed, when one leapte out,
and ran, and embraced me (his name was Charias, one of my companions,) and
said Cnemon, I bring thee merry tidinges, Charias brings Cnemon (...) of
Demencias Death.
now art thou well revenged upon thine Enemy, Demeneta is dead. Charias
said, welcome, but why do you not tell me these joyful news, but pass over
them, as if they were not needful to be known, I pray tell me the manner of
this revenge. Surely I fear mutche that she died not as other folks do,
neither escaped she such death, as well she had deserved. Justice quoth
Though Justice deferreth long, yet she strikes soar at last.
Charias, has not utterly foresaken us, according to Hesiodus mind. But
although she wincke a while upon the misdeedes of men, and prolonge the
Revenge a good season, yet although she casts a terrible eye upon such
offenders, who also has taken just pounishemente of the mischeiuous
Demeneta, neither was any thing either said or done, whereto by Thisbe, for
our old acquaintance, I was not made privy. After thine unhappy Father had
procured thine Aristippus is sorrowful for the loss of his Son.
unjust bannishement, repentinge of that he had done, conveyed him self to a
certain solitary manoure of his, from the company of men into the
country, and there lived eatinge, (as the Proverb says) his own heart out.
But she straight way became mad almost, and Demeneta loved Cnemon better
when he was gonne*
with more hot desire loved thee absente, neither at any time seized she
from sorrow, although she lamented thy chance, but rather in deed her own
mishappe, (and oh Cnemon, by pretty Boy, day and night would she cry)
calling thee her own life, in so much, that when weemen, or her acquaintance
came to visit, and comfort her, they wondered greatly, that she a Stepmother,
should bear such motherly affection toward thee, but she would make them
aunsweare, that it was a greater grief to her, then, that by any comfortable
words it might be assuaged, and that few of them knew what a coresey it was
to her heart, and when she came again to her self, she would much accuse
Demeneta accuses Thisbe.
Thisbe, in that she had not served her well: Oh how ready art thou (would
she say) to do mischief, who haste not now helped me in my love, but
rather caused me to lose, in the turninge of an hand, my most joy, neither
grauntedst thou me any time to change my mind: and therewith gave manifest
tokens, that she would do her sum harm. She percesuinge her to be very
wroth, and almost ouercomme with sorrow, and prepared to do sum great
mischief to her, being set on, as well with anger, as love, determined to
prevent her, and by beguilinge her, to provide for her own safety. Wherefore
she entered in to her, and said, what a do is this Misters? And why do you
accuse thus your maid, for my part I have always heretofore done, and even
now also did as you commanded me. If any thing happened not according to your
mind, you must ascribe that to Fortune, and if now also you will command
me to divise sum remedy for your present sorrow, you shall easily perceive,
you shall not want my good will. What remedy (replied she) is there possible
to be found, seeinge he, who can do the same, is by distance of place
separated from me, and the unhoped for lenity of those, that gave sentence of
him, has killed me? For if he had benne stoaned, then also in one, had benne
quenched, and dead the blasinge flames of my burninge desire. For that, whose
hope is paste, is taken from the heart, and that which is looked for no more,
causes grieved minds to intermit all manner of sorrow. Now me thinks I
see Tokens of a guilty conscience
him, and in his bannishement hear him, how he casts in my teethe the unjust
guiles, that I ensnared him with, as a thing shamefully done, so that I
blusshe to speak to him: sommetime me thinks, he commes toward me, and I
shall enjoy him: sommetime I determined to go toward him, in what coaste of
the world so ever he be. These things set me on fire: these things made
me mad. But, oh ye Gods, I have as I deserve, for why did I not rather
with good will speak to win him, then by craft to compel him? Why did I not
rather humbly pray him, then like an enemy persecute him? He would not take
me at the first, and by good reason, for I was an other man's. He feared to
defile his Fathers bed, but happily either by time he might be allured to be
more gentill unto me. But I rude, and cruel, as though I loved no man, and
had authority to compel him, because he obeyed me not at the first, and for
that he despised Demeneta, whom in beauty he far excelled, have committed an
heinous crime, but O my Thisbe, Thisbe with like craft deceives her Misiers,
as before she had Cnemon.
what remedy is that, which thou wouldeste me, or what is easy? Misters (quod
she) many men think that Cnemon is gonne out of the City, and Land of
Athens, as he was judged to do. But I know well enough, who have searched
all things narrowely for your sake, that he keepethe him self secretly in a
certain place, before the City. You have heard of one Arsmoe I know well,
she that plaiethe so well on the Virginalles, with her he liethe, for the
Maid after his misery took him in, promised to go away with him, and
keeps him at her house, until she can provide all things ready for her
journey. Oh happy Arsmoe (said Demeneta) both for the former acquaintance
which she had with Cnemon, and for the bannishment, which she shall have
with him: but what do these things touch us much. Misters, said she, I
will say, I love Cnemon, and will desire Arsmoe, with whom I have benne well
acquainted a great while, by reason of my art, that she would in her steed
suffer me to lie with him one night. Which if I shall obtain, it shall be
youres, and he shall think you to be Arsmoe, and in her place shall you be with
him: and I will provide for that also, that when he has drunk a little, he
shall go to bed, and if you get that you desire, then shall it be best for
you to geeue over your love. For in many the first experimente has quenched
such earnest desire, for the seed of love, wherewith we prosecute any
thing, is to have enough thereof, but if this desire shall then also remain
(which God forbid) then shall we make (as the Proverb says) a new
viage, and speak a new way: in the mean time, let us apply that which the
present opportunity permits. Demeneta allowed, and praised this well, and
prayed her not to slake this determination at all. She craved of her Misters
but one day to bring this about, she went to Arsmoe, and asked her if she
knew not Teledemus, she aunsweared, yes. Let us have a chamber I pray you
quoth she, for I have promised him this night, that he shall come first, and I
will follow as soon as I have brought my Misters to bed. This done, she
went to Aristippus into the country, and said to him thus, Master, I come
to you, to accuse my self, and ready to This^e accuses Demene^a to her
Master Arestippus.
take such pounishemente at your hand, as your discretion shall think good.
By me have you lost yours Son, not willinge in deed so to do, yet of
truth an healper to the same. For when I perceived, my Misters lived not well,
but was injurious to your bed, fearinge not only my self, if the matter came
to light by any other, for keepinge her counsel, should have some shrewde
turn, but especially sorrowefull for your mishappe, who for louinge your
wife so interely, should have such recompense, daringe not my self, came one
night, that no man should know thereof, and secretly made you privy to the
same, told to my young Master, that there was one, who used to play the
harlot with my Mistress, he thinking that then there had been one with her in
bed (for he was vexed before by her, as you know well ynoughs) taking his
swoorde in his hand very angry, and not esteeminge that I said: then there
was none, but thinkinge that I had repented me of bewraieinge the same, ran
like a mad man to your beds side, what followed you know, now is the time
that you may clear your self of your Son, though he be in bannishement,
and may take revenge on us both, who have done you wrong. I will show you
this night, Demeneta (which makes the matter a great deal more heinous)
lieinge with her Friend in an other man's house without the City. If, said
Aristippus, thou will show me this, I I will make thee free, and my self
should revive again, if I were revenged of mine enemy. I have benne grieved
about the same in my conscience a great while, yet for all that, though I
suspected no less, because I could not convince it by manifest proufes, I
held me content. But what must I do. You know (quod she) the Garden
wherein remains a monument of the Epicures, thither The Monumente of the
Epicures.
come a little before night, and tarry for me, when she had said this, she
returned, and coming again to Demeneta, make ready your self, said she,
you must be fine, all that I promised you is done. She apparelled her self,
and did as Thisbe commanded her, and when the eueninge was come, she carried
her to the place, as was appointed. When they came near the house, she willed
her to stay a while, and went in her self before, and destred Arsmoe to goo
aside into another house, and let al things be quiet, for she said, the
young man was somewhat shamefaste, being but of late inured with Venus
sportes. She was soon persuaded. Where returninge, took Demeneta, and
brought her in, and laid her in bed, and took the candle away (least you
should know her, who were then in Egma) and willed her to take her pleasure
and say nothing, and I (she said) will fetch this young man in to you,
for he is making merry hereby. Thus she went forth, and found Aristippus
at the place appointed, and willed him all the way as he came to bind the
Adulterer fast, he followed her, and when they were come to the house, he
ran into the chamber, and findinge the bed by Moon light, I have thee
(said Demeneta is taken.
he) O thou much hated of the Gods: While he spoke thus, Thisbe ran to the
doors, and made them give as great a crashe as she could, and cried out, O
wonderful thing, the Adulterer is fled, Master take heed you be not
deceived again. Peace (quod he) and be of good cheer, I have this wicked, and
mischeiuous woman: which I most desired, and thus after he had taken her.
brought her toward the City. But she wayinge with her self (as is like) in
what case she was, the beguilinge of her exspectation, the shamefulnes of her
offense, the punishment decreed by the Laws, moreover vexing her self
because she was taken in such sort, but especially taking in heavily, that
she was thus deluded, and flouted, when she came to the pit, which is in
the compass of the place where Platoes school was, you know it I am sure,
where the Noble men, and Captains do celebrate the honor of such as are
deceased, after the manner of our Country, suddenly pullinge her self out of
the Old man's hands, leapte hedlonge into the same, and Dementas Death,
worse then her former Life.
such an unhappy end had that mischeiuous woman. Then said Aristippus, in
deed thy pounishemente has prevented the Laws. The next day he declared
the whole matter to the people, and scante having obtained pardon for that
deed, he went to diverse of his friends, and devised with them, by what means
he might obtain leave for you to come home again. Whether he have done any
thing or no, I cannot tell, for as you see, before any thing could be
finished, I sailed thither about certain business of mine own.
Notwithstanding you ought to be in good comfort, that the people will
consent easily to your return, and that your Father shortly will come to
seek you, and fetch you home again. Thus much Charias told me. What
followed, and how I came hither, requires both longer talk, and time to
tell: and therewithal he wept. So did the strangers also under color of his
calamity, but in deed for the remembrance of their own mishappes: and they
had not seized from weepinge, if sleep in a manner flyinge unto them, for
great desire, had not assuaged their tears. And thus they fell a sleep. But
Thyamis (for so was the Master of the Thieves called) when they had passed the
greatest part of the night quietly, was after troubled with certain dreams,
and therewith suddenly awaked, for about the time, that Cocks Two^ reasons
why the Cocks crow.
crow, whether it be for that (as men say) they Naturally perceive the
conversion of the Sun, when he approaches near to us, and so are moved to
salute that God, or else, for too much heat, or desire of meat, by their
crowinge, they give such, as dwell with them warninge to rise to their work,
such a Vision sent from God, appeared unto him. As he entered into Isis Church
at Memphis Memphis Dream.
in his own City, he thought that al was on fire, and that the Altar filled
with all kind of beasts, did swim with blood, and that the Church porche,
the Churchyard, and every place thereaboute, were filled with the noise, and
tumulte of men: and that when he came into the Priuiest place of the Church,
the Gods met him, and gave Cariclia into his hands, and said, Thyamis, I
commit this Maid unto thy fidelity, yet having, thou shale not have her,
but shalt be unjust, and kill a stronger, yet shall not be killed. After he
saw this, he was troubled in his mind, castinge this way and that way, how
that which was foreshewed unto him, might be taken, at length, being weary of
beatinge his brains thereaboutes, he drew the meaning thereof to his own
will. And construed it thus. Thou having, shalt not have His Interpretation
thereof.
her, that is a wife, not a maid, any longer. By that thou shalt kill, he
coniectured to be meante, thou shalt break her limbs, whereof for all that
Cariclea should not die, and thus did he Interpret his dream, followinge
therein his own lust, and desire. As soon, as the day appeared, he
commanded the chief of those, who were under his jurisdiction, to come unto
him, and charged them to bring forth their Pray, which by a grauer name,
he termed their spoils: and calling for Cnemon, willed him also to bring
those with him, who were committed to his custody, as they were thus carried,
oh (said they) what shall become of us? and therewith they desired Cnemon, if
by any means he might, that he would healpe them. He promised so to do, and
badde them be of good cheer, affirminge that their Captain was not
altogether barbarously disposed, but had in him some Gentleness, and Courtesy,
as one that was come of a noble stock, but by necessity compelled to follow
such trade of life. After they were brought thither, and the rest of the
company made haste also, and Thyamis was set in a hier place, then the rest
in the Island which he appoincted the place of their meetinge, and had
commanded Cnemon (for he understood by this time the Egyptian tongue
perfectly, but Thyamis was not very well skilled in the Greek) to interpret
what he said to the Prisoners: my mates (quod he) of what mind I have The
Oration of Thyamis, to his mates.
ben ever toward you, you know very well. For I (as you can bear me witness) as
though I were the Son of the Priest of Memphis, frustrate of the Priestely
honor, for that my younger brother by craft beguiled me of the same, when I
fled to you, the better to revenge my wrong, and recover mine Aunciente
estate, by all your voices, made your Captain, have hitherto lived with you,
and not given any special honor to my self, more then to any of the common
sort. But whether monye were to be divided, I ever loved equality, or
prisoners The dewtie of a good Captain.
sold, I always brought the sum forth to you, accomptinge it the office of
him, that will rule well, to do most him self, and take equal part of that
is gotten, as others of the prisoners do, such as were strong, I ever Judged
to you, and the feeble sort I sold to make money of: I never did wrong to
women, for such as were of good Parentage, I suffered to depart, either
redeemed with money, or else, for pity of their ill hap, and such as were
of inferior condition, whom not only the Law of Arms made prisoners, but
also their continual use had taught to serve: I distributed to every one of
you, to do you service. At this time, of all the spoils, I crave, one Thyamis
desires to have Cariclia for his share, to make her his wife.
thing only of you, this strange Maid, whom although I might geeue unto my
self, I thought* I should do better to take her with all your consentes. For
it is a foolish thing, by constraininge a Captive, to seem to do any thing
contrary to his friends pleasure. Wherefore, I crave this good turn at your
hands, not for naught, but rewardinge you again in such sort, that of all
the other booty, I will have no part at all, for seeinge the Prophetical
sort of men, despises the common sort of women, I have decreed to make her
my companion, not for pleasure so much, as to have issue by her: and therefore
am content to rehearse to you the causes that move me thus to do. First,
she seems to be of a good Parentage, which a man may easily gheasse by the
Riches found about her. Secondely, for that she is nothing broken with
these adversities, but even now also of a hawtie stomach against Fortune.
Lastly, I see she is of an excellent nature, and good disposition by diverse
arguments: for she doothe not only pass all other in beauty, and modesty
of countenance, but also moves all such as look upon her, to a certain
kind of gravity, and shall she not therefore leave behind her, a worthy
estimation of her self? and which is especially above all that is spoken, to
be considered, she seems to be the Priest of sum Goddess. For even in her
adversity, she accompteth it an intolerable, and heinous offense, to leave
of her sacred stool, and Laurel garlande. Can there be therefore any Marriage
(oh you that be present) more meet, then that a man being a Prophet should
Martie one consecrated to sum God? All they that were present approved his
saieinges, and prayed the Gods to geeue him joy of his Marriage. Which
thing, when he heard, he said to them again, I thank you all, but in mine
opinion, it shall not be amiss, if about this matter we enquire the Maids
mind, for if I list to use mine own authority, my will were sufficient,
because it is a needelesse thing to ask their good will, whom a man may
constrain. But in this case, seeinge we entreat of a lawefull Marriage, it
is convenient to be done with both consentes: and so turninge his talk to
them, asked the Maid how she liked that, which was propounded Thyamis
asks Cariclia her opinion, and co^sente to the Marriage.
as touching her Marriage, and therewithal willed them to declare what they
were, and where they were borne. But she castinge her eyes to the ground,
first, after a good season lifted up her head, as though she had premeditated
somewhat, and therewithal looking upon Thyamis, and with the brightness of her
beauty, abashed him more then ever she did before (for by the inward
cogitation of her mind, her cheeks became more read then accustomably they
were, and her eyes were very earnestly Cariclias answer.
bente upon him) spoke thus by Cnemon her Interpreter. It were more meet, that
my brother Theagenes here should have told this tale, for mine opinion is,
that a The duty of a woman in the presence of ^enne.
woman ought to keep silence, and a man amongst men should make answer.
But seeinge you have given me leave to speak, it is an especial token of your
courtesy, that you rather mean by persuasion to attempt that, which is
just, then by force to compel: and the rather, because that which has benne
spoken, most touched me, I am constrained to pass these bonds: I prescribed
my self, to answer to the Victors question in so great an assembly of men.
We were borne in Ionia, and are come of a Noble house of Ephesus. When we came
to the age of fouretiene years, by the Law (which calls such to the
office of Priesthood) I was made Priest, to Diana, and this my brother to
Apollo. But for as much as this honor lasted but for a year, and our time
was expired, we prepared to goo to Deles with our sacred attire, and there to
make certain Plays, and to geeue over our Priesthood, according to the
manner of our Auncesters. And for this cause was our Ship laden with Gold,
Silver, goodly Apparel, and other necessaries, as much as were sufficient for
the expenses of the same, and to make the people a public feast: and thus we
losed out of the Haven, but our Parents for that they were old, and feared
the daungerousnes of the viage, tarried at home: but many of the other Citezens
some in our ship, sum other in ships of their own, came to accompany
us. After we had ended the greatest part of our viage, a tempest suddenly
arose, and a vehement wind, with fearful blastes, moving great waves of the
Sea, caused us to leave our determined Journey, and the governor ouercomen
with the greatness of the danger, gave over the government, and within a while
after, coming out of the Hulke, committed the rule thereof to Fortune. Then
were we driven with the wind seven days, and seven nights, at last, we
were cast upon the shoore, where in you found us, and saw the great
slaughter in which place the Mariners, as we were bankettinge, for joy
unlooked, for delivery, assaulted us, and for our riches sought to destroy
us, but they were all slain, not without the destruction of our Friends, and
acquaintance, and we only miserable Creatures (which would God had not
happened) obtained the Victory. But seeinge it is thus, we have good cause in
this point, to account our selves happy, because sum God has brought us
into your hands, where those who feared death, have now space to think on
Marriage. Which surely I will not refuse. For, that the Captain should be
Cariclia seems to consent, but takes a delaie finely.
judged worthy the Victors bed, doothe not only pass all other felicity,
but that a Pristes Son shall marry a woman consecrated to the Gods, seems
not to be done without the singular forefight, and providence of God. I
therefore crave but one thing only, at thy hand Thyamis, suffer me first, as
soon as I shall come to my City, or any place where is an Altar, or Church
sacred to Appollo, to surrendre mine office, and the tokens thereof. This might
be done very commodiously at Memphis, She appoints the place of her
Marriage.
when you have recovered ye honor of your Priesthood, for by that means it
should come to pass, that Marriage joined with Victory, and after good luck
celebrated, shall be much more merry. But whither this must be done before, or
after, I leave it to your discretion: only my request is, that I may fulfill
the Rites of my Country, before I know that you will hereunto agree, who have been brought up from your childehoode, about holy Offices, and think also very
well, and reverently of the Gods. With this she made an end of speaking,
and began bitterly to weep. All they, who were present, praised her, and
willed, that it should be done even so, and for their parts, they promised
their ready aid, to do what so ever he would. Thyamis also partly
willinge, partly against Thyamis is scante content to drive of the matter so
long.
his will, consented thereunto. For the more desire that he had toward
Cariclia, he accounted that same hour wherein these things were a dooinge, to
be an infinite time. Again he was pleased with her Oration, as it had benne
with sum Meremaydes song, and was enforced to consent to her, and
therewithal he thought upon his dream, supposing that he should be Married at
Memphis. This done, having first divided their booty, and taking sum of
the best Iuelles, which of their own accord they gave him, he suffered
every man to depart, with further commandment to be ready the tenth day
after, to go toward Memphis. He let the Greeks have the Tabernacle that they
had before: And with them was Cnemon, not as a Keeper now, but as a companion,
and Thyamis furnished them with as good victual, as there might be gotten.
Whereof also Theagenes, for his sisters sake, had part. He determined not to
Sight oftentimes moves a man to do sommewhat contrary to good te^perance,
and therefore Thyamis shunned this sight.
look upon Cariclia very often, that her beauty might not move his hot
desire, to do somewhat contrary to that, which by common counsel was
Decreed, as was before rehearsed. And for these causes, Thyamis would not look
upon the Maid, thinkinge it an impossible thing, that a man should both
look upon a fair Maid, and keep him self within the bonds of temperance.
But Cnemon after every man was quickly dispatched, and were crept into their
corners, which they had in the Marishe, went to seek the Herb, which the
day before he promised Theagenes. At this time Theagenes having gotten fit
opportunity, weapt and cried out, speakinge never a word Theagenes is
offended with Cariclias Oration.
to Cariclia, but without seasing called upon the Gods. And when she asked
him whither after his accustomed manner he deplored the common mishappe, or had
any new grief befallen him: what (quod he) can be more new, or contrary to
equity, then to break an oath, and final agreemente? Cariclia has
forgotten me, and is content to marry another man. God defend, said the
Maid: I Her witty answer to him.
pray you be not more grievous unto me, then the miseries I have already,
neither misdeeme any thing, by my talk applied to the time, and perhaps to
sum purpose, saying you have before by many arguments, tried how I am
affected toward you. Except perchance, the contrary may happen, and that
you sooner change your mind, then I will depart from any the least jot of my
promise. For I am content, and take in good part all these calamities, but
that I shall not live chastely, and temperatly, there shall be no torment, that
may constrain me. In one thing only I know, I have not ruled my self, that
is, in the love that I have borne to you, from the beginning, but
notwithstanding it is both lawful, and honest: for I like not your Lover,
but at the first concludinge marriage with you, have committed my self to
you, and have lived chastely without copulation hitherto, not without refusinge
you oftentimes, proferinge me such things, and have waited for occasion to be
married, if any where it might lawfully be done, which thing, at the first,
was decreed bitweene us, and above al things, by oath established. Beside
this, consider how vain you are, if you suppose, that I esteem more of a
Barbarous fellow, then a Grecian of a thief, then of him, whom with my heart
I love. What did those things then mean, said Theagenes, which in that goodly
company were of you openly rehearsed? For in yt you fained me to be your
Brother, it was a very wise divise, which caused Thyamis to be far from the
Ialousie of our love, and made us to be together safely. I perceived also to
what end that tended, which you said of Ionia, and of wandringe about
Delos. For they were shadows which might easily cover the truth, and deceive
in deed the Auditors. But so readily to Theagenes is not al satisfied with
the answer.
approve the marriage, and openly to conclude the same, and to appointe the
time, therefore what that should signify, neither could I guess, neither
would I. But I wished that the Earth might have cloven, and swallowed me up,
rather then that I should have seen such an end of the trauelles, and hope
that for your sake I Cariclia takes in very good part his doubtfulnes of her
steadfastness.
undertook. Herewithall Cariclia embraced Theagenes, and kissed him a
thousand times, and bemoystinge his face with her tears, oh in how good
part, said she, do I take these fears, that for my sake you sustain? For
hereby you declare, that you quayle not in your love toward me, although many
miseries depend thereupon. But know for a truth Theagenes, that at this time
we had not talked together, If I had not made him such a promise. For
drawinge back with labouringe a contrary way, doothe much kindell the force
of vehemente desire: Whereas in yeeldinge talk, The property of a gentle
answer, in yeeldinge talk.
and applieinge the same to the mouinge of his will, has quieted his burning
love, and with the pleasantness of my promise, has brought on sleep to his
hasty appetite. For rude Lovers at the first, think that they must labor
to have a promise, and after are of quieter minds, still houeringe in hope,
and trustinge, that at length, Procrastination is sommetime profitable.
they shall enjoy that, which was promised. All which things I foreseeinge,
by my present talk, committed my self to him, commendinge that, which shall
follow, to the Gods, and the Angel, that at the first has obtained the
tuicion of our love. Oftentimes the space of a day, or two has benne very
healthefull, and brought things to happy pass, which before by no device
could any man bring to prosperous end: Wherefore I also at this time have
preferred this invention before all other, ponderinge with uncertainty, that
which is most sure. We must therefore (sweet love) use this policy wisely,
and keep it secretly, not only from all other, but also from Cnemon too. For
although he seem to favor our estate, and is a Grecian, yet being at this
time a prisoner, will perhaps, if occasion serve, be ready to do the
Captain a good turn. For neither this time of friendeshippe, neither
Countriemanshippe, is a sufficient pledge to us of his fidelity, and truth:
Wherefore if at any time by suspicion, he geather any thing touching our
estate, at the first we must deny it. For that manner of a lie is
tolerable which What lie is best to be borne withal.
profitethe the Inuentoure, and hurtethe not the hearer. While Cariclia spoke
these things, and many such other to this purpose: Cnemon ran in hastly,
and declaring a great perturbation by his countenance. Theagenes (quod he) I
bring you this Herb, wherewith I pray you dress your own wounds. But I
fear me, you must prepare your self, to receive other as great wou^des, and
trauelles as these. But he asked of him, what the matter was, and desired him to
tell it more plainly. The time (aunsweared he) will not suffer me: for it is
to be feared, lest we should feel the stripes before, I could tell you the
circumstances. But follow me quickly, and Cariclia also, and thus he carried
them both to Thyamis. Whom when he found scouring of his Helmet, and
sharpening the point of his Spear, in good time (said he) are you in hand
with your Armor, put them on quickly your self, and command the other to
do the like. For Cnemon tells Thyamis of their Enemies at hand.
such a company of enemies is at hand as I never saw before, and are so
near us, that I standinge on the top of the next Hille, saw them, and for
that cause came runninge as fast I could to tell you of their coming, and
have moreover by the way as I came, commanded such as I saw, to be in a
readiness. Thyamis, when he he heard this, looked up, and asked where
Cariclia was, as though he he had benne more careful for her, then for him
self. Whom when Cnemon had showed to him, standinge at the door, carry her
alone (quod he) into the Cariclia carried to be keapte in the Thieves Den,
where their treasure was.
Den, where our treasures are safely keapte, so that none see her. And
leauinge her charely there, covered her face with a muffler as the manner is,
and came quickly again. As for the war, let me alone with it. He bad his
Shield bearer bring his offeringe, that after sacrifice done to the Gods,
they might begin the battle: Cnemon did as he was commanded, and carried
Cariclia away diversely lamentinge, and often lookinge back unto Theagenes, and
at the length, put her into the Den. This was no natural work, as many are
The property of that Den.
both in, and under the Earth: but devised by the wit of Thieves, that
followed nature, and dug out by their hands very artificially, to keep
their spoils. And it was made after this sort. It had a very narrow mouth,
and was shut with privy doors, so that even the Threshoulde was in steed of
a gate when need required: and would open and shut very easily: the inner
part was countermined with diverse overthwart ways, the which sommetime would
run alonge by them selves a great way, sommetime, they would be entangled
like the roots of trees, but in the end, they all leadde to one plain place,
which received a little light out of the marshes at a little lofte in the
top, when Cnemon was well experiensed in that place, and had put Cariclia
into the same, and comforted her many ways, but especially in that he promised
her, that he with Theagenes, at night would comme unto her, and that he would
not suffer him to strike one stroke in the battle, but priuelie conveyed him
out of the same, he left her, who spoke not one word, but was stricken with
that mischief, as if it had benne with death, in that she was deprived of
Theagenes, whom she loved as her own soul, and went forth, and in
shuttinge of the outmost door, he weapte a little, not only for that of force
he was constrained so to do, but for her sake also, in as much as almost he
had buried her quick, and committed the ioyfullest name in the world,
Cariclia, to night, and darkness. This done, he ran back to Thyamis,
whom he found very desirous to fight with Theagenes, well armed, and making
those that were with him, almost mad with his earnest Oracion, for as he
stood in the midst of them, he said thus, my mates, The Oration of Thyamis
to his companions.
I see not to what end it should tend, to use many words in exhorting you,
who need no encouragement at all, but ever have accoumpted war, the
pleasantest life: especially, for that the sudden approchinge of our enemies
will not permit us to use many words, for seeinge our enemies do now
violently assault us, if we should not with like courrage propulse their
violence, it were altogether a point of those, that in like case, were void
of Counsel, and at their wits end. Sith therefore we know, we fight
not for our wives, and children, which only in sum were enough to make
them pluck up their hearts, (although in deed they are not of great valewe,
and we shall have all that which the Conquerours do gain, if we get the
victory) but for our own lives, and safety, for war among Thieves, is
neither taken up with truce, nor ended with How War with Thieves is ended.
league, but it must needs be, that the Victours shall live, those who are
ouercommed must die, let us even with our hearts, and hands haste to meet
our cruel enemies. When he had said thus, he looked about for his Shield
bearer, and called him by name, Thermutes, but when he could not see him any
where, grievously threatninge him, he ran as fast as he could to the
landinge place. For by this time was the battle begone, and a man might see
those that dwelled a far* even in outer coaste of the Fenne come into their
enemies hands, for they, who came upon them, burned up the Boats, and Cotages
of such, as either were slain, or else fled out of the Battle, whose eyes
also were daseled with the great, and intolerable brightness of the fire,
that burned up the Keedes, whereof there was great plenty, and theirs cares
filled with the great noise, and tumulte, so that now a man might both see,
and hear the whole manner of the skirmishe, those who dwelled there,
mainteininge the Battle with all their power, and strength, and their
enemies being more in number, and taking them at a sudden, killed sum of
them on the earth, other sum they drowned in the Poole with Boats, and
houses too, of all, which, as well of those that fought by land, and lake, did
kill, and were killed, as also of those, who were besette with Fiere, and
Water, arose a marvelous sound in the Air, which when Thyamis saw, he
remembered his dream, wherein he saw Isis, and her Church filled with fiere,
and dead men, and supposinge thereby to be meante, that which he now had
seen, geathered thereof a contrary interpretation to that he made before,
that having, thou shall not have Cariclia, as taken away by War, and that
he should kill, and not wound her, that is, with his sword, and not with
Carnal copulation. At length railinge on the Gods, as though she had
beguiled him, and thinkinge it not meet, that any other should enjoy
Cariclia, commaundinge his men to keep their places, and maintain the
Battle as long as they might: him self fighting in every part of the
Island, and diverse times making privy erruptions, out of every quarter upon
his enemies, thinkinge it also to be good, if that way he could prevail
against them, him self as though he went to seek for Thermutis, and do
certain Sacrifices to his privy Gods, sufferinge no man to go with him, in
haste went to the Cave. Surely a barbarous nature cannot easily be withdrawn,
or turned from that, that he has once determined. And if the Barbarous people
be once in despair of their own safety, they have a custom to kill all
those, by whom they set much, and whose company they desire after death,
or else would keep them from the violence, and wrong of their enemies. For
that same cause also Thyamis, forgettinge all that he had to do, being
enclosed with his enemies army, as if he had benne caughte in a Net, almost
enraged with love, gelousie, and anger, after he came in haste to the Cave,
goeinge into the same, crieing with a loud voice, and speakinge many things
in the Egyptian tongue, as soon as he heard one speak Greek to him about
the entry of the Cave, and was conducted to her by her voice, he laid his
left hand upon her head, and with his sword thruste her through the body a
little beneath the pappes, and after this sorrowful sort, that woman geuinge
up her last, and ghostly groan, was slain. But he, after he came out, and had
shut the door, and cast a little gravel thereon, with tears, said, these
espousalles have thou at my hand: and coming to his Boats, found a great
many ready to run their way, as soon as they laid eyes on their Enemies,
and Thermites also coming to do sacrifice, chidinge him sharply, for that
he had offered the most acceptable offeringe already, went with him into a
Boat, and had an other to row them, for the Boats that they use in the
pooles, will carry no more, being but rudely hewed out of the whole Tree.
Theagenes also, and Cnemon took an other Boat, so did all the rest. After
they had gonne a little from the Island, and rather rowinge about the banks
then venturing into the Deep, they stayed their Ores, and set their Boats
a front, as though they would have received their enemies face to face.
After this provision, goeinge forewarde a little, but not mindinge to abide the
mouinge of the Waters, as soon as they saw their enemies, fled, and would
not abide the first Clamor, and Noise of the battle. Theagenes also, and
Cnemon, but not for fear, by little, and little withdrewe them selves, only
Thyamis accounted it a shame to fly, and not in mind to live after Cariclia,
thrust him The description of their Battle.
self into the thickest press of his Enemies, and as soon as they were comme
to blows, one cried out, this is Thyamis, let every man do his best to take
him alive, and therewithal they compassed him about, and held him enclosed
as a ringe, in the middeste of them. And fought against them stoutely, and to
see how he wounded sum, and killed other sum, it was a worthy sight. For
of so great a number there was none, that either drew his swoorde against
him, or else cast any darte, but every man labored to take him alive, he
fought against them a great while, but at length, he lost his spear, by
reason that many fell on him at ones, he lost also his Harnesbearer, who had
done him very good service, for he being deadly wounded (as might be
gheassed) despairinge of his safety, lepte into the poole, and with much adoo
did swim to land, in as much as no man remembered to pursue him. And now had
they taken Thyamis, and with him thought, that they had gotten the whole
victory: and although they had lost so many of their companions, yet in
as much as they had him in their hands (by whom they were slain) they had a
greater joy thereby, then sorrow for all their The nature of a Thief.
dead Friends, and Kinsfolks. Such is the nature of Thieves, that esteem
more money then their own lives, and make much of the name of frendshippe,
and affinity, so far as Lucre, and gain shall extend. Which might easily
be gathered by these, for they were those, who at the Mount of Nilus called
Heracleot, fled for fear of Thyamis, and his Companions, and were no less
grieved for the loss of other men's goods, then if they had benne their
own, and therefore took up as well all such as were their housholdfrendes, as
also those that dwelled near about them, promisinge them equal part of
their booty, and that they would be Conductors, and Captains to guide them
thereunto. Now why they took Thyamis prisoner, this was the cause. He Why
Thyamis is taken alive.
had a Brother called Petosiris at Memphis, who contrary to the manner and
ordinance of the Country (in as much as he was a younger Brother) had by
craft beguiled him of the Priesthood. And hearing now that his Brother was
become a Captain of certain Robbers, and fearinge, least that if he gatte
good occasion he would return, and manifestly detecte his subtle dealinge,
and beside this, consideringe the voice of many people, that supposed he had
slain him, because he could no where be seen, he promised a great Sum of
money, and other goods, to those who would take and bring him alive.
Wherewith the Thieves being allured, no not in the midst of their war,
forgettinge their gain, after one knew him, with the death of Thyamis
through the death of many of his enemies, is taken alive.
many of them, took him alive, and carried him to land, and placed the one
half of them, as a guard about him, castinge into his teethe diversely the
courtesy that they used toward him, (although in deed he misliked worse
their bands, then death it self) and the rest went to search the Island,
in hope to find other Treasures that they sought for. But after they had gonne
over the same, and had left nothing, either untouched, or unsearched that was
there, and had found nothing of that they hoped for, except a few things
of littell valewe, if ought was left about the mouth of the Cave, while
they conveyed the rest into the ground, settinge fire on the Tabernacles,
when it drew toward night, and that they might tarry no longer in the Island,
for fear they should fall into the hands of those, that escaped out of the
Battle, returned to their own Company.

Here ended the First Book.
The Second Book.
AND thus was the Island with fire and flame destroyed, Theagenes, and Cnemon,
as long as the Sun shined upon the earth, knew not of this mischief: for
the brightness of the fire, by reason of the Sun beams in the day time, is
much dimmed. But after the Sun was set, and the night drew on, and the
fire without impediment might be seen a far of, they sum what courageous,
came out of the Poole, and perceived the whole Island to be on fire. Then
Theagenes Theagenes thinkinge Cariclia to be brent, lamenteth.
beatinge his head, and tearinge his hear, said: Farewell (quod he) this day
my life, let here, al fear, dangers, cares, hope, and love, have end, and be
dissolved, Cariclia is dead, Theagenes is destroyed, in vain was I unhappy
man afraid, and content to betake my self to flighte, which no man would
have done, reseruinge my self to thee my sweet heart. Suerly (my Joy) I
will live no longer, since thou art dead, not according to the common course
of nature, which is a grievous thing, and contrary to thine opinion, and not
with these hands, which was thy whole desire. With fire (alas wretch that I
am) art thou consumed, and in steed of lights at thy Marriage, has God
ordained such lights for thee? The brauest bewty in the world is lost, so
that no token of such singular fairness remains in the dead body. Oh
marvelous cruelty, and unspeakable wrath of the Gods. I have no leave to
give her my last imbracinges, I am deprived of my last kisses. While he spoke
thus, and looked about for his swoorde, Cnemon rebuked him, saying, and Cnemon
comfort Theagenes.
what means this Theagenes, said he? why do you thus bewail her yt is
alive, Cariclia is safe, fear not. Cnemon (said he) you may tell mad men,
and children this tale. Surely you have deserved death, for hinderinge me from
so pleasante death. Therewithal Cnemon swear to him, and told him
altogether the commandment of Thyamis, how he placed her there, the nature
of the same Den, and how that it was not to be feared, that the fire could
comme to her, being broken, and put back by six hundred Crankes. Theagenes
began to comme to him self again, when he heard this, and hasted to the
Island, and thought in his mind, that he was in the same already, and made the
Den his chamber, not knowinge the sorrows whereunto he should fall. Thither
they were carried therefore with much adoo, themselves plaieinge the watermen,
for he, who rowed them, with the noise of the first conflicte, as it had benne
with a Lever, was stricken over boorde into the lake, they were therefore
carried away hither and thither, as well for that they were both ignorant in
rowinge, and not placinge the Ores equally, as also for that they had a
contrary wind: But for all that, the readiness of their wills, got the
victory of their Ignorance in that Art. When therefore with much adoo, they
were arrived in the Island, they ran to the Tabernakle as fast as they
could, which also they found burned, and could not know it, but only by the
manner of the place, for there could nothing be seen, but the great stoane,
which was the Thresholde, and cover also of the Cave, for a vehemente wind
blowinge the fire upon the cottages which were made only of slender Reed,
and such as grew on the Marishe banks, burned them up every where, and made
them almost equal with the ground, but when the violent fire slaked, and was
turned into Ashes, which also was driven away by a blaste of wind, and that
which remained, being but a little, was quenched, and granted them free
passage, they came to the Cave, the Posts thereof and the Reeds, they also
found half burnte, and openinge the door, Cnemon leadinge the way, they
ran down apace. But after they had gonne a little way, Cnemon suddenly
cried out, O Jupiter, what means this? we are undone: Cariclia is slain.
And therewith he cast his light to the ground, and put it out, and holdinge
his hands before his face, fell on his knees, and lamented. But Theagenes as
though by violence Theagenes bewaileth a dead body, and thought it had benne
Cariclia.
one had thrust him down, fell on the dead body, and held the same in his
Arms a great while without mouinge. Cnemon therefore perceiuinge that he was
utterly ouercomme with sorrow, and fearinge least he should do him sum
harm, took his swoorde out of his scabbarde, and ran out to light his
Link again. In the mean time Theagenes Tragecally, and with much sorrow
lamented: And oh grief intolerable, oh manifold mischiefs, sent from ye
Gods, said he. What insaciable fuery so much rages still to have us
destroyed? who has bannished us out of our Country, cast us to dangers by
Seas, perilles by Pirates, and has often delivered us into the hands of
Robbers, and spoiled us of al our Treasures? only one comfort we had, which
is now taken from us, Cariclia is dead, and by enemies hand (my only Jot)
is slain: while she no doubt defended her Chastity, and reserved her self
unto me, she unhappy creature is dead, and neither had she by her beauty any
pleasure, neither any commodity. But oh my sweet heart, speak to me lastly,
as thou werte wont to do, and if there be any life in thee, command me to
do sommewhat. Alas thou do hold thy peace, that goodly mouth of thine,
out of the which proceeded so heavenly talk, is stopped, darkness has
possessed her, who bare the star of beauty, and the last end of all has
now gotten the best Minister that belonged to any Temple of the Gods. These
eyes of thine, that with passinge fayrenesse looked upon all men, are now
without sight, which he, who killed thee, saw not, I am sure. But by what
name shall I call thee? my Spouse? thou werte never Espoused my wife? thou
werte not Married, what shall I therefore call thee, or how shall I lastly
speak unto thee, shall I call thee by thy most delectable name of all names,
Cariclia? Oh Cariclia hear me, thou haste a faithful lover, and shall ere it
be long, recover me, for I will out of hand, with mine own death perform
a deadly Sacrifice to thee, and with mine own blood will I offer a friendly
offeringe unto thee, and this rude Den shall be a Sepulcher for us both. It
shall be lawful for us, after death, to enioie either other, which while we
lived, the Gods would not grant. As soon as he had spoken thus, he set his
hand, as though Theagenes would have slain himself.
he would have drawn out his swoorde, which when he found not, O Cnemon
said he, how haste thou hurt me, and especially injured Cariclia, deprived
now again of most delectable company: while he spoke thus, through the hollow
holes of the Cave, there was a voice heard, that called Theagenes, he heard
it well, and was nothing afraid, and O sweet Soul, pardon me, said he: by
this it manifestly appears, that thou art yet above the earth, partly for
that with violence expulsed out of such a body, thou can not depart without
grief, partly for that, not yet buried, thou art chased away of infernal
Spirits. And when Cnemon came in with a light in his hand: the same voice
was heard again, calling Theagenes. O Gods, said Cnemon, is not this
Cariclias voice? Suerly Theagenes, I think that she is yet saved. Will not
thou yet leave, said Theagenes, so often to deceive, and beguile me? In deed,
said Cnemon, I deceive you, and am my self deceived, if this be not Cariclia
that lies here. And there withal, he straight way turned her face upward,
which, as soon as he saw, you Gods (said he) which be the Authors of al
wonders, what strange sight is this? I see here Thisbes face, and therewith he
lepte back, and without mouinge any whitte, stood quakinge in a great
admiration. Therewithal Theagenes came some what to him self, and began to
conceive sum better hope in his mind, and comforted Cnemon, whose heart now
failed him, and desired him in all haste to carry him to Cariclia. A while
after, when Cnemon came sommewhat to him self again, he looked more advisedly
on her. It was Thisbe in deed, and knew also the Swoorde that lay by her, by
the Hiltes to be Thyamis his, which he for anger, and haste left in the
wound. Last of all, he saw a little scrowle hang at her breaste, which he
took away, and would feign have readde it, but Theagenes would not let him,
but lay on him very earnestly, saieinge, let us first receive my sweet
heart, least even now also sum God beguile us: as for these things, we
may know them hereafter. Cnemon was content, and so taking the Letter in his
hand, and the Swoorde also, went in to Cariclia, who crepinge both on
hands, and feet to the light, ran to Theagenes, and hanged about his
neck, now Theagenes The joy of Theagenes, and Cariclia.
thou art restoared to me again, said she. Thou live mine own Cariclia,
quod he, oftentimes. At length they fell suddenly to the ground, holdinge
either other in their Arms, without vtteringe any word, except a little
murmuringe, and it lacked but a little, that they were not both dead. For many
times too much gladness is Too much mirthe oftentimes tourneth to woe.
turned to sorrow, and immoderate pleasure has engendered grief, whereof our
selves are the causes. As also these preserved contrary to their hope, and
opinion, were in peril, until Cnemon taking a little water in his hands,
sprinkled it on their faces, and rubbinge their nostrelles, caused them to
comme to them selves again. When they perceived that they were so familiarly
embraced, and on ground, they starte up suddenly, and blushed (but
especially Cariclia) because of Cnemon, who had seen these things, and
desired him to pardon them. He smilinge a little, and willinge to turn their
minds to some mirthe, In mine opinion (said he) or any man's else, who has
before wrastled with love, and has pleasantly yielded thereunto inevitable
chance thereof moderately, these things are much praise worthy. But
Theagenes, I could by no means commend that, whereof I also was ashamed, when
I saw you shamefully embrace a strange woman, and one to whom you were
bound, by no bond of freendshippe, for all that I boldly affirmed, your
dearest friend was alive, and safe. Cnemon (quod Theagenes) accuse me not to
Cariclia, whom in an others body I bewailed, thinkinge her who was slain, to
have benne this wenche? But forasmuch as the good will of God has now
declared, that I was in so doing beguiled, remember I pray you, your own
cowardenes, in as much as first you deplored my case, in the sudden
knowledge of her, who lay there, and though you had a swoorde by your side,
yet you like a stout, and valiant warrioure, were afraid of a woman, and she
dead, nolesse then if the Gods had benne in presence. Hereat they smiled a
little, but not without tears, as it happens to men in such misery. After
Cariclia had stayed a little, and scratchinge her cheek under her ear, I
judge (said she) her happy, who soever she was, whom Theagenes lamented, and
kissed also, as Cnemon reports, but except you think that I am in Ialoufie,
I would gladly know, what happy woman that was, for which were worthy
Theagenes tears. If you can tell me, and by what error you kissed her in
steed of me. Suerly (said? he) you will wonder at it greatly, for Cnemon says
it was that cunninge Player of the Harp, which was Thisbe, the deviser of the
wyles against him, and Demeneta. Herewith Cariclia afraid, asked him, how is
it like, that she should come out of ye midst of Greece (as of set purpose)
into the farthest part of Egypt? or how is it possible, that when we came
hither we saw her not? As touching this, said Cnemon, I have nothing to
say. But thus much I heard of her. After that, Demeneta prevented with her
craft, had cast her self into the ditche, and my Father had opened the matter
to the people, he, at the first obtained pardon, and was altogether busied
that he might get leave of the people to restoare me again, and make
preparation to seek me. Thisbe now Thisbe is no^ becomme an Harlot, and is
hated of Arsm.
because of his business, having little to do, and banketting without care
continually, set, as it were at sale, both her self, and her art: and in
as much as she passed Arsmoe in grace, and cunning play, both in quick
fingering, and also sweet singinge to her Intrumente, she perceived not that
she got thereby woorship, envy, and emulation, conjoined with singular
indignation: chiefly for that she was beloved of a certain Merchant of
Mancratia, named Nansicles, who despised Arsmoe, with whom he accompanied
before, for all that while she song, her cheeks swelled, and were unseemly,
with staringe eyes, almost leauinge their accustomed place. Wherefore Arsmoe
swellinge with anger, and emulation, came to Demenetas kinsfolks, and told
them the whole manner of the whiles that Thisbe used against her, whereof sum
she suspected, and Thisbe had told her other some, for the familiar
acquaintance which was bitweene them. When therefore Demenetas kinsfolks came
together to have my Father condemned, and had procured the most eloquente
Orators, with great Sums of money to accuse him, they said, that Demeneta
was killed without Judgment, and not convicted, and that the Adultery was
pretended to color the murder, and therefore they required to have the
Adulterer either quick, or dead, or at least, to know his name. Last of
all, that Thisbe might be brought to examination, which when my Father had
promised, and could not perform, (for she had provided that before the day
of Judgment was assigned, and went her way with the Merchant, as they had
appointed) the people taking the matter in evil part, Judged him not the
killer, in as much as he had told the matter plainly as it was done, but he
helped to the death of Demeneta, and mine unjust bannishmente, Aristippus
bannished from Athens.
exiled him out of his Country, and confiscated al his goods, and this
commodity got he by his second Marriage. But the most wicked Thisbe, who
is slain in my sight, sailed from Athens for that cause. And thus much ouely
could I know, which Anticles told me in Egma, with whom I sailed twice into
Egypt of purpose, if I might find her in Mancratia, to bring her back to
Athens, and-deliuer my Father from such suspicions, and accusations, as were
laid against him, and take revenge of her, for all the mischieues that she
did unto us: and hereof in your presence I make inquiry. Now as touching the
cause of my coming hither, the manner thereof, and the dangers that I
suffered in this space, you shall hereafter know. But how, and by whom Thisbe
was slain in this Den, we shall have need perhaps of some Oracle to tell
us. Nevertheless, if you will, let us look upon the Letter which we found
in her bosom: it may be, that we shall learn sommewhat beside this in it.
They were content, and he openinge it, began to read as follows. To Cnemon
my Master, Thisbies Letter to Cnemon.
Thisbe his enemy and revenger. First I tell you, of the death of Demeneta,
which for your sake I devised against her, the manner how I brought it to
pass, if you do Ransom me, I will tell you betwixt us two. Understand,
that I was taken by one of the Thieves How Thisle came into that Island.
that are of this crewe, and have benne here ten days already: he says,
that he is the Captains Harnesbearer, but he will not geeue me leave so much
as to look abroad, and thus he pounished me, as he says, for the love he
has toward me, but as far as I can geather, it is lest sum man else
should take me from him. Yet for all that by the benefit of the same God, I
saw you (my Master) yesterdaie, and knew you, and have therefore sent this
Letter to you by an old woman my bedfellowe, charginge her to deliver* it to a
bewtifull young man being a Grecian, and the Captains friend. Redeem me, I
pray thee, out of the hands of the Thief, and entertain your Handmaide, and
if you will preserve her, knowing this first, that when so ever I offended
against you, I was constrained to do it, but in that I revenged you of your
enemy, I did it of mine own free will, but if your anger be so grievous
against me, that it will not be assuaged, use it toward me as you shall
think good: so that I may be in your hand, I care not if I die, for I covet
much better to be slain of your hands, and to be buried after the manner of
the Greeks, then to lead a life more grievous then death, or else to sustain
such Barbarous Love worse then hatred.
Barbarous Love, as is more intolerable, the^ the hatred of Athens. And thus
spoke Thisbe in her Letter. But Cnemon said, Thisbe, as reason is, thou art
slain, and thy self art messenger to tell us of thy miseries, making
declaration of them by thine own death. Thus has the Revenger (as now may
it appear) driving thee over all the world, not withdrawn her scourge,
before she made me, whom thou haste iniuried, although living in Aegypte, to
be ye beholder of thy pounishment. But what mischief was that, which thou
did devise against me, as by thy Letters it may appear, which Fortune
would not let thee bring to end? Verily, even now also I much mistruste
thee, and am in great doubt, lest the death of Demeneta be but a tale, and
that, both they beguiled me, who told me of the same, and that thou art come
by Sea out of Greece, to make in Aegypte another Tragedy of me. Will you not
leave (said Theagenes) to be too valiant, and fear the Shadows, and
Spirits, of dead folks? For you cannot obiecte and say, that she hather
either beguiled me, or deceived my sight, seeinge that I have no part in this
play. But be sure Cnemon, that this body is dead, and therefore, have you no
cause to doubt. But who did you this good turn in killinge her, or how she
was brought hither, or when I, my self am in great maruill. As for the rest
(said Cnemon) I cannot tell. But surely Thyamis slew her, as by the sword
which lay by her being dead, we may guess. Thyamis his word.
For I know it to be his, by the Hilt of Iuory, wherein is an Aegle graven.
Tell me therefore, said Theagenes, how, when, and wherefore he killed her. How
can I tell you, aunsweared Cnemon? For this Cave has not made me a Soothsaier,
as doothe Apolloes Church, or those that enter into Trophonius Den, which
rapte with Divine Trophynus Den.
fury, do proficie. When Theagenes, and Cariclia heard this, suddenly
lamentinge, O Pitho, O Delphi, cried they: wherewith Cnemon was abashed, and
wiste not what they had conceived by the name of Pitho: and thus were they
occupied. But Thermutis, Thyamis Harnesbearer, after he being wounded, had
escaped the battle, and sailed to land: when night came, he got a loose
Boat, and hasted to go to the Island, and Thisbe whom he Thisbe taken by
Thermutis.
took a few days before from Mansicles a Merchant, in a narrow way, at the
side of the Hill. But after the broile began, and the enemies approached, when
Thyamis sent him to fetch the Sacrifice to the Gods, he desiringe to place
her without the danger of weapons, and to keep her for him self in safety,
put her privily into the Cave, and for haste left her but in the entry
thereof. In which place, as she at the first was left, partly for fear of
the present perilles, partly for that she knew not the ways Thyamis killed
her in steed of Cariclia.
that went into the bottom of the Cave. Thyamis finding her in steed of
Cariclia, slew her. To her therefore Thermutis made haste, after he escaped
out of the battle, and as soon as he was landed in the Island, he ran to
the Tabernacles, where beside ashes he found nothing. But findinge at length
the mouth of the Cave by the stoane, and the read, if any were left, on
fiere, he ran down in great haste, and called Thisbe by name: whom after he
found dead, and standinge a good while without mouinge, in a great study:
at length, hearing out of the inner parts of the Cave, a certain noise, and
sound, (for Theagenes, and Cnemon were yet in talk) he straight deemed that
they had slain her, was therefore much troubled in his mind, and could not well
tell what to do: For the Barbarous anger, and fearcenesse which is naturally
grafted in Thieves, kindled the more, for that he was now beguiled of his
love, moved him to set upon them whom he deemed to be, the Authors of that
murder, but for that he neither had armor nor weapon, he was constrained
whither he would, or no, to be quiet: he thought it good therefore, not to come
upon them, as an enemy at the first, but if he could get any Armor, then to
set on them after. When he had thus determined, he came to Theagenes, and looked
about with eyes frowning, and terribly bent, so that with his contenance he
plainly bewraied the inward cogitation of his mind. They seeinge a man comme
in upon them suddenly, soar wounded, naked, and with a blouddy face,
behaved not them selves all alike, but Cariclia ran into a corner of the
Cave, fearinge perhaps, to look upon a man so deformed, and naked. Cnemon
seeinge Thermutes contrary to his expectation, and knowinge him well,
mistrustinge that he would enterprise sommewhat, held his peace, and stepped
back. But that sight did not so much fear Theagenes, as move him to wrath,
who drew his sword, and made as though he would strike him, if he sturred,
and bad him stand, or else (quod he) thou shalt know the price of thy
coming, and the cause is, for that I know thee not, nor why thou come.
Thermutis came near him, and spoke him fair, having rather respect to the
present time, then for that he was accustomed so to do, and desired Cnemon to
be his friend, and said, that he had deserved to be helped at his hand,
because he never had done him wrong, and had been his companion the day
before, and that he came to them as to his friends. Cnemon was moved with his
words, and coming to him, helped him up, for he held Theagenes by the
knees, and enquired of him where Thyamis was, he told him every thing, how
he fought with his enemies, how he went into the thickest press of them, and
neither feared his own safety, nor their healche, how he slew every man
that came within his reach, but him self was guarded and compassed about, and
straight charge given, that every man should for bear Thyamis. But what
became of him at length, he could not tell, and I greenously wounded, (quod
he) swomme to land, and at this time am comme into the Cave to seek Thisbe.
And there with they asked him, what he had to do with Thisbe, or how he came
by her. Thermutis then told them also, how he took her from certain
Merchantes, and how he loved her wonderfully, and keapt her privily in his
own Tabernacle, and before the coming of the enemies, put her into this Cave,
and that he now found her stain, by some, whom he knew not, but he would be
glad to understand, why, and for what occasion it was done. Cnemon herewith
desirous to deliver him self, quickly from all suspicion. Thyamis killed her,
said he, and therewith for proof he showed him the sword which they found
by her, when she was slain, which as soon as Thermutis saw blouddy, and
almost warm with the late slaughter, and knew that it was Thyamis sword in
deed, fetching a great sighe from the bottom of his heart, not knowing what
was done further, went out of the Den, and said never a word, and
coming to the dead body, and laieinge his head on her breaste, O Thisbe,
said he often, but nothing else, repeatinge the name only, and within a while
his senses faylinge him, he fell on sleep, Theagenes, Cariclia, and Cnemon,
began to think of their own business, and seemed as though they would
consulte thereof: but their manifold miseries passed the greatenesse of their
calamities present, and the uncertainty of that which was to come, did
hinder and darken the reasonable part of the mind, so that they looked one
upon an other, and every one looked what his fellow would say, as touching
their present state, after this, their hope faylinge them, they would cast
their eyes to the ground, and with sorrowful sighs, and grievous mourninges
lift them up again, at length Cnemon laid him self on the ground, Theagenes
satte down on a stoane, and Cariclia leaned on him, and striued a great while
to ouercomme fleepe, for desire to consider sommewhat of their present
affairs, but they with sorrow and labor much abated, although against their
wills, were constrained to obey nature, and out of their great heaviness
they fell into a pleasant sleep. Thus was the reasonable part of the mind,
of force constrained, to agree with the affection of the body. But after they
had slumbred a while, so that their eyes were yet scante shut, Cariclia, who
lay there with them, had a marvelous dream, and this it was she thought. A
man with a roughe Cariclias dream.
head, terrible scowlinge eyes, and bloody hands, pulled out one of her eyes,
herewith she suddianely cried out, faieinge, that she had lost one of her
eyes, and called for Theagenes, who straight was at hand, and did bewail her
harm, as if in his sleep he had felt the same. But she put her hand to her
face, and felt every where for that eye, which was lost, and as soon as she
knew it was a dream, it is a dream Theagenes, said she, I have mine eye,
come hither and fear not: Theagenes was herewith well pleased, and as meet
is, (quod he) you have your eyes as bright as Sun beams: But what ailed you,
or why were you so afraid? An ill favored froward fellow (quod she)
nothing fearing your invincible strength, came to me as I leaned on your
knees, with a sword in his hand, in such sort, that verily I thought he had
plucked out my right eye. And I would to God (said she) it had been so in
deed, rather then appeared to me in my sleep. God defend (said he) and
send us better luck, I wish it, said she, because it were better for me to
loose both Cariclias exposition of her dream.
mine eyes, then to be sorrowful for the loss of you. Surely I am soar
afraid, lest you be mente by this dream, whom I esteem as mine eye, my
life, and al my riches. Not so, said Cnemon, (for he heard al, being waked
at the first cry of Cariclia) it seems to me, yt your dream should mean
an other thing, and therefore tell me whether your Parents be alive, she
said yea, if ever they were alive. Then Judge said he, that your Father is
Cnemons exposition of Cartclias dream, Why our Parents be likened to a
prayer of eyes,
dead, and that I geather by this, for as much as we know that our Parents
be the cause, and Authoures of our life, and that we see the light of day.
Wherefore by good reason, dreams do liken our Father, and Mother to a pair
of eyes, for as much as they be the cause as well of the sight, as of that may
be seen. This is much, said Cariclia, but God grant that this be rather
true, then the other, and that your interpretation prevail, and I be called
the false Prophet. These things shall thus come to pass, no doubt said
Cnemon, and therefore you must be tontent there with, but we in deed seem to
dream trifling thus long about dreams and fancies, without any consideration
of our own business, and the rather seeinge that this Egyptian (he meant
Thermutis) is absent and be wayleth his breathless Love. Theagenes answered
him, and said, Cnemon, for as much as some God has joined you to us, and
made you partaker of our calamities. Let us hear your advice first, for you
are skilled in these Countries, and understand their tongue well, and we are
not so meet to consult of that which is necessary, for yt we are drowned with
greater dangers. Cnemon therefore musing a little, spoke thus. Which of us is in
greater misery, I cannot tell, for I am sure that God has laid calamities
enough upon my back also: But for that you bid me, as the elder, to give mine
advise as touching the Cnemons advice as touching their present affairs.
present case, this is my mind, This Island as you see, is deserte, and has
no man in it, but us; moreover of Silver, and Gould, and Precious apparel, here
is great stoare. For of such things Thyamis, and his companions, have taken
much, as well from us, as also from others, and has laid it here, but as for
Corn, and other things whereby our life may be maintained, there is not one
whitte. We are in danger therefore if we tarry here long, either to perish
for food, or with the return of our enemies, or of those who have benne of
this fellowship, if they come to fetch this money, whereof they all know. If
any of these things happen, it shall not be possible for us to escape without
death, or if they deal more freendly with us, we shall be subject to their
reprochful dealing, and scornful behauiours. For saying that these Heardsmenne
be always A good Captain causes disordered people to live orderly.
faithless, now are they most, for that they want a Captain, and Ruler,
that may constrain them to be moderate, we must therefore leave and forsake
this Island, no less then harmefull snares, or a very prison in deed. And
first dispatche away Thermutis, under pretense to enquire, and seek to know
some certainetie of Thyamis. Then shall we consulte more safely together, and
think of those things that are needful. And if this were not, yet it is a
point of wisdom, to put out of our company a man by nature unconstant,
endued with rude and discourteous manners, which else mistrusteth somewhat of us
for Thisbes sake, and will not rest, till he have (if occasion serve) by
fraud beguiled us. They allowed his saieinge well, and thought it good to do
even so: wherefore they went to the entry of the Cave (for they perceived it
was day by this time) and waked Thermutis very drowsy with sleep, and when
they had declared to him the likelihoode of their Counsel, and had easily
persuaded him, being a fickle fellow, and had cast Thisbe Necessitas plus
posse quam pietas solet, Seneca.
into a little pit, and as much duste on her, as was to be found about the
Tabernacle, and done to her as Religiously as the time would suffer, and with
tears, and weepinges, in steed of all other Ceremonies buried her, they sent
Thermutis about the pretended business, as was decreed, but he, after he had
gone a little way, returned again, and said, that he would not go alone,
neither rashly obiecte him self to so present a danger, as to be a spy,
except Cnemon might goo with him. Which thing when Theagenes perceived, that
Cnemon did detracte (for when he hard what the Egyptian said, he seemed to be
much troubled in his mind, and sore afraid) said to him. Thou art able to
geeue good Council, but thy heart fails thee, which thing I have both at
other times well perceived, but especially now. But pluck up your sprytes,
and take a good heart to you, for at this time it seems necessarte to
consent, and goo with him, that he conceive no suspicion of our determined
flight (for there is no danger for him that is armed, and has a swoorde, to
goo with one utterly Unarmed) and then if occasion serve, to slip from him,
and come to us into some Village hereby, which we will agree upon. Cnemon was
content, and appointed a certain town Chemmis a Town of Aegypte by Nylus.
called Chemmis, very Ritche, and well peopled, Cytuated on a Hill upon the
bank of Nylus, that it may thereby be the better defended, from the invasion
of the heardmen. And it was to it after they were over the lake, almost an
hundred furlonges, and they should goo right forth. It will be hard, said
Theagenes, especially for Cariclia, who has not benne accustomed to goo any
long iourneies. But for all that, we will goo, and counterfeite our selves to
be beggars, and such as goo about with certain Iuglinge castes to get our
living. That will be well (said Cnemon) for you be very evil favored people,
but most Cariclia, whose eye was lately pulled out, wherefore me thinks, you
will not only ask pieces of bread, but Couerletes, and Caldrons. Hereat they
smyled a little, so that their laughter moved but there lips only. When
therefore with Oath they had confirmed that, which was determined, and had
taken the Gods to witness, that they would never by their wills forsake
one an other, they went each of them about their decreed business. Cnemon
therefore, and Thermutis, having in the morninge early passed over the lake,
took their journey through a thick woodde, wherein it was hard to find any
way. Thermutis went before, for so Cnemon would have it, pretendinge the
cunninge he had in that hard passage, and willinge him to lead the way: but
in deed rather providing for his own safety, and preparing a just
opportunity to give him the slip. After they had gonne a good way, they
espied a flock of sheep, and after those, who kept them were fled, and
crepte into the thick woodde hard by, they killed one of the fairest Rames,
that went before the flock, and rostinge him at a fire, which the Shepherdes
had made, did eat of ye fleash without tarying, before it was thoroughly
roste, because their bellies were maruelously pinched with hunger. Like Woulues
therefore, or Cormorantes they devoured every part, though it were but a little
baked against the fire, so that while they did eat it, the blood ran
about their teeth. But after they had filled their bellies, and quenched their
thirste with Milk, they went forward, and now was it time for Cnemon to put
his devise in practice. When they had therefore gone up a little Hill (under
which, Thermutis said, was the Village, and in it Thyamis, being taken in the
Battle, was either kept Prisoner, or slain, as he coniectured) Cnemon made
an excuse that his belly was troubled with too much meat, and by reason of
the Milk, he had a painful laske, therefore he desired Thermutis to goo
softely before, and he would by and by overtake him. Thus did he ones or twice,
or three times, so that now he seemed to deal truly, affirminge that he had
much adoo to overtake him, after he had thus acquainted the Egyptian, at
last, without his knowledge, he tarried behind, and as fast as he could can
down the hill, into a very thick woodde. But he when he came to the top of
the hill, satte him down on a stoane to rest him, tarriynge till night came,
in which they appointed to goo into the village, to hear in what state
Thyamis was, and therewithal he looked about for Cnemon, to whom if he came
after him, he devised to do some harm. For he had not yet left his conceived
opinion, that he slew Thisbe, and therefore he bethought him self, how he
might kill him again, and afterward he was with a certain madness moved to
set upon Theagenes. But when Cnemon appeared not, and it was now far on the
night, he fell a sleep, and with the biting of an Aspe, having gotten like
death to all his passed life, by the Ladies of destinies pleasure perhaps,
he slepte his trason and last sleep. But Cnemon after he had forsaken
Thermutis is slain.
Thermutis, left not runninge, till dark night restrained his violente
course, so that in that place where the night ouertooke him, he hid him
self, and laid as many leaves as he could upon him. Under which he liynge,
was much troubled, and slepte but little, supposinge every noise, and blaste
of wind, and wagginge of each leaf to be Thermutis, and if at any time sleep
overcame him, he thought that he fled, and looked back for him, that pursued
him not. And when he had lust to sleep, he would refrain, for that he
would not sleep longer, then need required. Last of all, he seemed to be
angry with the night, and thought that it was longer then any other was. As
soon as with great desire he saw the day, first he cut of so much of his
hear, as he had let grow, that he might be like unto the Thieves, to Why the
Thieves let their hear grow. Long hear does becomme ^^uers well.
the intent, that those who met him, should not trouble, nor suspecte him.
For the Thieves beside other things that they do, whereby they may seem
more fearful, let their hear grow so long that al men loathe it, which they
shake hanginge on their shoulders, knowinge very well, that long hear makes
them more acceptable, which are in Love, but Thieves more terrible. When
therefore Cnemon had cut of so much of his hear, as would make him seem
the more trim, and not be thought one of the Thieves, he made haste to goo to
Chemmis, where he appointed to meet with Theagenes. And being now come to
Nylus, and ready to pass over, he spied an Old man walkinge on the bank, up
and down, who seemed to communicate sum of his cogitations with the fludde,
he had long hear after a holy facio^, but a very white, and roughe bearde
somewhat long, his Cloak and other Apparel like a Grecian. Cnemon therefore
stayed a little, but when the Old man passed up and down diverse times, and
seemed not to see any Thought makes a man in manner blind, yea and deaf, and
doumbe too.
man by him (he was in such a muse, and sure cogitation) he came before him,
and said, al Hayle Sir, I cannot, quod he, for that Fortune will not so.
Whereat Cnemon marueiled, and said, are you a Greek? or what Country man
else? Neither a Greek answered he, nor any other Countrieman, but of this
Country, an Egyptian. How then happens it, said Cnemon, that in your
apparaile you imitate the Greeks. My miseries, said he, have Miseries make a
man sommetimes change his apparaile.
changed this handsome apparayle for others. Cnemon maruailed that any man
could trim and deck him self for any mishappes, and feign would have
known the cause or manner thereof. You cause me, said the Old man, to
remember many troubles, and do also move by them a wonderful grudginge
against your self: but whether be you goinge, or from whence come you, or how
happeth it that you speak Greek in Aegypte? That were a merry ieste in deed,
said Cnemon, in as much as you first asked me, and will tell me no part of your
estate, yet you would know of me, mine. I am well pleased (quod the Old man)
for that you seem to be a Grecian, and some Fortune as I guess, has
tra^sformed you into an other Figure also. Beside that you so earnestly desire
to hear in what state I am. Surely my grief desires to be uttered, and if I
had not happened on you, I think I should It is a great pain to concele any
mishappe long.
have told it to these Reeds according to the tale. Let us therefore leave
these banks of Nylus, and Nylus it self too, neither is the border of this
bank fit, to tell a long tale in, sith that it is subject to the
vehemente heat of the Southe Sun. Let us therefore goo to the village that
we see over against us, if you have no greater business, there shall you be
my geste, not in mine own house, but in a very good man's, who has entertained
me in adversity: In his house shall you hear all my Fortune, if you will, and
in like manner you shall tell me yours. Content, said Cnemon. For if I had
not met with you, I must have gonne to this village, to tarry by
appointment for some of my companions, they took a Boat then (whereof there
was great stoare, ready to transporte any man for hyre) and came into the
Town, and so into the house, wherein this Old man was hosted, the good man of
the house was not at home, but his daughter now Marriageable, and the other
Maids: as many as were at home entertained them very courteously, and
entreated the Old man, as he had benne their Father. For so I think their
Master had commanded. One washed their legs, and sweapte the duste from
under their feet, another made their bed, and provided a soft lodginge for
them, an other brought in the pot, and made a fire, another covered the
Table, and set wheate^ bread thereon, and diverse other kinds of fruytes.
Whereat Cnemon maruailed, and said, Father, perhaps Jupiter hospitalis.
we are comme into Jupiter hospitalis house, we are so much regarded, and
that with so good mind. Not into Jupiter said he, but into such a man's as
knows Jupiter hospitalis, and the Patron of such as be in adversity well.
For, sometime he leads his life in travail, and Merchandise, and has seen
many Cities, and knows the manners and facions of diverse Nations. For which
cause, it is like, that he entertained me into his house, wandering and
trauelinge a few days agoo, about as also he has done, and many more
others. What travel, Father, said Cnemon is it, which you speak of. I am,
said ^e, in this place, berefte of my Children, and know the misdooers well,
but cannot be revenged: wherefore I with waylinge beweepe my sorrow, like a
Bird whose nest A pretye similitude.
a Dragon pulls down, and deuoureth her young before her face, and is
afraid to come nighe, neither can she fly away: at such controversy is
love, and sorrow in her, but making great noise, flies about the miserable
steep, and powers in vain her Motherlike, and humble tears into those
cruel ears, who have of Nature benne taught no mercy. Will you therefore,
said Cnemon, tell me, how and when you had this cruel hap? Hereafter,
said he, I will. Now it is time to look Homer calls the belly pernicious.
to our bellies, to which Homer having respect not without good
consideration, called it pernicious, for that in comparison thereof al things
else were counted little woorthe. But first, according to the wisdom of the
Calasiris will not forgette to do Sacrifice to the Gods, for any travail,
and this is every good man's duty also. Calasiris Sacrio ficeth to Theagenes,
and Cariclia.
Egyptians, let us do sacrifice to the immortal Gods, for nothing shall
ever cause me to break this custom. Neither shall any grief be so great,
which shall cause me to put the remembrance, and service of God out of my
mind: when he had said thus, he powered a little clean water out of a vial,
and said, I do Sacrifice to the Gods of this Country, and to the Gods of
Greece, to Apollo of Delphos, and beside, to Theagenes, and Cariclia, good and
honest Creatures, for as much as I make these Gods also: and therewithal he
wept, as though he would do an other Sacrifice to them beside, with
sorrowful tears. When Cnemon heard this, he was abashed, and looked earnestly
on the Old man round about. Theagenes, and Cariclia, Calasiris children
without a Mother.
What say you (quod he) be Theagenes, and Cariclia your children in deed?
They are my children, said he, borne without a Mother. For the Gods have
made them my children by chance, and caused me to be sorrowful for them, so
that I have a natural affection of mind toward them, by which they have
esteemed me as their Father, and so called me also. But I pray you tell me how
you knew them. I do not only know them, said Cnemon, but tell you that they
be safe and in good health. O Apollo, and the rest of the Gods, said he,
tell me in what Country they be, and I will call you then my Savior, and make
equal accoumpte of you as with the Gods. What reward, said he, will you
give me? At this time, said he, thanks, which a wise man coumpteth A wise
man cou^pteth thanks a great reward.
a goodly reward. And if ye comme into my Country, which the Gods tell me
shall be shortly, you shall have great riches. You promise me, said he, that
which is to come, and very uncertain, and may yet presentely sufficiently
recompense me. If you see any thing present tell me. For I so much desire
that, that I could be content to loose some part of my body, and yet think
that I am not maimed of any member, but have every iointe whole. I require this
(said he) that you would vouchesafe to tell me of them, of whence they are,
who be their Parents, and what Fortune they have had, thou shalt have,
answered he, a great reward, and such a one as to it nothing may be
comparable. Although you had asked all the Treasure in the world. But let us
now eat some meat. For both of us as well you to hear, as I to tell shall
have need of longer time. When they had eaten Nuttes, Figs, Palms new
gathered, and such other fruit, as the Old man was accustomed to feed on,
(for his conscience made no difference of meats) they drank, he water, and
Cnemon wine, after a little while, then Cnemon said, Father, how well Bacchus
is pleased with Tales, and Bacchus pleased with merry Songs, and Tales.
banquetinge Songs, you know well inoughe. Wherefore now also seeinge he
has challenged me to himself, he moves me to desire to hear somewhat, and
constrains me to crave my promised reward, and now it is time for you to
make provision to play this commodie as on a stage, as the Proverb is. You
shall hear it, said he, and would to God, that thriftie Mansicles had been
here, whom I have often by diverse delays deluded, very desirous to hear this
tale. After Cnemon heard Mansicles name, he asked where he was then. He is
gonne, quod the old man, on huntinge. What manner of hunting, said he? Of
wild beasts very cruel, which be called in deed men, and Heardmen, but
live by theft, and can hardely be entrapped, for that they use bypatches, and
Caves in the Marishie ground. Whereof doothe he accuse them said he? Of the
taking away of a Leman of his, which he brought from Athens, whom he called
Thisbe. Lord God, said Cnemon, and therewithal suddenly held his peace, as
though he would say no more, and when the old man asked him, what he ailed,
Cnemon willinge to bring him to other matters, said, I marvel how, or with
what army emboldened, he durst set upon them. He answered, Groondates is made
Deputy Groondates Deputy of Egypt.
of Aegypte, by the great King, by whose commanndemente Mitranes Captain of
the Watch is made Governor of this Town. Manclises hired him for a great
sum of money, and with great company of Horsemen, and footmen conducted him
against them. He takes in very ill part the loss of that man's Maid, not
so much for that she was his friend, and played well on instruments, but
much more, because he was in mind to carry her to the King of Aethiopia, as
he said, that she might be his Wives drinking gossippe, and Familiare after
the manner of the Greeks, as though he were deprived The VViues of Greece have
their drinking^ Gossippes.
therefore of a great sum of money, which he hoped to have for her, he
makes all provision possible to recover her again. My self willed, and
exhorted him so to do, supposinge, that he by some chance might hap to find
my children, and help me to them again. We have talked enough, said Cnemon,
now cuttinge him of those of the Heardmen, Captains, and of the Kings them
selves. It wanted but little, that you had not with your talk turned my mind
an other way, you have added this glaunce, nothing apperteininge to Bacchus,
as the Proverb is. Wherefore return your talk to that you promised. For I
have found you like Protheus of Pharos, not turninge your self into diverse
Figures, as he did, but attemptinge to bring me from my purpose. You shall
know, said the old man. But first I will tell you of my self, not beguilinge
you in my tale, as you think: but propoundinge such talk as shall be true, and
well agreeinge to that which follows. The City wherein Calasiris borne at
Memphis, he tells him all his whole life passed.
I was borne, is called Memphis, my Fathers name, and mine also is Calasiris.
As touching my trade of life, I am now a Vacabonde, who was not long before a
Priest, I had a Wife by the ordinance of the City, but lost her by the Law
of Nature. After she had passed out of this body in to an other rest, I lived
a while without any misery, delighting my self with two Sons that I had by
her. Not many years after, the course of Heaven prescribed by destiny, doothe
change all our estate, and Saturn Saturn an unlucky Planete, and never good.
cast his eye into our house, making the change still worse and worse,
without any hope of auoidinge the same, only foresighte, as in such matters
is common, was my gain, which much abated the violence, and heat of these
misaduentures. For those miseries (my Son) What mysteries be tolerable, and
what intolerable. The beginnings of Calasiris his evil luck. Rhodopis, a
Harlot.
that came on thee suddenly be intolerable, but such as are foreseen, are
borne with more equal mind. For the mind being occupied with fear, is
abashed of those, and takes them heavily, but custom by reason makes these
more familiare, such a thing happened unto me. A woman of Thrace, of ripe
years, and except Cariclia the fairest in world, whose name was Rhodopis, I
know not whence, nor how by the ill luck of her Lovers, leauinge her
Country, travailed over all Aegypte, and came in very wanton wise, to Memphis,
with a great sort of Maids, and Servants waytinge on her, very perfitly
instructed in all venerious entisementes, and wanton behavior, so that it was
possible for none that looked on her, not to be entangled with her love, of
such an unavoidable force, was the Whoorishe allurement, that proceeded from
her eyes. She entered into Isis Temple often, whose Priest I was, and
woorshipped the Gods daily, and offered diverse Sacrifices, and gifts, which
cost many Talentes, (I am ashamed to tell it; yet I will) with Calasiris
falls in love with Rhodopis.
often beholdinge her, she overcame me, and that temperance also, which in all
my life, with great study I had conserved. A great while, I withstoode the
eyes of my body with ye inward eyes of my mind, yet at last, overcome with
this affection of love, as those who are heavy laden, I was constrained to
yield. When therefore I understood that a woman should be the beginning of
all the ill luck, which the Gods had appointed me, of which I was not
ignorant before, and perceived that by Fatal destiny, it was so decreed, and
that the God, whose turn was then to rule, would play that part: I
determined not to dishonest the Priestehoode, in which from my youth I had
benne brought up, neither to defile the Churches, and secret places of the
Temples of the Gods, and to avoid that, which was by destiny decreed, not
for dooinge the deed (which God forebid) but to pounishe my desire with
convenient pounishment, as in my mind I determined, which by reason rulinge
in that Judgment, I bannished my self, and unhappy Calasiris bannished him
self.
name foresooke my Country, as well to yield to the necessity of the Ladies
of destiny, and give them leave to determine of us what they would, as also to
leave the cursed Rhodopis. For I was afraid, my gest, lest if he, who then
had Dominon, should violently enter into the City, and I should be forced to
do some viler thing. But the chief cause, above all other, that bannished
me, were my Sons, for the secret wisdom, that I had of the Gods,
foreshewed to me, that they should fight a blouddy battle bitweene them
selves, that I might therefore remove such a cruel spectacle from mine eyes
(which I think the Son him self would not behold) and to acquit these
fatherly eyes, of the sight of my Sons death, I went my way to prevent these
things, pretendinge as though I would go to great Thebes, to see my elder
Son, who was then with his Grandfather, his name was Thyamis. Cnemon started
when he heard the name of Thymis, yet he kept his counsel, as well as he
could, the better to hear that which followed: but he told on, as follows.
I omit that which happened to me by the way (young man) for it nothing
apperteineth to that, you ask for. But when I heard that there was a certain
City of Greece Sacred to Apollo, which was a Temple of the Gods, and a
College of Wise, and far from the troublous resort of the common people, I
went thither, thinking that City which was dedicated to Holiness, and
Ceremonies, to be a meet place for a man being a Prophet to resort unto. So
Calafiris journey to Delphi.
when I had sailed by ye coaste of Cressye, and was arrived at Cirrhus, I went
in haste out of my ship to the Town, whither after I was comme, I felt a
certain Divine Odore breeth upon me. So that for many causes I accou^pted that
City a meet place for me to abide in, the least whereof was not the natural
sight of the same. For as it The situation of Delphi.
were a natural defense, or Tower, Pernassus reaches over it, inclosinge the
City, as it were with a Wall with his two tops. You say very well (quod
Cnemon) and like one in deed who had tasted of Pithos Sprite, for I remember
that my Father told me, yt sight of the Tower was such, when the Athenians
sent him to the Council of Thamphictiones. Are you then an Athenian Son,
said he? Yea sir, said Cnemon. What is your name? Cnemon, answered he. How
came you hither? You shall hear that hereafter, now tell on your tale.
Content, quoth he. I went into the City, and praised it much The pleasant
commodities of Delphi.
in my mind, for the places of exercise there, and the pleasant fields, and
the springes, with the fountain of Castalius, this done, I went to the
Temple. For the report of the people, that said, the Prophets would give
answer, presently moved me so to do, as soon as I had gonne into the
Church, and said my prayers, and made Apolloes answer to Calasiris.
a certain secret request to the God, Pythias answered me thus.

To shun the destinies sure decree thou take all this toil:
And therefore leaust the fruitful coast of Nilus fertile soil.
Have a good heart, for I will give the blakishe fields again:
Of Aegypte unto thee, till then, our friend thou shall remain.
As soon as the Oracle had given me this answer, I tell grouelinge on the
Altar, and desired him in all things to be my good God. But a great sort of
those that stood by me, praised the God much, for geuinge me such an
answer at my first coming. Every man talked of Fortune, and beheld me,
and said, that I was the welcommest man to the God, that ever came there, but
one Licurgus of Sparta, wherefore when I desired to dwell Licurgus which gave
Laws to the Lacedaemonians.
in the Churcheyearde, they gave me leave, and decreed, that I should be
nourished of their common charges. To be short, I wanted no good thing. For
there I inquired the causes, and manner of the Sacrifices, which were very
diverse, and many, that as well the men that inhabit there, as also strangers
make, or else. I conferred with Philosophers, unto which City no final number
of such men comme, so that the City is in manner a study dedicated to
Prophesies under the God, who is Captain of the Muses. And at the first there
were diverse Pretty Heathenish questions.
questions, as touching many matters moved among us. For some would ask after
what sort we Egyptians honored our Gods, an other, why diverse countries
woorshipped diverse kinds of Beasts, and what they could say of every of them,
other inquired of the manner, and form of the buildinges called Pyramides, many
of their framinge of instruments, and their diverse tunes. At a word, they
left nothing that apperteined to Egypt, unsearched. For the Grecians ears
are wonderfully delited with tales of Aegypte. At last, certain of the
ciuilest sort, fell in talk of Nylus, and asked me whence were his heads, and
what special property it had above other Rivers, and why it alone of all
others in Summer did rise. I told them what I knew, and was written in the
Holy Books, and was lawful only for the Priests to know. How that the
head thereof was in the hiest parts of Aethiopia, and formoste bounds of all
Libia, at the end of the East Clime, and beginning of the South. It flows
in the summer, not as some think, by reason of contrary blastes of the
Winds, called Etestie (as some think) but for that those same winds blowing
out of the North, gather together, and drive all the clouds of the Air into
the South (about the middel of the summer) till they come to the burning Line,
where their violence is abated, for the incredible heat thereaboutes, so that
all the moisture, which was before geathered together, and congeled,
Melthethe, and is resolved into abou^dance of water, wherewith Nilus waxes
proud, and will be a River no longer, but runs over his banks, and covers
Aegypte with his waters, as with a Sea, and makes the ground very fruitful.
Wherefore it ministers sweet waters to drink, as is like, for that they come
from Heaven, and is pleasant to be touched, not now so hoate, as at the first,
yet is it luke warm, as one that springs in such a place. For which cause of
that stoude, and none other, arise no Vapors, for if there should, then were it
like that it received his increase of snow resolved, of which opinion some
learned men of the Greeks He confuteth the opinion of certain Greek
Philosophers, that thought the increase there had proceeded of the resolution of
Snow. Caricles Apolloes Priest.
have been, as I talked of these matters in this sort Apolloes Priest, called
Caricles, my familiare friend, said unto me. It is very well said you, and, I
my self am of your opinion also, for I have hard the Priests of Egypt that
inhabit about Nilus, say so also. And have you ben there then Caricles, quod
I? I have, quoth he, Calasiris. What mischance drove you thither? I asked him
then. The ill luck that I had at home, said he, which for all that turned to
my great felicity. I wondered at that, and thought it could not be so. You
will not marvel (quod he) if you hear the whole process of the matter,
which you shall do when you please. Then (quod I) tell me now, for I am well
pleased you should so do. Caricles then, when he had let the people depart,
said, know, that for a certain cause I have desired a great while, that you
might be made privy to mine estate. A long time after I was married, Caricles
tells Calasiris al his estate.
I had no Children: yet at length, when I was old, and had made earneste
Prayers to God, I had a Daughter, the which, God foreshewed me, should be
borne in an il time. For all that, she became mariageable, and I provided her a
Husband of one of her Suitors (for she had many) which in my judgment, was
the most honestest He was perhaps of Themistocles opinion, who rather chose
for his Daughter, a man without Money, then Money without a man.
man. The first night that she, unhappy wenche, lay with her Husband,
died, either with a Thunderbolte, or else, for that by negligent handelinge, her
bed was set on fire. And thus the Marriage Song, not yet ended, was turned
to mourninge: and she was carried out of her Bridebedde, into her Grave: and
the Tapers that gave her light at her Wedding, did now serve to kindle her
Funeral Fire. Biside this unhappy fortune, God gave me an other Tragical
missehappe, in that he took the Mother from me, being too sorrowful for the
Death of her Daughter. I therefore (not able to bear this great pounishmente
at any Gods hand, did not kill my self, in obeieinge their Precepts, who
are occupied about Holy controversies, and affirm it not to be It is not
lawful for a man to kill him self. But of sight out of mind commonly.
lawful, but) leafte my Country privily, and fled far from the sorrows I
fcalte at home: for the quick remembrance of the mind, is greatly helped, to
forgeate euilles passed, if it be obscured, and darkened by tourninge of the
eyes from the same. After I had travailed over many Countries, at length I came
into your Aegypte, and into the City Catadupi, to see the Sluices of Nilus.
And thus, Catadupi a City of Aegypte.
my friend, I have told you the manner of my travail into those places. But I
desire, that you should know the principal cause, why I tell you this tale. As
I walked about in the City, as my leisure served, and did buie such
things, as are very scarce in Greece (for new by continuance of time, having
well digested my sorrows, I hasted to return into my Country) there came a
sobre man to me, and such a one, as by countenance, appeared to be wise, that
had lately passed his youtheful years, of color black, and saluted me, and
said, that he would talk with me about a certain matter (not speakinge
Greek very well). And when he saw, that I was willinge to go with him, he
brought me into a certain Temple, and by and by, said, I saw you buie
certain Herbs, and Roots that grow in India, and Ethiopia. If you will buie
such things of me, in good faith, and without guile, I will show you them with all my heart. That I will, quod I, show me the^ I pray you. With that he took
a little bag from under his arm, and showed me certain precious stoones of
wonderful price. For there were Margarites among them as big as a little
nutte, perfect round, and Smaragdis, and Hiachinthes, they were in color as
the green Grass, and shined very bright. These were like the Sea bank, that
lies under a hard rock, which makes all that is underneath to be like
Purple color. At few words, their mingled, and diverse shining color,
delighted and pleased the eyes wonderfully, which as soon as I saw. You must
seek other Chapmen (quod I) good Sir, for I, and al my riches are scant able
to buie one of the stoones that I see. Why said he, if you be not able to buie
the^, yet are you able to take them, if they be geeuen you. I am able, said I,
to receive them in deed, but I know not what you mean so to mock me. I
mock you not, quod he, but mean good faith, and I swear by the God of this
Church, that I will give you al these things, if you will take them, beside an
other gift, which far excels them all. I laughed when I heard this, he
asked me why I laughed. Because, quod I, it is a thing to be laughed at:
seeinge you promise me things of so great price, and yet assure me to geeue
me more. Trust me, said he: but swear that you will use this gift well, and
as I shall teach you. I maruailed what he meante, and stayed a while, yet in
hope of those greater rewards, I took an Oath. After I had sworn, as he
willed me, he brought me to his Lodginge, and showed me a Maid of excellent
beauty, which he said, was but seven year Old, me thought she was almost
Marriageable, such grace does excellent beauty give What excellent beauty
with talenesse of stature, makes a woman seemly.
to the talenesse of Stature. I stood in a mase, as well for that I knew not
what he meante, as also for the insatiable desire I had to look upon her. Then
spoke he thus to me. Sir, the Mother of this Maid, which you see, for a
certain cause, that you shall know hereafter, laid her forth, wrapped in
such Apparel as is commonly used Cariclia laid forth, and committed to
Fortune. That it is not lawful to let one die without succoure, is a
precepte of the Gymnosophisis.
for such pourposes, committinge her to the doubtfulnesse of Fortune. And I by
channce findinge her, took her up, for it is not lawful to despise and
neglecte a soul in danger, after it has once entered into an Humayne body.
For this is one of the Wise men's precepts, that are with us, to be, whose
Scholar my self was once judged worthy. Besides that even in the Infantes
eyes there appeared some wonderful thing, she beheld me with such a
steadie, and amiable countenance, as I looked upon her. With her was also
found this bag of precious stoanes which I showed you of late, and a Silken
clothe wrought with letters in her Mother tongue, wherein was her whole estate
contained, her Mother as Cariclias estate written in her Fascia. Sisimithres
findinge Cariclia, provides for her bringing up
I guess procuringe the same. Which after I had read, I knew whence, and
what she was, and so I carried her into the Country far from the City,
and delivered her to certain Shepeheardes to be brought up, with charge that
they should tell no man. As for those things that were found with her, I
detained with my self, least for them, the Maid should be brought into any
danger. And thus at the first this matter was concealed: But after, in
process of time, the Maid growinge on, and becominge more fair, then other
women were (for beauty in mine opinion cannot be concealed, though Beauty
cannot be hid.
it were under the ground, but would thence also appear) fearinge least her
estate should be known, and so she killed, and I brought in trouble
therefore, I sewed, that I might be sent in Ambassadge, to ye Deputy of
Aegypte, and obtained, wherefore I come, and bring her with me, desirous to
set her business in good order. And now must I utter to him the cause of mine
Ambassadge, for he has appointed this day for the hearing Cariclia delivered
to Caricles.
of me. As touching the Maid, I commend her to you, and the Gods, who have
hitherto conserved her, upon such conditions, as you are bound by Oath to
perform. That is, that you will use her as a Free woman, and marrye her to a
Free man, as you receive her at my hand, or rather of her Mother, who has so
leafte her. I hope that you will perform al things whereof we have commoned,
as well by credit of your oath, as also by trust ye I have in your manners,
which I have by many days experienced to be very Greekishe in deed. Thus
much I had to say to you, before I executed my commission, as concerning mine
Ambassadge: as for other secresies belonging to the maid, I will tell you them
to morrow in more ample wise, if you will mete with me about Isis temple. I did
as he requested, and carried the maid muffled to mine own house, and used her
very honorably that day, comfortinge her with many fair means, and gave God
great Caricles calls Cariclia his own Daughter often, and named her after
his own name.
thanks for her, from that time hitherto, accoumpting, and meaning her my
daughter. The next day, I went to Isis Temple, as I had appointed with the
stranger, and after I had walked there a great while alone, and saw him not,
I went to the Deputies house, and inquired whether any man saw the Legate of
Ethiopia. The one told me, that he was gonne, or rather driven homeward, the
last day before Sun set, for that the Deputy thretned to Sisimithers his
Ambassadge.
kill him, if presently he departed not. I asked him the cause, for that, quoth
he, by his Ambassadge he willed him not to meddle with ye mines, out of which,
the Smaradges were dug, as those yt appertained to Ethiopia, I came home
again, much grieved, like one that had had some great mishap, because I could
not know any thing as touching the maid, neither whence she was, or who
were her Parents. Marvel not thereat, said Cnemon, interpretinge him, for I
my self take it heavily, that I cannot know it now: yet perhaps I shall know
it hereafter. You shall in deed, said Calasiris. But now will I tell you,
what Caricles said more. After I came into my house (quoth he) the maid came
forth to meet me, but said nothing, because she could not yet speak
Greek: yet she took me by the hand, and made me good cheer with her
countenance. I marueiled, that even as good Grayehoundes do fawn upon every
one, though they have but little acquaintance with them, so she quickly
perceived my good will toward her, and did embrace me, as if I had benne her
Father. I determined therefore, not to tarry longer in Catadupi, lest some
spite of the Gods should deprive me of my other Daughter too, and so
coming by Boat dawne alonge Nilus, to the Sea, I got a Ship, and sailed
home, and now in this my Daughter with me, this Daughter, I say, surnamed also
by my name, for whose sake, I lead scant a quiet life. And beside other
things, wherein she is Cariclia not only passinge be wtifull, but very witty
also.
better then I could wish, she learned the Greek tongue in so short space,
and came to perfect age with such speed, as if she had benne a peerless
branche, and so far passed al other in excellent beauty, that al men's
eyes, as well strangers, as Greeks, were set on her. To be short, whersoeuer
she was, either in the Temples, or at Public exercises, or in the places of
Common resort, she turned al men's minds, and countenaunces unto her, as if
she had benne the Image of sum God, lately framed. And although she be
such a one, yet she greeueth me soar. She has bidden Marriage farewell,
and determine the Caricilia not willinge to Marry.
to live a Maiden still, and so becoming Dianas servant, for the most part,
appliethe her self to huntinge, and doothe practice shootinge. For my part, I
set little by my life, who hoped to marrye her to my Nephew, my Sisters Son, a
courteous young man, well mannered, and fair spoken, but I can, neither by
prayer, nor promise, nor force of Argument persuade her thereto: but that
which greueth me most, is that (as the Proverb says) she uses mine own
Feathers against me, and addethe great experience, and many reasons to prove
that she has chosen the best kind of life, commending Virginity with
immortal praise, and placing it in Heaven by the Gods, callethe it
immaculate, unspotted, and uncorrupted: as for Love, Venus disporte, and every
Ceremony, that apperteineth to Marriage, she utterly dispraisethe. In this
matter I require your help, and therefore now I having good occasion, which
has in a manner proffered it self to me, use a longer tale, then need
requirethe. Do thus much for me, good Calasiris, use sum point of your
wisdom, though it be by Inchantemente, to persuade her, either by word, or
deed, to know her own nature, and to consider, that she is borne of a
woman. This you can do, if you will. For she disdaineth not to talk with men,
for that she has been commonly brought up among them. And she dwells in
the same house with you, here I mean within the circuit and compass of this
Temple. Despise not mine humble Prayers, and suffer me not to live in mine age
without children, and comfort, and hope of any to succeed me: This I beseech
you to do for Apolloes sake, and all the Gods of your own Country. I wept
when I hard this, Cnemon, because he him self not without tears thus humbly
besought me, and promised to do what I could for him in this point. While
we yet talked of these matters, one came to us in haste, and told us that the
Captain of the Aenians ambassadge, was at the gate, and made provision, and
therefore desired the Priest to come away, and begin the Sacrifice. I asked
Caricles what those Aenians were, and what holy Aenians a people of Thessalia
fetch their petigree from Deucalion. How far the Aenians Country goes
their chief City is Hipala, The manner of the Aenians sacrifice to Pirrhus,
Pithius Agon. The Captain of this legation is of Achilles race his name is
Theagenes.
message theirs was, and what sacrifice they made. The Aenians, said he, is
the noblest part of Thessalia, and right Greek, which fetch their petigree
from Deucalion, and stretch to the borders of Malia, their chief City is
Hipala, so called, as they say, because it is Mistres, and ruler of the rest,
but as other think for that it is cituate under the Hill Oeta. This Sacrifice
the Aenians send to Pirrhus Achilles son every fourth year, at such time
as the feast Agon is kept to Apollo (which is now as you know) for here was
he killed at the very Aultars of Apollo, by guile of Orestes Agamemnons Son:
This message is done more honorably then any of the rest, because the
Captain says, he is one of Achilles line. By chance I met with him too
days agoo, and there seems verily to appear in him somewhat worthy those
that come of Achilles blood, such is the comeliness of his person, and
talenes of stature, that it may easily prove he was borne of sum Goddess. I
marueiled how they being Aenians, did say they came of Achilles blood,
because the Egyptian Poet Homer safeth, that he was borne in Phthia. The young
man, A pretty discourse of Achilles Country with the arguments, that the
Aenians have to prove that they are of Achilles blood, the chief whereof is
this Sacrifice.
and the rest of the Aenians, say plainly that he is their progenitoure, and
that Thetis was married to Peleus out of Malia, and that in old time Phthia was
there aboutes, and that who so ever beside them do challenge the noble man for
his valiant acts, say untruly. For his part, he proves him self to be of
Achilles blood by an other reason: for that Menesthius his Grandfather, who
was the Son of Sperchius, and Polidora Peleus daughter, which went with
Achilles among the noble Captains to Troy, and because he was his Kinsman,
was one of the chiefest Captains of the Mirmidones. And although he him self
be very near on every side to Achilles, and join him to the Aenians, yet he
accoumpteth these funeralles to Pirrhus, for a most assured proof, which all
the Thessalians (as he says) have granted to them, bearinge them witness
that they be the next of his blood. I envy them not Caricles (quod I)
whether, they challenge this to them selves untruly, or it be so in deed. But
I pray you, send for yt Captain in, for I desire much to see him. Caricles
was content: Therewith entered in a The description of a very comely man.
young man of Achilles courage in deed, who in countenance, and stomach
appeared no less, with a straight neck, hie forehedded, with his hear in
comely sort rebendinge down, his nose, and nosthrilles wide inoughe to take
breathe, which is a token of courage and strength, his eyes not very greye,
but greye and black, which made him look somewhat fiercely, and yet very
amiably, not much unlike the Sea, which is new calmed after a boisterous
tempest. After he had saluted us, as the manner was, and we him again, it is
time, said he, to do Sacrifice to the God, that we may finishe the Noble
man's rightes, and the pomp thereto belonginge by times: let it be so, said
Caricles, and as he rose, he told me softly, you shall see Cariclia to day,
if you have not seen her before, for she must be at the pomp and Funeralles
of Neoptolemus by custom. I had seen the maid before, Cnemon, and done
Sacrifice with her, and she would enquire of me, of our holy customs and
ordinances. Yet I said nothing to him, waytinge to see what would come
hereof, and so we went to the Temple both together. For all things that
belonged to the Sacrifices, were made ready by the Thessalians. As Soon as we
came to the Altar, and the young man began to do the Sacrifice, having
leave first of the Priest. Phthia said thus:

Ye men of Delphi singe of her, Apollo his Answer, as touching Theagenes
and Cariclia.
and Gods ofspringe praise:
Who now in grace begins to grow, but fame shall end her days.
Who leauinge these my Temples here, and passinge surginge streams:
Shall come at length to Country scortche, with Phoebus blasinge beams.
Where they as recompenses due, that virtues rare do gain:
In time to come ere it belong, white Miters shall obtain.
After the God had said thus, those that stood by cast many doubts, but
knew not what that answer should mean. Every man had his several
exposition, and as he desired so he coniectured, yet could none attain to the
true meaning thereof, for Oracles and dreams are for the most part
understood, when they be come to pass. And although the men of Delphos were
in amaze, for that was said, yet they hasted to goo to this gorgeous
solemnity, not caringe to make any diligent inquiry of the answer which
was given.

Here ends the Second Book.
The Third Book.
AFter the Pomp and Funeral was ended: Nay Father (quod Cnemon, interruptinge
him) it is not done yet, saying your talk has not made me also a looker
thereon. But you slip from me, who desire, wonderfully to behold the whole
order thereof, no less then one (who as the Proverb is) came after a feast,
in as mutche as you have but opened the Theater, and straight shut it up
again. Cnemon (said Calasiris) I would not trouble you with such
impertinent matters as you do now desire, but would have brought you to the
principal points of my tale, and that, which you desired at first. But
because you desire by the way to be a looker hereupon, hereby you declare your
self to be an Athenian, I will briefly declare to you the bravery thereof, as
well for it self, because it is famous, as also for certain things that
happened thereat. The Hecatombe The manner of the Sacrifice.
went before, and such men as were but lately entered into the Holy
Ministry, leadde the same: each one had a white garment knitte about them,
their right hand, and arm with their breast naked, and a Polaxe therein. All
the Oxen were black, but very lusty, wagginge their heads, and liftinge them
up a little, they had even horns, part whereof was gilded, other had
Hecatombe is a kind of Sacrifice, wherein were a hundred beasts of one kind
slain, as a hundred oxen, Sheep, Swine, or Goats.
Garlandes of flowers, upon them their legs were somewhat crooked, and their
throtes hanged beneath their knees, and there were so many as would make a
just Hecatombe in deed. After these followed a great sort of other
offeringes, and every kind of beasts was leadde by it self in order alone,
with an instrumente that appointed when and with what they should begin.
These beasts, and their leaders did certain virgins of Thessalia standinge
in a ringe, with their hear loose about their ears, intertayne. The Maids
were divided into two companies, those who were in the first, carried flowers
and fruit. The other carried in baskettes other fine knackes, and perfumes, and
filled all the place with pleasant odor: they carried not these things in their
hands, but on their heads, for that they held their hands forward and
backwarde, that they might the more easily both go and dance. They received
their Song of an other company, for it was the duty of these to singe the
whole Hymn. In the Song was Thetis praised, and Peleus, then their Son, and
after his, after these Cnemon: what Cnemon (quod Cnemon? Now Father ye take
from me the pleasantest part of this tale, as though you would make me a
beholder only of that, that was done in this Royalite, and not a hearer also.
You shall hear it, said Calasiris, seeing it pleases you, this was ye Song.
The song that the Thessalia^^ Virgins song in the honor of Thetis, and
Peleus, Achilles* and Pirrhus.


O Nereus God in surginge Seas,
we praise thy Daughter dear:
Whom Peleus at commandment,
of Joue did make his fear.
Thou art our Lady, Venus brave,
in Sea a glimsinge Star:
Who, thee Achilles, did bring forth,
a very Mars in War.
And Captain good unto the Greeks,
thy glory scales the skies:
To thee did thy redheaded Wife,
cause Pirrhus rough to rise.
The Trojans utter overthrow,
but stay to Greekishe host:
Be thou good Pirrhus unto us,
a favorable ghost.
Who here in grave intombed lie,
in Phoebus sacred ground:
Bow down thine ear, to t'holy Limbs,
that we to thee do sound.
And this our City suffer not,
in any fear to be:
Of thee, and Thetis is our song,
Thetis al hayle to thee.
Thus was the song made: Cnemon, as far as I remember, and there was so good
order in the song, and the measure of their dauncinge, agreed so well to the
sound of the instrument, that the eyes neglected that they saw, in comparison
of that they heard, and those that stood by, would follow the Maids that
passed on, as though they had benne constrained with the pleasantness of
their song, until the lusty youths with their Captain appeared, the sight
whereof was better, then all that they had seen before. The whole number of
these youths was fifty, which was divided into twice five and twenty, in a
manner guarded their Captain, who rode in the midst of them. Their Boots
wrought with Purple Lether, The Aenians apparel.
were foulded finely alitle above their ancles. Their clokes were buttened with
Buttons of Gold before their breasts, and were laid on with rownde blewe
Buttons, down unto the nethermoste hemme. Their Horses came all out of
Thessalia, which also showed by their pleasant countenaunces, the good
Pasturage of their Country. They fomed on their brideles as though they
thought scorn, of such as rode on the^, yet they turned very readily as their
Riders would have them. Their Sadels, and the rest of their Harness was so
beset with Silver, and Gold, that in this point the young men seemed to
strive who should be brauest. But, Cnemon, those who were present, did so
despise, and pass these men thus apparailed, and look on the Captain
Theagenes (on whom was my care) that all, which showed Theagenes his cloak
with what was wrought thereon.
before very bright, was now darkened, as it had benne with some passinge
lightninge. Such brightness did his sight bring unto us, in as much as he
was on Horseback also, with a Spear of Ash, pointed with steel in his
hand, he had no Helmet on: but was bare headed. His cloak was of Purple
wrought with Gold, wherein was the battle of the Centaures, and Lapithes: on
the Button of his cloak, was Pallas pictured, bearing a Shilde before her
breaste wherein was Gorgons head. The comeliness, and commendation of that
which was done, was sommewhat increased by the easy blowinge of the wind.
Which moved his hear about his neck, parting it before his forehead, and
made his cloak wave, and the nether parts thereof to cover the back, and
buttockes of his Horse. You would have said, that his Theagenes his Horse.
Horse did know the beauty of his Master, and that he being very fair him
self, did bear a passinge seemly man, he rained so, and with priked up
ears, he tossed his head, and rolled his eyes fiercely, and praunsed, and
leapte in so fine sort. When he had the raines a little at will, he would set
forewarde courageously, and turn about on both sides, and beat the ground
with the tippes of his houfes lightly, and moderate his fierceness, with the
pleasantness of his Pace. Each man was amazed thereat, and gave the young man
the principal praise, as well for his courage, as also for beauty, and
comeliness of personage. At a word the common sort of women, What the
common sort of weemen did to Theagenes, and their opinion of him.
and such as could not moderate their affections, cast Apples, and Flowers
upon him, by that means, as might be geassed, seekinge to get his favor. For
they were al of this opinion, that there could be no human shape, which
could surmounte the seemelinesse of Theagenes. But after that Aurora, with
rosiall fingers, as says Homer, appeared, and the bewtifull, and wise
Cariclia, came out of Dianas Temple. Then I perceived that Theagenes begins
to love Cariclia.
Theagenes could be conquered, but so far conquered, as the natural
seemelinesse of woman's beauty has the more, and greater force at first to
bring under. For she was carried in a Chariot, drawn with a yoke of white
How Cariclia was attyred.
Oxen, she had on a purple Gown down to her foot, spangled with Gold. She
was girded with a girdel, in making whereof, the woorkeman bestowed al his
craft, in yt he never made the like before, nor hable to frame such Cariclias
Girdell.
an other after. For he tied two Dragons tails behind her back, bitweene
her shoulders, bringing further their contrary necks under her pappes, with
an artificial knotte, sufferinge both their heads to hang down after it
was fastened about her. You would have said that the Serpents, did not
seem to creep, but crepte in deed. They were not fearful with their
terrible looks, but seemed as though they had been wantonly a sleep. As
touching their matter, they were Gold, but in color blewe. For the Gold by
art, was made black, that black, and blewe, might in deed represente the
sharpness, and diversity of scales, and such was the Maids Girdel. Her
hear was neither al bound up, nor al loose: but the most part thereof that
grew behind, hanged over her shoulders, that which grew from the crown of
her head downewarde to her forehead, being yealowe colored, was crowned with a
Garlande of young Laurel, which did not suffer the whole to be blown more
then was seemly with the vehemency of the wind. In her leafte hand she
bare a gilted Bow, and a quiver of Arowes hanged on her right shoulder, and in
her other hand she bare a Taper burning, and although she were so attyred,
yet there came greater light from her eyes, then from the Taper. Those same
are Theagenes, and Cariclia in deed, said Cnemon. Calasiris thinkinge that he
had spied them somewhere, asked him, and where be they? show me them for
Gods sake. Me thought, Father (quod he) I saw them, being not here, you
have described them so well, and as I my self remember well, Men and women
happy* if they were like Theagenes, and Cariclia.
I have seen them. I cannot tell, quoth he, whether you saw them so attyred,
as at that time al Greece, and the son him self did see them. So fair and
so happy, were they as men had felicity yenough, if they were like him, and
weemen if they were like her. For they counted it an immortal thing to be
such a couple. Although the people of that Country rather praised the young
man, and the Thessalians, the Maid, both praising that wonderfully which
they never saw before. For a new countenance, and seldom seen doothe more
move the mind, then that wherewith we are daily acquainted. But oh delectable
deceit, O acceptable opinion, how did thou comfort me, Cnemon, when I
hoped that thou had seen my dear Children, and would have showed me
them? But thou go about utterly to deceive me. For whereas you promised me
at the first, that they would come by and by, and had for reward of so
dooinge, obtained of me this tale of them, yet cannot you shows me them,
although the eueninge approach, and it be dark night. Be content, quothe he,
and fear not, for they will come without doubt. Perhaps there is some let, that
they come not so soon as was appointed betwixt us, otherwise, If they were
here, I would not show you the^, before I had the whole Hier that you
promised me. Wherefore, if you desire to see them in haste, perform that you
promised, and make an end of your imperfect tale. I, quoth he, am very
unwilling to do that which brings me in mind of that which greeueth me
much, and I supposed that you had benne weary of this my so long pratlinge.
But seeinge you be so desirous to hear, and can never be wearied with a good
tale, go too, let us proceed where we left. Yet first let us light a
Candel, Calasiris was very superstitious.
and do Sacrifice to the Gods, that govern in the night, that having
performed the accustomable Ceremonies, we may lie quietly, and tell forewarde
our tale. He said thus, and forthwith a Maid brought in a Candel lighted,
and he finished his Sacrifice, and called upon diverse of the Gods, but
especially upon Mercury, and desired to have some happy dream that night, and
that his derely beloved children, might appear unto him in his sleep, he
prayed humbly, when he had thus done, he said, after that the young men had
gonne three times about Neoptolemus his Sepulture, in their bravery on
horseback, the Weemen cried out pitiously, and the Men made a strange noise.
Therewithal suddenly all the Oxen, Rams, and Goats, were killed, as if
they had benne slain at one stroke: last of all, when the Aultare being of
wonderful greatness had six hundred cloven logges laid upon it, and all
manner of lawful offeringes were added thereunto, they made request, that
Apolloes Priest might begin the Sacrifice. Caricles said, that The manner
of the Sacrifice with the ductie of the Priest of Apollo, and the ^^ians
Captain of their holy Embassadge
the Sacrifice in deed apperteined unto him, but the Captain of this Holy
Legation, should take the Taper of her, that was President of those Ceremonies,
and set the Altar on fire, for so was the Country fascion. This he said, and
did Sacrifice, and Theagenes took the Taper. Surely, Cnemon, that the mind is
a heavenly thing, and of great affinity with the superior nature, we may
know by the deeds, and works thereof. For they looked one upon an other, as
though the mind knew first that, which was like to it self, and did
approach near to that, which both in excellency, and Dignity was of
affinity to it. At the first therefore they stood still suddenly, as
though they had benne amazed. And she delivered her Taper with a constant
countenance, and he likewise received it, and viewed one an other The sundry
countenaunces, and behauiours of Lovers.
with so stedie eyes, as if either had seen, and known other before, and now
could not call to remembrance where. This done, they smiled alitle, but so
that it could scantly be perceived by their countenance. Afterward as though
they were ashamed of that they did, they blushed: within a while after, when
this affection, as I think, had griped their hearts, they became pale. At a
word, six hundred countenaunces appeared in their faces in short time, and
the changinge of all kind of color, and the rowlinge of their eyes, plainly
betokened the troubles in their mind. The people yt were present, as may be
gheassed, perceived not this, because every one thought of diverse matters,
neither Caricles, who at that time, repeted the usual Prayer. Only I did
nothing, but mark the young Couple, after that the Oracle spoke of Theagenes,
dooinge Sacrifice in the Temple, and by conjecture of their names, was moved to
suspecte that, which after should come to pass, yet I knew nothing
exquisitly, of that which was signified in the later part of the answer.
But after that at length, and as it were by force, Theagenes was withdrawn
from the Maid, and with his Taper set fire on the Aultare, the Pomp was
broken up, and the Thessalians went to bankettinge, and all the other people
went every man to his own house. Cariclia also puttinge on a white cloak,
with a few of her familiars, went into her own Chamber, which was within
the compass of the Temple. For she dwelled not with her supposed Father, but
altogether separated her self from him, that she might not be dissuaded from
her purpose. I being now made more curious, by reason of that I had hard,
and seen, came to meet Caricles of set purpose. Who asked me, saw you
Cariclia, my joy, and the honor of the people of Delphos? This was not the
first time (quoth I) but I saw her before, as often as the people resorted to
the Temple, not as one that stood a far of, as the Proverb is, but she
has done Sacrifice together with me, and if she doubted of any point,
either of Divine, or human matters, she would ask me, and I told her.
How liked you her at this time, quoth he? Did she set forth this brave
sight any whitte? Mary Sir Caricles (quoth I) you seem to ask me, whether the
Moon do exceed any whitte the the lesser Stars. They praised, said he,
the Thessalian young man, giving him the second place after her, yea and the
third too, quoth I. But in deed they acknowleged your Danghter to be the
principal show, yea and the very eye of the Pomp. Caricles was well pleased
with this (and I began now to draw to the purpose, especially desiringe
that he would be of good heart, and doubt nothing) who smilinge alitle
said, I go to her now, and if it please you, go with me, and let us see,
whether this great company has benne any thing noisome unto her. I was
very glad of this request, yet I made as though, I had other business to do:
but was content to leave that, and go with him. After we came where she
was, and had gonne into her chamber, we found her sick on her bed, and
could take no rest, and all her eyes bedewed Cariclia in Love.
with low drops. After her Father was come in, and she (as was her manner)
had embraced him, he asked her what she ayled. See made him answer, that her
head did ache, and that she would feign sleep if she might. Caricles mutche
grieved with this, went out of her chamber with me, and commanded the Maids,
to make as little noise as might be, and after he came before his own house,
he said. What should this mean good Calasiris? What disease has my dear
Daughter? Marvel not, quoth I, if she having showed her self in such a
company, has benne spied by sum spiteful eye. He smiled at this, and
said in iestinge wise, you then do believe, as men commonly do, that there
is Witchcrafte. Ye mary, quoth I, and verily, as I think there is any thing
true, and that for this cause. The air Calasiris proves by diverse reasons
that there is witchinge.
which is about us on every side, enteringe into us by our eyes, nosthrilles,
mouth, and other Pores, cariynge with it such outward qualities as it is
indewed withal, does in graffe alike infection in them, who have received it.
For which cause when a man has enuiously looked upon any excellent thing,
forthwith he has filled the air with that Pestilent quality, and sent
forth also that poisoned breathe to that which is near at hand. That same
air being a sclender and subtle thing, perseth even to the boanes, and very
marowe, and by that means has envy benne cause to many of that disease,
which we call by a proper name Bewitchinge. Consider that also Caricles, how
many have gotten sore eyes, and the plague, though they neither touched those
that had such diseases, nor eat at their table, nor lay in their beds, but
only by being in the same air: as well as any thing else. Let love be an
argument, The air is infectious.
or proof of this, who takes his beginning and occasion of that which is
seen, and so as if it were some preuy passion, by the cies is suffered to
enter into the heart. And this is like to be true. For saying of al our other
Pores, and senses, sight is capable of most mutations, and the hotest: it
must needs receive such infections as are about it, and with a hot spirit,
entertain the changes of Love. If need be, I will bring, for examples sake,
some reason out of the holy Books, gathered of the consideration of Nature.
Charadrius heals those that have the The bird Charadrius, if one that has
the Kings evil see her, heals him that is so diseased, but dies thereof
her self. The Nature of the serpent ^^siliscus.
Kings evil, which bird flies away, as soon as any that has this
discase, has spied her, and turns her tail toward him, shuts her eyes.
Not (as some say) because she would not help him, but that in lookinke upon
him, she draws that evil disease unto her by nature, and therefore she
declineth such sight as a present peril. And perhaps you have heard how the
Serpent Basiliscus with his only breathe and look, does dry up and
corrupt, all that it passes by: and it is no marvel if some do bewitche,
such as they hold most dear, and wish best unto, for saying they be
envious by nature, they do not what they would, but what by nature they are
appointed. After he had stayed a little at this, he said, you have discussed
this doubt right wisely, and with very probable arguments. I would to God
that she might once feel what affection and love means: Then would I not
think that she were sick, but in most perfect health, and you know that I
have craved your healpe to bring this about. But now nothing less then this
is to be feared, to have happened to her, who hates her bed, and will be
won with no Love, but she rather seems to be bewitched in deed: and I
doubt not, but you will undo this witchcrafte, for the friendship which is
betwixt us, and to show us some point of your singular wisdom, I promised
him if I could perceive her grief, to healpe her what I could. And while we
yet talked of their matters, one came to us in have, and said: Good sirs, you
make such tariance, as if you should come to a battle, or skyrmishe, and not
to a banquet: The maker whereof, is the excellent Theagenes, and great
Neoptolemus the president at the same. Come thither, neither let the Banquet
through your defaulte, be continewed till night, saying none, but you, are
away. This fellow (quod Caricles to me in mine ear) bids us with a cudgil
in his hand. O what a lofty fellow Bacchus is, if he be well washed. But let us
goo, for it is to be doubted, least if we tarry, he will drive us forward. You
jest, said I, yet I am pleased, let us goo in deed. When we came, Theagenes
placed Caricles beside him self, and honored me also somewhat for his sake.
Why do I trouble you now, with tellinge how the Maids daunced, and what
instruments were there, and how the young youths daunced the dance called
Pyrricha in armoure, and others, which Theagenes had mingled with fine and
delicate meats, orderinge his banquet, as if it had benne but a Drinkinge, but
that which is needful for you to hear, and pleasant for one to tell, was
thus, Theagenes set a merry countenance on the matter, and strained him self
wonderfully that he might intertaine Calasiris espieth that Theagenes was in
Love.
his gheastes courteously, and make them good cheer. But I perceived whereto
his mind was bente, by the rowlinge of his eyes, and sudden sighinge without
cause. Sometimes he was sad, and in a muse, streightway, as though he knew
his own fault, and would correct him self, he would be merry: to be
short, he changed his countenance a thousand ways. For the mind as well
Dronken men and Lovers in a manner like.
of a lover, as of a dronken man is flexible, and can tarry in no certain
state, as though they both swimmed in a moiste affection. And for that cause a
Lover will soon be drunk, and a dronken man soon in Love. Afterward by his
sorrowful gapinge, and careful countenance, al those who were there, saw that
he was not well. So Caricles also perceiuinge that, said to me softely. What
means this variety? Some envious eye has looked upon him also. Me thinks
that Cariclia, and he, have one disease: They have one, and the same in deed,
by Isis said I, and not without cause, in as much as in this royalty next to
her, he was the fairest person. Thus talked we. But after the cups should goo
about, Theagenes drank to every man, although against his will, for
courtesies sake. When he came to me, I said, that I thanked him for his gentel
proferre, but drank not. Thinkinge that I had despised him, he looked upon me
angerly, and with burninge eyes. Which as soon as Caricles perceived, he
said, this man drinks no wine, nor eats of the fleashe of any living
thing. He asked, why? He is, Isis Priesles drink no wine, neither eat they
the fleashe of any living thing.
quod he, an Egyptian, borne at Memphis, and Isis Priest. When Theagenes
perceived that I was an Egyptian, and a Priest, he conceived a wonderful
pleasure, and stretched him self for joy, as those, who have found some
great treasure, and called for water, and after he had drunk a good draught,
he said, Right wise man, I have drunk to you of that which you like best,
and I pray you, let this table make a lasting league of Amity between us.
Let it do so worthy Theageanes, quod I, for I have a good while desired the
same, and so receiuinge it at his hand, did drink, and with such talk we
made an end of the banquet, and went every one to his own lodging. But
Theagenes embraced me very lovingly, and with diverse kisses, both oftener,
and more familiarely then our former acquaintance suffered. After I came home,
I sleapte not the first part of the night, thinkinge diversely of the young
couple, and diligently studied, what the later end of the Oracle should mean.
Apollo and Diana, sent to deliver Theagenes and Cariclia, to Calasiris in his
dream.
When it was midnight, I saw Apollo, and Diana, as I thought (if I thought,
and it was not rather so in deed) and he delivered Theagenes to me, and she
Cariclia, and calling me by my name, it is time, said they, that you return
into your Country, for so the Ladies of destiny, command you. Goo therefore
hence thy self, and take these with thee, and love them as thine own
Children, and bring them out of Egypt, whether, and how it shall please the
Gods. When they had said thus, they went away, and gave a token, that it
was not a dream which I saw, but a thing done in deed. I understood all
the rest as I had seen it, but into what Country, or to what people they
should be carried, I could not tell. You will tell me hereafter Father (quod
Cnemon) if you know your self, but how said you, the Gods were showed to
you, not in your sleep, but manifestly appeared? Even so my Son (quod he) as
wise Homer in a A rule of Homer, how to know the Gods: expounded by Calasiris.
manner by a Riddle did notify, mary many do let the hardness of the saying
pass, as he says somewhere.

His feet and thighs behind, by goeinge easily I knew:
The Gods also may be espied, and known, this is true.
And I my self seem to be one of that sort (said Cnemon) and perhaps to
reprove me, you Calasiris, have made mention of these Verses, the words
whereof I well remember, since the time I first learned them, but that there
is Divinity contained in them, I know not. Calasiris stayed at this a little,
and made him ready to tell him the secret meaning of them, and said. The
Gods, Cnemon, and other heavenly powers, coming too, and goinge from us, do
change them selves seldom into ye likeness of other Creatures, but commonly
into men, that we supposing, by the likeness of the Figure, that we saw, was
a dream, may so be beguiled. So although the rude, and profane people know
them not, yet can they not escape a wise man, but he will know them, either by
their eyes, in that they look steadfastly, and never shut their eye liddes,
but best by their gate, in that they move not their feet, neither set one
foot before an other, but are carried with violence of the air, rather
slidinge through, then stridinge over the winds. Wherefore How the Egyptians
make the images of their Gods.
the Egyptians make the Images of the Gods, with their feet joined
together and not seperable asonder. Which thing the skillful Homer, like an
Egyptian, and one well instructed in the holy doctrine, secretly, and closely
signified in his Verses, leauinge it to the understanding of such as could
attain thereto. Of Pallas he speaks thus: Also her terrible eyes did glister
as she looked. And of Neptune thus: His feet and thighs, by goinge easily, I
knew. As though he swimmed in his gate, for thus must you take it, by goinge
easily, not as some being deceived, have thought easily I knew. You have well
instructed me in these things, quod Cnemon. But in that you often call Homer an
Egyptian, I can not believe that, and therefore am in much marvel about it. I
pray you, discuss this doubt also. Although Cnemon, it be nothing near to
A pretty discourse, whereby Calasiris proves Homer to be an Egyptian. Thebes a
City of Egypt.
our purpose, to talk of such things, yet I will briefly tell you. Homer by
report of diverse men, is ascribed unto diverse Countries, and in deed, to a
man of good courage, no Country comes amiss But to tell the troth, he was our
Countryman, an Egyptian, borne at Thebes, which has an hundred gates, as of
him self a man may know, and his Father a Priest, as some think, and not
Mercury as is falsely fained. His Father was supposed to be a Priest, because
as he celebrated certain Sacrifices in the Temple with his wife, who by
chance slepte there, the God lay with her, and engendered Homer, who had
about him a token of unlawful generation, for on both his thighs there
grew from his birth a great deal of hear. Whereof as he traueled, as well in
Greece, as in other Countries, and made his Poem, he gained his name. He him
self neither would tell his name, nor his Country, nor kindred: therefore
those, who knew that quality of his body, gave him a name thereof. To what
end, Father said Cnemon, would he not tell his Why Homer concealed his
Country.
Country? Either (quod he) because he was ashamed of his banishmente, for he
was driven out of his Country by his Father, at what time, having passed the
age of fourtene years, he should have been numbered among those, that were
consecrated, for that by the mark on his body, he was known to be a bastard,
or else for policy, that while he concealed his own Country, he might
lawfully say, that he was borne every where. You seem to discuss these
things very well and wisely, said Cnemon, gatheringe your conjecture of his
Verse, which is stuffed with all pleasure, and delectation, right Egypt like,
which no doubt should not so far have passed all other, if he had not had
some heavenly foundation. But after (as Homer did) you perceived that they were
Gods, tell me, Calafiris, what followed. Surely, Cnemon, such things as went
before, I slepte little, devised much, and fell into such cogitations, as
likes the night well. I was very glad in hope to find such things as I
thought upon, and also looked for return into my Country. Yet was I sorrowful
that Caricles should loose his Daughter. I bethought me, how I might carry
the young folks with me, and some means was to be devised how to get
away. Then was I troubled as touching our flight, how we might do that
privily, and whether we should direct it, whither by Sea, or Land. While I
lay thus, a thousand thoughts arose in my head, and I slepte no more that
night. And it was scante day, when one knocked at my door, and I heard a
boy call, my man asked who called, and what he would have? who answered,
that Theagenes ye Thessalian was there. I was glad of those tidinges, and
badde him be called in, thinkinge that this beginning did profer it self,
that I might learn, how to bring to pass, that which I was about. For I
gheassed that he came to crave my healpe to obtain his Love, because he heard
that I was an Egyptian, and a Priest. So affected (as I think) as many be,
who suppose the wisdom that the Egyptians have, to be one, and the same, but
are deceived. For thereof Two kinds of wisdom are professed of the
Egyptians, and what they be.
is one kind common, and (as I may term it) crepinge on the ground, which
ministereth Signs, and is occupied about dead bodies, using Herbs, and
addicted to inchauntmentes, neither tendinge it self, nor bringinge such as
use it, to any good end, but is often deceived by the own practices, sometimes
shewinge terrible, and vile tokens, that is to say, visions of such things,
as are not, as though they were, and beguileth men of such things as they
looked for, a deviser of mischieues, and minister of all foul, and lost
pleasures. The other, my Son, which is the true wisdom, and from whence the
other conterfaite has degenerated, which we Priests, and holy men do
practice from our youth, is conuersante with heavenly things, lives with the
Gods, and is partaker of better Nature, consideringe the mouinge of the
Stars, and countinge it a vantage to know things to come, far removed
from these earthly evils, and directs all things, to the honesty, and
commodity of men. By which, I also left my Country for a time, if by any
means I could avoid such things, as I told you of before, yt were foreshewed
unto me, and the battle between my sons. But let us commit these
things as well to the other Gods, as also to the Ladies of destiny, in whose
power it consists, whether they shall do this or not, who as well decreed my
banishment, for such things as I gathered before, as also that I should
find Cariclia, how that happened, you shall know by that which followed.
After Theagenes was come in, and badde me good morrow, and I had saluted him
again, I set him on my bed beside me, and asked him, what earnest matter
drove you hither to me thus early? After he had stroked his face a little, I am
in great danger, quod he, and I am ashamed to tell you how. I thought it then
a fit time to gloss with him, and to gheasse at that, which I knew well
enough. Therefore lookinge upon him cherefully, I said, although you be
ashamed to tell me, yet nothing can be hid from my Wisdom, and the
Calasiris makes as though he were a southsayer to Theagenes, and so r^uinge at
the cause of his cominge, happens to glaunce some what near the mark.
Theagenes pained the more because he was never in Love before. VVherby may be
gathered that the first Love pincheth ^^ s^^.
knowledge of the Gods. And after I had lifted up my self a little, and made
as though I would have cast some accounte with my fingers, and spredde my
hear about mine ears, like one that would have Prophesied, I said, my
Son thou art in Love, he started at that word, and when I had added, with
Cariclia, then he supposinge that I had known it of God, missed but a little,
that he had not fallen down and woorshipped me. Which when I would not let
him do, he came to me, and kissed my head often, and gave God thanks that his
hope had not failed him, and prayed me heartily that I would save him: For he
should not live if he had not healpe, and that presently: so great was the
mischief that he had, and so vehemently did his heart burn, the rather for
that he never was in Love before. For he swear unto me many oaths, that he
never had to do with woman, and that he utterly refused Marriage and Love, if
any were proffered him, until Cariclias beauty had ouercomen him. Not because he
was chaste of nature, or could not do like other men, but because till
then, he never saw woman worthy to be loved: and as he said thus, he wept,
Theagenes is in love aginste his will.
in token that by force, and against his will, he was subdued by the Maid. I
took him up, and comforted him, and said, be of good cheer, for seeinge you
have come to me for help, she shall not be stronger then my wisdom, in deed
she is stout, and will hardly be made to love, utterly despisinge love, and
may judge, if she but hear them named, but for your sake, we must try al
means. Art can break nature, only you must be bold, and Art can break
nature.
of necessity, do what so ever I command you. He promised to do all that I
would will him, and thus, while he was praying, and beseechinge me, and for my
pains, promised to geeue me all that ever he had: One came from Caricles, and
said, Sir, Caricles desires you, to come to him. He is in Apolloes Church
hereby, and prays to God, for that he has benne troubled, I know not how,
by certain dreams. Therewithal I rose, and when I had sent Theagenes away,
and was come into the Church, I found Caricles sittinge in a stalle very
sad, and sorrowful. I came to him, and why be you so sad, quod I* He
answered, why should I not* Seeinge that diverse visions in my sleep, have
troubled me, and my Daughter, as I hear, is very sick, and sleapte never a
wink this night? For my part, although for diverse causes her disease
greeueth me, yet the greatest is, for that to morrow is a day ordained for
sport, and the custom is that It was Cariclias duty to hold the Garlande
because she was Priest.
she, which is entered into these holy Orders, should hold the Garlande to
those that run in armoure, and ouersee that pastime, one of these two
things must needs happen, that either her absence must break of this long
accustomed Order, or else by coming against her will, she shall be more sick.
Wherefore if before you could not, yet now help her, and do us this good
turn, which shall well beseem our friendship, and deserve good at Gods hand.
I know that it is easy for you, if you will, even to heal one (as you say)
bewitched. For i^ is not impossible for such holy Priests, to bring
woonderful Caricles thought that Calasiris could do wonders belike.
things to pass. I told him, that I had esteemed lightly of it til then,
bringing him also into a vain opinion, and now I craved liberty, but one
day, that I might make some medicine for her. At this present, said I, let us
go to the Maid, to consider of her more diligently, and to comfort her as
much as we may. And I would also yt you, Caricles, should have some talk of
me with the Maid, and by your commendation bring me into better credit with
her, that she being more familiare with me, may the boldelier suffer me to
heal her. Content, said he. After we came to Cariclia, to what end should
we make many words? She was altogether vanquished by affection, and the
beauty of her color, was gonne out of her face, and the heat thereof, was
quenched with tears, as if it had been with water, yet when she saw us come
in, she framed her self, and went about to call again, her accustomed
countenance. Caricles imbracinge her, and making much of her, leaving no
kind of courtesy, my Child, my dear Daughter, quod he, will thou not tell
thy Father, what thy disease is? And seeinge thou art over looked, do thou
hold thy peace, like one that had done wrong, and not benne iniuried thy
self by those eyes, which have so vnluckely looked upon thee? But have you a
good heart. This wise man Caricles commends Calasiris to Cariclia.
Calasiris, is requested by me, to find some remedy for thee, which he can
well perform, for he is as excellent as any man else, in heavenly knowledge,
as one by profession, a Priest, and that, which is the best my very friend.
Wherefore you shall do very well, if you suffer him without any impedimente,
to use for your health, either any inchauntment, or what else so ever he will,
for as much, as otherwise you are well pleased with the familiarity, and
company of such wise men. Cariclia said Cariclia loved the company of wise
men.
nothing, but by countenance made as though she were well pleased with the
council he gave her, to suffer me to deal with her. When these things were
thus ordered, we went our way, and Caricles alwaie put me in mind, that I
should have regard to my promise, and bethink me, how I might make her have
a fancy to marriage, and a desire of men. I therewith made him very glad,
when I told him, that within short time, I would satisfy his mind.

Here ends the Third Book.
The Fourth Book.
THE next day Apolloes games did end, but youthful disportes began, Cupide
(in mine opinion) moderatour, and Arbiter thereof, being in full determination,
Cupid fully determined to try all that he was hable to do, with Theagenes,
and Cariclia. The manner of their disportes.
to declare his force, in most ample wise, by these two Champions, which he
had set together. Such was the sight. All Greece looked on, and
Thamphictiones sat in Judgment. After all other disportes were sumptuously
finished, as Runninge, Wrastlinge, fight with Plommetes; at last, the Crier by
Proclamation, called these in, that should run in Armor. And therewithal
Cariclia glistered at the race end. For she came, although against her
will, for the customs sake partly, but rather, in my judgment, upon hope to
see Theagenes somewhere: in her left hand, she had a burning Taper, and in
the other hand, a branche of Palm, and as soon, as she appeared, every man
looked upon her, but I cannot tell, whether any saw her before A Lover is
quick eied.
Theagenes, for a Lover is very ready to spy. That, with Love whereof he is
detained. But he, beside, that after he knew what should be done, thought
upon nothing, but to see her. Wherefore he could not keep his own council:
but said secretly to me (for he satte next me of purpose). That same is
Cariclia, but I badde him be quiet. After the Proclamation was ended, there
came forth one of goodly Personage, and of great courage, like whom in
honor was none in ye whole company, who in many courses before, had won the
Garlande: mary then there was none to contend with him, for that as I think,
none durst be so bold. The Thamphictiones therefore let him go. For by the
Law he may not have the Crown, that has not ventured for He is not
rewarded that ventureth not.
the same. Yet he made request, that challenge might be made against all
men. The Judges gave commandment, that it should be so, the Crier called
for some man, to run with that other. Theagenes said to me, This man calls
for me. For me, quod I, what mean you by that? It shall be so, Father (quoth
he). For none but I, if I be in presence, and look on, shall receive reward
of Victory at Cariclias hand. Do you neither care for, nor esteem the shame
that ensues, if you be ouercommed, said I. What man, said he, will look on
Cariclia, and appreche to her so hastily, that he can get before me? To whom
^an her eyes, give like Wings, as to me, and cause him fly so fast. Know
you not, that Painters make Love Why Cupide is pointed with two wings.
Theagenes light footed.
with two Wings, declaringe, as by a Riddel, the nimblenesse of those that be
in Love? And if I must needs boaste, beside that I said already, hitherto
never any man vaunted, that he out ran me. When he had said thus, he leapte
forth, and went down, declared his name, and Country, and went to the
least end, and when he had put on his Armoure, he stood at the place
appointed, pantinge for great desire he had to run, and was very unwilling,
and bad much adoo to tarry the sound of the Trumpet. It was a goodly sight,
and worthy to be looked on, much like that, wherein Homer brings in
Achilles, as he ran at Scamander, al Greece was much moved at this deed,
which fell contrary to their expectation, and wished the Victory to Theagenes,
as heartily, as if every man had run him self. For the comelines of
Comeliness of Personage gets the good will of men.
Personage, is of great force to get the good will of men. Cariclia also was
moved out of measure, and I saw it, by reason I looked upon her a great
while, and espied how her countenance changed diversely. For after the Crier
had in all men's hearing, named those that should run. Ormenus, an Archadian,
and Theagenes a Thessalian, they left their standinges, and finished their
race, as fast almost as men could look after them, there could not the
Maid be quiet any more, but her body was moved, and her feet leapte for joy,
as though her mind had benne with Theagenes, and helpte him in his race. All
those that looked on, waited to what end this would come, and were very
careful. But I above Calafiris takes Theagenes for his Son.
the rest, who had now determined with my self, to have like care of him, as if
he had been my son. No marvel, said Cnemon, if those that were there, and
saw him, were careful: now I my self am afraid for Theagenes, and
therefore if he get the price, I pray you tell me so much the sooner, after
they had run the middel of the race, Cnemon turned him a little about, and
frowninge upon Ormenus, lifted up his Shilde alofte, and stretched out his
neck, and with face fast fixed upon Cariclia, at last he got to the race
end, and starte so far before, that the Archadian was many yardes behind,
which quantity of ground was after measured. This done, he ran to
Cariclia, and of purpose fell in her lap, as though he could not stay him
self, and when he had Theagenes got the Garlande for runninge.
taken the Garlande, I saw well yenough, that he kissed her hand. O happy
turn, that he got the Victory, and kissed her too. But what then? Thou can
not only be satisfied with hearing this tale, neither easily ouercommed by
sleep, and although a great part of the night be paste, yet thou watchest, and
art not weary of so long Cnemon blames Homer for saieinge that a man might be
weary of Love. A man can not be weary to hear the Love of Theganes, and Cariclia
a whole year.
a tale. I blame Homer (Father said he) for that he said, a man might as well
be weary of Love, as of any thing else. Whereof in mine opinion, a man can not
be weary neither if he be in Love him self, or hear of others Love. And if any
man talk of the Love of Theagenes, and Cariclia, who is so stony or hard
hearted, that he would not conceive delight therein, although he should hear
nothing else a whole year. Wherefore go forewarde with your tale. Theagenes,
Cnemon, was crowned, and proclaimed Victor, and brought back with all men's
joyful gratulations. Now was Cariclia quite vanquished, and bound to Love
more, then she was before. When she had seen Theagenes the second time. For
the mutual sight of Lovers, is a remembrance, and Mutual sight of lovers is a
renewinge of Love.
renewinge of Love, and does as much inflame the mind, as fire when it is put
to any dry matter. After she came home, she abode a like night to the other,
or a worse. I also sleapt but little, for consideringe, whether we should go
to council our flight, and into what Country God would have the young couple
carried, and I coniectured that we must take our voyage by Sea, by the
Oracle where it said. And saylinge surginge streams: Shall come at length to
Country scortche, With burninge Phoebus beams. But whether they should be
conveyed, I could find but one way to know, if I could by any means get
the fascia which was laid out with Cariclia, wherein Caricles said, that he
heard say, all the Maids estate was notified. For I thought it was like
that, by it I should know the Maids Parents, and Country, which I began
already to suspecte, and perhaps also whither the Ladies of destiny would
send the^. When I came the next morning very early to Cariclia, I found all
her kinsfolks weepinge, and Caricles, as much as any other: when I came in,
what a do is here, said I? My Daughters disease (answered he) waxes worse,
and worse, and she has had a worse night of this, then she had any yet.
Get you hence, quod I, and all the rest avoid, and let one set me a
threefooted stool here, and a little Laurel with fire, and frankensense. And
let none come in to trouble me before I call, Caricles willed the same, and it
was done. Now, having gotten good occasion, I began to play my Pagent, as if
I had benne on a stage, and burned Frankensense, and mumbled with my lips,
and laid Laurel on her, from top to toe, and at length when I had drowsily,
or old wiselike gaped, and plaide the fool a great while with my self, and
the Maid, I made an end. She, while I was thus dooinge, wagged her head
often, and smiled, and told me, that I was deceived, and knew not her grief.
Therewith I sat near her, and said, my Daughter be of good cheer, thy grief
is common, and easy to be healed, without doubt, thou art over looked, not
only when you were at the Pomp, but more when you were ouerseer at the race,
which was run in Armoure. And he that has thus looked on you, I think, is
Theagenes, for I perceived well, that he often beheld you, and cast many wanton
looks at you. Whether he did so, or not, said she, well fare he. But what
Countryman is he, or of what Line is he descended? For I saw many wonder
much at him. You heard that he was a Thessalian, by the Crier that uttered
his name, and he fetches his petygree from Achilles, and in my judgment, he
may do so by good reason, who do A pretty comme^dation of Theas genes for
courtesy, with a nippe to Achilles for his ar^oga^cie, and pride
deem no less by his tale stature, and comely Personage, which manifestly
confirm Achilles blood. Saving that he is not so arrogant, and proud as he
was, but does moderate, and assuage the hautinesse and fierceness of his
mind, with commendable courtesy, which thing seeinge it is so, although he
have an envious eye, and with his looks has bewitched you, yet has he him
self more pain, then he has caused you to have. O Father. quod she, I
thank you, that you be sorrowful for our mishappe, but why do you speak evil
without cause of him, who has done us no harm. For I am not bewitched, but
have, as I gheasse, some other infirmity. Then Daughter, said I, why do you
conceal it, and not franckely utter it, that we may with more ease find
remedy thereto. Am not I in age, yea rather in good will your Father? Is not
your Father familiarly acquainted with me? Are we not of one profession? Tell
me your disease, I will keep your council: yea, and if you will, I will be
bound by oath to you so to do. Speak boldly, and suffer not your infirmity
to increase by silence. For every grief, which is soon known, can easily To
much lingringe makes diseases incurable.
be cured: but that which by long time has gotten strength is almost
incurable: for silence does much succor any disease, but that which is
uttered, may by comfort easily be remedied. With this she stayed a little, and
declared by her countenance many changes of her mind, and said, let me alone
to day, and you shall know it hereafter, if you know it not before, because
you would have us think, that you are a Southesaier. Therewith I rose, and
departed, geuinge her leave to moderate the bashfulnesse of her mind. Then
Caricles met me, and have you any good news to tell me, quoth he? All shall be
well, said I, for to morrow she shall be healed of her infirmity. When I had
said thus, I made haste to be gonne, that he might ask me no more questions.
After I was gonne a little from the house, I spyed Theagenes walkinge about the
Church, and the Cloisters, reasoning with him self, as though he had yenough,
if he saw but Cariclias Theagenes glad to see the house of Cariclia.
house. I turned a little aside, and passed by, as I had not seen him. He saw
me, and said, God speed you, and tarry I pray you, for I waited for you. I
turned suddenly about, and said, is this bewtiful Theagenes, surely, I saw
him not. How is he bewtifull, said he, that doothe not please Cariclia? I
set a face on it, as if I had benne angry, and said, will not you leave to
speak evil of me and my skill, by which she is intrapped and constrained to
love you, and does desire to see you, as one that is better then her self.
What say you Father, said he? Does Cariclia desire to see me? why do you
not then carry me to her? and therewith he ran forth. But I caught him by
the clock, and said, stand still here, although you be very light footed,
for you must not handle this matter as if it were a pray, or easy for every
man that list to get the same? But it must be done with great Counsel, and
performed with no small provision. Know you not that her Father is the Noblest
man in Delphis? Do Among the Delphia^s, death is ordained to such as steal
away any Maid.
you not remember that the Laws appointe death a reward to such? The matter
were not great, quod he, if I died, after I had my will of Cariclia. But if
you think it good, let us goo to her Father, and desire her of him to be my
wife, for I am worthy yenough to be Caricles kinsman. We shall not prevail,
said I, not because he can find any fault in you, but for that he has
promised her, in Marriage to his Sisters Son. He shall repent it, said he,
who so ever he be, for while I live, there shall no other wedde Cariclia, this
hand of mine is not yet so benumbed, neither my swoorde so blunte. Be
content, said I, we shall have no need of any of these things, be only
ruled by me, and do as I command you, for this time depart, and take heed
you be not spied to talk with me often, but when you come, come privily, and
alone: He went his way very sad. Caricles met me the next day, and
as soon as he saw me, he ran to me and kissed my head oftentimes,
continually criynge of such force is your wisdom, such is our Freendship.
Thou haste brought a great business to pass, she is taken now, that was
hard to be won, and she that was before invincible is now subdued:
Cariclia is in Love. I began to wagge my head at this, and knitte my brows,
and yet proudely, and said there was no doubt, but that she should not be
able to abide the first assault, when as yet I have done no greater thing to
her. But tell me, Caricles, how you perceived that she was in love? When I had
gotten very trusty Physicians, as you gave How Caricles perceived. that
Cariclia was in love.
me Counsel, I brought them to her, and promised them all the riches I had,
if they could cure her. As soon as they came into her, they asked what her
disease was, and where her pain held her. She turned her face from them, and
repeted with a loud voice, this Verse of Homer. Achilles is the brauest man,
of all the Greekishe rowte. Acestinus a wise man (perhaps you know him) took
Acestinus a Physician.
her wriste in his hand, although against her will, and seemed to judge her
disease, by the beatinge of her pulse, which declares (as I gheasse) the
state of the heart: after he had felt her pulse a good while, and had looked
often upon every part of her, he said, Caricles, you have brought us hither in
vain, for Physic can do her no Physic can do Cariclia no good.
good. O God, said I, why say you so, must my Daughter die without all hope
of recovery? Make not such adoo, said he, but hear me, and so when we were
in a corner, that neither the Maid, nor any other could hear us: he said.
Our Art does profess the curinge of distempered A pretty discourse of
physic, where, and when it avails.
bodies, and not principally of the diseased mind, but then when it is
afflicted with the body, so that when that is healed, then is it also cured.
The Maid in deed is diseased, but not in body, for no humor abounds, the
head ache greeueth her not, no ague burns her, nor any part or parcelles of
her body, is grieved: accoumpt this, and nothing else to be true. I heartily
prayed him, if he perceived any thing by her, to utter it to me. Does not the
Maid know (quod he) that Love is an affection and What love is, and the
qualities thereof.
manifest grief of the mind? Do you not see that her eyes be swollen, and
looks every way, and is pale in her face, but finds no fault with her
heart? beside this she raueth, and utters what so ever comes into her
mind, and watches without cause. At a word she has suddenly lost the
moisture of her body, and just amplitude thereof. You must, Caricles, if it
be possible, find her out a man: and when he had said thus, he departed. I
come in haste to you my Savior and God, whom both I and she do acknowledge,
to be only hable to do us a good turn. For when I desired her often, and
diverse ways besought her, to tell me what she ailed, she made me this
answer, that she knew not what disease she had, mary she knew that none
could healpe her, but Calasiris, and therefore, she desired me to call you to
her. Whereby I chiefly gheassed, that your wisdom had brought her under: Can
you (said I to him) tell as well whom she loves, as that she is in Love?
No by Apollo, said he. For how, or by what means should I know that. Mary I
would above all things, that she loved Alcamenes, my Sisters Son, whom, as
much as lies in me, I have appointed to be her Husband. You may (said I)
try and bring him in, and show him to her. He liked my Counsel well, and
went his way. When he met me the next time, in the middle of the Town,
where great resort was, you shall hear said he a pitiful thing, my
Daughter seems to be out of her wits, such a strange infirmity has she.
I brought in Alcamenes as you badde me, and showed him her very freashly
apparailed, she (as though she had seen Gorgons Cariclia mad almost at
the sight of Alcamenes.
head, or some more fearful thing) cried with a loud voice, and turned her
countenance to the other part of the chamber, and put her hand to her throat
in steed of an halter, and threatened, that she would kille her self, and
bound it with an Oath too, if we dispatched not our selves out of the chamber
quickly. We went from her in less while then she spoke the words, for
what should we do, saying so fearful a sight? Now I come to beseech you
again, that you will neither suffer her to perish, nor me to be frustrate of
my purpose. O Caricles, said I, you said truly that your Daughter was
mad: for she is moved with the multitude, that I have burdened her with,
which are not of the least, but such as should force her to do, that which
she abhorred, as well by nature, as determination of mind. But I suppose that
some God takes an him to hinder this business, and to strive with my
ministers. Wherefore it is time that you show me her safety, which you
said, was found with her, with the other Jewels. I am afraid, least that be
enchanted, and wrought with such things, as do now exasperate her mind, by
reason, that sum Enemy had ordained this for her as soon as she was borne,
that she should be estraunged from all love, and die without Issue. He
allowed, that I said, and within a while after, he brought me the same,
wherein were Ethiopian Letters, not common, but such as the Princes use,
which are like the Letters that the Egyptians use in their Holy affairs, as
I readde it over, I found such things written therein. Persina, Queen The
contents of Cariclias fascia, which declares who are her Parents, and the
cause of her exposition.
of the Aethiopians to her Daughter only, in sorrow, by what name so ever
she shall be called, doothe write in haste this Lamentation contained herein, as
her last gift. I was astonished, Cnemon, when I heard Persinas name: yet I
readde that which followed, which was thus: My Daughter, the Sun being
Authoure of our stock, is witness, that for no misdeede, I have cast thee
forth, and concealed thee from thy Father Hydaspes sight: yet my Daughter, I
would have my self excused to thee, if thou happen to live, and to him, who
shall find thee, if God procure any, and to al men, and therefore I declare
the cause of thy Exposition. The greatest of The Aethiopians Gods are the
Sun, Bacchus, Perseus, Andromeda, and Memnon.
al our Gods, are the Sun, and Bacchus: The noblest next to these, are
Perseus, Andromeda, and Memnon, after them. Those, who have by Succession
edified, and finished the Kings Palaice, have portraied there many things
that they did: as for the dwellinge houses, and Galleries, they have set
diverse Images, and Noble acts of theires in them: but all the bed chambers
are garnished with Pictures, containinge the Love of Perseus, and Andromeda, in
one of them, after Hidaspes had benne Married to me ten years, and we had
never a child, we happened to rest after dinner in the Su^mer, for that we
were heavy a fleepe, at which time your Father had to do with me, swearinge
that by a dream he was commanded so to do, and I by and by perceived my
self with Child. All the time after until I was delivered, was kept Holy,
and Sacrifices of thanks geuinge were offered to the Gods, for that the
King hoped to have one now to succeed him in his Kingdom. But thou werte
borne white, which color is strange among the Ethiopians, I knew the
reason, because I Why Persina being blake, brought forth a white Daughter.
looked upon the picture of Andromeda naked, while my Husband had to do with
me (for then he first brought her from the rock, had by mishappe engendered
presently a thing like to her) yet I determined to rid my self of shameful
death (countinge it certain that thy color would procure me to be accused
of Adultery, and that none would believe me, when I told them the cause) and
to commit thee to the unstableness of Fortune, which is a great deal
rather to be wished, then present death, or to be called a bastard. And
tellinge my Husband that thou werte straight dead, I have privily laid thee
forth, with the greatest Kitches that I had, for a reward to him that shall
find thee, and take thee up. And besides that, I have furnished thee with
other things, I have wrapped thee in this blankette, wherein is contained the
sum of both our Estates, which I have written with tears, and blood that
I have shed for thee, by reason that I bare thee, and fell into much sorrow
for thee, at one and the same time. But o my sweet Child, and but for a small
while my Daughter, if thou live, remember thy Noble parentage, and love
Chastity, which is the Character and mark of womanly Chastity is the token
of womanly virtue.
virtue, and Princely mind, and follow thy Parents, by keepinge the same.
Above all things remember that thou seek for a certain King, among the
Iewelles that are about thee, which thy Father gave me, when we were first
made sure, in the hoope whereof is a Princely posie, the stoane is a Pantarbe,
of secreete virtue, consecrated in the place where it is set. These things
have I said to thee, inuentinge my writing to this use, sith that God had
taken from me the Ability to tell thee them to thy face, which as they may
be void of no effect with little labor, so may they be profitable hereafter.
For no man knows the uncertainty of Fortune is uncertain.
Fortune. To be short, that I have written, if thou live, shall be tokens to
thee (my bewtifull Daughter in vain, which by thy beauty procurest my blame)
of thy birthe. But if thou die, which God grant I never hear, they shall
serve to bury thee. After I had read this, Cnemon, I knew what she was, and
marueiled greatly at the governance of the Gods, and was full of pleasure and
sorrow, and altogether newely affected, weepinge and laughinge at ones, my
mind now became glad for the knowinge of that whereof I was ignorant
before, and for remembringe that which was answered by the Oracle, but very
much troubled for that which was to come, and had great pity and compassion
of the life Man's Life unstable.
of man, as a thing very unstable and weak, and bendinge every way, which I
knew them first by the hap of Cariclia. For I thought of many things, of
what Parents she was come, whose Child she was thought to be, how far
she was from her Country, and was now called Daughter by a false name,
whereas she had lost her natural Country soil, and royal blood of
Aethiopia. To make few words, I was a great while in study, for that I had
good cause to have pity, and bewail her state passed, and yet durst not
commend that which was to come, until pluckinge up my heart, I concluded,
that now it was not good to delaie the matter, but with speed to execute that
I had begone. And when I came to Cariclia, I found her alone, altogether
weried with love, and striuinge to withstand her fancy. Mary her body was
much afflicted, by reason that it yielded to her infirmity, and she was not
hable with any force to withstand the violence thereof. After I had then far
put them away, who were with her, and gave them charge that they should make
no noise, in manner as if I had made some Prayers and inuocations about the
Maid, I said to her. Now is the time come Cariclia, (for so you promised
yesterdaie) to tell me your grief, and not to conceal it any longer from a
man that loves you heartily, and also can know it though you hold your
tongue: she took me by the hand and kissed it, and therewithal she wept.
And said: wise Calasiris, grant me this favor first, suffer me to hold
Silence pleases unhappy people well.
my peace and be unhappy, in as much as you (will seem to) know my disease
all ready, and to account avoided ignominy, my gain, by concealinge that
which to suffer is evil, but to utter worse. Although mine increasinge
disease does much grieve me, yet that greeueth me more, that at the first I
overcame it not, but am yielded unto Love, which by hearing only does
defile The name of Love disgraceth virginity.
the honorable name of Virginity. With that I comforted her, and said. My
Daughter you do well, for two causes, to conceal your estate: For I have no
need to know that again, which by my skill I knew before. Women should
not discover their own love. Many weemen and Maids of noble race, have benne
in Love before Cariclia.
And not without cause you blushe to utter that, which it becomes weemen to
keep secret. But because thou haste ones tasted of Love, and Theagenes has
subdewed thee (for thus am I by divine inspiration informed) know that neither
thou art alone, nor the first that has benne thus affected, but many other
Noble women, and many Maidens (if you consider other things) very chaste have
tasted hereof as well as you. For Love is the greatest of the Gods, and is
said also sometime to overcome the Gods them selves. But now consider how
presently you may best order your business, in as much as at the first, not
to be in Love, is a kind of happiness, but when you are taken, to use it
moderately, it is a point Good Counsel for Lovers, how they shall use their love
well.
of excellent wisdom, which thing you may well do, if you will believe me,
by puttinge away the filthy name of lust, and imbracinge the lawful band of
weddinge, and turninge your disease into Matrimony. After I had said thus,
Cnemon, she was in a great swelte, and it was evident that she was glad of
that she heard, and greatly in fear, and much troubled for that she
hoped: at length she waxed read, to think in what manner she was taken.
After she had stayed a while: Father, said she, you do tell me of Marriage,
and bid me embrace that, as thought it were plain that either my Father
would be content therewith, or mine enemy, seek that. As for the young man,
said I, it is out of doubt. For he is more in Love then you, being moved
with like means so to do, by reason that both your minds (as is like) at
the first sight knew others excellency, and fell into like affection, and I
my self have made his Love the more, to do you a pleasure. But he that is
supposed to be your Father, provides you an other Husband, Alcamenes whom
you know well yenough. Let him (quod she) rather seek to late him in his
grave, then Marry him to me. Either Theagenes shall Cariclia will have Theagenes
or none.
have me, or that which is destinied to all men shall receive me. But I
prayeyou, tell me how you know that Caricles is not my Father in deed, but
supposed so to be. By this fascia (said I) and therewithal I showed it her:
Where had you that, or how came you by it, said she? for after he had
received me in Egypt, of him who brought me up, he brought me hither I know
not, how, and took that from me, and keapte it in a Cheste, that by
continuance of time it might not be spoiled. How I came by it (said I) you
shall hear afterward. But tell me presently, if you can tell, what is
contained therein: when she told me that she could not tell, it declares
(said I) your Parents, your Country, and all your Fortune. At last for that
she requested, that I would tell her what I knew, I told her al, readinge
it word by word, and interpretinge it to her. After she knew her self,
and had taken stomach unto her, she drew more near her own Petigree, and
said, what must we do? Then began I to tell her plainly all our devise,
and made her privy to every point. I, my Daughter (said I) have gonne into
Ethiopia, to learn some of theie wisdom, and was well acquainted with
Persina. The Kings Court of Aethiopia is a place, whereunto is great resort
of wise men, and therein are they well cherished.
For the Kings Court is a place for all wise men to resort unto. Mary I had
a little praise the more, by reason that I joined both the wisdom of Egypt,
and Ethiopia together, which made me of more credit a great deal. After
she understood that I would return into my Country, she told me all your
affairs, bindinge me by Oath first, to keep it secret, and said moreover
that she durst not tell it to the Wise men of that Country, and she desired
me to ask the Gods, first whether after your exposition, you lived: then in
what Country you were. For she could hear of none such in Ethiopia,
although she had made thereof diligent inquiry. I learned all of the Gods,
both that you were alive, and where you leadde your life. Then she Persina
requires Calasiris to seek Cariclia, and bring her home again.
besought me, that I would seek you out, and will you to return into your
Country. For, she said, that she lived without issue and Children, by
means of the great sorrow she conceived for your sake, and that she was
now ready to confess no less to your Father, if you at any time came to
light, and that she knew he would be persuaded, as well for that he had
experience of her, by long continuance of time, as also for great joy and
desire that he should have by one to succeed him contrary to his expectation.
Thus much she said, and desired The wisemen in old time* might not break
their Oath, if they had sworn by the Sun.
me to do it, by the Oath that I had sworn by the Sun, which may not be
violated of any of the Wise men. I came hither to perform the Oath, and made,
although I took not this viage for this cause only, yet I accounted it by the
will of the Gods, an advantage gotten in my long journey. I have benne busy
about this long, and have left no convenient service undone to you, yet I
told you not the matter, waitinge for just opportunity, and to get the
Fascia also by sum means to make dew proof of that I would say.
Wherefore you may, if you will be ruled, and goo away with us (before you
suffer any thing by violence which you would not, of Caricles, who provides
very busily to match you with Alcamenes) recover your Kindred, your Country,
and Parents, and dwell with Theagenes, who is ready to follow us into what
Country so ever we will, and to reign with your dear lone, that is content
to change his natural, and princely life, for our strange, and uncertain
state, if we shall give credit, not only to the Gods, and other things, but
also to the Oracle of Apollo. And with that, I brought the Oracle into her
remembrance, and declared to her, what it meante, which Cariclia knew before,
in as much as it was in every man's mouth. She starte back a little at
this: and after said, Father, seeinge you say, the Gods would have it so,
and I believe no less. What must we do? You must (quoth I) make as though
you were content with Alcamenes Marriage. That is, said she, very much, and
scante allowable, to prefer any man only in promise before Theagenes? But
Father, for as much as I have given my self into the hands of the Gods and
you, tell me the end of this tale, and A woman is best at a sudden attempt.
how it may be undone, before it be brought to effect. You shall know
(said I). Many things told before hand to woomen, have greatly hindered the
matter in hand: which being suddenly put in practice, are by them more
boldly atcheiued for the most part. Only follow my counsel, as well now, as
at other times, and be content to allow the marriage, which Caricles will
provide for you, who will do nothing without my counsel, and help. She made
promise so to do: and I went my way, and leafte her weepinge. I scantly was
gone out of her Chamber, but I saw Caricles, very sad, and full of sorrow.
Ah good Sir (said I) when you should follow me, and rejoice, and do
Sacrifice of thankesgeuing to the Gods, for that you have gotten, that which
before you desired, Cariclia, at length by much skill, and manifold wisdom,
made content to take a Husband, then are you sad, and heavy, and can scante
refrain from tears, but I know not why. Why should I not (said he)?
seeinge it shall come to pass, that the things, which I hold dearest in my
life, shall be carried into sum other Country, if we may give credit, as
well to the Dream that I had this night, as to others, wherein, me thought,
that an Egle, let fly out of Apolloes Caricles dream.
hand, came down, and took my Daughter out of mine arms, and carried her
into, I know not, what far Country, which was full of black, and ougly
shadows. At a word, I could not tell what he did with her, by reason that
the infinite distance of place took away Great distance of place, takes
away the sight of our eyes.
the sight of mine eyes. As soon as he had said thus, I knew whereto his
dream tended* But that I might withdraw him from this despair of mind, and
bring him far from suspicion of that which should comme to pass, I said,
Sir Priest, you seem not to Calasiris subtle exposition thereof.
deem arighte of this Vision, in as much as it for shows to you, the
marriage of your Daughter, and does secretly signify by the Egle, that she
shall have an Husband, and that this shall be so, Apollo will bring her an Husband
with his own hand, yet you seem to be angry, and construe your Dream worse,
then it is meante. Wherefore, Caricles, let us be merry, and addicte our selves
to the will of the Gods, labouringe every way the better to persuade the
Maid. He asked me what was best to be done, that the Maid might be more
obediente. If (quod I) you have any precious thing in stoare, or apparel
wrought with Gold, or any Jewel of price, bring them to her, as Tokens from
her Spouse, and appease her with gifts: For Gold, and Precious Stoanes are
woonderfully esteemed with woomen. You must provide other things for this
Solemnity also, and this Marriage must be dispatched presently, while her
desire thereto, which is wroughte by Art against her will, is stable, and
unchanged. After Caricles had said, think that I will omit nothing which I
can do, he went home, and for joy, as soon as I had leafte talkinge with
him, he made haste Caricles gives Cariclia all the Iewelles that her Mother
gave her at the time of her Exposition.
so to do. And he did in deed, as I perceived afterward, that which I
commanded him, without delaie, in bringinge, as well the costly Garmente, as
also the Iewesl of Aethiopia, which Persina laid forth with Cariclia, that
she might know what she was, as though they had benne Tokens from
Alcamenes. Then met I with Theagenes, and asked him where those were, who
were the Dooers of the Roialtie aforsaide. The Maids (quoth he) are gonne
away before, that they may take the easier iournies: and the young men will
tarry no longer, but make much adoo, and great provision to return to their
Conntrie. When I knew this, I told him what he should both say to them, and
do him self, and gave him charge, that he should wait until I gave him a
Token, what he should do. And so I leafte him, and went to the Temple of
Apollo, to pray the God, that he would instruct me as concerning my flighte
with the young God is ready to help those that work by his will.
couple. But the God was quicker then any man would think, who helps those
that do their business, according to his will, although he be not called
upon, oftentimes preuentinge their prayers with the readiness of his good
will: as even then it happened, that he prevented my question with the answer,
and did in deed declare his help, and pleasure. For as much as a certain
voice stayed me as I went by, to a Prophetess, and was very careful for the
perfourmance of that I determined: which said, you may make haste when the
strangers call you, who at that time, with the noise of Shames, made a
Banquette in the honor of Hercules. I went not so fast after I heard this,
for I might not go paste when God had called me. After I had with Frankensence
perfumed, and offered water, they seemed to wonder at the cost of my
Oblations: yet for all that, they desired me to take part of their Banquette.
I did so, and after I sat down on a Benche which they had strewed with
Myrte, and Laurel for strangers, and had eaten such meat as I was accustomed
to do, I said unto the^, good fellows, I thank you for my goo cheer. But I
am utterly ignorante of your Demeanor: wherefore it is time that ye tell me,
what ye are, and whence ye comme. For it is an unseemly, and very rude thing,
that those, who have done Sacrifice, and Banquetted together, and made holy
meat at the beginning of their friendeship, should depart without either
knowinge others affairs. Then they told me, that they were Merchauntes of
Tyros in Phoenicia, and that they sailed to Carthage in Aphrique, with a Ship
fraughted with Merchandyse of India, Aethiopia, and Phoenicia: At this time we
make a Banquette The Tyrians do Sacrifice to Hercules, for a victory that one
of their companions had.
to Hercules of Tyros, for a Victory which we have gotten, in as much as this
young man, pointing to him that sat before me, got the best game at
Wrastlinge: whereby he has proved, that a Tyrian may get the Victory in
the midst of the Greeks. For he, after we had sailed paste Malea, and by
force of Tempeste were constrained to land at the Island of the people of
Cephalem, swear unto us by this our Country God, that in his sleep it was
told him, he should obtain the Victory in these sportes of Apollo. And when
he had persuaded us to turn from our intended course, and land here, he made
proof by deed, that his Prophecy was true. So that now he is denounced a
famous Conqueror, that was but late a Marchante, who also as a thanks geuinge
for his victory, does this Sacrifice to the God, who was his Conductor. And
to morrow if the wind serve, we will leave this coaste. Have you determined
this in deed said I? Yea verily answered they: you shall then if you please;
have my company: For I have a viage into Sicilia for a certain cause, and you
sailynge into Aphryke, must pass by it. You shall be welcome (quod they) if
you will: for we suppose we shall want no commodity, if we have with us a
Wise man, and a Grecian, and such a one as by experience may be proved, that
he is well beloved of the Gods. I would (said I to them) if you will grant
me but one day, to make my provision. You shall have to morrow (quod they) on
condition that about night you will be at the Sea. For we commonly sail by
night, for that the winds that come then from the earth, do calmely fill our
sails. I made bargayne that I would do so, bindinge them first by Oath,
that they should not depart before their promised time was expired. And so I
left them there, yet pipinge and dauncinge, after the manner of the Assyrans,
sometime leapinge alofte, sometime bendinge their bodies downewarde, and like
such as were inspired with some God, writhinge them selves. Then went I to
Cariclia, and found her holdinge in her lap the Jewels which Caricles gave
her, and earnestly vewed them. After I went to Theagenes, and when I had told
them both what they should do, and when I went to mine own The manner of
the taking away of Cariclia.
lodgyng, diligently consideringe of that which should be done. The next day
thus did they. About midnight when all the City was fast asleep, a crewe of
armed young men came to the house of Cariclia, the Captain of this amorous
war was Theagenes, who taught his youths after their brave Pomp to play
the Soldiers. They suddenly made those afraid, which perceived a little,
with their great clamor and classhynge of their armor, so that with great
light they brake into her house, liftinge the door aside easily, for that it
was provided before, it should not be very hard barred, and took her away
well prepared, for that she knew hereof before, and with good will suffered
this assault, and carried a great deal of stuff such as the Maid
commanded them, away also. After they came out of the house, they sounded a
warlike cry, and made a terrible noise with their Harness, and so passed
through the City, and cast the Inhabitants thereof into a woonderful fear,
by reason that they had chosen the night for none other purpose, but that they
might be the more feared. So that Pernassus gave an Echo back to their noise.
After they were gone out of the City, as fast as they could, they hied them
on Horseback into the Mountains of Locrus and Oeta. But Theagenes and
Cariclia, as was before concluded, foresooke the Thessalians, and came to me
privily, and fell both in great fear at my feet, and still cried, save us
Father. Cariclia said no more, but held down her head, as though she were
ashamed of that she had done. But Theagenes said more. Calasiris save us
being Strangers, and bannished our Countries, deprived of all our Friends,
that among them all we might win our selves. Save our bodies hereafter
committed to Fortune, which also are made bond to chaste Love. Save us by our
own accord bannished, yet glad thereof, and such as have set all their
sauegarde on you. I was moved herewith, and after I had wept, rather with my
heart, then mine eyes, so that the young folks perceived it not, yet it eased
my grief, I comforted and imboldened them. At a word I badde them hope for a
luckie end, in that this matter was begone by the will and Counsel of the
Gods. As for me (quod I) I will goo and dispatche the rest of our business.
But tarry you me in this place, and take diligent heed that no man epsy you.
When I had said thus, I went back, but Cariclia caught me by the coat, and
held me fast, An example of passinge Chastity.
and said: What Father, this beginning is unjust or rather Traiterous, if
you will depart, and leave me alone with Theagenes, and will not consider how
unmeet a man, a Lover is to be a keeper, if that be in his power to enjoy
which he loves, and want such as may make him ashamed thereof. For, I
think, that he is rather incensed, when he sees, that which he desires,
without any defense before his face. Wherefore I will not let you depart
before, as well for the time present, but rather for that which is to come: I
may be sure by Theagenes Oath, that he shall not fleashly have to do with me,
until I have recovered my Country, and Parents, or if the Gods be not
content herewith, at least until I by mine own free will be content he shall
Marry me. Otherwise never. After I hard what she had said, I woondered and
was determined it should be so, and made a little fire upon an Aultare, and
burned Incense. Theagenes swear, saying that he had wrong, for that the
faith which he had determined in his mind to keep, was taken away by reason
of an Oath, and that he could not praise that will, which was forced by a
Theagenes thinks patience par force, scant worthy praise.
greater power, yet for all that he took his Oath, by Apollo of Delphos, and
Diana, by Venus her self, and all Laws, that he would do all things in
such sort, as Cariclia would have him. This and many other things they
concluded between them selves, calling the Gods witnesses thereto. I coming
as fast as I could to Caricles, found all his house on a hurlyburly, and sorry
because the Ministers were now come to him, and had told him of the taking
away of the Maid, and the Citizens came by heaps and stood round about
him, while he sorowed, at a word, what for ignorance of that was done, and
want of counsel for that was to come, they were at their wits ends. There
began I with my big voice to thunder, and say: Ye unhappy people, how
Calasiris dissembled Oration.
long will ye sit still, dombe like stocks, as though your courage were
also taken away with ill Fortune? Why do you not in Armoure pursue your
enemies? will you not take, and punish them, who have done you this wrong? It
is in vain perhaps (said Caricles) to strive any longer with this present
Fortune. For I understand perfitely, that I am thus punished for the anger of
the Gods, which was foreshewed me, since I went in an unlucky time, into
the privy Chapel, and saw there that which was not lawful to be seen,
that therefore I should lose, that I set most stoare by. But there is no
impediment (as the Proverb is) that should let us to fight with the Gods,
if we knew whom to pursue, or him, who has done us this mischief. That is
(said I) Theagenes the Thessalian, and the young men, which were with him,
whom you praised so much, and made my friend. And so you may yet find some
man in the City, who has till this time stayed here: wherefore arise, and
call the people to Council: so was it done. The Captains appointed a
meetinge, by Trumpet proclayminge the same in the City, the people straight
came together, the Theater was made a Court by night. Caricles came forth,
and fallinge suddenly aweepinge, began to say thus: Perhaps ye (men
Caricles pitiful Oration, about the taking away of Cariclia.
of Delphi) suppose, consideringe the greatness of my miseries, that I come
hither, and have gathered this multitude of people, to utter mine own
mishappes unto you. But it is not so: For although I suffer often such things
as may be compared with death it self, and at this present time my house is
desolate, and destroyed by the Gods, solitary, and robbed of those that I
held most dear, in whoes company, and pleasant behavior I contented my
self: yet the common frustration, and vain hope of al, doothe comfort me
alitle, and causes me to suffer, who promises to find my Daughter again,
which thing in deed may be done: but the City moves me more, which I
desire, and look shall be Victorious first, and take revenge of those, that
have wronged it. Except these Thessalian youths have taken away our lofty
courages, and just wrath which we should receive for our Country, and
Country Gods. For, that which is most intolerable, a few dauncinge
Boys, sent about a Sacred message, do depart after they have wasted the most
Noble City of Greece, and have taken out of Apolloes Church, the most
Precious Jewel thereof, Cariclia, which also was my Life. O implacable and too
obstinate anger of God, toward us: First (as you al know) it killed my
natural Daughter at the day of her Marriage, and her Mother also with the
grief that she took for her Death, and bannished me from my Native
Country. But all this was tolerable after I had found Cariclia: Cariclia was
my life, my hope, and stay of my stock: Cariclia only was my comfort, and,
as I may term her, mine increase: which also this misery (what so ever it
be, that now came upon me) has taken from me. Neither has it done this
simply, or by chance, but as it accustomably triumphethe over me with most
cruelty, it has taken her even almost from Hegesias Oration, as touching
the pursuit of those, who took away Cariclia. Occasion is of mos^^ force in
War.
her Husband, in as much as the day of Wedding was already spreadde abroad
among you all. As he spoke thus, and fell quite from the matter into sorrowinge,
Hegesias the Captain, badde him be content, and get him away: and said, you
that be here, Caricles shall have time yenoughe to lamente hereafter. But let us
not be drowned with his sorrow, nor carried away unadvisedly with his tears,
as with a great stream of water, letting pass al due occasion, which as it
is in all things, so in War it is of most force. For now if we pursue as
soon as we shall diminishe this Company, there is some hope that we shall
overtake our enemies, which now travel without care, for that they know we be
unprovided. But if we still lamentinge, or rather wailinge like weemen, shall
give them longer time, that they escape, with our tarryinge, we shall deserve
nothing, but to be scorned, and that of the young men them selves: which, I
say, ought to be hanged as soon as they be taken, and sum of them
ignominiously dealt withal, so that their pounishmente also redounde to their
Families. This may easily be done, if we shall move the Thessalians to
displeasure against these that be fled, and their posterity, by forbiddinge
the^ to do any more this Holy Legation, and due Funeralles of the Noble man,
which we had decreed, should be done of the cost of the common Treasury.
After all this was praised of the people, The Thessalians are forbidden by
common Council, to do Sacrifice to Pirrhus, for the taking away of
Cariclia. This is when the steed is siolen. to shut the stable door.
and by their Decree established: Let this also, said the Captain, if it
please you, be ratified by your voices, that the wooman, who has the charge
of the Sacrifices, be showed no more to them that run in Armoure. For, as I
can conjecture, thereof has grown the beginning of this impiety in
Theagenes, who also thought (as may be denied) of this Rape, ever sithence he
first saw her. For it is good hereafter to take away the occasion of such
like attempt. After this was granted by the voices, and hands of all that
were present, Hegesias gave them a Token to go forth, and gave a sign of
War with a Trumpette, so that the Theater was dissolved into War, and every
man ran hastily out of the Council to Battle, not only the strong men,
and such as were able to wear Armoure, but boys also, and striplinges without
order, durst be partakers of that voyage, by their readiness greatly
augmentinge the number of lusty men of that time. many woomen also behaved
themselves more stoutely, then their nature permitted, every one taking up for
a Weapon, that which came next to hand, and followed in vain: who, for that
they missed of their purpose, perceived well the infirmity of their kind.
You might then have seen old men strive with age, and in a manner the mind
drawinge their bodies, and for great and ardente desire to fight, objected
weakness, as a shame to it. So great grief took the City for the Rape of
Cariclia, and prepared them selves suddenly to the pursuinge, as if they had
had but one mind, and would not look for day.

Here ends the Fourth Book.
The Fifthe Book.
THus therefore was the City of Delphi occupied, but what they did in the
end, I knew not, sauinge that their pursuet gave me good occasion to conueye
my self away. So I took the young folks with me to the Sea, and put them
into the ship of Phenices, which was by and by ready to depart. For as
soon as the morning began to appear, the Phoenicians which promised to
tarry for me a day and a night, thought now that they should not break the
Oath which they swear to me. When we came they entertained us very joyfully,
and forthwith they launched out into the deep, with Ores first, then, after a
calm gale blewe from the earth, the waves quietly came under our ship, and
in a manner smiled upon her, and suffered her to goo with full sail. And thus
we passed with our ship, the coast of Cyrrha, and Pernassus with his hie
tops, and the Rocks of Actolia, and Calidonia, and by the time that it was
Sun setting, we discovered the Islands, as well by Figure, as name Acute,
and the Zacynthian Sea. But (in an unhappy time) why do I tell this? why do I
forgette my self, and you, and continewe my tale, bringyng you hereafter in
very deed to the Sea? Here let us leave ye rest of our talk, and sleep a
little. For although thou, Cnemon, be nothing weary to hear, and stiffly strive
with sleep, yet I think that now you begin to quail, in that I have
continued my talk far on the night. And besides this, my Son, both age
does burden me, and the remembrance of my miseries dissoluinge my mind,
does drive me to sleep. Do so Father, said Cnemon, not as though I willed
you to make an end, for that as I think, I could not do, though you would
tell it many days and nights together, with such singular pleasantnes, and
excellent suauitie is it seasoned. But me thinks I hear some noise and
business about the house, and have benne troubled alitle therefore, but
forced my self to keep silence, for ye great desire I had to hear your tale.
I heard it not, said Calasiris, either for that age makes mine ears
somewhat Age beside other discommodities makes men hard of beatinge.
dull, and hard (for age breeds many infirmities, both in ye other parts,
but chiefly in the ears) or else for that my mind wholly was occupied about my
tale. I think, Nausicles ye owner of this house is come. But o ye Gods, how
has he spedde? As I desired (said Nausicles) stepping in suddenly to them.
For I knew well enough, good Calasiris, that you were careful of my business,
and almost traueled with me in your mind. But I perceive your good will
toward me, by diverse courtesies showed me, bathe at other times, and also by
this, whereof I hear you talkinge here. But what Stranger is this? He is a
Grecian, said Calasiris, you shall hear more of him hereafter. But tell you us
quickly what good luck you have had, that we may rejoice with you. You shall
hear to morrow said Nausicles, as now be content to know that I have gotten
a better Thisbe: for I have need to sleep a little, to abate my grief which
I have gotten, as well by my journey, as other cogitations. This said, he went
his way to do as he had said. But Cnemon was much abashed when he heard
Thisbes name, and turned al his cogitations to the time paste, with much and
continual sorrow tormentinge him self all the rest of the night, so that
Calasiris though he were fast a sleep, perceived it, who sittinge up a
little, and leaninge on his elbowe, asked what he lacked, and why he was so
disquieted, as if he were almost mad. Have I not good cause (said Cnemon to
him) to be mad, saying I hear that Thisbe is alive. What is this Thisbe
(quod Calasiris) or how do you know her, by hearing her name, and are so
grieved that she is alive? You shall hear the rest (quod Cnemon) when I tell
you mine estate. But her I saw slain with these eyes, and with mine own
hands, I buried her with the Heardmen. Sleep, said Calasiris, and we shall
know how this goes ere long. I may not (quod he) but lie you still and
stir not: For my part I know not whether I can live, except I goo for the
secretly, and make diligent inquiry, how Nausicles is deceived, and how
only with the Egyptians, such as were dead, revive again. Calasiris smiled
a little at this, and so fell a sleep. Cnemon went out of the chamber, and
restrained him self much, as is like one would do that is in the dark, and
in an unacquainted house: but he took all in good part, for fear of Thisbe,
being desirous in haste to rid him self out of this doubt: till at length
with much adoo, after he had gonne up and down often in one place, as if he had
benne in diverse, he heard a woman like a Nightingale in the Spring,
dolefully lamentinge, and with sorrowful tunes, so that by her mourninge (as
if one had taken him by the hand) he was brought to her chamber, and layinge
his ear to the door, heard her yet complayninge in this sort. I poor
wretch supposed, Cariclias pitiful complainte, being separated from Theagenes.
that I had benne delivered out of the hands of thieves, and escaped death,
which I always looked for, and that I should after have lead, though a strange
and banished life, with my dearest friend, yet such a one, as in his company,
should have benne most delectable, for there is nothing so troublesome and
grievous to me, which is not tolerable with him. But now the God who has
had charge of our business from the beginning, and has granted us but small
pleasure, not yet satisfied, has deceived us again. I thought that I had
escaped bondage, but now I serve again, and am kept in prison: I was in an
Island and dark place before, this present state is like too it, or rather, to
say the trothe, worse, because he, who both could and would by comfort
abate these sorrows, is violently separated and taken from me. A den of
Thieves the day before was mine Inn, and what was that habitation, but a very
Hell, or worse place? yet my dear Lover being with me, made it easy to be
suffered. There he lamented me alive, and shed tears for me, being (as he
thought) dead, and bewailed me as if I had benne slain, now am I deprived of
all this: he is gonne, who was partaker of my calamities, and who would have
divided them, as though it had benne a burden. And I alone am forsaken, a
prisoner, and by many ways to be lamented, am objected to the arbiterment of
cruel Fortune. And do reteyne my life only, for that I hope my most dear
friend is alive. But o my heart, where art thou? or what Fortune haste thou?
art thou also alas bound, which haste a free mind, not able to abide any
seruage, but of Love? well, do nothing but save thy life, to the intent thou
may once behold thy Thisbe again: for so shalt thou call me, whether thou will or not. Cnemon could abide no longer, after he heard this, too hear the
rest: though he gheassed by the beginning somewhat else, yet by that he heard
in the end, concludinge that it was Thisbe, wanted but little The name of
Thisbe, troubles Cnemon sore.
that he sounded not at the gate. But after he had ouercommed that passion with
much adoo, for fear least he should be spied of any man (for now the Cocks
crewe the second time) he ran back slumblinge, sometime hurtinge his toes
against the selles, sometimes hittinge his head against the walls and door
posts. When he came to his lodginge after much travel, he fell into the
bed, and all his body trembled, and his teeth chattered sore: and he had
perhaps benne in extreme peril, if Calasiris, had not perceived it, and
comforted him, and brought him to him self again. After he was revived a
little, he asked of him the matter. I am undone (quod he) for that most wicked
Thisbe is alive in deed: and therewithal he sounded again: and Calasiris had
much adoo to call him again, and comfort him. Surely some God plainly
scorned Cnemon, because (as otherwise, for the most part it makes a ieste, or
toie of human affairs: so now it would not suffer him peaceably without
disquietnesse, to enjoy that which was most pleasant and welcome to him, but
that which shortly after would make him very joyful, was now turned into
sorrow) either for that it showed then the nature, and custom of it self, or
else because the Nature of man can not take true joy as should be. Wherefore
Cnemon stedde from that, which he then should most have desired, and supposed
that to be fearful, which was most delectable to him. For the woman that
wept was not Thisbe, but Cariclia. For thus it was: after Thiamis came into
his Enemies hand alive, and was kept Prisoner, the Island was set on fire,
and the Heardemen, who inhabited it, were fled, Cnemon, and Thermutis,
Thiamis Shield Bearer, in the morninge rewed over the Lake, to spy in what
case their Captain was with their Enemies: the manner of their journey was
such as is declared before. Then were Theagenes, and Cariclia leafte in the
Den alone, who accoumpted the prolonginge of their calamities a singular
benefit, that was the first time that ever they were by them selves, and
delivered from all that might trouble them. Wherefore they considered of their
estate, not forgettinge to kiss and embrace each other, so that they foregat
all that they had to do, and stood either in others arms a great while, as
if they had benne made one Body, content yet to satisfy them selves with
Chaste Love, temperatinge their affection with tears, and clenly kisses. For
Cariclia, if at any time she perceived Theagenes to pass the bounds of
seemelinesse, and deal with her over want only, would rebuke him by tellinge
him of his Oath: and he would suffer him self to be reformed with little
labor, and brought again to temperatenesse, in as much as he was Cariclia
more in Love, then Theagenes.
in Love inferior to her, but in pleasure he far surmounted. But at length,
though it were long first, they remembered what they had to do, and by force
were constrained to content them selves, and then Theagenes began to speak
thus: That we, Cariclia, may enioie one an other, and attain unto that,
which we have preferred before al other things, and for which we have
sustained al our troubles, both we do wish, and the Gods of Greece
grant. But for as much, as well because al worldly things are unstable, and
incline diverse ways, and we have borne much, and hope for many things, we
must now haste us to Chemmis, as we have concluded with Cnemon, as also
because we know not what fortune we shall have, and we have (as it seems)
a great, and woonderful deal of ground to pass, before we can comme to the
Land which we hope for: Let us divise A very wise devise of Theagenes.
certain Tokens, whereby we being one in others sight, may know our
secrets: and if it happen us to be Seawinded, we may in absence seek one an
other. The commodity of a watchwoorde.
For a watch word of friends, which is keapte in hope to find, is a great
easemente of long travel. Cariclia praised his divise, and they agreed, if
they were separated, that Theagenes should write, Pithicus: Cariclia, Pithies
upon al famous Churches, Pictures, Monumentes, and great Stoanes in Cross
ways, whether they were gonne the right hand way, or the left: to what
City, Village, or Country: and lastely, that they should declare the very
day, and hour. And if they might, it should be sufficient one to see the
other. For they thought no time should be hable to put out of their minds
such Love: yet for the better assurance, Cariclia would show her Fathers
King, which was laid out with her, and Theagenes a Scarre in his Thighe,
that a wild Bore gave him. It was further concluded between them, that in
steed of words, she should bear a Taper, and he a Branche of Palm. To
confirm this, they embraced each other, and wept, powringe out their tears
in steed of Sacrifice (as I gheasse), and for an Oath, they used many kisses.
After these things were thus ordered, they came out af the Cave, without
touching any of the Treasures which were laid up there. For they coumpted
those goods unclean, which were gotten by Robberies: but that which they
brought with them from Delphi, and that the Thieves had taken from them, that
they gathered together, and carried with them: And Cariclia changed her
Apparaile, and put it into a little Pack with the Coppie of their Vow, and her
Garland, and Sacred Garmente: and that it might be more privy, they laid the
rest of their woorste stuff upon it. As for her Bow, and Quiver, she gave
them to Theagenes to bear, which was a passinge pleasante burden to him,
seeinge they were the proper Weapons of the God, who had the power over him. As
soon as they came near to the Lake, and were about to take Boat, they spied
a band of Armed men rowinge over to the Island. Theyfore abashed at that
terrible sight, stood a great while astonished, as though with the greatness
of their sorrow which they conceived of the unstableness of Fortune, which
so raged still against them, that they had lost their senses: yet at length
when they were ready to arrive, who coming toward them, Cariclia desired to
retire back, and creep into some corner of the Den, and there hide them
selves, and therewithal she ran her way. But Theagenes caused her to
abide, and said how long shall we flee the fate that follows us every where?
Let us yield to Fortune, and withstand no longer the violence which is ready
to assault us, for what else shall we gain, but fruitelesse travel, and a
banished life, and from time to time, be scorned of the Gods? Do you not see
how they join the Robberies of the Pirates to our banishment, and go about
with great diligence and travel to bring us into greater dangers, by Land,
then erst we have found by Sea? not long agoo they made afraie about us:
within a little after, they brought Thieves unto us, ere while they made us
prisoners, then left they us alone, but at liberty, and made us believe we
might goo whither we would, then straight have they brought us into the
hands of such as shall kill us. This war for their disporte have they made
against us, making as it were, a Comedy of our affairs. Why then do not we
break of this Tragical Poem of theirs, and yield us to those that will kill
us? least perhaps if they mean to make an intolerable end of our Tragedy,
we be forced to kill our selves. Cariclia allowed not all that he said, mary
she thought that he justly accused Fortune, but not that it was any point of
wisdom, to yield them selves willingly into their enemies hands, for they
were not sure that they would kill them as soon as they had them, neither had
they to do with so gentle and friendly a God, that would make a quick end
of their miseries, but would perhaps reserve them to a further bondage.
Which thing, then what death should it not be more grievous? If we give our
selves to the injuries of barbarous people, we shall be so unworthily handled,
as I am loathe to gheasse. Which thing by all means, and as long as we can,
let us avoid: measuringe our hope of time to comme, with experience of that
which is paste, how we have benne diversely preserved at such time as is not
credible. After Theagenes had said, Let us do as you will: she went before,
and he followed her, as if he had benne tied to her. Yet for all their haste,
they came not to the Den before their Enemies: but while they looked on them
that went before them, they wiste not that with an other band which came
into the Island at an other place, they were compassed, and enclosed.
Wherewithal they sore abashed, stood still, and Cariclia ran under Theagenes
arm, that if she must needs die, she would die in Theagenes hands. One of
those, who were landed, went about to shoot at them, but after the young
folks had looked upon them, their hearts failed, and their right hands
quaked. For the very The property of bewtifull personages.
barbarous hands (as may appear) do fear the bewtiful personages, and a
right cruel eye will be made gentell with a lowly look. As soon as they had
taken them. they carried them to the Captain, greatly desiringe to carry the
fairest of the spoils to him at the first: and they brought nothing else, for
although they had compassed the Island with their Armoure, as with a net
round about, and had searched it from one part to another, yet could they
find nothing, for all that was in the Island, was burned in the former
skirmishe, sauinge the Den only which no man knew. And thus were they
brought to the General of ye war: his name was Mytranes, whom Groondates had
made Captain of the watches: This Groondates was deputy of Egypt in the
great Kings behalf, who being hired with a great sum of money, by
Nausicles, as is aforesaid, to seek Thisbe, came into the Island. After
Theagenes, and Cariclia were brought almost into their sight, Nausicles by a
crafty devise, Marchauntlike stepped forth, and cried with a A Merchaunt
like, that is to say, a crafty devise used by Nausicles, to get Cariclia, in
steed of Thisbe.
great voice, this is that Thisbe, of whom I was robbed by the mischievous
Heardmen, now do I recover her again, Mytranes, by benefit of you, and
favor of the Gods, then he caught Cariclia, and feigned him self to be very
glad, and whispered in Greek to her privily in her ear, that none who were
by, might hear him, that she should say, her name was Thisbe, if she
desired to escape danger. And his policy took effect, for Cariclia, when
she heard him speak Greek, thought that he went about somewhat for her
commodity, and ordered her self as he desired: and when Mytranes asked what
her name was, she said, Thisbe. Then he ran and Cariclia says her name is
Thisbe.
kissed Mytranes, and co^mendinge his Fortune, made the barbarous man proud,
for that he had not only atchyued many other wars well, but had brought also
this to prosperous end, he proud of his praise, and thinking by the false
name, that it was so in deed. Although him self was taken with her bewty,
which appeared in her simple apparel, as if the brightness of the Moon
should shine out of a Cloud, yet because the inconstancy of his mind, was
ouerraught with the quickness of the craft, and all time to repent was taken
from him. Now she Nausicles receives of Mytranes Cariclia, whom he
beguileth, by a flatteringe praise. Theagenes and Cariclia separated.
is recovered (quod he) take her with you seeing she is yours. And when he had
said thus, he delivered her to him, still lookinge back upon her, and
plainly declaringe that it was against his will, and for the money that he
had received before, that he suffered her to depart. As for this young man
(pointinge to Theagenes) whatsoever he be, he shall be our pray, and go with
us, and be kept diligently to be sent to Babylon, because the comeliness of
his body is such, that he may wait at the Kings table. This said, they
rowed over the water, and departinge one from an other, Nausicles having
Cariclia, came to Chemmis. But Mytranes goinge to vewe other Towns under his
Jurisdiction, without delay sent Theagenes with Letters to Groondates, who
was then at Memphis in this wise indyted.

Mytranes the Captain to Groondates the Lieutenant. Theagenes is sent to
Groondates.
I have sent unto you a young man of Greece too good to serve me, and meet
only to wait in the sight of our God, the great King geuinge you leave to
present such an excellent gift to him, who is Master to us both, as the
Kings Court hitherto never saw, neither yet shall hereafter. This was the
Contents of his Letter. But Calasiris, and Cnemon hopinge to know that they
were ignorante of, came to Nausicles before day, and asked him how he had
spedde. Then Nausicles told him all: how they came to the Island, and found
it deserte, and no man therein to meet them: how he had craftily be guiled
Mytranes, and had gotten a certain Maid which was there, in steed of Thisbe:
and that he had spedde better in gettinge of her, then if he had found Thisbe.
For there was no small difference between them, but as was betwixt God, and
Man, and that there was no beauty so excellent, that might stain hers, and
that it was not possible to set forth the same justly by words, for that he
might show her before them. When they heard this, they began to surmise
the thing as it was in deed, and prayed him instantly to bid her comme in
straight way: for they knew, that it was not possible, by words to express
Cariclias beauty. After she was brought in, and Nausicles (because she cast
her eyes to the ground, and had muffled all her face, save her brows) began
to comfort her, and badde her be of good cheer. She looked up a little, and
contrary to her expectation, she saw, and was seen: so that they al three
began to cry out, and howl suddenly, as if there had benne a token given
them when they should have begone: and you might have heard often these
words, o my Father, o my Daughter Cariclia in deed, and not Cnemons Thisbe.
Nausicles for woonderinge, had almost forgotten him self, and was astonished
when he saw Calasiris embrace Cariclia, and not refrain from tears, and
knew not what that sudden acquaintance, as if it had benne in a Comedy,
meant, until Calasiris had kissed him, and said thus: The Gods give you
(good man) so much as may content your desire and will, who have saved my
Daughter which I never looked for, and caused me to behold the dearest thing
that I might possible see. But o my Daughter, where haste thou left
Theagenes? she cried out when he asked her that question, and after she had
stayed a while, she answered, he that delivered me to this man, leads him
away prisoner. Calasiris then besought Nausicles, to tell him what he knew of
Theagenes, who it was that had taken him, and whither he would carry him.
Nausicles told them all, after he perceived, that these were they, of whom the
old man had talked so often with him, and to find them, had led a wanderinge
life in great sorrow. He said moreover that they should get little there,
but the knowledge of him being poor and needy folks, for as much as it were
a great matter, if Mytranes would be content to let him go for a great
sum of Money. I have Money (said Cariclia softely to Calasiris) promise him
as much as you will, for I have about me the Iewelles, which you know of.
Calasiris was glad hereof, but fearinge least Nausicles should suspect what
Cariclias profer was, he said, good Nausicles, A wise man is never poor.
a wise man never wants, but does measure his Riches by his will, receiuinge
so much of his betters, as he deemeth worthy to ask. Wherefore tell me only
where he is that keeps Theagenes, and Gods gracious liberality will not let
us want, but will geeue us so Persians and Merchantes, are alike conctous.
much, as well may content the covetous mind of the Persian. Nausicles smiled
at this, and said: Then shall you make me believe, that you can suddenly, as
it were with some devise be made Rich, when you have paid me the raunsom for
this your Daughter, for you know that as well Merchauntes, as Persians, labor
to get money. I know it well, said Calasiris, and you shall have money, but
why do you make such haste, and beside that you pretermitte no kind of
courtesy toward us, you also of your own accord, approve and allow the
restitution of my Daughter. I should first have requested this at your hand.
I am pleased (quod Nausicles) and if it please you, come and pray to the
Gods (for I will do Sacrifice) and crave that you may have goods to give
me. Ieste not, neither be of so littel faith (quod Calasiris to him) but go
and prepare the Sacrifice, and when all things is ready, we will come. They
did so, and within a while came one from Nausicles that called them, and badde
the^ make haste. They (for by this time they had concluded what to do) went
forth wyefully. Calasiris, and Cnemon went with Nausicles, and the other
gestes, for he made a Public Sacrifice. But Cariclia went with Nausicles
Daughter, and other woomen which comforted her diversely, but had much adoo to
persuade her to go with them: and I know not, whether ever she would have been
persuaded, if under pretense of the Sacrifice, she had not determined to pray
for Theagenes. After they came to Mercuries Temple (for Nausicles made his
Mercury the God of Merchauntes.
Sacrifice to him, as the God that had most care of Merchauntes, and honored
him more then the rest) and the Offeringe was begone, Calasiris looked a
little upon the Intrailes, and by the diverse chaunges of his countenance,
declared the pleasure, and pains of that which was to comme. And while the
fire yet burned on the Aultare, he thruste in his hand, and made as though he
pulled out of the fire, that which he held in his hand The description of
the Ringe, that Calasiris gave Nausicles to redeem Cariclia.
before, and said: This price of Cariclias redemption, the Gods profer thee,
Nausicles, by me. And therewith he delivered him a Princely Ringe, a passinge
Heavenly thing: as touching the Hoope, it was of Iuory, wherein was set a
bright Amethyst of Aethiopia, as great as a Maidens eye, in bewtte far
better, then those of Iberia, or Britayne. For those have but an ill color,
which shine not at all, but are like to the Rose budde at the first, which
after with the heat of the Sun wax perfect read. But the Ethiopian
Amethyst, has a perfect Orient color, and shines through out, and if you
turn him about, as you hold him, he casts forth a Golden beam, which
does not hurt or dim the sight, but makes it much better and clearer,
and he has a natural virtue, more then the Western stoanes: for it has not
his name without effect, but will not let him be drunk in deed, that
wears him, but keeps him fober at all feasts: and of this quality is every
Amethyst, of India, and Ethiopia. But that stoane which Calasiris gave
Nausicles, did pass these far: For there was a Picture graven in it,
representinge certain beasts, which was done in this sort. A boy sittinge
not upon a very hie Hill to look about him, kept Sheep, appointing his
flock their several pastures with his pipe, they seemed to be ruled, and
tarry at their feedinge, accordingly as he sounded his instrument. A man would
have said that they had Golden fleeses, not by reason of the woorkemanship,
but for that the Amethyst shyninge with his redness upon their backs, made
them show so fair. There were graven young Lambs leapinge up and down, and
some by heaps went up the Rock, other some daunced round about the
Sheepherde, so that the top of the Rock was made a Shepeherdes disporte.
Other skipped in the flame of the Amethyst, as if they had benne in the Sun,
who with the tippes of their feet, scraped the stoane. Many of the younger
forte being of greater courage, seemed as though they would go out of the
compass, but were let by the woorkemanship, which set a pale of Gold in
manner of a wall, about the Rock and them, and it was a Rock in deed and
not a counterfeite, for when the woorkeman had wrought the Gold about the
outer part of the Stoane for that purpose, he showed that very lively which
he desired, thinkinge it to no purpose, to counterfeite one Stoane in an
other. Such a one was the Ringe. Nausicles, moved with the strangeness of
the thing, but more with the value thereof: esteeminge the Ringe of more
price, then all the goods he had beside, spoke thus: Good Calasiris, I did but
ieste: and where I asked somewhat for the Ransom of your Daughter, it was but
words: for I determined to let you have her for nothing. But for The gifts
of the Gods ought not to be refused.
as much as the gifts of the Gods are not to be refused (as you say), I
take this Stoane sent from Heaven, perswadinge my self, that this was sent
from the God that is most beneficial to me, according as he is woonte, and
has given this to you, through fire, as may yet be seen by the flaminge
thereof. Otherwise I deem that What gain is best.
vantage to be best, which without damage of the geuer, doothe enriche him
that receives it. After he had said this, and made an end of the Offeringe,
he went to meet with the rest, placing the woomen by them selves in an inner
part of the Temple, and the men in the porche. After they had eaten yenough,
and the Cups were set on the Table, the men called upon Bacchus with an
offeringe, and song the Song accustomably used, when men go aborde their
ships, and the weemen daunced after a ditty made in the honor of Ceres. But
now when the banquette waxed somewhat warm, and each man after his sort
solaced him self, Nausicles holdinge in his hand a glass of clear water,
said: I drink to you in water, good Calasiris, and if it will please you, to
begin to us the tale which we sore desire to hear, it shall be more pleasant
to us, then all the Cups on this board. For you hear how the woomen now be
at leisure, and have well banqueted them selves, begin to Dance: but your
travel, if it please you to make report of it to us, shall shorten
woonderfully well our feast, and be more pleasant to us, then any dance or
instrument. The tellinge whereof, for as much as you have (as you know
differed diversely, for that your mischaunces overwhelmed you) you can reserve
to no better time then this, because your Daughter, one of your Children is
well, and your Son by the Gods help shall be recovered by and by, if you
anger me not again, by driuinge it of any longer. Gods blessinge on your heart
(quod Cnemon to Nausicles) catchinge hold of his talk, who for all that you
have brought to this feast, all manner of Musical instruments, do set
light by them, and give the ruder sort leave to hear them, but you your self
are desirous to hear secret affairs, and such as are seasoned with singular
mirthe, and me thinks you well understand the Nature of the Gods, who
join Mercury, and Bacchus together, and add pleasantness of speech to the
finesse of your banquet. Wherefore although I have for just cause marueiled at
the other sumptuousness of the Sacrifice, yet I know not whether a man may
by any mean please Mercury better, then to talk at his feasts, which thing
is his Badge above all other. Calasiris was content, as well to do Cnemon a
pleasure, as also for that he would curry favor with Nausicles, for that
which should ensewe, he told them all, briefly repetinge the principal
points of that which he had told Cnemon before, and of purpose passinge over
with silence, that which he thought was to little purpose for Nausicles to
know, but that which had not yet benne told, and did depend upon that
which went before, he told in this sort. After they were aborde in the
ship of Phoenicia, and were gonne from Delphi, they sailed as they would
wish at the first, and had very prosperous wind. But when they came into the
Calidonian Sea, they were greatly troubled, because they had happened into a
Sea, which of his The Calidonian Sea is very trouble some.
own nature, was very disquiet and troublesome. Cnemon desired him that he
would not pass over this, but tell it, if he knew any reason of the ragynge of
the same, in that place. The Ionian Sea (quod he) being restrained of his Why
the Calidonian Sea, is so troublesome.
great breadth, and in a manner brought into straightes, fallinge into the
coaste of Crisa, and hastinge to come into the Sea called Egeum, is stopped by
Isthmus in Peloponnesus, so perhaps by the providence of God is the Hill
placed there, least by the violence of the water, it should ouerflowe the land
on the contrary coaste. And for as much as from hence the water beaten back
(as may be by reason) is restrained of his course, rather about this Sea, the^
in any other part, because that which yet flows, falls into that, which
now by Isthmus was made to return, so that the water is much troubled and
very boisterous, by reason of the continual concourse of the waves, in all the
Ebbes and Floudes: which opinion of his, after all these who were present
praised, and affirmed to be true. Calasiris told on his tale, saying: After
we had passed the Sea, and had lost the sight of the Acute Islands, we
thought that we discovered a Mountain of Zacynthus, in manner of a dark
cloud before our eyes, and therewith the Master badde strike some of the
Sails, and when we asked him why, he abated them, and went more easily,
saying that the ship had a very good gale of wind, because (said he) if we
went with full sail about the first watch we should ariue at the Island,
and so were it to be doubted, least in the dark, we run upon some Rocks
whereof are there great stoore, and those very hie. It is therefore wisdom
to lie all night in the Sea, and take the wind in such proportion, as shall
serve to bring us thither to land in the morninge. Thus said the Master,
Mary we did not so Nausicles, but even with the risinge of the Sun, we cast
Ancore. The inhabitauntes of the same Island, which dwelt about the Haven,
which was not far from the City, came by heaps to look upon us (as if it
had benne some strange sight) in great wonder (as might seem) to see the
handsomnesse of that great Ship, which was builte very fair, according to
her height, and said that the industry, and excellent woorkemanship of the
Phoenicians, might be known by that, and that we had wonderful good luck,
that made so good a viage in the winter, about the time the Pleiades Pleiades,
vuluckie Stars to Mariners.
were reddy to set. All our company, ere the tacklinges and sails were in
good order, left the Ship, and went about their Merchandise, to the City
Zacynthus. But I (because I heard by chance, of the Master, that they would
winter there) went to seek me some Inn about the shore, esche wing the
Ship, for that it was unmeet by reason of the rudeness of the Mariners,
and the City, for that it was not convenient for the flight of the young
couple. After I had gonne a little way, I saw an Old man which was a Fisher,
that satte mendinge his broken nets, before his door. I came to him, and
said good man God save you, and tell me I pray, where a man may get
lodginge? He answered me: It was rent about a promontory hereby, being
let slip upon a rock, which they saw not. I ask not that quod I, but
you shall show us great courtesy, if either you your self will be our Host, or
else show us some other Inn. He answered, not I, for I was not aborde with
them: God defend that Tyrrhenus should do so much amiss, or have such a
spite though he be Old, but it was my Sons defaulte, who knowinge nothing
of the rocks here in the Sea, cast their nets where they should not. At
length when with much adoo, I perceived that he was somewhat hard of
hearing, I spoke alowde to him and said: God speed you Sir, and I pray you,
tell us where we may have an Inn, you are welcome said he again, and if it
please you abide with me, except you be any of those, that seek for the houses
wherein are many beds, and have some great train after you. I have (quod I)
but two children, and I am the third my self, you are a good company (quod
he) you shall find one more of us, for I have two Sons that dwell with me
(for mine eldest Sons are Married, and keep houses them selves) and the
fourth is a Nurse for my children, because their Mother died but a while ago,
wherefore good man come on and doubt not, but we will be glad of you, who
are a man which seem to be some Gentleman even by your talk. I did so, and
shortly after I came with Calasiris with his children lodge with Tyrrhenus.
Theagenes and Cariclia, and Tyrrhenus entertained us gladly, and let us have
the warmer part of the house. Truly we were very well at the first, and had
good leisure, to confer whole days together, and when we should sleep,
Cariclia went to bed with the Nurse, in one place by her self, and I with
Theagenes lay in another. Tyrrhenus and his Children in a parlour also alone
took their rest. We did eat at one Table all, and such things as were
needful, we provided of our own cost, beside Fish which Tyrrhenus took
in the Sea, as he would sommetime fish alone: sommetime we would help him
at leisure. For he had all manner of ways to fish, and for all seasons, and
the place was well stoared, and very conueniente to cast Nets: so that many
would ascribe that gain which they got by their Art to the benefit of
Fortune. But there was Once unhappy, and ever unhappy. The Merchaunt with whom
Calasiris sailed falls in Love with Cariclia. That is a commm practice which
Lovers use.
none other remedy, but as the Proverb is, once unhappy, and ever unhappy.
Cariclias beauty, even in this solitary place, was not without great broyle:
for that Merchaunte of Tire, which was denounced Victor at Delphi in the games
of Apollo, called Pithia, with whom we sailed, came to me alone, and was very
importunate, and grievous unto me: beseechinge me, as if I had benne her
Father, that I would give her him to wife. He talked much of him self,
partly by telling of his Noble stock, partly by shewinge us of his riches,
and that the Hulke wherein we sailed, was his own, and that the greater part
of the Merchandise therein, as Gold, Precious Stoanes of great valewe, and
Sylke was his above the rest: and he added also his late obtained Victory, as
no small increase of his honor and name, and a thousand things beside
these. But I alleged for my self, our present poverty, and that I would
never marrye my Daughter to one that dwelte in a strange Country, so far
from Egypt. Leave this talk, Father (quod he) for I will accoumpte the Maid
a Dowry woorthe many Talentes, and all the riches in the world. As for my
Country I will change it for yours, and will turn my pourposed viage to
Carthage, and go with you whither so ever you will. When I saw that the
Phoenician would not give over his determination, and purpose, I determined
with fair words to drive of the matter, least he should attempt any
thing forceibly against us, and promised that I would fulfill al his desire
when I came into Egypt. When I had by this means pacified him, God laid one
mischief upon an other, as the Proverb is. For Tyrrhenus not many days
after, when he had carried me into a secret place, on a crooked shore, said
thus to me: Calasiris, I swear by Neptune, and all other Gods of the Sea,
that I have loved you, as if you had benne mine own Brother, and your
children, as if they had benne mine also. I will tell you a thing which is
woorkinge against you, very grievous, and painful to you: but such as is
not lawful for me to conceal, for that we dwell both in one house, and it
apperteineth altogether for you to know it. There is a Pyrate which waits
upon the Hulke of Phoenicia, which lies secret under the side of this
Promontory, and sends out Spies daily to enquire when this Ship will go
forth.: wherefore look to your self, and take heed what you do, for as
much as this shamefuul fact, usual to them, is enterprised for you, or
rather for your Daughter. The Gods (quod I to him) give you such thanks for
these tidinges, as you deserve. But Tyrrhenus, how understood you these
things? By reason of my Craft I am acquainted with them (said he): and when
I bring them victualles, I have more of them then any men else. Therefore when I
drew my Pottes about the fall of yonder Hill, the Master Pyrate came to me,
and asked, whither I heard when the Phoenitians would leave their harbor.
When I perceived the suttlenesse of his talk, In faith Trachynus (quod I) I
can tell you no certainty: but I suppose that at the beginning of the next
Spring, they will sail. Will the Maid then sail with them (quod he) which
lies at your house? I cannot tell (quod I). But why do you ask that? Because
(quod he) I love her in such sort, that I am scante in my wits, yet I never
saw her but ones, and I know not, whether I ever saw so fair a wooman
before: yet I have taken many prisoners, and sum of them very bewtifull. That
I might the better cause him to tell me all his counsel privily, I said unto
him: What need you to fight with the Phoenicians, and not rather without
Blood fetch her out of my house before they go aborde. He answered me, that
Thieves did use gentleness, and Thieves use courtesy to their acquaintance.
courtefie to such as they were acquainted with. I leave that therefore for
your sake, least my so dooinge should bring you into trouble: in as much as
the geastes which you interteined, would be required again at your hand. Also
I desire to have two things at ones: the Riches in the Ship, and the
Marriage of the Maid: one whereof I must needs lack, if I attempt this by
Land, and beside it were very dangerous, if any such thing should be
enterprised so near the City, least the Rape would be perceived, and
pursuit made after. When I had much commended him for his wisdom, I leafte
him there, and am come to tell you of the Waits which these pastegraces have
laid for you, desiringe you heartily to devise diligently how you may save
you, and yours. I went from him very heavy after I heard this, and thought
upon many things, until the Merchante by chance met me: and fallinge in
talk about these matters, gave me a pretty beginning of a wise devise. For I
concealinge what I list, of that Tyrrhenus had told me, opened unto him only
this: That a man thereaboutes, whom he was not hable to withstand, went
about violentely to take the Maid from me. But I (quod I) had rather marry
her to you, both for that knowledge which I have had of you, and also for your
wealth: but especially for that you promised to dwell with us in our Country,
if you have her. Wherefore if you desire to have her, let us sail hence
quickly, before we be prevented, and have had sum extremity showed us. He
was woonderfully glad when he heard this, and said: Father, this is well
devised, and therewithal he came and kissed me, and asked when I would
command him to depart. Although (quod I) it be unseasonable now, yet I
would have you to get you into sum other Port, that we may avoid the
guiles prepared against us, and there abide for better time. Therefore (quod
I) if you will be ruled by me, at the beginning of the next night we would
depart. And he, when he had promised so to do, went his way. I came home,
but told nothing of this to Tyrrhenus: mary to my Children I said it was
behoouefull for us to go aborde in the eueninge. And although they marueiled
at the suddainenesse thereof, and asked the matter, yet I drove them of, saying,
that I would tell them afterward, and that there was no remedy now, if we
would do well. After we had eaten a slender Supper, and were gonne to bed,
an Old man Ulysses appears to Calasiris and rebukes him for not dooinge
Sacrifice to him,
appeared to me in my sleep, whose Body was dried up, yet he had a Disshe tied
to his Girdle, who seemed in his youth to have benne a talle man: he had a
Hatte on his head, and seemed by his countenance, that he had been a wise,
and subtle man: mary he halted a little, as if he had gotten sum Wound in
his Thighe: who, after he came near me, smiled a little with an angry
countenance, and said: You good man, alone of all that have sailed by
Cephalene, and looked upon my house, and accoumpted it a great matter to know
my renoume, have had no respect to me, but have set so light by me, that
you would not speak to me, which every man doothe, for all I dwelt so near
you, but you shall ere long be punished for this, and shall have like perilles
as I had, and fall into your enemies hand, as well by Land as Seas. As for the
Maid that thou carriest with thee, speak to her, and greet her in my Wives
name, because she esteems more of her Virginity, the^ any thing in ye
world, wherefore she shall have a luckie end. I started for fear of this
Vision, and when Theagenes asked me what I ayled, we had (quod I) almost
forgotten the goinge of the ship out of the Haven, for when I waked, I was
sore troubled with thinkinge thereof. Wherefore gather up your stuff, and I
will call Cariclia, who as soon as I gave her warninge came. When Tyrrhenus
wist of this he arose also, and asked what we meant to do. What so ever it be
(quod I) that we do at this time, it is by your advise: we go about to
escape from them, that awayte us with mischief, and the Gods keep you in
safety, who has played the right honest man with us. One good turn I pray
do us at partinge, go over into Ithaca, and do Sacrifice for us to Ulysses,
and pray him to appease his wrath toward us, for that as he has told me
to night in my sleep, he is greatly offended, as if he had benne despised and
set at naught. He promised he would so do, and conducted us to our ship, and
wept woonderfully, and prayed to God that he would grant us a prosperous
viage, according to our hearts desire. To be short, by day we were in the
midst of the Sea, but the Mariners at the first were greatly against it,
yet at length they were persuaded by the Merchant of Tire, because he told
them that they fled certain Pirates that pursued the^, of which he had
warninge. He meante Many times Iestes turned to good earnest as did his now.
to tell them this for a tale, and knew not that he said truth. But the
winds and weather were sore against us, so that the Sea was very rough, and
we in a great tempest, very near to be cast away, yet at length when we
had lost half our rudder, and broken the most part of our sail yardes, we
arrived in a certain Harbor of Crete. We thought it good therefore to tarry
there certain days, as well to repair our ship, as also to ease our selves.
When these things were done, it was appointed that we should sail, the
first Mondaie after the change of the Moon, we were carried into the deep
Seas, with the Easterly wind, a day and a night, and our Master directed our
Hulke to the coast of Aphrique. For he said that if the wind blewe, and we
kept a straight course, we might pass the main Sea, and he made all haste
possible to come to the main Land, or into some Haven, for the Bark which
he saw out of the pupe was a Pyrate. For ever sithence we loosed from the
promontory of Crete, he follows us, and never declineth one jot from our
course, but pursues our ship, as if it went our viage with us: for I have
perceived this diverse times, when I turned about of purpose our ship from his
right course, that has also turned. When he had said this, some were moved,
and exhorted the rest to make them ready to defense, but some made light
thereof. Saying that the shorter ships might well overtake such as are
greater, for that they know by more experience the certainety of their way.
While these things were disputed on, upon both parts, it was that time of the
day, that the Husbandman does unyoke his Oxen from the ploughe, and the
vehement wind began to wax caulme, so that within a little while it was
almost down, and blewe softly to no purpose on our sails, whereby it rather
huffed them together, then made any way for our ship. At length it ceased
quite, as if at the Sun settinge it had appointed to leave blowinge, or
rather (that I may speak more truly) to do them which followed us a good
turn, for they that were in the Bark as long as we had wind, were far
behind our ship which was full fraughted, as is good reason, for that our
greater sails received more wind. But after the Seas were caulme, and we of
force constrained to row, the dark came upon us sooner then a man would
think, in as much (as I think) every one of them rowed, and so made the
light bark which was more fit for that purpose, go the faster. When they
drew somewhat near, one of the men of Zacynthus which came aborde with us
cried out. This is a Pirates ship, mates, I know Trachinus bark: al y^
Hulke was moved at these news, and in a calm weather had it a great tempest,
every part thereof was filled with great noise, lamenting, and runninge up and
down, sum ran into the nether parts of the Ship: sum stood upon the
Hatches, and exhorted one an other to fight: sum were of opinion, that it
was best to go into the Cock Boat, and be gonne. Until (before they
determined any thing) the present skirmishe appeased their adoo, for that
every man must needs by that time meet one in Harneis. I, and Cariclia hung
about Theagenes, who desired sore to fight, and could scante make him give
over. She said to him, that she would not be parted from him by Death, but
that she would, with the same Swoorde, and like wound, abide such hap, as
he felt. But I, after I perceived that it was Trachinus, which came on,
thought upon sommewhat which might do us good afterward, which in deed
took effect: for as soon as the Pirates were comme, they went about us,
without castinge any Darts at us, so tryinge, if by any means they might
take the Hulke without battle: mary they rowed round about us, and would
suffer the Ship to go no further. So that they were like, as if they had
besieged us, and desired to take our Ship upon certain Conditions, and
said: Why be you so mad (you unhappy folks) why attempt you to stir
against such invincible strength, and that which far surmounteth yours:
thereby to purchase your certain Destruction? Yet we use you friendely, and
give you leave to take your Cock, and save your lives, if you will. These
Conditions they propounded. But they, who were in the Hulke, as long as they
were without danger, and the Battle was without blood, were very stout,
and said plainly, that they would not depart. But when one of the Pirates
bolder then the rest, stepte aborde, VVarres are made with slaughter and
blondshedde.
and with his swoorde flewe al them that he met, and taught them, that
Wars were accustomably made with Slaughter, and Death. Then the Phoenicians
repented them of their so dooinge: and fallinge flat on their faces, prayed
them of mercy, for that they would do what they would have them. They, for all that they were now gredy to kill (for the sight of Blood is a The sight
of blood, makes men egar to fight.
great moving to the mind): yet by commandment of Trachinus, contrary to al
hope, they spared them. Surely their Conditions were heinous, and for all the
cou^terfeited name of Peace, it was cruel War in deed by reason of the
Truce which was propounded to them, more tolerable then the Battle it self.
For straighte commandment was given, that every man should go out of the
Ship with one suit of Apparel only, and that he should die that brake the
same. It seems, that Men set more by their lives, then any thing else.
men set more by their lives, then any thing else: for which also, the
Phoenicians without al hope of the goods in the Ship, as if they had lost
nothing, but rather made a good Market, got out of the Ship, every man
desiringe to save him self first. After we also were there ready to obey
their Decree, Trachinus taking up Cariclia, said unto her: This War
nothing belongethe to thee, my Dear, but has benne enterprised for thy
sake, and I have followed you ever since you sailed from Zacynthus: only for
you have I adventured these perilles by Sea. Wherefore fear not, but be of
good comfort, and know, that you shall be Lady of al these with me. Thus he
said. But she (for it is a point of wisdom It is wisdom to have respect
of time.
to have respect to time, and to turn al to the best (very discretely,
being greatly cheered with mine advice, and what I had told her, as touching
these present mishappes, with a countenance so seemly, as would have allured
any man, said, I give the Gods thanks, who have given you a heart to deal
more gently with us, then the rest. But if you will have me to be bold in
deed, and to tarrye, show me this for a token of your good will: save this my
Brother, and my Father, and command them not out of the Ship also: for if
these be from me, there is no way to save me alive. And when she had said
thus, she fell at his knees, and held him fast. Trachinus was well pleased
with her so holding, and deferred his promise of purpose. At length moved with
her tears to compassion, was by her countenance forced to fulfill her will,
after he had taken up the Maid, said thus: I give this your Brother to you
with all my heart: for I see he is a young man of stout courage, which may do
us good service. As for the Old man, which is but a chargeable burden
without profit, let him tarrye only for your pleasure. While these things
were saying, and dooinge, the Sun came out of his course, to his settinge,
and made that space between the day, and the night dark: the Sea, either
changinge by reason of the time, or else by the will of Fortune, began to wax
roughe, and a man might hear a great noise of the Winds arisinge, whose
great and valiante Blastes suddenly much abashed the Pirates, by reason
that they al had left the Bark, and were busy in the Hulke about spoylinge
of the Merchandise therein, and knew not how to use the greatness of the
same. Wherefore A pretty description of a ship in a tempest, in which are none
but unskillful Mariners.
every part was ordered of every man unadvisedly, so that each of them began
to practice that, which he had never done before: sum stroke the Sails on
heaps: other entangled the Ropes without skill: one ignorante fellow took the
Rudder in hand: an other as wise as he was in the Foreship. The greatest
thing that brought us into peril, was not the Tempeste, which was not yet
very great, but the unskillfulness of the Master, who as long as he could
see any light of the day, stood to it, but when it was dark gave over his
charge. When therefore they were in danger of drowninge, and almost sunk,
sum of the Pirates would have gonne into their own Bark again, but they
held the^ selves content, being disappointed of their purpose by the force
of the Tempeste: and Trachinus counsel, who persuaded them that they should
have six hundred such little Barks, if they keapte the Hulke and the Kitches
therein whole: and at last he cut of the Rope whereby it was tied to the
Hulke, saieinge, that it would bring them into an other Tempeste: wherefore
it was best to work wisely to be safe afterward, for it was a suspicious It
is wisdom to foresee.
matter to ariue in any place with two Ships, saying it must needs comme
to pass, that inquirye must be made of those that sailed in the one. And he
seemed to speak probably, and by dooinge that one thing, to approve his
devise in two matters. They had but little remedy when the Bark was gonne,
neither were they out of peril, but tossed with continual Waves without
ceasinge: so that they lost many parts of their Ship, until after that
night about the Sun settinge of the next day, they landed by chance at a
certain Mouth of a Haven of Nilus, called Heracliote in Egypt against our
wills, unhappy creatures. Sum were glad thereof, but we were very
sorrowful, and accoumpted the benefit of our health that we had of the Sea, a
great reproach: in as much as it envied us a Death without It is better to
die with honor then live with shame.
al injury, and committed us to land, which was more sorrowful then it: in
as much as now we were subject utterly to the Pirates, that they might do
with us their will, which might easily be gheassed by that which those
Villains attempted before they came ashore. For by reason that they said they
would do Sacrifice to Neptune, to give him thanks for their safety, they
brought alande Wine of Tire, and many such things else out of the Ship, and
sent sum of their mates to the Borders adioining to buie cattle with a
great deal of Money, and gave them charge to pay what so ever was asked at
the first word. After so dooinge, they straight way returned, and brought
with them a whole Heard of Swine and Sheep, and they which tarried behind,
had made the fires, and fleaed the beasts appoited for the Sacrifice: they
went to their Feast, Trachinus took me aside, so that none might hear,
and said to me: Father, I am determined to take thy Daughter Trachinus would
Marry Cariclia out of hand.
to wife, and marry her this day, so that I purpose to join this pleasante
Solemnity with the Sacrifice of the Gods. Wherefore least you in the Feast
(if you heard not of this before) should be any thing sad: but that you
might tell your Daughter hereof, and cause her to be of a cheereful courage,
I thought it good to tell you my mind, not for that I need your consent,
for I have Absolute power to do what I list. But because I accoumpte it more
luckie, and seemly also, if the Bride It is a good sight at a Brydale, to see
the Bride merry.
more cheerfully prepare her self, being admonished thereof first by her
Father. I praised his opinion, and made as though I had benne glad, and gave
thanks to the Gods that they had appointed my Master to be my Daughters
Husband. And when I was gonne, I began to think on that which was to
comme, and came to him again, and besought him, that that which was new
begone, might be done more solemnly, and that he would appointe the Hulke
to be the Maids Bedchamber, and give commandment that no man might go in
and trouble her, that she migt provide that which was meet to furnishe, and
set forth a Bride by leisure. For it were il ordered, if she, which is of
a good stock, and very ritche, and (that which is greatest) shall be Trachinus
wife, should not be made so handsome as she might be, although time and
place will not give her leave to be very trim. Trachinus was very glad of
this, and promised it should be so with all his heart: and therewith he gave
charge, that all such things as they should have need of, should be
carried out, and that after none should comme near the Ship. They did as he
commanded them: they brought out Tables, Cups, Carpettes, Clothes of
Arrace, Works of Sidon, and Tire, and other such things, as were expediente
to the furniture of a feast: each one brought out of ye Ship things upon their
shoulders, without respect or order, such as diverse men with great travel,
and thryftie usage had gathered together: but now Fortune had prepared them to
serve their Prodigal Banquette. But I took Theagenes with me, and when we came
to Cariclia, and found her weepinge, said, Daughter, this is no news to you:
marry I know not, whether it be for your old il fortune, or any new
mishhappe. For both (quod she), but above al things, for that which I am
afraid of, which is the hated good will of Trachinus, which time, as is like,
procures for such success, as is not looked for, Success not looked for,
does make men do otherwise often times then else they would do.
is accustomed to move men to do il. But Trachinus, and his Love which I
hate so much, shall be sorrowful, which I will preuente with Death. And to
think that I should be divided from you and Theagenes before the end (if
that came to pass) caused me to be thus heavy. You think (quod I) in deed
as it is: for Trachinus, after the Sacrifice, means to change the Banquette
into his, and your Bridal, and made me (as I had been your Father) privy
thereto, who knew before his unreasonable love that he bare to you, by
Communication that I had with Tyrrhenus in Zacynthus, but I did not tell you
thereof, least you should have benne discouraged for fear of those
mishappes, saying also that we might have avoided his snares. But my Children,
seeinge God will not let this comme to pass, and that we are now in extreme
peril, attempt sum woonderful, and courragious enterprise to withstand
this increasinge evil, whereby we shall live freely ever after, if we have
good luck: or else accoumpte it advantage if we sail, to die Chastely, and
like men. After they promised to do what I would command them, and I had
taught them what was best to do, I leafte them making such provision as was
requisite, and came to that Pyrate, which was chief next Trachinus (whose name
I think, was Pelorus) and said, that I had a thing to lel him for his
profit. He was ready. And after I had brought The crafty devise of Calasiris
to hinder the Marriage of Trachinus and Cariclia, whereby all the Pirates are
slain.
him where none might hear, I said: Give ear my Son shortly, for the
shortenesse of the time will not suffer me to be very long: my Daughter is in
love with thee, as ouercomme with the better man: marry she suspecteth that
the Archepyrate makes this Banquette to marrye her, for he seemed to mean
sum such thing, when he gave her commandment to deck her self somewhat
finely. Wherefore consider how you may undo that, and have her your self.
For she says, she will rather die, then marrye Trachinus. Then said he, be
of good cheer: for in as much as I have benne as well minded that way, as the
Maid, I desired to have some occasion, and mean proffered to take that matter
in hand a good while ago. Wherefore Trachinus shall suffer me to marry her of
his own free will, or else he shall have but a soary Marriage, by sufferinge that
at my hand, that he has well deserved. I hasted back for fear of suspicion,
when I heard him say thus, and coming to my Children comforted them, and
told them how my devise took good effect: Within a littell after we went to
Supper. Then I, when I saw them well whitled with wine, and wantonly bent,
whispered Pelorus in the ear (for I satte next him of purpose) and said,
have you seen how the Maid is dressed? He answered me no: But you may quod
I now, if you go privily to the ship, for you know Trachinus has given
contrary commandment, you shall see Diana her self sit there: but so behave
your self, that you be not over bold to behold her, least you purchase death
to you both. He tarried not, but as if he had some very earnest business,
arose and came privily into the Hulke, and when he saw Cariclia were a Crown
of Laurel on her head, and glister in her Garment garnished with Gold, (for
she had put on the holy apparel which she brought from Delphi, to be a
furniture either to her Victory, or else beauty to her burial) and such other
things about her, as might beseem a Marriage well, was set on fire (as was
like he would be) with that sight, in as much as desire and emulation pricked
him forward, and it was evident by his countenance when he returned, that he
intended to do some mischievous thing, for ere he was well set down, he
said, why have not I the reward dew to him that first ^ourded the enemies
ship? Because, said Trachinus, yet you have not asked it, neither is that
which we have gotten divided. Then I will have quod he, the Maid which is
taken prisoner. But when Trachinus had said, beside her take what you will.
Pelorus began to say, then do A Law of the Pirates.
you disanull and abrogate the Law of Pirates, which gives him, which first
enters the enemies ship, and has for all his mates adventured him self to
the most dangerous part of the skirmishe, leave to chose what likes him
best. I break not good Sir, said Trachinus, this, but I leave to another
which wills that place be Another Law or decree.
given to the Captains. For my part I love the Maid woonderfully well, and
mean to take her to my wife. And I say plainly it is reason that I chose
before you, and if you do not as the Law wills you, you shall repent it with
a blow of this pot. Then said Pelorus to those that were by, you see what
is the reward of our travel? so shall any of you hereafter be put beside your
due. What else might any man see there Nausicles? you might have compared those
men so suddenly, moved to the Sea: so blind and foolish a quarrel draw
them to so great a broyle, being with Wine and anger almost made stark
mad. Some took this man's part, some his, one sort would have the honor
given to the Captain, an other said that the law and ordinance might not be
broken. At length Trachinus bente him self to The Pirates fall together by the
ears, and are al slain with mutual wounds.
cast a pot at Pelorus, but he prevented him (for he was provided before)
and thrust his Dagger to his heart, and there lay he wounded to death.
Between the rest was a cruel battle, for as they met they spared not them
selves, some to revenge the Captain, other to defend Pelorus his right, so
that they wayled al a like, and fought with Battes, Stoanes, Pottes and Tables.
But I went a great way of, and from the top of a little Hill looked upon
them out of all danger. Neither was Theagenes and Cariclia, free from this
war, in as much as they dooinge as was agreed upon, he came with a swoorde,
and ioyninge to one side, behaved him self as if he had benne distraught, she
when she saw the battle begone, shot out of the ship in such sort as
she never missed one, and spared none but Theagenes, she shot into no one
part of the Battle, but him she hilte, that she first spied, for that she
was not seen, but did easily see her enemies through the fire, so that they
knew not what mishappe that was, but some supposed it a plague Theagenes and
Pelorus, fight hand to hand for Cariclia.
sentefrom Heaven, until every man was slain, and Theagenes only left
fighting hand to hand with Pelorus, a stout man, and practiced in many
Murders. Now could Cariclias shootinge do no more service, she was sorry that
she could not help him, and afraid least she should loose him, now they
two were come to hand blows: but at length Pelorus was not hable to stand
against him, for though that Cariclia with her deed, could healpe him no
more, yet with her word she comforted him, crying out: Now my heart play
the man, then was Theagenes far too good for Pelorus, as though her voice had
made him strong, and bold, and declared what was the reward of that
battle. For then he plucked up his heart, which was sore wounded before, and
leapt near Pelorus, and with his swoorde stroke a full blow at his head, but
missed thereof, for that he avoided the blow a little, but he cut his arm
from his shoulder, and therewith he fled, and Theagenes pursued him, what
followed I cannot tell but that he returned again, and I saw him not, for
that I tarried on the Hill, and durst not be oner bold to walk in the night
in a place so full of enemies, but Cariclia espied him well yenoughe, for I
perceived when it was day, that he lay like a dead man, and she sat by him,
and wept, and declared that she would kill her self, but she held her hand
for a little hope that she had of his life. But I unhappy man, could not speak
to them, nor know the trothe, nor comfort their calamity before that as
great mishappes by Land, as these were by Sea, happened to us without any
delaie. For as soon as I saw the day appear, and was coming down the
Hill, I spied a company of Thieves of Egypt, run from a Mountain which
stretches that way by seeminge, and by this time had taken the young couple,
and within a while after carried them away, and what so ever else they could
out of the Ship. I spoke to no purpose a far of, and bewailed my Forture,
and theirs in vain, for that I could not defend them, neither thought I it
best to comme among them, for that I would reserve my self, in hope to help
them afterward. So I tarried behind, for that by reason of mine age I was not
so well hable as the Thieves to run down The first book declares how they
were handled afterward the beginning and process whereof, orderly follows,
until the beginning of Calasiris tale almost in the end of the second
Book. Wine makes men apt to weep.
the steep, and combersomme places, but now have I used your heple,
Nausicles, and the favor of the Gods in recovery of my Daughter, though I
did nothing thereto else, but weep and lamente abundantly. And then he wept him
self, and they also who were present: to be short, the Banquette was turned
into such weepinge, as was mingled with a kind of pleasure (for Wine in a
manner makes men ready to tears) so long, til Nausicles comforted Calasiris,
and said: Father, hereafter be merry, and of good cheer, for that you have
recouerd your Daughter, and after one night only you shall see your Son
also. For in the morninge we will talk with Mytranes, and do all that we can
to Ransom good Theagenes. I would with all my heart, said Calasiris. But
now it is time to make an end of our Banquette. Let us remember God, and
conioine to our Offeringe a Thankesgeuinge for her delivery. After this, the
Offeringe was carried about, and so the Banquette ended. Calasiris looked for
Cariclia, and when he found her not emonge the company that went out, at the
last with much adoo, by the tellinge of a wooman, he saw her holdinge the
feet of the Image, and either for the length of her Prayers, or greatenesse
of her sorrow, she was fallen into a sound sleep. So that he wept a little,
and prayed the God humbly to grant her better success, and so softly he
awaked her, and brought her into a Chamber, sore ashamed belike, that sleep
at unawares had so ouercommed her. Thus she laid to sleep in a place, where
only woomen comme with Nausicles Daughter, for the most part wakinge,
thought upon her cares, and that which after was like to ensue.

Here ends the Fifthe Book.
The Sixte Book.
WHen Calasiris and Cnemon, had taken their ease, and slepte in the men's
chamber, and the rest of the night was passed more slowely then they desired,
yet sooner then they thought, because the greatest part thereof was consumed
in the Banquette, and long tale, of which they could not be weary, it was so
pleasant, not lookinge for day, they came to Nausicles, and besought him, that
he would tell them out of hand, where he thought Theagenes was, and bring
them thither. He was content, and they went together, Cariclia besought them
much that she might go with them, but she was forced to tarry behind,
because Nausicles told her, they neither would go far, and that they
would safe return again, and bring Theagenes also. Thus they left her
waueringe between sorrow for their departinge, and joy for hope of that she
desired. They were no sooner out of the Village, and paste the banks of Nilus,
but they saw a Crocodyle, which crept from the right side to the other, and
diued under the water, as fast as it could. The other were nothing moved
with the sight because it was ordinary, sauinge that Calasiris prophesied,
Calasiris foresheweth an impediment in the journey by the creepinge of a
Crocodyle.
that it signified how they should have some let in their journey: but Cnemon
was woonderfully afraid of that sight, although he saw it not perfectly, but
a glimsinge thereof, so that he wanted but little, but that he would have run
back. Therewith spoke Calasiris, after he saw Nausicles laughe and said,
Cnemon, I thought that you had benne only afraid by night, for the noise and
darkness thereof, but you are over hardy even by day as may appear, that
are not afraid of names alone, but of such things also as are common, and
every man knows, and are not to be regarded. What Gods name, or heavenly
Creature is it, that this good man cannot abide, said Nausicles? Nay, if it
were a God, or any heavenly Creature, said Calasiris, then had I nothing to
say, but it is an human name, and that which is more to be marueiled at,
not any man's which has benne famous for his renoumed Acts, but a woman's, and
she dead (as he says) if a man may be bold to speak it. For yesternight
when you brought me home Cariclia safe from the Heardmen: he hearing this name
that I talk of, I know not why, nor wherefore, would not suffer me to sleep
any whitte, being ready still to die for fear, so that I had much a do to
call him again, and if I thought that I should not grieve him, nor make him
afraid, I would name it now also, that you might laughe the more, and
therewithal he named Thisbe. When Nausicles heard this, he laughed no more,
but was very sad, and stood in a study a great while, musinge in his mind
what Cnemon had to do with Thisbe, or how she harmed him in any sort. Then
began Cnemon to laughe woonderfully for joy and said: you see good
Calasiris, of what force this Name is, and that it does not only abashe and
fear me, but our good friend Nausicles also: for it has brought him to a
woonderful change of his cheer. As for me now I laugh because I know she is
not alive, but lusty Nausicles laughed other men to scorn not long ago.
Make an end, Cnemon, said Nausicles, for you have taken revenge enough of me
now. But I pray you tell me by the Gods of Hospitality and friendship, and
by the mirthe and cheer, which with especial good will (in mine opinion) you
have had in mine house, what mean you by Thisbes name, whether you know
whence she was in deed, or do it to fear me, or else have devised it as a
ieste against me. Then spoke Calasiris, now it behooves you to tell us of your
Fortune, Cnemon, which, for all that you oftentimes promised to communicate
with me, you have by diverse shifts driven of. But now you may do it very
well, both to pleasure Nausicles, and also to take away with your talk the
weariness of our iourneye. Cnemon did so, and told them al briefly, which he
before had told to Theagenes and Cariclia, that he was borne in Athens, and
Aristippus was his Fathers name, and Demeneta was his Mother in law. He told
them also of the wicked Love which Demeneta bare to him, and how that when
she could not come to her purpose, she awaited him with crafty sleightes by
means of Thisbe, who was suborned by her so to do. He added the manner also,
and then that he was banished his Country by the people, so punishinge him, as
if he had benne a Paricide, and that Charias first one of his companions told
him lyinge in Egina, that Demeneta was dead, and the manner of her death, being
also beguiled by Thisbe her self. After this that Anticles told him, how his
Father was brought into misery, by confiscatinge of his goods, for Aristippus
undone by means of his second wife.
that Demenetas kinsfolks gathered them selves together to condemn him, and
brought the people in suspection that he had done that Murder. Then how
Thisbe fled from Athens with a Lover of hers, which was a Merchant of
Naucratia. Last of al he rehearsed, how that Naucratia a City in Egypt.
he with Anticles sailed into Egypt to seek Thisbe, that if by hap they
could find her, they would bring her back to Athens, and deliver his
Father from that slander, and take revenge of her, and after he had fallen
into diverse mishappes by the way, at length he was taken by Pirates, then
after he had escaped by a mean, he arrived again in Egypt, and was taken of
the Heardmen, and there fell acquainted with Theagenes and Cariclia. And
thereto he added Thisbes death, and other things in order, until he came to
that which Calasiris, and Nausicles knew well yenough. This tale ended,
Nausicles had six hundred thoughts in his mind, sometime thinkinge to tell
them of Thisbe and him self, and yet determininge to defer it a while. At
last with much adoo he held his tongue, partly for that he thought it best
so to do, partly also for that an other chance stayed him. For after they
had gonne about seven miles and a half, and were almost at the town, where
Mytranes dwelled, they met one whom Nausicles knew well, and asked him
whither he went so fast. Do you ask (quod he) whither I go, Nausicles? as
though you knew not what I have to do at this time? all that I do tends to
one end, to do the commandementes of Isias of Chemmis. For her I till my
Land, for her I seek and provide all things, for her I wake night and day,
refusinge nothing (although thereby I gain nothing but grief and sorrow for
my pains) that the same Isias commands me: and Phoenicopterus a bird.
I am in haste to carry this bird Phoenicopterus, which uses about Nylus,
as my dear Mistress has bidden me. O how easy a Lover have you gotten, said
Nausicles, Nausicles friend had a gentle Lover. Whence the Phoenix comes.
and how light be her commandments, in that she badde you get her a
Phoenicopterus, and not rather a Phoenix it self, which Bird comes to us
even from the Ethiopians, and men of Inde. She (quod he) again makes but a
ieste of me and my trauelles: but tell me now whither and where aboutes you
go? When they had told him, to Mytranes. You loose your labor (quod he) for
Mytranes is not here now, but this night with his Army, is gonne against
Heardemen the inhabitants of Bessa. For they with their Captain Thiamis,
have taken away and keept a yongeman, which he sent to Memphis to Oroondates.
From thence to be carried to the great King for a present. When he had said
thus, he went his way, saying I must in haste to Isias, who even now
perhaps with her angry eyes looks about for me, least this long tariynge,
be any impediment to me in my Love: for she is too politic to accuse and
find fault with me without cause. When they heard this, they were amassed,
and stood still a great while without saying any word, for that they were
disappointed contrary to their exspectation, until at length Nausicles
comforted and cheered them, saying that they ought not, for being a little
disappointed, which shall not be long to despair of all that they have in
hand. But now it is best to return to Chemmis, and there to consulte of the
matter, and go to seek Theagenes with better provision, whether he be with
the Heardmen or else wheresoever, and to have good comfort to find him every
where. For we may not think this is done without the providence of God,
that we met with one of our acquaintance, who by that he told us, has
led us as it were by the hand thither, where we may seek Theagenes, and
has taught us the way to the place where the Heardmen dwell, as to a certain
place of speed. When he had said this, he easily persuaded the^, for as I
think they gathered a farther hope by that which was told them. And Cnemon
also by him self comforted Calasiris, and badde him be of good cheer, for
that Thiamis would use Theagenes well. So it pleased them to return: when
they were come home, they found Cariclia in the door, lookinge for them into
every coaste, who saying not Theagenes with them, took up a pitiful cry, and
said: Are you comme home alone as ye went hence Father? Without doubt (as I
may gheasse) Theagenes is dead. Wherefore I pray you by all the Gods, if you
have any thing to say tell me, and increase not my sorrow with prolonginge
the rehersall thereof. Surely it is a point It is a point of courtesy to
tell a mischaunce quickly.
of courtesy, to tell a mishappe quickly, as that which causes the mind to be
ready to resist the greatness of the evil, and soon makes it weary of the
grief. Then Cnemon with much adoo, breakinge of her sorrow: said, for shame
Cariclia what fascion is this? you are always ready in a manner to judge the
woorste, but that falsely, in which point you do well. For Theagenes is, and
by grace of the Gods shall be well: and therewith he told her briefly how,
and with whom. To that said Calasiris, it seems by this that you have
said, Cnemon, that you were never in Love, for then should you know for
certainty that things wherein is no danger at all, are fearful to Lovers,
and they trust nothing but their Lovers trust nothing but their own eyes.
own cies, in that which they best like, and would fainest have, the absence
of which breeds fear and heaninesse in the hearts, that be entangled with
such desire. Another cause is that either most dear to other have persuaded
them selves, that they will never be parted, except some great impediment
procure their separation. Wherefore Cnemon we pardon Cariclia, who loves
perfectly in deed, and let us go in and consulte of that we have to do.
This said, he took Cariclia by the hand, and with a certain Fatherly
obseruaunce, he brought her into the house. Nausicles willinge to refreshe them
after their cares, and also goinge about sum other thing, ordained a more
sumptuous Banquette then he was wont to do, and placed them alone with his
Daughter, deckinge her in more brave and costly sort then before. And after
they were well suffised with the feast as he thought, he spoke thus to them:
My gheastes (the Gods are witnesses of that I say) your presence is very
Nausicles Oration tendinge to this end, to have Cnemon marry his Daughter.
acceptable to me, if you would live here always, and take all that is mine
(though I esteem it never so well) for your own. And for as much as I
accoumpt you no Strangers, but as my Lovers and true Friends, henceforwarde
it shall be no burden that I bestow upon you: And also I will be ready as
long as I tarry with you, to crave of my friends to do for you, what so ever
they can in all matters. But you your selves know, that my trade of life
stands by Merchaundise, and this I use and practice as if it were a Farm.
Now therefore saying that the Easterly winds blow very commodiously, so that
they make the Sea easy to be sailed, and promise good speed to Merchauntes,
and my business do call me as it were a Trumpette into Greece, you shall do
very well if you tell me your mind, that I may order my business to such
end as I may pleasure you. After this Calasiris pausinge a while, said:
Nausicles, God send you a good viage, and Mercury who gives the gain, and
Neptune geuinge quiet passage, bear you company, and be your Guides, and make
every Haven a good Harbor to you, and every City easy for you to trade in,
and desirous of Merchauntes, because you have entertained us so friendly while
we have benne with you, and now we mind to depart, do suffer us to go so
gently, obseruinge in every point the Laws of Hospitality, and Friendship.
As for us although it grieve us greatly to depart from you and your house,
which you have caused us to take for our own, yet we must needs go seek
those whom we hold most dear, and this is Cariclias determination and mine.
Mary what Cnemon is minded to do, and whether he will travel with us to do
us pleasure, or has appointed to do any thing else, let him say him self.
Cnemon was willinge to answer this, and as he was about to speak, he sighed
sore, and the tears which trickled suddenly down his cheeks stopped his
tongue, until at length coming to him self again, he said with a sorrowful
voice, Oh human No estate is stable in this world.
estate most unstable, and full of all manner of changes, what stoare of
mishappes haste thou showed as well in me, as many other. Thou haste deprived
me of my Kinsfolks and Fathers house, thou haste bannished me from my
Country, and Native City, which I account most dear, thou haste brought me
into Egypt, and (that I leave to speak of many mishappes by the way) haste
brought me into the hands of the Thieves called Heardmen, and there showed me
a little hope of good Fortune, by acquaintinge me with men, who though they
were in misery, yet were they Greeks, with whom I thought to live all the
rest of my life. But thou seem to take this from me again: whither shall I
turn my self? or what shall I do? shall I leave Cariclia who has not yet
found Theagenes? that is intolerable and may not be done: shall I go with
her to seek him: if we were sure to find To what end pains should be
taken.
him, it were well done to take pains in hope of a happy end, but if that
which is to come be uncertain, and we hap to fall into greater sorrow, no
man can tell where my travel shall end. But what if I crave pardon of you and
the Gods of friendship, and now at length make mention of returninge into
my Country and Family? Saying that Nausicles in so good time (by the
providence of the Gods as I think) says that he will sail into Greece,
least if my Father die in mine absence our house be left without an heir. For
although I To leave Issue to succeed is a thing specially to be desired.
shall live in penury, yet that there should be sum left of our stock by me,
is a thing very honest, and for it self to be desired. But oh Cariclia I
would be excused to you especially, and I crave pardon at your hand, and pray
you to show me thus much favor, let me go with you to Bessa, and I will
desire Nausicles to tarry for me a little while, although he make great haste.
And if I deliver you there to Theagenes, let me be counted one, that has well
kept that he delivered to me. Whereby I may have better hope also to speed
well afterward, seeinge we parted so well: But if we fail of him there
(which God forbid) lay no fault in me; for that I leave you not alone, but
with Calasiris your good Father, who also will see to you very well. Cariclia
perceived by many Signs, that Cnemon was in Love with Nausicles Daughter (for
a Lovers eye is very quick to epsy an One Lover can soon epsy an other that
is like affected.
other who is like affected) and that also Nausicles went about (by that
which he spoke) to make a marriage, entised Cnemon diversely, iudgeinge him
also to be no meet Companion for their company, and would bread suspicion
also, made him answer: Do as it pleases you, and I give you hearty thanks
for that you have done to us already, and confess my self to be in your
debte. As for the time to comme, it is not needeful that you should have any
care of our business, nor be in danger in other men's matters against your
will. But God send you well to recover your Country, City, and house, and
make not light of Nausicles, nor of the profer he makes. As for me, and
Calasiris we will contend so long with all that which shall happen to us,
until we shall find an end of our travel, and although no man bear us
felwshippe, yet I trust the Gods will be our companions. With this spoke
Nausicles, The Gods send Cariclia her hearts desire, and bear her company
as she has prayed, and grant that she may recover her Kinsfolks, in as
much as she is of so noble courage, and excellent wisdom: and to you,
Cnemon, be no longer sorrowful for that you cannot carry Thisbe with you to
Athens, for that you have me, who have carried her from thence so craftily, for
I am that Merchante of Thisbe was carried from Athens by Nausicles.
Naucratia, Thisbes Lover: and if you will be ruled by mine advice, you shall
gain a great Sum of Money, and recover your Country, and House very well by
my conducte, and if you list to take a wife, you shall have my Daughter
Nausiclia, and a great Dowry with her, and I will think, that she has so
much, as she may look for at your hand, because I know of what Kindred,
and House you be comme. Cnemon made no stay at this, but took that which
before he desired, and was now persuaded contrary to his expectation, and
said: All that you promise me, I accept with all my heart. And therwithal he
gave him his hand, and Nausicles affianced, Cnemon marries Nausiclia,
Nausicles Daughter.
and delivered his Daughter to him: and commaundinge the Song usually song at
Marriages to be song, began to dance first him self, for making so
sudden a marriage of that prepared Banquette. All the rest celebrated the
marriage with dauncinge, and singinge, so that all the House was lighted with
such Candles as are used at Weddinges. But Cariclia, departinge from the
rest, went into her Chamber, and boltinge the Door, because that none
should trouble her, untied, and cast abroad her Hear, as if she had benne
in a rage, and cuttinge her Apparel, said: Well, let us also dance in The
sorrow that Cariclia was in, at Cnemo^ his Marriage, with a plain prouse of
her excellent good nature.
the honor of the God, who has care over us in such sort, as our estate
requires: Let us singe tears unto him, and dance with Lamentations: Let
the darkness resounde of the obscure night, (now this Candle is out) be
judge of that I mean to do: what a House has it made for our sake? what a
marriage Bed has it prepared for us? The God that has charge of me, has
me now alone, and without my Husband. Alas wretch that I am, I mean him,
that by name only is my Husband. Cnemon daunceth, and is married: Theagenes
is abroad, and perhaps a Prisoner, and in Hold, and if he be alive, Fortune
is sommewhat gentle: Nausiclia has a Husband, and is separated from me, who
until this night last paste, lay with me, only Cariclia is alone, and
forsaken of al. I am not for all this offended with her Fortune ( o ye Gods,
and Heavenly Powers) but pray that they may have their hearts desire: but at
our Fortune, that ye be not so favorable unto us, as to them: You have drawn
our act of such a length, as it now passes al sense. But why do I
complain of the miseries which the Gods send us: let the rest also be
fulfilled until they be pleased. But o Theagenes, o care only pleasante to me,
if thou be dead, and I hear thereof (which God grante I never do) I will
defer no time to be with thee, for this time I offer this Funerals to thee
(and therewithal she pulled of her Hear, and laid it on her bed) and pour
out these Libations out of ye eyes which thou love so dearly (and then she
moysted her Bed with her tears). But if thou be well (as thou of good right
ought to be) come and sleep with me, appearinge to me in thy shape: yet
spare me, spare me thine own Maid, I say, and use me not after the guise of
married folks, and have not to do with me, no not in my sleep: behold I
embrace thee, and think that thou art here and look upon me. And as she
had spoken thus, she cast her self grouelinge on her Bed, and sore
sighinge, and pitifully mourninge she clasped her arms hard together, until
a certain amasednesse, and dazeling, cast as it were a miste before her,
understanding part of the mind, and brought her asleep, and held her til
it was light day. Wherefore Calasiris marueiled that he saw her not as he was
wont to do, in searchinge for her, came to her Chamber, where knockinge
sommewhat hard, and calling alowde, Cariclia, waked her at length. She was
abashed at that sudden call, and came as she was attyred, and vnbolted the
door to let in the Old man. Who seeinge her Hear disordered, and her
Garments cut before her breaste with her eyes full of water, understood the
cause: and when he had brought her to her Bed again, and had caused her to
attire her self, and cast a Cloak upon her, he said: for shame, Cariclia,
what arraye is this? why do you vex your self so sore without ceasing? why
yield you to all chances without reason? Surely now I know you not, whom
till now I ever knew to be of excellent courage, and very modest. Will not
you leave What it is to be mortal.
of from this woonderful madness? Will you not think that you are borne
mortal: that is to say, an vnsteadye thing, bendinge for every light occasion
sundry ways? Have pity on us, my Daughter, I say, have pity, if not for
your own sake, yet for Theagenes cause, who desires to live with none, but
you, and accoumpteth it a vantage that you are alive. Cariclia blusshed when
she heard him speak thus: and after she had held her peace a great while,
and Calasiris desired her to give him sum answer, she said: Father, you
have good cause to chide, but perhaps I deserve pardon, for neither any
common, or strange desire has forced me, unhappy Creature, to do this, but
pure, and chaste Love that I bear to a man (although he never touched me) and
yt is Theagenes, who makes me thus sad because he is not here with me, and I
am the more afraid also, for that I cannot know whether he be alive or not.
As touching this matter said Calasiris, be of good cheer, and think that he
is alive, and one whom the Gods have appointed to live with you: if we must
give any credit to that which the Oracle has foreshewed us. We must also
believe him, who told us yesterdaie that Thyamis took him prisoner, as he was
carried toward Memphis, and if he be taken without doubt he is well, for as
much as there has benne acquaintance and familiarity betwixt the^ before.
Wherefore we ought not to stay but go to Bessa and seek, you for Theagenes,
and I for my Son, for you have heard ere now that Thyamis is my Son.
Thyamis was Calasiris Son.
Then was Cariclia in great thought, and said: If Thyamis be your Son in
deed, then are we in worse case then ever we were. Calasiris marueiled
hereat, and asked her why. You know (quod she) how I became prisoner to the
Heardmen, where the unhappy bewty with which I am indewed, forced Thyamis to
Love me: and it is to be feared least if he find us, as we make inquiry, and
see me, remembringe that I am she who dalied and drove of with diverse
disceiptfull promises, the Marriage which he meante to make with me, that he
will take me, and by force compel me to finishe the same. God defend said
Calasiris, that the vehemence of his lust should be such, that the same
should disdain his Fathers countenance, and not repress his licencious
desire, if any such move him. But for all that, why cannot you invent some
devise to delude that which you stand so in doubt of? for you are very
diligent, and crafty also to make shifts and delays against them, that seek
to have you. Cariclia was sommewhat merry with these words, and answered,
whether you speak this in earnest or in ieste let it pass for this time.
But I will tell you the way that Theagenes and I devised, but Fortune would
not let us put it in practice because it was very good. For when necessity
forced us to leave the Island of ye Heardmen, it pleased us to change our
apparel, and wander about in the Villages, and good Towns ragged like
beggars. Wherefore if it please you, let us counterfeite this habit and play
the beggars, so shall we not be so The commodities of beggary* Poverty is
rather pitied, then envied. Strangers buie dearly.
much in danger of those who would our harm. For in such a case by poverty
we shall be more safe: for commonly it is rather pitied then envied, and thus
shall we get our daily sustenaunce more easily. For all things are more
dearly sold to Strangers which have need to buie and know not the manner
of the Country, but will be freely given to such as beg. Calasiris praised
her devise, and made haste to be gonne: therefore the next day after they came
to Nausicles and Cnemon, and told them when thy were determined to depart,
they set forward (but took no Horse with them, though one were proffered them)
nor suffered any man to bear them company, save that Nausicles and Cnemon, and
the rest of the house brought them on their way. Nausiclia also went with
them, crauinge so much of her Father, for that the Love she bare to Cariclia,
was more then her late Marriage permitted. And when they had accompanied them
almost three quarters of a mile, each one according to their kind, took
their last leave and farewell and shook hands, and after they had shed a
great many of tears, and prayed that the partinge might be lucky to them, and
Cnemon craved pardon, for that he went not with them, by reason of his new
Marriage, and had told them that if he could get occasion he would follow
them, they left either other, and these went to Chemmis, but Calasiris and
Cariclia, turned them selves into beggars habit, and put on such ill favored
clowtes as they had provided before for that purpose. This done, Cariclia
defowled her face with durte, and soote, and tied a part of her Fascia that
was foul about her head, fufferinge it to hang ilfauouredly over her eyes in
steed of a Bonnegrace: she had moreover a scrip under her arm, as though
she would put pieces of bread and broken meat therein, but in deed to carry
the holy Vesture which she brought from Delphi, her Crown and the rest of
the remembraunces which her Mother laid forth with her. Calasiris carried
Cariclias quiver wrapped in a torn and naughty piece of leather, the wrong
end down ward on his shoulders, as if it had benne some other thing, and he
used her Bow (which as soon as it was unbent stood very straight) for a
staff leaninge very heavily thereon: and if happily they met any man, of
purpose he would make his back more crooked then his age required, and be lame
of one leg, and sometime be led of Cariclia by the hand. When they could
play this part well, and had iested one at another, and besought the God that
had their affairs in charge, that he would be content with that which was
past, and suffer their evil luck to proceed no farther, they went to Bessa,
where hopinge to find Theagenes and Thyamis, they failed of their purpose:
for coming near to Bessa about the Sun settinge, they beheld a great
slaughter of men lately made, of whom the most were Persians, which might
easily be known by their armor, and a few of those that dwelled there also:
so that they might conjecture that there had benne a battle, but they knew
not what ye parties were that had foughten it: until at length by raunginge
about the dead bodies, and lookinge if perhaps any of their friends were
there slain: Fear makes men judge the worste.
(for hearts which be in fear, and careful for that they love best,
oftentimes do deem the woorste.) At last they saw an Old wooman which
lay upon a dead body of one of those Country men, and wayled woonderfully.
They determined therefore if they might, to enquire sommewhat of her: and so
coming to her, at the first went about to comfort her, and appease her
great sorrow. Which when she accepted, they asked for whom she lamented,
and what Battle had benne there: Calasiris talkinge to her in the Egyptian
tongue, she told them al in few words, that she sorrowed for her Son,
and came of purpose to those dead bodies, that sum armed man might run
on her, and kill her, and in the mean time she would do such Kites to her
Son, as she was hable with tears and lame^tations. As touching the battle
she told them thus: There was a strange young man carried to Memphis, of
goodly stature, and excellent beauty to Oroondates the great A great battle
about Theagenes to reseue him from Mytranes.
Kings Deputy, he was sent from Mytranes the Captain of the Watches for a
great Present, as they said: him did our men that dwell in this Town (showing
the^ a Town hard by) say, was theirs: whether it were so in deed, or they
made it a color for them, I know not. When Mytranes heard this, being angry
(and good cause why) he conducted his Army hither two days ago, and the
people of this Town are very warlike, and live ever by spoylinge, and set
not a straw by Death, and have therefore taken from me, as well as other
woomen at other times our Husbands and Children. When our men knew
certainly of his coming, they placed their Ambushmente in places conueniente
for this purpose: and when their Enemies came emonge them, they easily subdued
them: sum with Banners displaide coming before them: and other breaking out
of ye Ambushment with great clamor set on the Persians backs. So Mytranes
was slain as he Mitranes slain.
fought with the foremost, and almost all the rest also, for yt they being
enclosed, had no way to flee, and a few of our people also. Of whom, by the
great wrath of God my Son was one, who had a wound in his breaste with a
Persian Darte, as you see: and for him thus slain, do I, unhappy Creature,
sorrow: and shall I fear to do the like hereafter for him yt is yet alive,
because yesterday he went with the rest against the Inhabitants of Memphis?
Calasiris asked her why they took upon them that viage. And the Old wooman
answered, that she heard her Son say which was alive, that they knew well
yenough, that because ye Kings Soldiers, and their Captain were slain, that
they should be, for that they had done, not in any small peril, but in
danger of all that they had: for that the Prince Oroondates, who lies at
Memphis, has very great power with him, who as soon as he shall be certified
hereof, will come and compass this Town about at the first, and revenge this
injury with the destruction of all the Inhabitauntes of the same: and are
therefore determined, saying that they are once in so great danger, to
redeem their great attempt with a greater if In extremity desperation may
stand for a singular virtue. Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem:
Virgilius.
they may, and to take Oroondates unprovided: supposing that if they may
comme on the sudden* either they shall kill him if he be at Memphis, or if he
be not there (as report goes) that he is busied in the Ethiopian war, that
they shall the sooner force the City to yield, for that it is without such as
may defend the same, and so they shall be safe afterward: and moreover to do
their Captain Thiamis service in recoueringe the Office of the Priesthood,
which his younger Brother by violence holds from him unjustly: but if al
their hope fail them, then are they determined valiauntly to die, and not to
comme into the Persians hands to be scorned, and tormented of them. But for as
much as you be strangers, wither go you? To the Town, said Calasiris. It is
not good (quod she) for that you be not known, and comme at such unlawful
time to be among them that are left. If you will vouchesaue to entertain us,
said Calasiris, we hope we shall be safe. I cannot said she now, for I
must do certain night Sacrifices. But if you can ^arry, as perhaps there
is no remedy, but you must whether you will or not, get you into sum place
beside these dead bodies, to pass this night, and in the morninge I promise
you I will entertain you, and be your warrante. Thus she said. Calasiris told
Cariclia al, and took her with him, and went their way. And having gonne a
little paste those bodies, they chanced upon a little Hill: there he laid him
down with her Quiver under his head. But Cariclia fate upon her scrippe in
steed of a stool: at that time the Moon arose, and with her brightenesse
lightened al things, for she was now three days paste the full. Calasiris
being otherwise an Old man, and weary of his travel fell fast asleep: mary
Cariclia by reason of the cares that troubled her, slept not that night, but
beheld a wicked and abominable fact, yet such as the woomen of that Country
commonly use: for ye Old wooman thinking that she had now gotten a time A
very pretty description of an old woman* Sorceres playinge her pagent.
wherein she should neither be seen, nor troubled of any, first dug a
Pit, then made she a fire on both sides thereof, and in the mids she
laid her Sons body, and taking an Earthen Pot from a three footed
stool, which stood thereby, poured Honey into the Pit: out of an other she
poured Milk, and so did she out of the third, as though she had done sum
Sacrifice: Last of al she cast a lump of Dowe hardened with the fire which
was made like a man, and had on a Crown of Laurel, and the tree called
Bdellium into the Pit. This The tree called Bdellium.
done, she took up a Swoorde that lay emonge the dead men's Shieldes, and
behauinge her self, as if she had benne in such fury, as the Priests of
Bacchus commonly are, said many Prayers to the Moon in strange terms: then
did she cut her Arm, and with a branch of Laurel she besprinkeled the
fire with her Blood: and dooinge many monsterous and strange things beside
these, at length bowinge her self down to the dead Body of her Son, and
saieinge sommewhat to him in his ear, awaked him, and by force of her
Witchecraftes, made him stand up suddenly. Cariclia, who hitherto had not
looked on her without great fear, then trembled, and was utterly discomforted
with that woonderful sight, so that she awaked Calasiris, and caused him also
to behold ye same. They could not be seen in a dark corner, but they saw
easily what they did in the light by the fire, and heard also what she
said, for that they were not far of, and the Old woman spoke very plain to
the Body. The question was this: Whether her Sons Brother which was yet
alive should return safe, or no? The Body made no answer, but with
noddinge gave his Mother a doubteful hope of good success according to her
mind, and so fell groueling down again: but she turned the face upward, and
ceased not to ask that question, and with more earnest enforcementes (bilike
speakinge many things in his ear again, and leapinge with a Swoorde in her
hand, sometime to the Pit: sommetime to the fire, made it stand vprighte
again, and asked the same question, compellinge him not to answer by noddes
and beckes, but plainly by mouth to the question she asked. While The
Priests of Egypt, though they were Heathen dealte not with Sorcerie.
this was in dooinge, Cariclia prayed Calasiris that they might go near, and
ask the Old Woman sum tidinges of Theagenes: but he would not, saieinge,
that that sight was wicked, but there was no remedy but they must needs be
content with it: for it becomes not the Priests, either to take delighte,
or be present where such things are dooinge. But they ought by Sacrifices,
and lawful Prayers enquire, not by shameful Sorceries, which are conuersante
about the Earth, and dead Creatures, of which sort is the Egyptians
practice, which chance at this time has caused us to see. While he spoke
thus, the dead Body spoke very terribly with a hollow voice, as if it had
comme out of a deep Cave, saieinge: Mother, at the first I spared thee, and
suffered thee to sin woonderfully against the nature of man, and break the
Laws which the Ladies of Sorcerie is a thing against nature.
Destiny have appointed, in attemptinge to make those things move, which by
nature are immovable. For even the dead men have a reverence as much as they
may to their Parents. But for as much as thou breakest Dead men he
says, reverence their parents.
this, and procedest in thy wicked and shameful deed, which at the first
thou haste begone, and art not content that a dead Body stand up, but
will compel him to speak also, nothing regardinge my Burial, The Heathen
Philosophers were of opinion that the Souls of men whose bodies were not
buried, should not come into the fellowship of other their fellows.
and will not suffer me to comme into the company of other Souls, which thou
art bound to do for private friendshippes sake. Hear now that which before
I was afraid to tell thee: Neither shall thy Son comme safe home, nor thy
self escape death with Swoorde. But in as much as thou haste spente thy life
in such wicked deeds, thou shalt have shortly violent death, appointed for
all such. Who haste benne coutente, not only to do these so secret and
hidden Mysteries alone, but in the sight of other also: so that thereby thou
bewraiest, and set forth to them the state of the dead, whereof one is a
Priest, and is therefore so much the better, for he knows, such is his
wisdom, that such things should not be blased abroad, but kept in
secret, and is also well beloved of the Gods, and he shall, if he make speed,
agree his Sons, who are ready armed to fight a bloody Battle hand to
hand. But the other which is so much worse, is a Maid, and looks upon
that thou dooest to me, and hears all that thou say, a wooman far in
love, who traueleth all the world over, almost for her Lovers sake, with whom
after infinite trauelles, and six hundred dangers, in the furthest part of
the world, she shall live in prosperity, and Kings estate. The Body fell
down when he had said thus: but the Old wooman perceiving that they were
strangers that looked upon her, armed as she was with the Swoorde in her
hand, like a woodde wooman sought for them, and raunged round about emonge
the dead Bodies, thinkinge that they had benne there, meaning that if she
could find them, to rid them out of their lives, as crafty folks, and
such, who by their lookinge on her, caused her to have so il success in her
Witchecrafte. Until at length seekinge sommewhat negligently, for anger emonge
those, a trunchion of a Spear that The VVitche had such death as all her
former life well deserved.
stood up, stroke her through the belly: and thus died she, fulfillinge
straighe way by dew deserte the saieinge which her Son prophesied to her
before.

Here ends the Sixte Book.
The Seventh Book.
CAlasiris and Cariclia, after they had escaped such a scouringe, as well to
get them out of the present danger, as also hastinge for that was showed
them, to Memphis, set forward apace, and they came to the City, as those
things were adooinge, which the dead man, that his Mother called up foretold
them. For they who were at Memphis, had shut the gates a little before
Thyamis came with his Army from Bessa, for that they had warninge of his
coming, by a Soldier that served under Mytranes, and had escaped from the
Battle at Bessa. Then Thyamis commanded his Soldiers, at a part of the
wall to lay aside their Armoure, and after their continual travel to take
some ease, and he determined to lay siege to the City. The Towns men
which were before afraid of a great Army, when they saw there were so few
from the walls, dispisinge the^, by and by gathered the few Archers, and
Horsemenne which were left in Garrison in the Town, and the rest of the
Citizens also took such weapons as came to their hands, and determined to
go forth, and fight with them, against the will of a wise and noble man in
the Town, who said that although it happened the deputy to be at the War in
Ethiopia, yet the matter ought to be brought before Arsace his wife, that the
Soldiers which were in the City might be the rediar to defend the same.
And because he seemed to speak well, they went all to the Kings Pallaice,
wherein the Deputies lodge in the Kings absence. Arsace was a bewtifull Arsace
Oroondates wife, Sister to the great King of Persia.
woman, and of tale stature, and singular wisdom to do any thing, and of a
stout stomach for the Nobleness of her birthe, as is like would be in her,
that is Sister to the great King, yet for her unlawful and dissolute lust
she was not without reprehension and blame. And beside other factes, she was
in a manner part of the cause of Thyamis bannishmente, when he was constrained
to forsake Memphis. For presently after Calasiris went privily from Memphis,
for that which was told him by the Gods of his Sons, and could not be
found, so that it was thought he was dead, Thyamis as his elder Thyamis made
Priest after the departure of Calasiris his Father.
Son, was called to the Office of Priesthood, and as he was dooinge
sacrifice, publicly at his first entry into Isis Church, Arsace saying him to
be a proper yongue man, and of good age, for that he was the handsomest man in
that company, and best attyred, cast many wanton looks and dishonest
countenaunces at him. Which Thyamis regarded no whitte, both for that he was
of nature very honest, and well instructed from a child: and perhaps that
which she did was further fetched, then that he perceived it, or he thought
perhaps she did it for some other purpose, for that he was altogether
busted about his Sacrifices. But his brother Petosiris, Petosiris does play
an unbrotherly part with Thyamis, and by means of Arsaces wa^ton looks,
procures his unjust banishment.
who before envied that his Brother should be Priest, and had well marked
Arsaces allurementes, took her unlawful intisementes for a good occasion to
endamage his Brother. Wherefore he came to Oroondates secretly, and told him
not only her desire, but that Thyamis also had made the match with her,
adding that very falsely. He suffered him self easily to be persuaded for
suspicion that he had conceived of Arsace, yet he molested her not, either for
that he could not manifestly convince her, or else thought it best to conceal,
and wincke at it for reverence and honor that he bare to the Blood Royal. But
he told Thyamis plainly and never ceased, to threaten to kill him, until he
put him to exile, and placed his Brother Petosiris in his room: but this was
done before. At that time when the whole multitude came on heaps to her
house, and certified her of the coming of their enemies, and besought her
that she would geeue commandment, that the Soldiers should be in a
readiness, answered that she would not lightly so do, for because she
knew not of what force her enemies were, nor what they were, nor whence they
came, nor for what occasion. It was therefore best first to go on the
walls, and see all their ordinances, and then provide such things as shall be
thought convenient. They thought she said well, and went every man to the
walls, there Arsace inquireth the cause why the people of Bessa comme in
armoure to Memphis.
by Arsaces commandment was a tente of purple silk garnished with Gold
pitched, and she her self very costly arrayed, came and satte in a hie seat,
with her Guard about her glisteringe in gilte armoure, she held out her Mace
in token of a peaceable Parlamente, and commanded the Captains of their
enemies to approach near to the Walls. After Theagenes and Thyamis elected of
the Army, came all armed save their heads, and stood under the wall, the
Heraulte at Arms said unto them: Arsace wife of Oroondates, chief Deputy,
and Sister to the great King asks what you are, what your meaning is, and
wherefore you are so bold to comme hither. They answered, that they were of
Thiamis declares the cause of his coming.
Bessa, but of him self spoke Thiamis what he was, and that wronged his
Brother Petosiris and Oroondates, and deprived craftily of his Priestehoode,
was brought to be restoared again by the Bessians, and if he might recover
the Priests Office, then should it be Peace, and the people of Bessa return
home again without any more harm dooinge. If not, he meante to commit the
matter to the judgment of War, and force of Arms, and that Arsace had good
cause, if she remembered that which was paste, to take revenge of Petosiris
for the falsehedde he practiced against her, and the untrue occasions that he
laid against her to Oroondates, whereby he brought her into suspicion of
vile and unlawful dealinge with her Husband, and caused him to be bannished by
his subtle and crafty means. All the City of Memphis was troubled with
these words. When they knew Thiamis, and the cause of his bannishmente,
which when he was bannished, none of them knew, and denied all that he had
said to be true: but Arsace of al other was most troubled, so that a whole
storm of thoughts in a manner overwhelmed her, for she was soar incensed
against Petosiris, and calling to mind that which was paste, devised with
her self how she might be revenged. Then beholdinge Thiamis, and after him
Theagenes, was diversely affected to them both, to the one by calling to mind
her old love: but in the other she found occasion of new, and that more
earnest love, so that those that stood by her might well perceive the
troublesome carfulness of her mind: yet for all this, when she had pawsed a
while, and came to her self, not much unlike one who is recovered of the Holy
Evil, she said thus: Good men, surely you were not well devised to take this
War in hand, for you have now brought as well all the people of Bessa, as
also your Arsace does answer This amiss.
selves being youthful young men, and therewithal bewtifull, and of good
parentage (as may be gheassed) into apparent peril for the Thieves quarrel,
in as much as if we would fight with you, you were not hable to sustain the
first assault of our force. For the great Kings estate is not brought to so
low an ebb, but that you may be enclosed of the leauinges of the Army, which
is behind him in the City (though the Deputy him self be away) but in mine
opinion the whole powers on both sides need not to be troubled, and it is
better, saying that the quarrel is private and not common, that it be
privately ended, and so be finished as the Gods shall appointe. I think it
reason therefore, and I geeue commandment too, that all the men of Memphis
be quiet, and that they stir not without occasion, and that they Arsace
sentence between Thiamis and Petosiris, as touching the Priesthood.
whose is the quarrel about the Priesthood, fight for it hand to hand, on
condition that the Conqueror have the same. When Arsace had said thus, all the
Memphites shouted woondersfirisly and praised her advise, for that they began
to suspect the mischievous attempt of Petosiris, and every man was glad to
lay the imminent and present danger, which was before their eyes, on an
other man's back. But the people of Bessa were not content with that order,
neither would they venture their Captain so daungerously, until Thyamis
persuaded them, telling them that Petosiris was but feeble, and unskillful to
fight, and that he should have a great advantage in the Battle by reason of
his practice. So thought Arsace also as may be deemed, and therefore ordained
the battle to be between them two, that she might have her desire without
suspicion, and be revenged of Petosiris sufficiently, if he fought with his
Brother Thyamis, who was the better man a great deal. There a man might see
that done, as soon as she had commanded it, and Thyamis with all his might
hasted to do what she had denounced, and took the rest of his Armoure that
he wanted, with a cheerful countenance, and Theagenes comforted him
diversely, and set on his head piece, wherein was a very fair plume of
feathers, glisteringe by reason it was well gilted, and fastened the rest of
his Armor surely about him. But Petosiris was thrust out of the gates by
violence, to fulfill that which was commanded, though he used many prayers to
entreat that he might not fight, and he took weapons in hand sore against
his will. When Thyamis saw him, he said, do you not see good Theagenes, how
Petosiris quaketh for fear? I see it well answered he: but how will you do
with this you have taken in hand? for he is not a plain enemy, but your
natural Brother, that you must fight with all. You say well (quod he) and as
I my self thought: by the grace of God I mean to overcome him, and not An
excellent example of Brotherly nature in Thiamis, whereby is plainly declared
the force against his will, caused him to follow his former trade of life.
Nothing is certain in this world.
to kill him. For God defend that my wrath and indignation should proceed so
far, that I should with the blood and slaughter of my natural Brother,
either revenge injuries paste or purchase honor to comme. You speak like a
noble man, said Theagenes, and one that well understands the force of Nature,
but what will you have me do? He answered: there is no doubt of this
battle so that it may be despised: yet for as much as the variety of
humayne Fortune, brings many things to pass contrary to our exspectation
oftentimes, if I get the victory you shall enter into the City, and live in
equal authority with me, but if any thing otherwise then we hope for,
happen to me, then shall you be Captain of these Robbers of Bessa, who love you
well, and so live until God have appointed some better end for your affairs.
When these things were ordered thus, they with weepinge eyes embraced and
kissed either other. And Theagenes as he was set down to see what would
happen, and gave Arsace leave, though he knew not so much to take pleasure in
lookinge upon him, and to vewe him round about, and suffer her eyes to take
such pleasure as she wished. But Thyamis The Battle between Thiamis and
Petosiris.
went to Petosiris, who tarried not to strike one blow with him, but as soon
as he saw him come toward him he turned to the gates, and would have gonne
into the City again: but he lost his labor, for that those who kept the
gates would not let him in, and they that were on every part of the wall
whereto he drew, exhorted one another not to healpe him: he therefore cast
away his weapons and fled as fast as he could about the City. Theagenes
also ran for fear of Thiamis, and stayed not but saw all that was done,
marry he was not armed, least men would think that he meante to help
Thiamis, but laid his Shield, and his Spear at that side of the wall where
Arsace satte, geuinge her leave in his absence to look upon them, and he
followed them. And yet was not Petosiris taken, nor very far before, but
almost ouergotten, and so far before, as a man may gheasse, one unarmed able
to outrunne an other in Armoure, and by this time had they run once or twice
about the walls: But as they ran the third time, Thiamis bente his spear
against his Brothers back, and commanded him to abide, or else he should
have a blow, in the sight of the whole City who looked upon them, and was
judge of that controversy, either a God, or some manner of Fortune which
gouetneth humayne affairs, by a new devise augmented that, that was done,
and in a manner began a new Tragedy like the other, and made Calasiris a
fellow of their course, Calasiris comes to the Battle of his (...).
and a beholder of the unhappy battle of his Children for life and death, at
the same day and hour, as if it had benne devised of set purpose before.
Who although he suffered much, and attempted many ways, and in a manner
bannished, got him self into a strange land to avoid that cruel sight,
yet ouercomed by destiny, he was compelled to see that, whereof the Gods by
Oracle gave him warninge before. So that he seeinge this chase and pursuit a
far of, knew that they were his Children, by tokens that were diverse times
foreshewed him, wherefore he ra^ne faster then his age permitted, and enforced
him self to cut of the end of the Battle which was like to ensue. After
he came near and ran with the^, he cried out oftentimes, my Sons what rage
is this? Why are you so mad? But they knew not their Father, for that he was
yet in his beggars weed, and their minds were altogether on their course,
so that they went by him as by one that had been out of his wits. Sum of
them, who were on the walls, mused that he spared not him self, but ran
ever between their Swoordes: other laughed him to scorn, as though he had
benne mad. But the Old man perceiuinge that he could not be known by reason
of his vile Apparel, cast of his Rags which were upon his Garments, and
the staff also that he had in his hand, and fell to intreatinge them, and
said with tears: My Sons, behold, I am Calasiris, I am your Father, make
an end here, and refrain the rage which il hap has raised betwixt you, in
as much as you have a Father, and own obedience to him. Then began they to
quail, and fallinge down at their Fathers feet, embraced him, and with
steadfast eyes looked upon him, not perfectly knowinge him: but when they
perceived it was no vision, but him self in deed, there arose diverse, yea and
contrary thoughts in their minds. They were glad of their Father, which
contrary to their expectation was alive, but were angry, and soar ashamed of
the case he found them in, and they were in doubt also of that which after
should befall. And while they of the City marueiled at this that was done,
and neither said, nor did any thing, but stood in a manner like doumbe
Pictures, because they knew not what it meante. An other act was interlaced
in the tragedy. Cariclia, as she followed Calasiris, spied Theagenes a far
of (for a Lovers eye is A Lovers eye is quick of sight.
quick of sight so that oftentimes though it be a great way of, yet will it
judge a likelihoode by mouinge, or habit, or gesture, and that behind) and as
if she had benne stricken with his visage, ran to him like a mad wooman, and
hanginge by her Arms about his neck, said nothing, but saluted him with
certain pitiful Lamentations. He seeinge her foul face, (belike of purpose
beblacked) and her Arparel vile, and al torn, supposinge her to be one of the
makeshiftes of the City, and a vacabonde, cast her of, and put her away,
and at length gave her a blow on the ear, for that she troubled him in
seeinge Calasiris. Then spoke she to him softly, Pithius, have you quite
foregotten this Taper? Theagenes was stricken with that word, as if he had
benne pearsed with a Darte, and by Tokens agreed on between them, knew the
Taper, and lookinge steadfastly upon her, espied her bewty shining like the
Sun appearing through the Clouds, cast his Arms about her neck. To be
short, all that part of the wall where Arsace sat (which Arsace in Ialousie
of Cariclia.
was soar swollen, and could not without great ialosie look upon Cariclia)
was full of such woonderful affections, as is commonly represented in Comedies.
The wicked Battle between the two Brothers was ended, and that which men
thought should be finished with Blood, had of a Tragical beginning a
Comical endinge. A Father saw his Sons in Armoure one against the other
hand to hand, came to that point, that almost before his eyes he saw his
Childrens Death, made him self their louedaie and peace: Calasiris agrees
his Sons.
who could not escape the necessity of Destiny, but seemed to use Fortunes
great favor, for that he came in dew time to that which was determined
before. The Sons recovered their Father after ten years absence, and
adourned him with the furniture of the Priestehoode, who, about the same had
almost benne the cause of a Bloody strife, and so brought him home. But
emonge all the rest, Theagenes and Cariclia which played the Lovers parts in
this Comedy, were most talked of, and for that they had found each other,
contrary to their hope, made the City to look upon them more then al other
sightes which were there to be seen: for great companies of every age came
out at the Gates into the open fields, and such as were youthful, and newely
comme to man's estate, came to Theagenes: such as were of riper years, men
grown in deed, drew to Thiamis, for that they also by reason of their age
knew him well: but the Maydenly sort, who now thought upon Husbands, flocked
about Cariclia: but the Old men, and such as were of the Holyer kind,
stood about Calasiris: and thus was there made a sudden Sacred Pomp and
brauerye. After Thiamis had sent back the people of Bessa, and given them
thanks for the pains they took in his quarrel, with promise that at the
next full Moon he would send them a thousand Oxen, a thousand Sheep, and
ten groates a piece in Money, he suffered his Father as he went, for ease, to
lean upon his shoulders, who now for his sudden joy began to ware
feeble, and very fainte. Petosiris did the like on the other side: and thus was
the Old man brought into Isis Temple with Tapers lighted, and with great
joy, and many Instruments of Music, so that the lusty youths began also
to dance. Beside these, Arsace also was not behind, but with her train
followed in brave wise, and offered great gifts of Gold in Isis Temple, under
pretense to do as other did in the City, but in deed her eyes were always
upon Theagenes, and she looked more on him then any other, and was not very
honestly minded toward him. And when Theagenes led Cariclia by the hand,
and put the thrust aside that she might take no harm, Arsace conceived a
woonderful Ialousie. But Calasiris after he came into the inner part of the
Temple, fell upon his face, and held the feet of the Image fast, and lay so,
so long that he was almost dead: so that he had much adoo to rise when they
called upon him, who stood by. And when he had done Sacrifice to the Gods,
and performed his vows, taking the Crown of the Priesthood from his own
head, he Crowned therewith his Son Thiamis, tellinge the Calasiris makes
his Son Thiamis Priest.
people that he was Old, and saw that he should not live long, and that his
eldest Son ought to succeed him by the Law, and that he had all things
requisite, both to body and mind, sufficient to use the same. After the
people had by a great shoute declared, that they approved yt which he did, he
went him self to a certain part of the Church, which is appointed for the
Priests, and remained there with his Sons, and Theagenes quickly. All the
other people went every man to his own house. Arsace also departed with much
adoo, but she returned diverse times, and used as it were great diligence
about the service of the Gods, yet she went away at length, turninge her
self as long as she might to Theagenes. As soon as she came into the
Palaice, she went straighte way to her Bed, and cast her self thereon
attyred as she was without speakinge any word, being a wooman otherwise
very laciuiously bente, but then especially enflamed when she had seen
Theagenes excellent beauty, which far passed Arsace almost mad with Love
to ward Theagenes.
all that ever she had seen before. So lay she all that night tossinge her
body from one side to an other, soar lamentinge: sommetime would she rise
up: sommetime lean upon her Elbowe: sommetime would she cast her Clothes
almost al from her: then would she suddenly fall into her Bed again:
sommetime would she call her Maid, and without biddinge her do any thing,
send her away again. To be short, love had made her mad, and none should
have known why, if and Old wooman called Cibele, her Chamberleine, and Bawd
had not comme into her Chamber: for she might well perceive all that was done,
by reason of a Candle that burnte, and made Arsaces face more vehement also,
saieinge: Mistress, for shame what adoo is this? Does Cibele Arsaces
Chamberlain and Bawd, does comfort her, and promises to subdue Theagen^s.
any new, or strange disease pain you? Has the sight of any man troubled
my Darlinge? What man is so proud, and mad, that will not be entangled with
your beauty, and accoumpte it a passinge blessed estate to lie, and have to do
with you, but will despise your desire and will? Tell me, my dear Daughter, for
there is no man so stoany hearted, but he shall be made to yield with our
flatteringe allurmentes. Tell me quickly, and you shall have your hearts desire,
as in effect, I think you have oftentimes proved before now. These words,
and many more like these, did this Old queen speak, vsinge diverse flatteringe
fasshions, more to make her confess her pain, who after she had stayed a
while, said thus: I am soarer wounded now Mother, then ever I was before, and
for that I have used your ready healpe many times in like cases: yet I doubt
whether now you shall have such like happy success. The Battle which this
day was like to have benne foughten before the Walls, to al other men was
unbloody, and concluded in peace: but to me it is the beginning of a worse
war, who have a wound, whereby I am like to loose, no one Lymme, or Member,
but my wit, and senses, because it showed unto me in an ill time the strange
young man, who in the time that the two Brothers fought, ran by Thiamis.
You know well yenough Mother, of whom I spoke. For there is no small difference
between his beauty, and other men's, which it (as it had benne the Sun)
dimmed, so that any wild, and savage Creature which could not be inamourdd,
of comely personage, might perceive the same. Wherefore your manifold
wisdom must needs perceive it. Therefore dear Mother, seeinge you know my
grief, it is time for you to put in practice all manner of means, all Old
woomens devises, and flatteringes, if you will have your scholar to live, for
there is none other way to keep me alive but to enjoy him. I know the young
man well, said the old A description of Theagenes.
wooman: he was broad brested, and large between the shoulders, straight
necked and comely, taler then the rest, and at a word to make an end, he
passed far all other men: his eyes were a little fiery, so that he looked
very lovingly, and courageously also, it was he whose hear was smothe commed,
and had but a little young yellowe bearde: to whom a strange wooman, marry not
foul, but passinge impudent, as might be thought, ran suddenly and cast
her arms about him, and held him fast and would not go from him: Do you
not mean this man Mistress? Yes even this, Mother answered she, and you
have done very well to bring to my remembrance that impudent queen, who has
kept her bewty secret at home, and painted her self, so that she is proud
thereof, yet is she but of the common sort, but sure she is much more happy
then I, that has gotten such a Lover. The Old wooman smiled at this a little,
and said: Mistress take a good heart, and be no longer sorrowful, the
Stranger counts her bewtiful but for this day, but if I can bring it to
pass that he have the fruition of you and your beauty, he will change Gold
for Brass, as the Proverb is, and set naught by the Harlotte which now
makes so much of her self. If you do this my dear Cibele (quod she) you
shall heal two wounds in me at once, Ialousie and Love, deliueringe me of the
one, and satisfiynge me with the other. Let me care and think upon this,
said she, but it is your part, to cheer your self, and take your ease
now, and despair not, before we begin, but live in hope. She said thus,
and took the Candell away, and shut the chamber door. She scant spied the
day, but she called one of the Kings Enuches, and a Maid with her, to whom
she gave a few small cakes, and other things necessary to do Sacrifice, and
went to Isis Temple. When she came to the door, and said that she must
do Sacrifice for Arsace her Mistress, who was troubled this night with
certain Dreams, and appease the Gods. One of the Sextens would not let
her in, but sent her away, tellinge her that the Church was full of sorrow:
for that Calasiris the Priest, after he came home from his long journey, made
a sumptuous feast, and endeavored him self to be more merry and ioconde then
ever he was, and after the feast Sacrificed, and made his earnest prayers to
the Gods, and told his Sons that they had seen their Father till that
time, and given them charge of two yange Greeks that came with him, that they
should do what they were hable for them, went to bed. Then either for the
exceedingnesse of his joy, his pores waxed over wide, by reason that his body
with age was infebled, wantinge of a sudden his dew strength, or by grant
Calasiris death.
of the Gods of whom he craved this, about the Cock crowinge was found
dead, for his Sons watched all that night with him for causes he told them
before. And now have we sent for the rest of this Priestely crewe in the
City to do his Death Rites according to the Country manner. Wherefore you
must now depart, for it is not lawful for any man to enter into the Temple,
nor to kill any thing these seven days, but for those who are Priests. How
shall these strangers then pass this time (quod Cibele). The new Priste
Thiamis has commanded a House to be dressed for them without the Temple, and
you may ^^e them give place to this Ordinance, by goeinge out of the Temple
for this time. Cibele taking this for a good occasion to get them a way, and
to make it the beginning of her policy, said: Then good Sexten you may do
the strangers, and us presentely a very good turn, but especially Arsace the
great Kings Sister, for you know how great favor she bears to Greeks,
and how courteously she entertaineth strangers. Wherefore tell them by
Thiamis Commandment that their Lodginge is prepared in our Palaice. The
Sexten did so, suspectinge nothing less, then that Cibele went about, but he
thought that he should do the strangers a great pleasure, if he by his
means might procure their Lodginge in the Princes Court, and do them,
which requested the same, a good turn, without harm or peril to any. And when
he came to Theagenes and Cariclia, who were very sorrowful, and wept
pitiefully, he said: You do not as beseems you, nor as the Manners, and
Ordinances of our Country bear, especially seeinge you have had
commandment that you should not mourn. That you be wail the Priest, for
whose departure hence, our Divinity bid the you to be glad, and rejoice,
as one, who has gained a better estate, and quieter rest. But you deserve
pardon, who have lost, as you say, a Father, and a Patron, and one, in whom
was al your comfort: yet ought you not altogether despair, for Thiamis (as
is to be seen) has succeeded him, not only in the Office of Priestehoode,
but in good will toward you also, and has given especial charge for your
welfare. Wherefore your Lodginge is prepared in the best sort, and so as may
beseem men of higher estate then you, and that of this Country also, and
not strangers, and such, who are now at as narrow pinche, and low ebb as
may be deemed. Therefore follow this wooman (shewinge them Cibele) and make
accoumpte of her, as Mother to you both, and be content with her
entertainemente. Theagenes and Cariclia, are conveyed into Arsaces house, by
Cibeles crafty means.
Thus much said he: and Theagenes did so, either for that he was overwhelmed
with the skorne of those things, which happed to him contrary to his hope, or
else for that in such cause he was content to take any lodginge in good part.
I think he would have taken heed to him self, if he had suspected what
tragical, and intolerable things, that lodginge would have procured them,
to their great harm. But then the Fortune which governed their affairs, when
it had refreshed them well a few hours, and given them leave to be merry one
day, suddenly ioyued thereto heavy and terrible things, and brought them
into their enemies hand, in manner as if they should have yielded them selves
to be bound. Making them prisoners under color of courteous intertainement,
without any knowledge of that which should hap to them afterward. Such
folly and in manner blindness, does the wanderinge life cast before their
eyes, who travel through The discommodities of a wandringe life.
strange and unknown Countries. When they came unto the Deputies house, and
went through the sumptuous entries, which were greater and higher, then might
beseem any private man's estate, furnished with the Princes guard, and the
other Courtly route, the whole Pallaice woondred and was troubled, saying
their present Fortune so far to excel. Yet for all that they followed
Cibele, who comforted them many ways, and badde them be of good cheer, and
promised that they should have excellent good luck. At length when she had
brought them into a parlour wherein dwelt an old woomen, which was far from
the noise of the Court, sittinge by them alone without more company, said
thus, my Children I know that you take this grief and sorrow wherein you be
now, of the death of the Priest Calasiris, whom for good cause you honored
as your Father. Mary it is requisite that beside this you tell me what you be,
and of whence, for that you be Grecians I understand, and it may appear also
by that which is in you, that you be of good Parentage: for so comely Comely
(...).
countenance and elegant bewty, is a manifest token of hie blood: but I pray
you, tell me of what Country in Greece, and City you be, and how you happened
to travel hither, for that I desire to hear the same for your commodity, and
may certify my Mistress Arsace thereof also, who is Sister of the great
King, and wife of Oroondates chief Deputy, a Lover of Greeks, and al
handsomnesse, and very liberal to strangers, to the intent you may come into
her sight, in such Honorable sort as your estate shall require: You shall tell
it to a wooman who is not utterly your enemy: for I my self am a Grecian
borne in Lesbos, surnamed of the City wherein I was borne, brought hither
Captive, yet have I had better Fortune here, then in mine own Country. For I
serve my Mistress in all matters, so that without me she does nothing but
breathe, and live: I am her mind, I am her ears, to be short, I am all: to
bring her acquainted with good and honest men. Theagenes comparinge that
which Cibele said, with that which Arsace did the day before, and thinkinge
how wantonly with steady eyes, continually she beheld him, so that her
beckes declared scante a chaste mind, whereby he gathered, small good would
ensewe, and now being ready to say somewhat to the Old wooman, Cariclia
said softely to him in his ear, in your talk remember your Sister I pray.
After he perceived what she meante by that she said to him, he gave such
answer. Mother, you know that we be Greeks already: Then know this further,
that we be Brother and Sister, who taking our viage to seek our Parents,
taken prisoners by Pirates, have had worse luck then they, by fallinge into
crueller men's hands. Whereafter we were robbed of all our riches (which was
much) scante we escapinge with our lives, by the good will of God met with
the noble Calasiris, came with him hither, in mind to pass ye rest of our
life here, but now are (as ye see) foresaken of al men, and left quite alone,
and have lost him, who seemed, and was in deed a Father to us, with our other
Parents, and such is our estate. As for the courteous, and gentle
entertainment which we have at your hand, we give you therefore very hearty
thanks, and you shall do us more pleasure, if you procure us a dwellinge alone
from other company, deferringe the courtesy whereof you talked. But now that
is to acquainte us with Arsace, and never bring a strange, bannished, and
restless life into so excellent hie Fortune: for you know well yenoughe that
friendship, and acquaintance ought to be between such as between who^
acquaintance ought to be.
are of one condition. When he had said thus, Cibele could not rule her
self, but gave manifest tokens by the cheerfulness of her countenance, that
she was very glad to hear the names of Brother, and Sister, thinkinge then
surely that Cariclia should be no impediment to Arsaces disportes, and said: O
bewtiful young man, you will not say thus of Arsace, when you have tried her
fashions, for she is conformable to al Fortune, and is readier to healpe them,
who unworthy to their estate have had mishappe. And although she be a
Persian, yet in her nature she imitateth the Greeks, much reioicinge in
those, who comme from thence, and is woonderfully delighted with their
company, and manners. Wherefore be you of good cheer, for that you shall be
adourned with all honor that may happen to a man, and your Sister shall be of
her familiare, and near acquaintance: but I must tell her too what be your
names. After she had heard them say, Theagenes and Cariclia, she badde them
tarry there a while, and she ran to Arsace, geuinge charge to the door
keeper, which also was an Old woman, that she should let no man comme in,
nor suffer the young folks to go any whither abroad, no said she, not if
your Son Achamenes comme: for he went out a little while after you were gonne
to the Church to dress his eye, which yet is sommewhat soar. No (quod she)
not if he comme, but lock the door, and keeping the Baye with you, say I
have carried it away. And so it happened. For Cibele was scante gonne forth,
so soon as that they being alone ministered to Theagenes and Cariclia good
time to lamente, and remember their old ill happes, so that they both in
manner with one mind, yea and almost with the same words bewailed each
other, often cried she, o Theagenes: o Cariclia, often said he. What Fortune have
we (quod he)? In what case are we (said she)? And at every word they
embraced ehch other: and when they had wept a while, then fell they to kissinge
again. Last of al, when they thought upon Calasiris, they bewailed him with
tears: but espectally Cariclia, because by longer space of time she had tried
his love, and good will toward her. Wherefore with tears she cried out, o
good Calasiris: for I am berefte of a delectable Cariclias lame^tation, for the
death of Calasiris.
name, so that I may not call him Father, in as much as God has every way
cut from me that name. I know not the Father that begotte me: him, who made
me his Child by Adoption, alas I have betrayed. Moreover I have lost him, who
took charge of me, and has saved, and nourished me hitherto, and the crewe
of Priests will not suffer me to weep over his dead Body as is accustomably
done in Burialles. But sure my Nourse and Savior, I will also call thee
Father, though God say nay, yet will I as I may, and where I may offer to
thee of my tears and do they death rightes with my locks. And therewith
she pulled of a great handful of her hear, but Theagenes appeased her, and
held her hands softely, yet she lamented nevertheless, saying: To what
end shall we live any longer? after what hope shall we look? He that
conducted us through strange Lands, was the stay of our error, and our
guide into our Country, the knowledge of our Parents, our comfort in
adversities, the ease of our ill Fortune, the Ancore of al our affairs,
Calasiris is dead, and has left us two, a miserable pair in a strange
Land, not knowinge what is best to do. Hereafter every Journey by Land,
every viage by water through ignorance is cut of: a grave and courteous, an
old and wise head, in deed and is gonne, who never made end to do for us.
As she in this, or such like sort lamented, and Theagenes concealed his own
grief, the rather thereby to cause Cariclias sorrow to abate, came Achemenes,
and findinge the Gate locked, asked of the Porter what adoo is here? And when
he knew it was his Mothers deed, he came near the doors, and consideringe
of the cause thereof in his mind, he heard Cariclia lamente: and bowinge down
him self, looked in by certain riftes in the iointes of the door, and saw
all that was done. And then he asked her that kept the door again, who were
within? She answered, that she knew of no more but that there were two
strangers, belike a man, and a maid which his Mother brought in a while
ago. Then he kneeled down again, to see if he might more perfitely know
them. Of Cariclia he was never the near, yet he marueiled at her excellent
beauty, and considered what a manner a one she would be, if she were not in
such sorrow, Achemenes, Son of Cibele, falls in Love with Cariclia.
and heaviness, and with this woonderinge he privily fell in love with her: but
he thought he should know Theagenes, if he could call him to mind. While
Achemenes was thinkinge hereupon, Cibele returned after she had told al how
she had handled her self about the young folks, and called her often unhappy
for her good Fortune, who had brought so much to pass by chance, as by six
hundred devises, one would scante have thought, could be done, that now she
might have her Lover in the House with her. And when she had with many such
words set Arsace on fire, she could scante rule her, she was in such
haste to see him: yet she caused her to be content, for that she would not
have him see her while her eyes were swollen for lack of sleep, but a day
after, when she had recovered her old beauty again. Thus, when she had made
her merry, and full of hope that she should have her hearts desire, and had
taken order with her what was best to do, and how she should entertain the
strangers. As soon as she came down, she said to her Son, why be you so
inquisitiue: tell me what strangers be those within, and of what Country? It
is not for you to know (said Cibele): but conceal that which you know, and
tell it to no man, neither be much emonge the strangers, for so has our
Mistress given charge. So he departed as his Mother badde him, and deemed that
Theagenes was kept to serve Arsaces turn by night. And as he went, he said
thus to him self: Is not this he, whom Mytranes Captain of the Watch,
delivered to me, to be carried to Oroondates, and from him to be sent to the
great King, that the people of Bessa took from me, at what time I was in
danger of my life, so that I almost alone of all that carried him, escaped with
my life? or do mine eyes beguile me. But I am well yenoughe now, and see as I
was woonte to do. Moreover I hear that Thiamis is comme a day, or two ago,
and in a Combat with his Brother, recovered the Priests Office again. It is
he, but I may not say so much now, but will mark how our Mistress is
affected toward these geastes. Thus he talked with him self: and Cibele went
in to them, and perceived well what they had done, by reason that their eyes
were yet full of water, for all that they went about, when they heard the door
open, to trim them selves, and counterfeited their woonted guise. Wherefore
she cried out, and said: My dear Children, why weep you out of season, when
ye should rejoice, and thank your good Fortune, for that Arsace thinks to
do all the good to you she can devise, and is content, that to morrow you
shall comme into her presence, and in the mean time she weth you al manner of
courtesy, and gentleness. Wherefore you must leave of these foolish, and
Childishe tears, and look up, and deck your selves, and in every point do
as Arsace would have you. The remembrance of Calasiris Death (quod
Theagenes) caused us to weep, who have lost the fatherly affection which was
in him toward us. These be toies (quod the Old wooman) Calasiris, and what so
ever fained Father else, who has given place to the common Law of nature, and
age: by one wooman shall thou have Rule, Riches, Daliaunce, and the fruits of
a florishinge youth, at a word think it to be your Fortune, and woorship
Arsace. Only be ruled by me, how you shall come into her presence, saying she
has given such commandment, and how you must use her, if she bid you
do ought: for her stomach is great (as you know) hie and Princely,
augmented by youthful age, and excellent bewty, which will not have a nay, if
it make any request. Theagenes stayed hereat, and thought within himself, that
in this talk was contained somewhat that was very beastely, and not to be
admitted. Within a while after came certain Eunuchs, which Theagenes and
Cariclia, were served very cortuously at the first, but their sweet meat had
sower sauce in the end. Theagenes is sent for to Arsace.
brought in plate of Gold, meat from the Princes Table, which passed al
manner of cost and sumptuousnes, and when they had said, that their Lady had
sent them this first intertainement for Honors sake, and set it on the
Table, they departed. They, least they should not do their duty, tasted a
little of that which was set before them, and this was done at night, and
ordinarily every day after. The next day about one a clock, the same
Eunuchs came to Theagenes, and said: Right happy man, our Mistress has
sent for you, and we are commanded to bring you to her presence: Wherefore
go and enjoy that happiness, which she voutchsaueth to very few, and at
seldom times. He stayed a while, but at length as if he had been violently
drawn, he rose against his will, and said unto them: is her commandment
that you bring me alone, or that this my Sister shall go with me also? You
must go alone, said they, and she shall go alone also another time: Mary
now there are certain noble men of Persia with her, and it is a custom to
talk with men by them selves, and with woomen alone at another time. Then
Theagenes stouped down, and said softely to Cariclia, sure this is neither
honest dealinge, nor without great suspicion. She answered him, that there
was no gainesayinge, but that he must go and make such countenance, as if
he would do all her will: This done he followed them, and when they taught
him how he should speak to her, and that it was the custom that such as went
in to her, should fall down and woorshippe her, he gave them no answer. When
he came in and saw her sittinge in her Chair of Estate, clothed in Purple and
clothe of Gold, glorious with jolly Iewelles, and her costly Bonnet, finely
attired and decked, with her Guard about her, and the chief Magistrates of
the Persians by her, he was not abashed a whit but rather the more encouraged
against the Persian bravery, as though he had quite forgotten that, whereof he
talked with Cariclia as touching Reverence, and woorshippinge, so that he
neither bowed knee, nor fell down to her, but holdinge up bis head alofte,
said: Arsace of Royal blood, God save thee: whereat when those who were
present, were offended, and grudged against him as one rash and ouerbolde, in
that he had not woorshipped her, Arsace smiled a little, and answered for him
thus: pardon him as one ignorant of our customs, and a stranger borne in
Greece, who by reason of the soil despises our pomp: and therewithal she
put of her Bonnette, sore against their wills that stood by, for so do the
Persians, to render Salute to those who first saluted them. And when she had
bidden him to be of good cheer, by an interpreter (for although she
understood, yet could she not speak the Greek tongue) and willed him to
speak if he wanted any thing, and he should have it. She sent him back
again, commaundinge her Eunuchs, and Guard to wait upon him: there Achemenes
seeing him again, called him better to his remembrance, for all that he judged
the cause of the over great Honor he had, yet he said nothing, but
determined to do that which first he intended. Arsace made a sumptuous
Banquette to the Magistrates of Persia, under color to Honor them as she was
wont to do, but in deed for joy that she had talked with Theagenes. To
whom she sent not only part of her meat as she was wont to do, but
Carpettes and Coueringes of sundry colors, wrought in Sidon and Lydia: she
sent also to wait upon them a boy for him, and a Maid for Cariclia, which
were borne in Ionia, and about foureteine years of age. She desired Cibele
heartily to make haste and out of hand to do what she intended, because she
could tarry no longer, who before left no way unsearched, but tried
Theagenes mind by all manner of means: Marry she did not tell him Arsaces
mind plainly, but by diverse biewaies and circumstaunces she meante to make
him understand the same, by tellinge him her Mistress good will to him, not
only commendinge her shape and bewty that all men saw, but she told him
also of that which was under her Apparel, by certain reasonable occasions,
then praised she her manners, for that they were amiable, and nothing coye,
and that she had great delighte in fine, and hable young men. The drifte of
al her talk was to perceive if he had any pleasure in Venus disportes.
Theagenes commended her good will that she bare to the Greeks, and her
friendely fashion, and else what so ever she talked of, and further for the
same gave her hearty thanks: but he passed over that which contained any
dishonest thing, as though he understood it not at the first. Wherefore the
Old wooman was soar grieved, and nipped at the heart, for that she thought
he understood what she meante, but utterly despised, and set at naught all that she did: she knew moreover that Arsace would abide no longer, but
began even now to be angry, and tell her plainly she could not rule her
self: wherefore she craved of her the perfourmonce of her promise, which
Cibele had deferred by diverse delays: sommetime saieinge that though the
young man would, yet he was afraid: sommetime that one, or other mischaunce
fell in the way: and now, because five, or six days were past, and Arsace
had called for Cariclia ones or twice, and used her honorably to do Theagenes
a pleasure, she was forced to speak more plainly to Theagenes, and tell him
of her love without circumstances, with promise that he should have six
hundred good turns, if he would consent: addinge moreover, for shame what
lingringe After Cibele had by many circumstances uttered the Love that Arsace
bare toward Theagenes, and he would not understand the same she was forced
plainly to tell the same with a shameless Oration, wherein she declares the
properties of such like Lascivious woome^ passinge finely.
is this? Or what may be so far from Venus delights, as so fair a young
man, and of good age to refuse to lie with a wooman like him self, that dies
for his love, and doothe not rather coumpte it a vauntage to have to do with
her, especially for that he need to fear nothing, and because her Husband
is out of the way, and I, who brought her up, provide the same for him, and
keep all her counselles, be they never so secret, and to you, for that you
have neither Spouse, nor Wife to let you, which also many men that have been in their wits have contemned, for that they knew they should do no
harm at home, and should do them selves good by gayninge great Riches, and
coumptinge the fruit of this pleasure also a good rewade. At length she
interlaced certain threats in her ta^ke, saieinge: Gentlewoomen, and such as
long for men, will not be appeased, but conceive great displeasure when they
are cruelly deceived, and will pounishe the stubborn, as if they had done the^
great wrong, and that not without cause. Moreover, consider of her that she
is a Persian borne, and of the Blood Royal, as you confessed, and of great
power, and authority, so that she may prefer to honor, whom she will, and
pounishe such as withstand her pleasure without controlment. As for you, you
are a stranger, alone without any to healpe you. Wherefore partly spare your
self, partly favor her: Surely she is worthy that you should have regard
to her, who is so furiously inflamed with your Love, which she of right ought
to rejoice at, and stand in doubt of the wrath which proceeds of Love, and
beware of the revenge which follows like contempt. I have known many who
have repented afterward such a stomach as this. I have greater experience in
these Venerious affairs then you: This white head that you see, has benne at
many such Banquettes, but I never knew any so violent, and incurable as you.
At last she spoke to Cariclia (for she was necessarily compelled to say
this in her presence) my Daughter persuade this thy Brother also, whom I know
not how to term. This will be for your avail too, you shall not be loved the
weight of a hear the less of her therefore, you shall have Riches yenough,
and she will provide to marry you wealthely, which things are to be wished
for of those, who be in happy estate, and not of strangers, and (...) as
presently are in great poverty. Cariclia looked upon her frowningly, and with
burninge eyes, said: It were to be wished also, and were very well too for
every body, that good Arsace had no such infirmity, but if she have, to use
it discretely. But seeinge that such a human chance has happened unto
her, and she is ouercommed as you say, I would counsel Theagenes my self,
not to refuse the fact, if he may do it without danger, least that his
deed through folly may breed him harm, and her no good, if this come to
light, and the Deputy hap to know of so shameful a thing. Cibele leapte
for joy when she heard this, and imbracinge and kissinge Cariclia, said: My
Daughter, thou do very well, that thou haste pity upon a wooman like thy
self, and seek for the safety of thy Brother: but thou need not doubt
hereof, for that the Sun (as the Proverb is) shall not know thereof. Let me
alone for this time, said Theagenes, and give me leave to consider hereupon:
and herewith Cibele went out, and as soon as she was gonne Cariclia said
thus: Theagenes God gives us such success wherein is more adversity
harbored, then our outward felicity can conteruaile: which thing saying it
is so, it is the point of wise men to turn their il happes as much as they
may, to better, whether therefore you be in mind to do this deed or not I
cannot tell: Although I would not be greatly against it, if there were no other
way to preserve us, but if you do deem that a filthy act (as honesty and
duty would you should) which is requested of you, feign your self to be
contented, and with fair words feeding the barbarous woomans desire, cut
of the same with delays, and let her live in hope, least in her rage she
put some cruel devise in practice against us. For it is like by the grace of
God, that space of time may provide some remedy Ialousie* a natural disease to
woomen, troubles Cariclia a little.
for this: but in any wise Theagenes, beware that you fall not out of your
consideration into the filthiness of the fact. Theagenes smiled hereat a
little, and said: I perceive you are not without Ialousie, woomens natural
disease, no not in adversity, but be sure I cannot feign any such thing: for
to say and do dishonest things, are both almost alike dishonest. And that
Arsace may be out of hope to obtain, brings an other commodity with it,
that she will cease to trouble us any more. If I must suffer any thing, as
well Fortune, as also the constant opinion of my mind, have inured me ere now
many times to take what so ever shall happen. Then think, quod Cariclia, that
so you shall bring us into great mischief, and therewith she held her
tongue. While they considered of these matters, Cibele went to Arsace, and
encouraged her to look for better success, and that Theagenes was content,
which done, she came into the parlour alone, and said nothing that night,
but exhorted Cariclia diverse ways, whom at the first she made her
beddefellowe to healpe her in this case, and in the morninge she asked
Theagenes what he meante to do? He gave her a plain denial, and willed her
never to look for any such thing at his hand. With which answer she went
heau^^y to Arsace, where she made report of Theagenes stoutness. Arsace
commanded to break his neck, and went into her Chamber, and vexed her self
cruelly on her Bed. The Old wooman Cibele was no sooner in the Parlour, but
her Son Achemenes seeinge her sad, and weepinge, asked her: Mother, what
mishap is befallen? Are there any il news come? Are there any il tidinges
comme from the Camp? Have our enemies in this war the upper hand of our
Lord Oroondates? And many such questions he moved. Tushe (quod she) thy
pratinge is to no effect. This said, she made haste to be gonne, but he
would not let her alone, but went after her, and taking her by the hand,
besoughte her, that she would tell her Son the cause of her grief. Then
she took him by the hand, and leadde him aside into a part of the
Orchyarde, and said: I would never have declared mine own, and my Mistress
harms to any other man. But seeinge she is in peril, and I in danger of my
life (for I know, that Arsaces maddenesse will fall in my neck): I am
constrained to tell you, if happily you can help her any thing, who conceived,
and bare you into the world, and nourished you with these Breasts. Our
Mistress does love the young man which is in our House, not with tolerable,
or usual Love, but so that she is almost mad therewith: about whom, she,
and I hopinge to speed well as we would, lost our labor: hence came al
courtesies, and manifold good will toward ye strangers. But now seeing the
young man like a fool, and cruel fellow which will not be ruled, has refused
to do as we would have him. I think she will not live, and I look to be
slain, and in this case are we now. If then thou causte help me any thing,
do it: if not, yet when thy Mother is dead, see that her Death Kites be
duly finished. What reward shall I have Mother (said he) for I have no
leisure to boaste my self, or with long circumstances to promise you any
help, seeinge you be in such, and so desperate a case. Look for what so ever
you will, for she has made you her chief Cup bearer for my sake already,
and if thou have any higher Office in thy head, tell me. As for the Riches
that thou shall have in recompense, if thou save her, unhappy Creature, of them
shall be no number. Mother, (quod he) I perceived as much a good while ago, but
I said nothing, and looked ever what would comme of it. But I care for no
honor, nor regard any Riches, but if she will give me the Maid which is
called Theagenes Sister to wife, she shall have her hearts desire. For Mother,
I love that Maid without measure. Wherefore saying our Mistress knows by
her own case, what kind and how great a grief love is, she has good cause
to healpe him who is sick of that disease also, saying further Love is a
mischievous thing.
he promises her so good luck. Have no doubt, said Cibele for our Mistress
will requite you without delaie, when you shall have done thus much for her,
and saved her in such distress: Beside perhaps we may persuade the Maid
our selves, to do this without troublinge her, but tell me how you will
healpe her. I will not tell you (said he) before I have a promise confirmed by
the Oath of our Lady: as for you til then say nothing to the Maid, least you
mar our markette against your will. For I see well that she has a lofty
stomach also. She promised that he should have his desire, and therewith she
went into the chamber to Arsace, and fallinge upon her knees, badde her be of
good cheer, for by the grace of God all shall be well, only send for my Son
Achemenes to come to you. Let him be called (quod Arsace) if you mean not to
deceive me again. Achemenes Arsace swears to give Cariclia in Marriage to
Achemenes, in recompense whereof he proves Theagenes to be her bondeman.
came in, and when Cibele had told her all the matter, Arsace swear by express
words, that he should have his destre, as touching the Marriage of Theagenes
sister. Then said Achemenes, let Theagenes hencefoorthe be quiet, because
for all that he is your bond man, yet he behaueth him self so stubbernly
against his Mistress. How say you this, said Arsace? Then Achemenes told
her all, that Theagenes was taken prisoner by order of War, that Mytranes
sent him to Oroondates, from him to be conveyed to the great King, that he
him self as he carried him, by means of the coming of the inhabitants of
Bessa, and Thiamis lost him, that he hardly escaped with his life: lastly
beside all this he showed Mytranes own letters to Arsace readily: and if there
were need of any more proof, he would have Thiamis for a witness. Arsace
came somewhat to her self when she heard this, and made no delaie but came
out of her Chamber, and sittinge in the seat where she was wont to hear and
give Judgment upon matters, she commanded Theagenes to be brought before
her. As soon as he came, she asked him if he knew Achemenes which stood by
him. He said yea. Were you not once his prisoner, quod she? Theagenes
confessed that he was. Then are you our bond man, said she, wherefore you
shall do as becomes a lowly servant, and be ruled by my will whither you
will or no. As for your Sister I have betrothed her to Achemenes, who is chief
about us, as well for his Mothers sake, as also for his own good will and
behavior toward us, so long delayinge the Marriage, until we may get such
things, as are needeful against that day to make a sumptuous feast.
Theagenes was hitte with these words, as with a grievous wound, yet he
would not contrary her, but would avoid her force, as a man would shun the
violent assault of some wild Beast, and said: Lady, the Gods be thanked,
for that in as much as we are well borne, in our adversity it is our good
hap to be bound to none but you, who have showed unto us Strangers and
Aliens borne, so great humanity and good will. But my Sister for all that she
is not prisoner nor bond, yet shall she be ready to do you service as shall
please you, wherefore tell us what you will have her to do with reason. Let
her (quod Arsace) be one of our waiters at our Table, and learn to serve our
Cups of Achemenes, that she may be inured before to serve at the Princes
Table. This done they went out, Theagenes was very heavy, and devised of
that which he had to do, but Achemenes laughed, and scorned him with such
like words. Lo you who were but lately so proud and loftye, and bare your
head so high, that you seemed to be free alone, and thought scorn to submit
your self and woorshippe Arsace, what kind of fellow are you now: surely if
you stoop not now, you shall be taught with Fistes to know your duty. Arsace,
when she had sent al other from her, said to Cibele: Now Cibele he has no
more excuses, wherefore tell this proud fellow, that if he will be ruled by us,
and do our will, he shall be made fee, and have plenty of al things: but if
will be still in contrary mind, and despise his Lover, he shall understand that
his Mistress is angry, and be made the vilest slave of al other, and be
tormented with all manner of pounishementes. Cibele came and told Arsaces
Commandment, and added of her own, what she thought was available to
persuade him. Theagenes desired her to stay a while, and took Cariclia alone,
and said thus: Now are we quite undone, Cariclia, every Cable (as is the
Proverb) is broken, every Ancore of hope is lost, now are we no longer with
free names in misery, but are bond again: (and therewith he told her how)
now are we subjects to the reprochful scoffs, and torments of the
Barbariens, so that either we must do as they will have us, in whose hands
we are, or else shall we be numbered emonge the condemned persons: yet this
were tolerable, if Arsace had not promised (which is the most grievous
thing of al) to marry you to Achemenes, Cibeles Son. And it is plain, that
either that shall not be done at all, or I will not see it done, so long as
life will give me leave, with Swoorde, and Armor to withstand the same. But
what shall we do? Or what way shall we devise to break of my abominable
fact with Arsace, and your shameful marriage with Achemenes? You may (quod
Cariclia) in approuinge the one, disanull the other which touches me. Be
content (quod he). God defend that the anger of any Heavenly mind should be
so vehemente against us, that I, who had never to do with Cariclia, should
incesteously meddle with an other. Necessity deuis^th many shifts.
But I think I have found a good remedy presently: surely necessary is a
Deuisoure of al manner of shifts. And therewithal he went aside to Cibele,
and said: Tell your Mistress that I would speak with her alone, so that no
man might hear. The Old wooman thinking this to be that they looked for, and
that Theagenes would now do what they would have him, went hastily to
Arsace, and received Comnaundemente to bring him after Supper, which she
did. For after she had charged those, who were near at hand to be still, and
let her Mistress take her case, without sturringe about the Chamber. She
conveyed in Theagenes privily, for every place was very dark, so that one
might work secretly yenough, and there was no light but a Candle in her
Chamber. When she had thus done, she would have shrunk away, but Theagenes
stayed her, and said? Mistres, for this time let Cibele be here, for I know
that she is very trusty to keep Council. And then he took Theagenes his
talk with Arsace, whereby is the Marriage of Cariclia and Achemenes broken o^.
Arsace by the hand, and spoke thus: Mistres, I prolonged not the dooinge of
that you commanded me because I would anger you, but that I might provide
security for my fact. And now seeinge that Fortune by very good luck has
made me your servant, I am the more readyer to do your will in all points.
But first I must pray you to grant me one thing, in steed of the great, and
manifold benefits that you have promised me: Break of the marriage of
Cariclia and Achemenes. For It is not meet that a wooman of good parentage,
should be Married to a bond slave.
(that I say no more) it is no reason that a wooman of very high Parentage
should be matched with a vile, and bond slave: else I swear to you by the
Sun, the fairest of all the Gods, and by all the rest of the Gods also,
that I will never do what you would have me, and before Cariclia sustain any
violence, you shall see me slay my self. Arsace answered him, think not, but
that I will do what I may to pleasure you, as one who is ready to deliver her
self into your hands. But I have promised by Oath to marrye your Sister to
Achemenes. It is well then (quod he). Marrye my Sister if you list: but her,
whom I love, and is my Spouse, yea and my wife, I know you will not marry:
neither if you would, may you. What mean you by this (said she). I meame
the trothe (answered he), for Cariclia is not my Sister, but my Spouse. A
manifest token whereof, you shall have when you please, if you list to make a
Bridal for us. This nipte her, when she heard that Cariclia was his wife, so
that she fell into a great ialousie: yet for all that she said, you shall have
your desire, and we will appease Achemenes with an other wife. And I will
perform my promise (said Theagenes) when this is undone. And the^ he bent
him self down to kiss her hand, but in steed of her hand, she kissed him
with her mouth. And so Theagenes went out with a kiss of hers: but he kissed
her not again. And as soon as he got leisure, he told Cariclia all, who
heard sommewhat that made her ialous also. He added moreover the strange end
that his promise tended unto, and how by that thing alone he had wroughte
many feats. Achemenes Weddinge was defeated, and a delaie was found for
Arsaces lust. But that which was the chief of all, was that Achemenes would
set all on a broyle, being offended, as well for that he was beguiled of that
he hoped for, as also because he saw me in better favor with Arsace, then
him self: for he shall know of all this by his Mother, in as much as I
foresawe that she should be there to hear that I said, both because I
would have her tell Achemenes this, and have her a Witness also of the
familiarity wihiche in only words passed between us: for although it were
yenough before God to have a clear conscience, An excellent sentence.
yet it is honesty for a man to lead his life so, (which lasts here but a
little while) that men may have such opinion too. He told her moreover, that
it was to be thought Achemenes would be revenged of Arsace, being a slave
borne (for it is almost seen every where, that that which is under
Obedience, is contrary to that which has Authority over it) and wronged
beside, and beguiled of an Oath, seeinge other better esteemed then him self,
whose mind is guilty of al mischief, and ill behaueour, and needeeth to be
taught to work no manner of Knavery, as many men being angry have
attempted the like, and seeinge he has a just quaurell whereupon to seek
revenge. The next day after he had told Cariclia these things, and exhorted
her yet to have a little hope, he was leadde of Achemenes to wait at her Table,
for so Arsace commanded him to do. For that purpose she sent him costly
Apparel, a Chain and Bracelettes of Gold, and other ritche Iewelles: part
whereof willingely, part against his will he put on. And when Achemenes
began to teach him how he should serve her the Cup, he ran to a Table
by, whereon stood much Plate, and taking a Precious Glass in his hand,
said: I need not to be taught, but I will of mine own head serve my
Mistres, without Theagenes gives Achemenes a cruel nippe.
such curiosity in these so easy matters. As for you, Fortunes favor caused
you to know such things, but nature, and time can teach me what I have to
do. And then he powered in Wine softly, and holdinge the Glass finely with the
tippes of his fingers, goeinge with a seemly, and fit pase, delivered it to
Arsace: and this draught set her more on fire then she was before, because
she drinkinge, and lookinge upon Theagenes at one time, supped more of his
Love, then of the Wine, neither did she drink that quite of, that was filled,
but in great sleighte, in a manner she drunk to Theagenes, and leafte him a
little. On the other side Achemenes was offended too, and moved, as well with
Anger, as Emulation, so that Arsace perceived it, for that he so scornefully
looked upon him, and whispered sommewhat to those which stood by. When Dinner
was done, Theagenes said: Mistres, I pray you grant me this my first
request, let none but me wear this Towel in seruinge at your Table. Arsace
was content. And when he went out as he was woonte to do, Achemenes went
out with him too, and taunted him soar for his too much diligence, and told
him that such rashenesse was very childishe, and that their Mistres at the
first winked at this fact because he was a stranger, and knew no fashion:
But if you continewe and be so stubberne still, (said he) you shall not please
her long: And that he counseled him as a friend, and one that should be his
Kinsman shortly, and much more like this he said: but he passed by him as
though he heard him not, but looked still down to the ground, until Cibele
came by chance, and went to have her Mistress to sleep in the after noone.
And saying her Son sad asked what he ayled, he answered this Strange
yonker, is honored above me, both yesterdaie, and to day, who for a show of
finesse is commanded now alone, to be her Cupbearer: and biddinge us who are
her chief Seruitours farewell, he raught her the Glass, and stood next the
Princes body, so that our Honor, which is but an Honor by name, is utterly
despised. And that were not so ill, that he should be more honored and better
preferred, and be more privy then we, who by too peeuishe reason do keep
his Counsel, and healpe him therein, but this ought by no means to be
suffered, that he should use us, who are Seruitours, and his companions in the
way of honesty in such sort, without check or taunte: but we will find an
other time to talk of these matters. Now Mother I would feign see my wife
Cariclia, if by lookinge upon her I may somewhat abate this grief of my
mind. What wife Son, said Cibele? You seem to chafe at trifles and know
not the greatest matters. Now shalt thou not marry Cariclia. What say you
Mother (quod he) am I not worthy to Marry her, who is my fellow Servant? Why
so I pray you? For our too good will and unlawful service toward Arsace,
answered she. For although we set more by her, then our own ease, and
preferred her desire before our own lives, in doing all that we could to
pleasure her. Yet as soon as this gentle and goodly Lover of hers, came into
her chamber, the sight of him did so much persuade her, that it made her
break the Oath she swear, and caused her to assure Cariclia to him, tellinge
her that she was not his Sister, but his spouse. Did she then promise him
this Mother (quod he)? Yea Son, answered Cibele, she promised him this,
while I was by and heard it, and means within these few days to make their
weddinge in sumptuous sort, and will marry thee to some other. Achemenes was
very sorrowful for these tidinges, and wringinge his hands, he said thus: I
will make this a sorrowful weddinge to them all. Only healpe me to prolonge the
same for a while, and if any man ask for me, say I am sore sick in the
Country. And does this Gentleman call his Sister his wife? as though it might
not be understood, that he doothe it for none other purpose, but to disanull
that which was granted me by promise, as though it were not his Sister but
his wife, if he embrace, colle, and kiss her as now he doothe, yea although he
lie with her, I and the Gods whose Religion is violated by breakinge of an
Oath, will see to this well yenough. This said, anger and Ialousie, Love and
frustration of that he looked for, set him on such fire (al which things
were sufficient What anger Ialousie, Love, etc. would make a man do.
to trouble an other man, though no barbarous fellow) that without waying
reasonably what he meante to do, but likinge his devise at the first, he
leapte upon a Horse of Armenia, which the Deputy kept for Royalties and
brave sightes, as soon as he could conveniently get him, and went to
Oroondates, who then was mustringe his Army against the Ethiopian, and making
al manner of provision, as well of men and weapons, as also other things
necessary for the War.

Here ends the Seventh Book.
The Eight Book.
FOr the King of Ethiopia, when he had beguiled Oroondates, and obtained half
of that, they contended for, and wanne the City Philae, which always is
easy to be conquered, by his speedy coming upon them, drove him to great
want, so that for the most part he enforced him to travail in haste, and
without Phaeil, Siene, Eliphantina, are Cities in Egypt.
order. For the City Philae, is Cituated upon the banks of Nilus, a little
above the lesser sluices, about twelve mile and a half from Siene, and
Eliphantina. This City because the outlawes of Egypt took and inhabited it,
caused the Ethiopians, and Egyptians, to contend about the same. The
Ethiopians will have the borders of Ethiopia to stretche unto the sluices, and
the Egyptians challenge Philae, because their Outlawes inhabited the same, as if
it had benne won by war. And because that City continually was now under
the one, and then straight under the other, and would be theirs who first came
and conquered it, at that time therein was a Garrison of Egyptians, and
Persians. The King of Ethiopia required to have Philae, and the Mines out of
which were dug the precious stoones called Smaragdi, of Oroondates,
Smaragdi.
and having made such request as is said before, and could not obtain, he
commanded his Legates to go a few days journey before, and he followed him
self well provided of all manner of furniture, as if he would have made sum
other War, but he told no man which way he would bend the strength of
his Army. After he supposed that his Ambassadors were paste Philae, and had
filled the Inhabitauntes with security, and carfulness, for that they bruted
abroad that they went with Commission to conclude a Peace, and amity. He
came suddenly upon them, and cast out A wise policy whereby Hydaspes took
Philae.
the Garrison which was not hable to sustain the force of their enemies, and
the Engines where with their Walls were battered above two or three days, and
so took the City, and did no manner of wrong to any of the Inhabitauntes
thereof. For by reason of these news, Achemenes found Oroondates soar
troubled, being by this time certified of all that happened by one who fled
from thence, but he troubled him a great deal more, because he came so
suddenly, and vnsentefor. Wherefore he asked him foorthewith, whether any
mischaunce was befallen Arsace, and the rest of his Family at home. He answer
that there was, but he would tell him in council. When every man else was
departed, he told him how Theagenes was taken Prisoner of Mytranes, and sent
to him, so to be conveyed to the great King, if he thought it good: for the
young man was worthy to be Archamenes does accuse Arsace to her husband
Oroondates.
placed in the Court, and to wait at the Kings own Table. Then how he was
rescued by the Inhabitau^tes of Bessa, who also slew Mytranes, and after that
came to Memphis, and thereto he added Thiamis estate. Last of all he told him
of Arsaces love toward Theagenes, and how he was brought to the Kings
Lodging, with the honor which she gave him in token of her good will, and all the service he did, and how that yet there was no harm done, by reason that
the young man withstoode, and would not: Mary it was to be doubted that by
continuance of time, or violence he might be forced, if sum man did not the
sooner fetch him from Memphis, and so cut of all the rest of Arsaces love.
And for that cause he came privily to tell him speedily thereof, for that his
love to his Master was such, that it could not conceal what he knew to be
contrary to his pleasure. When he had angered Oroondates with this tale, and he
was now thoroughly chafed, and in will to be revenged, he kindled in him a new
desire, by talkinge of Cariclia, commendinge her highely, praysinge
woonderfully her beauty and comeliness, as she well deserved, saieinge: that
there never was seen such a one before, nor might not be such an other
after. Accoumpte (quod he) all your Concubines, not only those that are at
Memphis, but those also which follow you here, not to be woorthe a Rushe, in
comparison of her. He told him many other things beside this: trustinge that
although Oroondates had to do with Caricha, yet within a while after he
should have her to wife, when he required her in recompense of this talk. By
this time was the Deputy soar moved, being wrapped as well in the snares of
anger, as desire. So that without delaie he called for Bagoas, Oroondates
sends Bagoas, to (...) Theagenes and Cariclia to him.
one of his Eunuchs, which was in greatest Authority, and best trusted of
him, and delivered to him fifty Horsemen, and sent him to Memphis, with
Commandment to bring Theagenes and Cariclia, where so ever he first might
see them, to him: He wrote a letter to Arsace beside in this manner.

Oroondates to Arsace. His Letters to Arsace.


Send Theagenes and Cariclia Brother and Sister, being the Kings prisoners
to me, to be conveyed to the King: and send them willingly, because whither
you will or not, they shall be taken from you, and I will credit Achemenes.

To Euphrates chief Eunuche at Memphis, His Letters to Euphrates.
he wrote thus. Of the negligent ordering of my house, you shall hereafter give
account. At this time deliver to Bagoas the two Grecian Prisoners, to be
brought to me, whither Arsace be content therewith or not: without excuse let
them be delivered, else know that I have commanded to bring thee also in
bonds, that thou may be put out of thine office. Bagoas went about his
business, and had his Letters sealed with the Deputies one Signet, that those
who were at Memphis should the better credit them, and deliver to him the
young folks. Oroondates also went him self to war against the Ethiopians,
Achemenes was commanded to follow him too, and certain men were privily
set to keep him (he thinkinge nothing less) until that was proved true,
which he had showed him. And at this time these things were done at Memphis.
Presently after Achemenes was gonne, and Thiamis was full Priest, and
therefore the chief of that City, and had performed what so ever
appertained to the burial of Calasiris within the appointed days, he remembered
to make enquiry after Theagenes, and Cariclia, because now it was lawful for
the Priests by their own ordinances to deal with Strangers. After he had
made diligent search every where for them, he heard that they were lodged in
the Princes Court, wherefore he (...) to Arsace in haste, and asked for them,
as though for many causes they appertained Thiamis desires to have Theagenes
and Cariclia, to provide for them as his Father commanded him.
to him, but especially for that his Father Calasiris, with the last words
he spoke, commanded him to provide for their living, and defend them from
wrong. And that he gave her thanks, for so courteously intertaininge them,
those few days, wherein it was not lawful for any, but such as were in
orders to be in the Church. Mary now he desired to have them him self again.
Arsace answered him thus: I marvel that for all you with your own words
commended us, for our humanity and gentleness, that ye will condemn us
straight again, of discurtesie and inciuilitie, whilst you would have us
seem, that either we can not, or will not provide for strangers, and do for
them as reason shall require. I mean not so said Thiamis: for I know that
they shall fare better here with you then at my house, if they would abide, but
saying they be of good Parentage, and have benne diversely tormented with
Fortune, and presently Though a man do travel all the days of his youth, yet
he desires to draw homewarde at length. Therefore home has no fellow.
are from their Native Country: they care for nothing so much as to recover
their Friends, and get home again. Wherein that I should healpe them, my
Father has leafte me his heir, who have also beside this further causes of
amity with them. You do well said Arsace that you leave brawlinge, and plead
equity: which shall be so much the more on our side, by how much to Rule is
of greater force, then fondely to provide for. Thiamis wondered at this, and
said, have you rule over them? how I pray you? By martial Law (quod she)
which makes prisoners bond servants. Then perceived Thiamis that she spoke
of Mytranes, and said: But there is The properties of war and peace.
no War, Arsace, but Peace at this time. The property in deed of the one,
brings into Bondage: but the other makes free. The one is a Tyrannous will:
the other a Princely decree. At a word War, and Peace ought not to be
scanned by their names, but by the meaning, and intent of those who have to
do therein. Wherefore you shall make a better definition of Equity, if you
consent to this. So shall neither honesty, nor profitablenesse come in
question. For what honesty is it for you, or what gain to say unreasonably,
that you will withhold from me these strangers. Arsace could rule her self no
longer, but that chanced unto her, which is common to all Lovers, so long as
they think they are not spied, they Arsace denies the delivery of the
prisoners to Thiamis, and in so doing does declare the property of disclosed
Lovers.
blushe, but when they are perceived, they are paste all shame. The secret
Lover is not very hasty, but he that is taken with the manner is made more
bold. As her guilty mind accused her, who thinkinge that Thiamis suspected
sommewhat, set not a Rushe by the Priest, nor the Honor of his Priestehoode,
but castinge of all woomanly shamefastness, said: You shall not be pardoned,
neither for that you did to Mytranes, but there will be a time, when Oroondates
will take revenge of them, who ^lewe him, and those also who were with them. As
for these, I will not part with them, who presently are my seruanntes, and
within a short space must be sent to my Brother the great King, according
to the Persian custom. Wherefore play the Orator as long as ye list, and
define Justice, Honesty, and Utility, you loose your labor, because he who
has power over an other, needs none of these, but measures each of them as
he thinks good, and get you straight out of our Court, and that willingly,
least if you deal unadvisedly, you be forced to depart spite of your Teeth.
Then went Thiamis a way calling the Gods to witness, and said nothing
else, but that these things would not come to good end, yet he thought to
tell this to the City, and crave the aid thereof herein. When Arsace had
said, I care not for your Office (for Love cares only for that which may
healpe to geite that it desires) she went into her chamber, whither sendinge
for Cibele, she devised of that they had to do. For by this time she began
to suspect that Achemenes was gonne to Oroondates because he came not into
sight. And Cibele if at any time she asked for him made diverse and sundry
excuses, to persuade her any thing rather, then that he was gonne to
Oroondates: for all that she was not believed always, but now for the
continuance of time she lost her credit quite. Then spoke Arsace, and
said: Cibele, what shall we now do? what way may be devised to rid me out
of all these perilles that I am in? my Love relenteth no whitte, but is rather
greater and greater, as though the young man by his obstinatenesse gave me
occasion thereof, who is cruel and will not be ruled, and was more gentell
before then now: then he comforted me with fair promises, but now he openly
refuses to do any request, and I am grieved the more for fear least he have
heard of Achemenes, that which I suspect, and therefore is the rather afraid
to do it. Surely Achemenes angreth me above all other things, who is gonne to
Oroondates, and is like either to persuade him, or else tell him a woonderful
tale. But let me only see Oroondates, I know he will not be hable to abide
one flatteringe What woomen which dwell together with men be hable to do.
welcome, or the least tear of Arsaces cies. For woomens eyes and such as dwell
in one house together, be of great force to persuade men. But this grieueth
me most, if happily I be accused, yea and punished before I have rejoiced
Theagenes, if Oroondates hear any thing hereof. Wherefore Cibele now turn
every stoane, devise al manner of means, saying you know that we are brought
into extremity. And think sith I despair of my self, that I will spare no
other: For thou shall have the first commodity that arises of thy Sons
attemptes, whereof how thou should be ignorant, I cannot surmise. Cibele
answered: as touching my Son, and my fidelity to you Mistress, you shall
know in the end that you are deceived. And further for that you so slackly
handel your own Love, there is no cause why you should blame other, that are
blameless: for you command him not as a Mistress, but flatter him like a
Servant, which perhaps was well done at the first, when we deemed him to
be of a weak and youthful courage. But now Cibeles unhappy Council to Arsace
against. Theagenes.
because he stands so stiffly against his Lover, let him try and know you
for his Mistress, and with whippes and torments be glad to yield to your
pleasure: for young men regard not, when they be prayed, but when they be
forced then begin they to stoop. Wherefore this also with pain will do
that which before he was gently handled, he would not. You seem to say well
(quod Arsace) but how can I abide with mine eyes to see that body of his
scourged or otherwise to be tormented? She answered again: You are too
pitiful as though a little pain will not make him better advised, and you with
his little grief shall have al your desire. But you need not with your eyes
see what shall be done to him, but deliver him to Euphrates and command him to
pounishe him as it were for sum other offense, so shall you not see that
What the eye sees not, the heart rueth not.
which will put you to pain (for it is nothing so grievous to hear of an
ill chance as with eyes to see the same) and if we perceive that he relente
and change his mind, we may deliver him from his pain. Arsace was content
to be persuaded, and sent for Euphrates the chief Eunuche, and commanded him
to do as they had devised. He, as well for that he was in Jealousy as al
Eunuchs All Eunuchs are by nature Ialous.
are, as also for other things that he saw and surmised, was offended with
Theagenes, by and by laid him in Irons, and tormented him with Honger and
Stripes, being enclosed in a dark house. And when Theagenes who knew the
cause hereof well enough, but would seem to be ignorant, asked him why he was
thus handled, he would give him no answer: But every day augmented his
pains, and tormented him more then either Arsace would, or had commanded, and
never suffered any man to go in to him but Cibele, for so had he
commandment. She came to him very often, and made as though she had brought
him meat privily, as if she had benne soary for his mishap by reason of the
acquaintance which she had with him, but in deed to see if he relented any
whitte for these pains, and how he was presently minded. But he played the
man a great deal more, and withstoode them most of al then, and suffered his
Body to be afflicted: but by reason of his Chastity, he took a lofty stomach
to him, and reioiced, and gloried in that Fortune, because though his greatest
part was tormented, yet his best, and most noble part was well pleased, and
for that he now had occasion to declare what good will he bare to Cariclia. He
thought it went very well with him, if she might but know thereof, and still
would call her his joy, his heart, and life. Which when Cibele saw, although
she, contrary to Arsaces mind (which was, that he should be but little
pounished, until he relented, and not tormented to Death) had brought
Euphrates word to augmente his pounishmente, and so could prevail no
whitte, but was quite without hope, and she began now by experience to
perceive in what miseries he was: sommetimes she was afraid of Oroondates, if
Achemenes told him hereof: sommetime least Arsace, if her love were
perceived, would kill her self, she determined to labor contrary to all that
was like to fall upon her, and with sum passinge mischief, either to execute
Arsaces pleasure, and so to avoid her present peril, or else to take aware
all that might make ought against her, by killinge of them all. And in that
mind she went in to Arsace, and said: Mistress, we loose our labor. For
that obstinate fellow relenteth no whitte, but is more wilful, and has
Cariclia always in his mouth, and comfort him self with her name, as if
it were the dearest thing in the world to him. Wherefore if it please you,
let us as the Proverb says, cast our last Ancore, and seek sum means
to take her away, which is so great a let to us. For if he shall know that
she is dead, it is like that he will change his mind, when he shall be out of
al hope of her love. Arsace was ready to believe her, for that through her
words, the Ialousie that she was in a good while before, was now by anger
increased, and said: You give me good counsel, I will take upon me to commau^de
this stop to be removed. Who will do your Commandment in this point (quod
Cibele)? For although you have al things in your hands, yet the Laws will
not let you kill one without the judgment of the Persian Magistrates. You
shall have need therefore to take great heed how you accuse the Maid, and
then it is doubteful whether we shall be hable to prove that which we lay to
her charge. But if you shall think it good (for I am ready to do any thing for
your sake) I will dispatch Cibele goes about to poison. Cariclia.
this matter with poison, and by means of a subtle Cup, rid our Adversary
of her life. Arsace allowed her devise, and badde her put it in practice, and
she went about it forth withal. And when she found Cariclia weepinge, and
making great moan, and did nothing but devise many ways to die (for by
this time she perceived in what case Theagenes was, although Cibele at the
first had by diverse subtle means deluded her, and made sundry excuses, for
that she saw him not as she was wont to do), she said: unhappy Creature
will thou not yet leave to pine thy self, and consume away to no purpose?
Behold, Theagenes shall be set at liberty this night, and comme to thee,
for our Mistress, who for a certain offense that he committed in serving her,
was angered, and commanded him to Ward, and has promised this day (partly
at my request) to set him at liberty, and to celebrate a sumptuous Feast
according to the custom of this Country. Wherefore arise, and be mercy, and
at length yet eat sommewhat with us. How should I believe you (said
Cariclia)? For your continual lieinge has so often beguiled me, that I cannot
give credit to any thing that you say. Then said Cibele, I swear unto you
by all the Gods, that al your business shall be dispatched this day in such
sort, that you shall never need to take more care hereafter, if you kill not
your self before, by refraininge thus many days without meat. Wherefore eat
sum bitte of that which is provided at this time. Cariclia was content with
much adoo, nevertheless she doubted that she would decieue her as often as
she had done before, but because of her Oath she partly agreed, and was
glad to take hold of that which was promised: for the mind does quickly
give We soon believe what we would have come to pass. Cibele does fall
into the pit, that she dug for Cariclia, whereby we may see that evil
Council is worste to him that gives it. The property of poison.
credit to that which it earnestly desires. So they sat down together, and
did eat. And as Aura served the^ of drink, Cibele becked to her that she
should bring first to Cariclia the poisoned Cup, and after her she drank
her self of an other Cup. She had scante drunk it of, but she began to
swell, and was cruelly tormented within: wherefore she powered out that which
was left, on the ground, and looked cruelly upon the Maid. Cariclia was
abashed, and soar troubled with this, and began to stay her vprighte. So
were all the rest that were there. For a Cup impoysoned is swifter then any
Arrowe, and is of force sufficient to kill one that is young and lusty. But
then when it was in an Old, and dry Body, it creapte into the principal
parts of her, sooner then any man could tell the tale. Thus was the Old
wooman consumed, and all her members were with the pinchinge of the Poison
dissolved, and quite without life, and all her Body was very black. But verily
I think that her crafty mind was more mischeiuous, then the Poison was, in as
much as Cibele now yielding up her Ghost, foregot not her subtle devises,
but partly by Signs, partly by imperfect words, and dieinge speech, she
signified that Cariclia was she who had poisoned her. So the Old wooman died,
and Cariclia was bound, and brought straighte way to Arsace, who asked her,
whether she had provided that Poison, and threatened to tormente her on the
Rack, if she would not confess the trothe. Now was Cariclia a strange
sight to those that looked upon her, for she was not sad, nor bare any
countenance that might argue a fainte heart, but came smilinge before her, and
made an account of that she had in hand, either for that she passed not of
that slander because she was giltlesse, or else for that if Theagenes were not
alive, she would also die, and esteemed it a vantage to take upon her a deed
which other men had done. And said: Jolly Dame, if Theagenes be alive, I
say that I am not guilty of this murder. But if he have miscarried through
thy mischievous attemptes, thou shalt need no torments to make me confess
the fact. I am she who has killed thy Nourse, that has brought thee up so
well, and taught thee so much good, kill me out of hand: for I could do
Theagenes no greater pleasure, who by good right has resisted thy wicked
devises. These words made Arsace mad, and when she had commanded her to
be beaten, she said carry this queen away bound as she is, and show her
to her goodly Lover, who is in like plite, and when you have bound her hand
and foot, commit her to Euphrates also to be kept until to morrow, to be
condemned to death by the Persian Magistrates. As she was led away, the
Maid who was Cibeles cup bearer (she was one of the Ionians, which at the
first was willed to wait upon them) whither it were for good will which she
bare to Cariclia, by reason of the acquaintance and familiarity which she
had with her, or moved by the will of God, wept and lamented pitifully, and
said: o unhappy wooman which is without al fault. They who were by woondred
at her, and compelled her to tell plainly what she meante. Then she
confessed how she her self gave Cibele that poison, and had received it before
of her to give it to Cariclia. But she either tro^^^^d with the strangeness
of the fact, or else called hastily upon by Cibele, who badde her bring the
first cup to Cariclia, changed the pottes, and gave the Old wooman that
wherein the Poison was. So she was carried forthwith to Arsace, and was very
glad if Cariclia might be excused of this fact, for even the very Barbarous
people have pity upon a Gentle and Noble countenance. And although the Maid
said the same to her, yet she prevailed nothing, but Arsace commanded her
also, as helpinge and consentinge thereto, to be put in prison, and kept to
Judgment. The Persian Magistrates in whose hands it was to determine
controversies, and punish offenses as touching the weal public, were sent
for in haste to sit in judgment the next day. And when they were come, and
satte, Arsace accused her for poysoninge her Nourse, declaring all that had
happened, and would often moist her words with tears, because she was
spoiled of her, whom she accounted more dear then any other thing, and
above all other loved her best: she took moreover the Judges to witness
how she had intertayned Cariclia being a stranger, and showed her all
manner of courtesy, and was now thus wronged in steed of thanks, which she
had well deserved. To be short Arsace laid sore accusations against her, but
Cariclia made no Answer, but confessed the fact again, and said that she
gave her the poison, and moreover she added, that she would have poisoned
Arsace also, if she had not benne prevented, and many other things else, and
ever among would she directly rail upon Arsace. For after she had benne the
night paste with Theagenes in prison, and conferred with him of al other
affairs too and fro, and had concluded that if need were she should
willingly die any manner of death, whereto she should be condemned, and to
depart out of a life full of troubles, and endless travels, and cruel
Fortune, and belike had given him his last farewell lovingly, and taken the
Jewels that were laid forth with her, which she was ever accustomably
wont to bear privily of purpose, and tied them at that time about her in a
bag, to the intent that they should furnishe her Burial, she confessed
every accusation that was laid against her, and refused no manner of death,
and rehearsed her self many things also, whereof she was not accused.
Wherefore the Judges made no delaie, but had almost adjudged her to a more
cruel and Persianlike death, yet because they were moved with her
countenance a little, and young surpassinge bewty, Cariclia is condemned to
the fire.
they condemned her to be burned with fire. Then was she had away presently
with the Executioners, and carried a little without the City, all the while
she was lead forth, one made a cry, that she should die for poisoning one,
wherefore a great company more followed them out of the City. Some whereof
saw her as she was lead, other heard thereof by report, which quickly
flewe over all the City, and so hasted thereto. Arsace came also, and saw
that which happened from the wall: for she thought it a pain, if she
satisfied not her self, with seeinge her die. When the Executioners had laid
a great deal of wood together, and put fire thereto, that now it began to
flame, Cariclia prayed them who lead her, to give her a little leave, and
promised that she would go into the fire alone, which granted, she said
with a loud voice: o Sun, and Earth, and all you blessed Cariclies prayer.
Creatures, that are above and under the Earth, which see and take revenge of
all wicked woorkers. You are witnesses that I am not guilty of that whereof I
am accused, and that I am willinge to die, for the intolerable griefs of
mind which burden me, vouchesafe to take me into your hands gently. And in
all haste take revenge of this shameless Arsace, who has defiled her self
with so many filthy factes, and is a Harlotte, and does all this to rob me
of my Husband. When she had said thus, every man that was there said
somewhat to that she had spoken: wherefore some would have the Execution
stayed til an other time of judgment, and sum were ready to take her away:
she preuentinge them all, went into the midst of the fire, and stood there
a good while without harm, and the fire went The fire would not touch
Cariclia.
every way about her, and would not approach near her, so it hurt her not,
but gave place when she came thereinto, by means whereof she was with the
light that was about her, made fayrer, and woondred at the more, by reason of
her bewty, so that in a manner she was married in a fiery chamber. She went
sometime into this side, sometime into that, maruelinge what it meante, and
hasted to be dead, but it prevailed not, for that the fire alwaie gave place,
and as it were fled from her: the Tormentours ceased not but laid on more
wood and reed ( Arsace with threatninge countenance charginge them so to do)
to make it burn more vehemently: But it did no good, save that it troubled the
City more, which supposinge that she had healpe from Heaven, cried out the
wooman is clean, the wooman is not guilty, wherefore they came to the fire,
and put aside the Tormentours. The first that so did, was Thiamis (for by this
time he was comme, being admonished of that which was done, by the great
brute in the City) and he encouraged the people to healpe her, and being in
will to deliver her, they durst not comme near the fire, but willed her to
comme forth. For she that had benne in the fire without harm, if she list
to comme out thereof, need fear nothing. Which when Cariclia saw and
heard, thinkinge also her self that God had preserved her, thought it best
not to be unthankful to him, nor to set light of that benefit, but leapte
out of the fire. Wherewith the people, what for joy, and wonder gave a great
shoute, and thanked the Gods for the same. But Arsace not well in her wits,
skipte from the walls, and came out at a Posterne with a great company of her
Guard, and other Noble men of Persia, and laid hands upon Cariclia her^elfe,
and lookinge frowardely upon the people, said: Are you not ashamed to go
about to deliver a graceless wooman, a Witch, and a Murderer, taken with
the deed dooinge, and confessinge the same from her deserved pain? Seeinge
that in your so healpinge such a wicked queen, you strive against the Laws
of Persia, and against the King him self, his Deputies, Nobles, and Judges
also. Perhaps you be deceived, for that she burned not this day, and
therefore you ascribe that hap to the Gods. Will you not be wiser, and
understand that this is a greater proof of her Witchcraft, who has such
sloare of sleightes, that she can withstand the strength of the fire? Comme
you to morrow into the Council house, if you will, for it shall be by all your
consentes: there shall you hear that she will confess the same, and shall be
convinced by such of her fellows, as are privy thereto, and I keep in
Prison. And therewithal she carried her away, holdinge her by the neck, and
commanded her Guard to make her room. But sum of them were angry, and in
mind to withstand: other gave over, because they were somewhat blinded with
the tale of poysoninge, but most for fear of Arsace, and her authority. Then
was Cariclia delivered to Euphrates again to be kept to a new Judgment,
and had more yrons laid upon her. The greatest comfort that she had in this
adversity, was that she had time to tell Theagenes of her affairs, for this
was Arsaces invention too, to put them to the more pain, that the young
Creatures being in one place prisoners, might behold either others A Lover is
more grieved at his friends harm then his own.
torments, and griefs, for she knew well yenough that a Lover is more
grieved at his friends pain, then his own disease. But they coumpted this a
comfort, and to be pained alike they thought it a vauntage, and if either had
less torments then the other, each supposed him self vanquished, and as it
were more fainte, and weak in love. For now was it lawful for them to be
together, and encourage each other to take in goodly wise what fortune so ever
came, and refuse no peril which should ensue of their unfeigned Chastity,
and steadfast Faith. After they had continued their talk of such matters, as
is likely they would talk of (who never hoped to talk together again) til
it was night, and had satisfied them selves as well as they might: at last
they fell into communicatio^ of the Miracle which happened about the fire.
Theagenes referred the benefit thereof to Gods goodness, who had saved her being
guiltless from Arsaces unjust sclaunder. But Cariclia seemed to doubt
thereof. For (quod she) this strange kind of delivery may be thought in
deed to proceed of God. But still to be afflicted with such miseries, and
torments without al measure, is rather a token of those who are plagued by
God, and are like to fall into greater ineonueniences: except there be some
more hidden mystery which casts into extreme peril, and when al hope is
paste, finds a remedy. When she had said thus, and Theagenes willed her to
take all in good part, and be of a godlier mind, she cried out alowd, the
Gods be favorable to us. Now I remember what a Dream, or Vision I had this
last night, but had forgotten it before, I know not how. It was a true
verse, and noble Calasiris expounded the same to me. The meaning whereof was
thus:

By virtue of Pantarbe, let fear Why the Fire touched not Cariclia.

of fire removed be:
An easy thing to pearse it is,
though else right strange to see.
Theagenes also when he heard this, was moved like those who have some Divine
spirit, and gave as great a leap as his Bands would let him, and said: The
Gods in deed be good to us: for I also am made a Poet by remembringe an
answer which sum like spirit gave me, whether it were Calasiris, or any
other of the Gods in Calasiris form, who seemed to say thus to me:

Tomorrowe shalt thou with the Maid,
escape Arsaces band:
And soon be brought with her into
the Ethiopian land.
As for me I can well gheasse whereto this Oracle te^deth. The Land of Aethiopia
seems to be that which is under the ground. With the Maid, that is to dwell
with Proserpina. And the escapinge of Arsaces band, to be a Departure of the
Soul from the Body. But what should your Verse mean, wherein is so many
contraries? For Pantarbe signifies al fearful, and yet it would not have you
be afraid of the fire. Then said Cariclia: My dear heart Theagenes, our
continual calamttie makes you take al of the woorste. For commonly men
apply their mind to that which accustomably happens. But I think that
this answer seems to foreshewe better luck then you suppose. So that I
perhaps shall be the Maid, with whom you have a promise that you shall recover
my Country Aethiopia: when you shall be delivered out of Arsaces bands. But
how that same shall be done, we know not, neither is it incredible, but it
is possible for the Gods to do it, and let them see thereto who give us
these answeares: for as touching that which was foreshewed of me, it is
fulfilled as you your self know, and I live of whom there was no hope at all,
and I, who then carried mine own saftie about me, was ignorante thereof: but
now me thinks I understand it. For whereas at all times before, I carried
with me the tokens that my Mother laid forth with me. At that time, above al
other, when I looked for my last Judgment, I privily tied them about me,
that if I were saved, they might find me such things as were necessary for me
to live by: but if I miscarried, that they should be my last Ornaments, and
dew Furniture to my Burial. Emonge these, Theagenes, which are Jewels of a
great valewe, and very Precious Stoanes of India, and Ethiopia, there is a
Ringe which my Father gave unto my Mother, when he was ensured to her, wherein
is set a stoane called Pantarbe, and about it are certain holy Letters
written, to be short that Ringe has sum heavenly virtue which withstandeth
fire, geuinge them grace that have the same, never to be endamaged with it,
which also perhaps by the will of the Gods has preserved me. Thus may I
think because Calasiris told me the same was written in my Fascia, wherein at
this time is the rest of my stuff wrapped. This is probable and like to be
true (quod Theagenes) because of your delivery. But what other Pantarbe shall
we have to aid us out of the next days danger? for the most wicked Arsace
does not promise immortality for auoydinge the fire (which I would to God
might happen) but deuiseth in the mean time some other new and strange
pounishment. And I would to God that she would condemn us both at once to
one kind of death, verily I would not call that death, but a rest from al our
troubles. Be of good comfort, quod Cariclia, we have another Pantarbe, this
promise which was made us this night paste, and if we trust in God, either we
shall have more pleasure if we be saved, or die with better minds if need
require. Thus were thief occupied, sometimes lamentinge and be wailinge more
either for others, then for their own estate, sometime would they take their
last leave, and make new promise, and swear by the Gods and their
present Fortune, that they would hold their Faith in Love inviolable to the
death. Bagoas Bagoas comes to Memphis, and takes away Theagenes and
Cariclia.
and the fifty Horsemen which were sent with him, came to Memphis late in the
night, when al were a sleep and when he had waked them, who lay near the
gate softely, and told them what they were, and were known, they went into
the gates al together in haste. There Bagoas left his Horsemen inclosinge the
Deputies lodginge round about withthem, that they might be ready at defense,
if any man would with stand them. Him self went out by a certain Posterne,
which the other knew not, and having with small adoo broken down a slender
door, and told him who dwelled thereby what he was, and commanded him to
make no noise, he went to Euphrates, knowinge the way readily by continual
use before, and yet the Moon shoone a little. Whom findinge him in his bed
he awaked, and as he made a noise, and asked who was there, he badde him peace:
Saying, it is I, bid one bring a candell hither: Then he called a boy
which waited upon him, and badde him light a candell, and awake no man else,
when the boy was come, and had set the candell in the Candelsticke,
Euphrates said: what news that you come so suddenly and not looked for? I
need not, answered he, use many words, but read these Letters, and mark
this Seal, and understand that it is Oroondates that gives this charge, and
think that it is good to fulfill the contents of them. As soon as Euphrates
had read both the Letters, he said: Arsace will be sorrowful, and at this
time is in great peril, by reason that see has had an ague, which I think the
Gods have sent her yesterdaie, and now is she in a burninge heat, so that
we have small comfort of her life, I would not deliver this Letter unto her,
though she would ask for it, who rather would die her self, and kill al us
too, before she would deliver these young folks to you, and know that you
come in due time, and take them with you, and healpe them all that you may:
have pity upon them who are pitiful and unhappy, and have benne afflicted six
hundred ways fore against my will, but Arsace gave commandment. Marry they
are (as may appear by them) of a good stock, and as I by experience have
seen very modest in all points, and so he lead him to the prison. When Bagoas
saw the young prisoners though they were pined away with torments, yet he
woondred at their tale stature and excellent bewty, they were troubled a
little, because they thought that Bagoas came at such untimely season by
night, to give them their last and deadly judgment, yet they took heart
unto them, and looked cheerfully as though they cared for nothing, and gave
them who were there, manifest tokens that they were very glad thereof. When
Euphrates came near, and set to his hands to take away the stocks,
whereunto their bands were tied. Theagenes cried out: o goodly Arsace, she
thinks to hide her The eye of Justice does bring to light evil deeds, be
they never so closely done.
mischievous deeds by night and darkness, but the eye of Justice is quick
to reprove, and will bring to light all wicked deeds, be they never so
closely and privily done: but do you as you are commanded, and whether it be
Fire, Water, or Swoorde, that is appointed for us, let us both together,
and at one time, have one manner of death. Cariclia made the same peticion
too. Wherefore the Eunuchs wept (for they partly understood what they
said) and brought them out with bands and all. When they were out of the
Deputies house, Euphrates tarried behind, and Bagoas with the Horsemen that
came with him, took many of their Irons, and leaft them no more but so many as
might keep them safely, and not annoye or hurt them, and set them upon
Horses, and goinge round about them, went as fast as they could to Thebes.
When they had ridden all the night after, and till three a clock at after
noone the next day and never alighted, and then not hable to abide the heat
of the Sun, as is like in the midst of the Summer in Egypt, and having a
will to sleep, but most for that they saw Cariclia weary of ridinge, they
meante to ride somewhat aside, to ease them selfs, and bayte their Horses, and
let the Maid: rest. There was a little Hill upon the bank of Nilus, about
the which the water went, not keepinge his straighte course, but was turned
in manner half round, so that it made the place like a little Island, that
which was thus compassed with the water, was full of rank Grass, by reason
that it was so near the water, so that it was very good for Cattle, and Horse
to feed in: it was shadowed moreover with trees of Persia, and great Fig
trees, and such other as do commonly grow about Nylus. There Bagoas, and
his company alighted, and used the trees in steed of a Tente, and did eat
meat him self, and gave Theagenes, and Cariclia sum too, who at the first
would eat none, sayeinge: It was needelesse for them to eat, which should
by and by be slain, but that he compelled them in a manner, and persuaded them
as well as he could, that there was no such matter, and be told them that
they should be carried to Oroondates, and not be killed. When the heat of the
day was paste, and the Sun shined on their side, and out of the Weaste,
there came one on horsbacke to Bagoas, who for have that he made, panted him
self, and his Horse had sweatte so much, that he could scante sit upon
him. And when he had said sommewhat to Bagoas secretly, he made no more
haste, but held down his head a little, and as it were mused at that which
was told him, and after said: Strangers, be of good cheer, you are revenged
of your enemy, Arsace is dead, who when she heard that you were gonne,
hanged her self, preuentinge of her own Arsace hanged her self, after she
heard that Theagene^ and Cariclia were gonn^.
will, Death, which necessarily should have ensued. For she could not have
escaped Oroondates, and the King without pounishmente, but either she should
have been put to death, or continual shame al her life after. Such word does
Euphrates send by this messenger. Wherefore be merry, because I know well
yenoughe you have hurt no body, and she that hurt you is dead. Thus said
Bagoas to them, not speakinge Greek very well, but lettinge many false phrases
escape him, yet he stayed not, but told them, for that he was partly glad
him self, because he was scante content with Arsaces frowardenesse: who while
she lived, played the Tyrant, and also to cheer, and comfort the young
folks. For he hoped that Oroondates would accept well of his pains, (which
was a hard matter) if he could keep the young man well, whose comeliness
would stain all the other Courtiers: and the Maid of such singular beauty,
to be his wife after Arsaces death. Theagenes, and Cariclia were very glad
these news and thanked the mighty Gods, and Justice therefore. For then they
thought they should have no more pain, though they had never What some
would do to be revenged of their enemies.
so ill luck, seeinge that their mortal enemy was dead. So great a pleasure
have sum thought it were to die, so that they might die with their enemies
destruction. When it drew toward night, and the heat began to abate, so
that it was better to travail in, they set forward, and road all that
evening, and the night, and the next morninge, making the more haste to take
Oroondates at Thebes, if they might, but they lost their lobour. For after
that one of the Host met him, and told him that the Deputy was not at
Thebes, but that he was sent to take up al ye Soldiers that were in wages,
though they were any where in Garrison, and bring them to Siene, whither he
willed them to go: for all was in trouble, and hurly burly, and it was to be
doubted that the City was taken, by reason that the Deputy came too late, and
the Ethiopian Army used such celeritie, that it was there Celerity is a
principal virtue in war.
before any news came, that it was coming. Bagoas leafte his intended
journey to Thebes, and went to Syene. And being now almost there, he fell
into the Ethiopian Scoute, a valiaunte crewe of lusty Soldiers, that were
sent before to spy the Country, that the great Army have safe passasse, who
at that time, as well because of the night, as also for that they were not very
skillful of the Country (for so they had commission to lay their Ambushment
where so ever they saw any commodious place) hid them selves under certain
Bushes for their own defense, and the better to grieve their enemies too, and
slepte not. Early in the morning, when they heard Bagoas, and the other
Horsemenne ride by, and saw that they were but a few, they suffered them to
ride on, and when they knew certainly that none followed them, they brake out
with a great noise, and pursued them. Bagoas, and the other Horsemenne that
were with him, being amazed, as well with their sudden cry, as also for that
they knew them to be Aethiopians, by their color, and them selves not hable
to withstand the number (for they were a thousand sent to scanne the
Country, in light Harneis) tarried not so much, as to look them in the
faces, but fled, not so fast at the first, as they might, because they
would not have their enemies think that they would flee in haste. These
chased them, and sent out about two hundred of the people called
Trogloditae. The Trogloditae are a people of Aethiopia What people the
Trogloditae are, and the ma^ners of their Country.
that live in Husbandry. They boorde upon the Arabians. They were very fwifte
of Nature, and practice the same from their youth. They never wear heavy
Armoure, but use Slinges in battle, and suddenly invade their enemies, and
so indamage them. If they perceive that they be too weak, they flee: their
enemies never pursue them, for that they know they are over swifte, and will
hide them selves in every corner. Thus these ouertooke the Horsemenne, being
them selves on foot, and wounded them in casting out of their Slinges. But
when they returned upon them, they would not abide by it, but fled back by
little and little to their fellows: which when the Persians perceived, they
despised them because they were no more: wherefore they chased the^ as fast as
they might, and when they had followed them a little, then road they forewarde
again with as much speed as they could, and spurred their Horses, and gave
them all the Raines at will. By which means sum escaped, and fled unto a
Hill that stands by Nylus, under the which they covered the^ selves that
their enemies might not see them: But Bagoas was taken because his Horse
stumbled, and he fell, and hurt his leg that he could not stir it.
Theagenes also, and Cariclia were taken prisoners, who Theagenes, and Cariclia
are taken prisoners of the Ethiopian foreriders.
thought it shame to foresake Bagoas, whose good will they had tried toward
them already, and hoped to find more at his hand afterward, and therefore
tarried by him, partly for that they could not flee, but especially as I
think, willinge to yield them selves to them. Then Theagenes said to
Cariclia, Thus is our Dream comme to pass: these be the Aethiopians, in whose
Land it is our Destiny to comme. I am determined therefore to yield to them,
and commit our selves rather to doubtful Fortune with them, then to present
peril with Oroondates. Cariclia understood all the matter, which was now led
thereto by Destinye, as if she had benne taken by the hand, and conceived
better hope in her mind, supposing those who took them, rather to be their
friends, then enemies, yet she told nothing to Theagenes of that she
thought, but said: she was well content. When the Aethiopians were comme to
them, they knew Bagoas to be an Eunuche by his face, but made further inquiry
what these should be, because they saw them bound, and without Harneys, of
an Egyptian of their own company, and an other who could speak the Persian
languge, thinkinge that they should understand either both, or one of them
at the least. For Espialles, and Foreriders are taught of necessity to have
such with them as can speak the language of the Inhatauntes, and their
enemies, that they may the better understand that, whereaboute they are
sent. After Theagenes, who by continuance of time had learned the Egyptian
tongue a little, and could answer to a short question, had told them that he
was the chiefest servant about the Persian Deputy, and them selves Greeks,
taken prisoners first by the Persians, but now through better Fortune of the
Aethiopians, they determined to save their lives, and take them prisoners, and
make a present of their first pray to their King, of the chiefest Iuell
his Persian enemy had. For Eunuchs are in the Courts of Persia In what
estimation Eunuchs are in the Court of Persia.
eyes, and ears too, who because they neither have Children, nor Kinsfolks,
to whom their minds might be bente, they depend only upon him who has
committed him self to them, and they thought that the two young folks would
be a goodly present to wait upon their King, and a grace to his Court. And
thus they set them upon Horses, and so carried them away, because else he
being wounded, and these hindered with their bands, could not go so fast as
they. Surely that which was done, was like a Prologue of a Comedy, strangers
being prisoners, who a little before were afraid still of death that they
saw before their eyes, were not now carried any more Captive, but guarded with
a number of such, as should within a short time become their In what case
Theagenes, and Cariclia were.
Subjects, and in such case were they.

Here ends the Eight Book.
The Ninthe Book.
BY this time was Siene besieged round about, Siene besieged by Hydaspes, and
the feats of Arms wrought before the same.
and enclosed with the Ethiopian Army, as if a man would have set nets about
it. For Oroondates when he heard that the Aethiopians were at hand, and that
they left Cataractae, and came to Siene, got into the Town before them a
little, and closed up the gates, and when he had planted his Slinges, and other
Ordinance upon the walls, he waited to see what they would do. Hidaspes
King of Aethiopia, hearing a great way of that the Persians were entered into
Siene, by his spies, and for all that he used the same celeritie in their
pursuit, by which he was in hope, he should have benne before them, yet came
short, lodged his Army before the City round about without any Skirmishe,
as if he should have sitten at a play, and filled all their Country with
three score hundred thousand men and Cattle, so that they drove them into a
straight corner. There Theagenes, and Cariclia presented to Hidaspes.
his espialles findinge him, presented their prisoners, be took great pleasure
to look upon the young couple, and had good affection to them in his mind, as
those that should be his own Children afterward, although he knew not so
much, but especially he accounted it good luck that they were bound. And
said: Loo at the first the Gods deliver our enemies to us in bands, and
saying that these be the first prisoners, they shall be kept to the end of the
war, to be Sacrificed at our Triu^phe to the Gods, according to the old
custom of the Aethiopians. After he had rewarded his Spies, he sent them and
the prisoners to their impedimentes, and set a company to keep them, which
could well speak their language, and gave them straight commandment to look
well unto them, and let them fare of the best, and keep them from al manner
of uncleanness, as things appointed for Sacrifice ought to be kept, and that
their bands should be changed, and have Chains of Gold for them. For
wherefore so ever Iron serves in other Gold serves for such uses in
Aethiopia. as Iron does in other Countries.
Countries, Gold serves in Aethiopia, and they did as they were commanded.
When they took of their former Chains, and without doing any thing else put
them in comfort, that they should live more at ease, and fitted for them
fetters of Gold. Theagenes laughed, and said: Good Lord whence comes this
trim change? truly Fortune flattereth us woonderfully, we change Iron for
Gold, and in prison we are enritched, so that we be more woorthe in our
Bands. Cariclia smiled too, and would have him of an other mind, and
therefore brought him in remembrance of that which the Gods had foreshewed
unto them, and so put him into better hope. But Hidaspes him self assaulted
Siene, and where as he thought before, that with his great Host at the first
approach he should have overthrown the Town, Walls and all, he had almost
benne then repulsed of them that kept the same, who dallied not, but valiantly
withstoode their enemies force, and railed on them spitefully, to anger them
the more. He very wroth that they were fully determined to endure to the end,
and had not straighte yielded them selves to him, thought it good not to trifle
the time with his Army, and do nothing, nor to lay such a siege whereby
sum might escape, and sum be taken, but utterly in short space to spoil
the Town. Wherefore he divised such a piece of work, he parted the compass
about the walls emonge his Soldiers, and to every ten men he appointed
ten yardes, the length, and breadth thereof was very great, and commanded
them to make a Ditche: some dug, other carried the grytte away, and sum
therewith did raise up a Counter wall against that which was besieged. No man
durst comme out of the Town, because of the great Army, to hinder, or let
the work that it might not be made round about the Town, and their
Slinges, and other Engines served to no purpose, because they saw that the
space between the two walls was so great, that they who made the Ditche,
were without their danger. When they had soon dispatched this, by reason of
the great number of the laborers, he began such an other thing. He left
betwixt the two ends of the Ditche, the breadthe of one hundred foot which
he ditched even unto Nylus, bringinge the same still from the lower ground to
that which was higher, and more hard. A man might have likened that work
to a long wall, because it kept equally an hundred foot in breadthe, and was
so long as the ground which is between Nylus and Siene. When he had brought
this to the banks of Nylus, he turned the water into his River, which in
falling from a higher place into that which is lower, and out of the
woonderful breadth of Nylus into a narrow River wrought by hand, made a
great noise; as well at the entry thereinto, as also in the Ditche when it was
in, so that they might hear it, that were a great way of. Which when they
who were in Siene saw, and understood into what danger they were brought,
because he meante by so compassing them about, to drown their Town, so that
none of them might flee, for that they were so enclosed with the Walls as well
by Land, as Water, and that they could not be assured: though they aboade
within they made a good shifte, as the time would suffer to save them selves.
First, when the gates, and the boorde work about them failed, they laid
upon it Plaster, and Pitche to make it the surer, and they underpropped their
walls that they might stand the stronger. Sum brought earth thereto, and
some stoanes, many brought old timber, and every man that which was next
hand: no man was unoccupied, but woomen and children, yea and Old men too
labored hard. For danger of death refused the aid neither of any age, nor
kind. The sturdier young men, and those that were in wages, were set to
make a little Countermine that should stretche to their enemies Fortress,
the manner whereof was thus: They dug a Pit almost five yardes right
down hard by the wall, and there laid a sure Foundation. Then dug they
forewarde straighte to their enemies Bulwarks by Torche light, and those that
came after in order, co^ueied the grytte from those that went before, and
carried it into a certain part of the City, where their Gardens were. And
this did they for this purpose, that if the water came into that place which
was without earth, it might have a way to break out, and fall away. But
this calamity prevented the readiness of the Citizens. For Nylus having
now passed the long Ditche fell very fast into the round River, and
flowinge every where over the Banks, drowned all the space between the two
walls, and made it like a standinge Poole. And thus was Siene made an Island,
and a City which stands in the midst of a Country was compassed about
with water, and beaten upon soar with the waves of Nylus. The wall of the
Town withstoode the force of the water but one day. But as soon as the water
increased, and waxed hie, so that it sonke into the ground, by reason that it
was black, and fruitful, and weeted sommewhat deep, and took the Foundation
of the wall, so that the weighte above began to shake, and do as though it
would fall in every place, where the softness of the earth caused it to
shrink, in such sort that al their provision trembled, and the warders upon
the wall were afraid of drowninge, and by that time that it was night, a
part of the wall where the Towers stood, fell down, not so that the fall was
less then the water, nor hable to receive the same, but that it was five
yardes higher, so that almost it put them all in fear of drowninge. Wherefore
there arose a pitiful cry of al manner of folks that were in the City,
Siene a pattern of a miserable besieged City.
so that their enemies might hear it, who lift up their hands to Heaven,
and called to the Gods for healpe, which was all their hope that was
leafte, and humbly besoughte Oroondates to send Messengers to Hydaspes to
entreat of Peace. He was content, now being made the servant of Fortune,
were he never so loathe. But how he should send to his enemies, because the
waters went round about him, he could not tell, but as necessity taught
him. For when he had written what he would, and tied it to a stoane, with
Slinge he cast the same in steed of a Messenger to his enemies, by that
means sent his humble prayers over the Sea. But he lost his labor, for that
the strength of the Slinge could not ouerreach the length of that space, but
fell into the water before it came to them. He cast again in like sort, and
was deceived: so did all the Archers, like such as contended to shoot at sum
mark, and labored to shoot beyond the drowned ground. Last of al they
held up their hands to their enemies that stood on their Fortresses, who
had good game at their miscries, and declared by signs as well as they could,
what those throws meante: sommetime they held up their hands before them,
like such as craved mercy: sommetime would they hold them behind their
backs, in token that they were ready to receive Bands, and becomme their
bondmen. Hidaspes perceived that they desired health, and was ready to grant
it them. For the enemy that yields, does make, and in a manner force a
Noble man to be gentle. But because he had no ready way thereto presently, he
determined to try them better. There were certain Boats which he suffered
to comme out of Nylus into his Ditche, and there he withhelde them. When he had
chosen ten of the newest of them, and furnished them with Archers, and other
armed Soldiers, and told them what they should say, he sent them to the
Persians. They rowed over in good order, that if their enemies would do any
thing that they looked not for, they might be ready to fight. Truly this was
a strange sight, that a Ship should sail from wall to wall, and a Mariner
should practice his skill in the midst of the dry land, and a Beat be
rowed where the Plowe was wont to work. And although the toil of war ever
deuiseth In war be new diuises always.
new things, yet then invented it the straungest thing, when it made those
that were in Ships fight with the^ that stood upon the walls, and joined
two Arms by Sea, and Land together. Those that were upon the walls seeinge
the Boats full of armed men drive near to that part where the wall was fallen
down, being men amazed, and full of fear for their present dangers,
suspected them who came for their safety (because in extremity, In
extremity every thing is fearful.
all that happens is feared, and suspected) and so cast stoanes, and shot
toward the Ships. In such sort deal men that are in a desperate case,
accoumpting every small protractinge of their life, a vauntage. Mary in their
castinge they so directed their hands that they would not hurt them, but
forebidde them the Land. The Aethiopians also shot, but more certainly, and
as men that understood not the Persians mind, and killed them by two or
three at ones, so that sum of them suddenly wounded, fell over the walls
headlonge into the water. And the skirmishe had been worse while the one
spared, and did but defend them from land, and the Aethiopians fought very
angerly, if a certain Old Gentleman of Siene had not comme and spoken thus to
them on the walls: O mad men, and too much amazed with A wise Oration of a
Gentilman of Siene.
your miseries, do we now keep them of, whom we humbly prayed to help us
before, seeinge that they come to us contrary to all hope? who if they come
friendely, and bring us Peace, they shall be our saviors: but if they mean to
deal like enemies, they may with little labor be slain when they be landed:
but what shall we be the better when we have slain these, seeinge that so
black a cloud hangs over our heads both by Water, and Land? why do we
not rather let them comme in, that we may understand what they have to say?
Every man thought that he said well. The Deputy also commended his devise.
Wherefore every man went up and down, and laid his Weapons aparte. When that
space between the Towers was without Defendantes, and the people gave them a
token with a Banner that they were content that they should land, the
Aethiopians came near, and as it were preached out of their ships to the The
Oration of Hidaspes Soldiers besieged in Siene, wherein Hidaspes is commended
for all the virtues requisite or needful for a King.
besieged company thus: Ye Persians, and men of Siene that be here, Hidaspes,
King of the East, and Weast Aethiopians, and at this time yours also, knows
both how to overcome his enemies, and is ready of nature to grant mercy to
the^ that humbly ask it, judging that to be ye virtue of his Soldiers
manhood, but this his own praise and honor proceedinge from courtesy. And
although he have your lives in his hand, either to grant it you, or take it
away: yet because you humble your selves to him, he wills you not to be in
fear, and he will not him self, but gives you leave to appointe what
conditions you will to be delivered from this peril: for he is not minded to
deal Tyrantlike with you according to his own will, but governs man's
estate with mercy without envy. The people of Siene made answer, that they
committed them selves, their children, and wives to him, to do with them as he
should think good, and that they would render up the City also if they
might live, which now was in a desperate case, and utterly lost, except the
Gods, and Hidaspes do preuente the Ruinous decaie. As for Oroondates, he
answered that he would depart from all that for which the war began, and
The folly of Oroondates.
that he would let him have the City Philae, and the Smaradge Mines, but he
made request that he would not deal hardely with him, nor cause him to yield
him self, and his Army. But if Hidaspes would keep all the points of
courtesy, he should give him leave to depart quietly with his Soldiers to
Eliphantina, which should do him no damage, nor lift up any weapon against
him, else he had as lieue die now as to live any longer, and be condemned by
his King for betrayinge his Army: and perhaps that also would be worse,
for that now he should have but a simple and usual death, then he should
happily have new torments devised for him. When he had said thus, they desired
them to take into their company two Persians, under pretense that they should
go to Eliphantina, and if they would yield that were in the Town, he would
do the like without further delaie. With this answer the Legates departed,
and took the two Persians with them, and recoumpted to Hidaspes how they had
said. Who after he had smiled a little, and much blamed Oroondates for his
great foolishness, that he being a man not in his own power, but in an other
man's either to live or die, would argue of any conditions, said: It were very
fondly done, to destroy such a number for one man's madness, and so he let
those depart to Eliphantina that Oroondates sent, as though he cared not if
they made what provision they could to withstand him. But of his own men he
appointed some to make a Damme at the entrance of Nylus, into his Ditche, and
other some to turn the water an other way, that so the water (if there came
no more in) might be the sooner avoided out of the space between Siene, and
them, and the harder to travel in. They began the work a little as they
were commanded, and would have proceeded the next day, but then they could
do no more because of the night that came upon them. Moreover they that were
in the City sought al means they could to save them selves, and were all
comforted with this health that was promised them unlooked for. And those that
made the Mine underneath the ground, drew somewhat near to the enemies
Ditche: which thing they gheassed, because they took the measure of the
space with a Line: other set proppes to stay up the walls, which thing they
might easily do, because of the Stoanes when the wall fell inward. Yet when
they had done all that they could, and thought them selves in saftie, they
were not a little troubled, but about midnight a great part of that the
Aethiopians began to dig before night (whether it were because the ground
was loose, and not thick yenough where the Damme was made, and so the
foundation was thoroughly wetted: or else by reason that the workmen left some
empty place in the ground, and therefore it decayed, or whither the water came
into that place, where was not grytte yenough laid, when the woorkemen were
gone, and so the Damme was broken, by reason that water did increase and swell,
or whether a man may judge it the providence of God, brake and made such a
noise, which so abashed them, that they knew not what was happened, but both ye
Aethiopians, and Sienians thought that the most part of the Walls was fallen
down. They which were in the Tents, kept the^ selves close, because they
were well, and thought they should know what it was in the Morning. But the
Citezins went round about upon the walls, and saying that all was well
there, they thought that their enemies had had some mishappe, until ye morninge
took a way all this doubt, and the breach was espied, and the water
suddenly avoided. The^ did the Aethiopia^s Damme up the entry of their
ditche, and made fludde gates of woodde, and laid many thousand loades of
earth therein, which they fetched as well from the land, as by water in
their boats, and thus went the water away at length, yet could neither of
them come to the other: for the earth was covered with a thick inued, and
under that which seemed to be dry at the top, there was much wetnesse,
which as well deceived men as Horses. So they passed their time two or three
days, and in token of peace the people of Siene set open their gates, and
the Aethiopians laid a side their Armoure. And so was there a truce, yet came
they not together, neither was there kept watch and ward, with either of
them. But they that were in the City gave them Niloa a feast that the
Egyptians keep in the honor of Nylus.
selves to pastime and pleasure, for then it happened that the hiest feast that
the Egyptians have fell, which is kept holy about midsomer, at what time the
Floudde encreasde, and it is honored more then al other for this cause, The
Egyptians feign Nylus to be a God, and the greatest of al* Why Nilus is in
such honor with the Egiptians.
Gods, equal to Heaven, because he waters their Country without Clouds, or
Rain that comes out of the Apre, and thus does he every year without
fail, as well as if it should rain. And this is the common sorts opinion.
But the cause why they gave him so Divine honor is, because they think that
the mixture of moist, and dry is the especial cause of the beginning, and
continuance of man's life (as for the other Elements, they depend upon
these, and are where so ever these be) and they deem that moisture proceeds
from Nylus, and drives from the Earth: but this every man knows also. Mary
their Divines say, that the Earth is Isis, and Nylus, Osiris, geuinge to
either a new name. Therefore the Goddess is very desirous of his company,
and reioiseth when he is with her, but lowreth when he is absent, as if some
unhappy blaste by lightninge had touched her. This tale have the skilful men in
Natures secrets divised, because as I think, they would not make profane
persons privy of the secresies contained therein: but they instruct those
that are desirous to know these priuities in their vestery by Candell light.
And let this suffice to be spoken at this time, by the leave of the Gods, as
for the great secrets they shall not be reveled for reverence sake. Now let
us proceed with that which was done about Siene orderly. When the feast of
Nylus was come, the inhabitants fell to killing of Beasts, and to do
Sacrifice, and for all that their bodies were busied with their present
perilles, yet their minds, as much as they might were godly disposed.
Oroondates waytinge his time, when the Sienians were fast a sleep after
their feastinge, conveyed his Army privily out, for he had secretly given the
Persians warninge before, at what hour and which gate he would go forth,
Every decurion was charged to leave all their Horses and other Cattle behind,
that they might not trouble them in their way, nor make a noise whereby that
they did should be discovered, but every man to take his Armoure, and a Boorde,
or Planke under his arm. When they were comme together, as he had commanded,
he cast the boordes that every man carried overthwart the Ose, and laid them
in such sort that one touched another, and so conducted over his Army with
little pain and great speed, as if there had benne a bridge, for that they
who came after, delivered their boordes to them that went before. When he
came to Oroondates subtle escape from Siene to Elephantina.
land, he went privily by the Aethiopians, who suspected nothing less, nor
kept watch any longer, but sleapte soundly, as fast as his breathe would
give him leave, and went to Eliphantina, and was let in by and by, for that
the two Persians which were sent from Siene (as was appointed) waited for
his coming every night, and when they heard their watch word, they
set open the gates. When it was day the people of Siene first knew of this
escape, suspectinge the same for that every man missed the Persian that was
Lodged in his house, and could not hear of them, and by the bridge which
they saw before the Town. Then was the City in great fear again, and
looked for grievous punishment, for this second injury, because they had
showed them selves so unfaithful, to let the Persians escape, after they had
found such clemency at the Aethiopians hands. Wherefore they determined
every man to go out of the City, and yield them selves to the Aethiopians,
and by Oath to confirm their ignorance, if happily they may move them to
pity. When all of every age were come together, and had taken bows in their
hands, to declare their lowliness and humility, and with Tapers burninge
carried all their Gods, and holy Images in tooken of peace, were come over
that bridge to the Aethiopians, they fell upon their knees and sat a far of,
gave all at once a sorrowful and lamentable cry, crauinge in humble sort the
forgiveness of their offense: and to A pitiful sight.
obtain it the rather, they laid their Infantes before them, sufferinge them
to go whither they would, so asswaginge the wrath of the Aethiopians with
their age, which was without suspicion and blame. Those children for fear
ran from their Parents and Nources with a woonderful cry: sum crepte in
the way which went toward the Aethiopians Host: other lay, and cried
which could not speak perfitely, and would have made any man to take
compassion upon them, because Fortune even in them printed out an humble
estate. When Hidaspes saw this, he thought that they craved mercy in more
earnest sort then they did before, and therefore sent one to know what they
would have, and how it happened that they ran out alone, and not the
Persians with them? They told him all, the Persians Flight, their Innocence,
the Hie Feast of the Country, and how that they privily slipte away while
they were busy in the service of their God, and when they had banqueted, and
were fallen asleep. Whereas perhaps if they had sent them without Armor
they should not have been hable to have stayed them being armed. When Hidaspes
heard this, he suspected (as the trothe was in deed) that Oroondates would
do sommewhat to entrap, and hurt him. Wherefore he sent only for the
Priests, and when he had woorshipped the Gods of greatest price, he asked
them if they could infourme him of any thing that they meante to do, and
whither they were gonne, and where in was their greatest trust. They answered
that they knew nothing certainly: mary they deemed that he was gonne to
Eliphantina, where the chief strength of his Army lay, and that Oroondates
best trust was in his Barde Horses. When they had said thus, they desired
him to go into ye Town as his own, and to take from them all his
displeasure. But Hidaspes would not enter into it at that time, yet he sent
thither two Troops of Armed men, to see whether there were any guile as he
suspected, if not that they should be a Garrison to defend the City, this
done he sent away the people of Siene with gentle promises, and went him self
forward with his Army, either to receive the Persians if they set upon him, or
if they would not, to charge them. He had scante set his men in array, but
his Spialles gave him warninge, that the Persians were cominge in Battle raye
with Banners displaied. Oroondates mustred a great Army at Eliphantina, but
when he saw that the Aethiopians were so near, and he looked not for them so
soon, he was forced to take Siene with a few Soldiers, where he enclosed on
every side, for all that he sued for saftie, and obtained it according to
Hidaspes promise, yet was he the falsest man alive, who caused two Persians to
go over with the Aethiopians, under color that they should enquire, and
know how they of Eliphantina would make peace with Hidaspes, but in deed to
understand whether they made them selves ready to Battle, if he by any means
could escape, which fraudulente, and guilefull devise he put then in practice.
And when he found them well provided, he leadde them forth straighte, and
protracted no time til he came to his enemies, puttinge all his hope in
celeritie, if he might take his enemies unprovided. By this time either Army
had fight of other, and he took the field first with all the Persian
bravery, so that it glistered with their silver and gilte Armoure, as if all
the place had benne on fire. For then the Sun arose, and shining upon the
Persians, gave such a wonderful brightness from their complet Harneys, that it
rebounded upon those that were a great way of. In the right winge of his Army
he placed the Medes, and Persians that dwelled The order of Oroondates his
army.
not far of, in the Forfrunte whereof went those that were surely armed, and
the Archers that were lightly Harnessed came behind them, that they might
shoot the better, being defended by them. In his left winge were the
Egyptians, and Aphricanes placed, and Slingers and Archers with them too, and
them he charged often to break out, and assail the side of their enemies
Battle. Him self was in the midst of his maine Battle, sittinge in a
Chariote very bravely enclosed therewith round about, for his better safety,
before whom were his barde Horsemen, upon trust of whom he ventured to join
with his enemies. For this is a valiant crew, and is set before the other
Army, as if it were a wall that might not be battred. They are armed thus: A
picked fellow How the Persian Horseman is armed.
of great strength puts upon him an Helmet according, which is as sit
for him, as if he should put on a Visarde in a Mask: this covers all his
head down to his shoulders, sauinge that there be holes left for him to look
out at, in his right hand is a great staff, bigger then a Spear, with his
left hand he rules his Horse, by his side hangs a Swoorde, and all his
body is covered with a Jack. And a Jack is made thus: with pieces How a
Jack is made.
of Brass, and Iron, as big as the palm of a man's hand, they make a coat
as it were of seals, layinge the end and sides of each of these upon other
(so that the neithermost part of one, goes over the top of the other) and
so they sow them together, and this lies upon every part of the body
without any adoo: it compasses every iointe, and never lets a man either to
strain out his limbs, or draw them in, for it has s^eeues, and reaches
from the neck down to the knees, saving that necessity forseeth that it be
cut of betwixt the thighs, as one should sit upon his Horse: and such is a
Jack, which beats of all Darts, and keeps of all manner of blows. Over
there legs to their knees, they pull on a Boat which is tied to their
Jack. Like unto this do they arm their Horses too: about his legs they
tie Boots, and cover his head with Frontales of s^eele, from his back down
beneath his belly hangs a clothe with diverse wreathes of Iron, which does
both Arm him, and by reason of the space that is between it hinders not his
course at all. Being thus appointed, and in a manner thrown into his Armoure,
he sits upon his Horse, mary he leapeth not up him self, but other help
him, he is so combred with the weight of his Armoure. And when the time of
Battle comes, he gives his Horse the Raines, and spurreth him with his
heels, and so fast as he can, he rides upon his enemies like a man made of
Iron, or an Image fashioned with hammers. His great staff at the fore end is
tied to his Horse neck with a cord, and the hinder end is made fast to the
buttockes of the Horse, so that in the conflicte it flies not back, but
helps the Horsemans hand, which does but guide the same arighte, and by that
means gives the greater blow, so that it runs through every man that it
hittes, and oftentimes it bears through too men at one blow. With such a
Troop of Horsemenne, and the Persian Army thus appointed, the Deputy set
forward toward his enemies, leauinge the fludde ever behind him, foreseinge,
because he was far inferior to the Ethiopian in number, that the water
should be in steed of a Wall to him, that he might not be compassed about
with his enemies. Likewise Hidaspes brought How Hidaspes ordered his Army.
on his Army, and placed the Soldiers that came from Moroe, being very
cunninge in fightinge hand to hand against the Persians, and Medes in his
enemies right winge. He set moreover against them, who were in his Trogloditae
a people of Aethiopia.
enemies left winge the Trogloditae, which came from that Country where the
Cinnamon grows, being light harnished Soldiers, and excellent swifte of
foot, and cunninge Archers. But against the middell ward, which he heard
was the strongest, he set him self and Blemmies and Seres, are people of
Aethiopia also.
his Elephantes, with Towers on their backs, and the Soldiers that came from
the people called Blemmies, and Seres: whom he instructed what they should
do when they came to fight. When the token was given in the Persian Army with
Trumpette, but in the Ethiopian with Drum and Timbrell, Oroondates set
forward as fast as he could, but Hidaspes at first went as softely as
possible he might, by this mean prouidinge that the Elephantes should not be
far from those that should rescue and defend them, and that the Horsemen in
the middell of his enemies Army, should be tired before they came to strokes,
as soon as they were within danger of shot, and the Blemmies perceived that
the Horsemen were hasty to comme upon them, did as Hidaspes commanded, and
leaving the Seres to see to the Elephantes, they ran a great way before
their fellows toward the Horsemen, that those who saw them would have
thought they had benne mad, that being so few, durst encounter with so many,
and so well Armed. Herewithal the Persians spurred their Horses faster then
they did before, taking their boldness in manner for a vantage, and thought
without more adoo at the first dashe to dispatche them. Then the Blemmies when
they were almost come to hand strookes, and in a manner stock upon their
Spears, suddenly all at once fell down and crepte under the Horses, and
kneelinge with one knee upon the ground laid their heads and shoulders under
the Horses without any harm, sauinge that they were trodden a little with their
feet: But they did a wonderful strange A notable fact of the Blemmies.
thing, for contrary to all men's opinion, they wounded the Horses, and thrust
them in the bellies, as they paste by them, wherewith a great sort fell down by
reason that their Horses for grief would be ruled no longer, and so cast them.
Whom as they lay on heaps, the Blemmies wounded under ye thighs, for ye
Persian Horseman is not hable to stir, if he want his Horse. They which
escaped with their Horses whole, fell into the Seres hands. They as soon as
their enemies came near stepte behind the Elephantes, as behind a great
Tower, and most sure Couerte. There was a great slaughter, so that their
Horsemen were almost all slain. For their Horses being afraid of the
greatenesse, and strange sight of Elephantes showed to them on the sudden,
some turned back, other ran aside, and caused the maine Battle to break
their Array straighte. They who were upon the Elephantes, because every Tower
had six men in itso that on every side, two fought save behind, shot so
continually, and so straighte as though they had shot at sum mark out of
their Towers, and as if they had benne in sum steady Cas^le, so that the
thickenesse of their Arrows was like a Cloud to the Persians: especially for
that the Aethiopians making their enemies eyes their mark, as though they
fought not alike for life, but contended whether were the better Archers, did
so hit their mark, that those who were stricken ran here and there with the
Arrows, as if they had benne Pipes in their eyes. If any of them came against
their wills out of the Array because their Horses would not be ruled, they
fell among the Elephantes, where they died there being overthrown of the
Elephantes, and trodden under their feet, or else killed of the Blemmies, and
Seres who ran out upon them, as if they lay at receip^e behind the
Elephantes, and wounded some with Arrows, and other they killed when their
Horses cast them to the ground. To be short, who so ever escaped, did nothing
worthy talk, nor hurt the Elephantes any whit, for that the Beast is
covered with Iron when he comes to Battle, and if he were not, he has of
Nature so hard The Elephant is almost inuulnerable.
a scale over his body, that no Spear can enter therinto. Lastly, when all
that remained alive were put to flight, the Deputy with shame yenough
foresooke his Chariot, and got him on Horseback and fled, and the Egyptians,
and Aphricanes who were in the left wing^ knew nothing hereof, but fought
manfully, and took more hurt a great deal then they did: mary they bore it
out valiantly. For the Soldiers of the Country out of which the Cinnamon
comes, being set against them, charged them soar, and drove them to such
shifts, that they knew not what to do, because when they set upon them then
would they flee, and runninge a great way before, would turn their Bows
behind them, and shoot as they fled: but if they fled, then would they
pursue them near, and either with Slinges, or little Arrows impoysoned with
Dragons blood anoye the^ greiuously, for every one of them has a round
Wrythe upon his How the Trogloditae wear their Arrows.
head, in which their Arrows are set in order, they turn the feathers toward
their heads, and suffer the Arrow heads to hang out like the beams of the
Sun, then in skirmishe do they take out their Arrows as readily as if they
had a Quiver, and leapinge and daunsinge in and out. Satyr like them selves,
being unarmed, shoot at their enemies, and have no Iron heads upon their
shaftes. For they take a bone out of the Dragons back, Whereof the
Trogloditae make their Arrows.
whereof they make their Arrows an ell long. This done, as well as they can,
they sharpen the same, and make a natural head thereof, so called perhaps ye
boanes that comme out of Greece. The Egyptians maintained the Battle, and
kept their order a great while, and received the shot upon their shieldes,
either for that they be of nature great sufferers, and make their boaste (not
The Egyptians care not for death.
so profitable, as arrogante) that they care not for death, or else fearing to
be pounished if they shrunk from their Standards. But after they heard that
the Horsemen which was the chief strength, and greatest hope of their
battle, were put to slighte, and the Deputy gonne, and that the Meades, and
Persians which were the best Soldiers had done no notable feate, but a little
damage to the men of Meroe, against whom they were placed, and received a
great deal more, and that every man else was fled, they began to leave
fightinge, and turn their backs too. Hidaspes seeinge this not able Victory
out of his Tower, as well as if he had been on the top of an high Hidaspes does
get the victory, and Oroondates flies.
Hill, he sent Heraultes to them that followed the chase, not to kill any more,
but take as many as they could alive: and above all other, Oroondates, which
was done. For the Aethiopians drawinge their maine battles alonge, yet so
that their Array was very thick, turned ye wings round about, and so
enclosed the Persian Army, and left no place for them to flee, but through
the River: into the which when many fell, and were in great danger among the
Chariottes, and other multitude of men, the^ perceived they that that policy
which the Deputy used in the conducte of his Army, was very foolish, and to
no purpose, because at the first when he feared least his enemies should
beset him round about, and therefore so leadde his Army, that Nylus was ever
at their backs, he marked not that he left no place for him self whereby he
might flee. There was he him self taken, at such Achemenes would kill
Oroondates, but is slain him self by an Ethiopian who takes him prisoner.
time as Achemenes Cibeles Son (who by this time heard what news were at
Memphis) went about in that broyle to kill him self (for he repented that he
told any thing of Arsace now) seeinge that all arguments whereby he might
prove the same, were taken away, and yet was deceived, and had not given him a
deadly wound, but he him self straight paid for it, being stricken through
with an Arrow of an Aethipian, who knew the Deputy, and desired to save him as
the charge was given, and was offended that any man in flight from his enemies,
should so shamefully set upon his own fellows, and take that opportunity which
fortune proffered, a time to be revenged of his private adversary. When he was
brought by him that had taken him prisoner, and Hidaspes saw him ready to
sownde, and soar blodyed, which he caused to be stinted straighte with such
things as were provided therefore, because he determined to save him, if he
might, he comforted him thus: I grant you your life with all my heart, for
it is a great praise to subdewe the enemy in the field, as long as he
withstandeth by The especial praise of a notable Captain.
manhood, but when he is ouercomme, with liberality. But what was the matter
that you were so false? I was false to you, answered he, but true to mine
own Prince. Then (quod Hidaspes) what pounishmente think A pretty
communication between Hidaspes and Oroo^dates.
you that you have deserved, seeing that you are overcome? Such as my Prince
ought to take (quod he) of any of your Captains, that had kept their
allegiance to you. Truly (said he) he would commend him, and send him away
highly rewarded, if he be a true King, and not a Tyrante, and is desirous that
other men by his example should do the like. But Sir (said Hidaspes) you
say that you be faithful, but will not confess that you played the fool in
aduenturinge to match so many score thousands. He answered: I did not
foolishly perhaps saying The nature of a cruel and tyrannous King.
I considered my Princes nature, who does more pounish the cowardly Soldier,
then reward the valiant man. I determined therefore to join with you, and do
some woonderful thing contrary to the opinion of men, as the like occasion of
well doing does often happen in war, or if I In war often is occasion
proffered of well doing.
happened to escape, that I might have a good excuse, because I remitted nothing
that I ought to have done. When Hidaspes heard him say thus, he praised him
greatly, and sent him to Siene, and gave the Chirurgians charge to look very
well to him. Him self also entered the Town, with certain picked men of his
Army, and all the men of what sort or age soever they were, of the City
met him, and cast upon him and his Army, Garlandes and Flowers, such as
grew about Nylus, and commended him greatly for his notable Victory. As
soon as he came into the Town, ridinge upon an Elephant Good Kings have ever
had their first and greatest care to serve God well.
in steed of a Chariot, he busied his mind about the service of the Gods,
and sacred things, and asked of the Driginall of the feasts of Nylus, and if
they could she we him any strange thing worthy to be looked on. They showed
him a deep well, which showed the manner of Nylus, like unto that at Memphis
made of hewed What sightes the people of Siene showed Hidaspes.
free stoone, wherein were lines drawn an ell one from an other, into the
which the water of Nilus brought under the earth by a spring, and fallinge
into these lines, declares to the Inhabitauntes the Ebbes and Fluddes of
Nylus, by the number of the Figures, which bare or covered, do plainly tell
the risinge and fallinge of the water thereof. They showed him also the strykes
of Dialles, which made no shadow, because the Sun about Midsomer at Siene,
goinge directly over the point thereof gives no shadow, and by the like
reason it shines upon the water which is in the bottom of their wells.
Hidaspes maruailed not at this as a thing strange to him, for he saw the
like at Meroe: but when they talked of their feast, and praised Nylus
woonderfully calling him the sum, and Author of al fruitefulnesse, the
vpholder of the upper Egypt, and Father and maker of ye inferior, which
brings every year a new inued thither, whereof the Grecians call it Nylus,
and tells them the course of the year, by flowing in Summer, and ebbinge in
Autumn, and the Flowers which grow in it in the spring time, and the brood
of the Crocodiles, and said that Nilus was nothing else but the year. Which
opinion also the name approved, for if you divide the Letters contained therein
into unities, if they be put together will make three hundred sixty and five,
and so many there be days in the year. To be short when they added thereunto
ye properties of the flowers, and beasts that breed thereaboute. Hidaspes
said, This tale does not only belong to Egypt, but Aethiopia also. And
seeing that Aethiopia brings this Flood Nylus runs through Aethiopia,
before it comes into Egypt.
to you, whether it be a God as you think, or a mingle mangle of al other
Flouddes, you have good cause to honor that which is the Mother of your God.
We do so said the Priests, as well for other causes, as that it has given
us a preseruour and a God, When Hidaspes told them that they ought to praise
reasonably, he entered into Siene, and solaced him self in the other part of
the day in Banquetinge with the chief Lords of Aethiopia, and the Priests
of Siene, he gave leave to his Army to do so too. There were great heardes of
beasts, flocks of Sheep, many Goats, and Swine, whereof the Sienians gave
some to the Army, and some they sold. The next day after Hidaspes sittinge
in his Royal Throne, divided to his Army, the Cattle, Horses, and all the other
booty, as well that which he had in the Town, as that he won in the field,
according as every man had deserved. When he was come to him that took
Oroondates, Hidaspes said to him, ask what thon will for thy labor. He
answered: I need ask nothing o King, but will be content with that I
have, if you be pleased there with, which I took from Oroondates, and saved
him according to your commandment: and therewith showed him the Deputies
Dagger set with precious stoanes of great valewe, and woonderful much
woorthe, so that sum of those that stood by, cried out it was too much for
a pryuate man, and a Jewel more fit for the King? Thereat Hidaspes smiled a
little, and said: what can be more meet for a King, then that I should be of
such courage of mind, that I am not moved with his covetousness but despise
the same? beside the Law of Arms gives the victor leave to take what so ever
he finds about his prisoners body, wherefore we give him leave to keep
that, which he might have concealed and we never the wiser. After him came
they who took Theagenes, and Cariclia, and said: o King our booty is not
Gold, nor precious stoanes, which is little woorthe in Aethiopia, and are
cast about by heaps in the Kings Palaice, but we bring you a young Man,
and a Maid, Brother and Sister borne in Greece, which except your grace, are
the talest and fairest Creatures in the world, wherefore we crave, that we
may be partakers also of your large liberality and bounty: well remembered said
Hidaspes, for when you brought them to me, then I looked upon them slightly:
wherefore let some man bring them hither straight, and the other prisoners
also. They were brought out of hand, for that one ran forth to the
impedimentes without the walls, and told the keepers, that they should
bring them to the King forthwith. They asked one of their keepers whole
Father was a Greek, whither they should be carried. He answered, that King
Hidaspes would see them, and therewith as soon they heard Hidaspes named,
they cried out, the Gods be our comfort, because till then they were
afraid, least any other had Reigned. Then said Theagenes softely to
Cariclia, now my heart you shall tell the King of our affairs, seeinge
Hidaspes reigns, whom Great matters may not be slightly handled, and here is
a passinge witty conference between Theagenes and Cariclia.
you have told me often was your Father. Cariclia answered, My dear, great
business must be done with great circumspectio^. For it is necessary that the
ends of those things must be done with many circumstances, whose beginninges
the Gods would have very troublesome, and it is meet not to detect that in a
moment, which has benne long a woorkinge, especially for that the head and
principal point, whereupon this business and invention depends, I mean my
Mother Persina is away, whom by the favor of the Gods we hear is alive
also. But if he give us away to any man, shall he not cut of all occasion,
how we shall come into Aethiopia, said Theagenes? You need not fear that,
answered Cariclia, for we have heard diverse times ere now of our keepers,
that we are keapte to be Sacrificed to the Gods of Meroe, wherefore you need
not doubt that either we shall be given away, or killed before we come there,
seeing we be consecrated to the Gods, which thing godly Good men will not
break a vow to God.
men cannot undo, but if we through this our woonderful mirthe in hope to
speed well, do without consideration tell our estate, saying that they be not
here, who may know and bear witness thereof. It is to be feared least
through our negligence, and that woorthely, we shall incense him that hears
us, and make him angry, who will perhaps also make a mock of it, that we
being prisoners, and appointed to serve, will be so bold to say that we are
the Kings children, and have no probable, but fondly devised Arguments to
prove the same. But the tokens, said Theagenes, which I know you To whom
tokens are tokens.
received and keep about you, will make for us, and declare that we use no
frawde nor falsehoode. Tokens said Cariclia, are tokens to them that know
them, and gave me them, but to those that know them not, and cannot understand
the whole matter, they are but a vain treasure, and perhaps would make them
lay theft and robbery to our charge. And put the case that Hidaspes know some
of them who shall persuade him that Persina gave me them, It is by nature
decreed that every Creature has a marvelous love to that which is engendered
of it self: and this appears most in mankind.
as a Mother to her Daughter? The surest token, Theagenes, that cannot be
denied, is a Motherly nature, by which it comes to pass, that that which
does engender, is pitiefully affected by some secret of nature toward that
which is engendered. Shall we then neglecte these things which may make all the
rest seem true? As they thus talked of these things, they were almost come
into the Kings presence, and Bagoas also was brought with them. As soon as
the King saw them stand before him, he lifted him self up a little from his
Throane, and when he had said: The Gods be merciful to me, he sat down
again, and was in a study. When the Noble men of Persia asked him what he
ailed, he made answer: I thought this last night, that I had a Hidaspes
dream.
Daughter, which suddenly was grown to such a stature as this wooman is of,
and though I took no regard to my dream before, yet now by the beauty of
this maid which is like her, I remember it again. Those who were about him,
said that it was a fantasy of the mind, which oftentimes would foreshewe
things to come. But for that time he made no accoumpte of it, but asked them
what they were, and of what Country borne. Caricha held her peace, and
Theagenes spoke, that they were Brother, and Sister borne in Greece. O Noble
Greece (said he) who doste at other times bring forth good, and honest
Creatures, and at this time haste provided us of good Offeringes to do
Sacrifice for our Victory. But why had I not a Son also in my Dream? (said
he smilingly to them that were by) for as much as reason would that I should
have seen this young man's figure first before the Maids. After this he
turned his talk to Cariclia, and speakinge Greek (which tongue is in price
with the Gymnosophistae, and Princes of Aethiopia) said: Thou Maid, why
dooste thou hold thy peace, and not answer to my question? Cariclia
answered: At the Aultares of the Gods (to whom we understand that we are
kept to be sacrificed, you shall know me, and my Parents. In what Country be
they (said Hidaspes to her again?) They be here (quod she) and shall be
present also when we shall be offered. Thereat Hidaspes smiled, and said: Surely
this Daughter borne to me in my sleep dreams, that her Parents shall be
co^ueied out of Greece into the midst of Meroe. Therefore let these be
carried away, and kept as well as they have benne hitherto, to set forth,
and adourne our Sacrifice. But what is he that stands by them so like an
Eunuche? One of the men that stood by, answered that he was an Eunuche in
deed, whose name was Bagoas. Let him go with these also, not as a Sacrifice
him self, but to see to this other Maid ordained to be offered, that she may
be kept chaste until the time comme that she shall be offered. For Eunuchs are
very ialous, and therefore be appointed to take heed that other do not that,
which they them selves are not hable to do. When he had said thus, he looked
upon all the other Prisoners which came orderly, and told them, sum whereof,
such as seemed were borne to be slaves, he gave away, but such as were of
good Parentage, he let god freely, sauinge that he commanded ten young men
chosen out of all the rest, and as many maids to be carried with Theagenes
for that purpose, when he had answered every man that had need of him. Last
of all he spoke to Oroondates, who was brought to him in a Hidaspes his equal
mind and great ^lemencie to Oroondates, and he is also a perfitte pattern of
all virtues which beseme a King.
Chariot, saying: For as much as I have obtained that about which we made
this war, I am not minded as many are. I abuse not fortune to desire to get
more then other men have, neither will I make me a great Empire, because I have
gotten this Victory, but am content with those bounds, and marks which
Nature made at the first, which part Aethiopia from Egypt by the sluices,
wherein I observe equity, and return, for as much as I have gotten that I
came down for. As for thee, if thou live, be Deputy of as much as thou haste
ben before, and tell the King of Persia that thy Brother Hidaspes has with
hand overcome thee, but through the moderation of his mind has released to
thee, all that was thine, and is desirous to keep the amity which is betwixt
thee, and him (of which thing he makes greatest accoumpte of any thing that
is in the world among men) and wilnot refuse to fight again, if thou shalt
attempt any thing hereafter. As for these people of Siene I release to them
the tributes that they were wont to pay for ten years, and charge, and
command you to do the same. After he had said thus, as well the Citizens, as
the Soldiers that were by thanked him, and clapped their hands so loud that
the noise might be heard a great way of. But Oroondates held up his hands,
and layinge them acrosse, fell down and woorshipped him, which thing the
Persians are never wont to do to any strange King, and said: Ye that be
present, me thinks that I break not the custom of my Country to my King,
if I adore him who has given me a Deputiship, neither do I any evil, if I
do this to the tustest man in the world, who might have slain me: he has
granted me life through his singular courtesy, and although he might have
ceased all into his own hand, yet has he given me my Deputyship again.
Wherefore I promise both the Aethiopians, and Persians if I live, that I will
keep long peace, and continual amity, and perform to the Sienians that
which I am commanded. But if any thing otherwise then well happen to me, the
Gods reward Hidaspes, and his House, and al his Posteritye for the goodness
he has showed to me.

Here ends the Ninth Book.
The Tenth Book.
THus let this suffice to be spoken of that which was done about Siene,
which after it was come into so great a danger, by the clemency, and equity
of one man, suddenly received so good a turn. This done, Hidaspes sent a
great part of his Army before, and went him self into Aethiopia, and the
people of Siene, and other Persians followed him a great way, and praised him
much and made many Supplications for his good, and prosperous health. First he
took his journey on the banks of Nylus, and such other places as were near
unto the same. After he came to Cataractae, and had done Sacrifice to Nylus,
and the other Gods of that Country, he turned aside, and went through the
midst of the Country. When he came to Philae, he gave his Army leave to
rest, and refreshed them selves two days. There again he sent away a
great number of his meanest Soldiers, but tarried him self to fortify the
walls, and place therein a Garrison. This done, he chose two Horsemen which
should ride in post before him, and in certain Towns, and Villages change
their Horses, with Letters to Meroe to certify the^ of his Victory. To the
wise men which are called Gymnosophistae, and are of the Kings Council he
wrote thus:

To the Divine Council Hidaspes sends greetinge. I certify you of the
Victory which I had of the Persians, Hidaspes Letters to the Cou^sailours of
Meroe.
yet I make not any great accou^pt of the success that I had in speedinge so
well, because I consider the chaunges, and unstableness of fortune, but
salute, and commend by my Letters the Priestehoode, which as at all times, so
has it very well at this time told me trothe. Therefore I pray you, and as I
may command you, to come into the place appointed, that with your presence
you may make the Sacrifice more acceptable to all the people of Aethiopia.

And to his wife Persina thus: Understand that we have won the field, and
that Hidaspes Letter to his wife Persina.
touches you most near, are in good health. Wherefore make sum sumptuous
provision to do Sacrifice of thankesgeuinge to the Gods, and when you have
showed the wise men our Letters, and exhorted them to be present, make haste
to be in the field before the City, which is consecrated to our Gods, the
Sun, the Moon, and Bacchus. When Persina had readde this Letter, she said:
Surely this was my dream that I had this night, Persinas dream
I thought that I was with child, and brought forth a Daughter which was
mariageable presently, and I gheasse that my sorrow in travel betokened the
Battle, and my Daughter the Victory. Wherefore go into the City, and tell
them of these ioiful news. The Posts did as she commanded them, and with
Garlandes of the herb Lotos, that grows by Nylus, upon their heads, and
branches of Palm in their hands which they shaked, and showed in the chief
places of the City, upon great Horses, made report of the Victory, and if
they had said nothing else there to, their gesture, and the habit of their
bodies, would have declared the same. Therefore all Meroe was suddenly full of
joy, and the people flocked together, and Sacrificed day and night in every
Family, Streate, and Tribe, and went often to the Churches, and were not so
glad of the victory, as that Hidaspes was well, because that man had by
equity and Hidaspes very well beloved of his Subjects.
courteous usage of his Subjects, so won the hearts of them, that they loved
him as their Father. Persina after she had prepared great droues of Oxen, and
Horses, and many Sheep, Quails, and Griphes, with all manner of other living
things, and sent them before into the sacred field, that of every one kind
of them might be a just Hecatombe, and such as were left should serve for
that public feast, she went to the Gymnosophistae, which dwell in the grove
of Pan, and gave them Hidaspes letters, and prayed them to fulfill the Kings
request in that behalf, and do her a pleasure, and be an Ornament by their
presence to the Sacrifice. They willed her to stay a while, and went them
selves into the Temple to pray, and ask Counsel at the Gods, what was
best to do, and returned by and by. And Sisimithres which was chief of the
Kings Council, said: we will come, Persina, for the Gods command us so to
do: Mary they foreshewe that there shall be a stir and business in the
Sacrifice, but it shall have a very good and delectable end, because that
destiny shall without your travail bring to light a member of your body, and
part of the Kingdom which was lost. All terrible things, said Persina,
shall have the better success, if you be by: And I will send you word, when
I hear that Hidaspes is almost come: you need not (quod Sisimitres) send us
any word when he will come, for to morrow morninge will he be here, and so
shall you have knowledge by his letters anon. And it happened so in deed: for
as soon as Persina was departed, and almost come home to the Kings Palaice,
a post gave her Letters from the King that told her that he would be there
the next day. Then by and by the Contents of these Letters were notified in
the Town, and the men only were commanded to meet them, but the woomen
might not go out of the City, because that the Sacrifice should not be
desiled by any means, in as much as at that time they Sacrificed to the
cleanliest Gods, the Sun, and Moon, and therefore might no woomen be
present, but the Priest of the Moon alone, which was Persina, for that the
King is the Suns Priest, and the Queen the Moons, by the custom of the
Country. Cariclia also should be there, not as a looker on, but a Sacrifice to
the Moon. Then Nilus, Asasoba, and Astabora flouddes of Aethiopia beside Meroe.
was there great adoo in the City, so that the men would not tarry till
day, but labored all the night, to go over the floudde Astabora, some by the
Bridge, other that dwelled a far of in Boats that were made of Reeds,
whereof many grow there on the banks sides: the boats be very swifte as well
for the matter that they be made of, as also for their burden, for they never
carry above two or three persons, for the Reed is cut into two parts, and
of either will they make a Boat. Meroe is Meroe.
the chief City of Aethiopia, in manner of an Island three cornerd, about
the which Nylus, Astabora, and Asasoba do run. At the head is Nylus, and
that is divided into two parts: the other two flouddes run on both sides
one by an other, and meet at length, and fall both into Nylus, by reason of
the greatenesse thereof, which is such that almost it makes the Island
imitate the main land (for it is three hundred threescore and The length and
breadth of the Island wherein Meroe is.
fiuetene mile long, and sixescore and five broad). It ingendreth beasts of
wonderful greatness of al kinds, but especially Elephantes, and as there
grow trees without the travail of men, so does it bring forth much other
fruit. For beside that, there are Palm trees of great height, which bear
stoare of Palms, there is Wheat and other fruit of Aethiopia.
Corn and Wheat of such talenesse, that it will hide a man on Horseback
always, and sometimes though he sat upon a Camele, and it brings forth so
much that they reap three hundred times so much as they sow, and the Reed
that grows there, is such as we spoke of before: so that all that night was
bestowed in passinge over the Rivers: which done, they went to meet
Hidaspes, and received him with great shoutes and clamours, as if he had been a
God, and those went a great way before. When he was almost comme into the
sacred field, the Gymnosophistes came, and gave him their hands, and
welcomed him with kisses. When these had done, Persina met him in the Church
Porche. When they had made an end of their prayers, and thankesgeuinge for his
Victory, and safe return, they made them ready to the public Sacrifice, and
he sat in a Tabernacle made ready before for that purpose: that same was made
of four Reeds, newly The Reeds of Aethiopia are great belike.
cut down, four square, so that at every corner stood a Reed to stay it up
in steed of a Pillar, the top was made round, and covered with diverse
bows, the fairest whereof were branches broken from the Palm trees. In an
other Tabernacle hard by this upon places above were set the Images of that
Country Gods, and the Pictures of Noble men, especially of Memnon, Perseus, and
Andromeda whom the Kings of Aethiopia suppose to be the Authors of their
stock. In other seats beneath sat the Gymnosophistae, and had in a manner
their Gods over their heads: about these stood a crew of Soldiers round,
which with their shieldes before them kept back the multitude, and reserved a
place in the midst for the Sacrificers without al tumulte or disease. As
soon as Hidaspes had in few words declared to the people his Victory, and
what he had done else luckely for the Common Wealth, he commanded them who
had to do with the Holy affairs to begin their Sacrifice. There were The
manner of there Sacrifice.
three Aultars made, two which apperteined to the Sun and Moon were set
together: the third that was Bacchus, was erected a good way of, to him they
sacrificed all manner of living things, because that his power is well known,
as I suppose, and pleases all. Upon the other Aultars to the Sun were
offered young white Horses, and to the Moon, a Yoke of Oxen, by reason that
they help them in their Husbandrye, not far from thence. While these
things were in dooinge, there was a sudden uncertain voice heard (as is
like would be among such a multitude) which cried: Let the Sacrifice which
our Country accustometh to do, be now made for all our safties, then let the
first fruits that were gotten in the war be offered. Hidaspes perceived
that they called for Human Sacrifices, which are woonte to be offered of
those that are taken in strange wars, and beckened with hand, and told
them that he would by and by do what they required: and therewith he
commanded the prisoners appointed for ye purpose to be brought forth, among
whom came Theagenes, and Cariclia not bound, but guarded about with men: all
the other were heavy, and good reason why, sauinge Theagenes, and Cariclia
smiled, and went with a cheerful countenance, and always looked upon
Persina, so that she also was moved therewith, and soar sighinge said: O
Husband, what a maid have you appointed to be sacrificed? I know not whether
ever I saw so fair a Creature? what a stout stomach: what a bewtifull visage
has she? with how courageous a heart bears she this Fortune? how does
she move my mind, by reason of her flowringe age? If the Daughter that I had
by you, which was so evil lost, had lived, she would have been almost as
old as she. But Husband, I would to God ye might deliver her by some means
from this peril, surely I should have great comfort if she served at my
Table and waited upon me. Perhaps also the unhappy Creature is a Greek for
never was there such a face in Egypt. She is a Greek answered he in deed,
borne of Father and Mother, whom she has promised to show at this time, but
I am sure she shall never be able to do that. But that she should be
delivered from this Sacrifice it is not possible, though I would, and yet am I
moved somewhat too with the Maid, and have compassion upon her: You know that
the Law requires a man to be offered to the Sun, and a wooman to the Moon,
and because she was brought me first and ordained for this purpose, the
people would be content with no excuse, only one healpe there is, if she be
found not to be a clean Maid, without medlinge with man, when she shall go
to the fire, seeing that the Law wills that she be as well clean also, that
is offered to the Moon, as he that is Sacrificed to the Sun, as for Bacchus
it made no great matter. But take heed that if she be found to have
accompanied with men, it be no honesty to take her into your house. Then said
Persina, let her be found to have done that, Captivity, War, etc. makes
many evil deeds* to be pardonned.
so she may be saved: Captivity, War, and banished life, so far from her
own Country, excuses her though she have done any such thing, whose
bewty is sufficient to make her to be forced. While she spoke thus, and wept,
but would not have them that were by to perceive so much, Hidaspes commanded
fire to be brought, then were the young Children gathered together, and the
The manner how the Aethiopians tried the Virginity of the young men and Maids
appointed to be Sacrificed.
Priests (which only may touch it without any harm) brought it out of the
Church, and set it in the midst, and badde all the prisoners tread upon it.
All those that trod upon it were burned in the soles of their feet, and were
not hable to abide it any while, there were spittes of Gold laid to the fire,
which was wrought to such purpose, that it would burn every unchaste person,
and him that was forsworn, but such as had lived otherwise, might tread upon
it and have no harm. Wherefore they appointed these to Bacchus and other
Gods, sauinge two or three Maids of Greece, which were found to have
kept their Virginity. After Theagenes also put his foot to the fire, and
was found a Maid, there was great wonderinge, both for that he being so
tale and bewtifull, as also because he was so young and lusty, and had never to
do with any wooman, and so he was appointed to be offered to the Sun. Then
spoke he softely to Cariclia, and said: Is Sacrificinge the reward of such as
live cleanly in Aethiopia, and shall they be slain, that keep their
Virginity? But Cariclia why do you not now manifest your self? What other
time do you look for hereafter? will you tarry till one come to cut our
throtes? utter I pray you, and tell your estate, perhaps when you are known
you shall save me, if not, yet you with out doubt shall be out of danger, which
thing when I see, I shall be better content to die. When she had answered him,
that her time was now at hand, and that the whole estate of her Fortune was
set upon six and seven, she tarried not, till they commanded her, that had
charge of that matter, but put upon her the holy Garment, that she brought
from Delphi, which she always carried in a little Fardell about her, wrought
with Gold, and other costly Iuelles, And when she had cast her hear abroad,
like one taken with Divine fury, ran and leapte into the fire, and stood
there a great while without harm, and her bewty then appeared a great deal
more, so that every man looked upon her, and by reason of her stool thought
her more like a Goddess, then a mortal wooman. Thereat was every man amazed,
and muttered soar, but nothing they said plainly, and woondred beside all
other things that she being more bewtiful then any mortal wooman, and in
her best youth had not lost her virginity: so that diverse in the company
were sorrowful that she was fit to be offered, and would if they wiste
how, gladly have delivered her, for all that they were very superstitious. But
Persina above al other was most sorrowful, so that she said to Hidaspes,
how unhappy is this wenche, which boasts so much of her virginity at such
vnreasnnable time, and must die for all this praise, But Husband, how shall
we do with her? He answered, you trouble me in vain, and for naught take
you pity upon her that cannot be saved, but has benne kept from the
beginning (as may be gheassed) for the excellency of her Nature to the Gods
alone. Then spoke he to the Gymnosophistes, and said: Right wise men seeinge
that all things are ready, why do you not begin to do this Sacrifice? God
defend (said Sisimithres in Greek, that the people might not hear it) for
we have defiled both our eyes, and our ears too much with this that is
done already. As for us we will go aside into the Church, for we our
selves mislike, and suppose that the Gods do not allow such abominable
Sacrifice, as is done with men and woomen, and I would to God that we might
also disalowe and fordoo all the other Sacrifices, What Sacrifice the Gods
like best.
which are made with slaughter, for as much as in our opinion that suffices
which is done with Prayers and other sweet savors. But tarry you (for there
is no doubt but the King must needs be there to appease the people) and do
this unclean Sacrifice, because of the Old customs and Decrees of Aethiopia,
that must needs be done, yet so that you shall have need to purge your self
afterward, and shall scante be hable to do it, I think that this Sacrifice
shall not come to any good end, for diverse causes, but especially for that God
has told me so, and because the fire stands about these Strangers, and
signifies that there is sum God that defends them. When he had said thus,
he and the rest that sat by him arose, and went their way. Then Cariclia
leapt out of the fire, and ran to Sisimithres, and fell flat at his knees
(in spite of the Officers, which would have stayed her, because they thought
that her humility was for nothing else, but to crave that she might not die)
and said: Most wise men stay a while, for I have a cause to plead with the
King and Queen, and must have Judgment thereon, and I hear that you only
give sentence upon such Noble persons. Wherefore abide, and be you judges of
this plea of life and death, for you shall know, that it is neither possible,
nor just to offer me to the Gods. They heard what she said gladly, and
spoke to the King, saying: Hear you o King this appeal, and what this
Stranger requires? Hidaspes smiled a little, and said, what judgment may
this be? or what have I to do with her? by what means should I come in her
danger? That which she will say (quod Sisimithres) shall declare. But (quod
Hidaspes) take heed, least this that you do, be no judgment, but plain
wrong. If I that am King, shall stand to plead with a prisoner. Sisimithres
answered, equity, and justice Sisimithres defines Justice excellently well
with all the duties and points thereof.
have no respect of honor, and estate, but he, speedeth best, that brings
best reasons. Hidaspes said: The Law gives you leave to determine the
controversies between the King and his Subjects, not with Aliens and
strangers. Sisimithres answered: wise, and discrete men do not measure
just things by countenaunces, and outward appearannce, but rather with
equity. Well (quod Hidaspes) let her speak, seeinge it is Sisimithres
pleasure, but it is manifest yt she will speak nothing to purpose, but some
soolishe devised thing, as such as are in extreme peril are commonly wont to
do. Cariclia, though else she were of a very bold spirit, for hope of her
delivery out of these dangers, which she trusted would come to pass, then
was she passinge merry when she heard Sisimithres name, for that was he that
first took her, and gave her to Caricles a ten years paste when he was
sent Embassadoure to Oroondates about the Smaradge Mines, and at that time he
was one of the Gymnosophistae, and chief of all the rest. Then knew not
Cariclia him by his face, because she was separated from him very young, and
but seven years old, mary she remembered his name, and was the gladder for
that, because she trusted that he would be her Advocate, and healpe her to be
known. Therefore she held her hands up to Heaven, and said alowde that all
might hear: O Sun, the fonnder of my Ancestors petygree, and ye other
Gods, and Noble men, you shall bear me witness that I say nothing but
truth, and healpe me in this place, to which I will bring due proof: and
there begin. Do you command, o King, strangers, or this Country men
to be offered? Strangers (quod he). Then is it time (said she) that you
seek other to be Sacrificed, for you shall find me to be one of this Country
borne, and your Subject. He marueiled at this, and said she lied. Soft
(quod Cariclia) you wonder at small things, there be greater matters then
this, for I am not only one of this Country borne, but of the Blood Roial.
Hidaspes despised her words, and turned away as though they had been to no
purpose. Then (quod she) Father, leave of thus to despise, and refuse your
own Daughter. Therewith the King not only despised her, but waxed very
wroth, accoumpting that judgment a great scorn, and intolerable wrong,
and said: Sisimithres, and the rest, how long shall she abuse my over great
patience? Is not the maid stark mad? who of singular boldness with lies
seeks t avoid death, and says she is my Daughter, as if it were in a
Comedy, and this but of a desperate mind, and fond devised matter? For my
part (as you know) I never had so good luck, as to have a Child, only ones
it was told me that I had one, but I lost her by and by. Wherefore let me
carrye her away that she delay the Sacrifice no longer. No man shall carrye
me away, Cariclia said, except the Judges command, and you your self are
judged now and do not judge, nor determine. Perhaps o King the Law suffers
you to kill Strangers, but neither this Law, nor the Law of nature will,
that you kill your own Children, for the Gods shall prove this day that you
are my Father, though you say naie. Every controversy in Law o King stands
upon two points especially, that is to say, proof by writings, and
confirmation by witnesses. I will bring both to prove that By Writings and
witnesses is every controversy is Law determined.
I am your Daughter, for a witness I will bring none of common sort, but him
self the Judge, for the Judges opinion makes greatly on his side that
pleads any matter: And I will lay before you a writing which shall tell you
both mine and your estate. As soon as she had said this, she took her
Fascia, that she carried about her, and unfolded it, and gave it to Persina.
As soon as she saw it, she was straight so amassed that she could say
never a word, and looked a great while upon that which was written therein,
and the maid together, so that for fear she trembled, and sweat sore, and
was glad of that she saw, mary she was much troubled with the
suddenness of the chance, which happened in such sort as no man would believe
it. Beside this she feared if it were opened, least Hidaspes would suspecte
somewhat, and be too light of belief, or angry and perhaps pounishe her, in
so much that Hidaspes seeing her so amazed, said: Wooman what means this?
Does ought contained in this writing, thus trouble thee? O King, my Lord
and Husband (quod she) I have nothing to say thereto, but take it and read
it your self, the same shall teach you well yenough: and as soon as she had
given it him, she satte down again very sad. When Hidaspes had it, and had
called the Gymnosophistae to read it with him, he ran over the same, and
marueiled much thereat him self, and perceived well that Sisimithres was
abashed, and that six hundred thoughts arose in his mind, so that he looked
often upon the Fascia, and often upon the Maid: When he had readde all, and was
thoroughly instructed as well of her exposition, as the cause thereof, he said: I
know well that I had a Daughter, which for all that it was told me she was
dead, and Persina said so her self also to me, yet now I know that she was
sent abreade to seek her Fortune. But who was he that took her up, saved
her, and nourished her thus, or who was he that carried her into Egypt? Was he
taken with her? to be short, how may I know that this is she, and whether
that which was cast forth be not dead, and some man when he happened to find
this, would abuse his good luck, and give them to this Maid, and make her
play this part, and so scorn the great desire that we have, to have a
Child, by suborninge some chaungelinge, and couloringe the truth with this
Fascia. To this Sisimithres answered, I can resolve you of your first doubt:
for I am he that took her up, and kept her secretly, and carried her into
Egypt, when you sent me Ambassador thither. You know well yenough that we
may not lie. And I know this Fascia, which is written with the letters of
the Kings of Aethiopia: Wherefore we need not doubt, that it was devised
any where else, and you have good cause to know it, because it is written with
Persinas hand. But there were other tokens also that I gave to him, who
received her of me, which was a Greek, and by seeminge a good and honest man:
I have them also said Cariclia, and so showed them the Iuelles, with which
sight Persina was more astonished then she was before. And when Hidaspes asked
her what they were? and whether she knew any of them? Gave him none other
answer, but that she knew them, mary it was better to make further trial of
these things at home. Then was Hidaspes troubled again, and almost beside him
self: but Cariclia said these tokens my Mother gave me, but this King is
yours, and then she showed him the Pantarbe. Hidaspes knew it, for he gave it
to Persina, when he was betrothed to her, and said: these tokens be very good
and mine own, but yet I know not that you have them as my Daughter, and have
not come by them by any other means. For to omit other things your color
is strange, and the like is not seen in Aethiopia. She was white too (said
Sisimithres) that I brought up, and the term of years does well agree with
the age of this Maid, for that the time of the exposition was seuentiene
years agone, and she is seuentiene years old, more her eyes will prove no
less, and all the habit of her body is like her that I saw at that time.
Sisimithres (quod Hidaspes) you have said very well, and rather have defended
this cause as an Advocate, then satte upon it in Judgment: but beware that
while you go about to take away part of this doubt, you charge not my wife
with a very hard matter. How is it possible by reason, that saying we be
both Aethiopians should begette a white Child? Sisimithres then looked aside
upon him, and smilinge scornefully, said: I cannot tell what ayleth you, that
you presently be thus affected, that you obiecte this Patrocinie to me as a
fact worthy blame, which I think I ought not to neglect. For we Who is
the best Judge.
call him the best judge which is a Patron and defender of equity: but why
do I not rather defend you then the Maid? saying that I have proved you to
be a Father by the healpe of the Gods. And should I now despise her, whom I
have kept for you from her Cradell? But think as you will of us, we pass
not a point. For we So ought all good men to live.
live not to please other men, but seek to content our own consciences,
with only honesty, and mere equity. As touching your question of her color,
the Fascia answeareth you, that Persina conceived such a Figure by looking
upon Andromeda, when you had to do with her: if you desire to be fully
satisfied herein, and be made to believe without denial, the Picture is at
hand, look upon Andromeda, who is as well expressed in the Maid, as in the
Picture without any difference. This said: the Officers brought the Image
which was carried away before, and when they had set it by Cariclia, there
was such a shoute among the people, by reason that those who were near, told
them that were a far of, and could not hear what was done, that for joy
they wiste not what to do. So that Hidaspes also could not distruste any
longer, but stood a great while, what for joy and woonderinge, still and
sturred not. Yet (quod Sisimithres) we want one point, strippe up your
sleeue Maid, for there was a black spotte above your Elbowe: it is no shame
to be stripped for trial of your parents and kindred. Cariclia uncovered her
left arm, and about it there was in a manner a mole, much like to the
strakes, that Elephantes have. Persina could rule her self no longer,
Cariclia known to be Hidaspes his Daughter.
but suddenly went out of her Throne, embraced her and wept, and for the
exceedingnesse of her joy, which she could not conceal, she made a
certain muttering, and she wanted but little, to have fallen with Cariclia.
Hidaspes had pity upon the wooman, when he saw her lamente so, and him self
was like affected in his mind too, but he kept tears out of his eyes, as if
they had been made of Iron or Horn, and so looked upon that which was done. And
although his mind was moved as well with a Fatherly affection, as with a manly
courage, so that he was drawn both ways, yet he was at length ouercomed of
Nature overcomes all things
nature, which overcomes al things, and did not only suffer him self to
be persuaded that he was a Father, but was also affected like a Father: so that
when he saw Persina fell with her Daughter, he took her up, embraced Cariclia,
and with tears, as with an offeringe, made a Fatherly League with her. Yet did
he not foreget what he had to do, but stood still a while and looked upon the
people, which were affected like him, and through joy, and pity wept to
see that strange hap, and would not hear the cries which commanded
silence. Wherefore he stretched out his hand, and bad them be still. And when
All this Oration of Hidaspes, declares what is the duty of a good King.
he had appeased them, he said: Ye that be present, the Gods contrary to
all hope, have declared that I am a Father, as you both hear and see, and that
this is my Daughter it is proved by many arguments: yet do Iowe such good will
to you, and my Country, that without regard either to the succession of my
Blood, or joy that I have to be called a Father, which all by her are like
to ensue, am ready to offer her to the Gods for your behoof: and although I
see you weep, and are affected like men, and have pity upon the untimely age
of the Maid appointed to die, and to see me without al hope of succession
hereafter: yet must I needs, though you say nay, perform the custom of our
Country, and rather have regard to the Soulelike utility, then my private
profit. Surely I know not, whether it be the Gods will to give her to me,
and take her away again at one time (as they did at the first when she was
borne, and now are like to do after she is found) but I leave that to be
scanned by your discretion: for I cannot determine whether they would have
her sacrificed, whom they have bannished into the furthest part of the world,
and by a woonderful chance brought to me again like a prisoner. Which thing
seeinge it falls out thus, though I have not slain her as an enemy, nor
indamaged her since she was prisoner, yet now I know that she is my
Daughter, I will make a Sacrifice of her, if you desire it, without more adoo:
neither will I yield to affection, which in an other Father perhaps deserved
pardon, not be abashed, nor desire you to be good to me, and grant me this
favor that ye Law of nature requires, in sparing her for my fancy, because
we may appease the Gods some other way, but even as you have been like
affected as I, and as sorrowful for my mishaps as your own: so will I make
more accoumpt of your Weal Public, the^ mine own private commodity, without
any respect at all to this misery, neither will I set by sorrowful Persinas
tears, who has now at this time seen her first child, and is a Mother, and
shall by and by be spoiled thereof. Wherefore if you will, leave your weepinge,
and fruitelesse pityinge of me, and let us go to our Sacrifice. Now to thee my
Daughter (for first and last will I call thee by this pleasant name) whose bewty
is peerless to no purpose, and have found thy Parents in vain, which haste
in an ill time happened upon thine own Country, worse to thee then any
strange Land, who haste ben safe in other Countries, but art in danger of
death in thine own, trouble not my mind with sorrowful weeping: but if ever
thou did show thy self to be of stout courage, and Princely mind, now
pluck up thy heart, and follow thy Father, who cannot provide a marriage for
thee, not bring thee to bed in any costly Bowers, but make thee ready for
Sacrifice, and bear before thee, not such Tapers as are used at Bridalles,
but appointed for Sacrifice, and is in will to make an offeringe of thine
unspeakable bewty: and you Gods bear with me, if affection has caused me to
speak any thing scante godly, or religiously, who have both called her my
daughter, and am ready to take her life away. When he had said thus, he
took Cariclia by the hand, and made as though he would have carried her to
the fire upon the Aultars above, and desired them to let the words that he
spoke take such root in their minds, that they would suffer him to do as he
said. The whole multitude of the Aethiopians was moved with this that he
said, and would not suffer him to lead Cariclia one foot farther, but cried
out suddenly alowde, save the Maid, save the Blood Tokens that the people
loved their King well.
Royal, save her whom the Gods will have saved, we thank you, you have
done to us so much as the Law requires, we acknowledge you for our good
King, acknowledge your self to be a Father, the Gods foregeue us this
offense, you shall more displease them if you withstand their will: let no man be
so bold as to kill her, whom they have preserved: you that are ye Father of the
people abroad, be Father in your own house at home also. And six hundred
things like these spoke they to him. Last of al to declare that they would
not let him in deed, they The people will not let Cariclia be Sacrificed.
stepte before him, and would not suffer him to go forewarde, but desired him
to appease the Gods with some other Sacrifice. Hidaspes was content with all
his heart to yield in this matter, and without much adoo to bear this wished
inforcemente, and gave the people leave to wish him joy of his good luck that
he had, whom he saw to be very ioiful, thinkinge that anon they would make an
end of their own accord. But he standing near to Cariclia, said: Dear
Daughter, that thou art my child, both by tokens is proved, and wise
Sisimithres bears witness, but above al, the favor of the Gods has
declared. But what fellow is this, that was taken with thee, and is now at the
Aultare ready to be sacrificed, or how did you call him your Brother when you
were brought into my presence at Siene first? For I think that he shall not be
proved my Son too. For Persina had no more but you at one time. Cariclia
blushed, and cast down her eyes, and said: I told you an untroth in that I
said he was my Brother, but necessity forced me to make that excuse. But what
he is in deed, he can tell you better then I: for he is a man, and therefore
will not be afraid to speak more boldly then I that am a wooman. Hidaspes not
perceiuinge what she meant, said: My Daughter, pardon me, because I have
caused thee to blushe in askinge thee a question, whereto a maid ought not
answer. But sit you in the Tabernacle with your Mother, who will be more
glad of you now, then when you were borne of her, and whereas she is ill at
ease, comfort her with your presence, and tell her your affairs. I will see to
the Sacrifice, and seek out sum other maid, if there be any to be found,
that in your steed may be sacrificed with the young man. Cariclia almost
cried out, when she heard Cariclia by many circumstances declares her Love,
but her Father understands her not.
that the young man should be Sacrificed: yet (because it was best) with much
adoo she concealed her mad affection, and touched the mark again almost,
and said: Sir, you shall not need to seek any other wooman, seeing the people
have remitted through me that part of the Sacrifice. But if any require it,
you shall not only seek an other wooman, but an other man too: if you do not,
the^ must you Sacrifice none other but me with him. God forbid (said he). But
why say you so? She answered, because that the Gods have appointed that I
must both live, and die with this man. Hidaspes not yet perceiving the effect
of the matter, said: Daughter, I praise this your courtesy, in that you have
pity upon this Greek stranger, and your fellow, with whom in your journey you
have fallen acquainted, and desire to save him. But he cannot be delivered from
this offeringe. For neither pity, nor Religion will admit that the custom
of our Country be al broken as concerning the making of sacrifice for victory:
beside this the people will not be content, which scant was moved by the goodness
of the Gods to pity thee. Then said Cariclia, o King, for perhaps I may not
call you Father, if the gentleness of the Gods has saved my body, let the
same gentleness also save my heart, who is my heart. These Gods which have
by fatal destiny appointed this do know very well. But if this will not be
granted, and that the slaughter of this stranger must needs adourne this
Offeringe. Grant me one request, let me kill the Sacrifice, and I will get me
a name of stoutness among the Aethiopians, with a Swoorde which shall be the
greatest thing, and dearest that ever you shall be hable to give me. Hidaspes
was troubled with this, and said: I understand not what this contrariety in
your mind means: who even now did go about to defend, and save the
stranger, and now would with your own hand kill him, as if he were your
mortal enemy: neither do I see what honesty or glory can be in this fact,
for one of your age: but put case there were, yet may you not by the Law, for
this is only lawful for the Priests of the Sun, and Moon, and that not to
all, but to the man that has a wife, and the wife that has a Husband. Saying
it is so your Virginity will not let you have your request, which whereupon
it should grow, I cannot tell. Truly said Cariclia to Persina in her ear,
that need not to let me, for if you will be content Mother, there is one that
can supply that name well yenough. We will be content said Persina merrily, and
God willinge we will Marry thee to such a one, as we shall think worthy
both for you and us. Cariclia spoke more plainly, you need not choose him
that is choosen already, and as she was about to say sommewhat more openly
(for the present peril that she saw Theagenes in before her face imboldened
her, and made her lay aside her Maydenly shamefastness). Hidaspes would hear
her no longer, but said o ye Gods, how seem you to mingle evil things,
and good together to us, that you may lessen one way or other this unlooked
for felicity of mine, in as much as you have given me a Daughter, that I
thought not upon, but have made her in manner mad: for shall we not judge her
foolish, that speak too fond things? She called him her Brother that was
not so. When she was asked what this stranger was, she answered, she knew
him not: then sought she to save him as her Friend, whom she knew not:
which when it was denied her, she besought me that she might kill him as her
most enemy. When this could not be granted her, because it was lawful for
none to do it, but such a one as had a Husband, she said that she was
Married, and named not to whom. How can she have a Husband, whom the fire
declared had never to do with her? except this do err in her alone, which
is the surest rule that the Aethiopians have, and never yet was proved
contrary, and would give her grace, when she trod upon it, to be unburned
though she had lost her Maydenhead. At few words I never saw any but
she, that made the same man her friend, and enemy in one minute of an hour,
and fained to have a Brother, and Husband, which never was so. Wherefore wife
go you into the Tabernacle, and see if you can bring her to her wits
again, which is either made mad of the God that comes to this Sacrifice,
or else is beside her self with too much joy, for the good luck that she
looked not for. And I will go answer the Ambassadors which came from
diverse Countries, and receive such things, as they bring to welcome me home
after my Victory, until they have found out an other to be killed in her
place, whom I have appointed for that purpose. As soon as he had said thus,
he satte in a hie Chair, not far from the Tabernacle, and commanded the
Legates to come, and let him see what they brought, Harmonias the Herault asked
him whether all should comme together, or orderly every Nation by it self.
Let every one comme orderly (quod he) that I may honor every man as he
deserves. Therefore (quod the Heraulte) shall Meroebus your Brothers Son come
first, Meroebus a young King, to whom Cariclia was after promised to wife.
who came even now, but he tarrieth till the Soldiers that be about us do
make him room. Thou dolte (quod Hidaspes) why did not thou tell me of him
presently? seeing thou know that he was no Legate, but a King, and my
Brothers Son that deceased but late, whom I have placed in his Throne, and by
adoption have made mine own heir too? All this I kn^we o King, said
Harmonias, but I thought it best to tarry a time, for if a Heraulte, have
need to do any thing especially he ought to tarry and wait for opportunity
of time. Pardon me therefore I beseech you, if I durst not be so bold as to
break of the pleasant talk, that you had with the Queens. Let him come
therefore now said the King. He went as he was commanded, and came by and
by again with his charge. Then came Meroebus, a tale and proper young man, at
that time coming to man's estate, for he was seuentiene years old, and hier
then all other that were there, and had a comely crewe of goodly fellows that
waited upon him, and the Ethiopian Army with great admiration and reverence,
made him ready way. Neither did Hidaspes tarry in his seat, but arose to
welcome him, and embraced him with a Fatherly affection, and set him beside
him, and taking him by the right hand, said: My Son you come in good time,
you shall beside celebration of this solemn Sacrifice, with me for my Victory,
be Royally Married. For our Gods and the Founders of our stock, and the
other Heavenly personages, have provided me of a Daughter belike which shall be
your wife: The secresies whereof you shall know hereafter, at this time if you
have ought to do with the people under your dominion tell me. Meroebus when
he heard of a wife, what for joy and shame, could not hide him self so in
his black color, but that men might perceive that he blushed, and after he
had stayed a while, he said thus: Father the other Legates that come, will give
you of the best, and most precious things that grow in there Countries: but
I because you have been valiant in Battle, and declared your excellent
manhood in noble Exploytes, have thought it Meroebus presents Hidaspes with
a Champion.
good to give you a like gift hereunto, and therefore I give you a man so well
practiced in bloudsheadde, and war, that there can none be found which
dares to have to do with him: in wrastlinge, and fight with plummettes of
Lead, and in all manner of other exercises so sturdy, that no man is hable to
withstand his strength. Therewith he badde the man come forth. He stepte
out, and fell down before Hidaspes, and was of such stature, being a man of
the old making, that when he stouped to kiss the Kings knee, he was as
high almost as those that stood about him. This done, he tarried not til
he was commanded, but put of his apparel, and stood naked, and made a
challenge against all that would come, either with weapon, or with hand. After
the King saw that none would come forth, though he had made diverse
proclamations, he said: You shall have a gift of us like your self. And then
he commanded to fetch an old Elephante, which was very great. When the
beast was brought, he received it gladly, and the people suddenly fell in a
great laughter being well pleased with the Kings civility: mary after they
had laughed, and iested yenough, it seemed they were ashamed of their fact.
After him came the Embassadoures that the Seres sent, The Seres give Hidaspes
two garments of very strange work.
and brought to him two garments, one Purple, and an other White, the yarne
whereof was spunne of the Spiders that breed in their Country. After these
gifts were received, and they had desired the King that such of their
Country men as were condemned in his prison might be delivered, and had
obtained their suit, the Ambassadors What the Ambassadors of happy Arabia
gave.
of Arabia foelix came and offered to him odoriferous leaves, both of Olives,
and Cinnamon, and other sweet savors that grow in Arabia, woorthe many
talentes, so that every place was full of sweet odours. After these came they
of Trogloditis, and brought Gold, What the Trogloditae gave, and the
Blemmies.
and a couple of Gryphes with Bridles of Gold on their heads. Then came the
Bleminges which carried bows, and arrows made of Dragons boanes, and said:
We bring you, o King, such gifts as are not in value equal to the other,
yet was there good accoumpte made of them (as you can say your self) at the
floudde in Battle against the Persians. They are (quod Hidaspes) more worth
then other of greater price, for these are the cause why the other are brought
us: and then he badde them tell him what they requested. When they desired to
have their tribute abated, he released them of all fourtiene years. This
done, when all were come that had any Message to do, and were as well, or
better rewarded then their gifts deserved. Last there came the Legates of
the The Axiomitae give Hidaspes a strange beast which is here described, and
of the fascion of his body, called Cameloperdalis.
Axiomitae, who paid no tributes, but were his Confederates, and in League
with him, wherefore they reioiced with him for his prosperous, and luckye
viage, and brought him gifts too, and emonge other a beast of woonderful and
rare nature, as big as a Camel, whose color was spotted, and upon his skin
there was like scales, his latter part was very low, and Lionlike, but his
shoulders, forefeete, and breast, were far beyond the proportion of his other
members: his neck was slender, and though the rest of his body was great,
yet was his throat very small, his head was in fascion like a Camels head,
but it was not paste twice so big, as the Lybian Ostriches head, wherein he
rolled his eyes terribly, as if there had benne in them sum read lead: His
gate was never changed, but went not like no beast either of the earth or
water, but he moved his legs on either side both at ones, so that he moved
his right legs, and left legs, not in order, nor one after an other, but
all his half body, with either of them: He was so tame and gentell to be
dealte with all by use, that he would be ruled of his keeper with a little
coarde, and rather follow his will, then the line he was tied in: as soon as
the beast was brought in sight, all the people were afraid, and suddenly
called it of the fascion and principal parts of his body Cameloperdalis, and
it made a great array in all the place about the which the men stood. For
such a chance befell, at the Aultare of the Moon stood two Bullockes, and
at the Aultare of the Sun, four white Horses to be Sacrificed: when the
Monstrous and strange beast came in sight, they were as sore troubled, and
afraid as if they had seen a sprite, and one of the Bulls, which as might
be thought saw the beast alone, and two Horses brake out of their hands
that held them, and ran about as fast as they could, mary they could not
break out of the compass of the Army, because the Soldiers with their
shieldes had made, as it were a wall round, but they ran here and there, and
ouerthrewe all that stood in their way, were it vessel or any thing else, so
that there was a great shoute, as well of those to whom they came for fear,
as also for joy and pleasure that other had to see them ouerrunne their mates,
and tread them under their feet. Wherefore Persina and Cariclia, could not
be quiet in there Tabernacle, but commanded to draw the Curtain aside, and
looked upon that, that befell. There Theagenes either moved with his own manly
courage, or A wonderful active feate of Theagenes.
else sturred forward with strength sent him of God, when he saw his keepers
that attended upon him, dispersed here and there, with the tumulte starte up
suddenly (for before he kneeled at the Aultare, and looked every minute to be
slain) and took up a clefte stick, whereof there lay a great many upon the
Aultare, and leapte upon one of the Horses that was broken loose, and holdinge
him by the mane in steed of a bridell, and with his heels, and the clefte
stick making him to go: followed the Bulle, at the first every man thought
that Theagenes would have benne gonne, and therefore encouraged one an other
that they would not let him go out of compass of the Soldiers. But by that
he did after, they saw he did it not for fear, nor to avoid the
Sacrifisinge: for when he had overtaken the Bull, in very short time, he took
him by the tail, and drove him forward of purpose, to weary him in making him
run faster, which way so ever he went, he followed after him, and with
great skill so took heed to his short turns, that they hurt him not.
After he had acquainted the Bull with this, he rode at his side, so near that
their skins touched, and their breathes and sweatte were mingled together,
and he made them keep so equal a course too, that those who were a far of,
deemed that they had benne made but one, and commended Theagenes to the
Heavens, that had so straungely yoked a Horse and a Bull together. And upon
this looked all the people: but when Cariclia saw it, she trembled and quaked,
because she knew not what he meant, and was as sore afraid of his hurt, if
he should by ill hap have a fall, as if she should have been slain her self,
so that Persina espied it, and said: Daughter, what lackest thou? Thou seem
to be in every danger that this stranger is in. Truly I my self also am
sommewhat moved with him, and I have pity of his youth, and I wish that he
might be saved from this danger, and not be sacrificed, so that the service of
the Gods might not be altogether imperfect, and neglected of us. That is a
ieste in deed (said Cariclia) to wish that he might not die for that cause
that he might not live. But Mother, if you may save the man, you do me a
pleasure. Persina not suspectinge the trothe, but that she was a little in love
with him, said: Although he may not be saved, yet be not afraid to tell thy
Mother what acquaintance thou haste with him, why thou should be so careful
for him, though in deed this be a youthful motion, and seante convenient for
a maid? A Motherly The property of a Motherly nature.
nature knows how to conceal her Daughters fact, and also one wooman an
others escape, because perhaps they are like affected. When Cariclia had very
sorrowfully wept, she said: In this point above all other I am unhappy,
because when I speak to those that are very discrete, and quick witted they
understand me not, and when I tell them my calamities, they think I touch them
not: now am I forced to tell the plain trothe, and hereafter to accuse my
self openly. As she had said thus, and was about to tell her the matter
truly, she was stopped by a great cry of the people again. For Theagenes,
after he had let the Horse run as fast as he could, so long till his
breaste was equal with the Bulls head, he let him go at liberty, and fell
upon the Bulls head between his horns, and cast his arms about his head
like a Garlande, and clasped his fingers on his forehead before, and let the
rest of his body hang down by the right shoulder of him, so that the Bull
in goinge hurt him a little. After Theagenes perceived that he was weary with
the great burden, and his muscules were fainte with too much travel, and
that he came before the place where Hidaspes sat, he turned him self before,
and set his feet before the Bull, who beatte upon his houfes still, and so
tripped him. He being let of his course, and ouercomme with the streangthe of
the young man, fell down upon his head and shoulders, so that his horns
stuck so fast in the ground, that he could not move his head, and his
feet stood upward, with which he sprauled in vain a great while, and by
his feebleuesse declared that he was ouercomme. Theagenes lay upon him, and
with his leafte hand held him down, but lifted his right hand up to Heaven,
and looked merrily upon Hidaspes, and all that were there else, who laughed, and
were much delighted with that sight, and they heard that the Bull with his
lowinge declared the famousnesse of the Victory, as well as if it had benne
declared with a Trumpet. On the other side was a great shoute of the people,
that said plainly nothing that one could vndestande to his praise, but with
their wide throtes, and gapinge mouths (as in like assemblies does often happen)
they seemed to extol him to the Heavens with one consent. Then by
commandment of Hidaspes the Officers ran, and sum brought Theagenes to
him, other tied Ropes about the Bulls horns, and took up the Horse, and
leadde them to the Aultars again. And as Hidaspes was about to say somewhat
to Theagenes, the people both delited with the young man, and singularly
minded to him, ever since they saw him first, and also maruailinge at his
strength, but rather for spite they had at Meroebus Ethiopian Champion, cried
with one voice, let this fellow be matched with Meroebus man, let him that
received the Eliphant have to do with him yt overcame the Bull. And because
they were very instant Hidaspes was content: Wherefore the Ethiopian was
brought forth straight, who looked cruelly round about him, and went on his
tiptoes stretchinge him self, and shakinge his Arms very arrogantly. When he
was come near, Hidaspes said to Theagenes in Greek, stranger the people
wills that you shall have to do with this fellow. I am pleased to do as
they will have me said Theagenes: But in what sort must we be matched? in
wrastlinge quod Hidaspes. Why shall we not rather fight with Swoordes (quod
he) that either I may do some excellent fact, or else with death if I be slain
content Cariclia, who hitherto has concealed our estate, or rather given me my
last farewell. What you mean (quod Hidaspes) to talk of Cariclia I know not,
but you must wrestle, and not fight with weapon, because it is not lawful to
see any blood shed before the Sacrifice be done. Then Theagenes perceived
that Hidaspes doubted least he should be slain, and said: you do well to
keep me for the Gods, and they shall have respect to my business. And then
he took Theagenes wrastleth with Meroebus his man, and overcomes him.
duste, and cast it upon his arms and shoulders that were yet sweaty with the
chasinge of the Bull, and shaked that of, that it stock not fast to his body,
and then stretched forth his hands, and took some footinge, and bente his
legs a little, and stouped low, at a word all parts of his body were
ready, so that he stood, and with great desire awayted for the advantage at
the close. The Ethiopian seeing this laughed irefully, and triumphed
scornefully upon him: and ran suddenly upon him, and with his elbowe hit
Theagenes in the neck, as sore as if he had siriken him with a leauer, and
then drew back, and laughed again at his own foolish conceit. But
Theagenes like a man always from his cradel brought up in wrastlinge, and
thoroughly instructed in Mercuries Art, thought it good to give place at
first, and take some trial of his adversaries strength, and not to withstand
so rude a violence, but with Art to delude the same. Therefore he stouped
lower, and made semblaunce as though he had benne very sorrowful, and laid his
other side to receive the next blow. And when the Ethiopian came upon him
again, he made as though he would have fallen flat upon his face: But as
soon as the Ethiopian began to despise him, and was encouraged well, and
came unadvisedly the third time, and lifted up his arm again to take hold
of him, and puttinge his right arm under his leafte side, and by liftinge up
his hand, ouerthrewe him on a heap, and castinge him self under his arm
pittes, gryped this gorbelly with much adoo, and forced him with his heels to
fall on his knees, and then leapte on his back, and claspinge his feet about
his privy parts, made him streatche out his legs, wherewith he did stay up
him self, and pulled his arms over his head behind him, and laid his belly
flat upon the earth. For this fact the people gave a greater shoute then
they did before, and the King him self could stay no longer, but starte
from his seat, and said: o hateful necessity, what a man are we forced to
kill by our Law? and when he had called him unto him, he said: Young man
there lacks nothing, but that thou be Crowned before the Sacrifice: Surely
this thy famous, and notable Victory, but unprofitable, and not continual to
thee, deserves a Crown. But for as much as I cannot deliver thee from this
present peril though I would, yet will I do all that I may for thee,
without breach of the Laws. And therewith he put a Crown of Gold upon
Theagenes head, and diverse men did see him weep. Theagenes said, then I
require you to let me obtain this request at your hand according as you have
promised. If there be no way to escape this murtheringe, command me to be
killed by the hand of her that is found your Daughter to day. Hidaspes was
bytten with this word, and considered Cariclias request, which was like
this, yet he judged it no great matter to scanne it narrowly at that time, and
said: Stranger, I bad thee ask that which might be granted, and I promised
to perform it: beside, the Law precisely wills, that she that kills the
Sacrifice should have a Husband. She has a Husband too, said Theagenes.
This man is mad, said Hidaspes, and beside him self, and one that has
given over him self to death. The fire declares that she is a Maid
unmarried, and never had to do with man, except you mean this Meroebus (I
cannot tell how you should come by knowledge thereof) which is not yet her
Husband, but I have promised her to him. Neither is he like to be, said
Theagenes, if I know Cariclias mind, and if you will believe me as a
Sacrifice. Good sir, said Meroebus, no Sacrifices that be alive, but such as
be killed, and cut up do with their intralles tell the Southsayers what shall
ensue. Wherefore Father you said well that this strange marchante was mad,
and spoke nothing to any purpose. Therefore if you will, let one carry him to
the Aultare, and when you have dispatched your other matter that you have in
hand, then may you go about the Sacrifice. Then was Theagenes carried as
commandment was given. But Cariclia, who was comforted a little because of his
victory, and hoped for better luck. But when she saw him leadde away, was
then in sorrow again, and Persina comforted her diverse ways, and told her
that he might happen to be saved, if she would tell her the rest more
plainly. Cariclia seeinge the time would permit her to drive of no longer,
told the chief, and principal points to her. That while Hidaspes asked if
there were any more who had ought to say. Hermonias answered, here are no more
bue the people of Siene, which with other presents brought Letters from
Oroondates, and they came but even now. When Hidaspes gave them leave to come
to him, they delivered the Letters, which he opended, and readde, the contents
whereof were:

To Hidaspes the gentle, and fortunate King of the Aethiopians, Oroondates the
great Kings Deputy sends greetinge. Forasmuch as when you overcame me in
Battle, Oroondates letters to Hidaspes.
but more in lofty courage of mind, you gave me a whole Deputiship of your
own courtesy, I shall think it no marvel if you perform a small requiste
now. There was a certain maid who in carriage from Memphis happened to fall
into your hands by chance of war, and it was told me, of such as were
with her, and escaped out of your danger, that you commanded her to be
carried captive into Aethiopia, this wenche I desire you to send me, both for
her own sake, but most for her Fathers, for whom I would see her safe kept,
he has travailed far for her, and in this travel he was taken prisoner in
this time of war by my Soldiers, which lay in Garrison in Eliphantina,
whom I spied, when I took the vewe of those that escaped out of the Battle,
and he desired that he might be sent to your Clemency: You have him such a
man among the rest of the Ambassadors, as may with his manners alone declare
that he is a Gentleman, and worthy only with his behavior to obtain his
desire at your hand. Send him back again to me o King, merry, who is not
called only, but has been ere now a Father too: when he had read this, he
asked which of these is this y^ seeks for his Daughter. They showed him a
certain Old man, to whom he said: Caricles comes into Aethiopia to seek
Cariclia.
stranger I will do any thing at Oroondates request, but I commanded ten
only to be brought hither, and for as much as one of them is known not to be
thine, look upon all the rest, if thou can find her take her with thee.
The Old man fell down and kissed his feet, and after he had looked upon them
al, as they were brought before him, and found her not whom he sought he was
very sad, and said none of these o King is she. You know (quod Hidaspes)
there is no want of good will in me, if you find her not that you seek for,
blame Fortune. For I give you leave to look that neither hers is any other
beside these, nor in the Tents: when the Old man had bente his brows and
wept, he lift up his face, and looked round about him, and suddenly ran
forth as though he had benne mad. And when he came to the Aultare he did
wind his cloak round like a rope (for he had a cloak on then by chance) and
cast it about Theagenes neck, and cried that all men might hear: I have
found thee mine enemy, I have gotten thee thou mischievous and accursed
fellow: And although the Officers would have stayed him, and plucked him from
him, he hanged so fast upon him, that he obtained leave to bring him before
Hidaspes, and the Council. And there he spoke thus: This man, o King, is he
who like a Thief has taken my Daughter from me, this is he who has made my
house desolate, and without any child, he has taken my heart even from the
Aultars of Apollo. And now he sits at the Aultars of the Gods like a good
and devout man. All that were there were moved with that which he did, Mary
they understood not his words, but they maruailed at his work. And when
Hidaspes badde him tell plainly what he meante: The Old man (that was
Caricles) concealed the truth of Cariclia, fearinge least if she were dead by
the way, that he should have much adoo with her true Parents. But he told
that briefly that was little hurtefull in this sort: I had a Daughter,
Caricles tells Hidaspes how Cariclia came out of Greece.
o King, if you had seen how wise, and fair with all, she had benne, you
would have thought that I had good cause to say as I do: She lead her life
in Virginity, and was one of Dianas Priests, which is honored at Delphi:
That Maid this jolly Thessalian, has stolen out of Apolloes Church: as he
came being Captain of a holy Embassage to Delphi my Native City there to
celebrate a certain Feast. Wherefore it may well be deemed that he has
offended also against you, for that he has displeased your God Apollo
(which is all one with the Sun) and defiled his Temple. Furthermore a false
Priest of Memphis was his companion in perfourmance of this his shameful, and
heinous fact. After I had benne in Thessalia, and required to have this
fellow, and they were all content to deliver him to me as a common plague of
their Country, where so ever he were found. I went to Memphis, which I
deemed to be a place whither Calasiris would go, for diverse causes. When I
came thither, I found him dead, as well he had deserved, and was told by his
Son Thyamis, of all that belonged to my Daughter: how that she was sent to
Siene to Oroondates, where not findinge Oroondates (for I came thither too). At
Eliphantina I was taken prisoner, and stayed: from whence I came at this
present in humble sort to seek my Daughter, and you shall do me (unhappy
man) a good turn, and a deed well beseeminge a King, if you will accept the
Deputies request made in my behalf. And then he held his peace, and wept
bitterly to confirm that he said. Hidaspes turned to Theagenes, and what say
you to this (quod he?) Theagenes answered, all that he has laid against me
in this accusation, is true: I am the thief, the unjust man, and the Robber.
As touching him, yet have I done you a good turn. Therefore said Hidaspes,
restoare that which is not your own, that because ye are vowed to the Gods
ye may be a clean, and glorious Sacrifice, and not seem to be pounished for
your offense. Nay Who ought by Justice to make restitution of a wrong.
(quod Theagenes) not he that did the wrong, but he that has the commodity
of it, ought by justice to make restitution. Saeinge therefore you have her,
restoare her, for it is Cariclia, whom he also will confess to be your
Daughter. No man could rule him self any longer, but they were disordred in
every place. Sisimithres, who had withhelde him self a good while, for all
that he knew the whole matter that was in handlinge, till it were boulted out,
which by little and little came to light, then he came to them, and embraced
Caricles, and said: Your Adoptiue Daughter, which I ones delivered you, is well
found, and known to be their Daughter, whom you know your self well
yenough. Cariclia also ran out of the Tabernacle like a mad wooman, without
regard what became of her kind and age, and fell at Caricles feet, and said:
O Father, no less dear to me, then those that begat me, take what revenge you
will of me, without any regard to the excuse, which sum man might allege
that it was the Gods will, and their dooinge. Persina on the other side
kissed Hidaspes, and said: Husband, judge that all this is so, and be sure
that this young Greek is your Daughters Husband. The people in an other
place reioiced, and almost daunced for joy, and with one consent were all
glad of that which was done: mary all they understood not, but gathered
the most part of Cariclia. Perhaps also they were sturred to understand
the trothe by inspiration of the Gods, whose will it was that this should fall
out woonderfully, as in a Comedy. Surely they made very contrary things
agree, and joined sorrow and mirthe, tears and laughter together, and
turned fearful, and terrible things into a joyful Banquette in the end,
many that wept began to laughe, and such as were sorrowful to rejoice,
when they found that they sought not for, and lost that they hoped to find,
and to be short the cruel slaughters which were looked for every moment,
were turned into holy Sacrifice. Then said Hidaspes to Sisimithres: Right wise
man what must we do? to refuse the Sacrifice of the Gods is a wicked act,
but to offer them which they have provided for us is the duty of deuaute men:
we must therefore bethink us what is best to do. Whereto Sisimithres
answered not in Greek, but in the Ethiopian tongue, that all might Too much
joy blinds the wisest men oftentimes.
understand him, thus: Through too much pleasure, o King, the wisest men
are oftentimes blinded, you might have perceived at the first that the Gods
liked not the Sacrifice which was ordained, who have now every way declared
that happy Cariclia is your Daughter even at the very Aulters, and have brought
him, that brought her up, out of the midst of Greece, as it had benne of
purpose: They have feared and troubled the Horses and Bullockes too, that
stood before the Aultars, whereby they declared that the greater Sacrifices,
which have benne used emonge our Auncesters should now cease, and be used no
more. And beside, declared this young Greek to be the Maids Husband, which
may be the end and conclusion of this Comedy. Let us therefore suffer these
divine Miracles to sink in our minds, and be healpers of their will, and do
more acceptable Sacrifices to them, and leave murtheringe of men, and woomen
for ever hereafter. After Sisimithres had said thus so loud that all might
hear him. Hidaspes who understood also the tongue wherein he spoke, took up
Theagenes and Cariclia, and said: Seeinge that these things benne thus
appointed by the will and pleasure of the Gods, I think (how seems it to
you that be here also) that it is not good to strive against them: Wherefore
before them who have preordained this, and you also which seem with your
consent to follow their fates and destintes, I wish that Theagenes and
Cariclia, are married by consent of Hydaspes, and are made Priests, he the
Suns, and she the Moons.
these two may increase and grow in wedlock, and give them leave to rejoice
either other, that they may engender and have Children. And if you shall
think it good let this decree be confirmed with Sacrifice, and let us fall
to woorshippinge of the Gods. The Army consented thereto, and with clappinge
their hands gave a Sign that they were contented with the match. Hidaspes
then came to the Aulters, and ready to begin Sacrifice, said thus: O Sun
our Lord, and Lady Moon, for as much as Theagenes, and Cariclia are declared
to be Man and Wife by your good wills, I am sure you will accept of their
Offeringes, and suffer them to do Sacrifice to you. This said, he took of
his own Miter, and Persinas, which were the notes of their Priesthood, and
set one upon Theagenes head, which was his own, and the other upon
Cariclias that was Persinas. When this was done, Caricles remembered him self
of the Oracles answer at Delphi, and saw that fulfilled in deed, which was
promised before of the Gods. Which was, that after they fled from Delphi,
they should come at length to Country scortche, with burninge Phoebus beams:
The Prophecy in the end of the second Book fulfilled.


Where they as recompenses dew,
that virtue rare do gain:
In time to come ere it be long,
white Miters shall obtain.
Thus after they had on these white Miters, and were made Priests by the
voice, and opinion of Hidaspes, and had done Sacrifice very well, they road
in Chariottes drawn with Horses, Hidaspes and Cariclia in one, Sisimithres and
Caricles in an other, and Persina with Cariclia in the third, but theirs was
drawn with two white Oxen to Meroe with great joy, and melody of
Instruments of Music, to accomplish the secreter affairs of Wedlock in the
City for more solemnities sake.

Thus ends the Ethiopian History of Theagenes and Cariclia, the Author
whereof is Heliodorus of Emesos a City in Phoenicia, Son of Theodofius,
which fetches his Petigree from the same.

The end of the tenthe and last Book of Heliodorus Ethiopian History.

