THE FIRST PART OF THE LIFE AND reign of King Henry the IIII.

Extending to the end of the first year of his reign.

Written by I. H.

Imprinted at London by John Woolfe, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near to the Exchange. 1599.

Illustrissimo and honoratissimo Roberto Comiti Essexiae and Ewe, Comiti
Marescallo Angliae, Vicecomiti Herefordiae and Bourchier: Baroni Ferrariis de
Chartley, Domino Bourchier and Louein: Regiae Maiestati Hyppocomo: Machinarum
bellicarum praefecto: Academiae Cantabrigiensis* Cancellario: ordinis Georgiani
Equiti aurato: Serenissimae Domino Reginae a sanctioribus consilijs: Domino meo
plurimum obseruando.
APs ka gennaiott: optimo and Nobilissimo (inquit Euripides) ex qua sententia
tu primus ac solus fere occurrebas (illustrissime comes) cuius nome^ si Henrici
nostri front radiaret, ipse and laetior and tutior in vulgus pr^diret. Magnus
si quidem es, and presenti iudicio, and futuri temporis expectatione: in quo,
veluti recuperasse nunc oculos, caeca prius fortuna videri potest; Dum cumulare
honoribus eum gestit, qui omnibus virtutibus est insignitus. Hunc igitur si
laeta front excipere digneris, sub nominis tui vmbra (tanquam sub Aiacis
clipio Teucer ille Homericus) tutissime latebit. Deus opt. max. celsitudinem
tuam nobis, reique publicae diu seruet incolumem: quo nos vz. tam fide quam
armis potenti tua dextra defensi, vltique, diutina cum securitate tum gloria
perfruamur.

Honori tuo deditissimus. I. HAYVVARDE.

Faults escaped in the Printing
Page. Line. Fault. Read. 11 23 played plied 15 13 pleases please 16 20
present presents 19 22 sport sort 19 24 tempored tempered 37 10 weedlesse
needelesse 41 18 cause fame 43 13 too two 44 13 in reporting to reporting 53 08
moved enforced 55 04 this his 55 05 challenged chalenging 57 27 else or else 65
20 carried carry 70 13 lenety leuity 71 35 Bush Bushie 75 05 officers of so
long offers of so large 75 12 Castle Trim Castle of Trim 75 32 of the one, by
the one, 77 32 at men to men 79 25 increased incensed 86 13 Thirminges
Thirninges 86 15 Lophane Lopham 88 32 confessed confused 100 10 taking raking
102 30 or violence or conceal violence 107 35 is no more it is no more 127 06
resistance assistance 127 27 Redding Reading 130 24 he had that he had 131 05
hardly shortly 131 24 was not he was not 131 27 blood bold 148 21 retained he
retained

A. P. to the Reader.
AMong all sorts of humane writers, there is none that have done more profit,
or deserved greater praise, then they who have committed to faithful records
of Histories, either the government of mighty states, or the lives and acts of
famous men: for by describing the order and passages of these two, and what
events has followed what counsels, they have set forth unto us, not only
precepts, but lively patterns, both for private directions and for affairs of
state: whereby in short time young men may be instructed, and old men more
fully furnished with experience then the longest age of man can affoorde. And
therefore Cicero reports that L. Lucullus, when he went from Rome to make
war against Mithridates, was altogether unskillful in Military services: yet
in the time of his Navigations he so exercised himself what with conference,
and what with reading of histories, that when he came into Asia, by the
judgment and confession of that great King, he was preferred before all the
commanders that were before him. Heerevppon when Alexander Seuerus did
deliberate of any weighty matter, he would especially take advise of men
skillful in histories, and not without good cause: for if (as Afranius says)
experience has begot Wisdom, and Memory as a mother has brought it forth;
who are to be better accounted then they whose memory is as it were a rich
storehouse, of the experiences not of one age or Country, but of all times and
of all nations. And therefore it is no great marvel that Zenobia, who after
the death of her husband Odonatus took upon her the state, not only insulted
upon the Romans, but held the Arabians, the Saricenes, the Armenians, and
other fierce and intractible people, in such obedience, that although she were
both a woman and a Barbarian, yet they never stirred against her: for she had
perfectly red the Roman history in Greek, and also had herself abridged the
Alexandrian and all the Oriental histories, whereby she attained the highest
pitch both of Wisdom and authority: for examples are of greater force to stir
unto virtue, then bare precepts, insomuch as Cicero said that nothing could be
taught well without example. Therefore the Lacaedemoians (as Plutarch writes)
did use upon feastiuall days to present unto their Sons certain drunken
slaves whom they called (...): that by view of the vice they might learn to
avoid it, and Hismenias the Thebane, would show to his Scholars musicians of
all sorts good and bad, instructing them to follow the one and not the other.
And this is that which the Apologily tells of a certain Country woman, who
being hard favored, and fearing least she should bring forth children like
her self, got many fair and beautiful Pyctures, which she did daily and
steedfastly behold: the meaning whereof it, that by setting before us the
acts and lives of excellent men, it is the readiest way to fashion our
qualities according to the same.

Hereupon Cicero does rightly call history the witness of times, the light
of truth, the life of memory, and the messenger of antiquity. Hereby we are
armed against all the rage and rashness of Fortune: and hereby we may seem
(in regard of the knowledge of things) to have traveled in all Countries, to
have lived in all ages, and to have been conversant in all affairs. Neither is
that the least benefit of history, that it preserves eternally, both the glory
of good men, and shame of evil. Some Philosophers do deny, that glory is to
be desired: for virtue (say they) is a reward unto it self, and must not be
respected for the vain and titulare blastes of glory: yet in writing these
things, they affect that especially, which they especially deprave. And indeed
there is no man has so horny hartstringes, (as Persius speaks) who is not
tickled with some pleasure of praise: again there is no man of so flinty a
forehead, who is not touched with some fear of infamy and shame. Do we think
that the valiant soldier thinks no toil too tough, but boldly aduentureth
the hazard of all happes, because he is weary of his life? death comes by
nature to all men alike, only with difference of memory with posterity.

And I would think that Cities at the first were builded, laws made, and
many things invented for the use of men, chiefly for desire of glory: which
humor except the old governors of common wealths, had thought necessary, they
would never have fostered it as they did, with Garlandes, statues, trophies and
triumphs, in which notwithstanding it is but temporary and short; but in
histories of worth it is only perpetual. This Cicero perceiving he dealt with
Luceius to commit his actions to the monuments of his writings: and Pliny the
younger did wish that he might be mentioned in the histories of Cornelius
Tacitus, because he did foresee that they should never decay.

But these are such as are not led away with a lust, either to flatter or to
deface, whereby the creadite of history is quite overthrown. Yet the endeavor
to curry favor is more easily disliked, as bearing with it an open note of
seruility, and therefore Alexander when he heard Aristobulus read many things
that he had written of him far above truth, as he was sailing the flood
Hidaspis, he threw the book into the River, and said that he was almost
moved to send Aristobulus after for his servile dealing: but envious carping
carries a counterfeite show of liberty, and thereby finds the better
acceptance.

And since I am entered into this point, it may seem not impertinent to write
of the style of a history, what beginning, what continuance, and what mean is
to be used in all matter; what things are to be suppressed, what lightly
touched, and what to be treated at large: how creadit may be won, and suspicion
avoided: what is to be observed in the order of times, and description of
places and other such circumstances of weight; what liberty a writer may use in
framing speeches, and in declaring the causes, counsels and euentes of
things done: how far he must bend himself to profit: and when and how he
may play upon pleasure, but this were too large a field to enter into:
therefore least I should run into the fault of the Mindians, who made their
gates wider then their town, I will here close up; only wishing that all our
English histories were drawn out of the dross of rude and barbarous English:
that by pleasure in reading them, the profit in knowing them, might more easily
be attained.

THE FIRST PART OF THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING Henry the fourth, Extending to
the end of the first year of his reign.
THe noble and victorious Prince, king Edward the third, had his fortunate gift
of a long and prosperous reign over this realm of England; much strengthened
and adorned, by natures supply of seven goodlye sons. Edward his eldest
son, prince of Wales, commonly called the Black Prince: William of Hatfield:
Lyonel, Duke of Clarence: John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster: Edmund of Langley,
Duke of York: Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester: and William of
Windsore. These sons, during the life of their renowned Father, were such
ornaments and such stays to his estate, as it seemed no greater could be
annexed thereunto. For neither armies, nor strong holds are so great defenses
to a prince, as the multitude of children: Fortes may decay, and forces
decrease, and both decline and fall away, either by variety of fortune, or
inconstancy of men's desires: but a man's own blood cleaves close unto him;
not so much in the blisses of prosperity, which are equally imparted to
others, as in the crosses of calamity, which touch none so near, as those that
are nearest by nature. But in succeeding times they became in their offspring*
the seminary of division and discord, to the utter ruin of their families,
and great wast and weakening of the whole Realm: for they that have equal
dignity of birth and blood, can hardly stoop to terms of sovereignty, but
upon every offer of occasion will aspire to endure, rather no equal then any
superior, and for the most part, the hatred of those that are nearest in
kind, is most dispitefull and deadly if it once break forth. The fear of
this humor caused Remulus, to embrewe the foundations of the City and Empire
of Rome, with the blood of his brother Remus. According to which example, the
tyrants of Turkey, those butchers of Satan, do commonly at this day begin
their reign, with the death and slaughter of all their brethren.

Prince Edward, the thunderbolt of war in his time, dyed during the life of
his father. And although, he was cut off in the middle course, and principal
strength of his age, yet in respect of honor and fame he lived with the
longest, having in all parts fulfilled the measure of true Nobili^e He left
behind him a young some called Richard, who after the death of King Edward,
was Crowned King in his stead, and afterward died childe-lesse.

William of Hatfield king Edwards second son, dyed also without issue,
leaving no other memory of his name, but the mention only.

Li^^^ll Duke of Clarence, the third son of King Edward, was a man of comely
personage, of speech and pace stately, in other qualities of a middle
temperature, neither to be admired nor contemned, as rather void of ill
parts, then furnished with good. He had issue Philip his only daughter, who
was joined in marriage to Edmunde Mortimer, Earl of March: Who in the
Parliament holden in the eight year of the Reign of King Richard, was in the
right of his wife, declared heir apparent to the Crown, in case the King
should die without children but not many years after he dyed, leaving issue
by the said Philip, Roger Mortimer Earl of March. This Roger was slain in the
rude and tumultuous wars of Ireland, and had issue Edmund Anne, and Elienor.
Edmund and Elienor dyed without issue. Anne was married to Richard Earl of
Cambridge, son to Edmund of L^ngley Duke of York, the fifth son of King
Edward. Of these two, came Richard (...) Duke of York who by the right
^^uolued to him from his mother, made open claim to the Crown of England,
(which was then possessed by the family of Lancaster) first by law, in the
Parliament holden the thirtieth year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth:
where either by right or by favor, his cause had such furtherance, that after
King Henry should die, the Crown was entayled to him, and to the heirs of
his blood for ever. But the Duke impatient to linger in hope, chose rather to
endure any danger then such delay: Whereupon he entered into arms soon after,
against King Henry in the field. But being carried further by courage, then
by force he could bear through, he was slain at the battle of Wakefield,
and left his title to Edward his eldest son: who with invincible persistance
did prosecute the enterprise, and after great variety of fortune at the last
achieved it.

John of Gaun^ Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Son of King Edward the third,
was a man of high and hardy spirit, but his fortune was many times not
answerable, either to his force or to his forecast. He had two sons, Henry
Earl of Derby (of whom I purpose chiefly to treat) and John Earl of
Somerset. This John was Father to John Duke of Somerset, who had issue
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother to the noble Prince, Henry the seventh.

Henry Plantagenet Earl of Derby, was likewise by his mother Bla^ch extracted
from the blood of Kngs, being descended from Edmund the second son of King
Henry the third: by which line: the D^chie of Lancaster did ^^cre^e unto his
house. He was a man of mean stature, well proportioned, and formally compact:
of good strength and agilitie of body, skillful in arms, and of a ready
dispatch: jointly showing himself both earnest and advised in all his actions.
He was quick and present in conceit, forward in attempt, courageous in
execution, and most times fortunate in event. There was no great place of
employment and charge, which he would not rather affect for glory, then
refuse either for peril, or for pains; and in service he often proved
himself not only a skillful commander by giving directions: but also a good
Soldier in using his weapon, aduenturing further in person sometimes, then
policy would permit: his expenses were liberal and honorable, yet not
exceeding the measure of his receiptes, he was very courteous and familiar
respectively toward all men, whereby he procured great reputation and
regard, especially with those of the meaner sort: for high humilities take
such deep root in the minds of the multitude, that they are more strongly
drawn by unprofitable courtesies* then by (...) benefits. In all the changes of
his estate, he was almost one and the same man: in adversity never daunted, in
prosperity never secure: reteining still his majesty in the one, and his
mildnes in the other: neither did the continuance of his Reign bring him to a
proud port and stately esteeming of himself, but in his latter years he
remained so gentle and fair in carriage, that thereby chiefly he did wear out
the hatred that was borne him, for the death of King Richard. He could not
lightly be drawn into any cause, and was stiff and constant in a good: Yet
more easy to be either corrupted or abused by flattering speeches, then to be
terrified by threats. To some men he seemed too greedy of glory, making small
difference of the means whereby he attained it: and indeed this humor in
noble minds is most hardly ouer-ruled, and oftentimes it draws even the
(...). But before I proceed any further in describing either the qualities, or
acts of this Earl, I must write something of the Reign of King Richard the
second, his cousin german: so far forth as the follies of the one, were
either ca^fer or furtherances of the fortunes of the other.

Richard son to Edward Prince of Wales, a little before deceased, was, after
the death of King Edward the third; Crowned King over this Realm of England,
in the eleventh year of his age* at which years the mind of man is like to
the po^^teis earth, apt to be wrought into any fashion, and which way so ever
it hardneth by custom, it will sooner break then bend from the same. Now the
governance of the King at the first was committed to certain Bishops, Earls,
(...), and Justices. But either upon (...) the King, or negligence to
discharge their duty* (...) was more ready with pleasant (...) to delight
(...) then with profitable counsel to do him good* for smooth and pleasing
speeches need small endeavor, and always finds favor: whereas to advise
that which is meet, is a point of some pains, and many times^ thanklesse
office. Herr^ upon two dangerous evils did (...) In, and private respects did
pass under public (...).

In the third year of his Reign; it was thought meet that this charge
should be committed to one man, to avoid thereby the unnecessary wast of the
treasure of the Realm, by allowing yearly stipend unto many. So by the whole
consent of the nobility and commons assembled together in Parliament, this
office was deputed to Lord Thomas Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick, and a
competent pension was assigned him, out of the Kings Eschequer for his pains.
But the King being now plunged in pleasure, did i^^^deratly bend himself to
the favoring and aduansing of certain persons, which were both reproueable in
life, and generally abhorred in all the Realm, and this was the cause of two
great inconveniences: for many young noblemen and brave Courtiers, having a
nimble eye to the (...) and dislikes of the King, gave over themselves, to a
dissolute and dishonestlise, which finds some followers when it finds death
no furtherancers, much more when it does flourish and thrive: the King also by
favoring these, was himself little favored and loved of many: for it is
oftentimes a dangerous to a Prince, to have evil and odious adherents, as to
be evil and odious himself. The names of these men were Alexander Ne^ill,
Archbishop of York* Robert Ve^^^, Earl of Oxford: Michael (...), afterward
Earl of Suffolk: Robert Tri^iliane, Lord chief Justice, Nicholas Brambre
Alderman of London; and certain others, of no eminency either by birth or
desert, but obsequious and pliable to the Kings youthful humor. These were
highly in credit with the King: these were always next unto him, both in
company and counsel: by these he ordered his private actions: by these he
managed his affairs of state: he spared neither the dignity nor death of any
man; whose auctho^^ie and life withstoode their preferment. In so much as in
the fifth year of his Reign, he removed Sir Richard Seroop^, from being Lord
Chauncellor of England (to which office he was by authority of Parliament
appointed) because he refused to set the great Seal, to the grant of
certain lands, which had wantonly passed from the King: alleging for his
denial, the great debts of the King, and small demerites of the parties, upon
whom the King might cast away and confirm, but spend in good order he could
not: aduertising him also to have respect, that ryote did not deceive him under
the term and show of liberality: and that gifts well ordered procure not so
much love, as placed without descretion, they stir (...). This Chancellor was
a man of notable integrit^ and diligence in his office, not scornfully turning
away from the ragged coat of a poor suppliant, or pale face of a fickely and
feeble (...), holding up their simple soiled bills of complaint, not yet
smothering (...) with partial (...) of (...) mighty* but being alike to all,
he was (...) disliked of (...).

In the eight year of this (...), the destruction of the duke of Lancaster was
extended likewise upon the like dislike: the plot was laid by Justice (...),
offenses were devised, appello^s appointed, and pe^res named; ^e should have
been put under (...), and forthwith ^^^^igned, condemned, and executed* But
the duke upon (...) intelligence of these continuances, fled to his castle at
Pomfret, and there made preparation for his defense against the king. So this
matter began to grow to a head of division, which the common people at that
time very busily desired and sought: but the kings mother traveling (...)
between the king and the duke (notwithstanding she was both (...)) (...) them
both to are con^^lement: the king, with regard of the dangerous and discontend
times: the duke with respect of his duty and faith: and so partly by her
entreaty and advise, partly by their inclination bending to the (...) course,
all apparancy of displeasure on the one part* and a (...) on the other, was for
that time laid aside.

The same year Michael D^lapoole was made Clancellour of England, and created
earl of Suffolk: and Robert Veer^ earl of Oxford was created Marquess of
Dubline, being the first man within this realm that was e^obled with that
(...). But (...) they grew in honor, sordid they (...) hate: for many noble
men did infinitely stomach their undeserved aduancements, and with these the
favor of the people generally went: but the kings intemperate affection was
peremptory, (...) not regarding (...) could not resist it.

The year next following, Robert Veere the new Marquis was created duke of
Ireland. This year the Knights and burgesses of (...) put up many: complaints
against the Earl of suffolk, upon which they (...) his (...) trial: namely
(...) he (...) the (...) in taking of him to farm all the profits (...) crown
thou wantonly he wasted the treasure of the land in (...) liberality, and
unnecessary charges: how deep he had diued into the kings debt: how careless
and (...) in his office: how greatly he had (...) deceived and (...) the king
in (...) dealing and (...) particularly (...): with diverse other (...) dishonor
and dishonesty, both in private actions and in office. This (...) was a
merchants son in London, and growing mighty on the sudden, he could not
govern himself in the change: but (...) lay (...) of his mind, which were
suppressed and (...) rulle^^ng (...), with (...) he made (...) of his (...).
Yet the king was willing, either secretly to dissemble, or openly to (...)
these (...): and so passed them over with a short audience (as his manner was in
matters of (...) weight) (...) with the complaint. Afterward, a (...) but
answer was made that this needed not; since the kings wants might be furnished
with the debts which were owing him from his Chancellor: neither was it to any
purpose, so long as the (...) ordered by such (...) as before it had been*
(...) was like: (...) the matter against the (...), and the king persuaded
(...) honorable not safe to bear him out, that to private men it was
sufficient if themselves abstain from wrong, but a prince must provide that
none do wrong under him: for by mainteining, or wincking at the vices of his
officers, he makes them his own, and shall surely be charged therewith when
first occasion does serve against him. At the last, upon instant importunity of
both houses, the king did consent, that a commission should go forth to
certain noble men, giving them authority to hear and determine all matters
which were objected against the L. Chancellor: and then was a Subsidy
granted, with excepti^n, that the money should be expended by the Lords, to
the benefit and behalf of the realm. The king did further demand, that the
heirs of Charles Bl^ys, who made claim to the duchy of Britain, should be
sold to the French men for thirty thousand marks, and the money granted to the
duke of Ireland, for recovery of those possessions which the king had given him
in Ireland: this was likewise assented unto, upon condition, that before Easter
then next ensuing, the duke should depart into Ireland, and there remain: at
so high a price did they value the riddance of him out of the realm.

The charge of the Subsidy money was committed to Richard earl of Arundell,
Commissioners for the earl of Suffolk, were appointed, Thomas duke of
Gloucester the kings uncle, and the said earl of Arundell: but during the time
of their proceeding, the king kept all off, in places far distant: either to
manifest thereby the dissent of his mind, or to avoid the grief which his
neerenesse would increase. And now was the Chancellor left unto himself, to
answer to those demeanures, wherein he made the kings blind favor his
privilege and protection, supposing never to see the same either altered or
ouer-ruled. In the end, being convict of many crimes and abuses, he was deposed
from his office, his goods were confiscated to the kings Exchequer, and
himself was adjudged worthy of death: Yet was execution submitted to the
kings pleasure, and under sureties he was permitted to go at large. At the
same time John F^^rd^ Bishop of Duresme, another of the Kings dainties, was
removed also from being Lord Treasorer of England, he was a man of little
depth, either in learning or wisdom, but one that had the Art of seeming, in
making the best show of whatsoever he spoke or did: and rising from mean
estate to so high a pitch of honor, he exercised the more excessiuely his
ryote, avarice and ambition, not able to moderate the lusts and desires which
former want had kindled.

When this business was blown over, the King ^^turned again to London, and
did presently receive the Earl of Suffolk, with the Duke of Ireland, and the
Archbishop of York, to greater grace and familiarity then at any time before.
These Triumuirs did not cease to stir up the Kings stomach against those
Noble men, whose special excellency had made matter of fame and regard:
partly for the disgraces which they had received, partly upon malicious
emulation, to see the other so favored, and themselves so odious, and that
their private choler and ambition might bear some show of public respect,
they suggested unto the King, that he was but half, yea not half a King in
his own Realm, but rather the shadow and picture of a King: for if we respect
(said they) matters of state, you bear the sword, but they sway it, you have
the show, but they the authority of a Prince, using your name as a color and
countenance to their proceedings, and your person as a cipher, to make them
great, and be your self nothing. Look to the duty of your subjects, and it
is at their devotion: so that you can neither command nor demand any thing,
but with such exceptions and limitations as they please to impose, come now to
your private actions: your liberality (the greatest virtue in a prince) is
restrained, your expenses measured, and your affections confined, to frown and
favor as they do prescribe. What Ward is so much under government of his
Guardian? Wherein will they next, or can they more abridge you? Except they
should take from you the place, as they have done the power of a Prince: and in
this we think, they may iusty be feared, having so great might joined with so
great aspiring minds. For power is never safe when it does exceed: and
ambition is like the Crocodile, which grows so long as he lives; or like the
Iuie, which fastening on the foot of the tallest Tower, by small, yet
continual rising, at length will climb above the top, it is already grown
from a spark to a flame, from a twigge to a tree, and high time it is that the
increase were stayed: oftentimes such ouer-ruling of Princes have proceeded to
their overthrowing, and such cutting them short has turned to cutting them
off, their minds are suspicious, their power dangerous, and therefore the
opportunity must be prevented.

The Kings own weakness made him apprehensiue, and framed his mind to a
vain, and needless fear: but chiefly he was moved at the remoouing of his
Chancellor and Treasorer out of their offices, and of the Duke of Ireland out
of the Realm, supposing it a restraint to his princely power, that he might
not absolutely and in things give or forgive as his pleasure served. When these
pr^^ie incensers perceived the Kings humor once sharpened, they so played him
with plau^ible persuasions, that (although he was naturally of no cruel
disposition, as wanting courage) yet they drew him to many violent and ^^direct
courses, partly upon negligence to search out the truth, partly upon delight to
be flattered and smothly used, neither did they long defer their devises:
and first it was appointed, that the Duke of Gloucester and certain others of
that part, should be invited to a supper within London, and there suddenly
surprised and made away. Sir Nicholas Brambre, who the year before had been
Mayor of London, and in whom abundance of wealth supplied the want of honest
qualities, was a busy agent in this butcherly business: but Richard Extone
the Mayor of the City that year, discovered the practice by whom the Duke
was warned both to avoid the present peril, and afterward to be wary of the
like.

The year next following, Richared Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Mowbraye Earl
of Notingham, had the conduct of a Navy committed to their charge: in this
viage they took above a hundred sail of the enemies ships, fraughted with
Wines, and well appointed for fight: they also relieved and fortified Breast,
and took two fortes which the Frenchmen had raised against it. The Earls so
behaved themselves in this service, that they grew to a very great estimation,
both for courtesy among their Soldiers, and for courage against their enemies;
and their actions were the more famous, by reason of the unfortunate
insufficiency of other Co^manders, by whose either rashness or cowardice many
good Soldiers were daily defeated, and every year made notorious by one loss
or other. Yet notwithstanding all their good labor and luck, they were at
there turn, entertained by the King, with great straungnes, both of
countenance and speech. Who was so unable to dissemble his dispight, that he
could hardly defer it, until the heat of the honor and love which they had
won, were somewhat abated. So much are men more inclinable to revenge
displeasure then reward desert: for it is troublesome to be grateful, and
many times chargeable: but revenge is pleasant, and preferred before gain.

About the same time, Robert Duke of Ireland forsook the company of his
lawful wife, whose mother Lady Isabel was daughter to King Edward the third,
and in steed of her he took unto him a base Bohemian, a Tauerners daughter.
The King little regarded this indignity done unto his cousin, and in so great
confusion of the state, let it pass unreproved, as ouershadowed with greater
vices, but the Duke of Gloucester her uncle, took it in high disdain, as
injurious to the royal blood, and did attend upon occasion to work revenge,
this was not secret from the Duke of Irelande, who likewise bent al his
devises to bring the Duke of Gloucester to his overthrow. The Duke of
Gloucester did prosecute this enmity, openly and manlike: the Duke of Ireland
closely, and therefore the more daungerously. The Duke of Gloucester was
greater in blood, the Duke of Ireland in favor: he being Uncle to the King,
this bearing himself as the Kings fellow. The Duke of Gloucester pretended for
the state, the Duke of Ireland for the King: and much private malice did pass
under these public shows: but in opposition of such equal powers, there is
many times final difference in harm.

And now was Easter past, the term affigned to Duke Robert Veere for his
departure into Ireland: and least his stay might breed some stir within the
Realm, he still busied himself in preparation for his journey, and at last
(although it were long) made a solemn show ofsetting forth. The King went in
great state to accompany him to his shipping; and the Earl of Suffolk, with
Justice Trisiliane, and the residue of that faction, either for favor
followed, or for fear durst not stay hehinde. So they passed together into
Wales, and (whether upon leuitie the Kings mind changed, or whether it was so
contrived at the first to draw themselves more separate from the Lords) there
the Dukes iornie was at an end. Then they entered into counsel, which way the
Lords might best be suppressed: many devises were deeply debated, all pleased
without respect either of danger of disgrace: but few stood with likelyhoode
of event to their desires, and therefore none was finally concluded. After long
time thus friuolously spent, they left Wales, and came to the Castle of
Notingham, where the King caused the high Shirifes of all the Shires in the
Realm to be called before him, and demanded of them, what strength they could
make on his part against the Lords, if need should require: their answer
was, that the common people did so favor the Lords, and were so well resolved
of their love and loyalty toward the King, that it was not in their power to
raise any great power against them. Then they were commanded, that no Knights
nor burgesses should afterward be chosen to any Parliament, but those whom
it pleased the King to appoint; whereto they said, that it was a hard matter
in those times of Jealousy and suspicion* to bereave the people of their
ancient liberty in choosing Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, some
few other matters being either unreasonably required, or obtained to small end,
the Sherifs were licensed to depart. Then were assembled Robert Trisilian,
chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Rob^rt Belk^^pe, chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, John Holte, Roger Stilthorpe, William Burgh, Knights and Justices
also of the Common Pleas*, men learned in one rule chiefly, without difference
of truth of falshoode, to please those in highest place, entituling that
wisdom, which indeed was but baseness and feeblenes of mind; these were
charged by the King upon their faith and legrance, to make true and full
answer to those questions following.

1 First, whether the Statute ordinance and commission, made and set forth the
last Parliament (whereby was meant the commission aganst Michael Delapoole Duke
of Suffolk) did derogate from the royal prerogative of the King.

2 Item, they who procured the said Statute etc. to be made* and set forth,
^ow are they to be punished?

3 Item, how are they to be punished, who provoked the King to consent to the
premises?

4 Item, what punishment have they deserved who compelled the King to consent
to the said statute etc.

5 Item, how are they to be punished, who resisted or let the King in
exercising his royal power, by remitting any penalties or debts whatsoeu^r*

6 Item, when a Parliament is assembled, and the affairs of the Realm, and
the cause of assembling the Parliament, by the Kings commandment declared,
and common^ Articles limited by the King, upon which, the Lords and commons in
the said Parliament should proceed: if the Lords and commons will proceed upon
other Articles, and not upon the Articles limited by the King, until the King
has first given answer to the Articles propounded by them, notwithstanding
that the contrary were enjoined by the King* whether in this case the King
ought to have the rule of the Parliament, and so to order the fact* that the
Lords and commons should first proceed upon the Articles limited by the
King, or that they should first have answer of the King, upon the Articles
propounded by them, before they proceed any further?

7 Item, whether may the King when he pleases dissolve the Parliament, and
command the Lords and commons to depart* or no?

8 Item, since the King may a^ his pleasure remove any of his Officers and
Justices, and punish them for their offenses: Whether may the Lords and
commons without the Kings will, accuse his Officers and Justices in Parliament
for their offenses, yea* or no?

9 Item, what punishment have they deserved, who (...) in Parliament, that the
Statute whereby King Edward Carnaruane was deposed, should be brought forth, by
view whereof, the new Statute ordinance and commission aforesaid were framed?

10 Item, whether the judgment given in the last Parliament holden at
Westminster, against Michael Delapoole Duke of Suffolk, was erroneous and
reuocable, yea, or no?

These questions or rather quarrelles were drawn by John Blake, a Counceller
at the Law, by direction of Justice Trisilian, whilst the King made his stay
in Wales: to the which the Justices aforementioned, some in discharge of their
own malice, and some to satisfy the minds of other, made answer as
follows.

To the first, that they did derogate from the prerogative of the King, because
they were against his will.

To the second and third: that they are to be punished by death, except it
pleases the king to pardon them.

To the fourth and fifth: that they are worthy to be punished as traitors.

To the sixth: that whosoever resists the kings rule in that point, deserves
to be punished as a traitor.

To the seventh: that the king may at his pleasure dissolve the Parliament, and
whosoever shall afterward proceed, against the kings mind, as in a
Parliament, he is worthy to be punished as a traitor.

To the eighth: that they can not, and whosoever does the contrary, he
deserves to be punished as a traitor.

To the ninth: that as well the motioner as also the bringer of the said statute
to the Parliament, are worthy to be punished as traitors.

To the tenth, they answered: that the said judgment seemed to them erroneous
and reuocable in every part. In witness whereof, the justices aforesaid, with
John Locktone, the kings sergeant at law, have subscribed and set their seals
to these present, etc.

When these bloody sentences of death and treason, were under general and
large terms thus fastened upon the lords, the king supposed his attempts
against them, whether by violence, or by color of law sufficiently warranted:
but his power both ways, as it was terrible against weak resistance, so
against such mighty defendants it was of small force to effect that which he so
much affected. Yet he did not omit his best endeavor: and first, accounting the
lords as condemned persons, he made division of their lands and goods among
those that he fauououred. Then he waged soldiers to be in a treadinesse for
his assistance, and sent the earl of Northumberland to arrest the earl of
Arundell, at his castle in Reygate, where he then lay. But the earl of
Arundell, either upon advertisement, or suspicion of the kings mind, band^d
himself so strong, that when the earl of Northumberland came unto him, he
dissembled his intent, and left his purpose unperformed. Thus were these
proceedings of the king, as now in counsel, so afterward in event, not much
unlike that which the Fable tells of a certain hunter, who first sold the
skin of the bear, and then went about to take her: but when he came within
the forest, either by unskillfulness or misaduenture, he not only missed his
pray, but fell himself into danger of the beast.

The duke of Gloucester having secret intelligence of the kings displeasure and
of his drift, sent the bishop of London to persuade the king to entertain a
more favorable opinion of him: making faith to the bishop with a solemn oath,
that he never intended any thing to the prejudice of the king, either in person
or state. The Bishop not unskillful to join profitable persuasion with honest,
declared to the king that his displeasure against the Lords was not grounded
upon just desert, but either upon false suggestions of their enemies, or
erroneous mistaking a^ some of their actions: how desirous they were of his
grace and favor: how faithful and forward they promised to persist in all
dutiful service: how honorable this agreement would be to the king: how
profitable to the realm: and how dangerous to both, these troubles might
increase. The king seemed to give good ear and credit to the bishops speech:
but Michael Delapoole, a turbulent man, and against quiet counsel obstinately
contentious, standing then by the king, soon stiffened his mind against all
impression of friendship. Hereupon contention did arise between the Bishop
and the Earl, and brake forth violently into heat of words. The Earl applied
to the Lords those objections wherewith great men are usually charged: sparing
no spite of speech, and using all art to aggrauate matters against them. The
bishop replied that the Earl was thus fiercely bent, not upon his own
necessity, nor love to the king: but only to satisfy his bloody and ambitious
humor, wherein he was so immoderate, that rather then the lords should not be
destroyed, he would ouerwhelme them with the ruins of the state, for tumults
might in deed be raised by men of little courage, but must be maintained with
the hazard, and ended with the loss of the most valiant: that neither his
counsel in this matter was to be followed, being the principal firebrand of
the disturbance, not his complaints against any man to be any thing regarded,
being himself a condemned person, and one that held both his life and honor
at the pleasure of the king. At these words the king was exceedingly wroth, and
charged the bishop with menacing and threats to avoid his presence. When the
duke of Gloucester had knowledge hereof, he signified the danger to the earls
of Arundell, Warwick, and Derbie, aduising them to take arms, and unite
themselves for their common defense: for in so doubtful and suspected peace,
open war was the only hope of safety. These three Earls were the chiefest
strength to the side, but the Duke bare the most stroke, because he was most
bold, and his greatness almost obscured the names of the rest. On the other
side, the king thinking separate dealing the only way to weaken a confederacy,
endeavored to prevent the lords in joining of their forces: and to that end he
sent a strength of men with charge, either to set upon the earl of Arundell
where he did lie, or to intercept him in his passage toward the Duke. But the
Earl had traueiled all the night before their coming, and so happily escaped
to Haringey park, where he found the Duke and the other Earls with a
sufficient company, as well to make attempt, as to stand upon resistance.

When the king heard hereof, he was disturbed and distracted in mind, being
now in choice either to relent or to resist, whereof he much disdained the one,
and distrusted the other. His followers also were divided in counsel: some
fretting at the disgrace, and some fainting at the danger. The Archbishop of
York persuaded the king, that occasion was now offered to show himself a King
indeed, if he would muster a royal army, and by maine might beat down the
boldness of this presumption. NIHIL DICTV FACILIVS, said another: This is more
readily devised, the^ done: the army against us is mighty, and the commanders
are great men, both for courage and skill, and greatly favored of the common
people: whereby that which is accounted so ready pay, may chance to prove a
desperate debt. Therefore it were better with some yielding to enter into
conditions of quiet, then by standing upon high points of honor to hazard the
issue of a battle, wherein the King cannot win without his weakening, not
loose without danger of his undoing. There was then in presence, a certain
old Knight, called Sir Hugh Linne, a good Soldier, but a very mad-cap, and
one that lived chiefly upon the liberality of noble men; by vain iestes
affecting the grace of a pleasant conceit: of him the King demanded in mirth,
what he thought best to be done? Sir Hugh swore, swownes, and snayles, let us
set upon them, and kill every man and mothers child; and so we shall make
riddaunce of the best friends you have in the Realm, this giddie answer more
weighed with the King, then if it had been spoken in grave and sober sport:
and thus it often happens, that wisdom is the more sweetly swallowed, when
it is tempored with folly, and earnest is the less offensive, if it be
delivered in jest. In the end, the devise of raising arms was laid aside, not
as displeasing (being so agreeable to former proceedings) but as despayring to
prevail thereby; and the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishop of Ely
being Lord Chaunceller, were sent unto the Lords, to understand the cause of
their assembly: answer was made, that it was for the safety of themselves;
the honor of the King; and the overthrow of them which sought the overthrow of
both. At the last it was concluded by mediation of the Bishops, that the Lords
should come before the King at Westminster, upon promise of his protection, and
there have audience concerning their griefs: the Bishop of Ely also making
private faith, that he would discover any danger that he could discrie, a little
before the time they should come, the Bishop of Ely sent word, of an awaite
that was purposed to be laid for them, at a place called the Mewes, near
London; aduising the^ either to make stay, or to come prepared: but rather to
make stay, least further provocation might make reconcilement more hard,
hereupon they came not at the time appointed, and the King maruailing at their
failance, enquired the cause of the Bishop of Ely: who answered, that the
Lords found want of true meaning, and that they neither did, nor durst repose
assurance in the Kings word, which they saw to be used as a means to entrape
them, the King made the matter very strange unto him, affirming with an oath
that he was free from deceit, both in consent and knowledge: and in a great
rage, he commanded the Sherifes of London to go to the place, and slay all
those whom they found there in a wait. Whether this was but a countenance of
his, or whether he was not privy to the practice, it is not assuredly known,
and in deed, the matter was not false, but the place mistaken: for Sir Thomas
Trivet, and Sir Nicholas Brambre had assembled many armed men at Westminster,
with direction to assault the Lords at their best advantage: but perceiving
their deceit to be discovered, they dissolved the company, and sent them
secretly away to London.

Then the Lords, upon new faith for their security, came to the King at
Westminster, and yet in faith they brought security with them, such troops of
men, as in a place where they were so entirely favored, was able to defend
them, in any sudden tumult or danger: the King upon their coming entered
into Westminster Hall, apparelled in his royal robes: and when he was placed
in his seat, and had composed himself to majesty and state, the Bishop of
Ely Lord Chaunceller, made a long Oration to the Lords in the Kings name.
Wherein he declared, the heinousness of their offense, the greatness of their
peril, how easy a matter it had been for the King to have levied a power
sufficient to distroy them; and yet for the general spare of his subjects
blood, and in particular favor to the Duke and other Lords, he made choice to
encounter and overcome them, rather by friendship then by force: and therefore
was willing, not only to pardon their ryote, but also to hear their griefs,
and in a peaceable and quiet manner to redress them. The Lords alleged for
causes of their taking arms, first the necessity of their own defense!
secondly, the love both of the King and of the Realm, whose fame and fortune
did daily decline, by means of certain traitors, who lived only by the
dishonours of the one, and decays of the other, those whom they challenged for
traitors, were Robert Veere Duke of Ireland, Alexander Neuill Archbishop of
York, Michaell Delapoole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trisiliane Lord chief
Justice, Sir Nichol^s Brambre, and certain others, somewhat secreter, but
nothing better: and to justify this appeal, they threw down their gloves,
and offered themselves to the trial by combat. The king replied, that often
times the causes of actions being good, yet, if the means want moderation and
judgment, the events prove pernicious: and therefore, though these complaints
were true, yet were these courses not tolerable, which did bear an open face
of rebellion, and by licentiousness of the multitude, might soon have sorted
to such an end: for it is more easy to raise the people, then to rule them:
whose fury once stirred, will commonly be discharged some ways. But (said he)
since we have broken this broile, we will not by combatting give occasion of a
new: but at the next parliament (which he appointed should begin the third day
of February then next ensuing) as well you, Crastino purificationis.
as they, shall be present, and justice indifferently done unto all. In the
mean time, he took all parties into his protection, that none should endanger
or endammage another: desiring the Lords to bear in mind, that as princes
must not rule without limitation, so subjects must use a mean in their
liberty. Then he caused the duke and the Earls, which all this time kneeled
before him, to arise, and went with them into his private Chamber, where they
talked a while, and drunk familiarly together, and afterward, with a most
friendly farewell he licenced them to depart. They of the contrary faction were
not present at this meeting, and if they had, it was thought, that the presence
of the King should little have protected them.

This act of the King was diverse ways taken: some judged him fearful: others
moderate, rather in sparing the blood of his subjects. The Lords were very
joyful of his goodwill and favor, which as by base or bad means they would
not seek, so being well gotten, they did highly esteem. Yet they thought it
the safest course, not to separate themselves, suspecting the mutabilitie of
the King, and the malice of their enemies, of whom they knew neither where
they were, nor what they did entend: and being men of great wealth, and great
power, and greatly bent to hurtful practices, they were feared not without a
cause: for the Duke of Ireland, either by setting on, or sufferance of the
King, was all this time mustering of Soldiers out of Cheshire and Wales,
where he gathered an army both for number, and goodness of men sufficient,
if another had been general, to have maintained the side.

When the Lords were advertised hereof, they divided themselves, and beset all
the ways by which the Duke should pass to London; determining to encounter
him, before he did increase his power, and countenance his actions with the
puissance or name of the King. At the last he was met by the Earl of Derby, at
a place called Babbelake near to Burforde: and there the Earl put his men in
array, resolving with great boldness to hazard the battle, his Soldiers
also were full of courage and heart, disliking nothing more then delay, as a
loosing of time, and a hinderance to the victory: but the Duke, being a man
not fit for action, yet mutinous, and more apt to stir strife, then able to
stint it: upon news of an enemy would presently have fled. There was then in
the army as a principal Commander, one Sir Thomas Molineux, Constable of
Cheshire, a man of great wealth, and of good proof in service, upon whose
leading all that country did depend: he persuaded the Duke, that this was but
a part of the forces that were against them, and led only by the Earl of
Derby, a man of no special name (at that time) among the Lords, and if they
could not bear through that resistance, it was but in vain to attempt any
great atchiuement by arms. Hereupon the Duke stayed his steps, but his faint
spirits were moved by this speech, rather to desire victory then to hope it:
his soldiers also were dull, silent, and sad, and such as were readier to
interpret, then execute the captains commandment. So they joined battle, but
scarce ten ounces of blood was lost on both sides, before the duke of Ireland
set spurs to his horse, and forsook the field. His soldiers seeing this,
threw away their unfortunate weapons, more for indignation then for fear,
ruffling their rancks, and yielding to the Earl the honor of the field. Sir
Thomas Molineux in flying away, was forced to take a River which was near, and
as he was coming forth again, a certain Knight whose name was Sir Thomas
Mortimer, pulled off his helmet, and stabbed him into the brains with his
dagger. The rest submitted themselves to the discretion of the victorours,
making them lords over their life, and death: but their yielding was no sooner
offered, then it was accepted, the Earl presently commanding that none should
be harmed, but those that did make resistance, or bear armor: the Soldiers
also being willing to show favor toward their countrymen, as led into
this action, partly upon simplicity, partly to accompany these which came upon
fear. Then the Gentlemen were still retained in the Earls company, the common
soldiers were dispoiled of their armor only, and so returned again to their
peaceable business at home. And this was the first act whereby reputation did
rise to the side, and the greatness began, whereunto the Earl afterward
attained.

The Duke of Ireland, at the beginning of his flight, was desirous to have
passed the river which ran by: and coming to a bridge, he found the same
broken: from thence he posted to another bridge, which he found guarded with
Archers. At the last, his fearfulness being feared away (as nothing makes
men more desperate upon a doubtful danger, then fear of that which is
certain) he adventured to take the stream; in the midst whereof, he forsook
his horse, and swam to the other side, and so by benefit of the night escaped,
and fled into Scotland: and shortly afterpassed the seas into Flanders, and
from thence traueiled into France: where the continual gall of his grief
soon brought his loathed life to an end. His horse was taken with his
breast plate, his helmet and his gauntlets, whereupon it was generally supposed
that he was drowned; and (as in great vncerteineties it often happens) some
affirmed that they saw his death, which men either glad to hear, or not
curious to search, did easily believe: whether this were thus contrived of
purpose, or fell so out by chance, it was a great means of his escape, by
staying the pursuit after him, which otherwise had been made. His coach also
was taken, and certain of the Kings letters found, wherein he desired the Duke
to come to London with all the power and speed he could make, and he would be
ready to die in his defense; so unskillful was he in matters of government,
that to pleasure a few, he regarded not the coffeehouse of all the rest.

The Earl of Suffolk, upon this accident, shaued his beard, and in base and
disguised attire fled to Calice, and either for fear, or for shame, never
after returned into England: he was a cruel spoiler, and a careless spender,
in war contemptible, in peace in supportable, an enemy to all cousaile of
others and in his own conceit obstinatly contentious; of a good wit, and
ready speech, both which he abused, to the cunning commending of himself, and
crafty deprauing of others: he was less loved but better heard of the King
then the Duke of Ireland: the more hurtful man and the more hateful: the Duke
being charged with no great fault: but only the Kings excessive favor; in
their course of good and bad fortune, both of them were famous alike. Also the
Archbishop of York, Justice Trisiliane, and others of that faction, ran every
man, like connies to their couerte: Yea the king betook himself to the Tower
of London, and there made provision for his winter aboade; having all his
courses now crossed, first rashness in taking arms, and afterward by
cowardice in maintaining them.

The Earl of Darby signified this success to his associates by letters, yet
without any vau^ting or enlarging terms: his speeches also were moderate,
rather exstenuating his fact then extolling it: but by stopping his fame, it
much increased when men esteemed his high thoughts by his lowely words, and
his conceit in great exploites, by his contempt of this. Then the Lords met,
and marched together toward London, whether they came upon S. Stephens day,
having almost forty thousand men in their army, and first they showed
themselves in battle array, in the fields near unto the Tower, within the
view of the King: afterward, they took up their lodging in the suburbs,
the Mayor and aldermen of the city came forth, and gave liberal allowance, of
victual to the soldiers, offering unto the Lords entertainment within the
City, but they did not accept it.

Now this discord seemed to draw to a dangerous distraction of the
commonwealth; the vanquished part being full of malice, and the conquerors of
presumption: the one wanting power, the other right to command and rule. The
Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain others of the neutrality, fearing the
sequel, persuaded the king to come to a treaty with the lords: but he made
show of very light regard of all these dealings; let them stay (said he)
until they have wearied themselves with maintaining this multitude, and then I
will talk further with them. When the lords understood the drift of his
devise they beset the thames, and all other passages, and protested that they
would not depart until they had talked with him to his face. The king having
neither strength to resist, nor scope to escape, conse^ted to a treaty, and to
that end desired the lords to come to him into the Tower: but they refused
that place of meeting, upon fear of false measure, until the king permitted
them to search as diligently, and come as strongly as they thought it meet. So
they came unto the King well guarded, and after a few cold kindnesses, and
strange salutations, they laid before him, his proceedings against them at
Nottingham; his letters which he sent to the duke of Ireland contrary to his
word, for the raising of arms against them: his agreement with the French
King, for the yielding up of Callice and other strong holds which he possessed
in those parts: with diverse other points of dishonorable dealing and
negligent government. What should the King then have said or done? all these
matters were so evident and so evil, that there was no place left either for
denial or defense. Therefore ingenuously, first with silence and patience,
afterward with tears he confessed his errors. And certainly the stiff
stomach of the lords relented more to these luke warm drops then they would
have done to his cannon shot.

Then it was agreed, that the next day the King should meet with them at
westminster, and there treat further, both of these, and other necessary
affairs of the realm. So the Duke, and the rest of the lords departed except
the earl of Darby, who stayed supper with the king, and all that time stayed
him in his promised purpose: but when he was also gone, some of the secret
counsailers, or corrupters rather, and abusers of the King, whistled him in the
ear, that his going to Westminster was neither seemly nor safe, and would
cause not only to his person present danger and contempt, but also both
abasement and abridgement to his authority afterward. The Kings mind was
soon changed; but the Lords being now stirred, and feeling the Kings hand
weak to govern the bridle, became the more vehement, and sent him word, that
if he did ieofaile with them, and not come according to appointment, they
would choose another King, who should have his nobility in better regard. This
peremptory message so terrified the King, that he not only went to
Westminster, but suffered the Lords to do there even what they would. So they
caused him much against his liking, to remove out of the court, Alexander
Neuill, Archbishop of York, John Foorde, Bishop of Durisme, Friar Thomas
Rushoke, Bishop of Chichester, the kings Confessor: Likewise they removed the
Lord Souch, the Lord Haringworth, Lord Burnell, Lord Beaumonte, Sir Albred
Vecre, Sir Baldewine Bereford, Sir Richard Alderburie, Sir John Worth, Sir
Thomas Clifford, and Sir John Louell, taking suerties for their appeara^ce at
the next Parliament. Also certain Ladies were expelled the Court, and put
under suerties: to wit, the Lady Mowen, the Lady Moling, and the Lady Ponings,
which was the wife of Sir John Worth. Furthermore, they arested Simon Burlye,
William Elinghame, John Salisburie, Thomas Trivet, James Berneis, Nicholas
Dagworth, and Nicholas Brambre Knights, Richard Clifforde, John Lincoln, and
Richard Motford, Clearkes, John Beauchampe the Kings Steward, Nicholas Lake,
Deane of the Kings Chapel: and John Blake counceller at the Law, all these
were committed to diverse Prisons, where they were forth-comming, but not
coming forth, until the Parliament next following.

After the feast of the Purification, 1388*
the Parliament began at London, and yet the King used many means, either to
dash or defer the same) to which the Lords came, attended with the number
and strength of a full army: upon color, to repress any ryote that might
happen to arise: but in truth, that by this terror, they might draw the whole
manage of affairs unto themselves. This assembly continued until Whitsontide
next following, with very great fear of some men, and hope of others, and
expectation of all. Herein was Justice Trisiliane, by counsel of the Lords,
against the Kings mind, condemned to be drawn and hanged: which judgment
was presently executed upon him: the like sentence and execution passed upon
Sir Nicholas Brambre, Sir John Salisburie, Sir James Barneis, John Beauchampe,
the Kings steward, and John Blake Esquire, who had framed the Articles which
were exhibited against the Lords at Nottingham. Also the Justices who gave
their judgment concerning those Articles, Robert Belk^ape, John Holte, Roger
Fulthorpe, and William Burghe, were condemned to perpetual exile: and yet they
did not interpose themselves, but intermeddle by constraint. Sir Simon Burlye
was also beheaded, who was keeper of Dover Castle, and had conspired to deliver
the same unto the Frenchmen: he was infinitely haughty and proud, equal to
the meanest in virtue and wisdom, but in bravery and train inferior to no
Duke Diverse other were either put to death, or banished, and, some (as it
happens when the reyne of fury is at large) without any great cause. The
Earl of Derby furthered no man's death; but labored very instantly for the
life and liberty of many, in so much as hot speeches did arise between the
Duke of Gloucester and him: whereby he purchased a favorable opinion among
those of the contrary part, having caused the death of no man, but only in
the field. Then was an oath exacted of the King, to stand to the government of
the Lords: and also an oath was taken of all the Subjects within the Realm,
to be true and faithful unto the King. The king in taking this oath of the
Lords, bewrayed his inward conceit by his open countenance, looking
pleasantly on those he favored, and angerly on those whom he hated; by which
untimely discovery, he made them more heedefull, and himself more hateful:
which were occasions afterward, both to preuente the revenge, which he much
desired, and to procure the mischiefs which he little feared. Lastly, a
subsidy was granted: and to the King coming as it were to a capitulation
with the lords, he to have the name of a King, and they the authority and
majesty, the contention for that time ceased.

All this was done in the xj. year of the kings reign, he being yet under
age, 1389
and in government of others. But the year following, he began to take upon
him more liberty and rule: and upon extreme disdain, that both his pleasure
and his power were by the Lords thus restrained, he did ever after bear a hard
mind against them. And first he assembled them in the Council chamber, and
there demanded, of what years they took him to be: they answered, that he was
somewhat above one and twenty: then (said he) I am of lawful age to have the
regiment in mine own hand, and therefore you do me wrong to hold me still
under government, as though the condition of a king were harder then of a
subject. This the Lords were neither willing to grant, nor able to deny, and
therefore they either kept silence, or spoke little to the purpose. Well (said
the king) since I am no longer an Infant, I here renounce your rule, and take
upon me such free administration of the Realm, as the Kings thereof, my
predecessors heretofore have lawfully used. Then presently he began his
Phaetons flourish, and commanded the Bishop of Elie being L. Chancellor to
resign his seal; which the king received, and put up, and therewith departed
out of the chamber: but soon after he returned again, and delivered the same
to William Wickham bishop of Winchester, constituting him L. Chancellor
thereby. Many other officers he likewise deposed, and placed new in their
room; partly to manifest his authority, and partly to satisfy his
displeasure. Also he removed the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of Warwick,
and many others from his Privy council, and took those in their places, which
more regarded the humor of the King, but less his honor.

Soon after, it was suggested to the King, that the Duke of Gloucester was
gathering of forces against him; but upon examination there was found not only
no truth, but no show or color of any such matter. The Duke would not quietly
have disgested the raising of these reports: but the King, whether upon a
general delight, to be tickled in the ears with such tales, or upon
particular desire to have some quarrel against the Duke, charged him to silence.

In the 13. year of the Reign of King Richard, the Citizens of Genua desired
his aid, 1390.
against the Barbarians of Afrike, who with daily incursions, infested and
spoiled all the Sea coasts and Islands of Italy, and France, which fronted
upon the^. The King sent a choice company of Soldiers, ynder the conduct of
Henry Earl of Derby; who behaved himself in this charge with great
integrity and courage, inciting his men, the good by praise, the bad by
example rather then reproof, as more ready to commend the virtues of the one,
then to vpbraide the vices of the other. And first he passed into France, and
there joined himself to certain French forces, appointed likewise for this
service: then with might and minds united, they sailed together into Afrike. At
their arrival, the Barbarians were ready in arms, to keep them from landing:
but the Earl commanded his Archers to break through and make passage,
dispising the enemy, whom he knew to be weak, and unskillful in service, and
not to have that advantage in place, which he had in men: the Frenchmen also
sharply set in and seconded the English: and so whilst both companies
contended, the one to be accounted a help, and the other to seem to need no
help, the enemies were forced to fly, and leave the shore unto the
Christians. In this conflict, three Dukes of the Barbarians and above three
hundred Soldiers were slain, and in the flight, four Dukes were taken, and a
great, yet uncertain number of common people. Then the Christians marched
directly toward Tunis, the head City of that Country* this they besieged,
and in short time took, chiefly by the prowes of the English soldiers, who
first scaled the Walls, and reared thereon the Earls banner. When they were
entered the Town, the Englishmen bent their endeavor, to the housing of their
enemies, and beating down of such as made resistance, but the Frenchmen
straight ways turned to their lascivious pleasures: so that there was
presented a spectacle, both pitiful and shameless: in one place butchering of
men, in another ryoting with women: here streams of blood, and heaps of
slaughtered bodies, hard by dissolute and licentious wantonnesses in some, all
the miseries of a cruel war, and the looseness of a secure peace. Here were
slain and taken above four thousand Barbarians: the Kings brother also was
slain: but the King himself fled into the Castle, which was strongly scited,
and well fortified and furnished with men. The Christians laid siege to this
Castle the space of five weeks, during which time, they lost many of their
men, yet not by sword, but by sickness: the Barbarians also were distressed
with want of victual, having but little provision, and many unprofitable
mouths to consume it: hereupon they sent unto the Christians, to desire peace,
offering them a great sum of money, to depart out of their country: this the
Christians accepted, upon condition, that they might also freely carry with
them, all their pray and prisoners; and that the Barbarians should from
thenceforth surcease from making spoil, upon any of the coasts of Italy, or
France. Thus had this voyage a prosperous and speedy end: the only service
(as I suppose) which the English and Frenchmen performed together, without
iotte of jar. And yet the Earl abused not the fortune of this success, to
vain vaunting, or brauing in words, but moderately im^arted to the rest, the
honor of the exployt: so by valyan^y performing his charge, and sparingly
speaking thereof, his glory increased, without bit of envy.

In the fifteenth and sixteenth years of the reign of King Richard, 1392
certain causes of coffeehouse did grow, between the King and the
Londoners, 1393
which set the favor of the one, and the faith of the other, at great
separation and distance: One was, for that the King would have borrowed of them
a thousand pounds: which they feeling much; and fearing more the Kings daily
exactions, did not only deny, but evil entreated a certain Lumbard, who
offered to lay out the money.

Another grief was thus occasioned: One of the Bishop of Salisburies servants,
named Roman, meeting in Fleetstreet with a Bakers man, bearing horse-bread,
took a loaf out of his basket: and by rude demand of the one, and rough
denial of the other, chollar so kindled betwixt the^, that Roman brake the
Bakers head. Hereupon the neighbors came forth, and would have arrested this
Bishops lusty yeoman: but he escaped, and fled to the Bishops house. The
Constable followed peaceably, and demanded a quiet delivery of the offendour:
but the Bishops men shut the gates against him, that no man could come near.
Then much people flocked together, threatening to break open the gates, and
fire the house, unless Roman were brought forth unto them: What (said they)
are the Bishops men privileged? or is his house a sanctuary? or will he
protect those whom he ought to punish? if we may be shuffled off in this sort,
not only our streets, but our shoppes and our houses shall never be free from
violence and wrong. This we will not endure: we can not: it stands not us in
hand. Heerewith they approached the gates, and began to use violence: but the
Mayor and Shiriffes of the City, upon aduerti^ement of this tumult, came
amongst them, crying out, that it was not courage, but outrage which they
showed: whereby they would procure, both danger to themselves and displeasure
against the whole City; that although wrong had been received, yet they were
not the men, nor this the means to redress the same: So partly by their
persuasions, partly by their presence and authority, they repressed the riote,
and sent every man away, with straight charge to keep the peace. Here was yet
no great harm done, and the quarrel might have been quieted without more
ado, had not the Bishop stirred therein, and kindled the coals of unkindness
a fresh. For the Londoners at that time, were not only suspected secretly, but
openly noted to be favorers and followers of wickliffes opinions: for which
cause, they were much maliced of the Bishops; and many of their actions
interpreted, to proceed from another mind, and tend to a worse end, then was
outwardly borne in countenance and show: and some matters of chance, were
taken as done of purpose. Therefore the Bishop of Salisburie called John
Waltham, who was also treasurour of England, made a grievous complaint of this
attempt, to Thomas Arundle Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor;
affirming, that if upon every light pretense, the citezens might be suffered in
this sort to insult upon the bishops, without punishment, without reproof
and blame, they would bring into hazard, not only the dignity and state: but
the liberty also of the whole Church: did they not lately take upon them the
punishment of adulteries, and other crimes appertaining to ecle^iasticall
jurisdiction? maliciously alleging, that the bishops and their officers,
either being infamous for those vices themselves, did wincke at the same in
others: or else by covetous comm^tation, did rather set them to sale, then care
fully repress them. Did they not rudely and ^n^euerently break open the
doors upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, and interrupte his proceedings
against John Astone, an open follower of wickliffe? and do we think that this
is the last indignity that they will offer? no surely, nor yet the least: and
if this boldness be not beaten down, our authority will fall into open
contempt and scorn, and be made a common foote-ball, for every base citizen
to spurn at. Hereupon they went together to the King, and so incensed his
displeasure against the Londoners, (being prepared thereto by former
prouocations) that he was in the mind to make spoil of the city, and
utterly to destroy it. But being persuaded to some more moderation in revenge,
first he caused the (...) and Shiriffes, and many of the chief citizens to be
apprehended, and committed to diverse several prisons: then he c^zed all the
liberties of the city into his hands, and ordained, that no Mayor should any
more be elected, but that the King should at his pleasure appointe a Warden
and gouernon^ over the city. This office was first committed to Sir Edward
Darlington, who for his gentleness toward the citizens, was shortly after
remouoed, and Sir Baldwine Radington placed in his room. Also the King was
induced, or rather seduced by the Archbishop of York Lord Chancellor, to
remove the Terms and Courts: to wit, the Chauncery, the Exchequer, the
kings bench, the hamper, and the common pleas, from London, to be kept at
York, where the same continued from midsommer, in the year 1393. until
Christmasse next following, to the great hinderance and decay of the city of
London. At the last, the King upon earnest entreaty of the Duke of Lancaster,
and the Duke of Gloucester, called the Londoners before him at Windsore: where
(having first terrified them with the presence and show of a great number of
armed men) he caused all the privileges of the city, both old and new, to
be brought forth, whereof he restored some, and restrained the rest: yet the
Londoners were not fully received to favor; neither recovered they at that
time, either the person or dignity of their Mayor. Shortly after, the King went
to London: at whose coming, the citizens changed all their grief into
gladness (as the common forte is without measure in both) entertayning him
with such joyful triumphs and rich presents, as if it had been the day of
his coronation. They supposed with these great courtesies and costs to have
satissied his displeasure; but they sound themselves far deceived: for they
were not fully restoa^ed to their liberties again, until they had made fine,
to pay unto the King ten thousand pounds. Thus did the Londoners manifest in
themselves, a strange diversity of disposition, both licenciously to commit
offe^ee, and patiently to endure punnishment: having rashness and rage so
tempered with obedience, that they were easily punnished, who could not
possibly be ruled. Yet fot this cause, so soon as first occasion did serve
against the King, they showed themselves, either his earnest enemies, or faint
friends.

King Richard in the nineteen year of his reign, passed the seas to Calice:
the French king also came down to Arde: between which two Towns, a place was
appointed, and tents erected for both the kings to meet. After large expenses
on both fides, and great honor done by the one king to the other: a surcease
of arms was concluded between them for thirty years: and king Richard took
to wife Lady Isabell, the French Kings daughter, being not above seven or eight
years old. The Duke of Gloucester was so offended; both with this friendship,
and assinitie, that he lost all manner of patience: exclaiming, that it was
more meet to be in arms, then in amity with the Frenchmen, who being
inferior to the English in courage, did always ouer-reach them in craft, and
being too weak for war, did many times prevail by peace: that now they had
got into their hands many Towns and Holds, appertaining to the crown of
England, they were willing to conclude a peace, to exclude the King thereby
from his possessions: but whenever occasion should change for their
advantage, they would be then as ready to start from the friendship, as at
that present they were to strike it: that the French Kings daughter, being but
a child, was very unmeet for the marriage of King Richard, as well for
disparitie of age, as for that the King had no issue by his first wife, and was
not like to have any by this, except (perhaps) in his old and withered
years. When the Duke saw, that with these motives he did nothing prevail, he
suborned the Londoners, to make petition to the King, that se^^g there was
peace with France, he would release them of the Subsidy which they had
granted to him in regard of those war^es. This suite was instantly followed,
and much perplexed the King, until the Duke of Lancaster declare to the
people, that the King had been at the charge and dispense of three hundred
thousand pounds in his voyage into France, for the procuring of this peace:
whereupon they were pacified, and desisted from their demand.

The year following, Guido Earl of S. Paul's, was sent into England by Charles
King of France, 1397
to visit and salute in his name, King Richard, and Queen Isabell his wife,
the French Kings daughter. To this Earl, the King did relate, with what
feruencie the Duke of Gloucester contended, to make disturbance of the peace
between England and France: how, because his mind was not therein followed,
he moved the people to seditious attempts, bending himself wholly to
maintain discord and disqui^t, rather in his own country, then not at all.
He further reported, what stiff strifes in formert^^es, the Duke had stirred:
which, howsoever they were done, yet as they were declared, they sounded very
odious and hard. When the Earl heard this, he presently answered, that the
Duke was too dangerous a subject to be permitted to live: that greatness was
never safe, if it grow excess^ue and bold: that the King must not affect the
vain commendation of clemency, with his own peril: and that it touched him,
both in honor to revenge the disgraces which he had received, and in policy to
prevent the dangers which he had cause to fear. These words of sharpened the
Kings displeasure, that from thencefoorth he busied his brains in no one thing
more, then how to bring the Duke to his end. Now he began to pry more narrowly
into his demeanor: to watch his words: to observe actions: adn always to
interpret them to the woorst* framing himself to many vain and weedlesse
feare^ Often times he would complain of him to the Duke of La^ster, and the
Duke of York, how fierce and violent he was in his speeches, and cross to him
in all matters. The Dukes would make answer, that the Duke of Gloucester their
brother, was in deed, more hot and vehement then they did commend: yet his
fierceness was joined with faithfulness, and his crosnesse proceeded from a
care, least the Commonwealth should decrease either in honor or in
possessions: and therefore the King had neither need to fear, nor cause to
disslike.

About that time, the Dukes of Lancaster and of York withdrewe themselves from
the court, to their private houses: the duke of Gloucester also went to ly at
Plashey, near Chelmessorde in Essex: upon advantage of which separation, the
King stood distracted in mind, between fear to differ, and shame to auow
the destruction of the Duke, least he might happily be disapointed by the one,
or dishonored by the other. Hereupon he entered into counsel with John
Holland, Earl of Huntington, his half brother: and Thomas Mowbray, Earl of
Notingham, how the Duke of Gloucester might be suppressed or oppressed rather,
the cruclty which was but wavering in the King, yea wanting by nature, was
soon confirmed by evil advise: and being once inclined to blood, he did not
fail, either of example of^ewd action to follow, or direction of cruel
counsel what to do: so the plotte was contrived, and according thereto, the
King and the Earl of No^tingham rod^ together into Essex, as though it were to
disporte themselves in hunting: when they were in the midst of the Forest,
the Earl made stay, and the King passed forth with a small and vnsuspicious
company to the Duke, lying at Plashey: there he stayed dinner: and then
pretending occasion of present return, he desired the Duke to accompany him to
London, the fair entreatie of a Prince, is a most forceable command:
therefore the Duke supposing that only to be intended in deed, which was
pretended in show, (...) to horseback with the King, taking such small
attendance, as upon the sudden could be in a readiness, and appointing the
rest to come after him to London. So they rode together, using much familiar
talk by the way, until they came near the place of await: then the King put
his horse forward, and the Duke coming behind, was suddenly intercepted and
stayed, crying aloud, and calling to the King for his help: the King continued
his journey, as though he had not heard, and the Duke was violently carried to
the Thames, and there shipped in a vessel laid for the purpose, and from
thence conveyed over to Calice.

When the King came to London, he caused the Earl of Warwick also to be
arrested and sent to prison, the same day that he had invited him to dinner,
and showed good countenance, and promised to be gracious Lord unto him. Upon
the like dissembled show, the Earl of Arundell, and his son, and certain
others were arrested also, and committed to prison in the I Will of Wight.

The common people, upon the apprehending of these three noble men, whom they
chiefly, and almost only favored, were in a great confusion and tumult; and
there wanted but a head to draw them to sedition: every man sorrowed,
murmured, and threatened, and daring no further, stood waiting for one to lead
them the way: all being ready to follow that, which any one was loath to
begin. The Duke of Lancaster and of York gathered a strong army, and came
therewith to London, where they were readily received by the citizens, although
the King had commanded the contrary: but this seemed to be done, rather for
guard to themselves, then regard to any others.

The king all this time, kept at a village called Helhame, within four miles
of London, having about him a great power of armed men, which he had gathered
out of Cheshire and Wales: and to paci^^^ the common people, he caused to be
proclaimed, that the Lords were not apprehended upon old displeasures, but
for offenses lately committed, for which they should be appealed by order of
law, and receive open trial, in the Parliament next following: the like
message was sent to the Duke of Lancaster, and the Duke of York, lying at
London: to whom the King made faith, for the safety of their persons, and
indemnitie of their goods, and that nothing should be attempted without their
priuitie and advise: all this was as rashly believed, as it was craftily given
out: whereupon the Dukes dissembled their fears, and dissolved their forces,
and remained in expectancie what would ensue.

A little before the feast of Saint Michael, the Parliament began at London,
wherein Sir John Bushie, Sir William Bagot, and Sir He^rie Green, were
principal agents for the Kings purpose. These were then in all the credit and
authority with the King, and his chiefest Schoolmasters both of cruelty and
deceit: they were proud, arrogant, and ambitious, and upon confidence of the
Kings favor, professed enemies to men of ancient Nobility; to the end* that
being lately start up, they might become more famous by maintaining contention
with great persons. And first, by their importunate travail, all the Charters
of pardon, granted by the King, were in this Perliament annulled and revoked.
Then the prelates did constitute Sir Henry Percie their procurator, and
departed the house, because they might not be present in judgment of blood.
Lastly, the Earl of Arundell, and the Earl of Warwick were arraigned; and
for the same offenses, for which they had been pardoned (namely for encroaching
to themselves royal power in judging to death Simon Burlye, John Berneis and
others, without the Kings consent) were condemned to be hanged, drawn, and
quarter^d: but the King so moderated the severity of this sentence, that the
Earl of Arundell was only he headed, and the Earl of Warwick committed to
perpetual imprisonment in the I Will of Man.

The Duke of Gloucester, was so greatly favored, that it was thought a point
both of policy and peace, notto bring him to his open answer, but to put him
to death secreately: so he was strangled under a fether bed at Calice by the
Earl of Notingham, being then Earl Marshall: which death, howsoever he
deserved; yet dying as he did, not called, not heard, he died as guiltless.

In this same Parliament, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Caunterburie was also
accused, for executing the commision against Michaell Delapoole, Earl of
Suffolk: for which cause, his temporalties were seized; his lands and goods
forfeited, as well in use, as in possession: and himself was adjudged to
exile, and charged to depart the realm, within six weeks then next ensuing.
So he went into France, where afterward, he became a principal mean of
the revolt which followed. Also the Lord Cobham was exiled into the I Will of
Gernsey: and Sir Reinolde Cobham was condemned to death, not for entering into
any attempt against the King, but because he was appointed by the Lords to be
one of his governors, and of his counsel, in the 11. year of his reign:

Now the King falsely supposing, that he was free from all dangers, and that
the humor against him, was clean purged and spent, conceived more secreate
contentment, then he would openly bewraye; as more able to dissemble his joy,
then conceal his fear: being so blinded and bewitched, with continual
custom of flatteries, that he perceived not, that the state of a Prince is
never stablished by cruelty and crafce. On the other side, the common people
were much dismayed, having now lost those whom they accounted their only
helps, and their only hopes, both for their private affairs, and for
supporting the state: and because these mishapes happened unto them, for
maintaining a cause of common dislike, the peoples stomach was stirred thereby
to much hate and hearte-burning against the King. And to make their deaths the
more odious, the Earl of Arundell was reputed a martyr, and pilgrimages were
daily made to the place of his burial: the rumor also was current, but
without either author or ground, that this his head was miraculously fastened
again to his body: this whilst all men affirmed, and no man knew, the King
caused the corpse to be taken up, and viewed, ten days after it was interred:
and finding the cause to be fabulous, he caused the ground to be paued where
the Earl was laid, and all mention of his burial to be taken away,
forbidding publicly and such speeches of him afterward to be used: but this
restrainte raised the more: and they, who if it had been lawefull, would have
said nothing, being once forbidden could not forbear to talk. It was also
constantly reported, that the King was much disquieted in his dreams with the
Earl, who did often seem to appear unto him, in so terrible and truculent
manner, that breaking his fearful, sleep he would curse the time that ever
he knew him.

In the one and twenty year of the reign of K. Richard, 1398
Henry Earl of Darby, was created Duke of Herforde: at which time the King
created four other Dukes: to wit, Duke of Aumerle, who was before Earl of
Rutland: Duke of Southrey, who was before Earl of Kent: Duke of Excester, who
was before Earl of Huntington: and Duke of Norfolk, who was before Earl of
Notingham. This degree of honor long time after, the conquest of the No^mans
(whose chiefest rulers had no higher title) was accounted too great for a
subject to bear: the form of the commonwealth, being framed by the
victors, far from equallity of all, and yet the King excepted without
eminency of any. At the length King Edward the third created his eldest Son
Edward Duke of Cornewale, and made this honor hereditary, conferring it unto
many: since which time, diverse princes of this land, have been either put, or
kept, or hazarded from their estate, by men of that quallity and degree. The
King likewise created the Countess of Norfolk, Duchess of Norfolk: the
Earl of Sommerset, Marquess of Sommerset: the Lord Spencer Earl of
Gloucester, the Lord Neuill, Earl of Westmerland: the Lord Scroupe, Earl of
Wiltshire: and the Lord Thomas Darcy his steward, Earl of Worcester. Among
these; he made division of a great part of the lands of the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the Earls of Arundell and warwick: supposing by this
double liberality, of honor and possessions: to have purchased to himself
most firm friendships, but bought friends for the most part, are seldom,
either satisfied, or sure: and like certain Ravens in Arabia, so long as they
are full, do yield a pleasant voice: but being empty, do make a horrible cry.

Now the Duke of Hereford, raised his desires, together with his dignities, and
either upon disdain, at the undeserved favor and advancement of some persons
about the King^ or upon dislike, that the King was so dishonourably, both
abused, and abased by them: or else (perhaps) upon desire, to manifest his
own sufficiency in matters of controwlement and direction: being in familiar
discourse with Thomas Mowbraye Duke of Norfolk, he brake into complaint, how
the King regarded not the noble princes of his blood, and Peers of the Realm,
and by extreamities used to some, discouraged the rest from entermedling in any
public affairs: how in stead of these, he was wholly governed by certain
newfound and newfangled favorites, vulgar in birth, corrupt in qualities,
having no sufficiency either of conncell for peace, or of courage for war;
who being of all men the most dishonest, and the most unable, with hatefulness
of the one, and contempt of the other, were generally despised in all the
Realm: that hereby: Frst the honor of the Kings person was much blemished,
for ungrate and ungracious adherentes, are always the way to hatred and
contempt: Secondly, the safety of his state might be endaungered; for
extraordinary favor to men apparently of weak or bad desert, does breed
insolency in them, and coffeehouse in others, too dangerous humors in a
commonwealth: Thirdly, the dignity of the Realm was much empaired: whose
fortune and valor, being guided by the ill chance of such unlucky leaders:
stood never in the like terms of doubt and distress; so that matters of
peace, were tumultuous and uncertain, and archiuements of war, were never
brought to honorable conclufion: that Alexander Se^^^^s would have smoaked
such sellers of smoke; that Xerxes would have pulled their skin over their
ears; and high time it was, that the King should look unto them: for the
nobility grew out of heart, the commons out of hope, and all the people fell to
a discontented murmuring. And this he said, (as he said) not for any grudge,
but for grief and goodwill: and therefore desired the Duke who was one of the
privy council, and well heard with the King, to discover unto him these
deformities and dangers, that by repayring the one, he might happily repel
the other.

These words procured to the Duke of Hereforde, both great offense, and great
glory: at the delivery whereof, the Duke of Northfolke made show of good
liking, and promise of sincere dealing. And in deed, if they had bin as
faithfully reported by him, and by the King as friendly taken, as they were
faithfully and friendly meant, many mischiefs might have been avoided: but
both of these did fail: for the Duke of Norffolke, although in former times he
had taken part with the Lords, yet afterward, being desirous be accounted,
rather among the great men, then the good, he made sale of his honor, to
maintain his pleasure, and continue himself in grace with the King; to which
he was altogether enthralled; insomuch, that the murdering of the Duke of
Gloucester, and the execution of the Earl of Arundell, was to his charge
especially committed, and supposing upon this occ^^aon to make a freehold of
his princes favor, he grievously aggrauated these speeches in in reporting
them, and yet cunningly to: with many lies intermixing some truethes, or making
the truth much more then it was. Again, the King not enduring the search of
his soars, did bend his mind, rather to punish the boldness, then examine the
truth of these reproves: his ears being so distemspered with continuance of
flattery, that he accounted all sharp that was sound, and liked only that,
which was presently pleasant, and afterward hurtful. Thus we may daily
observe, that no strange accident does at any time happen, but it is by some
means foreshewed, or foretold: but because these warnings are oftentimes
either not marked, or misconstrued, or else contemned, the events are accounted
inevitable, and the admonitions vain.

The King being in this sort touched by the one Duke, and tickled by the other,
was not resolved upon the sudden, what to do: therefore he assembled his
council, and called the two Dukes before him, and demanded of the Duke of
Norfolk, if he would openly avouch that which he had suggested in secreate.
The Duke seeing it was now no time for him, either to shrink or shuftle in his
tale, with a bold and confident courage, repeated all that before he had
reported. But the Duke of Hereforde could not be borne down by countenance,
where his cause was good: and therefore after a short silence, whereby he
seemed, rather amazed at the strangeness of this matter, then abashed at the
guilt, he made low obeisance to the King, and greatly both thanked and
commended him, that he had not given hasty creadite, to matters of such
tender touch, as his grief might have borne out the blame of rashness in
revenge; desiring him to continue yet a while, the respite of his displeasure,
and to reserve his judgment free for indifferent audience. Then he declared in
order, what speech had passed from him, upon what occasion, and to what end:
all the rest he stoutely denied, affirming that it was falsely surmised by his
adversary, either upon malice to pick a quarrel, or upon sycophancie to pick
a thank, and that thereupon he was untrue, unjust, a forger of slanderous
and seditious lies, whereby he treacherously endeavored to seduce the King to
destroy the Nobility, and to raise disturbance within the realm: and this he
offered to prove upon him (if the King would permit) by the stroke of a
spear, and by dint of sword. The Duke of Norfolks stomach not used to bear
scorn, could not digest these terms of disgrace: whereupon he stiffly stood
to his first imputation: and for maintenance thereof, he accepted, and also
desited the combat. The King would some other ways have quieted this
contention, but the Dukes would agree to no other kind of agreement: and
thereupon threw down their gloves one against the other, for gages. The King
seeing their obstinacy, granted them the battle, and assigned the place at
the City of Couentry, in the month of August then next ensuing: where in the
mean time, he caused a sumptuous Theater, and lists royal to be prepared.

At the day of combat, the two Dukes came, well banded with Noblemen and
Gentlemen of their lineage. The Duke of Aumerle, for that day hie constable, and
the Duke of Surrey for the same time and action, high Marshall of England,
entered into the lists, with a great troop of men apparelled in silk sendale,
embroidred with silver, every man having a tipped staff to keep the field in
order. About the time of prime, the Duke of Hereford came to the barriers of
the lists, mounted upon a white courser, barbed with blew and green velvet,
embroidred gorgiously with Swans and Anti^ops of Goldsmiths work, anned at
all points, and his sword drawn in his hand. The Constable and Marshall came
to the barriers, and demanded of him, who he was. He answered: I am Henry
duke of Hereford, and am come to do my deuoire against Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, as a traitor to God, the King, the Realm, and me. Then he swear
upon the Evangelists, that his quarrel was right, and upon that point desired
to enter the lists, then he put up his sword, pulled down his beauier, made a
cross on his forehead, and with spear in hand, entered into the lists, and
there lighted from his horse, and sat down in a charge of green velvet,
which was set in a trauerse of green and blew velvet at the one end of the
listes: and so expected the coming of his enemic. Soon after, King Richard
entered the field with great pomp, both in bravery and train: he had in his
company, the Earl of S. Paul, who came purposely out of France to see this
combat tried: he was attended with all the noble Peers of the Realm, and
guarded with ten thousand men in arms, for fear of any sudden or intended
tumult.

When he was placed on his stage, which was very curiously and richly set
forth, a King at arms made proclamation in the name of the King, and of the
high Constable, and of the Marshall, that no man except such as were appointed
to order and Marshall the field, should touch any part of the listes, upon
pain of death. This proclamation being e^ded, another herrald cried. Behold
her?, Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, appellant, who is entered into the
listes royal, to do this deuoire, against Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk
defendant, upon pain to be accounted false and recreant. The Duke of Norfolk
was houering on horseback at the entry of the listes, his horse being barbed
with crimson velvet, embroadered ^itchly with lions of silver, and mulberie
trees, and when he had made his oath, before the Constable and Marshall, that
his quarrel was just and true, he entered the field boldly, crying aloud God
aid him that has the right, then he lighted from his horse, and satte down
in a chair of Crimson velvet, curtained about with red and white damask, and
placed at the other end of the listes. The Lord Marshall viewed both their
spears, to see that they were of equal length: the one spear he carried
himself to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other to the Duke of Norfolk by
a Knight, This done, a Herrald proclaimed, that the trauerses and chaires of
the combatants should be removed, commanding them in the Kings name, to mount
on horseback, and adresse themselves to the encounter, the Dukes were quickly
horsed, and closed their beauiers, and cast their spears into the restes. Then
the trumpetes sounded, and the Duke of Hereforde set forth toward his enemy,
about fix or seven paces: but before the Duke of Norfolk began to put
forewarde, the King cast down his warder, and the Herralds cried, ho: then the
King caused the Dukes spears to be taken from them, and commanded them to
forsake their horses, and return again to their chaires: where they remained;
above two long hours, whilst the King deliberated with his counsel what was
fittest to be done. At last, the Herralds cried silence: and Sir John Borcy a
secretary of state with a loud voice, read the sentence and determination of
the King and his counsel out of a long roll: wherein was contained, that
Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford, appellant, and Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, defendant, had honorably appeared that day within the lists royal,
and declared themselves valiant and hardy champions; being not only ready, but
forward and desirous to darrein the battle: but because this was a matter of
great consequence and import, the King with the advice of his Council, thought
it meet to take the same into his own hands: and thereupon had decreed, that
H^nrie Duke of Hereford, because he had displeased the King, and for diverse
other considerations, should within 15. days next following, depart out of the
Realm, and not to return during the term often years, without the Kings
especial license, upon pain of death,

When this judgment was heard, a confused noise was raised among the people,
some lamenting either the deserte, or the injury of the Duke of Hereforde,
whom they exceedingly favored: others laughing at the conceit of the King:
first in causing, and afterward in frustrating so great an expectation:
wherein he seemed to do not much unlike Caligula; who lying in France with a
great army nere the sea shore, gave the sign of battle, set his men in
array, marched forth as if it had been to some great piece of service, and
suddenly commanded them all together cockles.

Then the Herralds cried again, o yes: and the secretary did read on, how
the King had likewise otdayned, that Thomas Moubraie Duke of Northfolke,
because he had sown sedition, by words whereof he could make no proof, should
avoid the realm of England, and never return again, upon pain of death:
and that the King would take the profits and revenues of his lands, until he
had received such sums of money as the Duke had taken up, for wages of the
garrison of Calice, which was still unpaid: and that the King prohibited, upon
pain of his grievous displeasure, that any man should make suite or entreatie
to him, on the behalf of either of these two Dukes.

These sentences being in this sort pronounced, the King called the two exiles
before him, and took of them an oath, that they should not converse together in
foraine regions, nor one willingly come in place where the other was: fearing
(as it was like) least their common coffeehouse should draw them, first to
reconcilement, and afterward to revenge. But this policy was over weak for
this purpose: for oaths are commonly spurned aside, when they lie in the way,
either to honor or ^euenge: and if their united forces was much to be
regarded, the^ separate are powers was not altogether to be con^^^ed.
Therefore the later plin^^^ of this Realm, have with more (...), wholly
abolished the use of abiuration and (...): and do either by death extinguish
the power, or by pardon alter the will of great offenders, from entering into
desperite and dangerous attempts: which men in (...) and disgrace, have more
vehemency to begin, and more (...) to continue. When the (...) had once so
enclosed the Roman legions within certain streig^, that they left them
neither space to fight, nor way to fly: but without force enforced them to
yield: they sent to Hre^^^us Pontius, an aged ruler of their state, for his
advise, what were best for them to do: his answer was, that the Romans
should be permitted to depart, without any (...) loss, orscorne. This pleased
not such as (...), ^^^her covetous for spoy^e, (...) for blood ^ and therefore
they sent unto him the second time: who then returned answer, that the Romans
should be put to the sword, and not one man suffered to escape. The
contrariety of these two counsels, brought the old man into suspicion of
dotage: but he coming in person to the camp, maintained both to be good: the
first whereof (which he thought best) would by unexpected favor, provoke the
Romans to a perpetual friendship: the second would defer the wars for
many years, wherein the enemies should hardly recover strength: third
counsel, there was none that safely might be follows Yes (said the Samnites)
to grant them their lives, yet with such conditions of spoil and shame, as
the laws of victory do lay upon them. This is the way (answered Heren^ius)
which neither wins friends, nor weakeneth enemies: but will much increase
the fury against us, and nothing diminish the force. And even so, in matters of
more particularity, than course of punishment is out of course, which does
neither reclaim the mind of men, nor restrain the might from mischievous
endeavors. But again to our purpose.

The Duke of Norfolk, having now got a fall, where he thought to take his
rest, repented his enterprise, and utterly condemned his light conceit of the
Kings lightness, and so with extreme grief and anguish of mind, he departed
out of the Realm into Almaine, and from thence traveled to Venice; where
through violence of thought and coffeehouse, in short time he ended his
days. This sentence of banishment was given against him the same day of the
year wherein the Duke of Gloucester by his wicked means was strangled to
death at Calice.

The Duke of Hereford took his leave of the King at Eltham, who there stroke
away four years of his banishment and even offered himself to be sawned upon
and thanked, for so odious a benefit. And this info^inate adventure he neither
bate put ^aingloriusly, not yet took impatie^tly: but in the midst of his
misery, retained still his reputation and honor; showing no sign of sorrow or
submines in his countenance, nor letting fall any intemperate and unseemly
word. The people as he departed, by heap^ flocked about him, some to see, and
some to salute him: lamenting his departure in such sort, as though their only
light and delight did then forsake them: not sparing to exclaim, that it was
against the law of arms, against the custom of the Realm, and against all
right whatsoever, that he should exiled, who had done his honorable endeavor
for the maintenance of his appeal. This affection was the more exce^^^e, for
that the duke was driven into exile by occasion of his liberal speeches
against the most hateful persons in all Realm: and being the only noble man
then alive, of the popular faction, the love was wholly accumulated upon him*
which was before divided among the rest. And thus the Duke leaving England,
took shipping, and passed the Seat to Galice, and from thence went into
France: where he was honorably entertained by Charles the French King, and
found such favor, that he should have taken to wife, the only daughter of
John Duke Berrie, uncle to the King of France, but King Richard^ fearing the
sequel, if the favor which was borne to the Duke of Hereford within the Realm,
should be strengthened with so great affinity in France, cast such stops in
the way, that the marriage did not proceed.

This year the Laurel trees withered, almost throughout the Realm, and
afterward against all expectation, recovered life and flourished again. The
same year, in Christmasse holy days, a deep river which rumneth between
Snedlistorie and Hareswood, near to Bedford, suddenly stayed the stream: so
that for three miles in length, the channel was left dry, and no course of
water did hinder passage on foot. This was afterward interpreted too presage,
the revolt of the people, and the division which happened the year following:
to these we may add certain other prodegies, either forged in that fabulous
age, or happening commonly and of course, are then only noted, when any
notable accident does ensue. When K. Richard brought his first wife out of
Beam, she had no sooner set foot within this land, but such a tempest did
forthwith arise as had not been seen many years before: whereby diverse ships
within the haven were quashed to pieces, but especially, and first of all, the
ship wherein the Queen was casried, this was the rather observed, because such
stiff ^^ormes were likewise stirring: when the King brought his second wife
out of France: wherein many ships perished, and a great part of the Kings
fardage was lost. At New castle upon Tine, as two shipwrites were squaring a
piece of Timber, whersoeuer they hewed, blood issued forth in great abundance.
At one of the Kings p^llaces, flies swarmed so thick, that they obscured the
air: these fought together most fiercely, so that sackfuls lay ^eau upon the
ground; and this continued so long, that scarce the third part of them (as it
was thought) remained alive, many like accidents are recorded of that time; but
I will maintain neither the truth of them, nor what they did portend: being a
matter wherein most men are rather superstitious, then not credulous, and do
oftentimes repute common occurrences to be ominous, when any strange event does
ensue. Yet as I am loath to avouch any vain and trifling matter, so dare I not
detract all truth from things anciently reported; although done in an age
wherein was some delight in lying; many do suppose, that those things which are
fatally allotted, though they never be avoided, yet sometimes are foreshewen:
not so much that we may prevent them, as that we shuold prepare ourselves
against them.

In the two and twenty year of the reign of K. Richard, Iothn of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster died, and was buried, on the north-side of the high alter, of the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, he was a man advised and wary in his
passages of life, liking better safe courses with reason, then happy by
chance: of his own glory, he was neither negligent, nor ambitiously careful:
toward the King he carried himself in terms honorable enough for a moderat
prince, and yet not so plausible as a vain man would desire; whereby there
never happened to him any extraordinary matter, either in prejudice, or
preferment. After his death, the Duchy of Lancaster did in right deuolue to the
Duke of Hereforde, his eldest son: but the King (as the nature of man is
inclinable, to hate those whom he has harmed) seized all the lands and
goods which appertained to the Duke of Lancaster, into his own hands; and
determined to perpetuate the banishment of Duke Henry his son: reuoking the
letters patte^ts, which were granted to him at his departure: whereby his
general atturneis were enabled to prosecute his causes and sue liuerie of any
inheritance; which during his exile, might fall unto him, his homage being
respited for a reasonable fine. The king supposed his estate more safe, by the
weakness and want of the Duke, whom he had now in some jealousy and doubt?
but these violent dealinges were means rather to prouoake his mischiefs, then
to prevent them; for by injurious suppressing of the Dukes greatness, he
greatly augmented the same.

Edmund Duke of York, the Kings only uncle which remained alive, had hitherto
moved his patience, to endure many things against his liking: but now either
in disdain of this indignity, or in distrust both of his own safety, and of
the common tranquillity of the realm, he retired himself with the Duke of
Aumerle his son, to his house at Langley: supposing priuatnes to be the best
defense, both from danger and blame, where neither the King had judgment to
discern, nor any about him had, either heart or honesty to admonish what was
done amiss; where an honorable fame was held suspected, and a good life more
in hazard the^ a bad: protesting that none of these practices, were either
devised by his counsel, or done by his consent.

At this time, the whole frame of the state was much shaken, and matters of
great weight and moment, did hang by a very slender thread. The King was plunged
in pleasure and sloth: after whose example, others also (as men do commonly
conform their minds according to the princes disposition) gave over
themselves to dilicacie and ease: whereby cowardice crepte in, and shipwreck
was made, both of manhood and glory. The chiefest affairs of state, had been
ordered for a long time, according to private respects, whereby the
commonwealth lost both the fat, and the favor, and seemed not at seasons
and by degrees, but with a maine course, and at once to ruinate and fall. The
north parts were many times canuased, and by small, yet often losses, almost
consumed by the Scots: who had there taken many towns and castles, and defaced
all the country with slaughter and spoil. Likewise the south parts were
oftentimes wasted by the Frenchmen: and in France many strong holds were
lost. It was also constantly affirmed, that the King made agreement to deliver
unto the King of France, the possossion of Callice, and of other towns which
he held in those parts; but the performance there of was resisted by the
lords whether this were true or surmised probably, as agreeable to the Kings
loose government, I cannot certainly affirm. As for Ireland, which in the
time of K. Edward the third was kept in order and awe, by acquainting the
people with religion and ciuility, and drawing them to delight in the plenty
and pleasures of well reclaymed countries; whereby it yielded to the kings
coffers, thirty thousand pounds every year: it was then suffered to run into
waste, and the people by rudeness became intractible: so that the houlding
thereof charged the King, with the yearly dispense of thirty thousand marks.
Many succors had been sent into these several countries; but scatteringly,
and dropping, and never so many at once, as to furnish the wars fully. The
King made some expeditions in his own person, with great preparation and
charge: but being once out of credit, whatsoever fell out well, was
attributed to others; misfortunes were inputed only to him. If any thing were
happily achieved by some of the nobility, it was by the Kings base hearted
parasites, to whom millitary virtue was altogether unpleasant so extinuated, or
depraved, or envied, that it was seldom rewarded, so much as with countenance
and thanks: yea sometimes it procured suspicion and danger; the King being
informed by a cunning kind of enemies, commenders, that to be a discreet and
valiant commander in the field, was a virtue peculiar to a Prince: and that it
was a perilous point, to have the name of a man of private estate, famous for
the same in every man's mouth. Hereupon, few sought to rise by virtue and
val^e, the readier way was, to please the pleasant humor of the Prince.
Likewise matters of peace, were managed by^men of weakest sufficiency, by whose
counsel either ignorant or corrupt, the destruction of the best hearted
nobility, was many times attempted, and at the last wrought. The profits and
revenues of the crown were said to be let to farm, the King making himself
landlord of this realm, and challenged no great privilege by his reign, but
only a dissolute and uncontrolled life. Great sums of money were yearly,
rather exacted from the subjects, then by them voluntarily granted: whereof no
good did ensue, but the maintenance of the Kings private delights, and the
advancement of his hateful favorites. To these he was somewhat above his power
liberal: for which cause, he was feign to borrow, beg, and extort in other
places: but he purchased not so much love by the one, as hate by the other.
Besides the ordinary terms of tenthes and fiftenthes, which were m^^ny times
paid double in one year, diverse new imposition^ were by him devised and put
in use: sometimes exacting xii. d. of every person throughout the realm:
sometimes of every religious man and woman vi. s. viii. d. and of every secular
priest as much, and of every lay person married or sole, xii. d. Under the
favorable term of benevolence; he wiped away from the people such heaps of
money, as were little answerable to that free and friendly name. He borrowed in
all places of the realm great sums of money upon his privy seals, so that
no man of worth could escape his loan: but he seldom, and to few, returned
payment again.

This present year, he sent certain Bishops, and other personages of honor,
to all the shires and corporations within the realm, to declare unto the
people the Kings heavy displeasure against them, for that they had bin
abetters and accomplices of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Earls of Arundell
and Warwick: and that the King was minded to make a road upon them, as
common enemies, except they would acknowledge their offense, and submit
themselves to his mercy and grace. Hereupon, all the men of worth in every
shire and Town corporate, made their acknowledgment and submission in writing
under their scales; and afterward were feign to grant unto the King, such
importable sums of money, to purchase again his favor, as the land being
already greatly impouerished, they were hardly able to endure. Then were
exacted of the^ strange and unaccustomed oaths, which were put likewise in
writing, under their seals. They were also compelled to set their hands and
scales to blancke chartes; wherein the King might afterward cause to be
written what he would; so that all the wealth of the realm was in a manner at
his devotion and pleasure. These and such like violences, were far wide from
the moderate government of K. Henry the second: who maintaining great
wars, and obteyning a larger dominion, then perteyned at any other time to
this realm of England, never demanded subsidy of his subjects: and yet his
treasure after his death, was found to be nine hundred thousand pounds,
besides his Jewels, and his plate.

In this sort the King bearing a heavy hand upon his subjects, and they again
a heavy heart against him, and being withal a Prince weak in action, and not
of valor sufficient to bear out his vices by might, the people at length
resolved to revolt, and rather to run into the hazard of a ruinous rebellion,
then to endure safety joined with slavery: so they attended occasion, which
shortly after was thus offered. The King received letters of advertisement out
of Ireland (which being priueledged from other venomous beasts has always
been pestered with traitors) how the Barbarous Irish had cut in pieces his
garrison, and slain Roger Mortimer Earl of Marsh, (who had been declared
heir apparent to the Crown) exercising all the cruelty in wasting of the
country, which wrath and rage of victory could incite a Barbarous people to
practice. This loss being great in it self, the hard affection of the people
did much augme^t by report: whereupon the King deliberated, whether it were
requisite that he should undertake the war in person, or commit it to
co^manders of lower degree? Some persuaded him, that wholly to subdue Ireland,
stood neither with policy, nor yet almost with possibility: for if it were
fully and quietly possessed, some governor might hap to grow to that
greatness, as to make himself absolute Lord thereof, and therefore it was
better to hold it certain by weak enemies, then suspected by mighty
friends, and yet by what means should those bogges and those woods be
overcome, which are more impregnable, then the walled Towns of other
countries? Then if the purpose were, only to repress the savage people, the
war was of no such weight, as should draw the King to stand in the field: and
therefore he might stay in the west parts of England, and from thence make
show of the princely puissance and state; neither venturing his person without
cause, and ready at hand if need should require. Others were of opinion, that
to subdue and replenish Ireland, was a matter neither of difficulty nor
danger: but both profitable and honorable to the King, and to God very
acceptable. For if credit might be given to ancient histories, this realm
of England was once as insuperable with bogs and woods, as Ireland was then:
but the Roman conquerors kept not their presidiarie Soldiers in idle
garrison, whereby many times the mind grew mutinous, and the body diseased,
and both unable for the labor and hardness of the field: but they held as
well them, as the subdued. Britains continually exercised, either in building
of towns in places of best advantage; or in making of high ways: else in
drayning and pauing of bogs: by which means the country was made fruitful
and habitable, and the people learned the good manners, not rudely to repulse
the flattering assaults of pleasure; preferring subjection with plenty, before
beggarly and miserable liberty. That the same Romans also kept many larger
countries in quiet obedience, (so long as they were quiet among themselves)
without either fear or danger of any governors: first by dividing them into
small provinces: Secondly by constituting in every province diverse officers, as
Lieutenants and procurators, whereof one was able to restrain the other; the
first having power over the bodies of the subjects, the second over their
goods: thirdly, by changing these officers every year; which was too short a
time to establish a sovereignty: Lastly, by retaining at Rome, their wives and
children, and whole private estate, as pledges for their true demeanure. That
the danger was rather to be feared, least a weak enemy whilst he was
cuntemned, should gather strength and be able to stand upon terms of
withstandi^g: example hereof, happened when the Romans overcame this Island;
for many Britanes who upon no co^ditious would abide bondage, withdrew
themselves into the Northparts of the land, and by maintaining their ancient
custom of painting their bodies, were called of the Romans, Picti: these were
neglected along time, and held in scorn, as neither of force, nor of number to
be thought worthy the name of enemies: but afterward they confederated
themselves with other people, and so sharply assaulted the subdued Britains,
that being unable to resist, and the Romans shrincking from the^, they were
constrained to desire help of the Saxons: and so between their enemies and
their, aides (being set as it were betwixt the beetle and the block) they lost
the possession of the best part of their land. That it was a pitiful policy
for assurance of peace, to lay all waste as a wilderness, and to have dominion
over trees and beasts, and not over men. That hereby the King did loose the
revenue of a fruitful country, and the benefit of wealthy subjects, which are
the surest treasure that a Prince can have. That hereby also the majesty of his
estate was much impaired: for (as Salomo^ says) The honor of a king
consists in the multitude of subjects. That the country being unfurnished of
people, was open to al opportunity of foreign enemies. That if none of these
respects would move: yet the King was bound in duty, to reduce those savages
to the true worship of God, who did then either profanely contemn him, or
superstiti^usly serve him.

These reasons so weighed with the King, that he gathered a mighty army,
determining to go in person into Ireland, and to pacify the country before
his return: but al his provision was at the charge of the subi^cts: and whereas
in time of sedition, a wise Prince will least grieve his people. As seeming to
stand in some sort at their courtesy, and having to employ their bodies beside;
the King in peace no stoarer for war, was forced to offend, when he should
have been most careful to win favor. So about Whitsontide, he set forth on
his voyage with many men, and few soldiers; being a dissolute and untrained
company, and out of all compass of obedience, he carried with him his whole
treasure, and all the goods and ancient Jewels appertaining to the crown. In
his company went the Duke of Aumerle, and the Duke of Exceter, and diverse other
noble men, and many Bishops, and the Abbot of Westminster. He also took with
him the sons of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the Duke of Hereford; whose
fauourours he chiefly feared.

When he came to Bristowe, he was put into suspicion, (whether upon some
liklyhood, or mere malice) that Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland and
certain others, intended some disloyal enterprise against him: and for that
cause did not follow him into Ireland, but had fastened friendship with the king
of Scots, upon purpose to retire themselves into his country, if their attempts
should fail. Hereupon the king sent message that the earl should forthwith
come unto him with all the power that he could conveniently make. The earl
returned answer, that it was unnecessary in respect of that service, to draw
men from such distant places; for the Irish rebels were neither so many nor so
mighty, but the King had strength at hand sufficient to suppress them: that it
was also dangerous to disfurnish the North-parts of their forces, and to offer
opportunity to the Scottish borderers, who were always uncertain friends in
their extremities, and assured enemies upon advantage. The King seeing his
commandment in these terms both contemned and controulled, would not stand
to reason the matter with the Earl, neither had he the reason to defer revenge
until he had full power to work it: but presently in the violence of his
fury, caused the Earl and his confederates to be proclaimed traitors, and all
their lands and goods to be seized to his use. The Earl took grievously this
disgrace, and determined to cure and close up his harm with the disturbance of
the common state. And thus the King having feathered these arrows against his
own breast, passed forth in his journey into Ireland.

This expedition at the first proceeded and succeeded exceedingly well, and the
king obtained many victories, even without battle, as leading his men to a
slaughter rather then to a fight: for the savage Irish were not under one
government, but were divided into many partialities and factions, and seldom
did two or three parts join their common strenth and study together: so
whilst one by one did fight, all of them were either subdued or slain. But
these news little rejoiced the common people, they lusted not to listen
thereto: their common talk was to recount their common grieuances, to lay them
together, and aggrauate them by construction: every man more abounding in
complaints then he did in miseries. Also the noblemen (the principal object of
cruelty) began to discourse both their private dangers, and the deformities of
the state: and upon opportunity of the Kings absence, some of them did conspire
to cut off that authority which would not be confined, and to cast it upon some
other, who was most like to repair that which K. Richard had ruined: or if
(said they) our power shall come short of so good a purpose, yet will we sell
him both our lives and lands with glory in the field, which with certainty in
peace we can not enjoy. The only man upon whom all men resolved, was Henry
duke of Hereford (whom since the death of his father they called duke of
Lancaster) not at his own motion or desire, but because he was generally
esteemed meet: as being of the royal blood, and next by descent from males to
the succession of the crown: one that had made honorable proof of his virtues
and valor: the only man of note that remained alive, of those that before had
stood in arms against the King, for the behoof of the Commonwealth: for
which cause he was deeply touched at that time both in honor and in state. This
attempt pleased as possible to prove, and of necessity to be followed:
whereupon they secretly dispatched their letters to the Duke, soliciting his
speedy return into England, and declaring that as well for the benefit of the
realm, as for their own particular safety, they were forced to use force
against King Richard: that if it would please him to make the head, they would
furnish him the body of an able army, to expel the King from his unfortunate
government, and to settle the possession of the Crown in him, who was more apt
and able to sustain the same: that they would not provide him a base multitude
only, and they themselves help in bare wishes and advise, but would also
adioyne their hands and their lives; so that the peril should be common to all,
the glory only his, if fortune favored the enterprise. These letters were
conveyed by men crafty and bold, yet of sure credit, and inward in trust with
the Duke: who passing into France, first associated unto the^ Thomas Arundell
late Archbishop of Canterbury, and at that time (whether deservedly or without
cause) an exile in France: then they travailed by several ways, and in
counterfeit attire to Parris, where all met at the house of one Clugney, where
the Duke the^ soiourned, After some courtesies of course, with welcome on the
one side, and thanks on the other, and joy of both: the Archbishop of
Canterbury having obtained of the Duke priuacie and silence, made unto him a
solemn oration in these words, or to this sense following.

We are sent unto you (right high and noble Prince) from the chief Lords and
states of our land, not to seek revenge against our King upon private injury
and displeasure: nor upon a desperate coffeehouse to set the state on fire:
nor to procure the ambitious advancement of any particular person: but to open
unto you the deformities and decaies of our broken estate, and to desire your
aid, in staying the ruinous downfall of the same. The remembrance of the
honorable reputation that our country has borne, and the noble acts which
it has atchiued, does nothing else, but make the baseness more bitter unto us,
wherinto it is new fallen. Our victorious arms have heretofore been famous and
memorable, not only within the bownds of our Ocean sea, and in the Islands
adjoining unto us; but also in France, in Spain, and in other parts of Europe,
yea in Asia and in Affricke, against the infidels and Barbarians: so that all
Christian Princes have been either glad to embrace our friendship, or loath to
provoke us to hostility. But now the rude Scots, whose spirits we have so many
times broken, and brought on their knees, do scornfully insult upon us: the
naked and fugitive Irish, have shaken of our shackles, and glutted themselves
upon us, with massachres and spoils: with these we daily fight, not for
glory, but to live: insomuch as we are become a pity to our friends, and a
very jest to our most base and contemptible enemies. In deed the King has
both sent and led great armies into these countries, but in such sort, that
they have much wasted the realm with their maintenance; but neither revenged
nor relieved it with their arms: and no marvel, for all our diligent and
discreet leaders (the very sinews of the field) are either put to death, or
banished, or else lie buried in obscurity and disgrace: and the marshalling of
all affairs is committed (without any respect of sufficiency or desert) to the
counsel and conduct of those, who can best apply themselves to the Kings
youthful delights. Among these, ancient nobility is accounted a vain jest,
wealth, and virtue are the ready means to bring to destruction.

It grieves me to speak, but it helps not, to hide that which every man
sees: our ancestors lived in the highest pitch and perfection of liberty;
but we of seruilitie, being in the nature, not of subjects, but of abiectes,
and flat slaves; not to one intractable Prince only, but to many proud and
disdainefull favorites; not always the same, but ever new; and no sooner have
we satisfied some, but fresh hungry masters are straight ways set upon us,
who have more endamaged us by extortion and bribes, then the enemy has done by
the sword. What unusual kinds of exactio^are daily put in practice? without
either measure or end, and oftentimes with out need: or if any be, it
proceeds rather upon ryotus expenses, then any necessary or honorable
charge: and great sums of money are pulled and pilled from good subjects, to
be thrown away amongst unprofitable unthrifts. And if any man opens his
mouth against these extorted taxations, then either by feined imputation of
capital crimes, or by small matters aggrauated, or else by open cruelty and
force, his life or liberty is forthwith hazarded. I were too tedious, too
odious, too friuolus to put you in mind of particular examples, as though your
own estate, and the lamentable loss of your uncle, and other noble friends,
could be forgotten: yea, I suppose that there is no man of quality within the
Realm, who either in his own person, or in his near friends, does not
plainly perceive, that no man enjoys the safeguard of his goods, and suerty of
his body; but rich men in the one, and great men in the other are continually
endaungered. This then is our case; but what is our remedy? we have endured,
and we have entreated: but our patience has drawn on more heavy burdens,
and our complaints procured more bitter blows: by the one our livings, and our
lives by the other are daily devoured. And therefore we are now compelled to
shake off our shoulders this importable yoke, and submit our selves to the
sovereignty of some more moderate and worthy person: not so much for the
grief of our miseries which are past nor for the pain of our present
distresses, as for fear of such dangers as are most like to ensue, for the
King has cut away the chief of the nobility, and the commons he has pared
to the quick, and still he harrieth us as a conquered country: whereby we
are laid bare to the havoc of al our enemies, and utterly disabled, not only
to recover that which is lost, but also to retain even that which is left. But
to whom should we complain? what succor, whose aid should we desire? you are
the only man, who in right should, and in wisdom can, and in goodness will
(we hope) relieve us. For you are nearest to the King in blood, and therefore
ought to have the rule of that which his weakness cannot wielde. Your years
are well stayed from the light conceits of youth, and so spent, that all your
actions have made proof of ability in government of greatest charge: nothing
past, needs excuse, and fear is vain for any thing to come. The pains and
perils which heretofore you have undertaken for the benefit of your country,
puts us also in good hope, that in these extremities you will not forsake
us: we are all as in a ship that is ready to sink, as in a house that is
ready to fall, and do most humbly crave and call for your help; now or else
never show your self in favor of your countrymen, to free us, to free your
self, to free the whole state from these dangers and decays, by taking into
your hands the scepter and diadem of the Realm, and reducing again the
government thereof to a princely freedom; in combining the sovereignty of
one, with the liberty of all. Omit not this occasion: to set forth to the view
of the world, as in a large field, and at free scope your virtue and courage,
by relieuing miserable wretches from their oppressors: which action has been
so highly honored, that many heathen men for the same, have been accounted as
Gods. This we are constrained to offer and entreat: this is both honorable for
you to accept, and easy to be performed: and so much the more, in that no
Prince, by any people have been desired with greater affection, nor shall be
with more duty obeyed.

The Duke entertained this speech, with great moderation of mind, showing
himself neither disturbed thereat, nor excessive in joy. His answer
concerning the King, was respective and well tempered; rather lamenting his
weakness then blaming his malice. Concerning himself he spoke so modestly,
that he seemed rather worthy of a kingdom, then desirous. The life (quoth he)
which hitherto I have led, has always been free from ambitious attempts: and
the stayednesse of my years, has now settled my mind from aspiring thoughts:
and experience of former dangers has bred in me a wary regard in such
weighty proceedings, for to cast a King out of state, is an enterprise not
hastily to be resolved upon, nor easily effected: but suppose that matter not
impossible, and perhaps not hard, yet the rareness of the like precedents,
will make the action seem injurious to most men: and he that shall attain a
kingdom upon opinion of desert, does charge himself with great expectation,
and how honorably soever he carried himself, shall never want his deadly
enuiers: besides this, in civil dissentions the faith of the whole people is
fleeting, and danger is to be doubted from every particular person: so that
it is possible that al may fall away, and impossible to beware of every one.
Therefore I could rather wish, to spend the course of my years which yet
remain, in this obscure, yet safe and certain state, then to thrust my self
upon the pikes of those perils, which being once entered into, are dangerous to
follow, and deadly to forsake: for in private attempts, a man may step and
stope when he please: but he that aymeth at a kingdom, has no middle course
between the life of a Prince, and the death of a traitor.

The Archbishop hearing this, did as vainly persist in importuning the duke, as
he vainly seemed unwilling and strange. The state (said he) wherein now you
stand, is not so safe and certain as you do conceive. In deed, by rejecting
our request you shall avoid certain dignity, and therewith uncertain and
contingent dangers; but you shall procure most certain destruction both to your
self and us. For this secret can not be kept long secret from the king: and
even good princes are nice in points of sovereignty, and bear a nimble ear to
the touch of that string: and it more hurts a subject to be esteemed worthy
of the kingdom, then it will profit him to have refused the offer. What then
will he do, who puts the chiefest surety of his reign in the baseness and
bareness of his subjects? whose head being possessed with eternal ielousy,
makes every presumption a proof, and every light surmise a strong suspicion
against them. Surely since the general favor and love which the people
bears you, has bereaved you of your liberty, this their general desire will
not leave your life untouched. As for us, if we either faint in our intent, or
fail in the enterprise, actum est: we shall be as lambs among lions: and no
conquest can be so cruel as the Kings reign will be over us. Certainly we
have gone too far, for to go back; and the time is past, when you for
ambition, and we for envy might seem to attempt against the King: the
attainment of the kingdom must now be a sanctuary and refuge for us both. The
like examples are not rare (as you affirm) nor long since put in practice, nor
far hence to be fetched. The kings of Denmark and of Sweueland, are oftentimes
banished by their subjects; oftentimes imprisoned and put to their fine: The
princes of Germany, about an hundred years past, deposed Adulphus the Emperor:
and are now in hand to depose their emperor Wences^aus. The earl of Flanders
was a while since driven out of his Dominion by his own people, for usurping
greater power then appertained to his estate. The ancient Britains chased
away their own King Carecious, for the lewdness of his life, and cruelty of
his rule. In the time of the Saxon H^ptarchic, Bernredus King of Mercia, for
his pride and stoutnes toward his people, was by them deposed. Likewise
Aldredus and Ethelbertus Kings of Northumberland, were for their disorders
expelled by their subjects. Since the victory of the Normaines, the Lords
endeavored to expel King Henry the third, but they were not able: yet were
they able to depose King Edward the second, and to constitute his young son
Edward King in his stead: these are not all, and yet enough to clear this
action of rareness in other countries; and novelty in our. The difficulty
indeed is somewhat, because the excellency is great: but they that are
affraide of every bush, shall never take the bird: and your self had once some
trial hereof, when without battle, without blood or blows, you had the King
at such a lift, as he held his Crown at your courtesy, even at that time when
his grieuances were, neither for greatness nor continuance, so intolerable as
now they are grown: and by reason of his tender years, not out of al compass,
both of excuse for the fault, and of hope for an amendment. And as concerning
the lawfulness.

Nay (said the Duke) where necessity does enforce, it is superfluous to use
speech, either of easiness, or of lawfulness: necessity will beat through
brazen Walls: and can be limited by no laws. I have felt very deeply my part
in these calamities, and I would you knew with what grief I have beheld your:
for what other reward have I received, of all my travails and services, but
the death of my uncle and dearest friends, my own banishment, the imprisonmeut
of my children, and loss of my inheritance? and what have been returned to
you, for your blood so often shed in his unfortunate wars, but continual
tributes, scourges, gallows, and slavery? I have made sufficient proof, both
of patience in my own miseries, and of pity in your: remedy them hither to I
could not: If now I can, I will not refuse to sustain that part, which yonr
importunity does impose upon me, if we prevail, we shall recover again our
liberty: if we loose, our state shall be no worse the^ now it is: and since
we must needs perish, either deseruingly or without cause, it is more honorable
to put our selves upon ^he adventure either to win our lives, or to dye for
deserte: and although our lives were safe, which in deed are not, yet to
abandon the state, ane sleep still in this slavery; were a point of
negligence and sloth. It remains then, that we use both secrecy and
celeritie, laying hold upon the opportunity which the Kings absence has now
presented unto us: for in all enterprises which never are commended before they
be achieved, delays are dangerous; and more safe it is to be found in
action, then in counsel: for they that deliberate only to rebel, have
rebelled already.

So the messengers departed into England, to declare the Dukes acceptance, and
to make preparation against his arrival, both of armor, and of subjection,
and desire to obey. Presently after their departure, the Duke signified to
Charles king of France, that he had a desire to go into Britain, ^o visit
John Duke of Britain, his friend and kinsman. The King suspecting no further
fetch, sent letters of commendation in his favor, to the Duke of Britain:
but if he had surmised any dangerous drift against King Richard, who not long
before, had taken his daughter to wife; in stead of letters of safe-conducte,
he would have found lettes to have kept him safe from disturbing his son in
laws estate.

As Soon as the Duke was come into Britain, he waged certain soldiers, and
presently departed to Calice, and so committed to sea for England; giving
forth, that the only cause of his voyage, was to recover the Duchy of
Lanchaster, and the rest of his lawful inheritance, which the King wrongfully
deteyned from him. In his company was Thomas Arundell the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Thomas the son and heir of Richard late earl of Arundell,
who was very young, and had a little before escaped out of prison, and fled into
France to the Duke. The residue of his attendants were very few, not exceeding
the number of fifteen lances: so that it is hard to esteem whether it was
greater marvel, either that he durst attempt, or that he did prevail with so
small a company: but his chiefest confidence was in the favor and assistance of
the people within the realm. So he did bear with England, yet not in a
straight course, but floated along the shore, making head sometimes to one
coast, and sometimes to another, to discover what forces were in a readiness,
either to resist or to receive him.

As he was in this sort houering on the seas, L. Edmund duke of York, the
kings uncle, to whom the king had committed the custody of the Realm during
the time of his absence, called unto him Edmu^d Stafford bishop of Chichester,
L. Ghancellour, and W. Scroupe earl of Wiltshire, L. Treasurour of the Realm,
also, Sir John Bushie, Sir Henry Green, Sir William Bagot, Sir John Russell,
and certain others of the kings Privy council; and entered into deliberation
what was best to be done. At the last it was concluded, deceitfully by some,
unskillfully by others, and by all perniciously for the king; to leave the sea
coasts, and to leave London, the very walls and castle of the Realm, and to
go to S. Albons, there to gather strength sufficient to encounter with the
duke. It is most certain that the dukes side was not any ways more furthered,
then by this dissembling and deceiuable dealing: for open hostility and arms,
may openly and by arms be resisted: but privy practices, as they are hardly
espied, so are they seldom avoided. And thus by this means the duke landed
about the feast of Saiud Martin, without let or resistance, at Rauenspur in
Houldernesse, as most writers affirm.

Presently after his ariual, there resorted to him Lord Henry Pearcie Earl of
Northumberland, and Lord Henry his son Earl of Westmerland, Lord Radulph
Neuill, Lord Rose, Lord Willoughby, and many other personages of honor, whose
company increased reputation to the cause, and was a great couutenance and
strength to the Dukes further purposes. And first they took of him an oath,
that he should neither procure nor permit any bodily harm to be done unto
King Richard; whereupon they bound themselves upon their honors to prosecute
all extremities against his mischievous counsailers. And this was one step
further then that which the Duke pretended at the first, when he took
shipping at Callice, which was only the recovery of his inheritance: but that
was as yet not determined, nor treated, and of some perhaps not thought upon;
which afterward it did ensue: and so was that place easily insinuated into by
degrees, which with maine and direct violence would hardlier have bin obtained.
Then the common people desperate upon new desires, and without head, headlong
to matters of innovation, flocked very fast to these noble men, the better sort
for love to the commonwealth, some upon a wanton lenetie, and vain desire of
change, others in regard of their own^ distressed and decayed estate, who
setting their chief hopes and devises upon a general disturbance, were then
most safe when the common state was most unsure. So between the one and the
other, the multitude did in short time increase to the number of threescore
thousand able soldiers.

The Duke finding this favor not only to exceed his expectation, but even
above his wish, he thought it best to follow the current whilst the stream
was most strong, knowing right well, that if fortune be followed, as the first
do fall out, the rest will commonly succeed. Therefore cutting of unnecessary
delays, with all possible celerity he hastened toward London: to the end that
possessing himself thereof as the chief place within the realm, both for
strength and store, he might there make the seat of the war. In this journey
no sign nor show of hostility appeared, but all the way as he passed, the men
of chiefest quallity and power adjoined themselves unto him, some upon heat of
affection, some for fear, others upon hope of reward after victory; every
one upon causes dislike, with like ardent desire contending, least any should
seem more foreward then they: In every place also where he made stay, rich
gifts and pleasant devises were presented unto him, with large supply both of
force and provision: far above his need: and the common people which for their
greatness take no care of public affairs, and are in least danger by
reason of their baseness, with shoutes and acclamations gave their applause;
extolling the Duke, as the only man of courage, and saluting him Kiug; but
spending many contumelious terms upon King Richard, and deprauing him, as a
simple and sluggish man, a dastard, a meycocke, and one altogether unworthy to
bear rule; showing themselves as much without reason in railing upon the one,
as they were in flattering the other. Again, the Duke for his part was not
negligent to uncover the head to bow the body, to stretch forth the hand to
every mean person, and to use all other complements of popular behavior,
wherewith the minds of the common multitude are much delighted and drawn;
taking that to be courtesy, which the seuerer sort account abasement. When h^
came to the city, he was there likewise very richly and royally entertained,
with processions and pageantes, and diverse other triumphant devises and shows;
the standings in all the streets, where he passed were taken up to behold him;
and the unable multitude, who otherwise could not, yet by their good words,
wishes, and wills, did testify unto him their loving affections: neither did
there appear in any man at that time, any memory of faith and alleagiance
toward King Richard, but (as in seditions it always happens) as the most
swayed all did go.

On the contrary side, the Duke of York with the rest of his ^ounsaile, fell
to mustering of men at S. Albones, for the King: but as the people out of
diverse quarters were called thither, many of the^ protested, that they would
do nothing to the harm and prejudice of the Duke of Lancaster, who they said
was unjustly expelled, first from his country, and afterward from his
inheritance. Then W. Scroupe Earl of Wiltshire L. Treasorer, Sir I. Bush, Sir
W. Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, perceiving the stiff resolution of the people
forsook the duke of York, and the L. Chanceller, and fled toward Bristow;
intending to pass the seas into Ireland to the king. These four were they
upon whom the common fame went, that they had taken of the king his realm to
farm: who were so odious unto the people, that their presence turned away the
hearts of many subjects; yea it was thought, that more for displeasure against
them, then against the king, the revolt was made. For being the only men of
credit and authority with the King, under false color of obedience they wholly
governed both the realm and him; to many mischiefs corrupting his mind, and in
many abusing his name, either against his will, or without his knowledge,
insomuch as he was innocent of much harm which passed under his commandment:
but the patience of the people could not endure that two or three should rule
al; not by reason they were sufficient, but because they were in favor: and
the King in that he permitted them whom he might have bridled, or was ignorant
of that which he should have known, by tolerating and wincking at their
faults, made them his own, and opened thereby the way to his destruction. So
often times it falls out to be as dangerous to a prince to have hurtful and
hateful officers in place and services of weight, as to be hurtful and
hateful himself.

The Duke of York either amazed at this sudden change, or fearing his
adventure if he should proceed in resistance, gave over the cause, and
preferred present security, before duty with danger; giving most men occasion
to misdeeme by his dealing, that he secretly favored the dukes enterprise;
likewise all the other counsailers of that side, either openly declared for the
Duke or secretly wished him well: and abandoning all private direction and
advice, adjoined themselves to the common course, presuming thereby of greater
safety.

Duke Henry in the mean time being at London, entered into deliberation with
his friends, what way were best to be followed. At the last, having considered
the forwardness of the people, the greatness of the peril whereinto they had
already plunged, and the kings irreconcilable nature, whereof he made proof
against the duke of Gloucester, and the earls of Arundel and of Warwick: they
finally resolved to expel him from his dignity, and to constitute duke Henry
king in his sted: and to that end open war was denounced against the King, and
against all his partakers, as enemies to the quiet and prospenty of the realm;
and pardon also promised to all those that would submit themselves to follow
the present course, otherwise to look for no favor, but all extremities. None
of the nobility durst openly oppose himself to these designs: some unwilling
to play all their state at a cast; kept themselves at liberty, to be directed
by success of further event: others consented coldly, and in terms of
doubtful construction, with intent to interpret them afterward, as occasion
should change: but the most part did directly and resolutely enter into the
cause, and made their fortunes common with the Duke, in danger of the attempt,
but not in honor: among whom, the Duke standing up, used speech to this
purpose.

I am returned here as you see, at your procurement, and by your agreement have
entered into arms for the common liberty: we have hitherto prosperously
proceeded, but in what terms we now stand, I am altogether uncertain. A
private man I am loath to be accounted, being designed to be King by you; and a
Prince I cannot be esteemed, whilst another is in possession of the kingdom.
Also your name is in suspense, whether to be termed rebels or subjects, until
you have made manifest that your allegiance was bound rather to the state of
the realm then the person of the Prince. Now you are the men who have both
caused this doubtfulnes and must clear the same; your parts still remains to
be performed; your virtue and valor must add strength to the goodness of
this action. We have already attempted so far, that all hope of pardon is
extinct; so that if we should shrincke back, and break of the enterprise, no
mercy is to be expected but butchery and gibbets, and all extremities if we
drive of and delay the accomplishment thereof, we shall loose the opportunity
which now is offered, and open to our enemies occasion of advantage. For the
peoples blood is up now on our side, and nothing is wanting but our own
diligence and care: let us not therefore trifle out the time of doing, in
talking and deliberating: it is best striking whilst the iron is hoate: let us
set forth roundly, and possess our selves with speed of all the parts of the
realm: and so we shall be able either to keep out our concurrent, or else to
entertain him little to his liking. So troops of men were sent into every
quarter of the realm, to secure them for making strength on the part of King
Richard: but the people in all places as men broken with many burdens, did
easily entertain the first commer, and were not curious to fide with the
stronger. The Duke pursued those of the Kings privy counsel, which fled away
from the duke of York; bearing himself with great cheer and courage, as
confident in the cause, and secure of the event. When he came at Bristow he
found the castle fortified against him; but in short time he forced it, and
took therein Sir John Bushy, Sir Henry Green, and W. Scroupe, L. Treasurer,
a joyful pray to the common people: who (fearing that if execution should be
deferred, petitions for pardon might happen to prevail, and so their cruelties
and injuries should be canswered with the vain title and commendation of
elemency) did violently require them unto death, no respite could be obtained,
no defense admitted, no answer heard: yea their humble and submisse entreaty
was interpreted to argue a weak and broken courage upon a guilty conscience,
which more incensed the rage of the people, crying out that they were
traitors, bloud-suckers, thieves, and what other heinous terms insulting
fury did put into their mouths: at which clamorous and importunant instance,
the day following they were beheaded. Sir William Bagot came not with them to
Bristowe, but turned to Chester: and the pursuit being made after the most, he
alone escaped into Ireland. This execution, partly because it pleased the
people, and partly because it excluded all hope of the Kings pardon, caused
them to cleave more closely to the Duke; which greatly increased, both his
glory, and his hope; having officers of so long aid, and need of so little.

In the mean time this news of the Dukes arrival and of other occurrences,
part true, part false, and part enlarged by circumstance (as fame grows in
the going) was blown over to the King, being then entangled with other broils
in Ireland, at the receipt whereof, he caused th^^nnes of the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the Duke of Lancaster to be imprisoned in the strong Castle
Trim, which is in Ireland, and for dispatch to return into England, left many
matters unfinished, and most of his provision behind, hasting and shufling up,
as present necessity did enforce. So being both unskillful and unfortunate
himself, and de^oide of good direction; with more haste then good hap he took
shipping, with the Duke of Aumerle, Exceter, and Surrie, the Bishops of London,
Lincoln, and Caerliele, and many other men of quality: and crossing the seas,
landed at Milford haven in Wales, in which conntrimen he always reposed his
chiefest surety and trust, but then he saw contrary to his expectation, that
as well there as in all other places, the people by plumps flocked to the Duke,
and fled from him: yea they that came with him began for to waver, no man
encouraging them to be constant, but many to revolt. This sudden change not
looked for, not thought upon, disturbed all the Kings devises, and made him
irresolute what he should do: on the one side he saw his cause and quarrel
to be right, and his conscience (he said) clear from any bad demerite: on
the other side he saw the great strength of his enemies, and the whole power
of the realm bent against him: and being more abashed of the one, then
emboldned by the other, he stood perplexed in uncertain terms, either where
to stay, or whether to stir, having neither skill nor resolution himself in
cases of difficulty, and noxious to hurtful and unfaithful counsel. Some
advised him to march forward, and pierce deeper into the land, before his own
forces fell from him: affirming, that valor is seconded by fortune: that this
courage of his, would confirm the constancy of his soldiers: and his
presence put the people in remembrance of their faith: that in all places he
should find some, who for favor, or for hire, or else for duty, would
adheare unto him: whereby he should soon gather strength sufficient to join
issue with his enemy in the f^de. Others persuaded him to retire again into
Ireland, and then if succor failed him in England, to wage soldiers out of
other countries. But the King being no man of action in military affairs,
rejected both the counsels, as neither venturous enough with the one, nor
wary enough with the other: and taking a middle course (which in cases of
exremitie of all is the worst) he determined to make stay in Wales, and there
to attend to what head this humor would rise.

The Duke upon advertisement that the King was landed in Wales, removed with a
strong army from Bristowe toward Chester, using the first opportunity
against him, and which in deed was the fittest, When L. Thomas Percie Earl of
Worcester, and steward of the Kings household, heard of the Dukes approach, he
brake forth into show of that displeasure, which before he had conceived
against the King, for proclayming his brother; the Earl of Northumberlande
traitor, and thereupon openly in the hall, in the presence of the Kings
servants, he brake his white rod, the ensign of his office, and forthwith
departed to the Duke, willing every man to shift for himself in time: by which
act he lost reputation, both with the haters and fouourers of King Richard;
being accounted of the one a corrupter, of the other a forsaker and betrayer of
the King. After this example, almost all the rest, more fearful then
faithful scattered themselves every one his way: and they who in the Kings
flourishing time, would have contended to be foremost, now in his declining
estate equally draw back, and like swallows, forsook that house in the
winter of fortunes boisterous blasts, where they did nothing but feed and
foil in the summer of her sweet sunshine. And thus between faint
soldiers and false friends, the King was abandoned and forsaken, and left
almost unto himself: look on he might, but let it, he could not, as not of
force to punish that, which he never forced to prevent: his only remedy was
patience: (a cold comfort) his only revenge was complaint: (a weak weapon)
between which two, his bitterness did in this manner break from him.

And do these also (said he) forsake me? does their faith and my fortune end
together? well, if I had forsaken them in time I had not been forsaken of
others, who once loved me better, and now are able to harm me more. But now I
see the blindness of my judgment: I plainly see, that there is no friendship
in flattery, nor treachery in plain truth: and I would I had as much time to
reform this error, as I am like to have to repent it, but they would not
suffer me to be wise when I might, and now they have made me wretched they
run from me: they could be the causes, but they will not be companions of my
miseries: such attendants are Crows to a carcass, which flock together, not
to defend, but to devour it, and no sooner have they laid the bones bare, but
straight-wayes they are gone.

Thus the King having lost both the fear and love of his subjects, disturbed
and distracted in thoughts, without comfort council or courage, remained still
in Wales, as a stranger at home, as an exile in his own kingdom, not daring
to go to London, nor any man desirous to come to him, shifting still from
place to place, and (as it falls out at men distressed and amazed) fearing all
things, but most disliking the present. The Duke continually pursued him with a
mighty army: but the Kings company was too small to do any thing by force,
and yet too great to remain in secret: neither were they in any sort assured
unto him, but such as shame and reverence retained a while; bands of small
countenance, with men fearful of danger, and careless of credit. At the
length he came to the Castle of Conweye; and there being utterly destitute both
of help and hope, he stood divided in mind what way to bend his course, all
his followers wear more ready to impugn the opinions of other, the^ to give
direction themselves, as seeing better what to shun then what to follow: and
as it always chances in desperate causes, that way was commonly preferred,
whereof the opportunity was already past. Some advised him, that it was the^
time to think, rather of saving his life, then recovering his estate. You see
(said they) how greatly and how wholly your subjects are set against you: it is
but in vain to look for a sudden change, or without a change to hope that
your purposes may prevail, give place for a time to the current of this fury;
let it have the full sway; and when it is at the highest pitch, it will turn
again; and then you shall have the tide as strong on your side, as it is now
against you. This motion or rather commotion of the people, is violent and
against nature: and therefore (as a stone forced upward) is most strong at the
beginning, and the further it passes the more it weakneth, until at last it
return to the natural course again. Therefore give a little space, for the
bad to draw back, for the good to put forward: treasons prevail on the
sudden: but good counsels gather forces by leisure. You have example in
your noble progenitor King Henry the third, against whom the Lords set up
Jews the French kings son: conditions were concluded, and faith was made
that he should be their King: but this purpose lasted not the pulling on: for
before they had possessed him of the kingdom, they joined together in arms
against him, and were as fierce to drive him out of the realm, as they had
been found to draw him in. The like alteration may you likewise not only
hope, but assuredly expect: for the minds of men are constant in nothing but
inconstancy, and persevere only in change, in dislike of things present they
desire new, wherewith they rest not long contented, but are many times glutted
even with the first sight. And indeed how can they long endure the reign of
him, who attaining the kingdom only by their favor and might, shall hold
the same in a manner, at their courtesy and will? for every unpleasant
command, shall be deemed ingratitude: every suit rejected, shall charge him
with unkindness: Yea if honor be not offered, they will be discontented: and
upon any occasion of displeasure, think themselves as able to displace him,
as they were to set him up: therefore you may for a time, return again into
Ireland; or else pass the seas to your Father in law, the king of France:
you may assure your self of his assistance, to set upon your side, and recover
your losses. Times have their turns, and fortune her course too and fro like
the sea, and magnanimity is shown by enduring, and not relinquishing when she
does cross, only loose no point of courage, and keep your person at large:
reserving your self to that good hope, which never dies whilst life endure.

Others, who were enemies to all counsel, whereof themselves were not
authors, persuaded the King, that the nobility and commons of the realm had
attempted so far, that they would rather dye, then desist; not so much for
hatred to you, as for fear to themselves; having so deadly increased your
displeasure against them. For it is a hard matter to forgive, and impossible to
forget those injuries and indignities which they have offered. And to omit what
some princes have done, what all will promise to do, they will soon find
fresh and bleeding examples what you are like to do. The Duke of Gloucester
and the Earls of Arundell and of Warwick did rise in arms against you, not
to remove you from your crown: but to remove certain persons from your
company; an action more displeasing then prejudicial unto you: at the last, a
friendship was made, and charters of free pardon granted unto them: but what
followed? was ever the breach perfectly made up? did displeasure dye? or was it
only dissembled? ah, it grieueth us to think, how the present want of their
lives, has fully revenged their deaths: for if they had lived, their
countenance and authority would easily have stayed these stirs; and the manner
of their deaths does strike an obstinate persistance into all your enemies. As
for refuge to foreign Princes, you shall surely receive of them entertainment
and allowance, and yet may grow burdensome, and at last perhaps fail: but it
is very hard to draw any Prince into so dangerous a quarrel: and more hard by
that means to prevail: or if you should, it is to be feared that the
victorers will hold to themselves the benefit of their conquest, and not yield
it over unto you. Few countries but have bin under pretense of aid by
forrenners subdued: and this was the only cause which first drew the Saxons
into this land: who so assisted the Britains against their enemies, that
themselves could not be resisted from possessing they^ kingdom. Yet we do not
altogether condemn the help of strangers, in cases of extremity; but do
account it a remedy, least to be trusted, and last of all to be tried. What
then if first you should procure a treaty, to see in what terms the people
stand against you? It may be that upon some conditions they will submit
themselves unto you, as heretofore they have done. Or if they will needs deforce
you from your kingdom, yet if an honorable maintenance may be assured, what
shall you lose thereby? What shall you lack? You have no child to be
disinherited; the chiefest motive which makes men so greedy to get, and so
careful to keep. And as for your self, you shall be removed from a steep
and sli^^ pery hill, to a smooth and pleasant plain; from tempest^^us seas, to
a calm haven; from dangerous travail to secure rest: and if there be no
solace without safety, no felicity without firmness; you shall find the
private life not only more sweet, but more high and happy then your princely
state. The tallest trees are weakest in the tops; in widest fields are
greatest tempests; and envy always aims at loftiest marks: so that to be
placed on high, is a false felicity, and a true misery; in show a rule, but
indeed a subjection to all the subjects; having least stay to stand, and most
danger in the fall: and therefore if you come down safely, you are therein
priuileged above many other. But you shall lose (you will say) the credit and
the countenance of a King: so you shall the cares; and so you shall the
casualties. The crown and sceptar are things most weighty to weld: if a Prince
be good, he is laden with labor; if evil, with infamy and reproach: i^ either
with perils: on every side he is beset with dangerous rocks, with deadly
gulfes, and continually tossed with strong and sturdy tempests: so that to be
freed from these fears, is to be esteemed an escape, and not a loss. This did
the stoic Philosopher perecue, who seeing Dionysius ^it, merrily and freely
conceited in the theater, being a little before expelled his kingdom; greatly
condemned the error of his people who had banished him to such liberty, and so
preferred him by his punisliment. These are the dreams of philosophers (you
will say) who usually contemn and deprave honor, and yet never lie from
honorable men's tables. Let pass then Philosophers: go to vain and sottish
men. Seleuchus being a King was wont to say, that if a man knew with what cares
the diade^ was clogged, he would not take it up, although it lay in the street.
You will say peradventure, that like the boatman, he looked one way, and pulled
another; or like the lapwing, he cried most when he was furthest from his nest,
vainly dispraising that which he was loathest to loos^* What say you then to
Antiochus? whom when the Romans had dispoiled of al Asia, he sent unto them
great thanks, that they had rid him of infinite and importable cares, and set
him at a moderate quiet: you will say that he made a virtue of his necessity.
Well then, we are some what near your case: and they that cannot frame their
wills to this wisdom, let them thank their enemies for enforcing them to it.
But what say you to Di^clesian? who did voluntarily relinqusht, not a small and
corner kingdom, but the greatest empire that the world did ever bear and
found so sweet contentme^t in that exchange, that when he was importuned by the
senate, to resume his estate, he utterly rejected their suite. But what need
we travel in externe histories, for those examples, whereof we have so large
supply in our own? the ancient Saxon Kings; Kingilsus, Ina, Ceolulphus,
Eadbertus, Ethelredus, Ke^redus, Offa, Sebbi, and Sigebertus did of their own
accord lay down their diadems and scepters, and betake themselves to solitary
and religious lives. Now many Princes have held their estate with better
fortune, but none did ever with greater honor leave it, then you should at this
present: for others have aba^doned their rule, either for desire of ease, or
for auoidance of dangers, or upon some sluggish and superstitious devotion: but
you for love to your country, shall forbear to seek your uttermost remedy, in
setting up a most cruel war: wherein much English blood should be spilt, and
the realm deprived of many worthy armies. Let others be repotted to forsake
their kingdoms, when they had no longer pleasure to hold the^: but your praise
shall be for giving over, when it is greatest benefit unto the people: and the
more hope you have to prevail, if you list to contend, the greater
commendations will it be to yield as being rather voluntary then by constraint.

The king commended the courage of the first, but this last counsel best
agreed with his faint and feeble spirit, more yielding to fear then forward in
hope; apt by the one to despair, unable by the other to hold out in any hard
adventure, preferring always abject and base safety, before hazard with
honor. Yet were many ready to reply, that al speech of conditions and yielding
was both dishonorable and also dangerous: for even in hardest haps, said they,
a noble nature will not presently relinquish; but first endeavor either by
courage to repel the danger, or by wisdom to decline it: and why should you
so little esteem your glory and fame, as without battle, or blow stricken* to
bind your hands, and yield up your weapons, and put your self upon miserable
mercy: or if the honor of your noble house does nothing move you, yet let
danger and despair at least arm you to boldness: for neither the duke nor
his friends will be so confident as to think themselves safe, so long as you
shall remain (although in private state) alive. Indeed you may assure your
self that fair words will be given, and large offers made: but the performance
shall consist in the courtesy of the conqueror: and nothing will be thought
unlawful to him that has power. King Edward the second was too heavy to be
endured, eue^ of his own son: and many have used violence to themselves,
rather the^ they would fall into the power of their concurrents: and do not you
expect more favor or greater fortune the^ other have found: let never that
senselesnes possess your mind, to imagine that a prince may live safely in
private estate: for in this case there is no mean between Caesar and nothing,
between the highest honor and the deadliest downfall. Therefore omit neither
all nor any one means unassayed, to maintain your side by arms: no greater
harm can happen at the hardest, then that which willingly you run into: you
can but die if you be vanquished, and die you shall if you do yield: but by the
one you shall end your life with glory, by the other, with shame and perpetual
reproach. And although you do now esteem equally of both, yet when you shall
see your self pent in prison, in daily fear and expectancy of a bloody
messenger; you shall then perceive a difference in death, and find the
weakness and fault of the counsel which you are about to follow. Many like
speeches were with great veheme^cy often repeated, but the kings ears were
stopped against all impression of manhood: and as he was unable to govern
himself in his prosperous estate, so was he much less sufficient to wind out
of these intricate troubles. Therefore perceiving himself so straightly beset,
that he could hardly either escape away, or shift any longer, he desired speech
with Tho. Arundel archbish. of Cant. and L. Hen. Percy earl of Northumb. of
whom, the one he had banished, the other he had proclaimed traitor not long
before. These two came unto him, and the king upon short conference,
understanding what stiff stomachs they bare against him, was content not to
demand that which he saw he could not obtain: and thereupon agreed that he
would relinquish his estate, upon condition that an honorable living might be
assigned him, and life promised to 8. such persons as he would name: the
greatest number whom adversity did not alter. This was then both readily and
faithfully promised by the Archbish. and the earl, and afterward solemnly
ratified by the duke. The king ceased not to entreat submisly, and promise
largely, and (as the nature is of men perplexed with fear) above his ability,
and without measure, the earl encouraged him, and declared that the Duke
before he had obtained any aid, secured by his oath the safety of the kings
person. Then the king desired to talk with the duke, which was likewise
promised; and so the archbish. and the earl departed, and the king removed to
the castle of Flint, about 8. miles distant from Chester, to which place the
Duke came to him. Here the coutenances and words of both were noted, by them
that were present: the king seemed abject and base: the duke neither iusulting
nor relenting, but comforting and promising friendly. The king repeated many
benefits and kindnesses that he had showed: how in former time he had spared
the dukes own life, and lately his sons: in regard where of he desired him,
with such submisnes as was agreeable rather with his necessity then his honor:
that he would show some pity, where he had received such pleasure: and permit
him to enjoy his life, with such private maintenance as was convenient for his
estate. The duke put him in good comfort, promising him assuredly, that he
would provide for his safety: for which he suffered himself to be solemnly
thanked, and thought it not much to have it accounted a great benefit. Indeed
from that time the king was kept safe and sure enough, from hindering any of the
dukes purposes, neither could it so easily have been discerned what had beue
best for him to do, as that this which he did was the very worst: for the same
night he was brought by the duke and his army to Chester, and from thence
secretly conveyed to the Tower of London, there to be kept safe until the
Parliament, which was appointed shortly after to be holden.

Thus the King yeal ded himself, the 20. day of August, being the 47. day
after the Dukes arrival: so that his iournyes considered, from Houldernesse in
the North to London: from thence to Bristowe, and so into Wales, and back
again to Chesten a man shall not easily travail over the land in shorter time
then he conquered it. So frienly was fortune unto him, that he either found or
made a ready passage through al hindrances and lets: and it seemed that he
needed only, to open his arms, to meet and receive her, as she offered her
self unto him. All the Kings treasure and Jewels, with his horses, and all his
fardage came to the Dukes hands; and many that were in his company, were
afterward also despoyled by the soldiers of Northumberland and Wales.

Some writers affirm, that the King did not yeald himself, but was forelaied
and taken, as he was secretly passing from Flint to Chester: but the authority
of others who lived in that time, either in the plain view, or certain
intelligence of these affairs, who for their place could not but know, and
for their profession would not but deliver the very truth, has drawn me to
follow their report: which I find also received by some late wrighters, of as
great deapth in judgment and choice, as any (without exception) that this age
has brought forth.

As the King was carried toward London, certain citizens conspired to lay
themselves in a wait by the way, and suddenly to slay him; partly for private
grieuances, and partly for the cruelty that he had used toward the whole
city: but the Mayor upon intelligence prevented the practice, and rode forth
in person with a convenient company, to conduct him safely unto the tower.
Shortly after the duke came to London in solemn estate, and sent forth summons
in the Kings name, for a Parliament to be holden at Westminster, the last day of
September in the same year: in the mean time he deliberated with his kindred
and kind friends, concerning the order of his proceedings. The duke of York
(who a little before had been governor of the realm for the king and the^ was
the chiefest directer of the duke) thought it best that K. Richard should both
voluntarily resign, and also solemnly be deposed, by consent of all the states
of the realm: for resignation only would be imputed to fear, and depriuati^^
to force; whereof the one is always pitied, and the other envied; but if both
concur, and his desire be combined with his desert, being willing to forsake
that which he is adjudged worthy to forgo; then shall it appear, that he
neither is expelled his kingdom by mere constraint, nor leaves it without
just cause This advice pleased the rest, and for executing thereof upon the day
of S. Michaeil (which was the day before the parliament should begin) there
assembled at the Tower. Thomas Arundell archbish. of Canturbury, Richard
Scroupe archbish. of York, John bishop of Hereford, Henry duke of Lancaster,
Henry earl of Northumberland, Radulph Earl of Westmerland, L. Hugh Burnell,
L. Thomas Berkley, L. Rose, L. Willoughby, L. Abergeiny, the Abbat of
Westminster, the Prior of Canterbury, Willam Thirminges, and John Makeham,
Chief Justices, Thomas St^ke, and John Burbacke, Doctors of Law. T.
Herpingham, and T. Gray knights, W. Ferby, and Dionise Lophane public
Notaries, and diverse others either not noted, or not remembered. When all were
set in their places, King Richard was brought forth, apparelled in his royal
to be, the diadem on his head, and the scepter in his hand; and was placed
amongst them in a chair of estate. Never was prince so gorgeous, with less
glory and greater grief: to whom it was not disgrace sufficient, to lose both
the honor and ornaments of a king, but he must openly to his greater scorn,
renounce the one, and deliver the other, After a little pause and expectation,
the king arose from his seat, and spoke to the assembly these words, or the
very like in effect.

I assure my self that some at this present, and many hereafter, will account
my case lamentable; either that I hane deserved this deiection, if it be just;
or if it be wrongful, that I could not avoid it. Indeed I do confess, that
many times I have showed my self both less provident, and less painful for
the benefit of the commonwealth, then I should, or might, or intended to do
hereafter; and have in many actions, more respected the satisfying of my own
particular humor, then either justice to some private persons, or the common
good of al yet I did not at any time, either omit duty or commit grieuance,
upon natural dullness or set malice; but partly by abuse of corrupt
councellers, partly by error of my youthful judgment. And now the
remembrance of these ouer-sights, is so unpleasant to no man, as to my self:
and the rather because I have no means left, either to recompense the injuries
which I have done, or to testify to the world my reformed affections, which
experience and stayednesse of years had already corrected, and would daily
have framed to more perfection. But whether all the imputations wherewith I am
charged be true, either in substance, or in such quality as they are laid; or
whether being true, they be so heinous, as to enforce these extremities, or
whether any other Prince, especially in the heat of youth, and in the space of
two and twenty years (the time of my unfortunate reign) does, not sometimes
either for advantage, or upon displeasure, in as deep manner grieve some
particular subject; I will not now examine: it helps not to use defense,
neither booteth it to make complaint: there is left no place for the one, nor
pity for the other: and therefore I refer it to the judgment of God, and
your less distempered considerations.

I accuse no man, I blame no fortune, I complain of nothing: I have no
pleasure in such vain and needless comforts: and if I listed to have stood
upon terms, I know I have great favorers abroad, and some friends (I hope)
at home, who would have been ready, yea forward on my behalf, to set up a
bloody and doubtful war: but I esteem not my dignity at so high a price,
as the hazard of so great valor, the spilling of so much English blood, and
the spoil and waste of so flourishing a Realm, as thereby might have been
occasioned. Therefore that the Commonwealth may rather rise by my fall, then I
stand by the ruin thereof. I willingly yield to your desires; and am here
come to dispossess my self of all public authority and title, and to make it
free and lawful for you to create for your King, Henric Duke of Lancaster my
cousin german, whom I know to be as worthy to take that place as I see you
willing to give it to him.

Then he read openly and distinctly the form of his cession, wherein he did
declare, that he had discharged his subjects, from their oaths of fealty and
homage, and all other oaths whatsoever; and of his own will and free motion,
did abdicate, the title, dignity, and authority of a King: and rendered up
the possession of the Realm, with the use and title thereof, and all the
rights thereunto appertaining. To this the King subscribed and was sworn: and
then he delivered with his own hands the Crown, the Septer, and the Robe to
the Duke of Lancaster; wishing unto him more happiness therewith then had ever
happened unto himself. Then he did constiture the Archbishop of York, and the
Bishop of Hereford his procurators, to intimate and declare this his
resignation to all the states of the realm, which should be assembled together
in Parliament* Lastly, he gave all his riches and goods, to the sum of thee
hundred thousand pounds in coin, besides his Jewels and plate, for
satisfaction of the iniuryes that he had done, desiring the Duke, and all the
rest that were present severally by their names, not altogether to forget that
he had been their King, nor yet too much to think upon the same; but to
retain of him amoderate remembrance; and in recompense of the ease that he
had done them by his voluntary yielding, to permit him to live safely, in a
private and obscure life: with the sweetness whereof he was so possessed, that
from theneforth he would prefer it, before any preferment in the world. All
this was delivered and done by the King, with voice and countenance so
agreeable to his present beauinesse, that there was no man to unmindful of
humane instabilitie, which was not in some measure moved thereat: insomuch as a
few secret tears melted from the eyes of many that were present, in whose
minds a confessed and obscure alteration already g^nne to begin. So pro^e
and inclinable are mento pity misery, although they have procured it, and to
envy prosperity, even that which they have raised.

Upon Monday next following the Parliament began at Westminster; and the
Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Hereford (the Kings Atturneys for this
purpose) declared openly to the states there assembled, the Kings voluntary
resignation; and demanded whether they would assent and agree thereunto? the
Barons of the realm by several and particular consent, the commons with one
general voice, did expreslye accept and admit the same. Then it was thought
meet that certain defects and misdemeanures concerning matters of government,
should be objected against the King: for which he should be adi^dged as
unworthy, as he seemed unwilling to retain the kingdom. To this purpose
certain articles were engrossed, and openly read: in which was contained, how
unprofitable the King had bin to the realm; how unjust and grievous to the
subjects; contrary both to his honor, and to his oath. The chiefest of which
articles are these that follow.

1 FIrst that King Richard did wastefully spend the treasure of the realm, and
had given the possessions of the crown, to men unworthy, by reason whereof,
new charges were daily laid on the necks of the poor comminaltie.

2 Item, where diverse Lords as well spiritual as temporal, were appointed by
the high court of Parliament, to commune and treat of matters concerning the
state of the realm, and the commonwealth of the same, they being busied about
the same commission, he with others of his affinity went about to impeache
them of treason.

3 Item, that by force and menace, he compelled the Justices of the realm at
Shrewsburie, to condescend to his opinion for the destruction of the said
Lords: Insomuch as he began to raise war, against John Duke of Lancaster,
Thomas Earl of Arundell, Richard Earl of Warwick, and other Lords contrary
to his honor and promise.

4 Item, that he caused his uncle the Duke of Gloucester, to be arrested
without law, and sent him to Calice, and there without judgment murdered
him: and although the Earl of Arundell upon his arraignement, pleaded his
charter of pardon, he could not be heard, but was in most vile and shameful
manner suddenly put to death.

5 Item, he assembled certain Lancashire and Cheshire men, to the intent to
make ware on the foresaid Lords, and suffered them to rob and spoil, without
correction or reproof.

6 Item, that although the king flatteringly and with great dissimulation, made
proclamation throughout the realm, that the Lords aforenamed were not attached
for any crime of treason, but only for extortions and oppressions done within
the realm, yet he laid to them in the Parliament rebellion and manifest
treason.

7 Item, he has compelled diverse of the said Lords servants by menace, to make
great fines and extreme paiments, to their utter undoing: and notwithstanding
his pardon to to them granted, he made them fine a new.

8 Item, where diverse were appointed to common of the estate of the realm; and
the commonwealth of the same, the king caused all the roules and records to be
kept from them, contrary to his promise made in parliament, to his open dishonor.

9 Item, ^e uncharitably commanded, that no man upon pain of loss of life
and goods, should once entreat him for the return of Henry now duke of
Lancaster.

10 Item, where the realm is houlden of God, and not of the Pope, or any other
Prince, the said King Richard, after he had obtained diverse acts of Parliament,
for his own peculiar profit and pleasure, then he procured Bulls and extreme
censures from Rome, to compel all men streitly to keep the same, contrary to
the honor and ancient privileges of this realm.

11 Item, although the Duke of Lancaster had done his deuoyre against Thomas
Duke of Northfolke, in proof of his quarrel, yet the said king without reason
or ground banished him the realm for ten years, contrary to all equity.

12 Item, before the Dukes departure, he under his broad Scale, licenced him to
make atturneys, to prosecute and defend his causes: the said king after his
departure, would suffer none attorney to appear for him, but did with his at
his pleasure.

13 Item, the said king put out diverse Shiriffes lawfully elected, and put in
their rooms diverse others of his own minions, subuerting the law, contrary
to his oath and honor.

14 Item, he borrowed great sums of money, and bound himself under his
letters patents for the repayment of the same, and yet not one penny paid.

15 Item, he taxed men at the will of him and his unhappy counsel, and the
same treasure spent in folly, not paying poor men for their vittaile and viand.

16 Item, he said that the laws of the realm were in his head, and sometimes
in his breast: by reason of which fantastical opinion, he destroyed noble men,
and impouerished the poor commons.

17 Item, the parliament setting and enacting diverse notable statutes, for the
profit and advancement of the commonwealth, he by his privy friends and
solicitours, caused to be enacted, that no act then enacted should be more
prejudicial to him, then it was to his predecessors: through which prouiso, he
did often as he list, and not as the law meant.

18 Item, for to serve his purpose, he would suffer the Shiriffes of the
shires, to remain above one year or two in their office.

19 Item, at the summons of parliament, when the Knights and Burgesses should be
elect, and the election had fully proceeded, he put out diverse persons elected,
and put in others in their places, to serve his will and appetite.

20 Item, he had privy espials in every shire, to hear who had of him any
communication, and if he communed of his lafciuious living, and outrageous
doing, he straightwayes was apprehended, and made a grievous fine.

21 Item, the spirituality alleged against him, that he at his going into
Ireland, exacted many notable sums of money, beside Plate and Jewels, without
law ot custom, contrary to his oath taken at his coronation.

22 Item, when diverse Lords and Justices were sworn to say the truth, of
diverse things to them committed in charge, both for the honor of the realm,
and profit of the king, the said king so menaced them with sore threatenings,
that no man would or durst say the right.

23 Item, that without the assent of the Nobility, he carried the Jewels and
Place, and treasure, over the sea into Ireland; to the great impouerishing of
the realm; and all the good records of the common wealth against his
extortions, he caused privily to be embeaseled and carried away.

24 Item, in all leagues and letters to be concluded and sent to the sea of
Rome and other regions, his writing was so subtle and dark, that no other
Prince durst once believe him, nor yet his own subjects.

25 Item, he most tyranouslie and unprincely said, that the lives and goods of
all his subjects, were in the Princes hands, and at his disposition.

26 Item, that he contrary to the great Charter of England, caused diverse
lusty men to appeal diverse old men, upon matters determinable at the common
law, in the court Marciall, because that in that court is no trial but only
by battle: whereby the said aged persons fearing the sequel of the matter,
submitted themselves to his mercy, whom he fined and ransomed unreasonably at
his pleasure.

27 Item, he craftily devised certain privy oaths, contrary to law, and
caused diverse of his subjects, first to be sworn to observe the same, and
after bound them in bands for surer keeping the same, to the great undoing of
many honest men.

28 Item, where the Chancellor according to law, would in no wise grant a
prohibition to a certain person, the king granted it unto the same person
under his privy ^eale, with great threatenings if it should be disobeyed.

29 Item, he banished the Bishop of Canterbury, without cause or judgment,
and kept him in the Parliament Chamber with men of arms.

30 Item, the bishops goods he granted to his successor, upon condition that
he should maintain all his statutes made at Shrewsburie Anno. 21. and the
statutes made Anno 22. at Couentree.

31 Item, upon the accusation of the Archbishop, the king craftily persuaded
the said Bishop to make no answer, for he would be his warrant, and advised him
not to come to the Parliament; and so without answer he was condemned and
exiled, and his goods seized. Four other Articles were laid, which
particularly did concern the said Archhishop, by whose doing chiefly the
king was utterly undone.

Then was demanded of the Nobility and commons of the realm, what they
judged both of the truth and desert of these articles? who all agreed that the
crimes were notorious, and that king Richard was worthy for the same to be
deposed from his princely dignity. The noble men gave their voices, part
corrupted by favor, part awed by fear: and the commons are commonly like a
flock of Cranes, as one does fly, all will follow. Hereupon Commissioners
were appointed by both the houses; who pronounced sentence of deposition
against king Richard, in manner and form as follows.

In the name of God Amen. We John Bishop of S. Asses, I. Abbote of
Glastenburie, Thom. Earl of Gloucester, Thom. Lord Berkley, Thom. Erpinghame,
Thom. Graye Knights: Will. Thirninge Justice, Commissioners for the matters
hereafter specified, by the Lords spiritual and temporal of the realm of
England, and the Commons of the said realm, representing all the states of the
said Kingdom, specially deputed, sitting in seat of judgment, and
considering the manifold periuries, and cruelties, and many other crimes and
offerces by Richard late King of the said realm, committed and done,
contrary to good government in the realms and dominions aforesaid, during
the time of his reign: also considering the articles which were openly
^^^bibited and red before the said states, which were so public, notorious,
manifest, and famous, that they could nor can by no auoydance and shift be
concealed: also considering the confession of the said King, acknowledging and
reputing and truly upon his certain knowledge judging himself to have been
and to be altogether insufficient and unskillful, for the rule and government
of the realms and Dominions aforesaid and of any parts of them, and not
unworthy to be deposed, for the notorious demerites, by the said Richard first
acknowledged, and afterward by his will and mandate, before the said states
published, and to them opened and declared in the English tongue. Upon these
and other matters which were done concerning the same business, before the said
States and us, by the diligent place, name and authority to us in this part
committed, in abundance and for a cautele we pronounce, decree and declare,
the said Richard, to have been and to be unprofitable and unable, and
altogether insufficient and unworthy for the rule and government of the said
realms, and of the dominions, rights and parts of them: and in regard and
respect of the premises, worthily to be deposed from all kingly dignity and
honor (if any such dignity and honor remains in him) and for the like
cautele we do depose him by our sentence definitive in this writing:
inhibiting from henceforth expressly, all and singular Lords, Archbishops,
Bishops, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, Barons, Knights, Vassalles,
and all other persons whatsoever, of the said realms and dominions, and other
places to the said realms and dominions appertaining, the subjects and liege
people of the same, and every of them, that from henceforth none obey, or
intend to obey the foresaid Richard, as king or Lord of the realms and
dominions aforesaid.

Then the same Commissioners were by the consent and suffrages of both houses,
constituted procurators, ioyntlye and severally for all the states of the
realm; to resign and surrender unto King Richard, for them and all other
homagers of the realm, all the homages and fealties which were both due and
done unto him; as King and Sovereign, and also to declare unto him all the
premises, concerning his deposition. Now Henry Duke of Lancaster, that he
might be reputed, or reported at the least, not to attain the kingdom by
intrusion and wrong, was counseled by his friends, to pretend some lawful
challenge and claim thereunto: and being in power, it was no sooner advised
what was to be done, but it was presently devised how to do it. So a title
was drawn from Edmund, son to King Henry the third, whom they surnamed
Crowch back: affirming that he was the eldest son of King Henry, and that
for his deformity, he was put from his right of succession in the kingdom;
which was for that cause given to his younger brother, King Edward the third: to
this Edmund the Duke was next of blood by his mother Blanch, sole daughter and
heir to Henry the first Duke of Lancaster, and son to the said Edmund.
This cunning conceit was perceived of all men; but seeming not to perceive it,
was a point of friendship in some, and of obedience in the rest: therefore the
kingdom of England being then thought vacant, both by the resignation, and
also by the deposition of King Richard: Duke Henry arose from his seat, and
standing in the view of the Lords, crossed himself on the forehead, and on the
breast, and spoke as follows.

In the name of God Amen: (...) Henry of Lancaster, claim the realm of
England, and ^^^^owne, with all the appurtenances, (...) of the blood royal,
coming from that good Lord K. Henry the third, and through the right that God
of this grace has sent me, with the help of my kindred and of my friends,
to recover the same: Which kingdom was in point to be undone, for default of
good government and due justice.

After these words, it was demanded in both houses, of the Nobility and of
the commons which were assembled, whether they did consent that the Duke should
reign? Who all with one voice, acknowledged and accepted him for their King:
then the Archbishop of Canterbury took him by the hand, and placed him in the
throane of estate, the Archbishop of York assisting him, and all the
assembly testifying their own joy, and wishing his. Then the Archbishop made
an oration, and took for his theme, this place of Scripture: See; this is the
man whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall reign over my people. 1. Reg. 9.
17. After all this he was proclaimed King of England, and of France, and Lord
of Ireland: and the common people which is void of cares, not searching into
sequels, but without difference of right or wrong inclinable to follow those
that are mighty, with shoutes and clamours gave their applause, not all upon
judgment, or faithful meaning, but most only upon a received custom to
flatter the Prince whatsoever he be. Yet least the heat of this humor should
allay by delay, it was forthwith proclaimed in the great Hall, that upon the
13. day of September next ensuing, the Coronation of the King should be
celebrated at Westminster. These matters being thus dispatched, the King
proclaimed, arose from his seat, and went to White Hall: where he spent the
rest of the day in royal feasting, and all other complementes of joy:
notwithstanding there appeared in him no token of statelynesse or pride, nor
any change in so great a change.

Upon Wednesday next following, the procurators, before mentioned, went to the
presence of King Richard, being within the Tower; and declared unto him the
admission of his resignation, and also the order and form of his deposition:
and in the name of all the states of the realm, did surrender the homage and
fealty which had been due unto him; so that no man from thence forth would
bear to him faith and obedience, as to their King The King answered that he
nothing reguarded these titulare circumstances, but contented himself with
hope, that his cosen would be gracious Lord, and good friend unto him.

So upon the 13. day of October, which was the day of the translation of Edward
the Confessor, the Duke was with all accustomed solemnities, by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, sacred, anointed and Crowned King at Westminster,
by the name of king Henry the fourth: upon the very same day, wherein the year
before, he had been banished the Realm. He was anointed with an oil, which
a certain religious man gave unto Henry the first Duke of Lancaster
(Grandfather to the King by the mothers side) when he served in the wars of
King Edward the third, beyond the seas; together with this Prophecy, that the
Kings which should be anointed therewith, should be the champions of the
Church. Duke Henry delivered this oil in a golden violl to Prince Edward, the
eldest son of King Edward the third; who locked up the same in a barred chest
within the Tower, with intent to be anointed therewith, when he should be
crowned King: but the Prince dying before his Father, it remained there, either
not remembered, or not regarded, until this present year; wherein the King,
being upon his voyage into Ireland, and making diligent search for the jewels
and monumentes of his progenitors, found this Violl and Prophecy: and
understanding the secret, was desirous to be anointed again with that oil:
but the Archbishop of Canterbury persuaded him, that both the fact was
unlawful, and the precedent unseen, that a King should be anointed twice:
whereupon he brake of that purpose, and took the Violl with him into Ireland:
and when he yielded himself at Flint, the Archbishop of Canterburye
demanded it of him again and did receive and reserve the same, until the
coronation of King Henry; who was the first King of this realm, that was
anointed therewith.

I am not purposed to discourse, either of the authority, or of the certaintye
of these prophesies: but we may easily observe, that the greatest part of
them, either altogether failed, or were fulfilled in another sense, then as
they were commonly construed and taken. During the reign of King Henry the
fourth, execution by fire was first put in practice within this Realm, for
controversies in points of religion: in any other extraordinarye mattter, he
did as much make the Church champion, as show himself a champion of the
Church: but afterward his successors were entytuled Defenders of the faith:
and how in action they veryfied the same, I refer to remembrance and
report of later times.

Now it had been considered, that the title which was derived to King Henry,
from Edmund, whom they surnamed Crouchbacke, would be taken but for a blind
and idle jest: for that it was notorious that the said Edmund, was neither
eldest son to King Henry the third (as it was plainly declared by an act of
Parliament) nor yet a misshapen and deformed person: but a goodly Gentleman, and
valiant commander in the field, and so favored of the King his Father, that
he gave him both the heritages and honors of S^^one Mountfort Earl of
Leicester, of Ferrare Earl of Darby, and of John Barron of Monmuthe, who to
their own ruin and destruction, had desplaied seditious ensigns against the
King. And further to advance him to the marriage of Blanch Queen of Nauerne,
he created him the first Earl of Lancaster, and gave unto him the county,
Castle, and town of Lancaster, with the Forrestes of Wiresdale, Lounsdale,
Newcastle beneath Linne, the Manner, Castle and Forest of Pickering, the
Manner of Scaleby, the town of Gomecester, of Huntendone, etc. with many large
privileges, and high titles of humor.

Therefore King Henry upon the day of his Coronation, caused to be proclaimed,
that he claymed the Kingdom of England, first by right of conquest: Secondly
because King Richard had resigned his estate, and designed him for his
successor: Lastly, because he was of the blood royal, and next heir male
unto King Richard.

Haeres malus indeed (quoth Edmund Mortimer Earl of March unto his secret
friends) and so is the Pirate to the Merchant, when he despoyleth him of all
that he has. This Edmund was son to Roger Mortimer who was not long before
slain in Ireland, and had been openly declared heir apparent to the Crown,
in case King Richard should dye without issue; as descended by his Mother
Philip, from Lionell Duke of Clarence, who was elder brother to John Duke of
Lancaster, King Henry's Father: and therefore the said Edmund thought himself,
and indeed was, nearer heir male to the succession of the Crown, then he that
by color of right clayming it, carried it by dynt of force.

But such was the condition of the time, that he supposed it was vain, for
him to stir, where King Richard could not stand: Whereupon he dessembled,
either that he saw his wrong, or that he regard it; and chose rather to
suppress his title for a time, then by untimely opposing himself, to have it
oppressed and depressed for ever: to this end he withdrewe himself far
from London, to his Lordshippe of Wigmore, in the West parts of the realm:
and there settled himself to a private and close life: Idleness and vacancy from
public affairs, he accounted a virtue, and a deep point of wisdom to
meddle with nothing, whereof no man was chargeable to yield a reckoning. In
revenues he was mean, in apparel moderate, in company and train not
excessive, (yet in all these honorable and according to his degree) so that
they which esteemed men by outward appearance only, could see in him no great
show, either of wit and courage in his mind to be feared, or of wealth and
honor in his estate to be enuyed. And thus whilst a greater enemy was feared,
he passed unregarded; making himself safe by contempt, where nothing was so
dangerous as a good opinion; and raking up those coals in obscurity for a
time, which shortly after set all the realm on fire.

King Henry presently after his coronation, created his eldest son Lord
Henry, being then about xiii. years of age, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and soon after he created him also Duke of
Aquitaine. Afterward it was enacted, by consent of all the states of the
realm, assembled together in the Parliament, that the inheritance of the
Crowns and Realms of England and of France, and of all the dominions to them
apperteyning, should be united and remain in the person of King Henry, and in
the heirs of his body lawfully begotten: and that Prince Henry his eldest
son, should be his heir apparent, and successor in the premises: and if he
should dye without lawful issue, then they were entayled to his other sons
successively in order, and to the heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten.

The inheritance of the Kingdom being in this sort settled in King Henry and
in his line, it was moved in the Parliament what should be done with King
Richard. The Bishop of Caerliel, who was a man learned and wise, and one that
always used both liberty and constancy in a good cause; in his secret
judgment did never give allowance to these proceedings: yet dissembled his
dislike, until he might to some purpose declare it: therefore now being in
place to be heard of all, and by order of the house) to be interrupred by none,
he rose up and with a bold and present spirit, uttered his mind as follows.

This question (right Honorable Lords) concerns a matter of great
consequence and weight: the determining whereof will assuredly procure, either
safe quiet, or dangerous disturbance, both to our particular consciences, and
also to the common state. Therefore before you resolve upon it, I pray you
call to your considerations these two things: First, whether King Richard be
sufficiently deposed or no: Secondly, whether King Henry be with good
judgment, or justice chosen in his place. For the first point we are first to
examine, whether a king, being lawfully and fully instituted by any just title,
may upon imputation, either of negligence, or of tyranny, be deposed by his
subjects: Secondly, what King Richard has omitted in the one, or committed in
the other, for which he should deserve so heavy judgment. I will not speak
what may be done in a popular state, or in a consular; in which although one
bears the name and honor of a Prince, yet he has not supreme power of
Majesty; but in the one, the people have the highest empire; in the other, the
Nobility, and chief men of estate; in neither, the Prince. Of the first sort
was the common wealth of the Lacedaemonians, who after the form of government
which Licurgus framed, oftentimes fined, oftentimes fettered their Kings, and
sometimes condemned them to death: such were also in Caesar's time, the petit
Kings of every City in France; who were many times arreigned upon life and
death, and (as Ambiorix Prince of the Leodienses confessed) had no greater
power over the people, then the people had over them. Of the second condition
were the Roman Emperors at the first; Tranquil in caligula. Tacitus, in
proaemio.
of whom some, namely Nero and Maximinus were openly condemned, others were
suddenly surprised by judgment, and authority of the Senate: and such are
now the Emperors of Germany, whom the other Princes by their Aristocraticall
power, do not only restrain, but sometimes also remove from their imperial
state: such are also the Kings of Denmark, and Sweueland, who are many times
by the nobilitye dejected, either into prison, or into exile: such likewise are
the Dukes of Venice, and of some other free states in Italy: and the chiefest
cause for which Jews Earl of Flanders was lately expelled from his place, was
for drawing to himself cognizance in matters of life and death, which high
power never pertayned to his dignity.

In these and such like gouernmentes, the Prince has not regal rightes, but
is himself subject to that power which is greater then his, whether it be in
the Nobility or in the common people. But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the three first Empires, and in the Kingdoms of Judea and
Israel; and is now in the kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland,
Muscouia, Turkey, Tartaria, Persia, Aethiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of
Asia and Afric: although for his vices he be unprofitable to the subjects,
yea hurtful, yea intolerable: yet can they lawfully neither harm his person,
nor hazard his power, whether by judgment, or else by force: for neither one,
nor all Magistrates have any authority over the Prince, from whom all
authority is derived, and whose only presence does silence, and suspend all
inferior jurisdiction and power. As for force, what subject can attempt, or
assist, or counsel, or violence against his Prince, and not incur the high
and heinous crime of treason?

It is a common saying, thought is free: free indeed from punishment of
secular laws, except by word or deed it break forth into action: Yet the
secret thoughts against the sacred majesty of a Prince, without attempt,
without endeavor, have been adjudged worthy of death: and some who in
auriculer confession, have discovered their treacherous devises against the
person of their Prince, have afterward been executed for the same. All laws
do exempt a mad man from punishment: because their actions are not governed
by their will and purpose: and the will of man being set aside, all his doings
are indifferent; neither can the body offend without a corrupt or erroneous
mind: yet if a mad man draw his sword upon his King, it has bin adjudged to
deserve death. And least any man should surmise that Princes, for the
maintenance of their own safety and soueraignety, are the only authors of
these judgments; let us a little consider the patterns and precepts of holy
Scripture. Nabuchadnezzer King of Assiria wasted all Palestine with fire and
sword, oppugned Jerusalem a long time, and at the last expugned it: slew the
King: burnt the Temple: took away the holy vessels and treasure: the rest
he permitted to the cruelty and spoil of his unmerciful soldiers: who
defiled all places with rape and slaughter, and ruinated to the ground that
flourishing City: after the glut of this bloody butchery, the people which
remained, he led Captive into Chaldaea: and there erected his golden Image, and
commanded that they which refused to worship it, should be cast into a fierye
furnace.

What crueltye, what injustice, what impiety is comparable to this? and yet God
calls Nabuchadnezzer his servant, and promises him hyre and wages for his
service: Ierem. 25. 9. Ezech. 29. 18.
and the Prophets Jeremiah and Baruch did write unto the Jews to pray for
the life of him, and of Baltasar his Son, Ierm 29. 7. Baruch, 1. 11.
that their days might be upon earth as the days of Heaven: and Ezechtel
with bitter terms abhors the disloyalty of Zedechia, because he revolted
from Nabuchadnezzer, whose homager and tributary he was. What snall we say of
Saul? did he not put all the Priests to execution, because one of them did
relieve holy and harmless David: did he not violently persecute that his most
faithful servant and dutiful Son in laws during which pursuit, he fell
twice into the power of David; who did not only spare, but also protect the
King, and reproved the preto^an soldiers for their negligent watch, and was
touched in heart for cutting away the lap of his garment: and afterward
caused the messenger to be slain, who upon request and for pity, had lent his
hand (as he said) to help forward the voluntary death of that sacred King. As
for the contrary examples: as that of Iehu who slew Iehoram and Ahazia, So did
D^mitian put to death Epaphroditus, Neroes libertine, because he helped Neroe
(although in love) to kill himself. So did Seuerus kill all the killers of
Pertinax his prodecessour: and likewise Vitellius did put to death all the
murderers of Gal^a. Theophilus Emperor of Grecia caused all those to be
slain, who had made his Father Emperor, by killing Leo Armenius: And
Alexander the great put to cruel execution, those that had slain Darius, his
mighty and mortal enemy.
Kings of Israel and Judah: they were done by express oracle and revelation
from God, and are no more set down for our imitation, then the robbing of the
Egyptians, or any other particular and privileged commandment, but in the
general precept, which all men must ordinarily follow, not only our actions,
but our speeches also, and our very thoughts are strictly charged with duty
and obedience unto Princes, whether they be good or evil, the law of God
ordains: Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Psalm, 105.
that he which does presumptuously against the ruler of the people shall dye:
and the Prophet David forbids, Exodus 22. 28. Act. 23. 5.
to touch the Lords anointed. Thou shall not (says the Lord) rail upon the
judges, neither speak evil against the ruler of the people. Romans 13. 1. 13.
Tit. 3. 1.
And the Apostles do demand further that even our thoughts and souls be
obedient to higher powers. 1 Pet, 2. 13, 14. 17.
And least any should imagine that they meant of good Princes only, 1. Tim. 2,
2.
they speak generally of all; and further to take away all doubt, they make
express mention of the evil. For the power and authority of wicked princes
is the ordinance of god; and therefore Christ told Pilate, Romans 1^ 2. John. 19.
(...).
that the power which he had was given him from above; and the Prophet Esaias
calls Cyrus, being a profane and hea^^en Prince, Cap. ^5. 1.
the Lords anointed. For God stirs up the spirit even of wicked Princes to
do his will; 2. Chro. 36. 22.
and (as Iehoshaphat said to his rulers) they execute not the judgment of man,
but of the Lord: 2. Chron. 19. 6.
in regard whereof David calls them Gods; Psalm. 28.
because they have their rule and authority immedyatly from God: which if they
abuse, they are not to be adjudged by their subjects, for no power within
their dominionis superior to theirs: but God reserueth them to the sorest
trial: Sap. 6.
Horribly and suddenly (says the Wiseman) will the Lord appear unto them, and
a hard judgment shall they have.

The law of God commands, that the Child should be put to death, for any
contumely done unto the parents: but what if the Father be a robber? if a
murderer? if for all excess of villanyes, odious and execrable both to God
and man? surely he deserves the highest degree of punishment, and yet must not
the Son lift up his hand against him, for no offense is so great as to be
punished by parricide: but our country is dearer unto us then our parents: and
the Prince is pater patriae, Quintil in declam.
the Father of our Country: and therefore more sacred and dear unto us, then
our parents by nature, Cic. offic. lib. 1.
and must not be violated, how imperious, how impious soever he be: does he
command or demand, our persons or our purses, we must not shun for the one,
nor shrink for the other: Nehem. 9. 37.
for (as Nehemiah says) Kings have dominion over the bodies and over the
cattle of their subjects, at their pleasure. Does he enjoin those actions
which are contrary to the laws of God? we must neither wholly obey, nor
violently resist, but with a constant courage submit our selves to all manner
of punishment, and show our subjection by enduring, and not performing: yea
the Church has declared it to be an heresy, Alphons. a cast in lib. de
haeresi in verb. Tyrannus. Dominie.
to hold that a Prince may be slain or deposed by his subjects, for any
disorder or default, either in life, or else in government, there will be
faults so long as there are men: and as we endure with patience a barren
year, Soto lib. 5. de just. et iur. q. 1. artic. 3.
if it happen and unseasonable weather, and such other defectes of nature, so
must we tolerate the imperfections of rulers, and quietlye expecte, either
reformation, or else a change.

But alas good king Richard, what such cruelty? what such impiety has he ever
committed? examine rightly those imputations which are laid against him,
without any false circumstance of aggrauation, and you shall find nothing
objected, either of any truth, or of great moment. It may be that many errors
and ouersightes have escaped him, yet none so grievous to be termed tyranny; as
proceeding rather from unexperienced ignorance, or corrupt counsel, then from
any natural and wilful malice. Oh, how shall the world be pestered with
tirantes, if subjects may rebel upon every pretense of tyranny? how many
good Princes shall daily be suppressed by those, by whom they ought to be
supported? if they leauy a subsedy, or any other texation, it shall be claymed
oppression: if they put any to death for traiterous attemptes against their
persons, it shall be exclaymed cruelty: if they do any thing against the lust
and liking of the people, it shall be proclaimed tyranny.

But let it be, that without authority in us, or desert in him, king Richard
must be deposed: yet what right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? or
what reason have we without his right to give it to him? if he make title as
heir unto king Richard, then must he yet stay until king Richards death; for
no man can succeed as heir to one that lives. But it is well known to all
men, who are not either wilfully blind or grosely ignorant, that there are
some now alive, lineally descended from Lionell Duke of Clarence, whose
offspring was by judgment of the high Court of Parliament holden the viii. year
of the reign of King Richard, declared next successor to the Crown, in case
King Richard should dye without issue. Concerning the title from Edmund
Crouchbacke, I will pass it over, seeing the authors thereof are become
ashamed of so absurd abuse, both of their own knowledge, and our credulity,
and therefore all the claim is now made, by right of conquest; by the cession
and grant of King Richard; and by the general consent of all the people. It
is a bad wool that can take no color: but what conquest can a subject
pretend against his Sovereign, where the war is insurrection, and the
victory high and heinous treason? as for the resignation which king Richard
made, being a pent prisoner for the same cause; it is an act exacted by force:
and therefore of no force and validity to bind him: and seeing that by the
laws of this land, the king alone cannot alienate, the ancient jewels and
ornaments pertaining to the Crown, surely he cannot give away the Crown it
self, and therewithal the kingdom.

Neither have we any custom, that the people at pleasure should elect their
king: but they are always bound unto him, who by right of blood is next
successor, much less can they confirm and make good that title, which is
before by violence usurped: for nothing can then be freely done, when liberty
is once restrained by fear. So did Scilla by terror of his legions, obtain
the law of Velleia to be made, whereby he was created dictator for
fourscore years: and by like impression of fear, Caesar caused the law
Seruia to be promulged, by which he was made perpetual dictator: but both
these laws were afterward adjudged void. As for the deposing of king. Edward
the 2. is no more to be urged, then the poisoning of King John, or the
murdering of any other good and lawful Prince: we must live according to
laws, and not to examples: and yet the kingdom was not then taken from the
lawful successor. But if we look back to times lately past, we shall find
that these titles were more strong in King Stephen, then they are in the Duke
of Lancaster: for king Henry the first being at large liberty, neither
restrained in body, nor constrained in mind, had appointed him to succeed: (as
it was upon good credit, certainly affirmed.) The people assented to this
designement; and thereupon without fear, and without force, he was anointed
King, and obtained full possession of the realm. Yet Henry (Son of the Earl
of Aniowe) having a nearer right by his mother to the Crown, (notwithstanding
his father was a stranger and himself borne beyond the seas) raised such rough
wars upon King Stephen, that there was noe end of spoiling the goods and
spilling the blood of the unhappy people, besides the ruynes and deformities of
many Cities and holds; until his lawful inheritance was to him assured. It
terrifieth me to remember how many flourishing Empires, and Kingdoms have bin
by means of such contentions either torn in pieces with detestiue division,
or subdued to foreign Princes, under pretense of assistaunce and aid: and I
need not repeat how sore this realm has heertofore been shaken with these
several mischieues: and yet neither the examples of other countries nor the
miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us to beware.

O English men, worse bewitched then the foolish Galathians; our unstayed
minds and restless resolutions, do nothing else but hunt after our own
harms: no people have more hatred abroad and none less quiet at home: in
other countries the sword of invasion has been shaken against us: in our own
land, the fire of insurrection has bin kindled amongs us: and what are these
innouasions, but whetstones to sharpen the one, and bellows to blow up the
other?

Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us which Aesope fableth to
have been fallen unto the Frogs; who being desirous to have a King, a beam
was given unto them: the first fall whereof did put them in some fear, but
when they saw it lie still in the stream, they insulted thereon with great
contempt, and desired a king of quicker courage: then was sent unto them a
Storke, which stalking among them with stately steps, continually devoured
them. The mildness of king Richard has bred in us this scorn, interpreting
it to be cowardice and dulnes of nature: the next heir is likewise rejected: I
will not say that with greater courage we shall find greater cruelty; but if
either of these shall hereafter be able to set up their side, and bring the
matter to trial by arms, I do assuredly say, that which part soever shall
carry the fortune of the field, the people both ways must go to wrack. And
thus have I declared my mind concerning this question, in more words then
your wisdom, yet fewer then the weight of the cause does require: and do
boldly conclude, that we have neither power nor policy, either to depose king
Richard, or to elect Duke Henry in his place; that king Richard remains
still our Sovereign Prince, and therefore it is not lawful for us to give
judgment upon him; that the Duke whom you call king, has more offended
against the king and the relame, then the king has done, either against him or
us; for being banished the realm for ten years by the king and his counsel
(amongst whom his own Father was chief) and sworn not to return again
without special lycense: he has not only violated his oath, but with impious
arms disturbed the quiet of the land, and dispossessed the King from his
royal estate, and now demands judgment against his person, without offense
proved, or defense heard: if this injury, and this perjury does nothing move
us, yet let both our private and common dangers somewhat withdraw us from these
violent proceedings.

This speech was diversely taken, as men were diversely affected between fear,
hope, and shame: yet the most part did make show for king Henry, and
thereupon the Bishop was presently attached by the Earl Marshall, and
committed to prison in the Abbey of S. Albones. Whose counsel and conjecture
then contemned, was afterward better thought upon; partly in the life time of
king Henry, during whose reign, almost no year passed without great
slaughters and executions: but more especially in the times succeeding, when
within the space of xxxvi. years, twelve set battles upon this quarrel were
fought within the realm by English men only: and more then four score Princes
of the royal blood slain one by another.

Then it was concluded, that king Richard should be kept in a large prison,
with all manner of Princely maintenance: and if any persons should conspire, to
rear war for his deliverance, that he should be the first man who should
suffer death for that attempt. Then the Acts of the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the xi. year of King Richard, were revived; and the Parliament
houlden the xxi. year of king Richard was wholly repealed: and they who were
attainted by that Parliament, were restored again to their fame and honor, and
to their lands without suing lyuerie, and to such goods whereof the King was
not answered; except the rents and issues which had been received out of their
lands in the mean time. Hereupon Richard Earl of Warwick was delivered out
of prison, and the Earl of Arundelles son recovered his inheritance: many
others also that were banished or imprisoned by King Richard, were then fullye
restored again, to their Country, liberty, and estate.

It was further provided, that none of those which came in aid of King Henry
against King Richard, should for that cause be impeached or troubled. Also the
King gave to the Earl of Westmerland the County of Richmond; and to the Earl
of Northumberland he gave the I Will of Man, to be houlden of him by the service
of bearing the sword, wherewith he entered into England. Diverse other of his
followers he advanced to offices of highest place and charge, some upon
judgment and for desert, but most part to win favor, and perhaps proiecting
a plot for friends, if times should change: for in many actions men take more
care to prevent revenge, then to lead an innocent and harmless life.

It was further agreed, that the procurers of the death and murder of Thomas
late Duke of Gloucester, should be searched out and severely punished. And
judgment was given against the appellants of the Earl of Warwick and the
Earl of Arundell, that the Dukes of Aumerle, Sussex, and Exceter, the
Marquess of Dorset, and the Earl of Gloucester who were present, should loose
their degree of honor for them and their heirs: that they should likewise
loose all the Castles, Manors, Lordshippes, etc. then in their hands which
sometimes apperteined to those whom they did appeal, and that all the letters
patents and charters which they had concerning the same, should be surrendered
into the Cha^cerie, and there be cancelled: that for all other their Castles,
Manors, Lordships, possessions, and liberties, they should be at the grace and
mercy of the King: that they should give no liueries, nor keep any retinue of
men, but only such officers as were meerelie necessary for their degree: that
if any of them should adhere to Richard the deposed King, in giving him aid or
encouragement, against the judgment of his deposition, then he should incur
the pains and forfeitures of high treason. And because it was a clamorous
complaint among the common people, that many officers had committed greeuo^s
extoruons and wrongs, either by the open maintenance or secret con^itiuence of
these Lords: First those officers were remo^ued, and that corruption taken away
with integrity, which briberie h^d wrought, in placing (for money) men of b^d
quality, in high degrees of office and service: then proclamations were made,
that if any man had been oppressed by these Lords, or by any officers under
them, he should prove his complaint, and receive recompense. It was made a
question whether it was not meet that these noble men should be put to death:
the importunity of the people, and the persuasion of many great men drew that
way, but policy was against it, and especially the opinion of clemency, which
seemed needful to the settling of a new risen state.

In this parliament also the Lord Fitzwater appealed the said Duke of Aumerle,
son to the Duke of York, upon points of high treason: likewise the Lord
Morley appealed John Montacute Earl of Salisburie, and more then twenty other
appeilants waged battle; but the king purposing to lay the foundation of his
realm by favor and not by force, gave pardon and restitution alike to all,
upon sureties and band for their allegiance: and in a sweet and moderate
oration, he admonished, and as it were entreated the one part, that old
griefs and grudges should not be renewed, but buried together with the memory
of former times; wherein men were forced to do many things against their
minds: the other part he desired to be more regardfull of their actions
afterward, and for the time past, rather to forget that ever they were in
fault, then to remember that they were pardoned. No punishment was laid upon
any, save only the Earl of Salisburie and the Lord Morley, who had been in
especial grace and favor with King Richard: these two were committed to
prison, but at the suit of their friends they were soon released: the rest the
King received freelye to favor, but most especially the Duke of Aumerle, and
the Duke of Excester, Lord Governor of Calice. The Duke of Aumerle was cosen
germane to both the kings: John Holland Duke of Exce^^^, was half brother to
King Richard, and brother in law to King Henry; whose sister, the Lady
Elizabeth he had taken to wise. The greatest matter that was enforced against
them, was their loyalty unto King Richard: (a grievous crime among rebels)
because they did not only stomach and storm at his deiection, but stir
also more then others, and assaye to raise forces on his behalf. The Dukes
bouldly confessed the accusation, that they were indeed unfortunately faithful
to King Richard: but as those who once are false, do seldom afterward prove
soundly firm, so they that have showed themselves true to one prince may the
better be trusted by any other. The King did rather admit this as a defense,
then remit it as a fault: affirming, that such examples were not to be misliked
of Princes: so he entered with them into great terms of friendship, and put
them in place nearest his person, endeavoring by courtesy and liberality, to
make them fast and faithful unto him: this fact was diversely enterpreted,
according to men's several dispositions, some admiring the kings moderation,
others disliking and disallowing his confidence; and indeed although these
means have to this purpose prevailed with some, yet the common course may
move us commonly to conjecture, that there is little assurance in reconciled
enemies: whose affections (for the most part) are like unto Glass, which
being once cracked, can never be made otherwise then crazed and unsound.

Furthermore, to qualify all prejudice and hard opinion which other princes
might chance to conceive, King Henry dispatched Ambassadors to diverse
countries near unto him, to make it known by what title, and by what favor
and desire of all the people he atteyned the kingdom. To the court of Rome he
sent John (...) Bishop of Hereford, Sir John Cheyney Knight, and John Cheyney
Esquire: into France he sent Waker Shirlowe Bishop of Durham, and Lord Thomas
Pearcy, Earl of Worcester: into Spain he sent John Treuor Bishop of S.
Assaph^^, and (...) William Parr^: and into Almaine he sent the Bishop of
Bangor, and certain other. Most of these Princes (as in a matter which little
concerned either their honor or their harm) seemed either not to regard what
was done, or easily to be persuaded that all was done well. But Charles King
of France, was so distempe^ed at this dishonorable dealing with his son in
law King Richard, that by violence of his passion, he fell into his oulde
panges of frenzy: and at the last by help of Physic returning to the
sobriety of his senses, he purposed to make sharp war upon that disloyal
people (as he termed them) for this injury against their lawful and harmless
Prince. Many noble men of France showed themselves very forward to enter
into the service, but especially the Earl of Saint Paul, who had married King
Richards half Sister. So letters of defiance were sent into England, and great
preparation was made for the war.

Likewise the news of these novelties much abashed the Aquitanes (who were at
that time under the English subjection) and plunged their thoughts in great
perplexities. Some were greiued at the infamous blemish of the English nation,
who had disteyned their honor with the spot of such disloyal dealing: others
feared the spoil of their goods, and oppression of their liberties by the
Frenchmen; against whose violence they suspected that the realm of England,
being distracted into civil factions, either would not attend, or should not
be able to bear them out: but the Citizens of Bordeaux were chiefly anguished
in respect of King Richard, partly fretting at his injury, and partly
lamenting his infortunitie; because he was borne and brought up within their
City. And thus in the violence, some of they^ anger, some of their grief,
and some of their fear, in this sort they did generally complain.

O good God (said they) where is the world become? saints are turned to
Serpents, and Doves into devils. The English nation which has been accounted
fierce only against their ^oes, and always faithful to their friends; are
now become both fierce and faith less against their lawful and loving Prince,
and have most barbarously betrayed him. Who would ever have thought that
Christians, that civil people, that any men, would (...) have violated all
religion* all laws, and all honest and orderly demeanure? And although the
heavens blush at the view* and the ear^^ sweat as the burden of (...), and all
man proclaim and exclaim open shame and confusion against them* yet they
neither feel the horror, nor shrink at the shame, nor fear the revenge* but
stand upon terms, some of defense for the lawfulness of their dealing, and
some of excuse for the necessity. Well let them be able to blind (...)
world, and to resist (...); yet shall they never be able to escape (...)
desire to be powered upon them. Alas good King Richard, thy nature was too
gentle, and they government too mild for so stiff and stubborn a people:
what King will ever repose any trust in such (...) them with laws as thieves
are with (...)? What (...) he (...) can recover their credit? What time will
be sufficient to blotte out this blemish? What other action could they have
done, more joyful to their enemies, more woeful to their friends, and more
shameful to themselves? Oh corruption of times? Oh conditions of men.

The Frenchmen were nothing discontented at this coffeehouse of the
Aquitanes; supposing that opportunity was then offered, to get into their
possession the Duchy of Guian* if either power or policy were thereto
applied Hereupon Law* Duke of Burbea came down to Angiers, who from thence
sent many messengers to the chief cities of Guian, and by fair speeches and
large promises, solicited the people to change allegiance: on the contrary
side, sir Robert Knowles Lieutenant of Guian, endeavored with all diligence to
repress the (...), to stay the doubtful, to confirm the good* and to (...)
all in order and obedience: but he profited very little, whether by the
weakness of his own arm, or stiff neck of the people it is not certainly
assured. Neither did the Duke of Burbone much prevail* when it was considered
(...) the yoke of France was above the English subjection: for all men were
well acquainted with what tributes and (...) the Frenchmen were charged, having
in every country Lieutenants and Treasurours assigned, the one to draw the
blood, the other the substance of the slavish subjects, whose cruelty and
covetousness laid hold without exception upon all, the (...) other undoing
by law. Thus stood the (...) which the wind drives one way, and the (...)
another: desirous they were to displease the English, but (...) to endanger and
undo themselves.

Upon aduertisment whereof, King (...) sent into Guian the Lord Thomas Percie
Earl of Worcester, whom he knew to be faithful unto him, and expert in
matters of charge, having in his company a strong and serviceable band of
Soldiers: who not by unseasonable exprobating their fault, but by reason
conuincing it, (...) with his wisdom and credit so persuaded, and partlye
with his authority and forces so terrified the wavering people, that he wanne
them to his opinion, and confirmed them in their allegiance; the grauer sort
with respect of duty and faith, the rest with regard and (...) of danger.
Them he received oaths of obedience unto King (...), and planted (...) strong
garrison in pla^es of chief import, without molestation if they remained quiet,
and yet of force to repress them if they should rebel. This done, he returned
again into England, where he showed an excellent example of moderation, in
seeming rather to have found then to have made the Aquitanes duetifull
subjects.

No sooner could this stir be stinted, but another more dangerous and
desperate did forthwith arise: for diverse noble men who either had
dissembled, or did repent the furtherance that they used to the advancement of
King Henry did conspire together to compass his destruction: the hystories of
that time do vary, concerning the causes of this conspiracy; whether it were
for favor to King Richard, as the nature of man is inclinable to behold
sudden misfortune with a pitiful eye; or for envy to King Henry, as
commonly we can (...) excessive forr^^e, no where so little as in those that
have been in equal degree with our (...) or whether upon dishonours received
in the late (...), or upon (...) to see others go before them in the Princes
favor many sought to revenge their unjust anger with lewd disloyaltye:
likewise it is not assuredly known by what means the workers thereof were
drawn together, and the secret devises of some (...) to the rest: whether one
of them did persuade another to enter into the action, or whether all were
induced by the same unconstant disposition and light account of faith: which
being once falsed to King Richard, was afterward upon every light
coffeehouse, little respected to any: but concerning these matters, the most
current report is this.

There was at that time an Abbot of Westminster, one that applied his studies,
not as the most part, to cloak idleness and sloth under the glorious title
of religion, but to enable himself for counsel and direction in public
affairs: who for the general opinion of his wisdom and integrity, was in
good favor and credit with King Richard, and did accompany him in his last
voyage into Ireland.

This Abbot called to his remembrance, a speech which he heard once fall from
King Henry, when he was but Earl of Derbie, and not yet come to any great
stayednesse, either in years or judgment; that Princes had too little, and
religious men too much.

At that time the riches of the church were grown so great, that many began to
look upon them with an envious eye; but least covetousness should show it
self with open face, policy was pretended, and the excess thought
dangerous, both to the King and also to the (...); as very like to cause want
to the one, and (...) in the other.

Heerevpon many bills had been put up in the parlaments houlden in the
reign of King Richard, that (...) might be made to repress the increase of
religious possessions: namely, that inquisition and redress might be had
against such religious persons, as under the license to purchase ten pounds
yearlie, did purchase four score, or a hundred pounds: and also against such
religious persons as caused their villains, to take to their wives free women
inheritable, whereby the lands came to those religious men's hands: yea it was
moved in open Parliament, that the king should seize into his hands, all the
temporal livings of religious houses, as being rather a burden then a
benefit unto religion.

Upon these and the like petitions, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Archbishop of York, for themselves and the Clergy of their Provinces; were
oftentimes compelled to make their solemn protestations in open Parliament,
that if any thing were attempted in restraint of the liberty of the Church,
they would in no wise assent, but utterly withstand the same: the which their
protestations they required to be enrouled.

So partly upon love to King Richard, and partly upon fear, least King Henry
would be as ready to invade, as he was to enueigh against the richesse of
religious houses: this Abbot was the first man that blew the coals, and put
fuel to the fire of this confederacy. And first he observed a far off,
then he searched more nearly and narrowly (and yet warely too) how the
minds of certain Noble men were affected, or rather infected against King
Henry; tempering his speeches in such sort, that if matters sorted to his
mind, he might take them upon him, if his co^^ses were crossed, he might
clearly disclayme them: at last he invited to his house upon a day, in
Michaelmas term, those whom he had sounded to be most sound for his
purpose: the chief of whom were such as in the Parliament before had in some
sort been touched in reputation, although by pardon and reconcilement the
harm did seem to be closed up: their names were John Holland Duke of
Exceter, of whom: mention has been made before, Thomas Holland his brothers
Son, Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke of Aumerle, John Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, John Bishop of Caerliele, Sir
Thomas Biunt, and Magdalen one of King Richards Chapel, who in all points
both of feature and favor, so nearly resembled King Richard, that the Lords
dissembled afterward that he was King Richard indeed.

These and some others were highly feasted by the Abbot: and after dinner they
withdrewe themselves, into a secret Chamber to counsel: here the Duke of
Exceter, who was most hotly bent either to restore, or to revenge the cause of
his deposed brother, declared unto the rest, the allegiance that they had
sworn unto King Richard: the honors and (...) whereunto they were by him
advanced: that therefore they were bound both in conscience by the one, and
in kindness by the other, to take his part against all men: that king Henry
contrary to both, had dispoyled him of his royal dignity, and unjustly
possessed himself thereof, whilst they stood looking on, and showed neither
the obedience of subjects, nor love of friends, as though they were men who
knew to do any thing, better then to defend, and if need were to dye for
their lawful Prince and loving patron: that king Henry by violent inuading,
or fraudulent insinuating himelse, into the kingdom of his natural and liege
Prince, was but a tyrant, and usurper, and such a one as it was lawful for any
man, by any means to throw down, without respect whether he were a good man
or evil, for it is lawful for no man, upon pretense and show of goodness to
draw sovereignty unto himself: that the laws and examples of best governed
common wealths, did not only permit this action but highly honored it with
statues and garlandes, and tytles of nobility, and also rewarded it with all
the wealth of the suppressed tyrant: that this enterprise would be very
profitable, and almost necessary to the common wealth, by extinguishing those
wars which the Scots menaced, the Frenchmen prepared, and the Welshmen had
already begun upon this occasion and quarrel: that he did not distrust but it
might be accomplished by open arms, but he thought it more sure for them, and
for the common wealth more safe, to put first in proof some secret policy:
and to that purpose he devised, that a solemn Iustes should be challenged, to
be kept at Oxforde, in Christmasse holidays, between him and twenty on his
part, and the Earl of Salisburie and twenty on his part, to which king Henry
should be invited: and when he was most intentive in regarding their military
disport, he should suddenly be surprised by men which without suspicion might
at that time be assembled, both for number and preparation sufficient for the
exployt, and thereby King Richard presently be restored, both to his liberty,
and to his state.

This devise was no sooner uttered, then allowed and applauded of the rest of
the confederates: and so resolving upon the enterprise, they took an oath upon
the Evangelists, the one to be true and secret to the other, even to the hour
and point of death: the Lords also made an Indenture sextipartite wherein they
bound themselves, to do their best assay, for the death of the one king and
deliverance of the other: this they sealed and subscribed, and delivered to
every Lord a counter pane of the same: and further they concluded what forces
should be gathered, by whom, how they should be ordered and placed, and to
whose trust the execution should be committed.

When all things were thus contrived, and their hungry ambitious minds were
well filled with the vain winds of hope and desire: the Duke of Exceter came
to the king at Windsore, and desired him for the love that he bare to the noble
fears of Cheualry, that he would vouchsafe to honor with his presence the
martial exercise, that was appointed between him and the Earl of Salisbury,
and to be the judge of their performances if any controversy should arise.

The king supposing that to be intended indeed, which was pretended in show,
easily yielded to his request. The Duke supposing his purpose now half
performed, departed to his house, and so did the other confederates: where they
busily bestirred themselves, in raising men, and preparing horse and armor for
the accomplishment of this act.

When the Duchess of Exceter, king Henry's Sister, perceived the drift of the
devise, and saw that the Duke was upon his journey: alas good Lady how was
she distracted in mind, with a sharp conflicte of her conceiptes? one way
she was moved with nature toward her brother; another way she was more
strongly stirred, with love toward her Lord and husband; and both ways she
was divided in duty. And what (said she) is this love then against nature? or
about it? shall I be undutiful to my Prince? or is no duty comparable to the
duty of a wife? heigh ho: in what perplexities (wretched woman) am I plunged,
to see my two dearest friends in this case of extremity, that (it is doubtful
which but) certainly one must be ruined by the other. Heerewith such a shower
of tears streamed down her cheeks, that it drowned her speech, and stopped
the passage of further complaint: which when the Duke espied, he stepped unto
her, and seazing softly upon her hand, used these words. What Besse? is it
kindness to me or kindred to your brother that thus has set your eyes on
floate? Content your self woman, for whatsoever the event shall be, it cannot
be evil to you, nor worse to me then now it is. For if my purpose prevail,
and my brother be restored again to his crown, both of us shall be sure
never to decline: if it be prevented, and your brother continue still in his
estate, no harm shall be done unto you, and I shall be then sure of that
destruction which I do now continually dread: the fear whereof in expecting,
is a greater torment then the pain in suffering. When he had thus said, he
kissed her, and so leaving her to the torture of a thousand thornie thoughts,
he took his journey toward Oxforde, with a great company both of Archers and
Horsemen. There he sound all the rest of his accomplices, well armed and banded,
except only the Duke of Aumerle.

The King also hearing that both the Challengers and defendants were in a
readiness, determined the day following to ride to Oxforde, according to his
promise and appointment.

Now the confederates much maruailed at the stay of the Duke of Aumerle, some
only blamed his slacknesse, others began to suspect it, every man coniectured
as he was diversely affected between confidence and fear: and in this
confusion of opinions, they sent unto him in post, to know the certain
truth. Before the messenger came to the Duke, he was departed from Westminster
toward Oxford, not the direct way, but went first to see his Father the Duke
of York, and carried with him his counterpane of the Indenture of confederacy.
As they sat at dinner, the Father espied it in his bosom, and demanded what
it was? the Son humbly craved pardon, and said that it nothing touched him,
by S. George (quoth the Father) but I will see it: and so whether upon a
precedent iealosie, or some present cause of suspicion, he took it away from
him by force. When he perceived the contents, he suddenly arose from the
table, and with great fi^rcenesse both of countenance and speech, uttered to
his Son these words.

I see traitor, that idleness has made thee so wanton and mutinous that thou
playest with thy faith, as children do with sticks: thou have been once
already faithless to King Richard, and now again art false to King Henry, so
that the like fish Sepia, thou troublest all the waters wherein thou live.
Thou know that in open Parliament I became suertie and pledge for thy
allegiance, both in body and goods: and can neither thy duty, nor my desert
restreine thee, from seeking my destruction? in faith, but I will rather help
forward thine. With that he commanded his Horses to be made ready, and
presentlye took his iorneye toward Windsore, where the King then lay.

The Duke of Aumerle had no time either to consulte with his friends, or to
consider with himself what was best to be done: but taking advise upon the
sudden, he mounted likewise on horseback, and posted toward Windsore
another way. It was no need to force him forward, his youthful blood, and
his sudden danger were in steed of two wings, to keep his horse in Pegasus
pace: so that he came to Windsore, and was alighted at the Castle, before his
stiff aged Father could come near. Then he entered the gates, and caused them
to be surely locked, and took the Keys into his own hands, pretending some
secret cause for which he would deliver them unto the King. When he came in
presence, he kneeled down and humbly craved of the King mercy and
forgiveness. The king demanded for what offense? Then with a confused voice,
and sad countenance, casting down his eyes as altogether abashed, partly with
fear of his danger, and partly with shame of his discredit; he declared unto
the King all the manner of the conspiracy. The King seemed neither rashly to
believe, nor negligentlie to distrust the Dukes report; neither stood it with
policy to enterteine the discovery with any hard and violent usage:
therefore with gracious speeches he comforted the Duke, and if this be true,
said he, we pardon you: if it be feined, at your extreme perrill be it.

By this time the Duke of York was rapping at the Castle gates, and being
admitted to the Kings presence, he delivered to him the endenture of
confederacy, which he had taken from his son. When the King had read it,
and was thereby persuaded of the truth of the matter, he was not a little
disquieted in mind, complaining of the unconstant disposition of those men,
whom neither cruelty (he said) could make firm to King Richard, nor clemency
to him; but upon dislike of every present government, they were desirous of
any change. So being possessed with deeper thoughts then to gaze upon games,
he laid his journey aside, and determined to attend at Windsor, what course his
enemies would take, and which way they would set forward: knowing right well
that in civil tumults, and advised patience, and opportunity well taken, are
the only weapons of advantage; and that it is a special point of wisdom, to
make benefit of the enemies folly. In the mean time he directed his letters
to the Earl of Northumberland his high Constable, and to the Earl of
Cumberland his high Marshall, and to others his most assured friends,
concerning these sudden and unexpected accidents.

The confederates all this time hearing nothing of the Duke of Aumerle, and
seeing no preparation for the Kings coming, were out of doubt that their
treason was betrayed. And now considering that once before they had been
pardoned, the guilt of this their rebellion, excluded them from all hope of
further mercy: whereupon they became desperate, and so resolved to prosecute
that by open arms, wherein their privy practices had ^ailed. And first they
apparrelled Magdalen (a man very like to King Richard both in stature and
countenance, and of years not disagreeable) in princely attire; and gave
forth that he was King Richard, and that either by favor or negligence of
his keepers, he was escaped out of prison, and desired the faith and aid of
his loving subjects. Then they determined to dispatche messengers to Charles
King of France, to desire his help and assistance on the behalf of his son
in law, if need should require.

The common people, which commonly are soon changeable, and on the sudden as
prone to pity as they were before excessiuely cruel, most earnestly wished
the enlargement of King Richard, and earnestly wishing, did easily believe it:
in which imaginary conceit, being otherwise men of no deep search, the
presence of Magdalene most strongly confirmed them: and so either upon
ignorance of truth, or delight in trouble, they joined themselves in great
troops to the Lords: desiring nothing more then to be the means whereby King
Richard should be restored, as in a manner resuming their first affections and
humors toward him. Then the Lords of this association with great force, but
with greater fame, as the manner is of matters unknown, advanced forward in
battle arraye toward Windsore, against King Henry, as against an enemy of
the common state; having in their company above forty thousand armed men. The
King upon intelligence of their approache, secretlye with a few horse, the next
Sunday night after Newyeres day, departed from Windsore to the Tower of London,
and the same night before it was day, the confederates came to the Castle of
Windsore: where missing their expected pray, they stood doubtful and divided
in opinions, which way to bend their course. Some advised them with all speed
to follow the King to London, and not to leave him any leave and liberty, to
unite an army against them: that Winter was no let but in idle and peaceable
times: that in civil discentions nothing is more safe then speed, and greater
advantage always grows by dispatching then deferring: that whilst some were
in fear, some in doubt, and some ignorant, the City, yea the realm might
easilye be possessed: and that many armies whose fury at the first rush could
not be resisted, by delays did wear out, and waste to nothing. Others who
would seem to be considerate and wise, but in very deed were noe better
then dastardes, persuaded rather to set King Richard first at liberty; for if
their counterfeiting should be discovered before they possessed themselves of
his person, the people undoubtedly would fall from them to the certain
confusion of them all. Herevppon they gave over the pursuit, and retired to
Colebrooke, and there delayed out the time of doing, in deliberating, being
neither courogiouslye quick, nor considerately stayed, but faintlie and
fearefullye shrincking back: and when they once began to relent, they
decreased every day more and more both in power and in hope.

King Henry the next morning after he was come to the Tower, sent to the
Mayor of the City to put Soldiers in arms for his resistance, who
presentlye presented unto him three thousand Archers, and three thousand bill
men, besides those that were appointed for defense of the City. The King spent
upon him many good speeches, and liberally loaded him with promises and thanks;
and soon after he issued out of London, with twenty thousand tall men, and
came to Hounslowe Heath, abiding there, and as it were da^ing his enemies to
join issue in the field: contemning their disorderlye multitude, as a vain
terror of names without forces. But the confederates either for fear of the
Kings power, or for distrust of their own, or else lingering, perhaps, after
some succor out of France, refused the encounter, and doubtful it is whether
they showed greater courage in setting up the danger, or cowardice in declining
it when it was presented unto them.

So they departed from Colebrooke to Sunnings, a place near Redding, where
Queen Isabell, King Richardes wife did then abide: to whom upon the plain
truth before declared, fame had falslye descanted, that King Richard was
escaped out of prison, and did lie at Pomfret with a hundred thousand armed
men; and that King Henry for fear of him, was fled with his children and
friends to the Tower of London. All which was as lightlye believed, as it was
vainlye toulde: whereupon she defaced King Henry's arms, and plucked away
his cognizance from those his servants that attended upon her; and having in
some sort satisfied her womannish anger, with this harmless spite, she and
the Lords departed together first to Wallingforde, and from thence to
Abington, stirring the people by the way to take armor, and to rise in aid
of king Richard, who was (said they) and is, and should be their Prince.

At the last they came to Chichester, and there the Lords took their
lodgings, the Duke of Surrey and the Earl of Salisburie in one Inn; the Duke
of Exceter and the Earl of Gloucester in another; and all the host encamped
in the fields. But the Bayliffe of the town, suspecting all this countenance
to be but the vain flashe of a false fire, did in the night with about four
score Archers, beset and set upon the house where the Duke of Surrey and the
Earl of Salisburie lay: who were men but of weak resistance by nature, but
being put upon necessity, showed great manhood and persistance in defending
themselves against the townsmen. The Duke of Exceter and the Earl of
Gloucester being in another Inn, were not able by force to rescue their
associates; whereupon a certain Priest of their company set diverse houses in
the town on fire, supposing thereby to divert the townsmen from their assault,
to the saving of their houses and of their goods: but this fire greatly
inflamed their fury, and made them more obstinate in their attempt; crying out
that they would never labor to rescue their losses, but to revenge them; and
that with the blood of the Lords, those flames should be quenched. Then there
arose confused clamours and noyses, all the town being in an vproare and in
arms, shooting fiercely and running upon the Lords with a rash and desperate
rage; not caring to loose many, whereof they had many to spare.

When the Earl of Exceter and they that were with him perceived the force of
the assaylants dangerously to increase, and that it was impossible for a few
to sustain the fury of so many so obstinately bent: they fled out of the
back side toward the camp, intending to bring the whole army to the rescue:
but the soldiers having heard a tumu^^, and seeing fire within the town,
supposed that the King was entered with all his puisance: whereupon being
struck with a sudden and false fear, and wanting a commander of courage to
confirm them, they ran away, and dispearsed themselves without measure; and so
whilst every man endeavored to save himself, all were brought to their
confusion.

Thus the Duke of Surrey, and the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lords and
Gentlemen which were in their company, were left to defend themselves against
the townsemen as they could who manfully maintained the fight with great
bloodshed of their enemies, from midnight until three of the clock the next
day in the after noone: at the last, being inferior both in number and
fortune, the Duke and the Earl were wounded to death and taken, and the same
evening their heads were stricken off and sent to London: there were also
taken Sir Bennet Shelley, Sir B^^nard Brokas, Sir Thomas Blunt, and 28. other
Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, who were sent to Oxford, where the King then
lay, and there were put to execution.

The Duke of Exceter when he found the army dispersed and fled, fled likewise
with Sir John Shelley into Essex, lamenting the certain destruction which his
rashness had procured to himself, and to his friends, but most especially to
King Richard; if not as a party, yet as a cause of this unhappy tumult; many
times he did attempt to have escaped by sea into France, but he was always
driven back by distress of weather; and so wandering and lurking in secret
places, he was at the last attached as he sat at supper in a certain
friends house, and led to Plashy, and there shortly after beheaded: so that a
man might probably con^ecture that the death of the Duke of Gloucester was then
brought in reckoning, who by his counsel and contryuance chiefly, in the same
place had been apprehended. An excellent example for all those which measure
their actions either by their pleasure, or by their power: that revenge of
injurious dealing, although it be prolonged, yet does never fail, but comes
surely although perhaps, slowly. This duke was a man of high parentage, of a
frank mind, and wealth answerable thereunto: openly praise^, worthy, but his
secret actions were hardly spoken of: he was of consent to all his brothers
vices, and of counsel to many, yet somewhat the more close and vigilant man:
and not so much partaker of his prosperity, as violently carried with the
current of his misery.

The Earl of Gloucester fled toward Wales but was forelayed and taken, and
beheaded at Bristow: Magdalen^ the counterfeite of King Richard; flying into
Scotland, was apprehended and brought to the Tower, and afterward hanged and
quartred, with W. Ferby another of King Richards Chapleines. Diverse other
Lords and Knights and Gentlemen; and a great number of mean and base persons
were in other places put to death; insomuch as the King though otherwise of a
very temperate and intreatible nature, seemed to show too hard and haughty
dealing in revenging his own injury, or rather maintaining the injury he had
done: the heads of the chief conspiratours, were pitched upon poles, and set
over London Bridge: in all other parts of the realm a spectacle both
lamentable and ugly was presented to the view and terror of others: bodies
hewn in pieces, heads and quarter of unfortunate disme^bred wretches
putrif^ing above ground: not al for desert, but many to satisfy either the
malice or want of King Henrie^ friends, insomuch as many grave men openly gave
forth, that in short time there would be cause to wish King Richard again as
being more tolerable to endure the cruelty of one, then of many, and to live
where nothing, then where any thing might be permitted.

The Abbot of Westminster in whose house and in whose head this confederacy
began, hearing of these adventures, as he was going between his monastery and
his mansion, fell suddenly into a palsy, and hardly after without speech ended
his life; and although in this enterprise fortune gave policy the check, and by
a strange accedent which wisdom could not foresee, ouerturned the devise, yet
is it certainly affirmed that this Abbot first stirred the stone, which
rolling a long, was like to have turned king Henry out of his seat. The bishop
of Caerliel, was condemned upon this treason, but the extremity of his fear,
and grief, closed up his days, and prevented the violence and shame of
public execution. And now king Richard after he had abdicated his dignity,
did but short time enjoy that sweet security, which he did vainly expect, and
first all his goods which he did give in satisfaction of the injuries that he
had done, were brought to division and share amongst his enemies: shortly after
he was removed from the Tower, to the Castle of Leedes in Kent, and from
thence to Pomfret, to the end that by often changing he might either more
secretly be dispatched, or more uncertainly found: here being kept in
straight prison, both innocent and ignorant of this offense, was
notwithstanding made a party in the punishment. For King Henry perceiving that
the Lords so far prevailed with their late strategeme, that if their stomach
had bin answerable to their strength, and their blood beginning had not ended
in faintnes and sloth, they might have driven him to a hard hazard; caused
King Richard to be put to death: intending to make sure, that no man should
cloak open rebellion, under the color of following sides, nor countenance his
co^spiracy, either with the person or name of K. Richard: whether he did
expressly command his death, or no, it is a question, out of question he
showed some liking and desire to the action, and gave allowance thereto when it
was done.

The most current report at that time went, that he was princely served every
day at the Table, with abundance of costly meats, according to the order
prescribed by Parliament, but was not suffered to taste or touch any one of
them; and so perished of famine; being tormented with the presence of that,
whereof he dyed for want, but such horrible and unnatural cruelty, both
against a King and a kinseman, should not proceed from King Henry (me think)
a man of a moderate and mild disposition, not yet from any other mind which
is not altogether both savage in humanity, and in religion profane. One
wrighter who would seem to have the perfect intelligence of these affairs,
makes report, that King Henry sitting at his table, sad and pensive, with a
deep sigh brake forth into these words: Have I no faithful friend that will
deliver me of him, whose life will breed destruction to me and disturbance to
the realm, and whose death will be a safety and quiet to both? for how can I
be free from fear, so long as the cause of my danger does continue? and what
security, what hope shall we have of peace, unless the seed of sedition be
utterly rooted out?

Upon this speech a certain Knight called Sir Pierce of Extone, presently
departed from the Court, accompanied with eight tall men, and came to Pomfrete,
and there commanded, that the Esquire who was accustomed to sewe, and take the
assaye before King Richard, should no more use that manner of service: and let
him (quoth he) now eat well, for he shall not eat long. King Richard sat
down to dinner, and was served without courtesy or assaye, whereat he
merueyled, and demanded of the Esquire, why he did not his duty? the Esquire
answered, that he was otherwise commanded by Sir Pierce of Extone, who was
latelye come from King Henry. The King being somewhat moved at this act and
answer, took the caruing knife in his hand, and struck the Esquire therewith
lightly on the head, saying, the devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee
together: with that Sir Pierce entered the chamber, with eight men in harneys,
every one having a byll in his hand: Whereupon King Richard perceiving their
drift and his own danger, put the table from him, and stepping stoutlye to
the foremost man, wrested the bill out of his hand, wherewith (although unarmed
and alone) he manfully defended himself a good space, and slew sour of his
assailants. Sir Pierce lept to the chair where king Richard was wont to sit,
whilst the rest chased him about the chamber. At the last being forced toward
the place where Sir Pierce was, he with a stroke of his Pollax felled him to
the ground: and forthwith he was miserably rid out of his miserable life. It
is said that at the point of his death, he gathered some spirit, and with a
fainte and feeble voice, groaned forth these words.

My great grandfather King Edward the second, was in this manner deposed,
imprisoned, and murdered; by which means my grandfather king Edward the third
obtained possession of the crown; and now is the punishment of that in^^trie
powered upon his next successor. Well, this is right for me to suffer, but not
for you to do: your King for a time may joy at my death, and enjoy his
desire; but let him qualify his pleasures with expectation of the like
justice: for God who measures all our actions by the malice of our minds,
will not suffer this violence unrevenged.

Whether these words proceeded from a distempered desire, or from the judgment
of his foresight, they were not altogether idle and vain. For Sir Pierce
expecting great favor and rewards for his ungracious service, was frustrated
of both, and not only missed that countenance for which he hoped, but lost
that which before he had: so odious are vices even where they are profitable.

Heerevpon he grew at the first discontented, and afterward mightily
turmoyled and tormented in conscience, and raging against himself would often
exclaim, that to pleasure one unthankful person, he had made both himself
and his posterity, hateful and infamous to all the world.

King Henry with great coffeehouse and disquiet held the kingdom during
his life: and so did his son King Henry the fifth: in whose time by
continual wars against the Frenchmen, the malice of the humor was otherwise
exercised and spent. But his second successor King Henry the sixth was
dispossessed thereof, and together with his young son Henry imprisoned and
put to death, either by the commandment or con^iuence of King Edward the
fourth.

And he also escaped not free; for he dyed not without many (...) suspicions
of poison^ and after his death his two sons were disinherited, imprisoned,
and butchered by their cruel Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, who being a
tyrant and usurper, was lawfully slain in the field; and so in his person
(having no issue) the tragedy did end. Which are most rare and excellent
examples both of comfort to them that are oppressed, and of terror to violent
dealers; that God in his secret judgment does not always so certainly
provide for our safety, as revenge our injuries and harms: and that all our
unjust actions have a day of payment, and many times by way of retaliation,
even in the same manner and measure wherein they were committed.

And thus was King Richard brought to his death, by violence and force as all
wrighters agree, although all agree not upon the manner of the violence* He
was a man of personage rather well proportioned then tall of great beauty, and
grace, and comeliness in presence; he was of a good strength, and no abject
spirit; but the one by ease* the other by flattery were much abased. He
deserved many friends, but found few, because he sought them more by
liberalitye, then virtuous dealing. He (...) merueilous (...) in all his
actions, which may very well be (...) to his negligence and sloth; for he
that is not provident can seldom prosper, but by his looseness, will loose*
whatsoever fortune, or other men's (...) he was driven is such distress, that
(...), it as a benefit to be disburdened of his royal dignity, for which
other men will not stick; to put their goods, and lives, and souls in hazard.

He lived three and thirty years, and reigned two and twenty. His dead body
was embaulmed, and (...) covered with Lead all save his face, and carried (...)
and in all the chief places by the, way, his face was (...), that by view
thereof no doubt should be made concerning his death. At London he had a
solemn obsequie kept in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul^, the King being
present, and all the chief (...)

Then he was conveyed to Langley Abbey in Bucking, ham shire, about (...) mile
from London, and there obscurely (...) by the Bishop of Chester, the Abbot of
S. Albones, and the Abbot of Waltham, without presence of noble men, without
co^^^uence of the common people, and without the charge of a dinner for
celebrating the (...) but afterward on the commandment of King Henry the
fifth, his body was taken up, and removed to Westminster, and honorably
entombed amongst his auncesters, with Queen Anne his wife, in expiation (as it
is like) of his Fathers violent and unfaithful dealing. So he whose life was
always tumultuous and unquiet, could not readily find rest for his bones,
even after death. It was not amiss in regard of the common wealth that he was
dead; yet they who caused his death had small reason to reckon it among their
good deeds.

And thus do these and the like accidents daily happen to such Princes as will
be absolute in power, resolute in will, and dissolute in life.

This year Hunfrey the son and heir of the Duke of Gloucester, dyed of the
plague? as he returned out of Ireland where King Richard had (...) him
prisoner; and shortly after the Duchess his mother with violence of grief
ended her daye^ this year also dyed Thomas Mo^bray the exiled duke of
Norfolk, whose death would much have been lamented, if he had not furthered so
many lamentable deaths: but he ouerliued his honor, and saw himself accounted
a person infamed and of no estimation. Likewise about this (...) Duke of
Britain deceased, who had taken to wife Mary daughter to King Edward the
third, and by her had no issue, but by Joan his second wife he left behind him
three sons, John, Richard and Arthur: this Joan was afterward married to K.
Henry, as hereafter shall appear. Also this year Edmund Duke of York
departed this life, his honor not stayrred, his fame not touched: he was a man
very circumspect and wary in his carriage; not careless of a good fame, nor
greedy after a great: of other men's wealth not desirous, liberal of his own,
and of the common sparing: he did not by obstinate opposing himself against
the current of the time, rashly hasten, either his fame or his fall, but by
moderation attained safely that degree of praise, and honor, which others
aspiring unto by desperate courses, wanne with ambitious death, without any
other profit at all; He left behind him two noble sons, express
resemblencers of his integrity: Edward, who succeeded in his dignity, and
before was called Duke of Aumerle, and Richard Earl of Cambridge. Edward, in
the change of the state, neither constantlye kept his fidelity, nor stoutly
maintained his treason. Richard took to wife the daughter and heir of Roger
Mortimer, whose mother Phillip was sole daughter and heir to Lionell Duke of
Clarence, the third son of King Edward the third, by which title and descent,
his posterity claimed the Crown and kingdom of this realm from the
successors of King Henry, as hereafter more at large shall be declared.

Charles King of France lost no time all this while in making preparation to
invade England: and to that end had now raised an army royal, which was
brought down into Picardie, and in a readiness to have been transported. But
it is very like that this have for the deliverance of King Richard did the
more hasten his death: upon news whereof the Frenchmen perceiving their
purpose for his restitution to be to no purpose, gave over the enterprise; some
being grieved that the occasion was lost of making spoil of so plentiful a
country, others being well content to be discharged of that hope together with
the hazard whereupon it depended. Shortly after the French King sent a solemn
Embassage into England, to treat, or rather entreat, that Lady Isabell his
daughter, who had bin espoused to King Richard, might with her dowry be
restored to him again. King Henry most honorably received these
Ambassadors, and gave in answer, that he would speedily send his
Commissioners to Calice, which should fullye commune and conclude with them,
both of this and other weighty affairs concerning both the realms.

Not long after he sent Edward Duke of York, and Henry Earl of
Northumberland to Calice: Also the French King sent the Duke of Burbone and
certain others to Bulleine. These Commissioners did often meet, sometimes at
one place, and sometimes at another: the Frenchmen especially required, that
Lady Isabell should be restored, showing that King Charles her Father had given
in charge, that this before all matters, and without this nothing should be
concluded. On the other side the Englishmen desired that she might be married
to Henry Prince of Wales King Henry's eldest Son, a man answerable to her in
equal degree both of blood and of years: but the French King denied that he
would any more join affinity with the English nation, whose aliance had once
so unfortunately succeeded: the^ they entered into speech of a perpetual peace,
but heereto the Frenchmen would not agree. In the end it was concluded that
Lady Isabell should be delivered to King Charles her Father but without Dower;
because the marriage between King Richard and her, was never consummate: by
reason whereof she was not dowable by the very treaty of the marriage. Also the
surcease of arms which four years before had been made with King Richard
for the term of 30 years, was continued and confirmed for the time then
vnexpyred. Some authors affirm that a new truce was taken, but these also are
at diffierence: for some report that it was during the life of both the Kings,
others that it was but for a short time, which has the more apparaunce of
truth, by reason of the open hostilitye which the year following did break
forth between the two realms.

Shortly after King Henry sent the Lady Isabell under the conducte of Lord
Thomas Pearcy Earl of Worcester, in royal estate to Calice: she was
accompanied with a great troop of honorable personages, both men and women;
and carried with her all the Iewelles and plate which she brought into
England, with a great surple sage of rich gifts bestowed upon her by the king:
at Calice she was received by the Earl of S. Paul, Leiuetenant for the French
king in Picardy, and by him was conducted to king Charles her Father, who
afterward gave her in marriage to Cbarles, son to Jews Duke of Orleance:
and so was either rest or respite of wars procured in France, whilst nearer
stirs might be brought to some stay.

For within the realm, the fire and fury of the late sedition was scarcely
quenched and quiet, but (that the common wealth should not cease to be torn by
multiplying of divisions, one straight succeeding another) the Welshmen, upon
advantage of the doubtful and unsettled estate of king Henry, resolved to
break and make a defection; before either the king could ground his authority,
or the people frame themselves to a new obedience: and having learned that
common causes must be maintained by concord, they sought by assemblyes to
establish an association, and to set up their own principality again.

To this purpose they created for their Prince, Owen Glendor an Esquire of
Wales, a factious person, and apt to set up division and strife: and although
he was of no great state in birth; yet was he great and stately in stomach:
of an aspiring spirit, and in wit somewhat above the ordynarie of that
vntrayned people: boulde, crafty, active, and as he listed to bend his mind,
mischievous or industrious in equal degree, in desires immoderate, and rashlye
aduenturous, in his young years he was brought up to the study of the Common
Law of the Realm, at London: and when he came to man's estate, besides a
natural fierceness and hatred to the English name, he was particularlye
incensed by a private suite, for certain lands in controversy, between the
Lord Gray of Ruthen and him; wherein his title was overthrown; and being a man
by nature not of the myldest, by this provocation he was made sauadge and
rough; determining either to repair or to revenge his loss, by setting the
whole state on fire. Also his expense and liberality had been too excessive
for a great man to endure, which brought him to bareness too base for a mean
man to bear: and therefore he must of necessity do and dare somewhat, and
more danger there was in soft and quiet dealing, then in hazarding rashly.
Heerewith opportunity was then likewise presented: for troublesome times are
most fit for great attempts, and some likelihood there was, whilst the King
and the Lords were hard at variance, that harm might easelie be wrought to
them both. Upon these causes his desire was founded, and upon these troubles
his hope. But that his aspiring and ambitious humor might bear some show of
honest meaning, he pretented to his countrymen the recovery of their free
estate, the desire whereof was so naturally sweet, that even wild Birds will
rather live hardlye at large in the air, then be daintily dyeted by others in
a Cage: and opportunity was at that time fitly offered, or else never to be
expected, to rid them of their thraldom, falselie and coulourablie entitled a
peace; whilst the one Kings power was waining, and the other not yet fullye
wexen, and either of them grew weak by wasting the other: neither was there
any difference which of them should prevail, since the war touched both
alike, insomuch as the overthrow would ruin the one, and the victory the
other: So he exhorted them to take courage and arms: and first to kill all
the English within their territories, for liberty and Lords could not endure
together: then to resume their ancient customs and laws, whereby more then
arms, commonwealths are established and enlarged: so should they be a people
vncorrupt, without admi^tion of foreign manners or blood; and so should they
forget servitude, and either live at liberty, or else perhaps, be Lords over
other.

Heerevppon many flocked unto him, the best for love of liberty, the basest of
desire of booty and spoil, insomuch as in short time he became commander of
competent forces to stand openly in the field. And being desirous to make some
proof of his prowess, he sharply set upon his old adversary Reignold
Lord Gray of Ruthen, whose possessions he wasted and spoiled, slew many of his
men, and took himself prisoner; yet gave him fair and friendly
enterteinment, and promised him releasment, if he would take his daughter to
wife. This he desired, not so much for need of his ability or aid, as
supposing that the name and countenance of a Lord, would give reputation to
the house that was then but in rising: But the Lord Greye at the first did not
so much refuse as scorn the offer: affirming that he was no ward, to have his
marriage obtruded upon him. Well (said Owen Glendore) although you be not my
ward* yet are you in my ward: and the suing of your liuerie will cost double
the marriage money that elsewhere you shall procure. The Lord Gray being not
very rich to discharge his ransom, and seeing no other means of his
deliverance, at the last accepted the condition, and took the damsel to
wife; notwithstanding his deceitful Father in law trifled out the time of his
enlargement until he dyed.

The Welshmen being confident upon this success, began to break into the
borders of Hereford shire, and to make spoil and pray of the Country: against
whom Lord Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, who for fear of King Henry had
withdrawn himself (as has been declared) to Wiggmore Castle, assembled all
the Gentlemen of the Country, and meeting with the Welshmen, they joined
together a sharp and cruel conflict: not in form of a loose skirmish, but
standing still and maintaining their place, they endeavored with maine might
to break and bear down one another. The courage and resolution of both sides
was a like, but the Welshmen were superior both for number and direction: for
they were conducted by one known leader, who with his presence every where
assisted at need, enflaming his Soldiers, some with shame and reproof,
others with praise and encouragement, all with hope and large promises: but the
Englishmen had no certain general, but many confused commanders, yea, every
man was a commander to himself* pressing forward or drawing back, as his
own courage or fear did move him. Insomuch as no doubt they had taken a
great blow that day by their ill governed boldness, had not Owen Glendor
presently upon the breaking up of the field, ceased to pursue the execution,
and showed himself more able to get a victory, then skillful to use it. But
even to his side the victory had cost blood, and many of those which remained,
were either wounded or weary: the night was near also, and they were in their
enemies country; by which means our men had liberty to retire rather then
run away, no man being hot to follow the chase. They lost of their company
about a thousand men, who sold their lives at such a price, that when manhood
had done the hardest against them, certain mannish, or rather deuilish women,
whose malice is immortal, exercised a vain revenge upon their dead bodies;
in cutting off their privy parts and their noses, whereof the one they
stuffed into their mouths, and pressed the other between their buttocks; and
would not suffer their mangled carcasses to be committed to the earth, until
they were redeemed with a great sum of money. By which cruel couetuousnesse,
the faction lost reputation and credit with the moderate sort of their own
people; suspecting that it was not liberty but licentiousness, which was
desired: and that subjection to such vnhumaine minds would be more
insupportable then any bondage.

In this conflict the Earl of March was taken prisoner and fettered with
chains, and cast into a deep and vile dungeon. The King was solicited by many
noble men, to use some means for his deliverance; but he would not hear on
that ear; he could rather have wished him and his two sisters in heaven, for
then the only blemish to his title had been out of the way: and no man can
tell whether this mischaunce did not preserve him from a greater mischief.

Owen Glendor by the prosperous success of his actions, was grown now more
hard to be dealt with, and hautelie minded, and stood even upon terms of
equality with the King: whereupon he proceeded further to invade the Marches
of Wales on the West side of Seuerne; where he burnt many villages and towns,
slew much people, and returned with great prey, and praises of his adherents.
Thus he ceased not this year to infest the borderers on every side, amongst
whom he found so weak resistance, that he seemed to exercise rather a spoil
then a war. For King Henry was then detained with his chiefest forces in
another more dangerous service, which besides these former vexations and
hazards, this first year of his reign happened unto him.

For the Scotts knowing that changes were times most apt for attempt, and
upon advantage of the absence of all the chief English borderers, partly by
occasion of the Parliament, and partly by reason of the plague which was very
grievous that year in the North parts of the realm: they made a road into
the country of Northumberland, and there committed great havoc and harm.
Also on a certain night they suddenly set upon the Castle of Work, the
captain whereof sir Thomas Gray, was then one of the knights of the Parliament:
and having slain the watch partly a sleep, partlye amassed with fear, they
brake in and surprised the place: which they held a while, and at the last
spoiled and ruined and then departed. Whilst further harms were feared this
passed with light regard. But when great perrils were past, as if noe worse
misfortune could have befallen, then was it much sorrowed and lamented. And in
revenge thereof, the Englishmen invaded and spoiled certain Islands of Orkney:
and so the loss was in some sort repaired: yet (as in reprisals of war it
commonly falls out) neither against those particular persons which committed
the harm, nor for those which suffered it: but one for another were both
recompensed and revenged. Again the Scotts set forth a fleet, under the
conduct of Sir Robert Logon, with direction to attempt as occasion should be
offered: his first purpose was against our Fishermen; but before he came to
any action, he was encountered by certain English ships, and the greatest part
of his fleet taken. Thus peace still continuing between both the realms, a
kind of theeuish hostility was daily practiced, which afterward brake out
into open war upon this occasion.

George of Dunbarre Earl of the Marches of Scotland, had betrothed Elisabeth
his daughter to David, the son and heir apparent of Robert King of Scotts,
and in regardc of that marriage to be shortly celebrated and finished, he
delivered into the Kings hands a great sum of money for his Daughters dowry.
But Archibalde Earl Dowglasse disdayning that the Earl of Marches blood
should be preferred before his, so wrought with King Robert, that Prince David
his son refused the Earl of Marches Daughter, and took to wife Mariell
Daughter to the Earl Dowglasse: Earl George not used to offers of disgrace,
could hardlye enforce his patience to endure this scorn: and first he
demanded restitution of his money, not so much for care to obtain as for
desire to pieke an occasion of breaking his allegiance. The King would make to
him neither payment nor promise, but trifled him off with many (...) and vaire
delays* Whcrevppon he fled with all his; family into England to (...) earl
of Northumberland, intending with open disloyalty both to revenge his
indignity, and recover his loss. The Englishmen with open arms enterteyned
the opportunity; with whose help and assistance the Earl made diverse
incursions into Scotland, where he burnt many (...), and (...) much people and
daily purchased with his sword* great abundance of (...) and spolle.

Heerevppon King Robert deprived the Earl of his honor, seized all his goods
and possessions, and wrote unto King Henry, as he would have the much between
them any longer to continue; either to deliver unto him the Earl of March and
other ^aytours to his person and state or else to banish them the realm of
England* King Henrye perceiving such iarres to iogger between the two realms,
that the peace was already as it were out of joints, determined not to loose
the benefit of the discontented subjects of his enemy: whereupon he returned
answer to the Heralde of Scotland, that he was neither weary of, peace not
fearful of wars, and ready as occasion should change, either to hold me
one, or hazard the other* but the word of a Prince was of great weight; and
therefore sith he had granted a safe conduct to the Earl of March and his
company, it were an impeachment to his honor, without just cause to violate
the same. Upon this answer the King of Scotts did presently proclaim open
war against the King of England, with blood, fire, and sword.

King Henry thought it policy, rather to begin the war in his enemies
country, then to expect it in his own: because the land which is the (...) of
the war, does commonly furnish both sides with necessary supply; the friend
by contribution, and the enemy by spoil. Therefore sending certain troops
of horsemen before him, both to epsy and to induce an uncertain terror upon
the enemy, he entered into Scotland with a puissant army; wherewith he burnt
many Villages and Towns, cast down diverse Castles, and ruined a great part
of the Towns of Edenborough and Lith, sparing nothing but Churches and
religious houses: so that in all places as he passed, the spectacle was ouglie
and grisly which he left behind him; bodies torn in pieces, mangled and
putrified limbs, the air infected with stincke, the ground imbrued with
corruption and blood, the country wasted, the Grass and Corn trodden down
and spoiled; insomuch as a man would have said that war is an exercise not
of manhood, but of inhumanitie. They that fled before the army, filled all
places with fear and terror, extolling above truth the English foreces, to
deminish thereby their shame in running from them.

In the end of September the King besieged the Castle of Maidens in
Edenborough; wherein were David Duke of Rothsaye Prince of the realm, and
Archibald^ Earl Dowglasle; the inconstancy of the one, and ambition of the
other, were principal causes of all this war.

During this siege, Robert Duke of Albonye, who was appointed governor of the
Realm, because the King was sick and unable to rule, sent an Herald unto
Henry; assuring him upon his honor, that if he would abide but six days
at the most, he would give him battle; and either remove the siege, or
loose his life.

The King was well pleased with these tidings, and rewarded the Herald with a
gown of silk and a chain of gould, and promised him in the word of a
Prince, to abide there and expect the governor, during the time by him
prefixed.

The six days passed, almost six times over and no more news was heard of
the Governor, either by presence or by messenger. Winter came on, and
victuaile failed, the Country was cold and fruitelesse, and it rayned every
day in great abundance: so that partly by hunger, partlye by distemperature of
the weather, the Soldiers began to dye of the Flixe; it is very like that
these accidents stayed the Governor from performing his promise, for policy
was against it, to hazard his men in the field, when winter and want, two
forceable foes, had given the charge upon his enemies: certain it is, that
they moved the King to remove his fiege, and to depart out of Scotland,
without any battle or skirmish offered.

Both the Wardens of the Marches were all this time in Scotland with the King:
upon which advantage the Scots did break into Northumberland, and burnt
certain towns in Bamborough shire. The English men were speedily up in
arms; but the Scotts more speedily made their return, or else no doubt they
had been met with and encountered.

Again when King Henry had discharged his army, the Scotts being desirous
not so much of life as of revenge, made a sudden road into England, under the
conduct of Sir Thomas Halsbarton of Dirleton, and Sir Patricke Hebburne of
Hales: but all the harm which they wrought did rather waken then weaken the
Englishmen: and they themselves were somewhat encouraged, but nothing enryched,
by that which they got.

Not long after, Sir Patricke Hebburne, being lifted up in desire and hope,
resolved to undertake a greater enterprise: the people, which are (...) by
prosporous success, in great companies resorted to him; but he was loath to
have more fellows in the spoil, then he thought should need in the danger:
therefore with a competent army of the men of Loughdeane, he invaded a
Northumberland, where he made great spoil, and loaded his Soldiers with
prisoners and pray. There was no question made what peril might be in the
return* Therefore they marched loosene and (...), as in a place of great
security, not keeping themselves to their ensigns and order: but the Earl of
Northumberlands Vice-warden, and order Gentlemen of the borders in good arraye,
set upon them at a town in Northumberland called (...)* The scotts rallied
as well as the soddainnesse did serve, and valliantlie received the charge; so
that the battle was sharp and (...), and continued a good time, with great
mortality. In the end the enemies ranckes grew thin, as being rather
confusedly shuffled together, then orderly and firmlie compacted: and when the
Vice-warden (...) them weak in the shock, and yielding under his hand, with a
company which purposel^e retained about him for sudden disp^tene^ and
chances of war, he flercely charged and disordered them. Sir Patricke
Hebburne being clean destitute both of counsel and courage, ran up and
down from one place to another, commanding many things, and presently
forbidding them again; and the less of force his directions were, the oftener
did he change them: anon (as it happens in lost and desperate cases) every
man became a commander, and none a putter in execution: so the ranket loosed
and brake, and could not be reunited, the victor hoatly pursuing the
advantage. Then might you have (...) a grievous spectacle, pursuing, killing,
wounding and taking, and killing those that were taken, when better were
offered: every where weapons, and dead bodies, and mangled lim^, lay
scattered: and sometimes in those that were slain, appeared at their death
both anger and valor. Sir Patricke Hebburne thought of nothing less then
either fleeing or yielding, but thrusting among the thickest of his enemies,
honorably ended his life. Many other of his lineage, and the flower of all
Loughdeane were likewise slain. There (...) side no great number was slain;
and those of no great service and degree. And with these troubles the first
year of King Henry the fourth ended. ()

FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes head
alley, near the Exchange. 1599.


