THE LIVES OF THE III. NORMANS, KINGS OF ENGLAND: WILLIAM the first. WILLIAM
the second. HENRY the first.
Written by I. H.

MART. Improbe facit qui in alieno libro ingeniosus est. IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY
R. B. ANNO 1613.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES Prince of Wales.
MOst Illustrious PRINCE:
Our late, too late borne, or too soon dying Prince, HENRY of famous memory,
your deceased brother, sent for me, a few months before his death. And at my
second coming to his presence, among some other speeches, he complained much
of our Histories of England; and that the English Nation, which is inferior to
none in Honorable actions, should be surpassed by all, in leaving the memory
of them to posterity. For this cause he blamed the negligence of former ages:
as if they were ignorant of their own deseruings, as if they esteemed
themselves unworthy of their worth.

I answered, that I conceived these causes hereof; One, that men of
sufficiency were otherwise employed; either in public affairs, or in
wrestling with the world, for maintenance or increase of their private estates.
Another is, for that men might safely write of others in manner of atale, but in
manner of a History* safely they could not: because, albeit they should write of
men long since dead, and whose posterity is clean worn out; yet some alive,
finding themselves foul in those vices, which they see observed, reproved,
condemned in others; their guiltiness makes them apt to conceive, that
whatsoever the words are, the finger points only at them. The last is, for
that the Argument of our English history has been so foiled heretofore by
some unworthy writers, that men of quality may esteem themselves discredited
by dealing in it.

And is not this (said he) an error in us, to permit every man to be a writer
of History? Is it not an error to be so curious in other matters, and so
careless in this? We make choice of the most skillful workmen to draw or
carue the portraiture of our faces, and shall every artlesse Pensell delineate
the disposition of our minds? Our apparel must be wrought by the best
Artificers, and no soil must be suffered to fall upon it: and shall our
actions, shall our conditions be described by every bungling hand? Shall every
filthy finger defile our reputation? Shall our Honor be basely buried in the
dross of rude and absurd writings? We are careful to provide costly
Sepulchers, to preserve our dead lives, to preserve some memory what we have
been: but there is no monument, either so durable, or so largely extending, or
so lively and fair, as that which is framed by a fortunate pen; the memory
of the greatest Monuments had long since perished, had it not been preserved by
this means.

To this I added; that I did always conceive, that we should make our
reckoning of three sorts of life: the short life of nature, the long life of
fame, and the eternal life of glory. The life of glory is so far esteemed
before the other two, as grace is predominant in us: the life of fame before
our natural life is so far esteemed, as a generous spirit surmounteth
sensuality; as humane nature ouerruleth brutish disposition. So far as the
noble nature of man has dominion in our minds, so far do we contemn, either
the inco^modities, or dangers, or life of our body, in regard of our reputation
and fame. Now seeing this life of fame is both preserved and enlarged chiefly
by history; there is no man (I suppose) that will either resist, or not assist,
the commendable or at least tolerable writing thereof, but such as are
conscious to themselves, either that no good, or that nothing but ill, can be
reported of them. In whom notwithstanding it is an error to think, that any
power of the present time, can either extinguish or obscure the memory of
times succeeding. Posterity will give to every man his due: Some ages
hereafter will afford those, who will report impartially of all.

Then he questioned, whether I had wrote any part of our English History,
other then that which had been published; which at that time he had in his
hands* I answered, that I had wrote of certain of our English Kings, by way of
a brief description of their lives: but for history, I did principally bend,
and bind my self to the times wherein I should live; in which my own
observations might somewhat direct me: but as well in the one as in the other I
had at that time perfected nothing.

To this he said; that in regard of the honor of the time, he liked well of
the last; but for his own instruction, he more desired the first: that he
desired nothing more then to know the actions of his Ancestors; because he
did so far esteem his descent from them, as he approached near them in
honorable endeauours. Hereupon, beautifying his face with a sober smile, he
desired me, that against his return from the progress then at hand, I would
perfect somewhat of both sorts for him, which he promised amply to requite; and
was well known to be one, who esteemed his word above ordinary respects. This
stirred in me, not only a will, but power to perform* so as engaging my
duty far above the measure either of my leisure or of my strength, I
finished the lives of these three Kings of Norman race, and certain years of
Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign.

At his return from the Progress to his house at S. James, these pieces were
delivered unto him; which he did not only courteously, but joyfully accept.
And because this seemed a perfect work, he expressed a desire that it should
be published. Not long after he died; and with him died both my endeauours and
my hopes. His death, alas! has bound the lives of many unto death, face to
face; being no ways able, either by forgetfulness to cover their grief, or
to diminish it with consideration.

For in truth he was a Prince of a most Heroical heart: Free from many vices
which sometimes accompany high estates, full of most amiable and admirable
virtues: of whose perfections the world was not worthy. His eyes were full of
pleasant modesty; his countenance manly beautiful; in body both strongly and
delicately made; in behavior sweet^ly sober, which gave grace to whatsoever he
did. He was of a discerning wit; and for the faculty of his mind, of great
capacity and power, accompanied with equal expedition of will: much
foreseeing in his actions, and for passions a commander of himself; and of
good strength to resist the power of prosperity. In counsel he was ripe and
measured, in resolution constant, his word ever led by his thought, and
followed by his deed. And albeit he was but young and his nature forward and
free, yet his wisdom reduced both to a true temper of moderation; his desires
being never above his reason, nor his hopes inferior to his desires. In a
word, he was the most fair fruit of his Progenitors, an excellent ornament
of the present age, a true mirror to posterity: being so equally both settled
to valor, and disposed to goodness and Justice, as he expressed not only
tokens, but proofs, both of a courage, and of a gravity and industry right
worthy of his estate.

Glorious Prince, my love and duty has carried me further, then happily is fit
for the present purpose: and yet this is but an earnest only of my earnest
affection and zeal to thy Honor. I shall hereafter have a more proper place
to display at large, the goodlinesse of thy shape, the goodness of thy nature,
the greatness of thy mind: all thy perfections, whereby our affections were
much enflamed. And euillworthy may he be of any happy hopes, who will not add
one blast of his breath, to make up the glorious gale of thy fame.

In the mean time I have here accomplished his desire in publishing this
work: More to testify to the world the height of his heart, then for any
pleasure I have to set forth any thing, to the view of these both captious and
unthankful times; wherein men will be, not readers only, but interpreters,
but wresters, but corrupters and deprauers of that which they read; wherein
men think the reproof of others, to be the greatest parcel of their own
praise. But how should I expect any better usage? The Commentaries of Caesar,
never disliked before, are esteemed by Lypsius, a dry saplesse piece of
writing. The most famous Tacitus is termed by Alceate, (...)
a thicket of thorns; by Budaeus, (...) (...) (...) (...)
a most lewd Writer; by Tertullian, (...)* simu^.
an exceedin^ liar; by Orosius, Adulat^.
a flatterer; then which assuredly he is ^thing less. I will not expect any
better usage, I will not desire it: I will hereafter esteem nothing of any
worth, which has not many to detract from it.

Whatsoever this is, I have presumed to present it to your Highness, for these
causes following: First, for that it received this being from him, who was most
dearly esteemed by you; who may be justly proposed, as an example of virtue,
as a guide to glory and fame. Secondly, for that the persons of whom it
treats, are those most worthy Ancestors of yours, who laid the foundation of
this English Empire; who were eminent among all the Princes of their times, and
happily for many ages after, as well in actions of Peace as of War. Lastly,
for that I esteem Histories the fittest subject for your Highness reading:
For by diligent perusing the acts of great men, by considering all the
circumstances of them, by comparing Counsa^les and means with events; a man
may seem to have lived in all ages, to have been present at all enterprises;
to be more strongly confirmed in Judgment, to have attained a greater
experience, then the longest life can possibly afford.

But because many errors do usually arise, by ignorance of the State wherein
we live; because it is dangerous to frame rules of Policy out of Countries
differing from us, both in nature, and custom of life, and form of
government; no Histories are so profitable as our own. In these your Highness
may see, the noble disposition and delights of your Ancestors; what were their
sweet walks, what their pleasant Chases: how far they preferred glory,
before either pleasure or safety; how by the brave behavior of their sword,
they hewed honor out of the sides of their enemies. In these you may see, the
largeness, commodities, and strength of this Country; the nature of the
people, their wealth, pleasure, exercise and trade of life, and what else is
worthy of observation. Generally, by these you may so furnish your self, as
not easily to be abused either by weak or deceitful advise.

The Most High preserve and prosper your Highness: that as you succeed many
excellent Ancestors in blood, so you may exceed them all in Honorable
atchieuements.

Your Highness most devoted, I. HAYVVARD.

THE LIFE OF KING WILLIAM THE FIRST, Surnamed Conqueror.
ROBERT Duke of Normandy the sixth in descent from Rollo, riding through
Falais a town in Normandy, espied certain young persons dancing near the
way. And as he stayed to view a while the manner of their disport, he fixed his
eye especially upon a certain damsel named Arlotte; of mean birth, a
Skinners daughter, who there daunced among the rest. The frame and comely
carriage of her body, the natural beauty and graces of her countenance, the
simplicity of her rural both behavior and attire pleased him so well, that
the same night he procured her to be brought to his lodging; where he begat of
her a son, who afterward was named William.

I will not defile my writing with memory of some lascivious behavior which
she is reported to have used, at such time as the Duke approached to embrace
her. And doubtful it is, whether upon some special note of immodestie in
herself, or whether upon hate toward her son, the English afterward adding
an aspiration to her name (according to the natural manner of their
pronouncing) termed every unchaste woman Harlot.

It is remembered by some, rather servile then fond in observations, who will
either find or frame predictions for every great action or event; that his
mother before the time of her delivery had a dream, that her bowels were
extended over Normandy and England. Also, that at the time of his birth, he
fell from his mothers body to the ground; and there filled both his hands with
rushes, which had been cast thick upon the floor, and streined them with a
very streit gripe. The wives laughed at large, and soon grew prodigal of idle
talk. But the Midwife somewhat more soberly said; That he should not only
hold well his own, but graspe somewhat from other men.

When he was about 9. years of age, his father went upon devotion to
Jerusalem; and in his return died at the City of Nice. So William at that
age succeeded his father; having then very generous and aspiring spirits, both
to resist abroad, and to rule at home. He was committed to the government of
two of his uncles; and the French King was entreated by his father to take
upon him the protection, both of his person and State. But his uncles
pretended title to his dignity, by reason of his unlawful birth; the King of
France also desired much and had often attempted to reduce Normandy to his
absolute subjection, as it was before the invasion of the Normans. So as it may
seem he was committed to these Tutors, as a Lamb should be committed to the
tutelage of wolves. The only means of his preservation consisted in a
factious Nobility, divided into so many parts, as there were parties: Some
contending for possession of the young Dukes person; others, of his authority
and power; all of them incompatible to endure either equals, or else superiors:
All of them united against a common enemy; all divided among themselves.

Here it may be demanded how he being unlawfully borne, could succeed his
father in the duchy of Normandy; his father leaving two brothers borne in
lawful marriage, and much other legitimate kindred behind him.

Will. Malmesburie and some others have reported, Lib. 3. in princ. Ingulph.
lib. 6. cap. 19.
that albeit he was borne out of marriage, yet Duke Robert his father did
afterward entertain his mother for lawful wife: which by the Law of that
Country, agreeable in that point to the Civil and Canon Laws, sufficed to
make the issue inheritable, although borne before.

And further, it was a general custom at that time in France, that bastards
did succeed, even in dignities of highest condition, no otherwise then children
lawfully begotten. Thierrie bastard of Clouis, had for his partage with the
lawful children of the same Clouis, the Kingdom of Austrasie, now called
Lorraine. Sigisbert bastard of King Dagobert the first, had his part in the
Kingdom of France, with Clouis the 12. lawful son to Dagobert. Loys and
Carloman bastards of King Loys le Begue, succeeded after the death of their
father. So likewise in England, Alfride bastard son of Oswine, succeeded his
brother Egfride. So Adelstane the bastard son of Edward the elder, succeeded
his father, before Edmund and Eldred his younger brother; notwithstanding they
were lawfully begotten. So Edmund, surnamed the Martyr, Bastard son to King
Edgar, succeeded him in the state, before Ethelbred his lawful issue.
Afterward, Harold surnamed Harefoote, bastard to Canutus, succeeded him in the
kingdom, before Hardicanutus, his lawful son. The like custom has been
observed in Spain, in Portugale, and in diverse other countries. And it is
probable that this use was grounded upon often experience, that bastards (as
begotten in the highest heat and strength of affection) have many times been
men of excellent proof, both in courage and in understanding. This was
verified (...). Eurip^ A^drom.
in Hercules, Alexander the Great, Romulus, Timotheus, Brutus, Themistocles,
Arthur: in Homer, Demosthenes, Bion, Bartholus, Gratian, Peter Lumbard, Peter
Comestor, Io. Andreas, and diverse of most flourishing name: among whom our
Conqueror may worthily be ranged.

And yet in the third race of the Kings of France a law was made, that bastards
should not inherit the Crown of the Realm. This custom was likewise
banished out of England, and other countries of Europe. Notwithstanding in
France, other bastards of great houses were still aduowed.

The exercises of this Duke from his very youth were ingenuous, manly, decent,
and such as tended to actiuitie and valor: He was of a working mind and
vehement spirit, rather ambitious then only desirous of glory: of a piercing
wit, blind in no man's cause, and well sighted in his own: of a lively and
present courage; neither out of ignorance, or rash estimation of dangers, but
out of a true judgment both of himself and of them. In peace he was
politic: In war valiant and very skillful, both to epsy, and to apprehend,
and to follow his advantages: this valor and skill in military affairs, was
always seconded with good success. He was continually accustomed both to the
weight and use of armor, from his very childhood. Oftentimes he looked death
in the face with a brave contempt. He was never free from actions of arms;
first upon necessity to defend himself, afterward upon ambition to offend and
disturb the possessions of others.

In his first age he was much infested with rebels in Normandy; who often
conspired both against his life, and against his dignity and State; traducing
him, as a bastard, as a boy, as borne of a base ignoble woman, as altogether
unworthy to be their Prince. Of these, some he appeased and reconciled unto
him: others he prevented, and dispersed their power before it was collected:
others he encountered in open field, before he had any hair upon his face;
where he defeated their forces in full battle, then took their strong holds,
and lastly chased them out of his dominion.

And first Roger Tresuye, having gained exceeding great both favor and
reputation by his services against the Sarasins in Spain, made claim to the
duchy of Normandy; as one lawfully descended from Rollo their first Duke. And
albeit many others were before him in title, yet (said he) if they will sit
still; if they, either through sloth, which is ill, or through fear, which is
worse, will abandone the adventure, he alone would free the Normans from their
infamous subjection. He was followed by many, partly upon opinion of his right,
but chiefly of his valor. But when he brought his cause to the arbitrament of
Arms, he was overthrown in a strong battle, wherein his claim and his
life determined together.

After this, William Earl of Arques, son to Richard the second, and uncle
to Duke William, upon the same pretense declared himself against his nephew.
And albeit the Normans were heavy to stir in his favor, yet he so wrought
with the French King, by assuring him great matters in Normandy, that with a
mighty army of his own people, he went in person, to place him in
possession of that duchy. The way which the King took, led him to a large
valley, sandy and full of short bushes and shrubs; troublesome for horsemen
either to fight or to march. On either side were rising hills, very thick set
with wood. Here the Army entered with small aduisement, either for clearing the
passage, or for the safety of their carriages. The Vaward consisted chiefly of
battle-axes and pikes. In the right wing were many Almans among the French. In
the left were many of Aniou and Poictou. After these followed the baggage, with
an infinite number of scullians, carters and other base drudges attending upon
it. Next came the French King with the maine battle, consisting for the most
part of valiant and worthy Gentlemen, bravely mounted. The lances and men at
Arms cloased the Rereward.

When they were well entered this valley, the Normans did lively charge upon
them in head; they delivered also their deadly shot from the hills on both
sides, as thick as hail. Notwithstanding the Vantgard, casting themselves
into a pointed battle in form of a wedge, with plain force of hand made
themselves way; and marching in firm and close order through the thickest of
their enemies, gained (albeit not without great loss) the top of a hill, and
there presently encamped themselves. The like fortune happily might the residue
have had, if they had followed with the like order and courage. But failing
herein, the right wing was hewed in pieces: the left wing was broken and beaten
upon the carriages; where ouerbearing and treading down one an other, they
received almost as much hurt from themselves, as they did from their enemies.
The maine battle and Rereward advancing forward to rescue the carriage, were
first miserably overwhelmed with a storm of arrows from the hill on both
sides: and the gallant horses once galled with that shot, would no more obey or
endure their riders; but flinging out, either overthrew or disordred all in
their way. And the more to increase the misery of that day, the dust and light
sand which was raised, partly by the feet of horses and men, and partly by
violence of the wind, which then blew full in the faces of the French, inuolued
them all as in a thick and dark cloud; which deprived them of all foresight
and direction in governing their affairs. The valiant was nothing discerned
from the coward, no difference could be set between contriuance and chance:
All labored in one common calamity, and every one increased the fear of his
fellow.

The Normans having well spent their shot, and perceiving the French in this
sort both disordered and dismayed, came down from the hills where they houered
before; and falling to the close stroke of battaile-axe and sword, most cruelly
raged in the blood of their enemies. By whom if any spark of valor was
shown, being at so great disadvantage, it was to no purpose, it was altogether
lost; it was so far from relieuing others, that it was not sufficient to
defend themselves. And doubtless no thing so much favored the state of the
French that day, as that the number of the Normans sufficed not to enclose them
behind. For then they had been entrapped as Dear in a toil; then not one of
them could have escaped. But the entrance of the valley remaining open, many
f^ed back to the plain ground; tumbling together in such headlong have, that
if the Normans had sharply put upon them the chase, it is certain that they
had been extreemely defeated. But the Duke gave over the execution upon good
advise. For knowing himself not to be of force utterly to vanquish the French,
he assayed rather by fair forbearance to purchase their friendship.

Here the French king assembled his broken companies, and encamped them for
that night so well as he could. The joy of their present escape expelled for
the time all other respects. But after a little breathing, their remembrance
began to run upon the loss of their cariages; whereby they had lost all
means to refresh themselves. Of their Vaward they made a forelorne reckoning,
and the like did the Vaward of them. Many were wounded, all wearied; and the
Normans gave notice by sounding out their instruments of war, that they were
at hand on every side. The rudest of the Soldiers did boldly vpbraid this
infortunitie to the King; one asked him where his Vaward was, where were his
wings, where were the residue of his battle, and Rereward. Others called for
the cariages, to preserve those in life who had not been slain. Others
demanded if he had any more mouse-traps to lead them into. But most sat heavy
and pensive, scarce accounting themselves among the living. The King swallowed
down all with a sad silence, sometimes he dissembled as though he had not
heard; sometimes he would fairly answer; Good words, good soldiers; have
patience a while, and all will be well: which was indeed a truer word then he
thought it possible to be when he spoke it.

In this extremity the King assembled the chief of his commanders, to advise
with them what was best to be done. It was generally concluded, that in staying
their case was desperate; and dangerous it was to stir. But here lay the
question; whether it was least dangerous to remove together, or every man to
shift for himself. Whilst this point was in debating, whilst they expected
every minute to be aslailed, whilst no man saw any thing but death and
despair; behold, a messenger came from the Duke, not to offer but to desire
peace; and to crave protection of the French king, according to the trust which
Robert the Dukes father reposed in him. There needed not many words to
persuade. Peace was signed, protection assured, in a more ample manner then it
was required. Then the messenger with many good words appeased the Kings
heaviness, telling him, that his Vaward was safe, his cariages not touched,
and that he should be furnished with horses both for burden and draught, in
stead of those that had been slain. These words, as a sweet enchantment,
ravished the French King with sudden joy. But when they came to gather up their
baggage, a spectacle both lamentable and loathsome was presented unto them. The
valley covered, and in some places heaped with dead bodies of men and horses:
many not once touched with any weapon, lay trodden to death, or else stifled
with dust and sand: many grievously wounded, retained some remainder of life,
which they expressed with cries and groans: many not mortally hurt, were so
ouerlaid with the slain, that they were unable to free themselves: toward
whom it is memorable, what manly both pity and help the Normans did afford.
And so the French King more by courtesy of his enemies, then either by courage
or discretion of his own, returned in reasonable state to Paris.

Upon these events of open hostility, Guy Earl of Burgogne, who had taken to
wife Alix, daughter to Duke Richard the second, and Aunt to Duke William,
conspired with Nicellus president of Constantine, Ranulph Vicecount of Bayon,
Baimond, and diverse others, suddenly to surprise the Duke, and slay him in the
night. A certain fool, (nothing regarded for his want of wit) observing their
preparations, secretly got away, and in the dead of the night came to Valogne,
where the Duke then lay; no less slenderly guarded with men, then the place it
self was slight for defense. Here he continued rapping at the gate, and
crying out, until it was opened, and he brought to the presence of the Duke.
To whom he declared the conspiracy, with circumstances of such moment, that
the Duke forthwith took his horse, and posted alone toward Falais, an
especial place for strength of defense. Presently after his departure the
conspirators came to Valogne, they beset the house, they enter by force, they
search every corner for the Duke: And finding that the game was start, and on
foot, in hot haste they pursued the chase.

About break of day the Dukes horse tired, and he was ignorant of his right
way. He was then at a little village called Rye, where the chief Gentleman of
the place was standing at his door ready to go abroad. Of him the Duke
enquired the next way to Falais. The Gentleman knew the Duke, and with all
duty and respect desired to know the cause of his both solitary and untimely
riding. The Duke would willingly have passed unknown; but perceiving himself
to be discovered, declared to him the whole adventure. Hereupon the Gentleman
furnished him with a fresh horse, and sent with him two of his sons to
conduct him the direct way to Falais.

No sooner were they out of sight, but the conspirators came, and enquired of
the same Gen^leman (who still remained at his door) whether he saw not the
Duke that morning: as if, forsooth, they were come to attend him. The Gentleman
answered, that he was gone a little before, and therewith offered them his
company to overtake him. But he lead them about another way, until the Duke
was safely alighted at Falais. And thus the more we consider these and the like
passages of affairs, the less we shall admire either the wisdom, or
industry, or any other sufficiency of man. In actions of weight it is good to
employ our best endeavors; but when all is done, he danceth well to whom
Fortune does pipe.

When the conspirators understood that their principal purpose was
disappointed, they made themselves so powerful in the field, that the Duke was
enforced to crave aid of the King of France; who not long before was his
greatest enemy. The King preferring to his remembrance the late honorable
dealing of the Duke, came in person unto him; by whose countenance and aid the
Duke overthrew his enemies in a full battle, in the vale of Dunes: albeit not
without great difficulty, and bold adventure of his own person. Guy de
Burgogne escaped by flight, and defended himself in certain castles which he
had fortified in Normandy for his retreite; but in the end he rendered both
himself and them to the Dukes discretion. The Duke not only pardoned him, but
honored him with a liberal pension; which he did afterward both with valiant
and loyal service requite.

Not long after, the French King had wars against Ieoffrey Martell, and Duke
William went with a fair company of Soldiers to his aid. In this service he
so well acquitted himself, both in judgment and in hand, that the French King
was chiefly directed by him; only blaming him for too careless casting
himself into the mouth of dangers; imputing that to ostentation, which was but
the heat of his courage and age. Oftentimes he would range from the maine
battle with very few in his company; either to make discoueries, or to
encounter such enemies as could not be found with greater troops. Once he
withdrew himself only with four, and was met with by fifteen of the
enemies. The most forward of them he struck from his horse, and brake his thigh
with the fall. The residue he chased four miles; and most of them being hurt,
took seven prisoners. Hereupon Ieoffrey Martell then said of him; that he was
at that time the best soldier, and was like to prove the best commander in
the world.

And as he was both favorable and faithful toward them who fairly yielded,
so against such as either obstinately or scornefully carried themselves, he was
extremely severe, or rather cruel. When he besieged Alencon, which the Duke
of Aniou had taken from him, the defendants would often cry from the walls,
Lapel Lapel; reproaching him thereby with the birth of his mother. This base
insolency, as it enflamed both his desire and courage to atchieue the
enterprise, so did it his fury, to deal sharply with them when they were
subdued; by cutting off their hands and feet, and by other seuerities which
were not usual.

Besides these, some others of his own blood provoked Engelrame Earl of
Ponthieu to move against him in arms: but the Duke received him with so
resolute valor, that the Earl was slain in the field, and they well
chastised who drew him to the enterprise. The Britains did often feel the
force of his victorious arms. He had many conflicts with Ieoffrey Martell
Earl of Aniou, confederate with the Princes of Britane, Aquitaine, and Tours;
a man equal unto him both in power and in skill to command, but in fortune and
in force of arm much inferior. Many excellent atchieuements were performed
between them; insomuch as their hostility seemed only to be an emulation in
honor. Once the Duke fell into an ambushment addressed for him by the Earl of
Aniou; wherewith he was so suddenly surprised, that he was almost in the midst
of the danger before he thought any danger near him. An exceeding great both
terror and confusion seized upon his soldiers; because the more sudden and
uncertain a peril is, the greater is it always esteemed. Many of his brauest
men were slain; the residue so disordered, or at least shaken, as they began
to think more of their particular escape, then of the common either safety or
glory.

When they were thus upon the point to disband, the Duke rather with rage then
courage cried unto them, If you love me not Soldiers, yet for shame follow me;
for shame stand by me; for shame let not any of your friends hear the report,
that you ran from me and left me fighting. With that he threw himself into
the thickest throng of his enemies, and denounced those either traitors or
cowards who would not follow. This example breathed such brave life into his
Soldiers, that they rallied their loose ranks, and in close order seconded
him with a resolute charge: encouraging one another, that it was shameful
indeed not to fight for him, who so manfully did fight with them. The Duke
brandishing his sword like a thunderbolt, dung down his enemies on every side;
made at Earl Martell in the midst of his battallion, struck him down, claue
his helmet, and cut away one of his ears. This so diuerted the Aniouans to the
rescue of their Earl, that they let the other part of the victory go. The
Earl they recovered again to horse, and so left the Duke master of the field.
Verily, it is almost impossible, that a commander of such courage should have,
either faint or false hearted Soldiers.

Now it happened not long before, that Fulc Earl of Aniou having drawn
Herbert Earl of Maine under fair pretenses to Xantonge, cast him in prison,
from whence he could not be released until he had yielded to certain
conditions, both dishonorable and disaduantageable unto him. Hugh succeeded
Herbert; from whom Ieoffrey Martell Earl of Aniou took the city of Maine,
and made himself lord of all the country. Hugh having lost his dominion, left
both his title and his quarrel to his son Herbert: who having no issue,
appointed Duke William to be his heir. Hereupon the Duke invaded Maine, and
in short time subdued the whole country, and built two fortifications for
assurance thereof; having first sent word to the Earl of Aniou, upon what day
the work should begin. The Earl used all diligence and means to impeach the
buildings; but he not only failed of that purpose, but further lost the
county of Medune.

Again, Henry King of France did many other times with great preparation
invade his Country; sometimes with purpose to win upon him, and sometimes to
keep him from winning upon others. Upon a time the King led his troops over
the foord of Dine; and when half his army had passed, the other half by
reason of the rising of the Sea, was compelled to stay. The Duke apprehending
the advantage, came upon them with a furious charge, being now divided from the
chief of the Army; and either slew them or took them prisoners, in the
plain view of their King. After this they concluded a peace, whereof the
conditions were, That the Duke should release such prisoners as he had taken;
and that he should retain whatsoever he had won, or afterward should win
from the Earl of Aniou. And yet the King did again enterprise upon him, with
greater forces then at any time before: But the Duke entertained his Armies
with so good order and valor, that the King gained nothing but loss and
dishonor: and the greater his desire was of victory and revenge, the more
foul did his foiles and failings appear; which so brake both his courage and
heart, that with grief thereof (as it was conceived) he ended his life. And
thus during all the time that he was only Duke of Normandy, he was never free
from action of arms: in all his actions of arms he was carried with a most
rare and perpetual felicity.

As he grew in years, so did he in thickness and fatness of body: but so, as
it made him neither unseemly, nor unserviceable for the wars; and never much
exceeding the measure of a comely corpulencie. He was most decent, and there
with terrible in arms. He was stately and maiesticall in his gesture; of a
good stature, but in strength admirable: in so much as no man was able to draw
his bow, which he would bend sitting upon his horse, stretching out the string
with his foot. His countenance was warlike and manly as his friends might term
it; but as his enemies said, truculent and fierce. He would often swear By
Gods resurrection and his brightness: which he commonly pronounced with so
furious a face, that he struck a terror into those that were present. His
head was bald; his beard always shaven; which fashion being first taken up by
him, was then followed by all the Normans. He was of a firm and strong
constitution for his health; so as he never was attached with sickness, but
that which was the summons of his death: and in his age seemed little to feel
the heavy weight and burden of years.

In his first age he was of a mild and gentle disposition; courteous,
bountiful, familiar in conversation, a professed enemy to all vices. But as
in Fortune, as in years, so changed he in his behavior; partly by his
continual following the wars (whereby he was much fleshed in blood) and
partly by the inconstant nature of the people over whom he ruled: who by often
rebellions did not only exasperate him to some severity, but even constrain
him to hold them in with a more stiff arm. So he did wring from his subjects
very much substance, very much blood; not for that he was by nature either
covetous or cruel, but for that his affairs could not otherwise be managed.
His great affairs could not be managed without great expense, which drew a
necessity of charge upon the people: neither could the often rebellions of his
Subjects be repressed or restrained by any mild and moderate means. And
generally as in all States and governments, severe discipline has always bin
a true faithful mother of virtue and valor; so in particular of his Normans
he learned by experience, and oftentimes declared this judgment: That if they
were held in bridle, they were most valiant, and almost invincible; excelling
all men both in courage, and in strength, and in honorable desire to vanquish
their enemies. But if the reins were laid loose upon their neck, they were
apt to run into licentiousnes and mischief; ready to consume either
themselves by riot and sloth, or one another by sedition: prone to innovation
and change; as heavily moved to undertake dangers, so not to be trusted upon
occasion.

He took to wife Matilde daughter to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, a man for his
wisdom and power, both reverenced and feared even of Kings; but because she
was his cousin Germane, he was for his marriage excommunicate by his own
uncle Mauger Archbishop of Roan. Hereupon he sued to Pope Victor, and obtained
of him a dispensation: and afterward so wrought, that by a provincial
Council his uncle Mauger was deprived of his dignity. But by this means both
he and his issue were firmly locked in obedience to the Sea of Rome; for that
upon the authority of that place the validity of his marriage, and
consequently the legitimation of his issue seemed to depend.

When he was about 50. years of age, Edward King of England ended his life.
This Edward was son to Egelred King of England, by Emma, sister to Richard
the second Duke of Normandy, who was grandfather to Duke R^^h. I.
R^^^. 2. I.
R^^ert. I.
William.

Emma. I.
Edward.


William: so as King Edward and Duke William were cousins germane once removed.
At such time as Egelred was first ouercharged with wars by the Danes, he sent
his wife Emma, with two sons which she had borne unto him, Alphred and
Edward, into Normandy to her brother; where they were enterteined with all
honorable usage for many years. Afterward giving place to the malice of his
Fortune, he passed also into Normandy, and left his whole state in the
possession and power of Swanus King of Denmark. But after the death of Swanus,
partly by the aid of the Normans, and partly by favor of his own people, he
recovered his Kingdom, and left the same to his eldest son Edmund. who
either for the tough temper of his courage and strength, or for that he almost
always lived in Arms, was surnamed Ironside.

Hereupon Canutus the son of Swanus made sharp war, first against Egelred,
then against Edmund: and finally after many varieties of adventure, but chiefly
by the favor of the Clergy of England (because they had sworn allegiance to
his father) spread the wings of his victory over the whole Kingdom. He
expelled out of the Realm Edwine and Edward the two sons of King Edmund: of
whom Edwine married the Kings daughter of Hungary, but died without issue;
Edward was advanced to the marriage of Agatha daughter to the Emperor Henry,
and by her had issue two sons, Edmund and Edgar, and so many daughters,
Margaret and Christine. The same Canutus took Emma to wife, who had been wife
to King Egelred; by whom he had a son named Hardicanutus.

After the death of Canutus, Alphred the son of Egelred came out of
Normandy, and with fifty sail landed at Sandwich: with purpose to attempt
the recovery of his fathers kingdom. In which enterprise he received not
only encouragement, but good assurance from many of the English Nobility. But
by Earl Goodwine he was abused and taken; his company slain, his eyes put
out, and then sent to the I Will of Elie, where in short time he ended his life.
Edward also arrived at Hampton with 40. ships, but finding the Country so
far from receiving, as they were ready to resist him, he returned into
Normandy, and attended the further favor of time. So after Canutus succeeded
in England, first Harold surnamed Harefoot, bastard son to Canutus; and after
him Hardicanutus, son to Canutus by Emma, mother also to King Edward.

Hardicanutus being dead, the Nobility of the Realm sent into Normandy for
Edward to be their King; whereto also he was appointed as some have written by
Hardicanutus. But because Alphred his brother upon the like inuitation had been
traitorously taken and slain before, William at that time Duke of Normandy
would not permit him to depart, until he had received for pledges of his
safety, Woolnoth son to Earl Goodwine, and Hacon son to Swain, Earl
Goodwins eldest son. Upon this assurance he was furnished by the duke his
cousin, with all means fit both for his enterprise and estate. And so he
passed the Seas, arrived in England, and with general iov was received for
King. He took to wife Edith the daughter of Earl Goodwine; but whether upon
vow of chastity, or whether upon impotencie of nature, or whether upon hatred
to her father, or whether upon suspicion against herself (for all these causes
are alleged by several writers of those times) he forbore all private
familiarity with her.

When he was well locked into the chair of State, Duke William came out of
Normandy to see him, to show his magnificence to the English people; to show
to the English, both that he loved their King, and that he was of power to
relieve him, in case his necessities should so require. Here, besides
honorable enterteinement, besides many rich gifts both to himself and to his
followers* the King having neither hope nor desire of issue, promised him, in
regard of his great favors and deserts, that he should be his next successor
in the Kingdom. And for further assurance thereof, sent him also the like
message into Normandy, by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury.

After this Harold son to Earl Goodwine passed the Seas into Normandy, to
deal for the discharge of his brother Wolnoth and Hacon his nephew, who had
been delivered for hostages to the Duke. In his passage he was much tossed with
troublesome weather, and in the end was cast upon the coast of Ponthieu, and
there taken by the Earl and committed to prison. But at the request of the
Duke of Normandy, he was released with honorable respect, and by the Earl
himself accompanied to the Duke; who enterteined him with great magnificence
at Roan. The Duke was then going in Arms against the Britains; in which
journey Harold did accompany him, and showed himself a man, neither rash in
undertaking, nor fearful in perfourming any services of the field. After
prosperous return, the Duke declared to Harold, the purpose of King Edward
concerning the Dukes succession to this Crown. Harold did auow the same to be
true; and promised to afford thereto the best furtherance that he could.
Hereupon the Duke assembled a Council at Boneuill; where Harold did swear
fidelity unto him: and promised likewise by oath, that after the death of King
Edward, he would keep the Realm of England to the use of the Duke: that he
would deliver unto him the castle of Dover, and certain other pieces of
defense, furnished at his own charge. Hereupon the Duke promised unto him his
daughter in marriage, and with her half the Realm of England in name of her
dower. He also delivered to him his nephew Hacon; but kept his brother Wolnoth
as an hostage, for performance of that which Harold had sworn.

In short time after King Edward died, and Harold being general commander of
the forces of the Realm, seized upon the soueraignetie, and without any
accustomed solemnities set the crown upon his own head. The people were
nothing curious to examine titles; but as men broken with long bondage, did
easily entertain the first pretender. And yet to Harold they were inclinable
enough, as well upon opinion of his prowess, as for that he endeavored to
win their favor, partly by abating their grievous paiments, and partly by
increasing the wages of his servants and Soldiers; generally, by using justice
with clemency and courtesy toward all. About this time a Heu vani m^nitus,
^morantia Parcas Prodigia* Lucan.
blasing star appeared and continued the space of seven days; which is
commonly taken to portend alteration in States. Of this Comet a certain Poet,
alluding to the baldness of the Norman, wrote these verses.

Caesariem Caesar tibi si natura negauit,
Hanc Willielme tibi stella comata dedit.
Duke William sent diverse Ambassadors to Harold; first to demand perfourmance
of his oath, afterward to move him to some moderate agreement. But ambition, a
reasonlesse and restless humor, made him obstinate against all offers or
inducements of peace. So they prepared to buckle in arms; equal both in
courage and in ambitious desires, equal in confidence of their fortune: but
Harold was the more aduenturous, William the more advised man: Harold was more
strong in Soldiers, William in Alies and friends.

Harold was seated in possession, which in case of a kingdom is oftentimes
with facility attained, but retained hardly: William pretended the donation of
King Edward, and that he was near unto him in blood by the mothers side.

Now there wanted not precedents, both ancient and of later times, that free
kingdoms and principalities, not settled by custom in succession of blood,
have been transported even to strangers by way of gift. Attalus king of ^o.
lib. 2. Eutr. lib. 4. epit. Liu. ^9.
Pergamus did constitute the people of Rome his heir; by force whereof they
made his kingdom a part of their empire. Nicomedes King of Bithynia made the
people of Rome likewise Eut^. lib* ^ epit. (...)* ^
his heir; whereupon his kingdom was reduced to the form of a Province. So
Alexander King of Egypt, gave Alexandria and the (...)*
kingdom of Egypt; and so Ptolemie gave the kingdom of Cyrene to the same
people of Rome. Prasutagus one of the kings of great Britain, T^* lib. (...)*
gave the kingdom of the Iceni to Caesar Nero, and to his daughters. Yea, in
the Imperial state of Rome, Augustus designed Tiberius to be his successor;
and by like appointment Nero became successor to Claudius; Troiane to Nerua;
Antonius Pius to Adrian; and Antoninus the Philosopher to another Antoninus.
When the Emperor Galba did openly appoint Tacit. A^. (...)
Piso for his successor, he declared to the people, that the same custom had
been observed by most approved and ancient Princes. Iugurth being adopted by
Mycipsa, succeeded Saiust. bell. (...)
him in the kingdom of Numidia; and that by the judgment as well of Mycipsa
himself, as of the Senate and people of Rome.

The holy histories report that Solomon gave 1. R^g. 9.
twenty cities to Hiram king of Tire: and if the argument be good from the
part to the whole, he might in like sort have disposed of all his kingdom. Who
has not heard of the donation falsely attributed to Constantine the great,
being in truth the donation of Lewis, surnamed the pious; whereby he gave to
Pope Paschal the city of Rome, and a large territory adjoining unto it; the
instrument of which gift Volaterrane does recite. So the Lady Matild, (...)* ^*
daughter to Roger the most famous Prince of Cicilie, and wife to king Conrade,
son to Henry the 4. Emperor, gave the Marquisate of ^em. cap. 22.
Apulia to the Bishop of Rome: which when the Emperor Otho the 4. refused to
deliver, he was for that cause excommunicate by the Pope. In like sort the
country of Daulphin was given Theod. Nehem. lib. ^. cap. 25.
by Prince Vmbert to the King of France, upon condition, that the eldest son
of France should afterward be called Daulphine. Lastly, the Dukes first
auncestor Rollo, received the Dukedom of Normandy by donation of Charles King
of France: And himself held the County of Maine by donation of Earl
Herebert, as before it is showed. And by donation of the King of Britain,
Hengist obtained Kent; the first kingdom of the English Saxons in Britain.
After which time the Country was never long time free from invasion: first, by
the English and Saxons against the Britains, afterward by the seven Saxon
kingdoms among themselves, and then lastly by the Danes. By means whereof the
kingdom at that time could not be settled in any certain form of succession
by blood, as it has been since; but was held for the most part in absolute
dominion, and did often pass by transaction or gift: and he whose sword could
cut best, was always adjudged to have most right. But of this question more
shall hereafter be said, in the beginning of the life of King William the
second.

Touching his propinquity in blood to King Edward by the mothers side, he
enforced it to be a good title: because King Edward not long before had taken
succession from Hardicanutus, to whom he was brother by the mothers side. And
although King Edward was also descended from the Saxon Kings, yet could not he
derive from them any right: For that Edgar and his sisters were then alive,
descended from Edmund Iron side, elder brother to King Edward. He could have
no true right of succession, but only from Hardicanutus the Dane. So Pepine,
when he was possessed of the State of France, did openly publish, that he was
descended of the blood of Charles the Great, by the mothers side. And albeit
the said Edgar was both nearer to King Edward then the Duke of Normandy, and
also joined to him in blood by the fathers side; yet was that no sufficient
defense for Harold. The usurped possession of Harold A^g. l. cre^itor. and l.
Claudius* D qui (...)* in (...). ^a.
could not be defended, by alleging a better title of a third person. The
injury which he did to Edgar, could not serve him for a title against any
other.

These grounds of his pretense, beautified with large amplifications of the
benefits which he had done to King Edward, he imparted to the Bishop of Rome;
who at time was reputed the arbitrator of controversies which did rise between
princes. And the rather to procure his favor, and to gain the countenance of
religion to his cause, he promised to hold the kingdom of England of the
Apostolic Sea. Hereupon Alexander then Bishop of Rome allowed his title, and
sent unto him a white hallowed banner, to advance upon the prowe of his ship:
also an Agnus Dei of gold, and one of S. Peter's hairs, together with his
blessing to begin the enterprise.

But now concerning his further proceedings, concerning his victorious both
entrance and continuance within the Realm of England, two points are worthy to
be considered: one, how he being a man of no great either power or dominion,
did so suddenly prevail against a courageous King, possessed of a large and
puissant State. The other is, how he so secured his victory, as not the
English, not the Britains, not the Danes, not any other could dispossess or
much disturb him and his posterity, from enjoying the fair fruits thereof.
And if we give to either of these their true respects, we shall find his
commendation to consist, not so much in the first, as in the second: because
that was effected chiefly by force, this by wisdom only; which as it is most
proper to man, so few men do therein excel. He that wins a State
surmounteth only outward difficulties; but he that assures the same,
trauaileth as well against internal weakness, as external strength. To attain
a Kingdom is many times a gift of Fortune; but to provide that it may long
time continue firm, is not only to oppose against humane forces, but against
the very malice of Fortune, or rather the power and wrath of time, whereby all
things are naturally inclineable to change.

For the first then, besides the secret working and will of God, which is the
cause of all causes; besides the sins of the people, for which (the Prophet
says,) Kingdoms are transported from one Nation to another: King Edward not
long before made a manifest way for this invasion and change. For although he
was English by birth, yet by reason of his education in Normandy, he was
altogether become a Normane, both in affection and in behavior of life. So as
in imitation of him, the English abandoned the ancient vsages of their Country,
and with great Moribus antiquis res stat Romanae Viris^ue. Aeneid.
affection or affectation rather, conformed themselves to the fashions of
France. His chief acquaintance and familiar friends were no other then
Normans; toward whom being a mild and soft spirited Prince, he was very
bountiful, and almost immoderate in his savors. These he enriched with great
possessions; these he honored with the highest places both of dignity and
charge. Chiefly he advanced diverse of them to the best degrees of dignity in
the Church: by whose favor Duke William afterward was both animated and aided
in his exploit. Generally as the whole Clergy of England conceived a hard
opinion of Harold; for that upon the same day wherein King Edward was buried,
he set the Crown upon his own head, without Religious Ceremonies, without any
solemnities of Coronation: so they durst not for fear of the Popes
displeasure, but give either furtherance or forbearance to the Dukes
proceedings; and to abuse the credit which they had with the people, in
working their submission to the Normans. Now of what strength the Clergy was
at that time within the Realm, by this which follows it may appear.

After that Harold was slain* Edwine and Morcar Earls of Northumberland and
Marckland, brothers of great both authority and power within the Realm, had
induced many of the Nobility to declare Edgar Athelinge to be their King: but
the Prelates not only crossed that purpose, but delivered Edgar the next heir
from the Saxon Kings to the pleasure of the Duke.

Again, when the Duke after his great victory at Hastings advanced his army
toward Hartford-shire; Frederick Abbot of S. Albanes had caused the woods
belonging to his Church to be felled, and the trees to be cast so thick in the
way, that the Duke was compelled to coast about to the castle of Berkhamstead.
To this place the Abbot under Suerties came unto him; and being demanded
wherefore he alone did offer that opposition against him, with a confident
countenance he returned answer: that he had done no more then in conscience
and by Nature he was bound to do: and that if the residue of the Clergy had
borne the like mind, he should never have pierced the land so far. Well,
answered the Duke, I know that your Clergy is powerful indeed; but if I live
and prosper in my affairs, I shall govern their greatness well enough.
Assuredly, nothing does sooner work the conversion or subversion of a State,
then that any one sort of Subjects should grow so great, as to be able to
ouerrule all the rest.

Besides this disposition of the Clergy, diverse of the Nobility also did
nothing favor King Harold or his cause: for that he was a manifest usurper,
naked of all true title to the Crown, pretending only as borne of the
daughter of Hardicanutus the Dane. Yea he was infamous both for his injury and
perjury toward the Duke, and no less hateful for his disloyalty in former
times, in bearing Arms with his father against King Edward. Hereupon the
Nobility of the Realm were broken into factions. Many (of whom his own
brother Tosto was chief) invited Harold King of Norway to invade* with whom
whilst Harold of England was incountring in Arms, the residue drew in Duke
William out of Normandy. And these also were divided in respects. Some were
carried by particular ends, as being prepared in diverse manner by the Normane
before hand: others upon a greedy and for the most part deceivable ambition,
in hunting after hazard and change: others were led with love to their
Country, partly to avoid the tempest which they saw to gather in clouds
against them, and partly to enlarge the Realm both in dominion and strength,
by adjoining the Country of Normandy unto it. In which regard, (because the
less does always accrue to the greater) they thought it more aduantageable
to deal with a Prince of an inferior state, then with a Prince of a state
superior or equal.

As for Edgar Atheling, the next successor to the Crown in right of blood, he
was not of sufficient age; of a simple wit and slow courage; not gracious to
the English, as well for his imperfections both in years and nature, as for
that he was altogether unacquainted with the customs and conditions of their
Country: unfurnished of forces and reputation, unfurnished of friends,
unfurnished of all means to support his title. So Duke William having better
right then the one, and more power then the other, did easily carry the prize
from both.

Now touching the state of his own strength, albeit Normandy was but little
in regard of England, yet was it neither feeble nor poor. For the people, by
reason of their continual exercise in Arms, by reason of the weighty wars
which they had managed, were well enabled both in courage and skill for all
Military atchieuements. Their valor also had been so favored by their
Fortune, that they were more enriched by spoil, then drawn down either with
losses or with charge. Hereupon when preparation was to be made for the
enterprise of England, although some dissuaded the Duke from embracing the
attempt, affirming that it was a vain thing to streine at that which the hand
is not able to contain, to take more meat then the stomach can bear; that he
who catches at matters too great, is in great danger to gripe nothing: Yet did
others not only encourage him by advise, but enable him by their aid. Among
which William Fitz-Auber did furnish 40. ships with men and munition; The
Bishop of Baieux likewise 40: the Bishop of Man's 30: and in like sort others,
according to the proportion of their estates.

And yet he drew not his forces only out of Normandy, but received aid from
all parts of France; answerable not only to his necessity, but almost to his
desire. Philip King of France at that time was under age, and Baldwine Earl of
Flanders was governor of the Realm; whose daughter the Duke had taken to
wife. By his favor the Duke received large supplies from the state of France,
both in treasure and in men of war: for countenance whereof it was given
forth, that the Duke should hold the Realm of England as he did the Duchy
of Normandy, under homage to the Crown of France. Hereupon diverse Princes of
France did adioyne to his aid; and especially the Duke of Orleance, the Earls
of Britain, Aniou, Boloigne, Ponthieu, Neuers, Poictou, Hiesmes, Aumale, and
the Lord of Tours. Many other of the Nobility and Gentlemen did voluntarily
adventure, both their bodies and whole estates upon the event of this
enterprise. So greatly had he either by courtesy won the love, or by courage
erected the hopes of all men: yea of many who had bin his greatest enemies.
With these also the Emperor Henry 4. sent him certain troops of Soldiers,
commanded by a Prince of Almaine. He received also many promises of favor
from Swain King of Denmark. And who can assure (for the sequel makes the
conjecture probable) that he held not intelligence with Harold Harfager King of
Norway, to invade England with two armies at once. So partly by his own
Subjects, and partly by supply from his Alleys and friends, he amassed a
strong Army, consisting chiefly of Normans, Flemings, French and Britains, to
the number of fifty thousand men; and brought them to S. Valeries, before
which Town his ships did ride. Here he stayed a certain time attending the
wind, as most writers do report; but rather as it may be coniectured, to
awaite the arrival of Harold Harfager K. of Norway: knowing right well, that
the invasion of Harold of Norway upon the North parts of the realm, would draw
away Harold of England to leave the coasts toward the South undefended.

During his abode at S. Valeries, certain English espials were taken, whom
King Harold had sent to discover both the purposes and power of the Duke. When
they were brought to his presence, with a brave confidence he said unto them:
Your Lord might well have spared this charge; he needed not to have cast away
his cost to understand that by your industry and faith, which my own presence
shall manifest unto him; more certainly, more shortly then he does expect. Go
your ways, go tell him from me, If he find me not before the end of this
year* in the place where he supposes that he may most safely set his foot,
let him never fear danger from me whilst he live. Many Normans disliked
this open dealing of the Duke: preferring to his judgment the valor and
experience of King Harold; the greatness of his treasure; the number and
goodness of his men; but especially his strong Navy, and expert Sailors;
accustomed both to the fights and dangers of the Sea, more then any other
people in the world. To these the Duke turned, and said: I am glad to hear
this opinion run, both of his prowess and of his power; the greater shall our
glory be in prevailing against him. But I see right well that I have small
cause to fear his discovery of our strength, when you, who are so near unto
me, discern so little. Rest your selves upon the Justice of your cause and
foresight of your Commander. Who has less then he, who can justly term
nothing his own? I know more of his weakness, then ever he shall know of my
strength, until he feel it. Perform you your parts like men, and he shall
never be able to disappoint either my assurance, or your hopes.

Now Harold King of England had prepared a fleet to resist the invasion of the
duke of Normandy: but by reason of his long stay at S. Valeries, speeches did
spread, whether by error or subornation, yea, assured advertisement was sent
out of Flanders, that he had for that year abandoned his enterprise. In the
mean time Harold Harfager King of Norway, then whom no man was esteemed more
valiant, having assured both intelligence and aid out of England, arrived in
the mouth of Humber: and from thence drawing up against the stream of the
river Owse, landed at a place called Richhall. Here he Marshalled his Army,
and marched forth into the Country: and when he came near unto York* he
was encountered by the English, led by Edwine and Morchar the principal
commanders of all those quarters. The fight was furious, but in the end the
English were overthrown, and with a great slaughter chases into York.

Upon advertisement hereof, Harold King of England carried all his forces
against Harfager. His readiness was such, and such his expedition, that the
fifth day after the fight before mentioned he gave him battle again; wherein
Harold Harfager was slain, and so was Tosto the King of Englands brother:
Tosto by an uncertain enemy, but Harfager by the hand of Harold of England.
Their army also was routed, and with a bloody execution pursued, so long as
day and fury did last. Here a certain Soldier of Norway was most famous
almost for a miracle of manhood. He had been appointed with certain others, to
guard the passage at Stamford bridge. The residue upon approach of the English
forsook their charge; but he alone stepped to the foot of the Bridge, and
with his Battle-axe sustained the shocke of the whole army; slew above forty
assailants, and defended both the passage and himself, until an English
Soldier went under the Bridge, and through a hole thereof thrust him into the
body with a Lance.

If this victory of King Harold had been so wisely used as it was valiantly
won, he should have neglected the spoil, and returned with the like
celeritie wherewith he came. But he gave coffeehouse to his Soldiers, in
abridging their expectation for free sharing the spoil; and having lost many
in that conflict, he retired to York, and there stayed; as well to reform the
state of the Country, greatly disordered by means of these wars, as also
both to refresh and repair his army.

In the mean time the Duke of Normandy receiving intelligence, that the
Seacoasts were left naked of defense, loosed from S. Valeries with three
hundred, or, as some writers report, 896, or, as one Norman writer affirms,
with more then one thousand sail: and having a gentle gale, arrived at Pemsey
in Sussex, upon the 28. of September. The ship wherein the Duke was carried is
said, (as if it had run for the garland of victory) to have outstripped the
rest so far, that the sailers were enforced to strike sail, and hull before
the wind to have their company. When he first stepped upon the shore, one
of his feet slipped a little. The Duke to recover himself stepped more
strongly with the other foot, and sunk into the sand somewhat deep. One of
his Soldiers espying this, said merrily unto him: You had almost fallen my
Lord, but you have well maintained your standing, and have now taken deep and
firm footing in the soil of England. The presage is good, and hereupon I
salute you King. The Duke laughed; and the soldiers, with whom superstition
does strongly work, were much confirmed in courage by the jest.

When he had landed his forces, he fortified a piece of ground with strong
trenches, and discharged all his ships; leaving to his soldiers no hope to
save themselves, but only by victory. After this he published the causes of
his coming in arms, namely:

1 To challenge the kingdom of England, given to him by his cousin King Edward,
the last lawful possessor at that time thereof. 2 To revenge the death of his
cousin Alfred, brother to the same K. Edward, and of the Normans, who did
accompany him into England; no less cruelly then deceitfully slain by Earl
Goodwin and his adherents. 3 To revenge the injury done unto Robert Archbishop
of Canterbury; who by the practice (as it was then given forth) of Harold,
had been exiled in the life time of King Edward.
This last article was added either to please the Pope, or generally in favor
of the Clergy: to whom the example grew then intolerable, that an Archbishop
should be once questioned by any other then by themselves.

So the Duke, leaving his fortification furnished with competent forces to
assure the place, as well for a retreit, as for daily landing of fresh supplies,
marched forward to Hastings; and there raised another fortress, and planted
likewise a garrison therein. And in all places he restrained his Soldiers,
either from spoiling or harming the Country people, for fear that thereby
they would fall into disorder: but giving forth, that it were cruelty to
spoil them, who in short time should be his Subjects. Here the Duke, because
he would not either adventure or trust his Soldiers, went forth in person to
discover the Country, with 15. horsemen in his company, and no more. His
return was on foot, by reason of the evil qualitied ways: and when
Fitz-Osberne who went with him, was over wearied with the weight of his armor,
the Duke eased him by bearing his helmet upon his shoulder. This action may
seem of slender regard; but yet did gain him, both favor and duty among his
Soldiers.

K. Harold hearing of these approches, hasted by great iourneyes toward
London; sending his messengers to all places, both to encourage and entreat
the people to draw together for their common defense. Here he mustered his
Soldiers; and albeit he found that his forces were much impaired by his late
battle against Harfager, yet he gathered an able army, countenanced and
commanded by diverse of the Nobility, which resorted unto him from many parts
of the Realm. The Duke in the mean time sent a messenger unto him, who
demanded the Kingdom in so stout manner, that he was at the point to have been
evil entreated by the King. Again the King sent his messenger to the Duke,
forbidding him with lofty language, to make any stay within that Country; but
to return again no less speedily, then rashly he had entered. The Duke
between mirth and scorn returned answer; That as he came not upon his
entreaty, so at his command he would not depart. But (said he) I am not come to
word with your King, I am come to fight, and am desirous to fight: I will be
ready to fight with him, albeit I had but 10000. such men as I have brought
60000.

K. Harold spent little time, lost none (unless happily that which he might
have taken more) both in appointing and ordering his Army. And when he was
ready to take the field, his mother entreated him, first moderately, then with
words of passion and with tears, that he would not adventure his person to the
battle. Her importunity was admired the more, for that it was both without
any apparent cause, and not usual in former times. But Harold with undaunted
countenance and heart, conducted his Army into Sussex, and encamped within
seven miles of the Normans: who thereupon approached so near to the English,
that the one Army was within view of the other.

First, espials were sent on both sides, (...) (...) uer the state and
condition of (...) (...) (...) They who were sent from the English (...) (...)
large report, both of the number, and (...) (...) meant, and discipline of the
Normans. Whereupon Girth, younger brother to King Harold presented him with
advise, not to play his whole State at a cast; not to be so carried with desire
of victory, as not to awaite the time to attain it: that it is proper to
Inuaders presently to fight, because they are then in the very pride and
flourish of their strength; but the assailed should rather delay battle,
rather observe only and attend their enemies, cut off their relief, vex them
with incommodities, weary them, and wear them out by degrees: that it could
not be long before the Dukes army, being in a strange Country, would be
reduced to necessities; it could not be long but by reason it consisted of
diverse nations, it would draw into disorder: that it was proper to an army
compounded of different people, to be almost invincible at the first, whilst
all contend to excel or at least to equal other in brave performance; but if
they be advisedly endured, they will easily fall into disorders, and lastly of
themselves dissolve. Or if (said he) you resolve to fight, yet because you are
sworn to the Duke, you shall do well to withdraw your presence; to employ
your authority in mustering a new army, to be ready to receive him with
fresh forces. And if you please to commit the charge of this encounter unto me,
I will not fail to express, both the love of a brother, and the care and
courage of a Commander. For as I am not obliged to the Duke by oath, so shall I
either prevail with the better cause, or with the quieter conscience die.

Both these counsels were rejected by Harold: The first out of a violent
vehemency of these Northern nations, who do commonly esteem delay of
battle a dejected cowardice, a base and servile deflouring of time; but to
bear through their designs at once, they account a point of honorable
courage. The second he esteemed both shameful to his reputation, and hurtful
to the state of his affairs. For what honor had he gained by his former
victories, if when he came to the greatest pinch of danger, he should
fearfully shrink back? with what heart should the Soldiers fight, when they
have not his presence for whom they fight? when they have not their General an
eye witness of their performance? when they want his sight, his encouragement,
his example to inflame them to valor? The presence of the Prince is worth many
thousands of ordinary Soldiers: The ordinary Soldier will undertake both
labor and danger for no other respects so much, as by the presence of the
Prince. And therefore he did greatly extenuate the worth of the Normans,
terming them a company of Priests; because their fashion was to shave their
faces: But whatsoever they were, as he had (he said) digested in his mind the
hardest events of battle; so either the infamy or suspicion of cowardice in
no case he would incur. He resolved not to ouerliue so great dishonor; he
resolved to set up as his last rest, his Crown, and Kingdom; and life
withal. And thus oftentimes Fortune deals with men, as Executioners do with
condemned persons; she will first blindfold, and then dispatch them.

After this the Norman sent a Monk to offer the choice of these conditions to
Harold; Either to relinquish his kingdom upon certain conditions; or to hold
it under homage to the Duke; or to try their cause by single combat; or to
submit it to the judgment of the Pope, according to the Laws of Normandy or
of England, which he would. Again, some conditions were propounded from K.
Harold to the Duke: But their thoughts were so lifted up both with pride and
confidence, by reason of their former victories, that no moderate ouerture
could take place: and so they appointed the day following, which was the 14. of
October, to determine their quarrel by sentence of the sword. This happened to
be the birth day of K. Harold, which for that cause by a superstitious error,
he coniectured would be prosperous unto him.

The night before the battle for diverse respects was unquiet. The English
spent the time in feasting and drinking; and made the air ring with showtings
and songs: the Normans were more soberly silent, and busied themselves much in
devotion; being rather still then quiet, not so much watchful as not able to
sleep. At the first appearance of the day, the (...) and the Duke were ready
in Arms, en^ging their Soldiers, and ordering them (...) (...); in whose eyes
it seemed that (...) did sparckle, and that in their face and gesture victory
did sit. The Duke put certain relics about his neck, upon which King Harold
had sworn unto him. It is reported that when he armed, the back of his
Curasses was placed before by error of him that put it on: some would have bin
dismayed hereat, but the Duke smiled, and said; Assuredly this day my Fortune
will turn, I shall either be a King, or nothing before night.

The English were knit in one maine body on foot; whereof the first rancks
consisted of Kentishmen (who by an ancient custom did challenge the honor of
that place,) the next were filled with Londoners; then followed the other
English. Their chief weapons were pole-axe, sword and dart, with a large
target for their defense. They were paled in front with paueises in such wise,
that it was thought impossible for the enemy to break them. The King stood on
foot by his Standard, with two of his brothers, Girth and Leofwine; as well to
relieve from thence all parts that should happen to be distressed, as also to
manifest to the Soldiers, that they retained no thought of escaping by flight.
On the other side, the Normans were divided into three battles: The first was
conducted by Roger Montgomerie, and William Fitz-Osborne; it consisted of
horsemen of Aniou, Maine and Britain, commanded by a Britain named Fergent;
It carried the Banner which the Pope had sent. The middle battle consisting of
Soldiers out of Germany and Poictou, was led by Geoffrye Martell, and a
Prince of Almaine. The Duke himself closed the last battle, with the
strength of his Normans and the flower of his Nobility. The Archers were
divided into wings, and also dispersed by bands through all the three battails.

Thus were both sides set upon a bloody bargain; ambition, hope, anger, hate,
enflaming them to valor. The duke edged his Soldiers, by declaring unto them
the noble Acts of their ancesters, the late admirable atchieuement of their
fellow Normans in subduing the Kingdom of Sicill, their own brave exploits
under him; by showing them all that pleasant and plentiful Country, as the
purchase of their prowess, as the gain and reward of their adventure: by
putting them in mind, that they were in a Country both hostile and unknown,
before them the sword, the vast Ocean behind, no place of retreit, no surety
but in valor and in victory; so as they who would not contend for glory, were
upon necessity to fight for their lives: Lastly, by assuring them, that as he
was the first in advise, so would he be the foremost in adventure, being fully
resolved either to vanquish, or to die. The King encouraged his men, by
presenting to their remembrance, the miseries which they sustained not long
before, under the oppression of the Danes; which whether they were again to
endure, or never to fear, it lies (said he) in the issue of this field. The
King had the advantage both for number of men, and for their large able bodies;
The Duke both in Arms, (especially in regard of the Bow and arrows,) and in
experience and skill of Arms; both equal in courage; both confident alike in
the favor of Fortune, which had always crowned their courage with victory.
And now by affronting of both the Armies, the plots and labors of many
months, were reduced to the hazard of a few hours.

The Normans marched with a song of the valiant acts of Rowland, esteeming
nothing of peril in regard of the glory of their adventure. When they
approached near their enemies, they saluted them first with a storm of
Arrows: Robert Fitz-Beaumant a young Gentleman of Normandy, beginning the
fight from the right Wing. This manner of fight as it was new, so was it most
terrible to the English, so were they least provided to avoid it. First, they
opened their rancks, to make way for the Arrows to fall; but when that
auoydance did nothing avail, they cloased again, and covered themselves with
their Targets, joined together in manner of a pendhouse; encouraging one
another, to have forward, to leap lustily to hand-strokes, and to scour their
swords in the entrails of their enemies. Then the Duke commanded his horsemen
to charge: but the English received them upon the points of their weapons, with
so lively courage, in so firm and stiff order, that the overthrow of many of
the foremost, did teach their followers to adventure themselves with better
advise. Hereupon they shifted into wings, and made way for the footmen to come
forward. Then did both armies join in a horrible shocke, with Pole-axes, and
the Prince of weapons the sword: maintaining the fight with so manlike fury,
as if it had been a battle of Giants, rather then of men. And so they
continued the greatest part of that day, in close and furious fight; blow for
blow, wound for wound, death for death; their feet steadie, their hands
diligent, their eyes watchful, their hearts resolute; neither their aduisement
dazeled by fierceness, nor their fierceness any thing abated by aduisement.

In the mean time the horsemen gave many sharp charges, but were always
beaten back with disadvantage. The greatest annoyance came from the Archers;
whose shot showred among the English so thick, as they seemed to have the
enemy in the midst of their Army. Their armor was not sufficiently either
complete or of proof to defend them, but every hand, every finger breadth
unarmed, was almost an assured place for a deep, and many times a deadly
wound. Thus whilst the front was maintained in good condition, many thousands
were beaten down behind; whose death was not so grievous unto them, as the
manner of their death, in the midst of their friends, without an enemy at
hand, upon whom they might show some valor, and work some revenge.

This manner of fight would soon have determined as well the hopes as the fears
of both sides, had not the targets of English been very serviceable unto them;
Had not King Harold also with a lively and constant resolution, performed the
part, not only of a skillful commander, by directing, encouraging, providing,
relieuing; but of a valiant Soldier by using his weapon, to the example of his
Soldiers. In places of greatest danger he was always present; repayring the
decays, reforming the disorders, and encouraging his company, that in doing as
men, whether they prevailed, or whether they perished, their labor was always
gloriously employed. So they knit strongly together, and stood in close and
thick array, as if they had been but one body: not only bearing the brunt of
their enemies, but making such an impression upon their squadron, that the
great body began to shake. The Duke adventured in person so far, moved no
less by his natural magnanimity, then by glory of the enterprise, that
besides his often alighting to fight on foot, two, or (as some report) three
horses were slain under him. And having a body both able by nature, and by use
hardened to endure travail, he exacted the greater service of his Soldiers:
commending the forward, blaming the slow, and crying out (according to his
nature) with vehement gesture and voice unto all; that it was a shame for them
who had been victorious against all men with whom they dealt, to be so long
held by the English in delay of victory. So partly by his authority, and
partly by his example, he retained his Soldiers, and imposed upon them the
fairest necessity of courage; whilst every man contended to win a good
opinion of their Prince.

Then the fight entered into a new fit of heat; nothing less feared then
death, the greatness of danger making both sides the more resolute: and they
who could not approach to strike with the hand, were heard to encourage their
fellows by speech, to pursue the victory, to pursue their glory, not to turn
to their own both destruction and disgrace. The clashing of armor, the
iustling of bodies, the resounding of blows, was the fairest part of this
bloody medley: but the grislinesse of wounds, the hideous falls and groans of
the dying, all the field desiled with dust, blood, broken armor, mangled
bodies, represented Terror in her foulest form. Never was fury better
governed; never game of death better played. The more they fought the better
they fought; the more they smarted, the less they regarded smart.

At the last, when the Duke perceived that the English could not be broken by
strength of arm, he gave direction that his men should retire and give ground;
not loosely, not disorderly, as in a fearful and confused haste, but
advisedly and for advantage; keeping the front of their squadron firm and
close, without disbanding one foot in array. Nothing was more hurtful to the
English, being of a frank and noble spirit, then that their violent
inclination carried them too fast into hope of victory. For, feeling their
enemies to yield under their hand, they did rashly follow those who were not
hasty to flee: And in the heat of their pursuit, upon a false conceit of
victory, loosed and disordered their ranks, thinking then of nothing but of
executing the chase. The Normans espying the advantage to be ripe, made a
stiff stand, redoubled upon the English, and pressing on with a fury equal
to their favorable fortune, with a cruel butchery brake into them. On the
other side it is scarce credible with what strength both of courage and hand
the English even in despite of death, sustained themselves in this disorder;
drawing into small squadrons, and beating down their enemies on every hand,
being resolved to sell their lives with their place.

But a mischief is no mischief, if it comes alone. Besides this disadvantage
of disarray, the shot of the Normans, did continually beat upon the English
with a grievous execution. Among other King Harold about the closing of the
evening, as he was busy in sustaining his army, both with voice and with
hand, was struck with an arrow through the left eye into his brains, of which
wound he presently died. His two brothers, Girth and Leofwine were also
slain, and also most of the nobility that were present: So long as the King
stood, they stood stoutly, both with him, and for him, and by him: his
directions supported them, his brave behavior breathed fresh boldness and
life into them. But his death was a deadly stabbe to their courage; upon report
of his death, they began to waver in resolution, whether to trust to the force
of their arms, or to commend their safety to their good footemanship. In this
incertainty many were slain: Many retired in reasonable order to a rising
ground, whither they were closely followed by the Normans; but the English
having gotten advantage of the place, and drawing courage out of despair, with
a bloody charge did drive them down. Count Eustachius supposing fresh forces
to be arrived, fled away with fifty Soldiers in his company; and meeting with
the Duke, rounded him secretly in his ear, that if he went any further he
was undone. Whilst he was thus speaking, he was struck between the shoulder
with so violent a blow, that he fell down as dead, and voided much blood at
his nose and mouth. In this conflict many of the noblest Normans were slain,
which moved the Duke to make a strong ordered stand, giving liberty thereby
for those English to retire. Others fled through a watery channel, the
passages whereof were well known unto them: and when the Normans did more
sharply then advisedly pursue, the place being shadowed partly with Sedges and
Reeds, and partly with the night, they were either stifled in the waters, or
easily destroyed by the English, and that in so great numbers, that the place
was filled up with dead bodies. The residue scattered in smaller companies, and
had their flight favored by increasing darkness: the enemy not aduenturing
to follow, both in a strange Country, and in the night. Earl Edwine and Earl
Morcher, brothers of approved both courage and faith, did great service at
that time, in collecting these dispersed Troops, and leading them in some
fashion to London.

Duke William surprised with Joy, gave public charge for a solemn
thanksgiving to God. Then he erected his pauilion in the midst of the field,
among the thickest of those bodies whom death had made to lie quietly together.
There he passed the residue of that night; and the next morning mustered his
soldiers, buried those that were slain, and gave liberty to the English to
do the like. The body of King Harold could not be known by his face, it was
so deformed by death, and by his wound; by his armor and by certain marks
upon his body it was known. As it lay upon the ground, a Norman Soldier did
strike it into the leg with his sword: for which unmanly act he was cassed
by the Duke with open disgrace. It was carried into the Dukes Pauilion, under
the custody of William Mallet. And when his mother made suite for it to be
buried, the Duke denied it at the first; affirming, that burial was not fit
for him, whose ambition was the cause of so many Funerals. The mother, besides
her lamentations and tears, offered for it (as one Norman writer affirms) the
weight thereof in gold. But the Duke, with a manly compassion gave it freely;
as holding it dishonorable both to value the body of a King, and make sale of
a slain enemy. So his body was buried by his mother at Waltham Cross, within
the monastery which he had founded. Verily there was nothing to be blamed in
him, but that his courage could not stoop to be lower then a King.

I have been the more long in describing this battle, for that I esteem it the
most memorable and best executed that ever was fought within this land: as well
for skillful direction, as for courageous performance, and also for the
greatness of the event. The fight continued with very great both constancy of
courage, and variety of fortune, from seven of the clock in the morning until
night. Of the Normans were slain 6000. and more, besides those that were
drowned and beaten down in the water. The slaughter of the English is
uncertainly reported, but certainly it was far greater then that of the
Normans. Certain also that their death was most honorable and fair, not any
one basely abandoning the field; not any one yielding to be taken prisoner.
And yet one circumstance more I hold fit to be observed; that this victory was
gotten only by the means of the blow of an arrow: The use whereof was by the
Normans first brought into this land. Afterward the English being trained to
that fight, did thereby chiefly maintain themselves with honorable advantage,
against all nations with whom they did contend in arms; being generally
reputed the best shot in the world.

But of late years it has been altogether laid aside, and in stead thereof
the harquebuze and calliuer are brought into use: yet not without contradiction
of many expert men of Arms; who albeit they do not reject the use of these
small pieces, yet do they prefer the Bow before them. First, for that in a
reasonable distance, it is of greater both certainty and force. Secondly, for
that it discharges faster. Thirdly, for that more men may discharge therewith
at once: for only the first rank discharges the piece, neither hurt they
any but those that are in front; but with the bow 10. or 12. rancks may
discharge together, and will annoy so many ranckes of the enemies. Lastly, for
that the arrow does strike more parts of the body: for in that it hurts by
descent; (and not only point blancke like the bullet) there is no part of the
body but it may strike; from the crown of the head, even to the nayling of the
foot to the ground. Hereupon it follows, that the arrows falling so thick
as hail upon the bodies of men, as less fearful of their flesh, so more
slenderly armed then in former times, must necessarily work most dangerous
effects.

Besides these general respects in many particular services and times, the use
of the Bow is of greatest advantage. If some defense lie before the enemy, the
arrow may strike where the bullet cannot. Foul weather may much hinder the
discharge of the piece, but it is no great impediment to the shot of the Bow. A
horse struck with a bullet if the wound be not mortal, may perform good
service; but if an arrow be fastened in his flesh, the continual stirring
thereof, occasioned by the motion of himself, will enforce him to cast off all
command, and either bear down or disorder those that are near.

But the crack of the piece (will some man say) does strike a terror into
the enemy. True, if they be such as never heard the like noise before. But a
little use will extinguish these terrors: to men, yea to beasts acquainted with
these cracks, they work a weak impression of fear. And if it be true which
all men of action do hold, that the eye in all battles is first overcome,
then against men equally accustomed to both, the sight of the arrow is more
available to victory then the crack of the piece. Assuredly, the Duke before
the battle encouraged his men, for that they should deal with enemies who
had no shot. But I will leave this point to be determined by more discerning
judgments, and happily by further experience in these affairs, and return
again to my principal purpose.

The next day after the victory the Duke returned to Hastings, about seven
miles from the place of the encounter, partly to refresh his Army, and partly
to settle in advise and order for his further prosecution. First, he dispatched
messengers to signify his success to his friends abroad; to the Pope he sent
King Harolds Standerd, which represented a man fighting, wrought curiously with
gold and precious stones. Afterward placing a strong garrison at Hastings, he
conducted his Army toward London: not the direct way, but coasted about
through part of Kent, through Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, and Barkeshire: the
ways where he passed being as free from resistance, as his thoughts were from
change. At Walling ford he passed over the Thames; and then marched forward
through Oxford shire, Buckinghamshire, and Hartford-shire, until he came to
the Castle at Berkhamstead. In this passage many of his Soldiers languished
and died of the Flux. And whether it were upon licentiousness after the late
victory, or whether for want of necessary provision, or whether to strike a
terror into the English, or whether to leave no danger at his back, he
permitted the sword to range at large, to harrie freely, to defile many places
with ruin and blood.

In the mean time the English Lords assembled at London, to advise upon their
common affairs; but the variety of opinions was the chief impediment to the
present service; the danger being more important, then the counsel resolute,
or the confidence assured. The Nobility inclined to declare Edgar grandchild
to Edmund Ironside, to be their King: and with these the Londoners wholly went.
But those of the Clergy were of opinion (some upon particular respects, all
upon fear to displease the Pope) to yield to the storm and stream of the
present time, to yield to the mighty Arm of GOD; that their forces being
prostrated, their hopes feeble and forlorn, they must be content not to be
constrained; they must not provoke the Victor too far; against whose forces
and felicities, time gave them not power to oppose. This deliberation held so
long, that all the time of action was spent. For the Duke approached so near
the City, that many preferring their safety before other respects, withdrew
themselves and went unto him. Hereupon the residue dissolved: and Alfred Archb.
of York, Wolstane Bishop of Worcester, Wilfire B. of Hereford, and many other
Prelates of the Realm went unto the Duke at Berkhamstead; accompanied with
Edgar, Earl Edwine, Earl Morchar, and diverse others of the Nobility: who
gave pledges for their allegiance, and were thereupon received to subjection
and favor. The Duke presently dispatched to London, was received with many
declarations of joy, the lesser in heart, the fairer in appearance, and upon
Christmas day next following was crowned King.

Now the means whereby this victory was Imperiumijs ar^bus facil^me retinet^r
quibus partum est. S^l. Catil.
assured, were the very same whereby it was achieved; even by a stiff and
rigorous hand. For whosoever supposes that a State atteined by force, can be
retained by milder means, he shall find himself disappointed of his hopes. A
people newly subdued by force, will so long remain in obedience, as they find
themselves not of force to resist.

And first he endeavored either to prevent or appease all foreign wars,
especially against the Danes, who were then chiefly feared in England, as well
in regard of their former victories, as for that they pretended title to the
Crown. And herein two things did especially favor his affairs. One, for that
the Normans were in some sort allied to the Danes; being the progeny of those
Noruegians and Danes, which under the conduct and fortune of Rollo invaded
France, and after many great atchieuements, seated in Normandy. The other was,
for that after the death of Canutus, the state of Denmark was much infeebled
by division. For the Noruegians set up Magnus the son of Olaus for their
King; but the Danes acknowledged Canutus the third of that name: by means
whereof that puissant empire did languish in consumption of it self, and could
not be dangerous to any neighbor Country. Yet ceased they not for many
years, to continue claim to the Crown of England: But King William had
purchased many sure and secret friends in that diseased state, wherein all
public affairs were set to sale; especially he used the authority of
Adelbert, Archbishop of Hamburgh, either to cross all counsel of hostility
against him, or else to delay, and thereby to delude the enterprise, or lastly
so to manage the action, that it should no^ work any dangerous effect.

After the death of Swain, Canutus prepared a Navy of one thousand sail for
invasion of England; and was aided with six hundred more by Robert le Frizon,
whose daughter he had taken to wife. But either for want, or else by
negligence, or happily of purpose, this Navy continued, partly in preparation,
and partly in a readiness, the space of two years, and then the voyage was
laid aside. The cause was attributed to contrariety of winds; but the
contrariety of wills was the truest impediment. Likewise Swain had furnished
against England a Navy of 204. sail, commanded by Earl Osborne his brother.
Another fleet of 200. sail was set forth under the charge of Earl Hacon:
But King William so corrupted them both, that the one departed out of the
Realm without performing any great exploit, the other never would arrive.

Also out of those confusions in England, Malcolme King of Scots, did take his
opportunity for action. He received into protection many English, who either
for fear, or for coffeehouse, forsook their Country; of whom many
families in Scotland are descended, and namely these; Lindsey, Vaus, Ramsey,
Louell, Towbris, Sandlands, Bissart, Sowlis, Wardlaw, Maxwell, with diverse
others. He entertained into his Court Edgar Atheling, and took his sister
Margaret to wife. He possessed himself of a great part of Cumberland, and of
Northumberland; wherewith the people were well content, for that he was their
Earls sisters son.

Hereupon King William sent against him, first, Roger a Norman, who was
traitorously slain by his own Soldiers; then Gospatrick, Earl of
Gloucester: These did only repress the enemy, but were not able to finish
the war fully. Lastly, he went himself with a mighty army into Scotland,
where he made wide waste, and in Lothiam found King Malcolme, prepared both in
force and resolution to entertain him with battle. The great army of King
William, their fair furniture and order, their sudden coming, but especially
their firm countenance and readiness to fight, much daunted the Scots:
whereupon King Malcolme sent a Herault to King William, to move him to some
agreement of peace. The more that the King was pleased herewith, the more he
seemed unwilling and strange: the more he must be persuaded to that, which if
it had not bin offered, he would have desired. At the last, a peace was
concluded, upon conditions honorable for King William, and not unreasonable
for the King of Scots: whereby all the English were pardoned, who had fled into
Scotland, and borne arms against their King.

As for the Welsh, albeit both their courage and their power had been
extremely broken in the time of King Edward, and that by the valor and
industry of Harold; yet upon advantage of these troubled times, they made some
incursions into the borders of England; but in companies so disordered and
small, so secretly assaulting, so suddenly retiring, so desirous more of
pillage then of blood, that they seemed more like to ordinary robbers then to
enemies in field. Against these the King led an army into Wales, reduced the
people both to subjection and quiet, made all the principal men tributary unto
him, received pledges of all, for assurance of their obedience and faith.

Whilst the King thus settled his affairs abroad, he secured himself against
his subjects, Quos v^ceris ^aue amicos tibi credas. Curt. lib. 7.
not by altering their will, but by taking away their power to rebel. The
stoutest of the Nobility and Gentlemen were spent, either by war, or by
banishment, or by voluntary auoidance out of the Realm. All these he stripped
of their states, and in place of them advanced his Normans: insomuch as scarce
a ny noble family of the English blood did bear either office or authority
within the Realm. And these ran headlong to servitude; the more hasty and
with the fairer show, the more either countenanced or safe. These he did assure
unto him, not only by oath of fidelity and homage, but either by pledges, or
else by reteining them always by his side.

And because at that time the Clergy were the principal strings of the
English strength, he permitted not any of the English Nation to be advanced to
the dignities of the Church, but furnished them with Normans, and other
strangers. And whereas in times before, the Bishop and Alderman were absolute
Judges in every Shire, and the Bishop in many causes shared in forfeitures and
penalties with the King; he clipped the wings of their Temporal power, and
confined them within the limits of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; to
maintain the Canons and customs of the Church, to deal in affairs
concerning the soul. He procured Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, Agelwine
Bishop of East Angles, and certain other Bishops and Abbots, to be deprived by
authority from Rome, and detained them in prison during their lives, that
strangers might enjoy their places. The matters objected against Stigand were
these.

1 That he had entruded upon the Archbishopricke whilst Robert the Archb. was
in life. 2 That he received his Pall from Benedict the fifth, who for buying
the Papacy had been deposed. 3 That he kept the Sea of Winchester in his
hands, after his inuestiture into the Sea of Canterbury.
He was otherwise also infamous in life; altogether unlearned, of heavy
judgment and understanding, sottishly serviceable both to pleasure and sloth;
in covetousness beneath the baseness of rusticitie: insomuch as he would
often swear, that he had not one penie upon the earth, and yet by a key which
he did wear about his neck, great treasures of his were found under the
ground. And this was a grief and sickness to honest minds, that such
spurious and impure creatures should sustain, or rather destaine the reverence
and majesty of Religion.

Further, the King caused all the Monasteries and Abbeys to be searched,
pretending that the richer sort of the English had laid up their money in them:
under color whereof he discovered the state of all, and bereaved many of their
own treasure. Some of these Religious houses he appropriated wholly to
himself; of diverse others he seized the liberties, which they redeemed
afterward at a very high and excessive rate. Those Bishoprics and Abbeis which
held Baronies, and had been free before from secular subjection, he reduced
under the charge of his service; appointing how many Soldiers, and of what
sort, they should furnish for him and his successors in the time of their
wars. Those strangers which he entertained in pay, he dispersed into
Religious houses, and some also among the Nobility, to be maintained at their
charge: whereby he not only favored his own purse, but had them as a watch,
and sometimes as a garrison over those, of whose allegiance he stood in doubt.

Now against the inferior sort of people, knowing right well that he was
generally hated, he prepared these remedies for his estate: All their armor
was taken from them, they were crushed down with change of calamity, which
held them prostrate under yoke, and brake the very heart of their courage:
leaving them no hope to be relieved, no hope to rise into any degree of
liberty, but by yielding entire obedience unto him. Those who either resisted
or favored not his first entrance, he bereaved of all means afterward to
offend him; holding them down, and keeping them so low, that their very
impotencie made him secure. All such as had their hand in any rebellion, albeit
they were pardoned their lives, lost their livings, and became vassals to those
Lords to whom their possessions were given. And if they attained any thing
afterward, they held it only at the pleasure of their Lords; at the pleasure
of their Lords they might be despoyled.

He much condemned the judgment of Swanus the Dane, sometimes King of
England, who permitted those whom he had vanquished, to retain their former
both authority and estates: whereby it happened, that after his death, the
inhabitants were of force to expel the strangers, and to quit themselves both
from their society and subjection. Hereupon many severe laws were made;
diverse of all sorts were put to death, banished, stripped of their wealth,
disabled in their bodies by unusual variety of punishments; as putting out the
eyes, cutting off the hands and such like: not only to diminish his fears, if
they were suspected; but sometimes if they were of wealth, to satisfy
therewith either his pleasure or wants. His cruelty made the people rebellious,
and their rebellions made him the more cruel; in which case many Innocents
were made the oblations of his ambitious fears. Many heavy taxations were
imposed upon them; their ancient Lords were removed, their ancient laws and
policies of State were dashed to dust; all lay couched under the Conquerours
sword, to be newly fashioned by him, as should be best fitting for his
advantage.

He erected Castles in diverse parts of the Realm, of which the Tower near
London was the chief, which afterward was increased both in compass and in
strength by addition of the outward walls. In these he planted garrisons of
Normans, as if it had been in a hostile Country; not without oppression to the
people although they remained quiet, and sufficient to suppress them if they
should rebel. Thus he secured the Realm against a general defection; as for
particular stirs, they might happily molest him, but endanger him they could
not. Exceter, Northumberland, and some other parts did rise against him in
arms; but being unable to maintain their revolt, their overthrow did much
confirm his State.

He either imitated or concurred with Caesar in advise: For, as Caesar invaded
the Germans which kept the great forest of Ardenna, not with his own
Soldiers, but with his aides out of Gallia; gaining thereby victory over the
one, and security from the other, without any dispense of the Roman blood: so
after the Kings great victory against the valiant, but too aduenturous King
Harold, when many of the English fled into Ireland, and from thence with fresh
both courage, and supplies returned into England; commanded by two of Harolds
sons; he encountered them only with English forces. In the first conflict
the Kings party was overthrown, and the valiant leader Ednothus slain, who
had been master of the horses to King Harold. In the second his enemies were so
defeated, as they were never able to make head again. So the victorers being
weakened, and the vanquished wasted, the King with pleasure triumphed over
both. Likewise when he was occasioned to pass the Seas into Normandy, either
to establish affairs of government, or to repress rebellions, which in his
absence were many times raised; he drew his forces out of England, and that in
a more large proportion then the importance of the service did require. He
also took with him the chief men of English blood, as well to use their
advise and aid, as also to hold them and their friends from working innovation
in his absence.

He enclosed the great Forest near unto the Sea in Hamshire, for which he
dispeopled villages and towns, about the space of thirty miles, to make a
desert for beasts of chase; in which place afterward two of his sons, Richard
and William ended their lives; Richard by a fall from his horse, and William by
the stroke of an arrow. The Kings great delight in hunting was made the
pretense of this Forest; but the true end was rather, to make a free place of
footing for his Normans and other friends out of France, in case any great
revolt should be made. Diverse other parts of the Realm were so wasted with his
wars, that for want both of Husbandry and habitation, a great dearth did
ensue* whereby many were enforced to eat horses, dogs, cats, rats, and other
loathsome and vile vermin: yea, some absteined not from the flesh of men. This
famine and desolation did especially rage in the North parts of the Realm. For
the inhabitants beyond Humber, fearing the Kings secret hate, so much the more
deep and deadly because unjust; received without resistance, and perhaps drew
in the Army of the King of Sueueland, with whom Edgar Atheling and the other
English that fled into Scotland joined their power. The Normans within York
fired the suburbs, because it should not be a lodging for their enemies: but
the strength of the wind carried the flame into the City, which consumed a
great part thereof, with the Minster of S. Peter, and therein a fair Library.
And herewith whilst the Normans were partly busied, and partly amazed, the
enemies entered, and slew in York, in Duresme, and thereabout, three thousand
Normans; among whom were many of eminent dignity, as well for birth, as for
place of their charge. But in short time the King came upon them, and having
partly by Arms, and partly by gifts dispatched the strangers, exercised upon
the English an ancient and assured experience of war, to repress with maine
force a rebellion in a State newly subdued. Insomuch as all the land between
Duresme and York, except only the territory of S. John of Beuerlace, lay
waste for the space of nine years, without inhabitants to manure the ground.

And because conspiracies and associations are commonly contrived in the night,
he commanded, that in all Towns and villages a Bell should be runge in the
evening at eight of the clock; and that in every house they should then put
forth their fire and lights, and go to bed. This custom of ringing a Bell at
that hour, in many places is still observed.

And for that likeness is a great cause of liking and of love, he enjoined the
chief of the English (and these were soon imitated by the rest) to conform
themselves to the fashions of Normandy, to which they had made themselves no
strangers before. Yea, children in the school were taught their letters and
principles of grammar in the Norman language. In their speech, attire, shauing
of the beard, service at the Table; in their buildings and household furniture,
they altogether resembled the Normans.

In the beginning of his reign he ordained that the Laws of King Edward
should be observed, together with those Laws which he did prescribe: but
afterward he commanded that 9. men should be chosen out of every shire, to
make a true report what were the Laws and customs of the Realm. Of these he
changed the greatest part, and brought in the customs of Normandy in their
stead: commanding also that causes should be pleaded, and all matters of form
dispatched in French. Only he permitted certain Dane-Lawes, (which before
were chiefly used in Northfolke, Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire) to be generally
observed; as having great affinity with his Norman-customes; both being
derived from one common head.

Likewise at the great suit of William a Norman then Bishop of London, he
granted a Charter of liberty to that City, for enjoying the use of K. Edwards
Laws: a memorial of which benefit, the Citizens fixed upon the Bishops
grave, being in the midst of the great West I Will of S. Paul's. Further, by the
counsel of Stigand Archb. of Canterbury, and of Eglesine Abbot of S.
Augustines (who at that time were the chief governors of Kent) as the King
was riding toward Dover, at Swanescombe two mile from Grauesend, the Kentish
men came toward him armed, and bearing boughs in their hands, as if it had
been a moving wood; they encloased him upon the sudden, and with a firm
countenance, but words well tempered with modesty and respect, they demanded
of him the use of their ancient Liberties and Laws: that in other matters they
would yield obedience unto him: that without this they desired not to live. The
King was content to strike sail to the storm, and to give them a vain
satisfaction for the present; knowing right well, that the general customs
and Laws of the residue of the Realm, would in short time ouerflow these
particular places. So pledges being given on both sides, they conducted him to
Rochester, and yielded the County of Kent and the Castle of Dover into his
power.

In former times many Farms and Manors were given by bare word, without
writing, only with the sword of the Lord, or his headpeece; with a horn or
standing goblet, and many tenements with a quill, with a horsecombe, with a
bow, with an arrow; but this sincere simplicity at that time was changed. And
whereas Charters and deeds were before made firm by the subscription of the
party, with crosses of gold, or of some other color; then they were firmed by
the parties special Seal, set upon wax, under the Test of three or four
witnesses.

He ordained also his counsel of State, his Chancery, his Exchequer, his
Courts of Justice, which always removed with his Court. These places he
furnished with Officers, and assigned four Terms in the year for determining
controversies among the people: whereas before all suites were summarily heard
and determined in the Gemote or monthly conuention in every hundred, without
either formalities or delay.

He caused the whole Realm to be described in a censuall Roll, so as there was
not one Hide of land, but both the yearly rent and the owner thereof, was
therein set down; how many plowlands, what pastures, fennes, or marshes; what
woods, parkes, farms and tenements were in every shire; and what every one was
worth. Also how many villains every man had, what beasts or cattle, what
fees, what other goods, what rent or commodity his possessions did yield. This
book was called The Roll of Winton, because it was kept in the City of
Winchester. By the English it was called Doomes day book; either by reason of
the generality thereof, or else corruptly in stead of Domus Dei book; for
that it was laid in the Church of Winchester, in a place called Domus Dei.
According to this Roll taxations were imposed; sometimes two shillings, and
sometimes six shillings upon every hide of land (a hide containing 20. acres,)
besides ordinary provision for his house.

In all those lands which he gave to any man, he reserved Dominion in chief
to himself: for acknowledgement whereof a yearly rent was paid unto him, and
likewise a fine whenever the Tenant did alien or die. These were bound as
Clients unto him by oath of fidelity and homage; And if any died his heir
being in minority, the King received the profits of the land, and had the
custody and disposing of the heirs body, until his age of one and twenty
years.

It is reported of Caligula, that when he intended Tranquil. in Calig.
to make advantage of his penal Edicts, he caused them to be written in so
small letters, and the tables of them to be fastened so high, that it was
almost impossible for any man to read them. So the King caused part of those
Laws that he established, to be written in the Norman language, which was a
barbarous and broken French, not well understood of the natural French, and
not at all of the vulgar English. The residue were not written at all, but left
almost arbitrarie, to be determined by reason and discretion at large. Hereupon
it followed, partly through ignorance of the people, and partly through the
malice of some officers of Justice, who many times are instruments of secret
and particular ends; that many were extremely entangled, many endangered, many
rather made away, then justly executed.

But here it may be questioned, seeing these Laws were laid upon the English,
as fetters about their feet, as a ponderous yoke upon their neck, to depresse
and deteine them in sure subjection; how it falls, that afterward they became
not only tolerable, but acceptable and well esteemed.

Assuredly, these laws were exceeding harsh and heavy to the English at the
first: And therefore K. William Rufus, and Henry the first, at such time as
Robert their eldest brother came in arms against them to challenge the crown,
being desirous to win the favor of the people, did fill them with fair
promises, to abrogate the laws of K. William their father, and to restore to
them the Laws of K. Edward. The like was done by K. Stephen, and by K. Henry
the second; whilst both contending to draw the State to himself, they did
most grievously tear it in pieces. The like by others of the first Kings of
the Norman race, whenever they were willing to give contentment to the
people: who desired no other reward for all their adventures and labors, for all their blood spent in the service of their Kings, but to have the Laws of K.
Edward restored. At the last the Nobility of the Realm, with great dispense
both of their estates and blood, purchased a Charter of liberty, First from K.
John, which was soon revoked, as violently enforced from him: afterward from
King Henry the third, which remained in force. And hereby the sharp severity
of these laws was much abated.

In that afterward they become, not only tolerable, but easy and sweet, and
happily not fit to be changed, it is by force of long grounded custom,
whereby those vsages which our ancestors have observed for many ages, do never
seem either grievous or odious to be endured. So Nicetas writing of certain
Christians, who by long conuersing with the Turks, had defiled themselves with
Turkish fashions, Nicet. page 19. (...)
Custom (says he) wins such strength by time, that it is more firm then
either Nature or Religion. Hereupon Dio. Chrysostom compares Chrysostom. orat. 76.
(...), Suid. dict. (...).
Customs to a King, and Edicts to a Tyrant; because we are subject voluntarily
to the one, but upon constraint and upon necessity to the Agath. lib. 2. (...).
other. It is manifest (says Agathias) that under whatsoever law a people has
lived, they do esteem the same most excellent and divine. Herodotus
reports, that Darius the son of Hysdaspis, having under his Dominion
certain Grecians of Asia, who accustomed to burn their dead parents and
friends, and certain nations of India, who used to eat them; called the
Grecians before him: and told them that it was his pleasure, that they should
conform themselves to the custom of the Indians, in eating their deceased
friends. But they applied all means of entreaty and persuasion, that they
might not be enforced, to such a barbarous, or rather brutish observation. Then
he sent for the Indians, and moved them to conformity with the Grecians; but
found that they did far more abhor to burn their dead, then the Grecians
did to eat them.

Now these seuerities of the King were much aggrauated by the English, and
esteemed not far short of cruelties. Not withstanding he tempered it with
many admirable actions both of justice and of clemency and mercy: for
Temperatus anim tim^* est qui (...)* (...) siduus and (...) ad vin^ctam
excitat* Sen^. 1. de clemen.
which he is much extolled by the Normane writers. He gave great privileges
to many places; and the better to give the people contentment, and to hold them
quiet, he often times renewed the oath which first he took at his Coronation:
namely, to defend the holy Church of God, the pastors thereof, and the people
subject to him justly to govern to ordain good laws, and observe true
justice, and to the uttermost of his power to withstand all rapines and false
Judgments. Such of the nobility as had been taken in rebellion, were only
committed to prison; from which they were released in time: such as yielded and
submitted themselves, were freely pardoned, and often times received to favor,
trust, and imploymemt.

Edric, the first that rebelled after he was King, he held near and assured
unto him* Gospatric who had been a stirrer of great commotions, he made Earl
of Gloucester, and employed him against Malcolme King of Scots. Eustace Earl of
Boline, who upon occasion of the Kings first absence in Normandy attempted to
surprise the Castle of Dover, he embraced afterward with great show of love and
respect. Waltheof son to Earl Siward, who in defending the City of York
against him, had slain many Normans, as they assayed to enter a breach, he
joined in marriage to his Niece Iudeth. Edgar who was the ground and hope of
all conspiracies, who after his first submission to the King, fled into
Scotland, and maintained open hostility against him, who pretended title to
the Crown as next heir to the Saxon Kings, he not only received to favor,
but honored with fair enterteinments. He furnished him to the war of
Palestine, where he atteined an honorable estimation with the Emperors of
Almaine and of Greece. After his return he was allowed 20. shillings a day by
way of pension, and large livings in the Country, where he mellowed to old age
in pleasure and vacancie of affairs; preferring safe subjection, before
ambitious rule accompanied both with danger and disquiet.

Thus was no man more mild to a relenting and vanquished enemy; as far from
cruelty, as he was from cowardice, the height of his spirit, ouerlooking all
casual, all doubtful and uncertain dangers. Other great offenders he
punished commonly by exile or imprisonment, seldom by death. Only among the
English Nobility Earl Waltheof was put to death, for that after twice
breaking allegiance, he conspired the third time with diverse both English and
Normans to receive the Danes into England, whilst the King was absent in
Normandy. And for the same conspiracy Ralph Fitz-aubert a Norman was also
executed; who had furnished 40. ships for the King in his voyage for England:
for which and for his other services in that war, he was afterward created
Earl of Hereford. But present injuries do always ouerballance benefits that
are past.

He much delighted in hunting and in feasting. For the first he enclosed many
forests and parks, and filled them with Dear; which he so dearly loved, that
he ordained great penalties for such as should kill those or any other beasts
of game. For the second he made many sumptuous feasts, especially upon the
high Festival days in the year. His Christmasse he often kept at Gloucester,
his Easter at Winchester, his Whitsontide at Westminster; and was crowned once
in the year at one of these places, so long as he continued in England. To
these feasts he invited all his Nobility, and did then principally compose
himself to courtesy, as well in familiar conversation, as in facility to
grant suits, and to give pardon to such as had offended. At other times he was
more Maiesticall and severe; and employed himself both to much exercise and
great moderation in diet; whereby he preserved his body in good state, both of
health and strength, and was easily able to endure travail, hunger, heat,
cold, and all other hardness both of labor and of want.

Many wrongs he would not see, of many smarts he would not complain; he was
absolute master of himself, and thereby learned to subdue others. He was much
commended for chastity of body; by which his Princely actions were much
advanced. And albeit the beginning of his reign was pestered with such routs
of outlawes and robbers, that the peaceable people could not account themselves
in surety within their own doors; he so well provided for execution of
Justice upon offenders, or rather for cutting off the causes of offense; that a
young maiden well charged with gold, might travail in any part of the Realm,
without any offer of injury unto her. For if any man had slain another upon
any cause, he was put to death; and if he could not be found, the hundred paid
a fine to the King; sometimes 28. and sometimes 36. pounds, according to the
largeness of the hundred in extent. If a man had oppressed any woman, he was
deprived of his privy parts. As the people by Arms, so Arms by laws were
held in restraint.

He talked little and bragged less: a most assured performer of his word: In
prosecution of his purposes constant and strong, and yet not obstinate; but
always appliable to the change of occasions: earnest, yea violent, both to
resist his enemies, and to exact duties of his Subjects. He neither loved much
speech, nor gave credit to fair; but trusted truly to himself, to others so
far as he might not be abused by credulity.

His expedition (the spirit of actions and affairs) may hereby appear. He
invaded England about the beginning of October; He subdued all resistance, he
suppressed all rising Rebellions, and returned into Normandy in March
following. So as the time of the year considered, a man should hardly travail
through the land in so short a time as he did win it. A greater exploit then
Julius Caesar or any other stranger could ever atchieue upon that place.

He gave many testimonies of a Religious mind. For he did often frequent
Divine service in the Church, he gave much Alms, he held the Clergy in great
estimation, and highly honored the Prelates of the Church. He sent many costly
ornaments, many rich presents of gold and silver to the Church of Rome; his
Peter paiments went more readily, more largely then ever before. To diverse
Churches in France after his victory he sent Crosses of gold, vessels of gold,
rich Palles, or other ornaments of great beauty and price. He bare such
reverence to Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbury, that he seemed to stand at
his directions. At the request of Wolstane Bishop of Worcester, he gave over a
great advantage that he made by sale of prisoners taken in Ireland. He
respected Aldred Archbishop of York, by whom he had been crowned King of
England, as his father. At a time upon the repulse of a certain suit, the
Archbishop brake forth into coffeehouse, expostulated sharply against the
King, and in a humorous heat offered to depart. But the King stayed him, fell
down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised satisfaction in the best manner
that he could. The Nobility that were present, put the Archbishop in mind
that he should cause the King to arise. Nay (answered the Archb.) let him
alone; Let him still abide at S. Peter's feet. So with much ado he was
appeased, and entreated to accept his suite. And so the name of Saint Peter,
and of the Church has been often used as a mantle, to cover the pride,
passions and pleasures of disordered men.

He founded and enlarged many houses of Religion: He furnished Ecclesiastical
dignities, with men of more sufficiency and worth then had been usual in
former times. And because within his own Dominions studies did not flourish
and thrive, by reason of the turbulent times, by reason of the often invasions
of barbarous people, whose knowledge lay chiefly in their fists; he drew out
of Italy and other places many famous men, both for learning and integrity of
life; to wit, Lanfranke, Anselm, Durand, Traherne and others. These he
honored, these he advanced, to these he expressed great testimonies both of
favor and regard.

And yet he preferred Odo his brother by the mothers side to the Bishopric of
Baion, and afterward created him Earl of Kent: A man proud, vain, mutinous,
ambitious; outrageous in oppression, cruelty and lust; a prophaner of Religion,
a manifest contemner of all virtue. The King being called by occasions into
Normandy, committed unto him the government of the Realm: In which place of
credit and command he furnished himself so fully with treasure, that he
aspired to the Papacy of Rome: upon a prediction then cast abroad, (which
commonly deceive those that trust unto them) that the successor of Hildebrand
was named Odo. So filled with proud hopes, he purchased a palace and friends
at Rome; he prepared for his journey, and drew many gentlemen to be of his
train. But the King returning suddenly out of Normandy, met with him in the
Isle of Wight, as he was ready to take the Seas. There he was arrested, and
afterward charged with infinite oppressions; also for seducing the Kings
subjects to forsake the Realm; and lastly, for sacrilegious spoiling of many
Churches. Hereupon his treasure was seized, and he was committed to prison; not
as Bishop of Baion, but as Earl of Kent, and as an accomptant to the King. And
so he remained about four years, even until the death of the King. His
servants, some in falsehood, and some for fear, discovered such hidden heaps
of his gold, as did exceed all expectation: yea, many bags of grinded gold
were drawn out of rivers, wherein the Bishop had caused them for a time to be
buried. After this he was called the Kings sponge: as being preferred by him
to that place of charge, wherein he might in long time suck that from others,
which should at once be pressed from himself. By this means the King had the
benefit of his oppression without the blame; and the people (being no deep
searchers into secrets of State) were so well pleased with the present
punishment, as they were thereby, although not satisfied, yet well quieted for
all their wrongs.

Toward the end of his reign he appointed his two sons, Robert and Henry,
with joint authority, governors of Normandy; the one to suppress either the
insolency, or leuitie of the other. These went together to visit the French
King, lying at Conflance: where entertaining the time with variety of
disports, Henry played with Louis then Daulphine of France at Chesse, and did
win of him very much. Hereat Louis began to grow warm in words, and was
therein little respected by Henry. The great impatiencie of the one, and the
small forbearance of the other, did strike in the end such a heat between
them, that Louis threw the Chesse-men at Henry's face, and called him the son
of a bastard. Henry again stroke Louis with the Chesse-boord, drew blood with
the blow, and had presently slain him upon the place, had he not been stayed
by his brother Robert. Hereupon they presently went to horse, and their spurs
claimed so good haste, as they recovered Pontoife, albeit they were sharply
pursued by the French.

It had been much for the French King to have remained quiet, albeit no
prouocations had happened, in regard of his pretense to many pieces which King
William did possess in France. But upon this occasion he presently invaded
Normandy, took the City of Vernon, and drew Robert, King Williams eldest
son, to combine with him against his own father. On the other side King
William, who never lost any thing by loosing of time, with incredible celeritie
passed into France; invaded the French Kings dominions, wasted and took many
principal places of Zantoigne and Poictou, returned to Roan, and there
reconciled his son Robert unto him. The French King summoned him to do his
homage for the kingdom of England. For the Duchy of Normandy he offered him
homage, but the kingdom of England (he said) he held of no man, but only of
God, and by his sword. Hereupon the French King came strongly upon him; but
finding him both ready and resolute to answer in the field: finding also that
his hazard was greater then his hope; that his loss by overthrow would far
surmount his advantage by victory; after a few light encounters he retired:
preferring the care to preserve himself, before the desire to harm others.

King William being then both corpulent and in years, was distempered in body
by means of those travails, and so retired to Roan; where he remained not
perfectly in health. The French King hearing of his sickness, pleasantly
said, that he lay in childbed of his great belly. This would have been taken
in mirth, if some other had spoken it; but coming from an enemy, it was taken
in scorn. And as great personages are most sencible of reproach, and the least
touch of honor makes a wide and incurable wound; so King William was so
nettled with this jest, that he swore By Gods resurrection and his
brightness, (for this was the usual form of his oath) that so soon as he
should be churched of that child, he would offer a thousand lights in France.
So presently after his recovery he entered France in arms, took the City of
Meux, set many Towns and Villages and corn fields on fire; the people
abandoning all places where he came, and giving forth, that it was better the
nests should be destroyed, then that the birds should be taken in them. At the
last he came before Paris, where Philip King of France did then abide: to whom
he sent word, that he had recovered to be on foot, and was walking about, and
would be glad likewise to find him abroad. This enterprise was acted in the
month of August, wherein the King was so violent and sharp, that by reason
both of his travail, and of the unseasonable heat, he fell into a relapse of
his sickness. And to accomplish his mishap, in leaping on horseback over a
ditch, his fat belly did bear so hard upon the pommell of his saddle, that he
took a rupture in his inner parts. And so ouercharged with sickness, and
pain, and disquietnesse of mind, he returned to Roan; where his sickness
increased by such dangerous degrees, that in short time it led him to the
period of his days.

During the time of his sickness he was Perfecto (...) (...) scel^re,
magnitudo eius intelligitur. Tacit. xv. Annal.
much molested in conscience, for the blood which he had spilt, and for the
severity which he had used against the English: holding himself for that
cause more guilty before God, then glorious among men. He spent many good
speeches in reconciling himself to God and the world, and in exhorting others
to virtue and Religion. He gave great sums of money to the Clergy of Meux,
and of some other places in France, to repair the Churches which a little
before he had defaced. To some Monasteries he gave ten marks of gold, and to
others six. To every Parish Church he gave five shillings, and to every
Borough Town a hundred pounds for relief of the poor. He gave his Crown,
with all the ornaments thereto belonging, to the Church of Saint Stephen in
Caen, which he had founded: for redeeming whereof, King Henry the first did
afterward give to the same Church the Manor of Brideton in Dorcetshire. He
retained perfect memory and speech so long as he retained any breath. He
ended his life upon the ninth day of September: full both of honor and of age,
when he had reigned twenty years, eight months and sixteen days; in the
threescore and fourth year of his age.

So soon as he was dead, the chief men that were about him went to horse, and
departed forthwith to their own dwellings: to provide for the safety of
themselves, and of their families and estates. For all men were possessed with
a marvelous fear, that some dangerous adventures would ensue. The servants
and inferior Officers also fled away; and to double the baseness of their
disposition, took with them whatsoever was portable about the king; his
Armor, plate, apparel, household-stuffe, all things were held as lawful
booty. Thus the dead body was not only abandoned, but left almost naked upon
the ground: where it remained from prime until three of the clock, neither
guarded nor regarded by any man. In the mean time the Religious persons went
in procession to the Church of S. Geruase, and there commended his soul to
God. Then William Archb. of Roan commanded, that his body should be carried to
Caen, to be there buried in the Church of S. Stephen. But he was so forsaken
of all his followers, that there was not any found who would undertake either
the care or the charge. At the last Herlwine a country Knight, upon his own
cost, caused the body to be embalmed and adorned for funeral pomp: then
conveyed it by coach to the mouth of the River Some; and so partly by land, and
partly by sea brought it to Caen.

Here the Abbot with the Covent of Monks came forth with all accustomed
ceremonies, to meet the corpse: to whom the whole multitude of the Clergy and
Lay People did adioyne. But when they were in the midst of their sad
solemnities, a fire brake out of a certain house, and suddenly embraced a
great part of the town. Hereupon the Kings body was once again abandoned; all
the people running from it in a headlong haste; some to save their goods,
others to repress the rage of the flame, others (as the latest nouelty) to
stand and look on. In the end a few Moncks returned, and accompanied the
Hearse to the Abbey Church.

Afterward all the Bishops and Abbots of Normandy assembled to solemnize the
funeral. And when the divine Office was ended, and the coffin of stone set
into the earth, in the presbytorie, between the Quire and the Altar (but the
body remained upon the Hearse) Guislebert bishop of Eureux made a long Sermon;
wherein he bestowed much breath in extolling the honorable actions of the
King. In the end he concluded; That for so much as it was impossible for a man to
live, much less to govern, without offense; First, by reason of the multitude
of a Princes affairs* Secondly, for that he must commit the managing of many
things to the conscience and courtesy of others; Lastly, for that personal
grieuances are many times beneficial to the maine body of State; in which
case, particular either losses or harms, are more then manifoldly recompensed
by the preservation or quiet of the whole: If therefore any that were present
did suppose they had received injury from the King, he desired that they would
in charity forgive him.

When the Bishop had finished his speech, one Anselme Fitz-Arthur stood up
amongst the multitude, and with a high voice said; This ground whereupon we
stand, was sometimes the floor of my fathers house; which that man of whom you
have spoken, when he was Duke of Normandy, took violently from my father, and
afterward founded thereon this Religious building. This injustice he did not
by ignorance or oversight; not upon any necessity of State; but to content his
own covetous desire. Now therefore I do challenge this ground as my right;
and do here charge you, as you will answer it before the fearful face of
Almighty God, that the body of the spoiler be not covered with the earth of
mine inheritance.

When the Bishops and Noble men that were present heard this, and understood by
the testimony of many that it was true, they agreed to give him three pounds
presently for the ground that was broken for the place of burial; and for the
residue which he claimed, they undertook he should be fully satisfied. This
promise was performed in short time after, by Henry the Kings son, who only
was present at the Funeral; at whose appointment Fitz-Arthur received for the
price of the same ground one hundred pounds.

Now when the body was to be put into the earth, the sepulcher of stone which
stood within the grave, was hewn somewhat too strait for his fat belly;
whereupon they were constrained to press it down with much strength. By this
violence, whether his bowels burst, or whether some excrements were forced out
at their natural passage, such an intolerable stinck proceeded from him, as
neither the perfumes that smoaked in great abundance, nor any other means were
able to qualify. Wherefore the Priests hasted to finish their office, and the
people departed in a sad silence; discoursing diversely afterward of all these
extraordinary accidents.

A man would think that a sepulcher thus hardly attained, should not easily
again be lost. But it happened otherwise to this unquiet King; not destined
to rest, either in his life or after his death. For in the year 1562. when
Castilion took the City of Caen, with those broken troops that escaped at
the battle of Dreux; certain savage Soldiers of diverse nations, led by
four dissolute Captains, beat down the Monument which King William his
son had built over him, and both curiously and richly adorned with gold and
costly stones. Then they opened his Tomb, and not finding the treasure which
they expected, they threw forth his bones with very great derision and
despite. Many English soldiers were then in the Town, who were very curious
to gather his bones; whereof some were afterward brought into England. Hereby
the report is convinced for vain, that his body was found vncorrupt, more then
four hundred years after it was buried. Hereby also it is found to be false,
that his body was eight foot in length. For neither were his bones
proportionable to that stature, (as it is testified by those who saw them) and
it is otherwise reported of him by some who lived in his time; namely, that he
was of a good stature, yet not exceeding the ordinary proportion of men.

And this was the last end of all his fortunes, of all that was mortal in him
besides his fame: whose life is too much extolled by the Normans, and no less
extenuated by the English. Verily, he was a very great Prince: full of hope to
undertake great enterprises, full of courage to atchieue them: in most of his
actions commendable, and excusable in all. And this was not the least piece of
his Honor, that the Kings of England which succeeded, did account their order
only from him: not in regard of his victory in England, but generally in
respect of his virtue and valor.

For his entrance was not by way of conquest, but with pretense of title to the
Crown: wherein he had both allowance and aid from diverse Christian Princes in
Europe. He had also his party within the Realm, by whose means he prevailed
against the opposite faction* (as Caesar did against Pompey) and not against
the entire strength of the State.

Again, he did not settle himself in the chair of Soueraignetie, as one
that had reduced all things to the proud power and pleasure of a Conqueror,
but as an universal successor of former Kings, in all the rights and
privileges which they did enjoy. He was received for King by general
consent; He was crowned with all Ceremonies and Solemnities then in use; He
took an oath in the presence of the Clergy, the Nobility, and of much
people, for defense of the Church, for moderate and careful government, and
for upright administration of justice.

Lastly, during the whole course of his government, the kingdom received no
universal change, no loss or diminution of honor. For, neither were the old
inhabitants expelled, as were the Britains; neither was the kingdom either
subjected or annexed to a greater: but rather it received increase of honor,
in that a less State was adjoined unto it. The change of customs was not
violent and at once, but by degrees, and with the silent approbation of the
English; who have always been inclinable to accommodate themselves to the
fashions of France. The grieuances and oppressions were particular, and with
some appearance either of justice, or of necessity for the common quiet; such
as are not unusual in any government moderately severe. So the change was
chiefly in the stem and family of the King: which whether it be wrought by
one of the same nation (as it was in France by Pepine and Capett) or by a
stranger, (as in the same Country by Henry 5. and Henry 6. Kings of England)
it brings no disparagement in honor; it works no essential change. The
State still remained the same, the solid body of the State remained still
English: the coming in of many Normans, was but as Rivers falling into the
Ocean; which change not the Ocean, but are confounded with the waters thereof.

This King had by his wife Matild, daughter to Baldwine Earl of Flanders,
four sons; Robert, Richard, William and Henry: He had also five daughters;
Cicely, Constance, Adela, Margaret and Elianor.

Robert his eldest son surnamed Courtcuise, by reason of the shortness of
his thighs, succeeded him in the duchy of Normandy. He was a man of exceeding
honorable courage and spirit, for which cause he was so esteemed by the
Christian Princes in the great war against the Saracens, that when they had
subdued the City and territory of Jerusalem, they offered the kingdom
thereof first unto him. Yet afterward, either by the malice of his Fortune, or
for that he was both sudden and obstinate in his own advise (two great
impediments that valor cannot thrive) he received many foiles of his enemies,
which shall be declared in their proper place. Before the King made his descent
into England, he gave the duchy of Normandy unto him: but whether he did
this only to testify his confidence, or whether afterward his purpose
changed, being often demanded to perform this gift, he would neither deny nor
accomplish his word, but enterposed many excuses and delays; affirming that he
was not so surely settled in England, but the duchy of Normandy was necessary
unto him, both for supply for his services (which he found like Hydraes heads
to multiply by cutting off) and also for an assured place for retreit, in case
he should be ouercharged with extremities. Hereupon Robert unable to linger
and pine in hopes, declared openly against him in arms. Philip King of France
was ready to put fuel to the flame; who as he never favored in his own
judgment the prosperous increases of the King of England, so then he was
vigilant to embrace all occasions, either to abate or limit the same. And thus
Robert both encouraged and enabled by the King of France, invaded Normandy,
and permitted his soldiers licentiously to wast; to satisfy those by spoil,
which by pay he was not able to maintain. At the last he encountered the King
his father in a sharp conflict, before the castle of Gerberie, wherein the
King was unhorsed and wounded in the arm; his second son William was also
hurt, and many of his soldiers slain. And albeit Robert so soon as he knew
his father by his voice, allighted forthwith, mounted him upon his own horse,
and withdrew him out of the medley; yet did he cast upon his son a cruel
curse, which lay so heavy upon him, that he never prospered afterward in any
thing which he undertook. And although after this he was reconciled to his
father, and employed by him in services of credit and weight, yet did the King
often bewray of him an unquiet conceit, often did he ominate evil unto him:
yea, a little before his death he openly gave forth, That it was a miserable
Country which should be subject to his dominion, for that he was a proud and
foolish knave, and to be long scourged by cruel Fortune.

Richard had erected the good expectation of many, as well by his comely
countenance and behavior, as by his lively and generous spirit. But he died
young by misaduenture, as he was hunting within the New-forrest, before he had
made experiment of his worth. Some affirm that he was goared to death by the
Dear of that Forest, for whose walk his father had dispeopled that large
compass of ground: others report, that as he rode in chase, he was hanged
upon the bow of a tree by the chaps: others more probably do write, that he
perished by a fall from his horse. He was buried at Winchester with this
inscription: Hic iacet Richardus filius Wilielmi senioris Berniae Dux.

William did succeed next to his father in the Kingdom of England. To Henry,
the King gave at the time of his death five thousand pounds out of his
treasure; but gave him neither dignity nor lands: foretelling, that he should
enjoy the honor of both his brothers in time, and far excel them both in
dominion and power. Whether this was devised upon event; or whether some do
prophecy at their death; or whether it was coniecturally spoken; or whether to
give contentment for the present; it fell out afterward to be true. For he
succeeded William in the Kingdom of England, and wrested Normandy out of the
possession of Robert. Of these two I shall write more fully hereafter.

His daughter Cicelie was Abbess of Caen in Normandy. Constance was married
to Allen Fergant Earl of Britain. Adela was wife to Stephen Earl of Blois,
to whom she bare Stephen, who after the death of Henry was King of England.
Margaret was promised in marriage to Harold; she died before he attained the
Kingdom, for which cause he held himself discharged of that oath which he had
made to the Duke her father. Elianor was betroathed to Alphonso King of
Gallicia; but she desired much to die a Virgin: for this she daily prayed, and
this in the end she did obtain. After her death her knees appeared brawnie and
hard, with much kneeling at her devotions. Assuredly it will be hard to find in
any one Family, both greater Valor in sons, and more Virtue in daughters.

In the beginning of this Kings reign, either no great accidents did fall, or
else they were obscured with the greatness of the change: none are reported by
the writers of that time.

In the fourth year of his reign, Lanfranke Abbot of Caen in Normandy, but
borne in Pauie, a City of Lumbardie, was made Archbishop of Canterbury: And
Thomas a Norman, and Chanon of Bayon was placed in the Sea of York. Between
these two a controversy did arise at the time of their consecration, for
prioritie in place: but this contention was quieted by the King, and Thomas for
the time subscribed obedience to the Archb. of Canterbury. After this they went
to Rome for their Palles; where the question for Primacie was again renewed,
or, as some affirm, first moved before Pope Alexander. The Pope used them both
with honorable respect, and especially Lanfrank, to whom he gave two Palles,
one of honor, and the other of love: but their controversy he referred to be
determined in England.

About two years after it was brought before the King and the Clergy at
Windsore. The Archbishop of York alleged, that when the Britains received
the Christian faith, in the time of Lucius their King* Eleutherius then Bishop
of Rome, sent Faganus and Damianus unto them, who ordained 28. Bishops, and two
Archbishops within the Realm, one of London, and the other of York. Under
these the Church of Britain was governed almost three hundred years, until
they were subdued by the Saxons. The Saxons remained Infidels until Gregory
Bishop of Rome sent Augustine unto them. By his preaching Ethelbert King of
Kent was first converted to the Christian faith: By reason whereof Augustine
was made Archbishop of Dover, by appointment of Pope Gregory; who sent unto
him certain Palles with his letter from Rome. By this letter it is evident,
that Gregory intended to reduce the Church of the Saxons to the same order
wherein it was among the Britains; namely, to be under twelve Bishops and two
Archbishops; one of London and the other of York. Indeed he gave to Augustine
during his life, authority and jurisdiction over all Bishops and Priests in
England: but after his decease he joins these two Metropolitanes in equal
degree, to constitute Bishops, to ouersee the Church, to consult and dispose of
such things as appertain to the government thereof, as in former times among
the Britains. Between these he put no distinction in honor, but only as they
were in prioritie of time: and as he appoints London to be consecrated by no
Bishop, but of his own Synod, so he expresses, that the Bishop of York should
not be subject to the Bishop of London. And albeit Augustine for the reason
before mentioned, translated the Sea from London to Dover, yet if Gregory had
intended to give the same authority to the successors of Augustine which he
gave unto him, he would have expressed it in his Epistle: but in that he makes
no mention of his successors, he concludes, or rather excludes them by his
silence.

The Archbishop of Canterbury alleged, that from the time of Augustine, until
the time of Bid, (which was about 140. years) the Bishops of Canterbury
(which in ancient time (said he) was called Dover) had the Primacie over the
whole land of Britain, and of Ireland; that they did call the Bishops of York
to their Councels, which diverse times they kept within the Province of York;
that some Bishops of York they did constitute, some excommunicate, and some
remove. He alleged also diverse privileges granted by Princes for the Primacie
of that Sea; diverse granted from the Apostolic Sea to confirm this dignity
in the successors of Augustine: that it is reason to receive directions of
well living, from whence we first received directions of right believing; and
therefore as the Bishop of Canterbury was subject to the Bishop of Rome, because
he had his faith from thence; for the very same cause the Bishop of York
should be in subjection to the Bishop of Canterbury: that like as the Lord said
that to all the Bishops of Rome, which he said to S. Peter; so that which
Gregory said to Augustine, he said likewise to all his successors. And
whereas much is spoken of the Bishop of London, what is that to the Archbishop
of Canterbury? For, neither is it certain that Augustine was ever resident at
London, neither that Gregory appointed him so to be.

In the end it was decreed, That York for that time should be subject to
Canterbury; that wheresoever within England the Archbishop of Canterbury
should hold his Council, the Archbishop of York should come unto it, with the
Bishops of his Province, and be obedient to his decrees: that when the
Archbishop of Canterbury should decease, the Archbishop of York should go to
Canterbury, to consecrate him that should succeed: that if the Archbishop of
York should decease, his successor should go to Canterbury, or to such place
as the Archbishop of Canterbury should appoint, there to receive his
Consecration, making first his oath of Canonical obedience. And thus was the
contention for this first time taken up; but in succeeding times it was often
renewed, and much busied the Clergy of the Realm.

In the ninth year of the reign of King William a Council was holden at
London, where another matter of like quality and nature was decreed: namely,
that Bishops should translate their Sees from villages to Cities; whereupon in
short time after, Bishops Sees were removed, from Selese to Chichester, from
Cornwall to Exeter, from Wells to Bath, from Shirbourne to Salisburie, from
Dorcester to Lincoln, from Lichfield to Chester, and from thence again to
Couentree. And albeit the Archbishop of York did oppose against the erecting
of a Cathedral Church in Lincoln, because he challenged that City to be of
his Province; yet Remigius Bishop of Dorchester, being strong both in
resolution and in friends, did prosecute his purpose to effect. Not long before
the Bishopric of Lindafferne otherwise called Holy land, upon the river
Tweed, had been translated to Durhame.

In the tenth year of his reign the cold of Winter was exceeding memorable,
both for sharpness and for continuance: For the earth remained hard frozen
from the beginning of November, until the midst of April then ensuing.

In the 15. year a great earthquake happened in the month of April; strange for
the strong trembling of the earth, but more strange for the doleful and
hideous roaring which it yielded forth.

In the 20. year there fell such abundance of rain, that the Rivers did
greatly ouerflow in all parts of the Realm. The springs also rising
plentifully in diverse hills, so softened and decayed the foundations of them,
that they fell down, whereby some villages were overthrown. By this
distemperature of weather much cattle perished, much cornevpon the ground was
either destroyed, or greatly empaired. Herehence ensued, first a famine, and
afterward a miserable mortality of men.

And that all the Elements might seem to have conspired the calamity of the
Realm, the same year most of the principal Cities in England were lamentably
deformed with fire. At London a fire began at the entry of the West gate, which
apprehending certain shops and Warehouses, wherein was Merchandise apt to
burn, it was at once begun and suddenly at the highest. Then being carried with
a strong wind, and the City apt to maintain the flame, as well by reason of
the crooked and narrow streets, as for that the buildings at that time had open
and wide windows, and were covered with base matter fit to take fire, the
mischief spread more swiftly then the remedies could follow. So it raged
until it came to the Eastgate, prostrated houses and Churches all the way,
being the most grievous that ever as yet has happened to that City. The
Church of S. Paul was at that time fired* Whereupon Maurice then Bishop of
London, began the foundation of the new Church of S. Paul. A work so
admirable, that many did judge, it would never have been finished; yet all
might easily esteem thereby his magnanimity, his high erected hopes, his
generous love and honor to Religion. The King gave toward the building of the
East end of this Church, the choice stones of his Castle at the West end of the
City, upon the bancke of the River Thames; which Castle at the same time was
also fired: in place whereof Edward Killwarby Archbishop of Canterbury did
afterward found a Monastery of black Friars. The King also gave the Castle
of Storford, and all the lands which thereto belonged, to the same Maurice, and
to his successors in that See. And doubtless nothing more then either
parcimonious or profane expending the Treasures of the Church, has since
those times much dried up those fountains which first did fill them.

After the death of Maurice, Richard his next Successor, as well in virtue as
in dignity, bestowed all the Rents rising out of this Bishopric, to advance
the building of this Church; maintaining himself by his Patrimony and
friends: and yet all which he could do, made no great show: so that the
finishing of this work was left to many other succeeeding Bishops. He
purchased the ground about the Church whereupon many buildings did stand, and
enclosed the same with a strong wall of stone for a place of burial. It
seems that this wall was afterward either battered and torn in some civil
wars, or else by negligence suffered to decay: for that a grant was made by
King Edward the second, that the Churchyard of Saint Paul's should be enclosed
with a wall, because of the robberies and murders that were there committed.
Many parts of this wall remain at this time, on both sides of the Church, but
covered for the most part with dwelling houses.

The same year in Whitsun-weeke, the King honored his son Henry with the
order of Knighthood. What Ceremonies the King then used it is not certainly
known: but before his time the custom among the Saxons was thus. First, he
who should receive the order of Knighthood, con^essed himself in the evening
to a Priest. Then he continued all that night in the Church, watching and
applying himself to his private devotions. The next morning he heard Mass,
and offered his sword upon the Altar. After the Gospel was read, the sword was
hallowed, and with a benediction put about his neck. Lastly, he communicated
the mysteries of the blessed body of Christ, and from that time remained a
lawful Soldier or Knight. This custom of Consecrating Knights the Normans
did not only abrogate, but abhor; not for any evil that was therein, but
because it was not altogether their own.

This year in a Province of Wales called Rosse, the Sepulcher of Wawyn,
otherwise called Gawen, was found upon the Sea shore. He was sisters son to
Arthur the great King of the Britains; a man famous in our Britain Histories,
both for civil courtesy, and for courage in the field. I cannot but esteem
the report for fabulous, that his body was fourteen foot in length. I do
rather conjecture that one credulous writer did take that for the length of his
body, which happily might be the length of his ^ombe.

It is constantly affirmed that the ground whereon the English and the Normans
did combat, does show after every rain manifest marks of blood upon the
grass: which if it was not a propriety of the soil before, it is hard now to
assign, either from what natural cause it does proceed, or what it should
supernaturally portend.

K. WILLIAM THE SECOND, surnamed RUFUS.
KIng WILLIAM the Victor when he drew toward the end of his days, commended
the Kingdom of England to his second son William: with many blessings, with
many admonitions, with many prayers for the prosperous success of his
succession. And because the presence of the next successor is of greatest
moment to establish affairs, the King a little before his passage to death,
dispatched him into England, with letters under his own Seal to Lanfranck
then Archbishop of Canterbury: a man highly esteemed in foreign Countries, but
with the Clergy and vulgar people of the Realm, his authority was
absolute. In these letters the King expressed great affection and care toward
his son William; commending him with many kind words, for his sufficiencies,
for diverse virtues; especially for that he did always stand firmly by him,
always declare himself both a faithful Subject and dutiful son. It was
also coniectured by some, that the King was guided in this choice, no less by
his judgment, then by his affection: for that he esteemed the fierce
disposition of his son William more fit to govern a people not well settled
in subjection, then the flexible and mild nature of his eldest son Robert.
So William taking his last leave of his father, who was then taking his last
leave of this world, iourneyed toward England; and in short time arrived at
the port called Whitesand, where he received the first report of his fathers
death. Hereupon with all speed he posted to Lanfranck, delivered his fathers
letters, and forthwith was declared King, upon the 9. day of September, in the
year 1087. and upon the first of October next ensuing was by the same
Lanfranck, with all ceremonies and solemnities perteining to that action,
crowned at Westminster.

Robert, either by negligence and want of foresight, or by the perpetual
malice of his destiny, or happily not without his fathers contriuance, was
absent in Germany, whilst his younger brother William did thus possess
himself, both of the Kingdom of his father, and of his treasure. Otherwise he
wanted neither pretense, nor purpose, nor favor of friends to have empeached
his brothers proceedings. For it was then doubted by many, and since has been
by many debated; whether in any case, upon any cause or consideration
whatsoever, a King has power to disinherite his eldest son, and to appoint
another to succeed in his estate.

That a King may advance any of his sons to be his successor, without
respect of prioritie in birth, there seems to want neither warrant of
example, nor weight of authority. David a man greatly proved and approved 3.
(...)
by God, did prefer Solomon to succeed him, before his eldest son Adonia.
And in like sort Rehoboam the son of Solomon, appointed 2. (...)
the youngest of all his sons to succeed him in the Kingdom. So some Lawyers
affirm, Ba^d, (...) (...) (...) 11. (...) (...). 7. item (...) (...)*
That a King may determine in his life, which of his sons shall reign after
him.

But this must be understood, either when a State is newly raised to the title
of a kingdom, or else when by Conquest, Usurpation, or some other means of
change, the government thereof is newly transferred from one stem to another:
For then because there is no certain Law or Custom of succession in force,
the right seems to d^pend upon the disposition of the Prince. And yet even in
this case, the eldest or nearest cannot be excluded without just cause. For so
when Jacob deprived his Genesis 49.
eldest son Reuben of his privilege of birth, he expressed the cause, For
that he had defiled his fathers bed; which fact of his Hierome applies to the
case in question. So when Ptolemie ^ust. lib. 16.
the first King of Egypt commended the State to his youngest son, he yielded a
reason for that which he did. So Henry the fourth Emperor, crowned Henry his
younger son King, rejecting Conrade his eldest son, for that he had borne
arms against him, and joined in league with his open enemies.

But when by express Law or long grounded Custom the Succession of a State
is established to the eldest son, the best approved interpreters of the
Canon and Civil law do Host. I^. An^ Collect. Pet. Anch. (...) Imo. Card. F^
and fere (...) nes in c. (...) (...) Voto.
conclude, that the father has no power to inuert or pervert that course of
order. For parents may debar their children of that which proceeds from
themselves, of that which depends upon their appointment; but of that L. si
arrogato^ D. de Arrog* l. 3 de interd* (...).
which is due by nature, by the immutable law of the State, the parents can
have no power to dispose. When by a fundamental Law or Custom of State,
Succession is annexed to the dignity of a Crown, according to prioritie in
birth, it follows, that so soon as the first Io. And. in ^. significasti de
(...) comp. Pan. cons. 85. li. 1. Molin* consuet. Paris. tit. 1. 85. gl* q. q
2. in fi.
borne comes into light, the right of succession is fixed in him; not in hope
only, but also in habit; whereof neither the father nor any other can
dispossess him.

And therefore when Prusias intended to Just. lib. 34
deprive his eldest son Nicomedes of his prerogative of birth, and to
prefer his younger sons, which he had by another wife, in succession before
him, he could not assure it by any means, but by determining the death of
Nicomedes; which Nicomedes to prevent, dispoiled his father both of kingdom and
of life. Ptolemie the first King of Egypt of that name, Just. lib. (...)
who after the death of Alexander the great possessed himself of Egypt, and
part of Arabia, and of Afric, left his kingdom to the yo^gest of his sons:
but afterward when Ptolemie, surnamed Pausan. lib. 1. Justin, lib* 39.
Phiscon, upon the importunity of his wife Cleopatra, attempted the like, the
kingdom being then settled in succession, the people opposed, and reuersed his
order after his death. So Pepine Glra^d. lib. 1. de l'estate.
after he had made seizure of the kingdom of France, and ordered all things
which he thought necessary for the suerty thereof, disposed the succession
therein by his Testament; leaving the Realm of Noion to his son Charles, and
to Carloman his other son the Realm of Soissons. The like was done by some
other of the first Kings of his race. But since that time the custom has been
strongly stablished, that the kingdom passes entirely to the eldest son,
and possessions are assigned to the rest under the name of Appanage. And
therefore the D. Benedict. in ^ep. c. Rainutius Ver^. in eodem t^stamento le.
1. (...). 209.
French writers affirm, that the eldest son of France cannot be deprived of
succession, upon any cause of ingratitude against his parents; and that if the
King should institute his eldest Io. d^ terr. (...). concl. 9. 10. 11. 12.
son, yet cannot he take the kingdom by force of his fathers gift, but
only by the immutable law of the Realm. Yea, Girard writes of Charl^^ the
simple, that he was King of Li. 1 de (...) (...) de France*
France before he was borne. And in this regard the Glossographer upon the
Decrees notes, In c. vl^. ^4. ^.
that the son of a King may be called King during the life of his father, as
wanting nothing but administration. And the same also does Seruius note out of
Virgil, where he says of Aescanius: regemque requirunt, his father Aeneas
being then alive.

Now then, for that the right of Succession to the Crown of England was not at
that time so surely settled as it has been since; but had waued in long
uncertainty: First, in the Heptarchie of the Saxons and English, afterward
between the English and the Danes, and was then newly possessed by the
Normane, and that chiefly by the sword: For that also Robert the Kings eldest
son gave just cause of offense, by bearing arms against his father; it may
seem that the King might lawfully direct the succession to his second son.
And yet, because as Herodotus says, It is a general custom amongst In
Polybiu^.
all men, that the first in birth is next in succession; because as Baldus
affirms, Semper L. ex hoc D. (...) Just. and (...)
fuit, and semper erit, etc. Always it has been, and always it shall be,
that the first borne succeeds in a kingdom; because as S. Hierome writes,
In Epist. ad O^agr. and in genesis 49. Chrysostom. hom. 5. aduers. Iudaeos.
A kingdom is due unto the first borne; and as S. Chrysostom says, The first
borne is to be esteemed more honorable then therest; whereupon Glo. Pan. in.
c. 1 de cens. Luc. Pen. in l. decurio. c. de decu. lib. 10.
diverse Lawyers observe, that the word Senior is often times taken for a Lord.
Lastly, because this precedencie both in honor, and in right seems to be the
Law of all nations, derived from the Law of Nature, and expressly either
instituted or approved by the voice of God: First, where he said to Cain of
his younger Genesis 4. ^.
brother Abel; His desires shall be subject to thee, and thou shall have
dominion over him: Secondly, where he forbids the father to disinherite
Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
the first son of his double portion, because by right of birth it is due
unto him: Lastly, where he makes choice of the first borne to be sanctified
and consecrated to himself; it Exo. 13. and 22. and 34. Leuit. 27. Number. 3. and
8. and 18. Neh. 10. Eze^h 44. Luc. 2. 23.
has almost never happened that this order has been broken, that the nearest
have been excluded from Succession in State, but it has been followed with
tragical events.

Yea, albeit the eldest son be unfit to bear rule, albeit he be unable to
govern either others or himself; as if he be in a high degree furious, or
foolish, or otherwise defective in body or in mind, (unless he degenerate
from humane condition) yet can he not therefore Io. ^gn. in. (...), An. Rex
Fra^* c^ae recognos^at superior^m. (...)* 28. Ang. in l* cum Praetor non autem.
D* de Iudi. Ias. ^n l. nemo D. de leg. 1.
be excluded from succession: because it is due unto him, not in respect of
ability, but by reason of his prioritie of birth. As for the kingdom, it shall
better be preserved by the government of a Protector (as in diverse like causes
it is both usual and fit) then by receiving another Prince: L. 1. c. de tu^*
vel. cur. Illust^* c. grand^. de sup. negl. (...).
as well for other respects, as for that by cutting off continuance in the
Royal descent, by interrupting the settled order of government, by making a
breach in so high a point of State, opportunity is opened both for domestical
disturbances, and for invasions from abroad: whereupon greater inconveniences
do usually ensue, then did ever fall by insufficiency of a Prince. For if
these pretenses may be allowed for good, what aspiring Subject, what
encroaching enemy, finding themselves furnished with means, will not be ready
to rise into ambitious hopes? Gabriel the younger brother of the house of
Saluse, kept his eldest brother in prison, usurped his estate, giving forth to
the people that he was mad. And seldom has any usurpation happened, but upon
pretense of insufficiency in government. Assuredly, if these principal points
of Principality be not punctually observed, the joints of a State are
loosened, the foundation is shaken, the gates are opened for all disorders, to
rise up, to rush in, to prosper, to prevail.

Hereupon Medon the eldest son of Codrus, Herod^n Terpsych.
albeit he was lame and otherwise defective, was by sentence of the Oracle of
Apollo preferred to succeed his father in the kingdom of Athens, before Neleus
his younger brother. So when Alexandrides King of Sparta lest two Herod. ibidem
Pausan. lib. 7.
sons, Cleomenes the eldest, distracted in wits, and Doricus the youngest,
both able and inclined to all actions of honor; the Spartans acknowledged
Cleomenes for their King. Agisilaus the famous King of Sparta was also lame, as
Plutarch and Prob. Aemilius do report; Orosius Plut. Aemil. in eius vita. Oros.
lib. 3. cap. 2.
says, that the Spartans did rather choose to have their King halt, then their
Kingdom. And therefore when Lisander moved them to Plut. in Lisandr.
decree, that the worthiest and not always the next in blood of the line of
Hercules should reign, he found no man to second his advise. Aristobulus and
Hircanus after a long and cruel Joseph. Ant. 14. cap. 1.
contention for the Kingdom of Iewrie, committed their controversy to the
arbitrament of Pompey: Hircanus alleged, that he was the eldest brother;
Aristobulus objected, that Hircanus was insufficient to govern: but Pompey
gave judgment for Hircanus. The like judgment did Annibal give for the
kingdom Liu. lib. ^* ^* belli Pun^. ^.
of that Country which is now called Sauoy; restoring Brancus to his State,
from Allobrog^.
which he had been expelled by his younger brother. And although Phirrus did
appoint that Plut. in e^u, vita.
son to succeed, whose sword had the best edge, yet was the eldest
acknowledged, who bare the least reputation for valor.

Ladislaus King of Hungary left by his brother Mich. Ricci^.
Geysa two Nephews; Colomannus the eldest, who was lame, bunch-backed,
crab-faced, blunt-sighted, bleare-eyed, a dwarf, a stammerer, and (which is
more) a Priest; and Almus the youngest, a man of comely presence, and furnished
with many princely virtues: In regard of these natural prerogatives Ladislaus
appointed Almus to succeed; but in regard of the prerogative in blood, the
Hungarians received Coloma^nus Cons. 20. (...)* ^.
for their King. Barbatius writes, that Galeace Duke of Milane did often times
express his grief, for that he could not prefer in succession Philip Maria
his youngest son, before John his eldest; for that he seemed the most
sufficient to De l' estate de France. lib. 1.
undertake the manage of the State. Girard affirms that it has been the
custom of the French, to honor their Kings whatsoever they are; whether wise
or foolish, valiant or weak; esteeming the name of King to be sacred by
whomsoever it be borne. And therefore they obeyed not only Charles the simple,
but Charles the sixth also; who reigned many years in plain distraction of his
mind. It was an ancient custom in Scotland, that the most sufficient of the
Only the Persians had rather a superstition the^ a law, that no man might be
King who had but one eye: for which cause Cosroes the son of Cabades was
preferred before Bozi his elder brother. Procop. lib. 1.
blood of Fergusus was received for King; but such wars, murders, and other
mischiefs did thereupon ensue, that a law was made vnde^ Kenet the third, and
afterward confirmed by Millcolumbus, that the nighest in blood should always
succeed. And accordingly the Scots refused not for their King John the eldest
son of Robert the second, albeit he was borne out of marriage, and did halt,
and was both in wit and in courage dull.

For what if he who is debarred for disabilitie Bald. cons. 389. l. 1. Socin.
cons. 47. l. 3. Card. Alex. in c. 1. tit. an. mut. vel imperfect. And. Isern in
c. vlt. tit. episc. vel Abb.
shall afterward have a son free from all defects? It is without question
that the right of the Kingdom should deuolue unto him: for that the calamity
of parents does not prejudice their children, especially in their L. vlt. D.
de senate. l. 3. D. de interd. and rel. l. 2. c. de lib^rt and (...). lib. l.
Diui. D. de iure patr. l. quaeritur. D. de bo. lib. Pan. cons. 85. l. 1. I^*
And. in c. significasti. de fo* comp.
natural rights, which they may claim from the person of former ancestors.
But what if another be in possession of the Kingdom? will he readily give
place to this right? will he readily abandon that honor, for which men will
not spare, to climb over all difficulties, to undergo all dangers; to put
their goods, their lives, their souls in adventure? If a man be once mounted
into the chair of Majesty, it stands not, I will not say with his dignity,
but with his safety, to betake himself to a private State; as well for the
eternal jealousy wherein he shall be held, as for the envy which shall be
borne against him upon many of his actions: So as what some few would not do
for ambition, the same they must do to preserve themselves. Hereupon it will
follow, that the possession of the Kingdom being in one, and the right in
another; disunions, factions, wars may easily ensue.

It is inconvenient (I grant) to be under a King who is defective in body or in
mind; but it is a greater inconvenience, by disturbing a settled form of
government, to open an entrance for all disorders; wherein ambition and
insolency (two riotous humors) may range at large. For as evil is generally
of that nature, that it cannot stand, but by supportance of another evil; and
so multiplieth in it self, until it does ruin with the proper weight: so
minds having once exceeded the strict bounds of obedience, cease not to
strengthen one boldness by another, until they have inuolued the whole State
in confusion.

But now to return to the person and government of this King William* He was a
man of mean stature, thick and square bodied, his belly swelling somewhat
round; his face was red, his hair deeply yealow, by reason whereof he was
called Rufus; his forehead four square like a window, his eyes spotted and not
one like the other; his speech unpleasant and not easily uttered, especially
when he was moved with anger. He was of great ability in body, as well for
natural strength, as for hardiness to endure all ordinary extremities both of
travail and of want. In Arms he was both expert and aduenturous; full of
inward bravery and fierceness; never dismayed, always forward, and for the
most part fortunate; in counsel sudden, in performance a man; not doubting to
undertake any thing which invincible valor durst promise to atchieue. He had
been bred with the sword; always in action, always on the favorable hand of
Fortune: so as, albeit he was but young, yet was he in experience well grounded;
for invention subtle, in counsel quick, in execution resolute; wise to
foresee a danger, and expedite to avoid it. In a word, the general reputation
of his valor and celeritie, made him esteemed one of the best Chiefetaines in
his time.

His behavior was variable and inconstant; earnest in every present passion,
and for the most part accompanying the disposition of his mind, with outward
demonstrations. Of nature he was rough, haughty, obstinate, invincible, which
was much enlarged both by his sovereignty and youth: so singular in his own
conceit, that he did interpret it to his dishonor, that the world should
deem, that he did not govern by his own judgment. In public he composed
his countenance to a stately terror; his face sowerly swelling, his eyes
truculent, his voice violent and fierce, scarce thinking himself Maiesticall
in the glass of his understanding, but when he flashed fear from his
presence. And yet in private he was so affable and pleasant, that he approached
near the degree of leuitie: much given to scoffing, and passing over many of
his evil actions with a jest. In all the other carriages of his life, he
maintained no stable and constant course; but declared himself for every
present, as well in virtue as in vice, strong, violent, extreme.

In the beginning of his reign he was esteemed a most accomplished Prince; and
seemed not so much of power to bridle himself from vice, as naturally disposed
to abhor it. Afterward, either with variation of times, or yielding to the
pleasures which prosperity uses to engender even in moderate minds, or perhaps
his nature beginning to disclose that which he had cunningly concealed before,
corruptions crept up, and he waued uncertainly between virtue and vice.
Lastly, being imboldned by evil teachers, and by continuance both of
prosperity and rule, he is said to have made his height a privilege of
looseness, and to have abandoned himself to all licentious demeanor; wherein
he seemed little to regard God, and nothing man.

Assuredly, there is no greater enemy to great men, then too great prosperity
in their affairs; which takes from them all judgment and rule of themselves;
which makes them full of liberty, and bold to do evil. And yet I cannot
conceive that this King was so bold, so careless, so shameless in vices, as
many writers do report. It is certain that he doubted of some points of
Religion, at that time without any great contradiction professed; and namely,
of praying to Saints, worshipping of Relics, and such like. It is certain
also, that out of policy in State, he endeavored to abate the tumorous
greatness of the Clergy at that time; as well in riches, as in authority and
power with the people: and that he attributed not so much to the Sea of Rome,
as diverse Kings before him had done. Insomuch as he restrained his subjects
from going to Rome, and withheld the annual payment of Peter pence, and was
oftentimes heard to give forth, that they follow not the trace of S. Peter,
they greedily gape after gifts and rewards, they retein not his power, whose
piety they do not imitate. These were causes sufficient for the writers of his
time (who were for the most part Clergymen) to enlarge his vices beyond the
truth, to surmise many vices untruly, to wrest his true virtues to be vices.

And this I do the rather conjecture, for that I do not find his particular
actions of like nature, with the general imputation which is cast upon him;
for that also I find the chie^e of these general imputations to be these:
That he was grievous to the Church, of no devotion (...)
to God, preferring respect of temporal state before the rules of the Gospel.
Verily, it is hard to do that which will bear a clear beauty in the eyes of
all men; and if our actions have not the favor of time, and the opinion of
those Nihilest quod man narrando non possit deprauarier. (...) Eun.
men who do estimate and report them, they are much dimmed with disgrace. Out
of all doubt he was a magnanimous Prince; merciful and liberal, and in
martial affairs most expert, diligent and prosperous; wise to contriue his
best advantage, and most courageous to atchieue it. But two things chiefly
obscured his glory; one, the incomparable greatness of his father, to whom he
did immediately succeed; the other was the prowess of those men, against whom
he did contend in arms; especially of Malcolme King of Scots, and of Robert
Duke of Normandy. To these I may add, that he died in the principal
strength and flourish of his age, before his judgment had full command over
his courage.

Many do attribute his excellent beginnings to Lanfranck Archb. of
Canterbury: who during the time of his life, partly by authority, and partly
by advise, supported the unstable years and disposition of the King: which
after the death o^ Lanfranck returned by degrees to their proper sway. But I do
rather attribute many of his first virtues to the troubles which happened in
the very entrance of his reign; which partly by employment, and partly by
fear, held his inclination in some restraint. For Odo Bishop of Baion and
Earl of Kent, the Kings uncle by the mothers side, had drawn the greatest
part of all the Prelates and Nobility that were Normans, into a dangerous
confederacy against the King; to deiect him from his Srate, and to advance
Robert his elder brother for their King.

The secret cause of this conspiracy was partly upon a general
coffeehouse, at the great, though worthy estimation and authority (a most
capital offense in the eye of envy) of Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury; by
means whereof many of the conspirators lived in far meaner reputation, then
their ambitious minds could easily break: but chiefly it was upon a more
particular grudge, which Odo did bear against the same Lanfranck; because by
his persuasion, Odo had been committed to prison by King William the elder. For
when the King complained to Lanfranck of the intolerable both avarice and
ambition of his brother Odo, the Archbishop gave advise, that he should be
restrained of his liberty. And when the King doubted, how he being a Bishop,
might be committed to prison, without impeaching the privileges of the Church;
indeed answered Lanfranck, you may not imprison the Bishop of Baion, but you
may do what you please with the Earl of Kent.

The public and open pretenses were these. Robert Duke of Normandy had the
prerogative of birth; which being a benefit proceeding from nature, could not
be reuersed by his fathers act. He had also won a most honorable reputation
for his military virtues; and had by many travels of war wasted the wild
follies of youth. He was no less famous for courtesy and liberality, two
most amiable ornaments of honor; being so desirous that no man should depart
discontented from him, that he would oftentimes promise more then he was able
to perform, and yet perform more then his estate could expediently afford. As
for K. William, besides that he was the younger brother, his nature was held to
be doubtful and suspect, and the judgment of most men inclined to the worst.
And what are we then aduantaged, (said they) by the death of his father? if
whom he has fleeced, this shall flay; if this shall execute those whom he has
fettered and surely bound; If after his seuerities that are past, we shall be
freshly charged with those rigours, which tyrants in the height and pride of
their Fortune are wont to use? And as stronger combinations are always made
between men drawn together by one common fear, then between those that are
joined by hope or desire; so upon these iealousies and fears, accompanied also
with vehement desires, the Confederats supposed that they had knit a most
assured league.

Now it happened that at the time of the death of William the elder, Robert his
eldest son was absent in Almaine; and at once heard both of the death of his
father, and that his brother William was acknowledged to be King. Hereupon in
great have, but greater heat both o^ anger and ambition, he returned into
Normandy: and there whilst he was breathing forth his coffeehouse and
desire of revenge, he received a message from the Confederats in England; that
with all speed he should come over unto them, to accomplish the enterprise, to
furnish their forces with a head: that they had no want of able bodies; they
wanted no means to maintain them together; they wanted only his person both
to countenance and conduct them. The Duke thought it no wisdom, to adventure
himself altogether; upon the favor and faith of discontented persons: and he
had been so loosely liberal before, that he was unprovided of money, to
appoint himself with any competent forces of his own. Hereupon he pawned a
part of Normandy to his brother Henry, for waging Soldiers: many also flocked
voluntarily unto him; upon inducement, that he who of his own nature was most
liberal and full of humanity, would not fail both of pay and reward, unless
by reason of disabilitie and want.

In the mean time the Confederats resolved to break forth in Arms, in diverse
parts of the Realm at once; upon conceit, that if the King should endeavor to
repress them in one place, they might more easily prevail in the other. And
so accordingly Odo fortified and spoiled in Kent; Geoffrey Bishop of Exceter,
with his nephew Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, at Bristow; Roger
Montgomerie in Northfolke, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire; Hugh de Grandmenill, in
Leicestershire and Northamptonshire; William Bishop of Durhame, in the North
parts of the Realm; diverse others of the Clergy and Nobility in
Herefordshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire, and all the Countries adjoining to
Wales. And as in time of pestilence all diseases turn to the plague; so in
this general tumult, all discontentments sorted to Rebellion. Many who were
oppressed with violence or with fear; many who were kept lower either by want
or disgrace then they had set their mounting minds, adjoined daily to the side,
and increased both the number and the hope. And thus was all the Realm in a
rumous rage against K. William, who wanted neither courage to bear, nor
wisdom to decline it.

And first he endeavored by all means to make the English assured unto him.
And albeit few of them were at that time in any great place, either of credit
or of charge, but were all wounded by his fathers wrongs; yet for that they
were the greatest part, he made the greatest reckoning of them. For this cause
he released many English Lords who had been committed to custody by his
father. He composed himself to courtesy and affability toward the people,
and distributed much treasure among them. But especially he wanne their
inclination by promises of great assurance, to restore unto them their ancient
laws, to ease them of tributes and taxations, and to permit them free liberty
of hunting: which being their principal pleasure and exercise before, was
either taken away, or much restrained from them by King William the elder.
Herewith he applied himself to appease the mutinous minds of his Nobility, to
sever the Confederats, to break the faction; to divide it first, and thereby
to defeat it.

To this purpose he dealt with Roger Montgomerie, who next unto Odo was a
principal both countenance and strength to the revolt; he dealt also with
diverse others, inferior unto him in authority and degree; that he could not
conjecture for what cause they were so violent against him: did they want
money? His fathers treasure was at their devotion: desired they increase of
possessions? they should not be otherwise bounded then by their own desires:
that he would willingly also give over his estate, in case it should be judged
expedient by themselves, whom his father had put in trust to support him: that
they should do well to foresee, whether by overthrowing his fathers judgment
in appointing the kingdom unto him, they should not do that which might be
prejudicial to themselves; for the same man who had appointed him to be King,
had also conferred unto them those honors and possessions which they held.
Thus sometimes dealing privately with particulars, and sometimes with many
together, and eftsoons filling them with promises and hopes, and that with
such new vehemency of words as they believed could not proceed from
dissembled intents; he so prevailed in the end, that hereby, and by example of
some inducing the rest, Roger Montgomerie and diverse others were reconciled to
the King; in whom was thought to rest no small matter to hold up the reputation
of the enterprise.

And further, he prepared a navy to guard the seas, and to impeach the
passage of his brother into England. He prepared great forces also by means
of the treasure which his father had left, and disposed them in places
convenient, either to prevent or to repress these scattered tumults. But the
success of his affairs was by no means so much advanced, as by Lanfranck
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by Woolstane Bishop of Worcester: the authority
of which two men, the one for his learning, wisdom, and mild moderation, the
other for his simple sanctity and integrity of life, was greatly regarded by
all sorts of people. By encouragement of Woolstane not only the city of
Worcester was maintained in firm condition for the King, but his enemies
received there a famous foil; the greatest part being slain, and the residue
dispersed. This was the first sad blow which the confederates took; afterward
they declined mainely, and the King as mainly did increase.

The King in person led his chief forces into Kent, against Odo his uncle, the
principal firebrand of all this flame. He took there the castle of Tunbridge
and of Pemsey, which Odo had fortified* and lastly he besieged Odo himself in
the castle of Rochester, and with much travel took him prisoner, and
compelled him to abjure the Realm. Upon these events, the Bishop of Durham,
aduising only with fear and despair, fled out of the Realm; but after three
years he was again restored to the dignity of his Sea. The residue did
submit themselves to the Kings discretion; and were by him received, all to
pardon, some to gracious and dear account. For in offenses of so high nature,
pardon never suffices to assure offenders, unless by further benefits their
loyalty be bound.

Robert Duke of Normandy was busied all this time, in making preparation for
his journey into England: but his delays much abated the affections of those
who favored either his person or cause. At the length, having made up a
competent power, he committed to sea; where, his infelicities concurring with
his negligence, diverse of his ships which he had sent somewhat before him, to
assure the confederats of his approach, were set upon and surprised by the
navy of King William. After this he arrived in England, sent unto many of his
secret friends, and made his coming known unto all: but no man resorted to
him, he received no advertisement from any man; but plainly found, that by the
fortunate celeritie of King William, the heart of the conspiracy in all places
was broken. So the Duke returned into Normandy, having then good leisure, to
look into the error of his leisurely proceedings.

When the King had in this sort either wisely reconciled, or valiantly
repressed his domestical enemies; because an imperfect victory is always the
seed of a new war, he followed his brother with a mighty army, and removed
the seat of the war into Normandy. For he coniectured (as in truth it fell
out) that the Duke his brother upon his return, would presently disperse his
companies, for want of money; and for the same cause would not easily be able
to draw them together again. So his valor and his power being much aduantaged
by his sudden coming, joined to the want of foresight and preparation in the
Duke; he took in short time the Castles of Walerick and Aubemarle, with the
whole Country of Eu; the Abbacie of Mount S. Michael, Fescampe, Chereburge,
and diverse other places; which he furnished with men of Arms, and Soldiers of
assured trust.

The Duke feeling his own weakness, dealt with Philip King of France, and by
liberal promises so prevailed with him, that he descended into Normandy with
a fair Army, and bent his siege against one of those pieces which K. William
had taken. But he found it so knottie a piece of work, that in short time
wearied with hardness and hazards of the field, he fell to a capitulation with
King William, and so departed out of Normandy; receiving a certain sum of
money in regard of his charges, and conceiving that he had won honor enough,
in that no honor had been won against him.

The money that was paid to the King of France, was raised in England by this
devise. King William commanded that 20. Thousand men should be mustered in
England, and transported into Normandy, to furnish his wars against the
French. When they were conducted near to Hastings, and almost ready to be
embarked, it was signified to them from the King; that as well for their
particular safeties, as not to disfurnish the Realm of strength, whosoever
would pay 10. shillings toward the waging of Soldiers in Normandy, he might
be excused to stay at home. Among 20. Thousand scarce any was found, who was
not joyful to embrace the condition; who was not ready to redeem his
adventure with so small a sum: which being gathered together, was both a
surer and easier means to finish the wars, then if the King had still
struggeled by force of Arms. For when the French King had abandoned the
party, Duke Robert, being prepared neither with money, nor constancy of mind
to continue the war, inclined to peace; which at the last, by diligence of
friends, was concluded between the two brothers, upon these conditions.

That the Duke should yield to the King the County of Eu, the Abbey of
Fescampe, the Abbey of S. Michaels mount, Chereburge, and all other Castles and
fortifications which the King had taken.

That the King should subdue to the use of the Duke, all other Castles and
houldes, which had revolted from him in Normandy.

That the King should give to the Duke certain dignities and possessions in
England.

That the King should restore all those to their dignities and lands in
England, who had taken part with the Duke against him.

That if either of them should die without issue male, the suruiuour should
succeed in his estate. These Articles were confirmed by twelve Barons on the
Kings part, and as many on the part of the Duke; so long observed, as either of
them wanted either power or pretense to disanull them.

This peace being made, the Duke used the aid of King William, to recover the
fort of Mount S. Michael, which their brother Henry did forceably hold, for
the money which he had lent to the Duke of Normandy. Forty days they laid
siege to this castle; having no hope to carry it, but by the last necessity,
which is hunger. Within the compass of this time, as the King straggled alone
upon the shore, certain horsemen salied forth and charged upon him; of whom
three struck him together so violently with their lances, as because he could
not be driven out of his saddle, together with his saddle he was cast upon the
ground, and his horse slain upon the place, for which he had paid the same
day 15. marks. Extremity of danger (as it often happens) took from the
King all fear of danger: wherefore taking up his saddle with both his hands,
he did there with defend himself for a time. But because to stand upon defense
only is always unsure, he drew his sword, and would not depart one foot from
his saddle; but making show of brave joy, that he had nothing to trust unto but
his own valor, he defended both his saddle and himself, till rescue came.
Afterward when some of his Soldiers in blaming manner expostulated with him,
wherefore he was so obstinate to save his saddle: his answer was, that a King
should loose nothing which he can possibly save: It would have angered me,
(said he) at the very heart, that the knaves should have bragged, that they had
won the saddle from me. And this was one of his perpetual felicities, to
escape easily out of desperate dangers.

In the end Henry grew to extreme want of water, and other provisions: by
which means he was ready to fall into the hands of those, who desired to avoid
necessity to hurt him. And first he sent to the Duke his brother, to request
some liberty to take in fresh water. The Duke sent to him a tun of wine, and
granted a surcease of hostility for one day, to furnish him with water. At
this the King seemed discontented, as being a means to prolong the war. But
the Duke told him, that it had been hard to deny a brother a little water for
his necessity. Here with like wise the King relenting, they sent for their
brother Henry; and wisdom prevailing more then injuries or hate, they fell to
an agreement, That upon a day appointed, Henry should receive his money at
Roan; and that in the mean time, he should hold the country of Constantine
in morgage. The King enterteined with pay many of his brother Henry's
soldiers; especially he received those who overthrew him, to a very near
degree of favor. And thus all parties ordered their ambition with great
modesty; the custom of former wars running in a course of more humanity,
then since they have done.

The King was the more desirous to perfect these agreements of Peace, for that
Malcolme King of Scots (as Princes often times make use of the contentions of
their neighbors) took occasion upon these confusions, to enterprise upon the
parts of England which confined upon him. So as he invaded Northumberland, made
great spoil, took much prey, carried away many prisoners; whose calamity was
the more miserable, for that they were to endure servitude in a hard Country.
For this cause the King with his accustomed celeritie returned into England,
accompanied with the Duke of Normandy his brother; and led a mighty army
against the Scots by land, and sent also a navy to infest them by sea. But by
a sudden and stiff storm, by a hideous confusion of all ill disposed weather,
his ships were cruelly crushed; and having long wrought against the violence
and rage of the tempest, were in the end dispersed, and diverse of them cast
away. Many of his soldiers also perished, partly by penury and want, and
partly by the evil qualitied air.

Notwithstanding the Scots, knowing the King of England to be an enemy mighty
and resolute, began to waver in their assurance; framing fearful opinions, of
the number, valor and experience of his army. Hereupon some ouertures of
Peace were made; the Scots expecting that the King, by reason of his late
losses, would be the more moderate in his demands. But he then showed himself
most resolute and firm; following his natural custom, not to yield to any
difficulty. King Malcolme coniecturing that such confidence could not be
without good cause, consented at the last to these conditions.

That King Malcolme should make a certain satisfaction for the spoils which
he had done in England.

That King William should resto^re to him certain lands in England.

That K. Malcolme should do homage to King William.

Now the day was come wherein Henry was appointed to receive his money at
Roan, from the Duke of Normandy. But as affairs of Princes have great
variations, so they are not always constant in their Counsels. And so the
Duke, carried by his occasions, and ready to lay down his faith and word more
to the train of times, then to the preservation of his honor; instead of
paying the money, committed his brother Henry to prison: from whence he could
not be released, until he renounced the County of Constantine, and bound
himself by oath never to claim any thing in Normandy.

Henry complained hereof to Philip King of France; who gave him a fair
enterteinement in his Court, but was content rather to feed then finish the
contention: either expecting thereby some opportunity to himself, or else the
opinion of his own greatness not suffering him to fear, that others might
grow to have fortune against him. Henry had not long remained in the Court of
France, but a Normane Knight named Hacharde conveyed him disguised into
Normandy; where the Castle of Damfronc was delivered unto him; and in short
time after he gate all the Country of Passays, and a good part of
Constantine; either without resistance, or without difficulty and peril.

Hereupon the Duke levied his forces, and earnestly assayed to recover
Damfronc: but then he found that his brother Henry was secretly, yet surely
underset by the king of England. Hereupon, incensed with the fury of an
iniuried mind, he exclaimed against his brother of England, and almost
proclaimed him a violater of his league. On the otherside, the King of England
justified his action, for that he was both a means and a party to the
agreement: and therefore stood bound in honor, not only to urge, but to
enforce performance. So the flame brake forth more furious then it was before,
and over went King William with an able army; where he found the Duke also in
good condition of strength commanding the field. And albeit in so near
approach of two mighty enemies, equal both in ambition and power, it is hard
to contain men of service; yet was nothing executed between them, but
certain light skirmishes, and surprizements of some places of defense. In the
end, the King hearing of new troubles in England, and the Duke finding himself
unable either to prevail with few soldiers, or to maintain many, and both
distrusting to put a speedy end to the war; they were easily drawn to
capitulations of peace. And thus ended the contention between these brethren;
who until this time had continued like the waves of the Sea, always in
motion, and one beating against the other.

Besides these businesses which befell the King, against his Nobility, against
the Duke of Normandy his brother, and against the King and nation of the
Scots; the Welshmen also (who always struggled for liberty and revenge)
perceiving that the King was often absent, and much entangled with hostile
affairs; enforced the favor of that advantage, to free themselves from
subjection of the English, and happily to enlarge or enrich themselves upon
them. So having both desire and opportunity, they wanted not means to
assemble in arms, to expel the English that were amongst them, and to cast
down the Castles erected in their Country, as the principal yoakes of their
subjection. Afterward, rising in boldness with success, they made diverse
incursions upon the bordering parts of England; spoiled the City of Gloucester,
and exercised all those outrages, which uncivil people, incensed both with
want and with hate do not usually omit. But being a company neither in
discipline nor pay, raw and unarmed, they proceeded more like to robbers then
to Soldiers; having no intention to vanquish, but to spoil.

Hereupon the King twice in person invaded Wales, but with small show of
success for the present. For the Welsh-enemies scattered the war, by
dividing themselves into small companies, and retiring into the mountains and
woods, and other places of natural defense. Here they travailed the King with
a fugitive fight; flying when they were pursued, and houering upon him when
they were given over: cutting off many straggling soldiers, and taking some
carriages, which in those rough places could not easily either be passed, or
defended. And so by shifting always into places of advantage, they sought at
one time, both to avoid fighting, and to hinder the King from doing any thing
of importance. At the last, the King having made sufficient proof how vain it
is, to follow a light footed enemy with a heavy Army, pestered with train
of carriage, in places where the service of horsemen is almost unprofitable; he
gave over the pursuit, and retired into England. But first he repaired those
Castles which the Welsh had destroyed, and built new Castles also upon the
frontiers and within the bosom of Wales; which he furnished with so sure
garrisons, as might suffice with favor of opportunity, either to weary or
consume the enemies.

And indeed the Welsh being by this means, always exercised, and daily
wasted; declined in short time, no less to cowardice then to weariness and
wants; so as Hugh Earl of Chester, and Hugh Earl of Shrewesbury, dispossessed
them of the Isle of Anglesey, which they had surprised not long before. The
Welsh that were there taken, were very hardly, or rather unmercifully and
cruelly entreated; Some had their eyes pulled out, some their hands cut off,
some their arms, some their noses, some their genitalles. An aged Priest named
Kenredus, who had been a chief directer of the common affairs, was drawn out
of a Church whereinto he had fled, had one of his eyes pulled out, and his
tongue torn from his throat. I make no doubt but these seuerities were used
against them, upon some savage outrages which they had done; wherein the less
compassion was borne to their calamities, for the cowardice which they showed
in their own defense.

Shortly after, Magnus King of Norway the son of Olaus, the son of Harold
Harfager, having brought the Isles of Orkeney under his dominion, subdued also
from the Welsh the Isle of Man; and enterprised upon the Isle of Anglesey
against the English. But at his landing he was encountered by the Earl of
Shrewsbury and the Earl of Chester; in which fight the Norwegians were
vanquished and repelled, but the Earl of Shrewsbury with too brave boldness
lost his life: leaving his honorable both actions and end as an excellent
ornament to his posterity. Afterward the Earl of Chester led an army into
Wales; and found the people so consumed by the English garrisons, that he easily
reduced many to profess obedience to the Crown of England; and disabled
others, having no leaders of experience and valor, for showing their faces as
enemies in the field.

Also upon some variances which did rise between Justinius, son to Gurguntus,
Earl of Glamorgane and Morganock; and Rhesus son to Theodore Prince of
Southwales: Justinius, not of power to maintain either his right or his will,
sent Aeneas, son to Genidorus, sometimes Lord of Demetia, to crave aid in
England. This he obtained, not only readily, but in greater measure then the
service did require. Robert Fitzhamond was general Commander of the English
army; who encountered Rhesus at a place called Blackhill; and in that fight
Rhesus was slain: after whose death the name of King ceased in Wales. Then
Justinius failing, and happily not able to perform such conditions as in
necessity he had assured, Fitzhamond turned his forces against him; chased
the Welsh out of the champaine Country, and divided the same among his
principal Gentlemen. These erected Castles, in places convenient for their
mutual aid; and so well defended themselves, that they left the Country to
their posterity. Thus was the Lordship of Glamorgane and Morganock, which
contains 27. miles in length, and 22. in breadth, subdued to the English;
giving example how dangerous it is for any people, to call in a greater force
of strangers to their aid, then being victorious, they may easily be able to
limit and restrain. This being a Lordship marcher, has enjoyed royal
liberties, since the time wherein it was first subdued. It has acknowledged
service and obedience only to the Crown. It has had the trial of all
actions, as well real as personal, and also held Pleas of the Crown; with
authority to pardon all offenses, Treason only excepted.

Whilst the King was entertained with these chases, rather then wars in
Wales, he lay at Gloucester many times; as not esteeming that his presence
should always be necessary, and yet not far off if occasion should require.
To this place Malcolme King of Scots came unto him, upon an honorable
visitation. But the King having conceived some displeasure against him, refused
to admit him to his presence. Hereupon King Malcolme, full of fury and
disdain, returned into Scotland, assembled an army, enuaded Northumberland,
harrased and spoiled a great part thereof; having done the like four times
before. Such is the heat of hate in minds that are mighty; who seldom hold
it any breach of Justice, to be revenged of him who offers dishonor. When he
was come near to Alnewicke, and his soldiers were much pestered with prey, (a
notable impediment both for readiness and resolution to fight) he was set
upon both suddenly and sharply by Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland; his
troops hewn in pieces, himself together with his eleest son Edward slain.
The third day ensuing, Margaret wife to King Malcolme, and sister to Edgar
Adeling, not able to bear so sad and heavy a blow of fortune, ended also her
life. She was famous for piety and for modesty, two excellent endowments of
that Sex. By her persuasion Malcolme made a law, that whereas by a former law
made by King Eugenius, the Lord enjoyed the first night with any new married
woman within his dominion; the husband might redeem that abuse by payment of
half a mark of silver.

King Malcolme being slain, Dunwald his brother usurped the kingdom; but
after a few days he was dispossessed thereof by Duncane, bastard son to K.
Malcolme. In this action Duncane was chiefly supported by the King of England;
with whom he had remained in hostage, and to whom he had made his submission
by oath. And because the Scots did either see or suspect that he bare a
favorable affection to the English, they would not receive him for their King,
but under promise that he should not entertain any English or Normane, either
in place of service, or as a follower at large. The year next following
Duncane was slain, and Dunwald was again possessed of the kingdom. Hereupon
King William sent Clito Edgar with an army into Scotland; by whose means
Dunwald was dispoiled again of his Kingdom, and Edgar son to King Malcolme
advanced to his fathers estate.

These were the principal adventures by Arms which concerned England, during
the reign of K. William the second: wherein he so behaved himself, that he
did worthily win an opinion to be one, who both knew and durst. In all
actions he esteemed himself greatly dishonored, if he were not both in
Arms with the first, and with the forwardest in fight; doing double service,
as well by example, as by direction: In which heat of valor, the favor of
his Fortune excused many of his attempts from the blame of rashness. He was
oftentimes most constant, or rather obstinate in pursuing those purposes, which
with small deliberation he undertook.

At a certain time when he was in hunting within the new Forest, he received
advertisement, that Man's was surprised by Helie, Count de la Flesch, who
pretended title thereto in right of his wife: that he was aided in this
enterprise by Fouques d' Angiers, an ancient enemy to the Dukes of Normandy:
and that the castle which held good for the King, must also be rendered, if in
very short time it were not relieved. Upon these news, as if he had been in
the heat of a chase, he presently turned his horse; and his passion not staying
to consult with reason, in great haste road toward the Sea. And when he was
advised by some to stay a time, and take with him such forces as the importance
of the service did require; with a heart resolute and violent voice he
answered, That they who loved him, would not fail to follow; and that if no
man else would stir, he alone would relieve Man's.

When he came to Dortmouth, he commanded ships to be brought for his passage.
The winds were then both contrary and stiff, and the Sea swelled exceeding
big; for which cause the Shipmasters persuaded him to await a more favorable
season, and not to cast himself upon the miserable mercy of that storm.
Notwithstanding the King, whose fear was always least when dangers were
greatest, mounted upon Shipboard, and commanded them to put to Sea; affirming,
That it was no Princelike mind to break a journey for foulness of weather;
and that he never heard of any King that had been drowned. And so for that the
chief point of rescue rested in expedition, he presently committed to Sea;
taking few with him, and leaving order that others should follow. After he had
long wrastled with the winds and waves, he arrived in France, where running on
in the humor of his courage and forwardness, he acquitted himself with
greater honor then at any time before. So effectual is celeritie for the
benefit of a service, that oftentimes it more avails, then either multitude
or courage of Soldiers.

In this expedition, Helie the principal commander against him was taken. And
when he was brought to the Kings presence, the King said pleasantly unto him:
Ah master! in faith I have you now; and I hope I shall be able to keep you in
quiet. Then he: It is true indeed, the success of my attempts have not been
answerable to the resolution of my mind; by mere adventure now you have me:
but if I were at liberty again, I do better know what I had to do, and
would not so easily be h^ld in quiet. The King with a brave scorn replied: I
see thou art but a foolish knave; unable to use, either thy liberty or thy
restreint aright. But go thy ways, make good thy confidence: I set thee free
and at liberty again; use thy advantage, and do thy worst. Helie daunted
more with this high courage, then before he had bin with the victory of the
King, submitted himself, and made his peace under such conditions as it
pleased the King to lay upon him* Certainly this magnanimous example has
seldom bin equalled, never excelled by those, who are admired for the
principal worthies of the world.

He little favored flatterers; the flies which blow corruption upon sweetest
virtues; the myrie dogs of the Court, who defile Princes with fawning on them;
who commonly are fatted with bread which is made with the tears of miserable
people. He was most firm (...)* (...). R^ pu^chra lingua cui (...) (...).
and assured in his word: and to those who did otherwise advise him, he would
say; That God did stand obliged by his word.

He is commended for his manly mercy; in releasing prisoners, and in pardoning
offenses of highest quality: which to a people that then lived under a Law,
both rigorous, and almost arbitrarie, and (as well for the novelty as for the
uncertainty thereof) in a manner unknown, was a most high valued virtue. He
not only pardoned many great offenders, but partly by gifts, and partly by
aduancements he knit them most assuredly unto him. And therefore although in
the beginning of his reign, most of the Nobility, and many Gentlemen of best
quality and rancks endeavored to displace him, and to set up Robert his elder
brother for their King; yet does it not appear, either that any severity was
executed upon them, or that afterward they were dangerous unto him.
Notwithstanding in some actions he was noted of cruelty, or at the least of
sharpness and severity in justice. For albeit he promised to the English,
whilst his first fears and iealousies continued, that they should enjoy free
liberty of hunting; yet did he afterward so severely restrain it, that the
penalty for killing a Dear was death.

Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, after he had defeated the Scots and
slain Malcolme their King, not finding himself either honored or respected
according to his service; first refrained, and afterward refused to come unto
the Court. Hereupon the King, ouerruled indifferently with suspicion and hate,
(two violent passions in minds placed in authority) sent his brother Henry
with an army against him; who spoiled the Country, took the Earl, and
committed him to prison. Then was he charged with diverse crimes, which were
sufficient (although but surmised) to undo an Innocent. Many examinations were
also made, but for appearance only and terror, not to any bottom or depth.
The especial matter objected against him was, for contriuing to despoyle the
King both of life and state, and to set up Stephen Albamerle his Aunts son
for King. And thus it often happens, that great deserts are occasions to men
of their destruction; either because Princes generally love not those to whom
they are exceedingly beholding, or else for that thereby men do grow proud,
insolent, disdainefull, bold, immoderate both in expectation and demand,
discontented, impatient if they be not satisfied, and apt to break forth into
dangerous attempts.

Of those who any ways declared themselves in his favor or defense, some were
despoiled of their goods, some were banished the Realm; others were punished
with loss of their eyes, or of their ears, or of some other part of their
body. William d'Owe was accused in a Council holden at Salisbury, to be a
complice of this Treason. And albeit he challenged his accuser to the combat,
yet his eyes were pulled out, and his stones cut off by commandment of the
King. And yet some authors affirm, that he was overcome in combat before.
For the same cause the King commanded William Aluerie to be hanged; a man of
goodly personage and modest behavior; the Kings ^ewer, his Aunts son, and
hi^ godfather. Before his execution he desired to be whipped through many
Churches in London: he distributed his garments to the poor, and bloodied the
street as he went, with often kneeling upon the stones. At the time of his
death he took it upon the charge of his soul, that he was clear of the
offense for which he suffered. And so committing his innocence to God, and to
the world his complaints, he submitted himself to the Executioners hands:
leaving an opinion in some, a suspicion in many, that others also died without
desert. For the king gave an easy ear to any man, that would appeach others
for his advantage: whereby it sometimes happened, that offenders were acquitted
by accusing innocents.

He was liberal above measure; either in regard of his own abilities, or of
the worthiness of the receivers. Especially he was bountiful (...). Milites*
ditate, reliquos omnes spernite. Seuerus apud Dionem.
(if that term may be applied to immoderate lauishing) to men of war: for
which cause many resorted to him from far Countries for entertainment. To
win and retain the favor of these, he much impouerished his peaceable
people. From many he took without justice, to give to others without desert:
esteeming it no unequal dealing, that the money of the one, should be
adventured and expended with the blood of the other.

He much exceeded in sumptuousnes of diet and of apparel, wherewith great men
use to dazel the eyes of the people: both which ways he esteemed the goodness
of things, by their price. It is reported, that when his Chamberlain upon a
certain morning brought him a new pair of hose, the King demanded what they
cost; and the Chamberlain answered, three shillings. Hereat the King grew
impatient, and said: What? heavy beast! do thou take these to be convenient
hose for a King? Away beggar, and bring me other of a better price. Then the
Chamberlain departed and brought a far worse pair of hose (for a better
could not at that time be found) and told the king that they cost a mark. The
king not only allowed them for fine enough, but commended them also as
exceeding fit. Assuredly this immoderate excess of a King is now far
exceeded by many base shifting unthrifts.

In building his expenses were very great. He repaired the City and Castle of
Caerlile, which had been wasted by the Danes 200. years before. He finished
New castle upon Tine. Many other Castles he erected or repaired upon the
frontiers of Scotland; many also upon the frontiers and within the very breast
of Wales. He much enlarged the Tower of London, and environed it with a new
wall. He also built the great Hall at Westminster, which is 270. foot in
length, and 74. foot in breadth. And when many did admire the vast largenes
thereof, he would say unto them, that it was but a bed chamber, but a closet,
in comparison of that which he intended to build. And accordingly he laid the
foundation of another Hall, which stretched from the River Thames to the Kings
high street: the further erection whereof, with diverse other heroical
enterprises, ceased together with his life.

Thus partly by reason of his infinite plots and inventions, and partly by his
disorders and unbridled liberalities, he always lived at great charges and
expenses; which whilst the large treasure lasted which his father left him,
were borne without grieuance to the subjects: But when that was once drained,
he was reduced to seek money by extraordinary means. So, many hard taxes were
laidvpon the people, partly for supply to his own necessities, and partly to
imitate the policy of his father; that the people being busied how to live,
should retain small either leisure or means to contriue innouations. For this
cause he was supposed, upon purpose to have enterprised many actions of charge;
that thereby he might have color to impose, both employments and taxations
upon the people.

And because the riches of the clergy at that time were not only an eyesore
unto many, but esteemed also by some, to be very far above due proportion;
He often fleeced them of great sums of money. For which cause it is evident,
that the writers of that age (who were for the most part Clergie*men) did both
generally enueigh against him, and much deprave his particular actions. He
withheld his annual payment to the Sea of Rome, upon occasion of a Schism
between Vrbane at Rome, and Clement at Rauenna. He claimed the inuestiture of
Prelates to be his right: He forbade Appeals and intercourse to Rome: For
which and other like causes he had a very great contention with the Clergy of
his Realm, especially with Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury.

The seeds of this contention were cast, when Anselme was first received to
his Sea. For at that time two did strive for the Papacy of Rome; Vrbanus and
Guibert, called Clement the third: some Christian States favoring the one, and
some the other. King William inclined to Clement the third, and with him the
Realm generally went; but Anselme did fully go with Vrbane; making so his
condition before he did consent to accept his dignity.

When he was elected and before his consecration, the King demanded of him,
that such lands of the Church of Canterbury as the King had given to his
friends since the death of Lanfranck, might still be held by them as their
lawful right: but to this Anselme would in no case agree. Hereupon the King
stayed his consecration a certain time; but at length by importunity of the
people he was content to receive his homage, and to give way to his
consecration. Not long after, the Archbishop desired license of the king to go
to Rome, to receive his Pall; which when the King refused to grant, he appealed
to the Sea of Rome. Now this was the first Appeal that ever before had been
made in England. For Appeals were not here in ordinary use, until after this
time, under the reign of King Stephen; when Henry Bishop of Wint. being the
Popes Legate, brought them in.

Wherefore the King offended with this novelty, charged Anselme with breach of
his fealty and oath. Anselme answered, that this was to be referred to the
judgment of a Council, whether it be a breach of allegiance to a terrene
Prince, if a man appeal to the Vicar of Christ. The King alleged; that the
custom of his Realm admitted no appeal from the king; that supreme appeal
was a most principal mark of Majesty, because no appeal can be made but to
a superior; that therefore the Archbishop by appealing from him, denied his
Souereignty, derogated from the dignity of his Crown, and subjected both him
and that to another Prince, to whom as to a superior he did appeal; That
herein he was an enemy and a Traitor to him and to the State. Anselme
replied, that this question was determined by our Lord, who taught us what
allegiance is due to the Pope, where he says; Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, etc. And again; To thee will I give the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. And again in general; He that hears you
hears me, and who despises you despises me. And again, He that touches
you, touches the apple of my eye. But for the allegiance due to the King, he
says; Give to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar, and to God what
pertains to God. To this the king finally said; That having made themselves
Masters to interpret and give sense to the Scriptures, it was easy to
maintain by them whatsoever they desired or did; it was easy for them to
burst their ambition with their swelling greatness. But well he was assured,
that CHRIST intended not to dissolve orders for Civil government, to ruin
kingdoms, to embase authority and right of Kings, by means of his Church: this
right of a King he had, and this right he would maintain.

In this contention few of the Bishops did openly take part with Anselme; but
some, and especially the Bishop of Durhame, did directly declare against him.
The residue, when he asked their advise, would answer him, That he was wise
enough, and knew what was best for him to do; as for them, they neither durst
nor would stand against their Lord. By assistance of these the King purposed to
deprive Anselme, and to expel him out of the Realm. But Anselme auowed, That
as he was ready to depart the Realm, so would he take his authority with him,
though he took nothing else.

Now the King had sent two messengers to Pope Vrbane at Rome, to entreat him to
send the Pall to the King; to be disposed by him as he should think fit. These
messengers were by this time returned; and with them came Guibert the Popes
Legate, who brought the Pall. The Legate went first privily to the King, and
promised that if Vrbane should be received for Pope in England, the King should
obtain of him whatsoever he would. The King required that Anselme might be
removed. The Legate answered, that it could not be, that such a man without
just cause should be removed; Notwithstanding some other things being granted
to the King, Vrbane was declared to be lawful Pope; and the King was content
to swallow down that mo^sel, which had been so unpleasant for him to champe
on. The Pall was carried to Anselme with great pomp, in a vessel of silver;
and he came forth bare footed, in his Priestly Vestments to meet and to
receive it.

The year next following the King invaded Wales; where he repressed the
rebellious enemies, and returned victorious. Anselme prepared to go unto him,
to salute him, to congratulate his good success. But the King prevented him by
messengers, who laid to his charge, both the small number, and evil
appointment of the Soldiers, which he sent to that service; and therefore
warned him to appear at the Court, to make his answer. Happily also the King
was incensed by matters more light; but taken in the worst part, as it commonly
falls out in suspicions and quarrels. At the day appointed Anselme appeared,
but avoided his answer by appealing to the Pope: for prosecution whereof, he
made suit for the Kings license to go to Rome. The King said as before; That
this appeal was against the custom of the Realm, and against the dignity of
his Crown, to both which Anselme had sworn. Anselme answered, That he was
sworn to neither of them, but so far as they were consonant to the Laws of
GOD, and to the rules of equity and right. The King replied, That no
limitation being expressed, it was not reasonable that upon his own conceit of
piety or equity, he should slip out of the band of his oath. Thus was the
contention on both sides obstinately maintained; and for a long time Anselme
was commanded to attend the Court.

At the last he was released, but under express charge, that he should not
depart out of the Realm; or if he did, that it should never be lawful for him
to return. Anselme departed from the Court, went straight to Dover, with
purpose to pass the Seas into France. Here he was either awaited or overtaken
by William Warlewast the Kings officer; not to stay him from his passage, but
to rifle him of all that he had. Others also were appointed to seize his goods
in other places, and to convert the profits of his Archbishopricke to the use
of the King; making a bare allowance to the Monks, of meat, drink and
clothing. So the Archbishop crossed the Seas into France, rested a while at
Lions, and then travailed over the Alps to Rome; where he was enterteined by
Pope Vrbane, with more then ordinary ceremonies of honor.

And first the Pope wrote to the king of England on the behalf of Anselme; and
retained him in his Palace until he should receive answer from the king. When
the messenger was returned with such answer as Anselme did not like, he
desired of the Pope to be discharged of his dignity; which he had found (he
said) a wearisome stage, whereon he played a part much against his will. But
hereto the Pope would in no case agree; charging him upon virtue of his
obedience, That wheresoever he went, he should bear both the name and honor
of Archbishop of Canterbury. As for these matters, (said he) we shall
sufficiently provide for them at the next Council, where your self shall be
present.

When the Council was assembled, Anselme Concilium Baronense.
fate on the outside of the Bishops; but the Pope called him up, and placed him
at his right foot with these words; Includamus hunc in orb nostro, tanquam
alterius orbis Papam. Afterward in all general Councels, the Archb. of
Canterbury took the place. In this Council the points of difference between
the Greek and Latin Churches were strongly debated; especially concerning the
proceeding of the Holy Ghost, and for leauened bread in the administration of
the Eucharist: wherein Anselme showed such deep learning, weight of judgment,
and edge of wit, that he approached nearer admiration then applause. These
matters determined, complaints were brought against the King of England, and
the Pope is said to have been ready to excommunicate him: but Anselme kneeled
before the Pope, and obtained for the King a longer term. The Pope was then at
great contention with Henry the fourth Emperor, who had been excommunicated
before by Hildebrand, and was then again excommunicate by Vrbane: being the
first Christian Prince with Sovereign power, who was ever excommunicate by any
Pope. And for that Vrbane at that time had his hands full against the Emperor,
for that also he would not make the example too odious at the first, he was
willing enough to forbear excommunication against the King. And the rather for
that Anselme had intelligence from his friends in England, that the
excommunication would not be regarded. Hereupon, accompting it a sufficient
declaration of his power for the time, to have menaced excommunication, he
caused a general decree to be made; That as well all Lay-persons who should
give inuestiture of Churches, as those of the Clergy who should be so
invested; also those who should yield themselves in subjection to Laymen for
Ecclesiastical livings, should be excommunicate.

This general sentence was pronounced. The Pope also signified by letters to
the King, that if he would avoid particular proceeding against himself, he
should forth with restore Anselme to the exercise of his Office in his Church,
and to all the goods and possessions perteining thereto. Hereupon the King sent
messengers to the Pope, who declared unto him; That their great Master the King
marueiled not a little, wherefore he should so sharply urge the restitution of
Anselme; seeing it was expressly told him, That if he departed out of England
without license, he should expect no other usage. Well said the Pope, Have you
no other cause against Anselme, but that he has appealed to the Apostolical
Sea, and without license of your King has travailed thither? They answered,
No. And have you taken all this pains (said he) have you travailed thus far
to tell me this? Go tell your Lord, if he will not be excommunicate, that he
presently restore Anselme to his Sea: And see that you bring me answer hereof
the next Council, which shall be in the third week after Easter: make haste,
and look to your term, lest I cause you to be hanged for your tarryance.

The messenger was herewith much abashed; yet collecting himself, he desired
private audience of the Pope: affirming, that he had some secret instructions
from the King to impart unto him. What this secret was it is unknown.
Whatsoever it was, a longer day was obtained for the King, until Michaelmas
then next ensuing. And when that day was come, albeit complaints were renewed,
yet was nothing done against the King. The Archb. seeing the small assurance of
the Pope, returned to Lions in France* and there remained until the death,
first of Pope Vrbane, and afterward of the king; which was almost the space of
3. years.

By this great conflict the king lost the hearts of many of the Clergy; but
his displeasure had seasoned revenge with contentment: and finding himself
sufficient, both in courage and means to bear out his actions, he became many
other ways heavy unto them. When any Bishopric or Monastery fell void, he
kept them vacant a long time in his hands, and applied the profits to himself:
At the last he would set them to open sale, and receive him for Prelate, who
would give for them the greatest price. Herehence two great inconveniences did
ensue; the best places were furnished with men of least sufficiency and worth;
and no man hoping to rise by desert, the general endeavor for virtue and
knowledge were laid aside: the direct way to advancement, was by plain
purchase from the king.

In this seazing and farming and marchandizing of Church-liuings, one Ranulph,
commonly called the Kings Chapleine, was a great agent for the King. He was a
man of fair use of speech, and lively in wit, which he made servants to
licentious designs; but both in birth and behavior base, and shameless in
dishonestie; a very bawd to all the Kings purposes and desires. He could be
so evil as he li^ted, and listed no less then was to his advantage. The King
would often laugh at him, and say; that he was a notable fellow to compass
matters for a King. And yet besides more then ordinary favor of countenance,
the King advanced him, first to be his Chancellor, and afterward to be Bishop
of Duresme. By his advise, so soon as any Church fell void, an Inuentory was
made of all the goods that were found, as if they should be preserved for the
next successor; and then they were committed to the custody of the King, but
never restored to the Church again. So the next incumbent received his Church
naked and bare, notwithstanding that he paid a good price for it. From this
King the use is said to have first risen in England, that the Kings succeeding
had the Temporalties of Bishops Seas so long as they remained void. He also
set the first enformers to work, and for small transgressions appointed great
penalties. He is also reported to have been the first King of this Realm, who
restreined his subjects from ranging into foreign Countries without license.

And yet what did the King by this sale of Church dignities, but that which was
most frequent in other places? For in other places also few attained to such
dignities freely. The difference was this: here the money was received by the
King, there by favorites or inferior officers: here it was expended in the
public uses of the State; there to private and many times odious enrichments:
this seems the more easy, that the more extreme pressure, as done by more
hungry and degenerous persons: this may be esteemed by some the more base,
but assuredly it was the better dealing. And further, it is evident that the
King did freely advance many excellent persons to principal dignities in the
Church; and especially Anselme to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, who was
so unwilling to accept that honor, that the King had much to do to thrust it
upon him. And the rather to enduce him, he gave him wholly the city of
Canterbury, which his predecessors had held but at the pleasure of the King.
This Anselme was one whose learned labors do plainly testify, how little
his spirits were fed with the fulsome fumes of surfeting and ease; which to
many others, together with their bodies, do fatten and engrosse their minds.
He so detested singularity, that he accounted it the sin which threw Angels
out of Heaven, and man out of Paradise. This detestation of singularity might
happily incline him to the other extreme; to adhere over lightly to some common
received errors. It is attributed to him that he would often wish, to be
rather in hell without sin, then with sin in heaven.

The king also advanced Robert Bloet, to the Bishopric of Lincoln: a man
whose wisdom was highly graced, with goodly personage, and good delivery of
speech: from whom notwithstanding the king afterward wiped five thousand
marks. He also freely received Hugh de Floriaco, a man for his virtue much
esteemed, to be Abbot of the Monastery of S. Augustines in Canterbury; and
likewise diverse others to other Ecclesiastical preferments: whereby I am
confirmed in opinion, that many odious imputations against the king, were
either altogether invented, or much enlarged above the truth.

It happened upon auoidance of a certain Monastery, that two Monks went to
the king, either of them contending, as well by friends, as by large offer of
purse, to procure to be made Abbot of the place. The ^ing espying a third Monk
standing by, who came with the other two, either to accompany them, or to
obtain some inferior place under him that should prevail, demanded of him
what he would give? The Monk answered, that he had small means and less
mind, to purchase that or any other dignity of the Church: For with that
intention did he first betake himself to a religious life, that holding riches
and honor (the two beauties of the world) in contempt, he might more freely
and quietly dispose himself to the service of God. The King replied, that he
judged him most worthy of that preferment; and therefore first offered it unto
him, then entreated, and lastly enjoined him to accept it. Assuredly, the force
of virtue is such, that often times we honor it in others, even when we
little esteem it in our selves.

He is charged with some actions and speeches tending to profaneness. The
Jews at Roan so prevailed with him by gifts, that they drew him to reprehend
one who had forsaken their superstition. At London a disputation was appointed
between certain Christians and Jews. The Jews a little before the day
prefixed, brought to the King a rich present; At which time he encouraged them
(no doubt but by the way of ioylitie and mirth) to acquit themselves like tall
fellows, and if they prevailed by plain strength of truth, he swear (as was
his usual) by S. Lukes face, that he would become one of their Sect. These
things happily not much spoken amiss, might easily be depraved by report.

It is affirmed of him that he so much exceeded in bodily lust, (then which
nothing makes a man more contemptible) that thereby he seemed to decline from
the Majesty of a Prince. This vice did cast a great mist over his glory. And
yet neither is it infrequent in lusty bodies, placed in a State both prosperous
and high, neither can the pleasure of one man that way extend it self to the
injury of many. The worst was, that after his example, many Haec conditio
principium vt quicquid faciant praecipere videantur. Quint. declam. 4.
others did follow licentious traces; examples of Princes being always of
greater force then their Laws, to induce the people to good or to evil. As
the King turned the prosperity of his actions to serve his vanities and
delights, so his followers by felicity became insolent, and let go at
adventure serious affairs; not receiving into their thoughts any other
impression then of bravery and pleasure. And they who were greatest in the
counsels and favors of the King, respected all things no further, then as
they were aduantageable to themselves.

Then rose up costly apparel, and dainty fare, two assured tokens of a
diseased State; the one the vainest, the other the grossest prodigality that
can be. Then was brought into use the laying out of hair, strange fashions and
disguisings in attire, and all delicacies pertaining to the body. Then were
practiced nice treadings, lascivious looks, and other dissolute and wanton
behavior: many effeminate persons did accompany the Court, by whose immodest
demeanor the majesty of that place was much embased. From hence also the
poison brake forth, first into the city, and after wards into other places of
the Realm; for as in fishes, so in families, and so likewise in States,
putrefaction commonly begins at the head.

IN the second year of this kings reign Lanfranck Archb. of Canterbury ended
his life: A man highly esteemed, with good men, for his learning and
integrity; with great men, for his diligence and discretion to sound deeply
into affairs; with the common people for his moderate and modest behavior.
King William the first did honor and embrace him with great respect, and was
much guided by his advise. He was as a Protector to King William the second.
When he went to Rome to obtain his Pall, the Pope rose from his chair,
stepped forwards to meet him, and with many ceremonies of courtesy did
enterteine him. Then he returned to his seat, and said: Now Lanfrancke, I have
done to thee what is due to thy virtue, come thou and do to me what
apperteineth to my place. He was an earnest enemy to all vices, especially to
avarice and pride, the two banes of all virtues. He renewed the great Church of
Canterbury, and enriched it with 25. mannours. He repaired the walls of that
City, and built two Hospitals therein; one of S. John, the other
Harlebaldowne. He gave a thousand marks toward the repairing and enlarging of
the Abbey of S. Albones, and procured Redbourne to be restored thereto. By his
Testament he gave to the same Church 1000. pounds, besides many rich
ornaments. He took great pains in purging ancient Authors from such
corruptions as had crept into them: diverse works also he wrote of his own,
but the greatest part of them are perished. Thus he lived in honor, and died
with fame; his time employed in honest studies and exercises, his goods to good
and Religious uses.

The same year a strange and great earthquake happened throughout all the
Realm; after which ensued a great scarciti^ of fruit, and a late harvest of
corn, so as much grain was not fully ripe at the end of November.

In the fourth year of the reign of his King, a strong stroke of lightning
made a hole in the Abbey steeple at Winchelscombe, near to the top; rent one
of the beams of the Church, brake one of the legs of the Crucifixe, cast
down the head thereof, together with the Image of the Virgin Marie that was
placed by it: Herewith a thick smoke darkened the Church, and breathed forth
a marvelous stincke, which annoyed the Church a long time after. In the same
year a mighty wind from the Southwest did prostrate 606. houses in London:
And breaking into the Church of S. Mary Bow in Cheap, slew two men with some
part of the ruins which it made, raised the roof of the Church, and carried
many of the beams on such a height, that in the fall six of them, being 27. or
28. foot in length, were driven so deep into the ground (the streets not then
paued with stone) that not above 4. foot remained in sight: and so they stood,
in such order and rank as the workmen had placed them upon the Church. The
parts under the earth were never raised, but so much was cut away as did
appear above the ground; because it was an impediment for passage. The Tower
of London at the same time was also broken, and much other harm done.

The next year Osmund Bishop of Salisbury finished the Cathedral Church of
old Salisburie; and the fifth day after the Consecration, the steeple thereof
was fired with lightning.

The year following much rain fell, and so great frosts ensued, that rivers
were passable with laden carts.

The year next ensuing was exceeding remarkable both for the number and
fashion of gliding Stars, which seemed to dash together in manner of a
conflict.

About this time Pope Vrbane assembled a Council at Cleremont in Auergne,
wherein he exhorted Christian Princes to join in action for recovery of
Palestine, commonly called The Holy Land, out of the servile possession of the
Saracenes. This motion was first set on foot, and afterward pursued by Peter
the Heremite of Amiens; which falling in an age both active and Religious, was
so generally embraced, as it drew 300000. men to assemble together from diverse
Countries; and that with such sober and harmless behavior, that they seemed
rather Pilgrims then Soldiers. Among others, Robert Duke of Normandy
addressed himself to this Voyage; and to furnish his expenses therein, he
laid his Duchy of Normandy to gage to his brother of England for 6666. li.
or as other Authors report, for 13600. pounds of Silver.

This money was taken up part by imposition, and part by loan, of the most
wealthy inhabitants within the Realm: But especially the charge was laid upon
religious persons, for that it was to furnish a religious war. When many
Bishops and Abbots complained, that they were not able to satisfy such sums
of money as the King demanded of them, unless they should sell the Chalices and
silver vessels which pertained to their Churches. Nay answered the King, you
may better make means with the silver and gold which vainly you have wrapped
about dead men's bones; meaning thereby their rich Relickes and Shrines.

The year following a blasing star appeared, for the space of fifteen days
together; the greatest bush whereof pointed toward the East, and the lesser
toward the West. Gliding stars were often seen, which seemed to dart one
against another. The people began (as to minds fearful all fancies seem
both weighty and true) to make hard constructions of these unusual sights;
supposing that the heavens did threaten them, not accustomed to show it self
so disposed, but toward some variation.

In the 13. year of his reign, the Sea surmounted his usual bounds, in
diverse parts of England and Scotland: whereby not only fields, but many
villages, castles, and towns were overflowed, and some ouerturned, and some
overwhelmed with sand; much people, and almost innumerable cattle was
destroyed. At the same time certain lands in Kent, which did once belong to
Godwine Earl of Kent, were ouerflowed and covered with sand, which to this day
do bear the name of Godwins sands. Thunders were more frequent and terrible
then had been usual; through violence whereof diverse persons were slain. Many
fearful forms and apparitions are reported to have bin seen; whether
errors, or inventions, or truethes, I will not aduow. The heavens often seemed
to flame with fire. At Finchamsted in Barkeshire Quae fata manent quamuis
significata non vitantur. Tacit. ^. hist.
near unto Abington, a spring cast up a liquor for the space of fifteen
days, in substance and color like unto blood; which did taint and infect the
next water brook whereinto it did run. The King was often terrified in his
sleep with uncouth, ougly, unquiet dreams: and many fearful visions of
others were oftentimes reported unto him. At the same time he held in his
hands three Bishoprics, Canterbury, Winchester, and Salisburie; and twelve
Abbeys.

The same year upon the second of August, a little before the falling of the
Sun, as the King was hunting within the new forest, at a place called
Choringham (where since a Chapel has been erected) he struck a Dear
lightly with an arrow. The Dear ran away, and the King stayed his horse to
look after it; holding his hand over his eyes, because the beams of the Sun
(which then drew somewhat low) much dazeled his sight. Herewith another Dear
crossed the way; whereat a certain Knight, named Sir Walter Tirrell, aimed
with an arrow: and loosing his bow, either too carelessly at the Dear, or too
steadily at the King, struck him therewith full upon the breast. The King
having so received the wound, gave forth a heavy groan, and presently fell
down dead; neither by speech nor motion expressing any token of life. Only so
much of the arrowe as was without his body was found broken; whether with his
hand, or by his fall, it is not certainly known. The men that were near unto
him (especially Sir Walter Tirrell) galloped away; some for astonishment,
others for fear. But a few collecting themselves returned again, and laid
his body upon a Colliers Cart, which by adventure passed that way; wherein it
was drawn by one lean euill-fauoured, base beast, to the City of Winchester;
bleeding abundantly all the way, by reason of the rude iogging of the Carte.
The day following he was buried, without any funeral pomp, with no more then
ordinary solemnities, in the Cathedral Church or Monastery of Saint Swithen;
under a plain flat marble stone, before the Lectorne in the Quire. But
afterward his bones were translated, and laid by King Canutus bones.

Most writers do interpret this extraordinary accident to be a judgment of
God, for the extraordinary loose behavior of the King, But it may rather
seem a judgment of God, that King William the first, who threw down
Churches, and dispeopled Villages and Towns; who banished both the service of
God, and society of men, to make a vaste habitation for savage beasts, had two
sons slain upon that place. It may also seem a judgment of God, that King
William the second, who so greatly favored beasts of game, that he ordained
the same penalty for killing of a dear, as for killing of a man; should as a
beast, and for a beast, and among beasts be slain. And thus God does often
punish us by our greatest pleasures; if they be either unlawful, or
immoderately affected; whereby good things become unlawful.

He died in the principal strength, both of his age, and of his distasteful
actions; wherein he had been much carried by the hoate humor of his courage
and youth; his judgment not then raised to that stayednesse and Seris venit
vsus ab annis. Ovid. 6. Metam.
strength, whereto years and experience in short time would have brought it.
He reigned in great variety of opinion with his Subjects (some applauding his
virtues, others aggravating his vices) twelve years, eleven months wanting
eight days: and was at his death forty and three years old. At this time he
presumed most highly, and promised greatest matters to himself, he proiected
also many difficult adventures, if his life had continued the natural course;
wherein his hopes were nothing inferior to his desires.

He gave to the Monckes of Charity in Southwarke his Manor of Bermondsey,
and built for them the great new Church of Saint Savior. Also of an old
Monastery in the City of York, he founded an Hospital for the sustentation
of poor persons, and dedicated it to S. Peter. This Hospital was afterward
augmented by King Stephen, and by him dedicated to S. Leonard.

KING HENRY THE FIRST, Surnamed BEAVCLERKE.
ROBERT Duke of Normandy, the eldest brother to King William the second, was
in Palestina when King William was slain; being one of the principal leaders
in that Heroical war, which diverse Christian Princes of Europe set up, to
recover Jerusalem out of the power and possession of the Saracens. In this
expedition he purchased so honorable reputation, for skill, industry, and
valor of hand, that when the Christian forces had surprised Jerusalem, and
diverse other Cities in those quarters, the kingdom thereof was offered unto
him. But the Duke, whether he coniectured the difficulties of that war, for
that the enemy was both at hand, and under one command, but the Army of the
Christians was to be supplied from far, and also consisted of many
Confederats; In which case albeit sometimes men perform well at the first, yet
in short time inconveniences increasing, they always either dissipate and
dissolve, or else fall into confusion. Or whether he heard of the death of his
brother, to whose Kingdom he pretended right; as well by prerogative of blood,
as by express covenant between them confirmed by oath; refused the offer,
which was the last period of all his honor, and in short time after took his
journey from Palestine toward France.

But Henry the Kings younger brother, apprehending the opportunity of the Dukes
absence, did forthwith seize upon the treasure of the King, and thereby also
upon his State, and so was crowned at Westminster upon the second day of
August, in the year 1100. by Maurice Bishop of London; because Anselme Archb.
of Canterbury was then in exile. This enterprise was much advanced by the
authority and industry of Henry Newborow Earl of Warwick, who appeased all
opposition that was made against it. The people also, albeit they had been
managed so tame, as easily to yield their back to the first sitter; yet to
Henry they expressed a prone inclination, for that he was borne in England, at
a place called Selby in Lincolneshire, since his father was crowned King:
whereas Duke Robert his brother was borne before his father attained the
kingdom.

This served Prince Henry not only to knit unto him the affections of the
people, but also to form a title to the Crown. For it has bin a question
often debated, both by Arguments and by Arms, and by both trials diversely
decided; when a king has two sons, one borne before he was King, and the
other after, whether of them has right to succeed?

Herodotus writes, That when Darius the In Polyb^^*
son of Hysdaspis King of Persia made preparation for war against the
Graecians and Egyptians, he first went about to settle his succession: because
by the Laws of Persia, the King might not enter into enterprise of Arms,
before he had declared his successor. Now Darius had three children before he
was King, by his first wife the daughter of Gobris. After he was King he had
other four, by Atossa the daughter of Cyrus. Artabazanes, or (as other term
him) Arthemenes was eldest of the first sort; Xerxes of the second. Artabazanes
alleged that he was the eldest of all the Kings sons, and that it was a
custom among all nations, That in principalities the eldest should succeed.
Xerxes alleged, that he was begotten of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, by whose
valor the Persians had obtained their Empire. Before Darius had given
sentence, Demaratus the son of Aristo, cast out of his kingdom of Sparta and
then living an exile in Persia, came unto Xerxes, and advised him further to
allege, that he was the eldest son of Darius after he was King; And that it
was the custom of Sparta, that if a man had a son in private state, and
afterward another when he was King, this last son should succeed in his
kingdom. Upon this ground Artabazanes was rejected, and Darius gave judgment
for Xerxes. This history is likewise reported by Iustine, and touched also by
Plutarch: although Just. lib. 2. Plut. de fraterna beneuolentia.
they disagree in names, and some other points of circumstance.

So when Herod King of Judea appointed Antipater his eldest son, but borne
to him in private state, to succeed in his Royalty, and excluded Alexander and
Aristobulus his younger sons, whom he had begot of Mariamne, after he had
obtained his kingdom; Josephus plainly Antiq. lib. 16 cap. 3.
reprehendeth the fact, and condemns the judgment of Herod for partial and
unjust. So Jews borne after his father was Duke of Milane, Guicc. l^b. 1.
Blond. decad, ^. lib. 2.
was preferred in succession before his brother Galeace, who was borne before.
And so when Otho the first was elected Emperor, his younger brother Henry
pretended against him; for that Otho was borne before their father was S^geb.
in Chron.
Emperor, and Henry after. In which quarrel Henry was aided by Euerharde
Earl Palatine, and Giselbert Duke of Lorreine, with diverse other Princes of
Almaine: But when the cause came to be canuased by the sword, the victory
adjudged the Empire to Otho.

Furthermore, this right of title seems to be confirmed by many grounds of
the Imperial Law. As L. neque Doroth. 61. l. docti^ij 63. l. neminem. 64. cur^
l. pen. and vit. C. de decur. lib. 1^ l. ex libera. 6. C. suis and legit.
that sons borne after their father is advanced to a dignity, do hold
certain privileges, which sons formerly borne do not enjoy. That L.
imperi^lis. 23. ^is ^lud. C. de nu^ (...) quicunque 7. C. de princip. agent. in
re^.
those children which are borne after a person is freed from any infamous or
servile condition, do participate only of that liberty, and not they who
were borne before. That if a man takes a wife in the Province wherein he
holds office, the marriage is good, if after the time his Office shall expire,
they continue in the same consent Leos qui. 65. D. de rit. nupt. l. Etsi 6. C.
de nupt.
: but so that the children borne before, shall not be thereby held for
legitimate. That L. senator. 11. C. de dignit. lib. 10*
those children which are borne after their father is honored with the title
of Clarissimus, do enjoy the rights due unto that degree of dignity, and not
they who were borne before. That as a son borne after the father has lost
his kingdom, is not esteemed for the son of a King L. emancipatum. 7. D de
Senate. facit l. Diuo Marco. 11. C. de quaest. l. 3. D. de Interd. and rel. l.
2. C. de lib. and e^r. lib^.
: so neither he that is borne before the father be a King Gl. in d. l.
Imperialis. Bar. in l. si. Senator. C. de dig. li. 12. Bald. in l. cum suis. D.
de lib. posth. Anch. and Phil. Franc. in c. ne aliqui de priuil. li. 6. 4. Ana.
in c. 2. de Iudae* facit l. ex libera* C. de su. and le. l. j. fi. D* de bo.
po. co. (...). l. si nequ^.. si deport. D. de bon. libert. l. filij..
senatores. D. ad municipia. l. quicunque C* de princ. again. in reb. lib. 12.
and ib. Luc. Pen.
.

And although these and diverse like passages of Law commonly alleged, do
seem little or nothing pertinent to this purpose; for that they concern not
any universal right of inheritance, which is due unto children after the death
of their parents; but certain particular piuiledges and rights attributed unto
them whilst their parents were in life, which for the most part are arbitrarie
and mutable, as depending upon the pleasure of the Prince: Yet many
Interpreters of both Laws have been drawn by these reasons to subscribe their
judgments for this kind of Title: and namely Pet. Cynus, Baldus, Albericus In
d. l. Imp^rialis.. illud.
, Iac. Rebuffus, and Luc. Penna In l. si Senat^* C. de dign. li. 12.
. Also Panormitane In c. lice^. de V^t.
, Collect. In c. ex tenor^. qui fill. sun^ leg it.
. Dynus In l. 2.. in ^ilijs. D. de Decu* and in l. mori^ * sed vtrum D de ^
oenis.
, Franc. Cremen. Sing. 50* ^ ib. addit.
. Marti. Laud. In tract p^mogen.
. Card. Alexander In c. Adr^ nus. di. 63.
, Phil. Decius In c. inter (...) ^eras de res^*
, Alceat In l. bona (...) des. D. deposit.
, Bon. Curti. In tract. (...)* bilitatis. ^art. 3. ad fin.
. And lastly, Anton. Corsetta In tract. de poten. and excellentia regi^
, delivers it for a common received and followed opinion. Which must be
understood with this distinction, if the kingdom be either newly erected, or
else newly acquired by Conquest, Election, or any such title, other then by
hereditarie succession according to proximitie in blood. For if the kingdom
be once settled in a certain course of succession, because the dignity is
inherent in the blood of that stock; because it is not taken from the father
but from the ancestors; because it is not taken only from the ancestors, but
from the fundamental law of the State; the eldest son shall indistinctly
succeed, although he were borne before his father was King Pet. la^. in arb.
succ. Reg. Franc. lo. Ray* in c. praeterca. de prohi feud* ^li. and in tract.
n^bil q. 10. ^a* a S. Georgio. (...) tract. feud. D. Benedict in (...)* c.
Ramutiu^. (...)* 200* de test.
. And therefore after the kingdom of Persia had been carried by succession in
some descents, when Darius the King had four sons, Artaxerxes the eldest,
Cyrus the next, and two others; Parysates the wife of Darius having a desire
that Cyrus should succeed in the kingdom, alleged in his behalf the same
reason wherewith Xexes had prevailed before: to wit, that she had brought
forth Artaxerxes to Darius, when he was in private state; but Cyrus was borne
to him when he was a King. Yet Plutarch affirms, that the reason In Artax.
which she used was nothing probable, and that Artaxerxes the eldest son was
appointed to be King. And so Blondus and Ritius do report, Blond. dec. 2. lib.
6. Mich. Ritius. de Reg. Hung. lib. 6.
that Bela the King of Hungary being dead, Geysa succeeded, although borne
unto him before he was a King.

Others inferior in number, but not in weight of Judgment do affirm, that
whether a Kingdom be settled in succession, or whether by any other title newly
attained, the right to succeed by all true grounds of law pertains to the
eldest son; albeit borne before his fathers advancement to the kingdom, in
case there be no express law of the state to the contrary. The principal
reason is, because this is the nature of all successions by way of inheritance:
For, if a father purchases lands, leases, cattle, or other goods, the
inheritance shall be transmitted to his eldest son, although borne before
the purchase. Likewise if a father be advanced to any title of honor, as Duke,
Earl, Marquess, etc. it was never, I will not say denied, but once doubted,
but that the eldest son should succeed in the same, albeit he was borne
before the advancement. And therefore seeing this is the general rule of all
other inheritable successions, and there is no reason of singularity in a
kingdom; it follows, that in like case the succession of a kingdom should
also descend to the eldest son, although borne before the kingdom were
achieved.

Again, the son who was borne before his father was a King, had once a right
to succeed in the kingdom; for if another son had not afterward been
borne, without all question he should have succeeded. But a right which a man
by his own person has acquired; albeit in some cases it may be diminished,
yet can it not be altogether extinguished by any external or casual event,
which has no dependencie upon himself. And so the right which the eldest
son has to his fathers inheritance, may be diminished by the birth of other
children, in regard of those goods which are to be distributed in parts among
them; but it cannot possibly be extinguished. Neither can it be diminished in
those things which are not of nature to be either valued or divided (of which
sort a Kingdom is the chief) but do pass entirely unto one. For the right
of blood which only is regarded in lawful successions, is acquired and held
from the nativity of the child, and does not begin at the fathers death; at
which time the inheritance does fall.

Lastly, if it be true in sons, that he shall succeed in a kingdom who is
first borne, after the father is exalted to be a King; then is it true also in
other remote degrees of consanguinitie. And hereby it should often happen, that
when a King dies without issue of his body, they who are not only inferior
in age, but more remote in degree, should exclude both the elder and the nearer
in blood; because perhaps borne after the kingdom was attained: which is
against all laws of lawful succession.

Howsoever the right stands, Henry the younger brother to King William Rufus,
upon advantage of the absence of Duke Robert his eldest brother, formed this
title to the Crown of England. In which pretense he was strongly supported,
first by a general inclination of the common people, for that he had both his
birth and education within the Realm, and they were well persuaded of his good
nature and disposition. Secondly, by the favor and travail of many of the
nobility, especially of Henry Neuborow Earl of Warwick. Thirdly, (for that
the sails of popular favors are filled most violently with reports) by his
giving forth, that his brother Robert intended never to return; for that he
was elected King of Jerusalem, and of all those large Countries in Asia, which
the Christians had lately wrung out of the Saracens hands. Lastly, by using
celeritie the very life of actions; for he was Crowned at Westminster (as it
has been said) upon the fifth day of August, in the year 1100. which was the
third day after his brothers death.

In person he was both stately and strong; tall, broad brested, his limbs
fairly fourmed, well knit, and fully furnished with flesh. He was exceeding
both comely and manly in countenance, his face well fashioned, his color
clear, his eyes lively and fair, his eyebrows large and thick, his hair
black and somewhat thin toward his forehead. He was of an excellent wit,
free from ostentation; his thoughts high, yet honorable and just: in speech
ready and eloquent, much graced with sweetness of voice. In private he was
affable, open, wittily pleasant, and very full of merry simplicity: in
public he looked with a grave Majesty, as finding in himself cause to be
honored. He was brought up in the study of Liberal Arts at Cambridge, where
he attained that measure of knowledge, which was sufficient both for ornament
and use; but ran not into intemperate excess, either for ostentation, or for
a cloak to unprofitable expense of time. By his example the young Nobility of
the Realm began to affect a praise for learning: Insomuch as, at a certain
enteruiew between the King and Pope Innocent the 2. the sons of Robert Earl
of Mellent, maintained open disputations against diverse Cardinals and
Chapleines of the Pope.

He was an exact esteemer of himself, not so much for his strength as for his
weaknesses: less inclined to confidence then to distrust; and yet in weighty
affairs resolute and firm; never dismayed, and always fortunate; his spirits
being of force to oppose against any sort of difficulties or doubts.
Extremities made him the more assured; and like a well knit Arch, he then lay
most strong when he sustained the greatest weight. He was no more disposed to
valor, then well settled in virtue and goodness; which made his valor of more
precious valuation. He had good command over his passions; and thereby attained
both peace within himself, and victory over others. In giving he was
moderate, but bountiful in recompense; his countenance enlarging the worth of
his gift. He was prone to relieve, even where there was least likelihood of
requital. He hated flattery, the poisoned sugar, the counterfeit civility
and love, the most base brokery of words: yet was no music so pleasing unto
him as well deserved thanks. He was vigilant and industrious in his affairs;
knowing right well that honor not only has a paineful and dangerous birth,
but must in like manner be nourished and fed.

He was somewhat immoderate and excessive, as well in advancing those he
favored, as in beating down and disabling his enemies. The sword was always
the last of his trials; so as he never either sought or apprehended occasions
of war, where with honor he could retain peace. But if it were injuriously
urged, he wanted neither wisdom, nor diligence, nor magnanimous heart to
encounter the danger; to bear it over with courage and success. He was
frugall of the blood and slaughter of his Soldiers; never aduenturing both his
honor and their lives to the hazard of the sword, without either necessity or
advantage. He oftentimes prevailed against his enemies more by policy then by
power; and for victories thus attained, he attributed to himself the greatest
glory. For wisdom is most proper to man, but force is common and most eminent
in beasts; by wisdom the honor was entire to himself, by force it was
participated to inferior Commanders, to every private ordinary Soldier: the
effects of force, are heavy, hideous, and sometimes inhumane; but the same
wrought to event by wisdom, is, as less odious, so more assured and firm.

After that he was mounted into the seat of Majesty, he neglected no means
to settle himself most surely therein, against the return of his brother
Robert. To this end he contracted both amity and alliance with Edgar King of
Scots, by taking his sister Matild to wife: by which means he not only
removed his hostility, but stood assured of his assistance, in case his
occasions should so require. She was daughter to Malcolme King of Scots, by
Margaret his wife; who was sister to Edgar surnamed Adeling, and daughter to
Edward, son to Edmund Ironside, the most valiant Saxon King, the scourge and
terror of the Danes. So as after the death of Adeling who left no issue, this
Matild was next by descent from the Saxon Kings to the inheritance of the
Crown of England: and by her entermariage with King Henry, the two families of
Normans and Saxons were united together both in blood and title to the Crown.
This more then any other respect made the whole nation of the English not only
firm to King Henry, against his brother, but loyal and peaceable during all
his reign: for that they saw the blood of their Saxon Kings restored again to
the possession of the Crown.

She was a Lady virtuous, religious, beautiful and wise: far from the
ordinary either vices or weaknesses incident to her sex. She had been brought
up among the Nuns of Winchester, and Rumsey, whether professed or only
veiled our writers do diversely report; but most affirm that she was
professed. Yet for the common good, for the public peace and tranquillity of
the State, she abandoned her devoted life, and was joined to King Henry in
marriage, by consent of Anselme, without any dispensation from Rome. Of this
Matild the King begat William a son, who perished by shipwreck; and Matild
a daughter, first married to Henry the fifth Emperor, by whom she had no
issue; afterward to Geoffrey Plantagenet Earl of Aniou, by whom she brought
forth a son named Henry, in whom the blood of the Saxon Kings was advanced
again to the government of this Realm.

Now to purchase the favor of the Clergy, he called Anselme out of exile, and
restored him both to the dignity and revenues of the Sea of Canterbury. Other
Bishoprics and Abbeys which King William kept void at the time of his death,
he furnished with men of best sufficiency and reputation. He committed
Radulph Bishop of Durham to prison, who had been both author and agent to King
William in most of his distasteful actions against the Clergy. This Radulph
was a man of smooth use of speech, witty only in devising, or speaking, or
doing evil: but to honesty and virtue his heart was a lump of lead. Envious
above all measure; nothing was so grievous to his eyes as the prosperity,
nothing so harsh to his ears as the commendations of others. His tongue
always slavish to the Princes desires; not regarding how truly or faithfully,
but how pleasingly he did advise. Thus as a principal infamy of that age, he
lived without love, and died without pity; saving of those who thought it
pity that he lived so long.

Further, to make the Clergy the more assured, the King renounced the right
which his Ancesters used in giving Inuestitures; and acknowledged the same to
appertain to the Pope. This he yielded at his first entrance, partly not
knowing of what importance it was, and partly being in necessity to promise
any thing. But afterward he resumed that right again; albeit in a Council
not long before held at Rome, the contrary had been decreed. For he invested
William Gifford into the Bishopric of Winchester, and all the possessions
belonging to the same. He gave the Archbishopricke of Canterbury to Radulph
Bishop of London, and invested him therein by a Ring and a staff: he invested
also two of his Chapleins at Westminster; Roger his Chanceller in the
Bishopric of Salisburie, and Roger his Larderer in the Bishopric of
Hereford. Further he assumed the custom of his father and brother, in taking
the revenues of Bishoprics whilst they remained void: and for that cause did
many times keep them a longer season vacant in his hands, then many of the
Clergy could with patience endure.

But especially the Clergy did favor him much, by reason of his liberal
leave either to erect, or to enlarge, or else to enrich Religious buildings.
For to these works the King was so ready to give, not only way, but
encouragement and help, that in no Princes time they did more within this
Realm either flourish or increase. And namely the house of S. John of
Jerusalem was then founded near Smithfield in London, with the house of
Nuns by Clerken well. Then were also founded the Church of Theukesburie, with
all Offices thereto belonging: the Priorie and Hospital of S. Bartholomewes in
Smithfield, the Church of S. Giles without Creeplegate; the College of
Seculare Canons in the castle of Leicester; the Abbey without the Northgate of
the same town called S. Mary deprato. Also the Monastery of S. John of
Lanthonie by Gloucester; the Church of Dunmow in Essex; the Monastery of S.
John at Colchester, which was the first house of Augustine Chanons in England:
the Church of S. Mary Oueries furnished with Chanons in Southwarke; the Priory
of the holy Trinity now called Christ's Church within Algate; and the Hospital
of S. Giles in the field: The Priorie of Kenelworth; The Abbey of Kenshame; The
Monastery of Plimpton in Devonshire; with the Cathedral Church of Exceter;
the Priorie of Merton; the College of Warwick; the Hospital of Kepar; the
Priorie of Osney near Oxeford; the Hospital of S. Cross near Winchester; the
Priorie of Norton in Cheshire, with diverse others. The King also founded and
erected the Priorie of Dunstable, the Abbey of Circester, the Abbey of Reading,
the Abbey of Shirebourne. He also changed the Abbey of Eley into a Bishops
Sea; he erected a Bishopric at Caerlile, placed Chanons there, and endowed it
with many honors. These and many other Religious buildings either done, or
helped forward, or permitted and allowed by the King, much increased the
affection of the Clergy toward him.

Now to draw the love of the common people, he composed himself to a sober
civility; easy for access, fair in speech, in countenance and behavior
kind: his Majesty so tempered with mildness and courtesy, that his Subjects
did more see the fruits, then feel the weight of his high estate. These were
things of great moment with the vulgar sort; who love more where they are
lovingly entreated, then where they are benefited, or happily preserved. He
eased them of many public grieuances. He restored them to the use of fire
and candle after eight of the clock at night, which his father had most
straightly forbidden. Punishments of loss of member used before, he made
pecuniarie. He moderated the Law of his brother, which inflicted death for
killing any of the Kings Dear; and ordained, that if any man killed a Dear in
his own wood, the wood should be forfeited to the King. He permitted to make
enclosures for Parkes; which taking beginning in his time, did rise to that
excessive increase, that in a few succeeding ages more Parkes were in England,
then in all Europe beside. He promised that the Laws of K. Edward should
again be restored; but to put off the present performance, he gave forth, that
first they should be reuiewed and corrected, and made appliable to the present
time. And albeit in truth they were never either reuiewed or corrected, yet
the only hope thereof did work in the people a favorable inclination to his
part.

Whilst the King did thus Immure himself in the state of England, as well by
ordering his affairs, as by winning the hearts of the people unto him, Duke
Robert was returning from Palestine, by easy and pleasurable iourneys; using
neither the celeritie nor forecast which the necessity of his occasions did
require. He visited many Princes by the way, and consumed much time in
entertainments and other complements of Court. He took to wife as he came
Sibell the daughter of Roger Duke of Apulia and Earl of Cicill, who was a
Norman: and the great portion of money which he received for her dower, he
loosely lauished forth amongst his followers; of whom he received nothing
again, but thanks when he (scattered rather then) gave, and pity when he
wanted.

At the last he arrived in Normandy, and forthwith was solicited out of
England by letters from many, who either upon conscience or coffeehouse
favored his Title; and especially from Radulph Bishop of Durham, who had
lately escaped out of prison, a man odious enough to undo a good cause; that
he would omit no time, that he would let fall no diligence, to embarke
himself in the enterprise for England: that he had many friends there, both
powerful and sure, who would partake with him in his dangers, although not in
the honor achieved by his dangers: that therewith the peoples favor toward
the King did begin to ebb, and that it was good taking the first of the tide.
Hereupon he shuffled up an Army in haste; neither for number, nor furniture,
nor choice of men answerable to the enterprise in hand. Then he crossed the
Seas, landed at Portesmouth, and marched a small way into the Country; vainly
expecting the concourse and aid which had been assured him out of England. But
King Henry had made so good use both of his warning and time to provide against
this tempest, that he did at once both cut from the Duke all means of aid,
and was ready to encounter him in brave appointment. Hereupon many who were
unable by Arms to relieve the Duke, by advise did to him the best offices they
could. For they labored both the King and him to a reconcilement; The King
with respect of his new unsettled estate, the Duke with respect of his
weaknesses and wants; both with regard of natural duty and love, knit
between them by band of blood. So after some travail and debatement, a peace
was concluded upon these Conditions.

That Henry should retain the kingdom of England, and pay to his brother
Robert 3000. marks yearly.

That if either of them should die without issue, the suruiuour should succeed.

That no man should receive prejudice for following the part of the one or of
the other.

These conditions being solemnly sworn by the king and the Duke, and twelve
Noble men on either part, the Duke returned into Normandy, and about two
years after went again into England, to visit the King, and to spend some
time with him in feasting and disport. At which time, to requite the Kings kind
usage and entertainment, but especially to gratify Matild the Queen, to whom
he was godfather, he released to the King the annual payment of 3000. marks.
But as a wound is more painful the day following, then when it was first and
freshly taken; so this loose leuitie of the Duke, which was an exceeding sad
and sore blow to his estate, was scarce sensible at his departure out of
England, but most grievous to him after he had remained in Normandy a while:
whereby many motions were occasioned, as well in the one place as in the other.

The Duke complained, that he had been circumuented by his brother the King:
that his courtesies were nothing else but allurements to mischief; that his
gifts were pleasant baits, to cover and convey most dangerous hooks; that his
fair speeches were sugared poisons; that his kind embracements were even to
tickle his friends to death. Robert Belasme Earl of Shrewsbury, a man of great
estate, but doubtful whether of less wisdom or fear, took part with the
Duke, and fortified the Town and Castle of Shrewsbury, the Castles of
Bridgenorth, Tichel, and Arundel, and certain other pieces in Wales against
King Henry. And having drawn unto him some persons of wretched state and worse
mind, whose fortunes could not be empaired by any event, he entered
Staffordshire, and drove away light booties of cattle; being prepared neither
in forces nor in courage, to stay the doing of greater mischief.

But neither was this sudden to the King, neither was he ever unprovided
against sudden adventures. Wherefore encountering the danger before it grew to
perfection and strength, he first brought his power against the Castle of
Bridgenorth, which was forthwith rendered unto him. The residue followed the
example (which in enterprise of arms is of greatest moment) and submitted
themselves to the Kings discretion* Only the Castle of Arundel yielded upon
condition, that Robert Belasme their Lord should be permitted to depart safely
into Normandy: And upon the same condition they of Shrewsbury sent to the King
the keys of their Castle, and therewith pledges for their allegiance. Then
Robert with his brother Ernulphus, and Roger of Poictiers abiured the Realm,
and departed into Normandy: where being full of rashness, which is nothing
but courage out of his wits; and measuring their actions not by their
abilities, but by their desires; they did more advance the Kings affairs by
hostility, then by service and subjection they could possibly have done.

Also William Earl of Mortaigne in Normandy, and of Cornwall in England,
son of Robert, uncle to the king, and brother to king William the first,
required of the King the Earldom of Kent, which had been lately held by Odo
uncle to them both. And being a man brave in his own liking, and esteming
nothing of that which he had in regard of that which he did desire, he was
most earnest, violent, peremptory in his pursuit. Insomuch as, blinded with
ambitious haste, he would often say, that he would not put off his upper
garment, until he had obtained that dignity of the King. These errors were
excused by the greenenesse of his youth, and by his desire of rising, which
expelled all fear of a fall. Wherefore the King first deferred, and afterward
moderately denied his demand. But so far had the Earl fed his follies with
assured expectation, that he accounted himself fallen from such estate as his
hungry hopes had already swallowed. Hereupon his desire turned to rage, and the
one no less vain then the other: but both together casting him from a high
degree of favor, which seldom stops the race until it come to a headlong
downfall.

For now the King made a counter-challenge to many of his possessions in
England; and thereupon seized his lands, dismantled his castles, and compelled
him in the end to forsake the Realm. Not for any great offense he had done,
being apt to the fault rather of rough rage then of practice and deceit; but
his stubborn stoutnesse was his offense; and it was sufficient to hold him
guilty, that he thought himself to have cause and means to be guilty. So
having lost his own state in England, he departed into Normandy, to further
also the loss of that country. There he confederated with Robert Belasme, and
made diverse vain attempts against the Kings castles; neither guided by
wisdom, nor followed by success. Especially he vented his fury against
Richard Earl of Chester, who was but a child, and in wardship to the King,
whom he daily infested with invasions and spoils; being no less full of
desire to hurt, then void of counsel and means to hurt.

On the other side, diverse of the Nobility of Normandy, finding their Duke
without judgment to rule, had no disposition to obey; but conceived a
careless contempt against him. For he seemed not so much to regard his
substantial good, as a vain breath of praise, and the fruitless favor of
men's opinions, which are no fewer in variety then they are in number. All the
revenues of his Duchy he either sold or morgaged; all his Cities he did alien,
and was upon the point of passing away his principal City of Roan to the
Burgers thereof, but that the conditions were esteemed too hard. Hereupon many
resolved to fall from him, and to set their sails with the favorable gale
which blew upon the fortune of the King. To this end they offered their
submission to the King, in case he would invade Normandy; whereto with many
reasons they did persuade him: especially in regard of the late hostile
attempts there made against him, by the plain permission of the Duke his
brother, and not without his secret support.

The King embraced the fair occasion, and with a strong Army passed into
Normandy. Here he first relieved his forts, which were any ways distressed or
annoyed; then he recovered those that were lost; Lastly, he wanne from the Duke
the town and castle of Caen, with certain other castles besides: And by the
help of the President of Aniou, fi^ed Baion, with the stately Church of S.
Marie therein. Upon these events, all the Priories of Normandy, resembling
certain flowers, which open and close according to the rising or declining of
the Sun; abandoned the Duke, and made their submission to King Henry. So the
King having both enlarged and assured his state in Normandy, by reason of the
approach of winter, departed into England: but this was like the recuiling of
Ramme^, to return again with the greater strength.

He had not long remained in England, but his brother Robert came to him at
Northampton, to treat of some agreement of peace. Here the words and behauiours
of both were observed. At their first meeting they rested with their eyes fast
fixed one upon the other; in such sort as did plainly declare, that
discourtesie then trencheth most deep, when it is between those who should
most dearly love. The Duke was in demands moderate, in countenance and speech
inclined to submisnesse; and with a kind unkindness did rather entreat then
persuade, that in regard of the natural Obligation between them by blood, in
regard of many offices and benefits wherewith he had endeavored to purchase the
Kings love, all hostility between them, all injury or extremity by Arms
might cease. For I call you (said he) before the Seat of your own Judgment,
whether the relinquishing of my Title to the Crown of England, whether the
releasing of my annuity of 3000. marks, whether many other kindnesses, so much
undeserved as scarce desired; should not in reason withdraw you from those
prosecutions, where war cannot be made without shame, nor victory attained
without dishonor.

The King used him with honorable respect; but perceiving that he was embarked
in some disadvantage, conceiving also that his courage with his Fortune began
to decline, he made resemblance at the first, to be no less desirous of peace
then the Duke: But afterward, albeit he did not directly deny, yet he found
euasions to avoid all offers of agreement.

The more desirous the Duke was of peace, the greater was his disdain that his
brother did refuse it. Wherefore clearing his countenance from all shows of
deiection or grief, as then chiefly resolute when his passion was stirred,
with a voice rather violent then quick, he rose into these words.

I have cast my self so low, as your haughty heart can possibly wish; whereby
I have wronged both my self and you: my self, in occasioning some suspicion
of weakness; you, in making you obstinate in your ambitious purposes. But
assure your self, that this desire did not proceed from want either of
courage, or of means, or of assistance of friends: I can also be both
unthankful and unnatural if I be compelled. And if all other supportance
fail, yet no arm is to be esteemed weak, which strikes with the sword of
necessity and Justice.

The King with a well appeased stayednesse returned answer; that he could
easily endure the injury of his angry words: but to men of moderate judgment
he would make it appear, that he intended no more in offending him, then to
provide for defending himself. So the Duke observing few complements, but such
as were spiced with anger and disdain, returned into Normandy, associated to
him the English exiles, and made preparation for his defense.

The King followed with a great power, and found him in good appointment of
arms: nothing inferior to the King in resolute courage, but far inferior
both in number of men, and in fine contriuance of his affairs. For the King
had purchased assured intelligence, among those that were nearest both in place
and counsel to the Duke: in whom the Duke found treachery, even when he
reposed most confident trust. Herewith Pope Paschal, to attain his purpose in
England, for deuesting the King of inuesting Bishops; did not only allow this
enterprise for lawful, but encouraged the King, that he should do thereby a
noble and a memorable benefit to his Realm.

So, many stiff battles were executed between them, with small difference of
advantage at the first; but after some continuance, the Dukes side (as it
commonly happens to evil managed courage) declined daily, by reason of his
daily increase of wants. At the last the Duke, wearied and ouerlayed, both with
company of men and cunning working, resolved to bring his whole state to the
stake, and to adventure the same upon one cast: committing to Fortune, what
valor and industry could bring forth. The king being the Inuader, thought it
not his part to shrink from the shocke; being also advertised that the French
King prepared to relieve the Duke. On the Dukes side, disdain, rage, and
revenge, attended upon hate: the King retained invincible valor, assured hope
to overcome, grounded upon experience how to overcome.

They met upon the same day of the month just 40. years, after the great
battle of William the first against King Harold of England. The Kings
footmen far exceeding their enemies in number, began the charge, in small
and scattering troops; lightly assayling where they could epsy the weakest
resistance. But the Dukes Army received them in close and firm order; so as
upon the loss of many of the foremost, the residue began somewhat to retire.
And now, whether the Duke had cause, or whether confidence the inseparable
companion of courage persuaded him that he had cause; he supposed that he had
the best of the field, and that the victory was even in his hand. But suddenly
the King with his whole forces of horse charged him in flank, and with great
violence brake into his battle. Herewith the footmen also returned, and
turned them all to a ruinous rout. The Duke performed admirable effects of
valor, and so did most of the English exiles: as fearing overthrow worse then
death. But no courage was sufficient to sustain the disorder; the Normans on
every hand were chased, ruffled, and beaten down. Hereupon the Dukes courage
boiling in choler, he doubled many blows upon his enemies; more furiously
driven, then well placed and set: and pressing up hardly among them, was
suddenly engaged so far, that he could not possibly recover himself. So he
was taken manfully fighting, or as some other authors affirm, was beastly
betrayed by his own followers. With him were also taken the Earl of
Mortaigne, William Crispine, William Ferreis, Robert Estotiuill, with four
hundred men of arms, and ten thousand ordinary soldiers. The number of the
slain on both sides, is not reported by any author; but all authors agree,
that this was the most bloody medly that ever had been executed in Normandy
before: portended as it is thought by a Comet, and by two full Moons, which
late before were seen, the one in the East, and the other in the West.

After this victory the King reduced Normandy entirely into his possession,
and annexed it to the Realm of England. Then he built therein many Castles,
and planted garrisons; and with no less wisdom assured that State, then with
valor he had won it. When he had settled all things according to his
judgment, he returned into England, brought with him his brother Robert, and
committed him to safe custody in the Castle of Cardiff. But either by reason
of his favorable restraint, or else by negligence or corruption of his
keepers, he escaped away, and fled for his liberty as if it had been for his
life. Notwithstanding this proved but a false favor, or rather a true
flattery or scorn of Fortune. For being sharply pursued, he was taken again,
sitting upon horseback; his horse legs fast locked in deep and tough clay.

Then he was committed to straight and close prison, his eyes put out (as if
he should not see his misery) and a sure guard set upon him. Thus he remained
in desolate darkness; neither reverenced by any for his former greatness,
not pitied for his present distress. Thus he continued about 27. years, in a
life far more grievous then death; even until the year before the death of
King Henry. So long was he a suitor in wooing of death: so long did the one
brother ouerliue his good fortune, the other his good nature and disposition;
esteeming it a fair favor, that the uttermost extremity was not inflicted.
Albeit some writers do affirm, that the Dukes eyes were not violently put
out, but that either through age or infirmity he fell blind: that he was
honorably attended and cared for: that having digested in his judgment the
worst of his case, the greatness of his courage did never descend to any base
degree of sorrow or grief: that his brave behavior did set a Majesty upon
his dejected fortunes: that his noble heart like the Sun, did show greatest
countenance in lowest state. And to this report I am the more inclineable, for
that it agrees best, both to the fair conditions, and to the former
behauiours, and to the succeeding fortunes and felicities of the King: For
assuredly he had a heart of manly clemency; and this was a punishment
barbarously cruel: For which cause Constantine did L^si qui^* (...) poenis.
forbid, that the face of man, adorned with Celestial beauty, should be
deformed for any offense.

Others auow that he was never blind; but that it was the Earl of Mortaigne
whose eyes were put out. And this seems to be confirmed, by that which Matthew.
Paris and Matthew. Westminster do report. That not long before the death of Robert,
the King upon a festival day had a new robe of Scarlet brought unto him: the
cape whereof being somewhat too straight for his head, he did tear a little in
striving to put it on. And perceiving that it would not serve, he laid it
aside and said: Let my brother Robert have this Robe, for whose head it is
fitter then for mine. When it was carried unto him, being then not perfectly in
health, he espied the cracked place, and thereupon enquired, if any man had
worn it before? The messenger declared the whole matter. Which when Robert
heard, he took it for a great indignity, and said: I perceive now that I have
lived too long, that my brother does clothe me like his almoseman, with cast
and torn garments. So he grew weary of his life: and his disease increasing
with his coffeehouse, pined away, and in short time after died, and was
buried at Gloucester.

And this was the end of that excellent commander; brought to this game and
gaze of fortune, after many trauerses that he had trodden. He was for courage
and direction inferior to none; but neither provident nor constant in his
affairs, whereby the true end of his actions were overthrown. His valor had
triumphed over desperate dangers: and verily he was no more settled in valor,
then disposed to virtue and goodness; never wilfully or willingly doing evil,
never but by error, as finding it disguised under some mask of goodness. His
performances in arms had raised him to a high point of opinion for his
prowess; which made him the more unhappy, as unhappy after a fall from high
state of honor. He had one son named William, upon whose birth the mother
died: of this William shall somewhat hereafter be said.

And now, as Princes oftentimes do make advantage of the calamity of their
neighbors, (...).
so upon this downfall of the Duke of Normandy, Fulke Earl of Aniou sharing
for himself, seized upon Maine, and certain other places; made large waste,
took great booties and spoils; not only out of ancient and almost hereditary
hate against the hose of Normandy, but as fearing harm from the King of
England, he endeavored to harm him first. In like sort Baldwine Earl of
Flanders declared in arms against the King for a yearly pension of 300.
marks; the occasion of which demand was this. King William the first, in
recompense of the aid which he received in his enterprise for England, from
Baldwine 5. Earl of Flanders, paid him yearly three hundred marks, which
after his death was continued to his son. Robert Earl of Flanders from a
collateral line, demanded the same Pension; but it was denied him by K.
Henry: wherefore Baldwine his son attempted now to recover it by Arms.

With these, or rather as principal of these, Jews the gross King of France,
seeing his oversight in permitting Normandy to be annexed to the Realm of
England, assembled a great army; and upon pretense of a trifling quarrel
about the demolishing of the Castle of Gisors, declared William son to Robert
Curtcuise for Duke of Normandy: and undertook to place him in possession of
that state, which his unfortunate father had lost. And besides those open
hostilities in Arms, Hugh the kings Chamberlain and certain others were
suborned traitorously to kill the King: but the practice was in good time
discovered, and the conspirators punished by death.

Hereupon the King both with celeritie and power answerable to the danger at
hand, passed the Seas into Normandy: having first drawn to his assistance
Theobald Earl of Champaine, the Earls of Crecie, Pissaux, and Dammartine, who
aspired to be absolute Lords within their territories, as were many other
Princes at that time in France. These detained the French King in some tariance
in France, whilst the King of England either recovered or revenged his losses
against the Earl of Aniou. At the last he was assailed in Normandy on three
parts at once: by the Earl of Aniou from Maine, from Ponthieu by the Earl of
Flanders, and by the French King between both. The King of England appointed
certain forces to guard the passages against the Earl of Aniou: with
directions to hold themselves within their strength, and not to adventure into
the field. Against the Earl of Flanders he went in person; and in a sharp
shocke between them the Earl was defeated and hurt, and (as some Authors
affirm) slain: albeit others do report, that he was afterward slain in a
battle between the two Kings of England and of France.

After this he turned against Jews King of France, and fought with him before
the town of Nice in Normandy; which town the French had surprised and taken
from the King of England. This battle continued above the space of nine
hours, with incredible obstinacy; the doubt of victory being no less great,
then was the desire: and yet neither part so hasty to end, as not to stay for
the best advantage. The first battle on both sides was hewn in pieces;
valor of inestimable value was there cast away: much brave blood was lost;
many men esteemed both for their place and worth, lay groaning and grinning
under the heavy hand of death. The sad blows, the grisle wounds, the grievous
deaths that were dealt that day, might well have moved any man to have said,
That war is nothing else but inhumane manhood.

The Kings courage, guided with his Fortune, and guarded both with his strength
and his skill, was never idle, never but working memorable effects. In all
places his directions were followed by his presence; being witness both of the
diligence and valor of every man, and not suffering any good advantage or
advise for want of timely taking to be lost. He adventured so far in
perfourming with his hand, that his armor in many places was battered to his
body, and by reason of the sturdie strokes set upon his helm, he cast blood
out of his mouth. But this was so far from dismaying his powers, that it did
rather assemble and unite them: so as advancing his brave head, his fury did
breath such vigor into his arm, that his sword made way through the thickest
throngs of his enemies, and he brake into them even to the last ranckes. He
was first seconded by the truly valiant; whose undaunted spirits did assure the
best, and therewith contemn the very worst. Then came in they whom despair,
the last of resolutions had made valiant; who discerned no means of hope for
life, but by bold aduenturing upon death. Lastly he was followed by all; being
enflamed by this example to a new life of resolution. Generally, the swords
went so fast, that the French unable to endure that deadly storm, were utterly
disbanded and turned to flight. K. Henry after a bloody chase, recovered Nice;
and with great triumph returned to Roan. Afterward he would often say, That in
other battles he fought for victory, but in this for his life: and that he
would but little joy in many such victories.

Upon this event the King sent certain forces into France, to harrase the
country, and to strike a terror into the enemy. The French King, besides the
abatement of his power by reason of his late overthrow, was then preparing in
Arms against Henry the Emperor, who intended to destroy Rhemes: partly drawn
on by Henry King of England, whose daughter he had taken to wife; but chiefly
for that a Council had been there held against him by Pope Calixtus a French
man, wherein the Emperor was declared enemy to the Church, and degraded from
his Imperial dignity. This brought the English to a careless conceit, and to
a loose and licentious demeanure in their action; a most assured token of some
mischief at hand. And so, as they scattered and ranged after prey (as greedy
men are seldom circumspect) they were suddenly set upon by Almaricke Earl of
Mountfort, appointed by the French K. to defend the Country, and with no small
execution put to the chase. The more they resisted, the greater was their
loss: The sooner they fled, the more assured was their escape. And for that
they were dispersed into many small companies, they had the better opportunity
to save themselves.

Many other like adventures were enterprised between the two Kings and their
adherents; some in France, and some in Normandy; with large loss on both
sides. But especially the King of France was most subject to harm; for that
his country was the more ample, open and rich. The King of England held this
advantage, that no advantage could be won against him: which in regard of the
number, valor and greatness of his enemies, was a very honorable advantage
indeed.

At the last he made peace with the Earl of Aniou; taking the Earls daughter
to be wife to his son William, whom he had declared for successor in his
estate; to whom all the Nobility and Prelates were sworn; and who seemed to
want nothing through all his fathers dominions, but only the name and Title of
King. This sinew being cut from the King of France, and also for that Henry the
Emperor made preparation of hostility against him, he fell likewise to
agreement of peace. By the conditions whereof, William son to the King of
England was invested into the Duchy of Normandy, doing homage for the same to
the K. of France. In this peace was comprised on the part of the French K,
William son to Robert Curtcuise, who had been declared Duke of Normandy. On
the part of the king of England, the Earl of Champ^igne and certain other
Lords were comprised; who had either served or aided him against the king of
France. After this the wars between the Emperor and the French king did
forthwith dissolve.

King Henry having happily finished these affairs, returned out of Normandy,
and loosing from Barbeflote, upon the 24. of November toward evening, with a
prosperous gale arrived in England; where great preparation was made to
entertain him with many well devised honors. His son William then duke of
Normandy, and somewhat above 17. years of age, took another ship; and in his
company went Mary his sister Countess of Perch, Richard his brother, begotten
of a concubine as some affirm; and the Earl of Chester with his wife Lucie,
who was the Kings niece by his sister Adela. Also the young Nobility and best
knights flocked unto him, some to discharge their duties, others to testify
their love and respect. Of such passengers the ship received to the number of
140. besides 50. sailers which belonged unto her.

So they loosed from land somewhat after the King; and with a gentle wind from
the Southwest, danced through the soft swelling floods. The sailers full of
proud joy, by reason of their honorable charge; and of little fear or
forecast, both for that they had been accustomed to dangers, and for that they
were then well tippeled with wine; gave forth in a bravery, that they would
soon outstrip the vessel wherein the King sailed. In the midst of this
drunken ioylitie the ship struck against a rock, the head whereof was above
water, not far from the shore. The passengers cried out, and the sailers
labored to wind or bear off the ship from the danger; but the labor was no
less vain then the cry: for she leaned so stiffely against the rock, that
the sterage brake, the sides cracked, and the* Sea gushed in at many breaches.

Then was raised a lamentable cry within the ship; some yielding to the
tyranny of despair, betook themselves (as in cases of extremity weak
courages are wont) to their devotions* others employed all industry to save
their lives, and yet more in duty to nature, then upon hope to escape: all
bewailed the unfortunate darkness of that night, the last to the lives of so
many persons both of honor and of worth. They had nothing to accompany them
but their fears, nothing to help them but their wishes: the confused cries of
them al, did much increase the particular astonishment of every one. And
assuredly no danger dismayeth like that upon the seas; for that the place is
unnatural to man. And further, the unusual objects, the continual motion,
the desolation of all help or hope, will perplexe the minds even of those who
are best armed against discouragement.

At the last the boat was hoysed forth, and the Kings son taken into it.
They had cleared themselves from the danger of the ship, and might safely have
rowed to land. But the young Prince hearing the shrill shrikes of his Sister
Mary Countess of Perch, and of the Countess of Chester his cousin, crying
after him, and craving his help; he preferred pity before safety, and
commanded the boat to be rowed back to the ship for preseruatiou of their
lives. But as they approached, the boat was suddenly so ouercharged with
those, who (struggling to break out of the arms of death) leaped at all
adventures into it, that it sunk under them: and so all the company perished
by drowning. Only one ordinary Sayler, who had been a butcher, by swimming all
night upon the mast escaped to land; reserved as it may seem, to relate the
manner of the misaduenture. This ship raised much matter of nouelty and
discourse abroad; but never did ship bring such calamity to the Realm:
especially for that it was judged, that the life of this Prince would have
prevented those intestine wars, which afterward did fall, between King
Steven and Matild daughter to King Henry. The King was so ouercharged with this
heavy accident; that his reason seemed to be darkened, or rather drowned in
sorrow. He caused the coasts a long time after to be watched; but scarce any
of the bodies were ever found. Afterward he took to wife Adalisia daughter to
Godfrey Duke of Louaine, of the house of Lorraine: She was crowned at
Westminster by Roger B. of Salisburie, because Radulph Archbishop of
Canterbury, by reason of his palsy was unable to perform that office. And
yet because Roger was not appointed by him, the doting old man fell into such a
pelting chafe, that he offered to strike the Kings Crown from his head. And
albeit this Lady was in the principal flower both of her beauty and years,
yet the King had no issue by her.

Now as after a storm a few gentle drops do always fall, before the weather
turns perfectly fair; so after these great wars in France, certain easy
conflicts did ensue: neither dangerous nor almost troublesome to the King. For
Robert Earl of Mellent, who for a long time had continued both a sure friend,
and most close and private in counsel with the King; upon some sudden either
coffeehouse on his part, or dislike on the Kings, so estranged himself, as
it was enterpreted to be a revolt: being charged with intent, to advance
William, cousin to William, son to Robert Curtcuise, to the Duchy of
Normandy. Wherefore the King besieged, and at last took his chief Castle
called Pont. Audomer; and at the same time environed the tower of Roan with a
wall. He also repaired and fortified the Castles of Caen, Arches, Gisore,
Falace, Argentine, Donfronc, Oxine, Aubrois, Nanroye, Iuta, and the Town of
Vernone in such sort, as at that time, they were esteemed impregnable, and not
to be forced by any enemy; except God or gold.

In the mean time the Earl of Mellent, with Hugh Geruase his son, and Hugh
de Mountfort his sisters son, calling such as either alliance or friendship
did draw unto them; besides those whom youthful either age or minds had filled
with unlimited desires; whom coffeehouse also or want did vainly feed with
hungry hopes; entered into Normandy in arms: being so transported with desire
to hurt, and troubled with fear of receiving hurt, that they had never free
scope of judgment, either to prepare or manage the means to hurt. They were
no sooner entered the Confines of Normandy, but William Tankeruill the kings
Chamberlain came against them, bravely appointed, and resolute to fight. The
very view of an enemy turned their evil guided fury into a fear: and
whatsoever they did (proceeding rather from violence of passion then ground of
reason) made them stumble whilst they ran, and by their own disorders
hindered their own desires. So with small difficulty they were surprised and
taken, and brought to the King; who committed them to streit prison at Roan. An
ordinary event when rage runs faster, then judgment and power are able to
hold pace.

About this time Charles Earl of Flanders as he was at his devotions in the
Church of S. Donatus in Bruxels, was suddenly slain by conspiracy of his own
people. And because he left no issue in life, Jews King of France invested
William son to Robert Curtcuis late Duke of Normandy, in the Earldom of
Flanders; as descended from Earl Baldwine surnamed the Pious, whose daughter
Matilde was wife to King William the first, and grandmother to this William.
This he did, not so much in favor to William, or in regard of his right, as to
set up an assured enemy against King Henry: an enemy not only of singular
expectation, but proof: whose courage was apt to undertake any danger; whether
for glory, or for revenge. And herein his project did nothing fail. For no
sooner was the Earl advanced to that estate, but he raised a great hostility
against the King of England: as well to recover the Duchy of Normandy, as
either to relieve or to revenge the hard captivity of his father.

In this war the Earl did win a great opinion, both for judgment to
discern, and for valor to execute what he did discern: showing himself in
nothing inferior to his uncle the king, but only in treasure and command of
men. For this cause he craved supply of Jews king of France; who, as he was
the first that blew the cole, so was he always ready to put fuel to the
flame. But the King of England entered France with a strong Army, where his
sword ranged and raged without resistance: and yet more in prosecution of prey,
then in execution of blood. He lodged at Hesperdune the space of 8. days; no
less quietly, no less safely, then if he had been in the principal City of
his kingdom. By this means he kept the French King from sending succor to
the Earl of Flanders. And in the mean season drew Theodoricke Earl of
Holsteine, nephew to Robert who had been Earl of Flanders, and Arnoldus
sisters son to Earl Charles, not long before slain, to invade Earl
William: Both pretending title to his dignity, both bringing several armies,
consisting of men, tough in temper, and well exercised in affairs of the field.

Theodorick upon his first approach took Bruges, Ipres and Gandt; either
willingly yielding, or with small resistance: and upon the neck thereof
Arnoldus took the strong town of S. Omer. Earl William being thus set as it
were between the beetle and the block, was nothing dejected, nothing
dismayed, either in courage or in hope. And first he went against Arnoldus,
with a small company, but with such a lively countenance of a Soldier, that
Arnoldus fell to capitulation for his safe departure; and so returned home as
if he had been vanquished. Then the Earl made head against Theodorick, and
gave him battle, albeit far inferious to him, both for number and furniture
of his men. The fight between them was long, furious and doubtful. The
Germans confident in their number, which made them trust the less to their
valor: the Flemings rather desperate then resolute, upon importance of their
danger. And indeed it often happens, that good success at the first does
occasion the overthrow of many great actions: by working in the one side a
confidence in themselves, and contempt of their enemies; and by making the
other more earnest and entire. So at the last the violent valor of the Earl,
well followed with the brave and resolute rage of his Soldiers, did such
effects, that the Germans were shaken and disordered, many slain in the field,
and the residue chased out of Flanders.

The Earl having now no enemy in open field, laid siege to the castle of
Alhurst, which was defended against him by the English. The assaults were so
lively enforced, and with such variety of invention and devise; that a wide
way was opened through all impediments, and the defendants were constrained by
many necessities, to desire fair conditions of yielding. This whilst the
Earl delayed to grant, he received in a certain light conflict a wound in his
hand, whereof in a short time after he died: having first raised himself very
high in opinion with all men, for his courage, industry and skill in Arms.
And thus Duke Robert and his son William were brought to their unhappy ends;
rather through the malice of their Fortune, then through any bad merit or
insufficiency in themselves: whereby the Duchy of Normandy, which had been
both the cause and the seat of very great wars, was then strongly settled in
possession of King Henry.

He was never infested with domestical wars; which in regard of those
tumultuous times, is a manifest argument both of his justice and providence;
the one not giving cause, the other no hope, for his subjects to rebel. The
King of Scots did homage unto him; for what territories I do not determine.
Morcard King of Ireland and some of his successors were so appliable unto him,
that they seemed to depend upon his command. The Welsh who hated idleness and
peace alike, did strive beyond their strength to pull their feet out of the
mire of subjection; but in loose straggling companies, without either
discipline or head. For this cause he made diverse expeditions into Wales,
where he had many bickerings, and put many chases upon them: but found nothing
worthy the name, either of enemy or of war. Wherefore by maintaining
garrisons, and light troops of Soldiers, he consumed the most obstinate, and
reduced the rest to his allegiance: receiving the sons of their Nobility for
hostages.

At that time many Flemings inhabited in England; of whom some came over in the
time of King William the first, by occasion of his marriage with Matild daughter
to Baldwine their Earl: but the greatest part came under the reign of this
King Henry, by reason that Flanders at that time by irruption of the sea, was
in many places overflowed. The King was willing to entertain them, because
they brought with them both industry and trades; because they made the
Country both populous and rich. For in making a place populous, it is thereby
also made rich: draw people to a place, and plenty will follow; drive away
people, and it is undone. They were first planted near the river of Tweede;
besides those who dispersed into diverse Towns. But at this time the King sent
many of them into Rose in Pembrokeshire, whose progeny did ever since maintain
themselves in good condition against the Welsh: being a people even at this day
distinguished from all other bordering upon them, both in language, and in
nature, and in fashion of life.

On a time as the king marched through Powesland in Southwales, he came to
certain streights, through which his maine army could not pass, by reason of
their (...) and train of carriage: wherefore he sent the greatest part a
further way about, and himself with a small company took the nearer way
through those streights. When he was well entered, he was charged very sharply,
but rudely, and disordredly by the Welsh; who having the advantage both in
number and in place, did much annoy him from the higher ground; but durst not
approach to close fight at hand. The King himself was smitten with an arrow
full upon the breast: whereat he swore By our Lords death (which was his
usual oath) that it was no Welsh arm which shot that arrow. Many of his men
also were hurt, and the residue strangely disordred; the amazement being far
greater then the distress. But the king with a firm countenance retired in
time, the enemies not daring to pursue him any further, then they might be
assured by advantage of place. Then he sent peaceably unto them, and after some
ouertures, brought them to agree, that for a thousand head of cattle the
passage should be left open unto him.

IN this politic government he so managed the State, that neither subjects
wanted justice, nor Prince obedience. He repaired many defects, he reformed
many abuses, which would in the mean time enfeeble, and at last oppress the
Commonwealth. He ordered his affairs with such moderation, that he was not
only well obeyed by his subjects, but highly honored and respected by
foreign Princes: whereby it appeared, that learning may be both a guard and
guide to Princes, if it be not so immoderately affected, as to bereave them,
either of the mind, or time for action. He used much severity in punishing
offenders; severity, the life of justice; of justice, the most assured
preserver of States: affording no more favor for the most parr, then dead
merciless law did allot. Against the eues he provided, that no money should
save them from hanging. He ordained that counterfeitures of money should loose
both their eyes, and be deprived of their privy parts. He took away the
deceit which had been occasioned by variety of measures, and made a measure by
the length of his own arm: which has been Commonly used ever since by the
name of a yard.

And whereas there are two infallible signs of a diseased State; excess in
eating, and in attire; which could never be restrained by penalties or fear,
but the more the people are therein forbidden, the more are they ravished into
riot and vanity: the King by two means cast a general restraint upon them
both: by example, and by reproof: which by reason of the inclination of men to
imitate and please their Prince, have always been of greater force then laws,
to reform abuses in that kind. He much abhorred excess in eating and
drinking, and was so moderate in his own diet, that he seemed to feed only
for necessity of nature. He both used and commended civil modesty in
apparel: especially he could not endure an absurd abuse of men in those times,
in wearing long hair like unto women. And when their own hair failed, they
set artificial Peruques, with long locks upon their heads; whereas by censure
of the Apostle, it is reproachful for men to wear 1. Cor. 11. 14.
long hair. He discharged his Court of many loose lascivious persons;
affirming, that they were no good instruments of the kingdom; as being in
peace chargeable, and unprofitable for war.

During his absence in Normandy, which was sometimes three or four years
together, he committed the government of his Realm to Roger Bishop of
Salisburie: A man harmless in life, in mind flourishing and fresh, in
intention upright: most wise in taking, and most faithful and fortunate in
giving advise. He had governed the Kings expenses of house when he was but a
Prince of private estate; whereby he gained that reputation for integrity and
skill, which advanced him to a higher trust. He was Doctor of the Canon and
Civil laws, as most of the Bishops at that time were, and did bear the title
and name of Iusticiarius totius Angliae. He built the Devises in Wiltshire,
the Castles of Malmesburie and Shireburne. He repaired the Castle of
Salisburie, and environed the same with a wall; he built the stately Church at
Salisburie, destined to a longer life then any of his other works. And
further, by reason of the Kings much abode in Normandy, the provisions of his
house were valued at certain prices, and received in money, to the great
contentment and ease of the people.

In these times were mighty woods about the place where the two high ways
Watling and Ikening do join together; which woods were a safe covert and
retreite for many robbers, who much infested those high ways. The most famous
thief among them, was named Dunne a famous thief.
Dunne, a man mischievous without mercy, equally greedy of blood and of
spoil, the first infamy of his name: He was in a sort as the most
villanously aduentrous and vile; (for in lewd actions, the worst are greatest)
Commander over the rest, and of him the place was called Dunstable. To repress
this annoyance, the King caused the woods to be cut down, built there a
Borough, to which he granted Fair and Market, and that the Burgesses should
be so free as any other Burgesses within the Realm. He erected there also a
Palace for himself, and also a fair Church or Priorie; whereto he gave large
privileges and endowments. By these means he made the place first populous,
and consequently both plentiful and safe.

Many other royal works he performed, some for Religion, as the Religious
buildings specified before; some for strength, as diverse Castles in Normandy,
in Wales, and some also in England: and namely the Castle of Warwick, of
Bristoll, the Castle College and Town of Windsore on the hill, about a mile
distant from the old Town of Windsore; which afterward was much increased by
King Edward the third, and after him by many Kings and Queens succeeding. Many
Palaces also he built for ornament and pleasure. And to this end he maintained
his Park at Woodstocke, wherein he preserved with great pleasure diverse sorts
of strange beasts; which because he did with many demonstrations of pleasure
both accept and esteem* were liberally sent unto him from other Princes.

He first instituted the form of the high Court of Parliament, as now it is
in use. For before his time, only certain of the Nobility and Prelates of the
Realm were called to consultation about the most important affairs of state:
he caused the commons also to be assembled, by Knights and Burgesses of their
own appointment, and made that Court to consist of three parts; the Nobility,
the Clergy, and the Common people; representing the whole body of the Realm.
The first Council of this sort was held at Salisbury, upon the 19. day of
April, in the 16. year of his reign.

His severity in justice, the very heart string of a Commonwealth, his heavy
hand in bearing down his enemies, in disabling those from working him harm
whom he knew would never love him at the heart; was traduced by some under
terms of cruelty. And yet was he always more mindful of benefits then of
wrongs; and in offenses of highest nature, even for bearing Arms against him,
he punished oftentimes by imprisonment or exile, and not by death.

When Matilde his daughter was given in marriage to Henry the fifth Emperor, he
took 3. shillings of every hide of land throughout the Realm: which being
followed by succeeding Kings, did grow to a custom of receiving aid,
whenever they gave their daughters in marriage. For albeit the same be found
in the great Custumier of Normandy, yet was it never practiced in England
before. This happened in the fifteenth year of his reign: and he never had
the like contribution after, but one for furnishing his wars in France. So
the people were not charged with many extraordinary taxations, but their
ordinary fines and payments were very great; and yet not very grievous unto
them. For that they saw them expended, not in wanton wast, not in loose and
immoderate liberality, but either upon necessity, or for the honor and
dignity of the state: wherein the preservation or advancement of the common
good, made particular burdens not almost sensible.

But both his actions and exactions were most displeasing to the Clergy; the
Clergy did often times not only murmr, but struggle and oppose against his
actions: as taking their liberties to be infringed, and their state diminished;
by abasing their authority, and abating both their riches and power. When any
Bishopric or Abbey fell void, he did apply the revenues thereof for supply
of his necessities and wants: and for that cause kept some of them many years
together vacant in his hands. He would not permit appeals to Rome. Canons were
not of force within the Realm, unless they were confirmed by the King. Legates
from the Pope were not obeyed; and no man would come to their conuocations. In
so much as one of the Popes Legates in France did excommunicate all the Priests
of Normandy, because they would not come to his Synod. For this cause the King
sent the Bishop of Exceter to Rome, albeit he was both blind and in years, to
treat with the Pope concerning that business. He gave inuestitures to
Prelates, by Cross, Ring and Staff: and is charged to have received of some
of them great sums of money for their places. About this time the marriage of
Priests was forbidden in England; but the King for money permitted them to
retain their wives, and in the end set an imposition in that respect upon
every Church throughout the Realm. It auailed not any man to say, that he had
no purpose to keep a wife: he must pay for a faculty to keep a wife if he
would.

For these causes they fastened the infamy of covetousness upon him. For
these causes and especially for inuesting and receiving homage of Prelates, he
had a stiff strife with Anselme Archb. of Canterbury. For the King said, that
it was against the custom of his ancesters, it could not stand with the safety
of his State; that the Prelates, who at that time held the principal places
both of trust and command in his kingdom, who in very deed ruled all the rest,
should not be appointed only by himself; should not swear faith and
allegiance unto him; should either be advanced or depend upon any foreign
Prince. On the other side Anselme refused, not only to confirm, but to
communicate or common friendly with those who had been invested by the King:
reproching them, as abortiues and children of destruction; traducing the King
also, as a defiler of Religion, as a deformer of the beauty and dignity of
the Church. Hereupon by appointment of the King, they were confirmed and
consecrated by the Archb of York. Only William Gifford, to whom the K* had
given the Bishopric of Winchester, refused Consecration from the Archb. of
York; for which cause the King deprived him of all his goods, and banished him
out of the Realm.

Then the King required Anselme to do him homage, and to be present with him
at giving Inuestitures; as Lanfranck his predecesior had been with King William
his father. Against these demands Anselme objected the decrees of the Council
lately held at Rome; whereby all Lay-persons were excommunicate, who should
confer any Spiritual promotions; and all those accursed, who for
Ecclesiastical dignities, should subject themselves under the homage or
service of any Layman. Hereupon messengers were dispatched from both parties
to the Pope: who determined altogether in favor of Anselme, or rather in
favor of himself. Notwithstanding the king desisted not to urge Anselme, to
swear homage unto him. Anselme required, that the Popes letters should be
brought forth; and he would do as by them he should be directed. The King
answered, that he had nothing to do with the Popes letters; that this was a
Sovereign right of his Crown; that if any man may pull these Royalties from
his Crown, he may easily pull his Crown from his head: that therefore Anselme
must do him homage, or else depart out of his kingdom. Anselme answered, that
he would not depart out of the Realm, but go home to his Church, and there
see, who would offer him violence.

Then were messengers again sent to the Bishop of Rome; two Bishops from the
King, and two Monckes from Anselme. The King wrote to the Pope, first
congratulating his advancement to the Sea of Rome; then desiring the
continuance of that amity which had been between their predecessors; Lastly,
he tendered all honor and obedience, which in former times the Kings of England
did yield to the Sea of Rome; desiring again, that he might not be abridged of
such vsages as his father did enjoy: concluding, that during his life, he
would not suffer the dignities of his Crown to be empaired; and if he should
so do, yet the Nobility and common people of the Realm would in no case
permit it, but would rather recede from obedience to his See.

The Pope wrote back again to Anselme; that for one man's pleasure he would
not reuerse the decrees of former Popes; and therefore gave him both
encouragement and charge, to continue constant, and to see them observed in
every point. He directed also his letters to the King, which the King did
suppress: but his Ambassadors declared by word, that the Pope permitted
Inuestitures to the King, so as in other things he would execute the Office of
a good Prince. Anselme called for the Popes letters. The King answered, that
his Bishops were to be credited before the Monckes, who were disabled either
for voice or testimony in Secular affairs. Anselme said, that he was desirous
to yield unto the King, but he durst not although it should cost him his head,
unless he had a warrant from Rome: and therefore he would send thither again,
to have a more full and ample answer. The King and diverse of the Nobility
persuaded him to go in person, to travail to the Pope, and to travail with
him, for the quiet of the Church, and of his country. With much ado he was
entreated, and so set forth on his journey toward Rome: and after followed the
kings Ambassador Wiliam Warlewast, new elect Bishop of Exceter.

When the Bishop came to the Popes presence, he declared unto him; what great
commodities did rise out of England to the Sea of Rome; that the Inuesting of
Prelates had been an ancient right to the crown of that Realm; that as the
King was by nature liberal, so was he stout and resolute in courage* that it
should be a great dishonor to him, who in power exceeded any of his ancesters,
if he should not maintain the dignities which they held; that for this cause
the Pope should do well to prefer to his consideration, what prejudice might
follow to his Estate, if he should remit nothing of the seuerities of those
Canons which had been lately made.

The Pope gave an attentive ear, and seemed to pause upon that which had been
said. Which the Kings Ambassador taking to be a degree of yielding, did more
earnestly insist, and said: that the King his master would not for the Crown
of his Realm, loose the authority of inuesting his Prelates. Hereto the Pope
with a starting voice and countenance answered; Neither will I lose the
disposing of spiritual promotions in England, for the Kings head that bears
the Crown; before God (said he) I aduow it. His flattering followers
applauded this speech, as proceeding from a magnanimous courage, or rather as
some flash of divine inspiration: and the Kings Ambassador not a little
abashed, was content to descend to lower demands. In the end it was ordered,
that the King should be restored to certain customs which had been used by
his father; but that all they who had bin invested by the King, should be
excommunicate, and that their satisfaction and absolution should be committed
unto Anselme.

Thus Anselme, with full sail of victory and joy returned toward England;
but the Kings Ambassador stayed behind, to assay whether by any means he
could work the Pope to a milder mind. But when he saw that he travailed in
vain, he followed Anselme, and ouertooke him at Placentia, and there delivered
unto him certain private instructions from the King: that if he would come
into England, and behave himself as his predecessors had done toward the
Kings father, he should be welcome; otherwise, you are wise enough (said he)
you know what I mean, and may easily conjecture what will ensue. With these
words he flang suddenly away; by occasion whereof his speeches settled with a
more strong impression, and multiplied many doubtful constructions. So the
Ambassador returned to the King; but Anselme went to Lions, and remained there
a year and half.

In the mean time much posting was made between England, Lions, and Rome; but
nothing was concluded, nothing could please: For neither the Pope would yield
to the King, nor the King to Anselme. At the last Anselme threatened to
excommunicate the King: whereof the King being advertised by the Countess
Adela his sister, he desired her to come to him into Normandy, and to bring
Anselme with her. Here the King restored Anselme to his former possessions; but
his return into England was respited, until the Pope had confirmed certain
things which Anselme did assure. So the King took his passage into England,
and Anselme abode at the Abbey of Beck. Then were dispatched for Rome, William
Warlewast mentioned before, and Baldwine Abbot of Ramsey; by whose means the
controversy was composed between the King and the Pope; that the King should
receive homage of Bishops elect, but should not inuest them by Staff and Ring.
After this the king went into Normandy, and there agreed to Anselme in these
points following.

1 That all his Churches which had been made tributary to King William the
second should be set free* 2 That the King should require nothing of the said
Churches, whilst the Sea should remain vacant. 3 That such Priests as had
given money to the King to retain their wives should surcease from their
function the space of three years; and that the king should take no more after
such manner. 4 That all such goods fruits and possessions as the King had taken
from the Sea of Canterbury, should be restored to him at his return into
England.
Thus Anselme returned into England, and after a short time the king followed;
having taken his brother prisoner, and subdued Normandy to his subjection.

Forthwith Anselme by permission of the K. assembled a great Council of the
Clergy at Westminster; wherein he so wrought with the King, that at length
(albeit not without great difficulty) it was newly decreed; that no temporal
man should give inuestiture with Cross, or with Ring or with Pastoral staff.
Also he directed (...)* to the Priests of his Province, that they and their
wives should never meet within one house; that they should not keep any woman
in their house, but such as were next in kindred unto them; That he who held
his wife and presumed to say Mass within eight days after, should solemnly
be excommunicate. That all Archdeacons and their Officials should be sworn,
not to wink at the meetings of Priests and their wives for any respect, and if
they would not take this oath, then to lose their office; that such Priests as
would forsake their wives, should cease forty days from ministration in their
office, and perform such penance as should be enjoined them by their Bishop.
The execution of these Canons importing both a great and sudden alteration,
occasioned much disquiet and disorder in many parts of the Realm.

In the same Council the censure of Excommunication was cast upon those, who
did exercise the vile vice of Sodomitrie: and it was further decreed, that the
same sentence should be published every Sunday in all the parish Churches of
England. But afterward it was esteemed fit, that this general excommunication
should be repealed. The pretense was, for that the prohibiting, yea, the
public naming of that vice might inflame the hearts of ungracious persons with
desire unto it. But wise men coniectured, that after this severe restreint of
marriage in the Clergy, it did grow so frequent and familiar among them, that
they would not give way to so general a punishment. It is certain that in
this Kings days Io. Cremensis a Priest Cardinal, by the Kings license came
into England, and held a solemn Synod at London; where having most sharply
enueighed against the marriage of Priests, the night following he was taken in
adultery, and so with shame departed the Realm. It is certain also that
Anselme, the most earnest enforcer of single life, died not a Virgin; as by
the lamentation which he wrote for the loss thereof it may appear.

Not long after Anselme died, being of the age of 70. years. He had bestowed
much money on Christ's Church in Canterbury; as well in buildings, as in
ornaments, and increase of possessions. Other works of charge he left not
many; neither in very deed could he, by reason of his often banishments, and
the seasures of the revenues of his Church. But this he did more then liberally
supply by the eternal labors of his pen. After his decease the
Archbishopricke remained void five years: during which time, the King applied
the fruits to himself. The like he did to other vacant Churches; and
compounded also with Priests for reteining their wives; and made his profit by
Ecclesiastical persons and livings, more largely and freely then he had done
before. For which cause it is not unlike that the imputation of covetousness
was fixed upon him. At the last Radulph Bishop of Rochester was advanced to the Sea of Canterbury; and notwithstanding all former agreements and decrees, the
King invested him with Ring and with Staff.

But howsoever we may either excuse or extenuate the two vices of cruelty and
covetousness, wherewith he is charged, his immoderate excess in lust can no
ways be denied, no ways defended: And when age had somewhat abated in him the
heat of that humor, yet was he too much pleased with remembrance of his
youthful follies. For this vice it is manifest, as well by the sudden and
unfortunate loss of his children, as for that he was the last King by descent
from males of the Norman race, that the hand of God pressed hard upon him.

As Radulph succeeded Anselme in the Sea of Canterbury. So after the death of
Thomas, Thurstine the Kings Chapplaine was elected Archb. of York. And because
he refused to acknowledge obedience to the Sea of Canterbury, he could not
have his Consecration, but was deprived of his dignity by the King. Hereupon
he took his journey to Rome, complained to the Pope, and from him returned
with a letter to the King: that the putting of a Bishop elect from his Church,
without judgment, was against divine Justice, against the decrees of holy
Fathers: that the Pope intended no prejudice to either Church, but to maintain
the constitution which S. Gregory, the Apostle of the English Nation, had
stablished between them: that the Bishop elect should be received to his
Church, and if any question did rise between the two Churches, it should be
handled before the King.

Upon occasion of this letter a solemn assembly was called at Salisburie,
where the variance between the two Prelates was much debated. Radulph would not
give Imposition of hands to Thurstine, unless he would profess obedience.
Thurstine said, that he would gladly embrace his benediction, but profess
obedience to him he would not. The King signified to Thurstine, that without
acknowledgement of subjection to the Archb. of Canterbury, he should not be
Consecrated Archb. of York. Thurstine replied nothing; but renounced his
dignity, and promised to make no more claim unto it.

Not long after, Calixtus Bishop of Rome assembled a Council at Rhemes; and
Thurstine desired license of the King to go to that Council. This he
obtained under faithful promise, that he should there attempt nothing to the
prejudice of the Church of Canterbury. In the mean time the King dealt
secretly with the Pope, that Thurstine should not be consecrated by him. This
the Pope did faithfully assure; and yet by means of some of his Cardinals,
whom Thurstine had wrought to be suitors for him; by reason also of his hate
against Radulph, for taking Inuestiture from the King; The Pope was drawn to
give him consecration, and there with the Pall. For this cause the King was
displeased with Thurstine, and forbad him to return into the Realm.

After this, the Pope came to Gisors, to which place the King went unto him;
and desired that he would not send any Legates into England, except the King
should so require. The reason was, for that certain Legates had come into
England lately before, to wit, one Guid^, and another named Anselme, and
another called Peter; who had demeaned themselves, not as Pillars of the
Church, but as Pillagers of all the Realm. Also he required that he might
retain all such customs, as his ancestors had used in England and in
Normandy. The Pope upon promise that the King should aid him against his
enemies, yielded to these demands: and required again of the King, to permit
Thurstine to return with his favor into England. The King excused himself by
his oath. The Pope answered, that he might and would dispense with him for his
oath. The King craved respite, affirming that he would advise with his
Counsel, and then signify to the Pope what he should resolve. So in short
time he declared to the Pope, that for love to him, Thurstine should be
received both into the Realm and to his Church: upon condition, that he should
profess subjection to the Sea of Canterbury, as in former times his
predecessors had done* otherwise (said he) so long as I shall be King of
England, he shall never sit Archb^shop of York.

The year following the Pope directed his letters to the King, and likewise to
Radulph. And herewith he interdicted both the Church of Canterbury and the
Church of York, with all the Parish Churches of both Provinces; from Divine
service, from Burial of the dead, from all other offices of the Church; except
only baptizing of children, and absolution of those who shall lie at the point
of death: unless within one month after the receipt of the same letters,
Thurstine should be received to the Sea of York, without acknowledging
subjection to the Sea of Canterbury. It was further signified to the King,
that he should also be excommunicate, unless he would consent to the same.
Upon these letters Thurstine was sent for, and reconciled to the King, and
quietly placed in his Church at York. And thus when the Bishops of Rome had
gained absolute superiority over the state of the Church, even for managing
external actions and affairs (which seem to be a part of civil government)
there wanted nothing but either a weak Prince, or a factious Nobility, or a
headstrong tumultuous people, to give him absolute superiority over all.

In the second year of this Kings reign the Cities of Gloucester and
Winchester were for the most part wasted with fire.

In the fourth year a blasing star appeared, and four circles were seen
about the Sun. The year next following the King prevailed much in Normandy,
and so did the Sea in Flanders: insomuch as a great part of that Country lay
buried in the waters.

In the seventh year a blazing star appeared: and upon thursday night before
Easter, two full Moons were seen, one in the East, and the other in the West.
The same year Robert Duke of Normandy was taken and brought prisoner into
England.

In the tenth year the Abbey of Elie was made a Bishops Sea, and Cambridge
shire was appointed for the Diocese thereof. In regard whereof, the King gave
the manor of Spalding to the Bishop of Lincoln, for that the shire of
Cambridge was formerly under the Jurisdiction of Lincoln. The same year a
Comet appeared after a strange fashion. About Shrewsburie was a great
earthquake. The water of Trent was dried up at Nottingham the space of a mile,
from one of the clock until three: so as men might pass over the Channel on
foot. Wars ensued against the Earl of Aniou; a great mortality of men; a
murraine of beasts both domesticke and of the field: yea, the ^oules perished
in great abundance.

In the 13. year the City of Worcester, and therein the chief Church, the
Castle, with much people were consumed with fire. A pigge was farrowed with a
face like a child. A chicken was hatched with four legs. The year next
ensuing the river of Medeway so failed for many miles, that in the midst of
the channel the smallest boats could not floate. In the Thames also was such
defect of water, that between the Tower and the Bridge many men and children
did wade over on foot. This happened by reason of a great ebb in the Ocean,
which laid the sands bare many miles from the shore, and so continued one
whole day. Much rage and violence of weather ensued, and a blasing star. The
City of Chichester with the principal Monastery was burnt. The year next
following almost all the Bridges in England being then of timber, by reason of
a hard Winter were borne down with Ice.

In the 17. year the town of Peterborough with the stately Church were burned
to the ground. The City of Bath also was much ruined and defaced with fire. In
March there happened fearful lightning, and in December grievous thunder and
hail. The Moon at both times seemed to be turned into blood, by reason of the
evil qualited vapors through which it gave light. The year following,
Mathild the Queen departed this life* a woman in piety, chastity, modesty,
and all other virtues nothing inferior to her mother; but in learning and
judgment far beyond her: who did not act, nor speak, nor scarce think any
thing, but first it was weighed by wisdom and virtue. When the king desired
her in marriage, for the public good and tranquillity of the State, in
reducing the Saxon blood to the Crown; she first modestly, then earnestly
refused the offer; showing no less magnanimity in despising honors, then
others do in affecting them. But when she was not so much persuaded as
importuned to forsake her profession, she is reported by some to have taken the
matter so to heart, that she cursed such issue as she should bring forth: which
curse did afterward lie heavy upon them. For her son William perished by
shipwreck, and her daughter Matild was never void of great vexations. As she
travailed over the river of Lue, at the Old-foord near London, she was well
washed, and somewhat endangered in her passage: whereupon he caused two
Stone-bridges to be built over the same river, one at the head of the town of
Stratford, the other over another stream thereof, commonly called
Channelsbridge; and paued the way between them with grauel. She gave also
certain mannours, and a mill called Wiggon mill, for repairing of the same
bridges and way. These were the first Stone-bridges that were made in England.
And because they were arched like a bow, the town of Stratford was afterward
called Bow.

In the 20. year, a great earthquake happened, in the month of September. In the
22. year, the City of Gloucester, with the principal Monastery was fired
again. The year next following, the City of Lincoln was for the most part
burned down, and many persons perished with the rage of the flame. In the 27.
year, the King received an oath of the chief of the Prelates and Nobility of
the Realm; that after his death, they should maintain the kingdom against al
men for his daughter Matild, in case she should survive, and the king not leave
issue male in life.

In the 30. year, the City of Rochester was much defaced with fire, even in
the presence and view of the King. The year next following the oath to Matild
was received again. About this time the King was much troubled with fearful
dreams; which did so affright him, that he would often leap out of his bed,
and lay hand on his sword, as if it were to defend himself. This year as he
returned out of Normandy into England, when he had been carried not far from
land, the wind began to rise, and the Sea swelled somewhat big. This weather
did almost suddenly increase to so dangerous a storm, that all expected to be
cast away. The King, dismayed the more by his sons mishap, reconciled
himself to God; and vowed to reform many errors of his life, if he did
escape. So after his arrival, he went to the Monastery of S Edmund; and there
both ratified and renewed the promise he had made. After this he was better
ordered in his actions; he erected a Bishopric at Caerlile, and endowed it
with many honors: he caused Justice indifferently to be administered; and eased
the people of the tribute called Dane-guilt.

In the 32. year, Matilde daughter to the King was delivered of a son, who
was named Henry. Hereupon the king assembled his Nobility at Oxeford, where he
did celebrate his feast of Easter; and there ordained, that she and her heirs
should succeed him in the kingdom. And albeit they were often sworn to this
appointment; albeit Stephen Earl of Bloise was the first man who took that
oath: yet was he the first who did rise against it; yet did many others also
join with him in his action. For oaths are commonly trodden under foot, when
they lie in the way, either to honor or revenge. The same year the City of
London was very much defaced with fire.

The year next following, many prodigies happened, which seemed to portend the
death of the King, or rather the troublesome times which did thereupon ensue.
In the month of August, the Sun was so deeply eclipsed, that by reason of
the darkness of the air, many stars did plainly appear. The second day
after this defect of light, the earth trembled with so great violence, that
many buildings were shaken down. Malmesb. says, that the house wherein he
sat, was lift up with a double remove, and at the third time settled again in
the proper place. The earth in diverse places yielded forth a hideous noise; It
cast forth flames at certain rifts diverse days together, which neither by
water nor by any other means could be suppressed.

During the time of the eclipse mentioned before, the King was traversing the
sea into Normandy; whither he usually went, sometimes every year, but every
third year at the furthest. Here he spent the whole year following, in
ordering affairs of State, and in visiting every corner of the Country. He
never gave greater contentment to the people, as well by his gifts, as by his
gentle and courteous behavior: he never received greater contentment from
them, by the lively expressing of their love. But nothing did so much affect
him with joy, as that his daughter Matild had brought forth other two sons,
Geoffrey and William* whereby he conceived, that the succession of his issue
to the Crown of England was so well backed, that he needed not to trouble his
thoughts with any fear that his heirs would fail.

At the last he began to languish a little and droupe in health; and neither
feeling nor fearing any great cause, he rode on hunting, to pass it over with
exercise and delight. Herewith being somewhat cheered, he returned home, and
eat of a Lamprey, albeit against his Physicians advise; which meat he always
loved, but was never able well to digest. After this, and happily upon this
vicious feeding, he fell into a fever; which increased in him by such dangerous
degrees, that within seven days it led him to the period of his life. He died
upon the first of December, in the 67. year of his age: when he had reigned
35. years and four months, wanting one day. His bowels and eyes were buried
at Roan: The rest of his body was stuffed with salt, wrapped up in Ox hides,
and brought over into England; and with honorable exequies buried in the
Monastery of Reading, which he had founded. His Physician who took out his
brains, by reason of the intolerable stinch which breathed from them, in short
time after ended his life. So of all that King Henry slew, this Physician was
the last.

He had by his first wife a son named William, who perished by shipwreck;
and Matild a daughter, who was espoused to the Emperor Henry the 5. when she
was scarce six years old, and at the age of eleven years was married unto
him. When she had been married unto him twelve years, he died; and she
returned to the King her father, both against her own mind, and against the
desire of the greatest Princes of the Empire: who in regard of her wise and
gracious behavior, were suitors to the King more then once, to have her
remain as Empress among them. But the king would not consent to their
entreaty: For that she was the only heir to his Crown. Then many great
Princes desired her in marriage. But the King bestowed her upon Geoffrey, son
to Fulke Earl of Aniou: somewhat against her own liking, but greatly to the
surety of his estate in France. By him she had Henry, who afterward was King
of England.

Further, the King had by a Concubine, Richard a son, and Mary a daughter;
who were lost upon the sea with their brother William. By another Concubine he
had a son named Robert, whom he created Earl of Gloucester: a man for valor
of mind and ability of body inferior to none; in counsels so advised, as
was fit for a right Noble commander. By his faith, industry, and felicity
chiefly, his sister Matild did afterward resist and ouerbeare, both the forces
and fortunes of King Stephen. He is reported to have had 12. other bastards;
which were of no great either note or continuance, according to that saying of
the Wise man: Bastard plants take no deep Sapien. 4. 3.
roots.

This King in the beginning of his Reign made many favorable laws: And
namely, That he would reserve no possessions of the Church upon their
vacancies: that the heirs of his Nobility should possess their fathers lands
without redemption from him, and that the Nobility likewise should afford the
like favor to their Tenants: that Gentlemen might give their daughters and
kinsewomen in marriage without his license, so it were not to his enemy: that
the widow should have her ioynture and not be compelled to marry against her
own liking: that the mother or next of kindred should be Guardian of the lands
of her children: that all debts to the Crown and certain offenses also should
be remitted. But these laws afterward were but slenderly observed.

Three virtues were most famous in him; wisdom, courage, and sweetness of
speech. By the last he gained much favor from the people. By the other two he
purchased, both peace at home, and victory abroad. He was noted also for some
vices: but out of doubt they were far exceeded by his virtues. And for these
vices also, being himself of a pleasant disposition, he was well pleased with
pleasant reproves. Guymund his Chapleine (observing that unworthy men for the
most part were advanced to the best dignities of the Church) as he celebrated
Divine service before him, and was to read these words out of S. James; [It
rained not upon the earth iij. years and Iam. 5* 1^.
vj. months:] He did read it thus: [ It rained not upon the earth one, one,
one years, and five, one, months.] The King observed this reading, and
afterward rebuked his Chapleine for it: But Guymund answered, that he did it
of purpose, for that such readers were soonest preferred by the King. The King
smiled, and in short time after preferred him to the government of S.
Frideswides in Oxeford. In this King failed the heirs male of King William the
first: and then the Crown was possessed by Title of heirs general.

In these times flourished two excellent ornaments of the Church; Anselme in
England, and Bernard in France: both of them enrolled in the list of Saints.
And no less infamous for vice was Gerard, Archbishop of York; a man of some
learning; not so much in substance, as in seeming and show; of commendable wit,
which he applied chiefly, to give a color for every vice of his own, and for
every virtue of others either a slander or a jest: Of envious disposition;
plagued less with his own calamities, then with the well either doing or
being of other men; in wiping money from his Subjects by dishonest means,
subtle and shameless; and no less sordide in his expenses: given to Magical
enchantments as many do affirm. On a certain day as he slept upon a cushion
after dinner, in his Garden at Southwell, and many of his Chapleines walked
near him; he was found in such a stiff cold dead sleep, as will require the
trumpe of an Archangel to awake him. His face then looked with an ougly
hell-burnt hue. His body was carried to York; few vouchsafing to accompany,
none to meet it (according to the use of Exequies) when it came to the City;
but the boys in scorn throwing stones at the hearse. He was basely buried
without the Church; without any funeral solemnities, without any sign either
of honor or of grief.

Escapes.
Page Lin. Errat. Correct. 7 17 Tresuy Tresuy 15 7 for strength of defense of
strength for defense 17 17 in hand with hand 41 12 Troiane Tr^iane 68 1
Beaumant Beaumonte 70 8 example excellent example 71 25 desiled de^iled 75 7
Morcher Morchar 77 11 blow of an arrow bow and arrow 84 11 204 200 18 those
these 102 5 become became 19 but upon but by 104 13 Boline Bologne 113 4
Pontoife Pontoise 121 11 Castilion Chastilion 127 19 Bow Bough 146 8 Aescanius
Ascanius 188 4 rancks rank 201 4 the place that place 209 in marg. principium
principum 216 in marg. fata fato 260 7 hose house 279 8 this his 283 18 with
great pleasure Dele.


