THE Strong Helper, OFFERING TO BEAR EVERY MAN'S BVRTHEN.

OR,

A TREATISE, TEACHING in all troubles how to cast our burden upon God: but
chiefly delivering infallible grounds of comfort for quieting of troubled
consciences.

By JOHN HAIVVARD.

The second Edition, corrected and enlarged.

PSALM. 31. 22. Though I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, yet thou
heardest the voice of my prayer* when I cried unto thee.

Imprinted at London by JOHN BEAL^, for William Welby. 1614.

TO THE WOR. shipfull and his most kind and loving friends, Master Israel
Owen, and Mis. Bathshaba Owen his wife.
IN the first publication of this Treatise (the argument whereof is more
agreeable to the hungry desires of a troubled soul, then to the dainty
appetite of them that seek to have their ears delighted with fine invention)
I commended it to none, but unto such as had the only need thereof; even to
them that are weary and laden, which groan under that burden, whereof none can
ease them, but only he that bears up all things by his mighty word. Heb. 13.
And heals those that are broken in heart, and gives medicine to heal their
sickness. Psalm. 147. 3.

At this second edition I have been bold to publish it under your Worships
name, not that I have any higher conceit of it now, then at the first; to
think it now worthier, then at that time, to bear it in the forehead thereof
thename of any worshipful patron. For though it be in some places altered,
and in some enlarged: yet our books grow not under our hands, as our children
do, to become fairer, stronger, and wiser by continuance of years: but they
retain (with little alteration) their first proportion and members. And this
little book, as it was at the first, so it remains no other, then a knitting
together (in one continud discourse) of those observations, which in my public
exercise I delivered in many Ser^ mons, when I entreated of that text of
Scripture, which I have put down in the beginning as the argument of the whole
work.

But finding my self inde bted unto your love, in a greater measure then I am
able to make satisfaction for (which love of yours to me has continued now
above twenty years, and above all other proofs thereof, has lately declared
it self in a most free and kind offer of extraordinary favor) I have been
bold in this dedication to testify unto you. as I was able, my thankful
heart, which is the best recompense that my weak estate is able to afford.
And with this little book which I offer unto your Worshippes I offer unto
Almighty God, my most hearty prayers, that the father of mercy, and God of all
consolations, will ever continue unto you, and your posterity, the abundance of
his grace, both for a long and happy life in this world, and for a seasonable
and christian departure hence, that after your years be complete on earth,
you may reign with Christ for ever in Heaven. From my house in Woolchurch this
thirteenth of November. 1613.

Your Worships wel-willer John Hayward.

To him that is weary and laden.
SOLOMON in the Proverbs affirms, that he that is full despises a hunnie
comb. And one wiser then Solomon tells us in the Gospel, that the whole
have no need of the Physician: Idly therefore should I offer my labor in
this treatise to them that are full, and live at ease, who bearing no burden,
or in their strength not feeling what they bear, would reject my offer as a
mock, and say unto me, Brach ia da lasso potius prendenda natanti, offer your
hand to him that is ready to sink in the sloud, we have no need, we sit safe
upon the shore.

If these men's security be sound, I wish it may be durable unto them: and as
they have no desire unto, so I wish they may never stand in need of the
counsel contained in this book: this I wish them out of love, though (out of
judgment) e know, if they belong to Christ, the tim will come, when they must
bear a cross, and follow him.

But with hope of better acceptance, I offer my counsel here following unto
thee, that see^est the burden that thou bear, and gronest under the burden
that thou feel. Solomon in the forenamed place tells us, that to the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet And the Lord Jesus affirms the
sick to stand in need of the Physicians help. Thy burden makes thee as
fainting labourer to long for releese, and the crumes of Gods mercy, easing thy
ouercharged soul, would be acceptable to thee: and the pain of thy diseased
spirit, more sick of thy tentation, then of a burning fever, makes thee
desirous of the Phisions help, thou criest in thy grief, Rebus succurrite
lesis, help my grieved estate, and the offer and assurance of help and health
cannot but be joyful unto thee.

If thy grief and wearines be occasioned, by any troubles of this life, if it
grow from any secular and worldly cause, I have reduced all such burdens unto
four heads. Because either it is some want in our worldly estate, which
commonly is the burden and trouble of the multitude: or, if we be that way
well stored, it is some trouble domestical and near unto us, either in our
selves or in our house habitation or kindred* or if we have peace in our
habitation, joy in our kindred, friends and servants, with life and health as we
desire, then there is some more removed person, or more removed accident, that
is the cause of greese care and fear unto us: or ^f abroad as well as at home,
and among strangers as well as among friends and neighbors, we live without
disturbance, yet we often find difficulties in the duties of our callings, or
we meet with oppositions, and are wronged with mistakings, and are evil
rewarded for our well deserving. Within the compass of one of these four
heads fall all such secular and worldly burdens, and in the first place, I have
given advice concerning these: perhaps not altogether such as some wise men,
well seen and traded in worldly causes would give, but surely such as an
honest man should give, and such as he must observe, that looks to obtain
ease and help from God.

If thy trouble and grief be of another kind, if thy burden be spiritual,
and the whole business lies more directly between God and thee, and either as
an honest man thou art grieved that thou can not serve him as thou should,
or so humbled that thou art grieved that thou have sinned against him as thou
should not, and fear punishment for that sin: these troubles I have
reduced to two heads, for either the lusts of our flesh fighting against our
souls, do cross us in the ways of truth and righteousness, so that we
cannot do the good we would, and the evil we would not, that we do: and our
desires being as the desires of the children of light, our deeds become as the
deeds of the sons of darkness. Or else, having in time of our security,
given way unto our own lusts, unto the worlds allurements, and to Satan's
temptations, our sins are called to remembrance, are set in order against us,
with full manifestation of the wickedness of them, and of all that wrath that
they have kindled ni heaven, and of all that punishment that they have deserved
in hell, to the incredible terror of our conscience. Under these two heads of
the lusts of the flesh, and accusing thoughts, of the dominion of sin, and
the reward of sin, fall all those spiritual burdens, that are heavy to the
honest mind and to the humbled spirit. And of these I have given advice in the
second place, that if it happen to be last learned, yet it may be longest
remembered.

And because the burden of accusing thoughts is even as the gates of hell: for
it is true that Saint Gregory says. Inter multiples humanae animae
tribulationes, among the manifold tribulations of the soul of man, and the
innumberable troubles of afflictions, Nulla est mayor quam conscienti^
delictorum, there is none greater then the conscience of our sins. (He might
have said, none like it, none equal unto it) for in other troubles, which are
in a sort without us, and strive to break in upon the heart, the troubled man
(says Gregory) Ingressus in interiora mentis penetrali^, entering in into the
closet of his heart, there calls upon God where no man sees: yea also he
shuts the door of his heart against these assailing troubles, and keeps
peace within. But malae conscientiae tribulationem perferens, in arcano cordis,
deum non inuenit: He that indureth this tribulation of an evil conscience, of
a wounded conscience still accusing, finds not God in the secret of his
heart, has not that free, as a retiring place, where quietly he may conser
with God: but the plague begins within his heart, and the fire is kindled in
the mouth of the spring, where the living waters of comfort should flow.

Therefore in that argument I have labored to be more full, and not only in a
direct path have led the afflicted sinner to see his sin to be pardonable,
and himself to be allowed, yea commanded to crave forgiveness of it, and God
also bound by promise to grant it: which he will do, and (having promised)
cannot deny to do, if we seek it aright and may do without any impeachment
of his holy and severe justice, having receiu^d full satisfaction in the death
and sacrifice of his Son. But because the old serpent is subtle, and the
poor sinner is weak, and that cunning craftsmaster of all tentations and
snares, does sophistically frame many dangerous arguments, and puts them
into the mind and mouth of the affrighted and distempered sinner, making him
over witty to disclaim his part in God, and his inheritance in heaven: and
over confident in his fear, and over resolute in his doubting, so to drive him
(if it might be, and which the devil does most desire) into final despair;
therefore have I at large answered those arguments out of the word of God, and
with the sword of the spirit I have eat asunder the cords of those snaring
objections, which the enemy had bound more fast and close then were the cords
of Gordius: and ^ have endeavored to do this in a plain and familiar style.

Others dedicate their works to honorable patrons, because they are worthy of
honorable patronage: I have no such opinion of mine, I offer my labor, as a
loving service unto thee. They seek a defender, I seek a reader: not one to
countenance or commend what is written, but one that might profit by that which
I have written: and therefore I present it to thee, that art weary and laden,
together with my hearty prayer unto God for thee, that it may be (by Gods
blessing) a means of thy refreshing: entreating thee to read it thorough: and
again to read all that part that concerns the last burden which is the
burden of accusing thoughts, to thee the most heavy. Learn thou to depend
upon God* to fear him, and to abstain from sin^e, and he will be unto thee a
Father of mercy and a God of comfort. Unto whose mercy in Jesus Christ I
commend thee, taking my leave this 21. of January. From my house in Wool-church
in London.

Thine in the Lord JOHN HAIVVARD.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this book.
THE first Chapter shows the context. And divides the text. page 1. 2 The
second Chapter makes observation from the person instructing. page 3. 3 The
third Chapter makes observation from the person instructed. page 6. 4 The
fourth Chapter divides the instruction into a precept and a promise: and in
the precept shows what is meant by the name of burden, and sets down the
several sorts of burdens. page 9 5 The fifth Chapter teaches what it is to
cast our burden upon God in general rules, without reference to any particular
sort of burdens. page 21. 6 The sixth Chapter gives warning of two particular
sorts of burdens that must not be cast upon God. page 31. 7 Our burdens to be
cast upon God being some secular, some spiritual. The seventh Chapter teaches
how to cast the first secular burden of worldly cares and want of things
necessary upon God. page 36. 8 The eight Chapter teaches general rules how
to cast the second secular burden of domestical troubles upon God. page 52. 9
The ninth Chapter teaches particular rules for the casting of particular
domestical troubles vp^n God. page 71. 10 The tenth Chapter teaches how to
cast the third secular burden of troubles more remote upon God page 123. 11 The
eleventh Chapter teaches how to cast the fourth and last burden of secular
troubles, which is the difficulties of our callings upon God. page 140. 12 The
spiritual burdens ar^ either the rebelling lusts of the flesh, the honest
man's burden, or accusing thoughts breeding terrors of conscience, the humbled
man's burden. The twelfe Chapter teaches how to cast the burden of rebelling
lusts upon God. page 152 13 The thirtenth Chapter beginning with accusing
thoughts* if the sinner be charged in a general and confused manner, with an
evil heart, teaching how to seek ease by casting that burden upon God. page
172. 14 If the sinner be charged with particular sins and finds them done in
the time of his ignorance, the (...) Chapter teaches him how to seek ease by
casting that burden upon God. page 189. 15 If his particular sin were
committed against his knowledge, but either the sudden tentation gave him no
time to consider, or the violent tentation left him no power to resist, the
fifteenth Chapter teaches how to seek ease by casting this burden upon God.
page 197. 16 If his particular sin were committed with full consent of will,
the sixteenth Chapter teaches how to obtain ease by casting this burden upon
God, because only the sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable. And his
sin is proved not to be that sin, whereof God never gives repentance, and
therefore never forgiueth it. page 208. 17 Hence follow objections made by his
troubled mind And first he obiecteth that his sin comes so near that
unpardonable sin, that the angry eye of heaven can se no difference: and
though his sin be pardonable, yet it is punishable: and less sins then his
are punished therefore why not his. The seventeenth Chapter answers this
objection. page 225. 18 His second objection is, the justice of heaven cannot
suffer such sin as his to pass unpunished: and the holiness of heaven will
not admit such sinners as he to enter. The eighteenth Chapter answers this
objection. And adds encouragements from the promise of God and commandment
of Christ. page 234 19 His third objection is against Christ's commandment, as
not pertaining to him, he may not ask forgiveness of sins, because he cannot
call God his father. The nineteenth Chapter answers this objection. page 247.
20 His fourth objection is against Gods promise as not pertaining to him,
because it was Gods covenant with the house of Israel, and he is no Israelite,
neither after the (...) or after the promise. The twenieth Chapter answers
this objection. page 264. 21 His fifth objection is, notwithstanding Christ's
commandment to ask, and Gods promise to grant forgiveness yet ma^y perish
therefore why not he? The ^ne and twentieth chapter answers this obi^ction,
showing the conditions of obtaining forgiveness to be repentant toward God,
faith in Christ, and charity ^oward our brethren. page 275. 22 His sixth
objection is; There is in him neither repentance nor faith nor love. The two
and twentieth chapter answers this objection. page 302. 23 His seventh
objection i^; His heart is even full of all evil thoughts If they ri^e out of
his own heart, it is incurably evil, ^f the devil thrusts them in, his heart
is irrecouerable in the devils power. The three and twentieth chapter answers
this objection. page 312. 24 His eight objection is this; The law ^f God
curses (...), he is a transgressor, therefore by the law of God accur^ed, the
four and twentieth chapter answers this objection. page 330. 25 His ninth
objection is, He cannot pray, and alleges many impediments. The five and
twentieth chap. answers this objection. page 340. 26 His tenth objection in
an extreme fit of his disease is this; He is forsaken o^ G^d, he is a child
of perdition and lost, and he is a reprobate The six and twentieth chapter
answers this objection. page 368. 27 His eleventh objection is the h^ight of
despair. He says he must and will di^, and must and will be the instrument of
his own death, and alleges reasons for it, some to prove from the justice of
the fact, some from the aduentage. The seven and twentieth chapter, in answer
to the objection, shows the foulenes of the fact. page 421. 28 The eight and
twentieth chapter examineth and answers his reasons, both for the supposed
justice and for the supposed advantage of the fact, showing their weakness and
error. page 468. 29 Being driven from his desperate resolution, he makes ^
twelfth objection from his unworthiness of life, and of the comforts of life,
concluding that he must and will abstain from them. The nine and twentieth
chapter an^wereth thi^ objection. page 517. 30 A thir^eenth objection is from
the ^eare of death, that either he shall die before this ten^ation be overcome,
or that it will be renewed after death, as in the proper place, for then sins
are brought to judgment. The thirtieth chapter answers this obi^ction page
533 31 A fourteenth objection is a matter of discomfort, namely, that all
things that minister delight and comfort to others, are unto him mingled with
grief and fear. The one and thirtieth chapter answer^th this obi^ction and
conuerteth the precept. page 559. 32 The two and thirtieth chapter begins
the promise pronounced in words answer able to his own present estate. page
569. 33 The three and thirtieth chapter handles the first part of the promise
in these words he will nourish thee. page 578. 24 The four and thirtieth
chapter begins the second part of the promise in these words. He will not
suffer ^he r^ghteous to fall for ever, Men's falls are here showed to be either
into sin or into m^serie, and this chapter shows that God will not suffer
the righteous when they fall into sin, to lie in it for ever. page 35 The five
and thirtieth chapter shows that God will not suffer the righteous when they
are ^allen into misery either inward or outward, to lie in it for ever. page
36 The six and thirtieth chapter gathers the conclusion of all the whole
treatise. page
Faults escaped in Printing.
P^g. 19* line. 7 read wight. p. 23. l. 13. r. you. p. 54. l. 12 for and r. 2^
p. 84. l. 8. ^. their burden. p. 88. l. 17. 1. f^r mat man. p 89 l. 23 r. b^ by
the. p. 9^. l. 5. r. Aramite. p. ^04. l. 12 r* no meat^ and l* 13 (...). no
drink and l. ^7. r. ^rieue. p. 105. l. 1^. r. repentance. p 139. l. 8 r
tries. p. 141. l. 15. r offices. p. 1^2. l. 26. r. to (...) p. 153 l. 6. for
troubles. r. burdens. p. 160. l. 25. r. pnt^eth. p 164 l. 6. r (...). p. 172.
l. 12. r. muster master. p. 1^3. l 2. 6 r. loving. p 20^. l 25. for that. r. no
constancy. p. 225. l. 14 r. to show for. p. 2^8. l. 13. r. but l. p. 290. l.
1^. r. budding p. 315. l. 20. r. derived. p. 320. l. 12. r had covered. p.
(...). l. 2^. ^. sc^uethe. p 367* l. 13. r. and of the. p* 36^. l 12. ^. thou
knowell whereof. p. 392 l. 27. r and serve him. p 424 l. ^. r d^agon p. 427. l.
2^ r. in min^ hurt. p. 428. l. 3. ^. they ^ocke them. p. 432. l. 28. r.
conjecture unto me p. 436. l. 8. r. pe^secu eth. p. 442. l. 23. r. pas^ibus. p.
457. l. ^. r. limme. p. 465. l. 11. r. arts. p. 48^. l. 20. r. h^ receaueth p.
490. l. 11. r. cut of p. 502. l. 16. r. unexpected. p. 527* l. 15. r. idl^e. p.
560. l. 13 r. without content.

Other letterall faults good gentle reader bear withal.
THE STRONG HELPER.
PSALM. 5^. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: he
will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.
CHAP. 1.
THE violence of Saul and ^nuy of his courtiers had The context.
bred unto David trouble and danger. This trouble and danger had affrighted his
mind, so that trembling fear and horror oppressed his heart, as appears in
the first eight verses of this Psalm.

His trembling fear and horror made him ^e unto God, before whom he
complains of the most perfidious falsehood of his enemies; and at the hands
of God he craves (in justice) their death and destruction. This appears in
the next seven verses of the Psalm.

By this time his mind is somewhat calmed, having vented his grief into the
bosom of God, and therefore from the beginning of the sixteenth verse he
speaks in another temper, partly professing his own comfort, and faith
(whereto even the falsehood of his enemies, detestable before God, gave some
strength) and partly instructing others how, in like assault of trouble, they
may grow unto like comfort.

He professes his own recovered What is in the text
comfort in all these verses, beginning with the sixteenth, to the end of the
Psalm (my text excepted) and he instructs others in my text.

Those whom he instructs are such as himself lately was, namely men
ouercharged with some heavy burden.

The instruction that he gives them is the same that he followed himself when
he was burdened, namely, by faith and prayer to turn the burden upon the
shoulders of God; in these words, Cast thy burden upon the Lord.

The success that he promises them (observing his instruction) is the same
that he found himself, namely relief help and deliverance from God in these
words, And he shall nourish thee: he will not suffer the righteous to fall for
ever.

Some profitable observations may be drawn from the persons, instructing and
instructed: and some from the instruction it self. These things shall be
handled in order.

CHAP. 2.
THe person instructing declares Observation from person instructing.
true charity, seeking to further others in obtaining mercy, as he (before) had
been furthered himself, according to a good rule of our blessed savior, given
in word to Peter, but recorded in writing for all. When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren. That is, when Luke 22. 3^*
thou have found favor with God, teach others the way how so to seek, that
they also may find the same: and in all things impart unto others the good that
has been imparted to thee.

He that escaped a danger in the way, will he not give warning to his neighbor
that is to travel the same way? and he that has recovered health by any good
means, will he not in his neighbors sickness, acquaint him with the means
for his recovery? certainly an honest man will.

This rule should be kept in all things, but especially in the best things: when
thou have learned the truth, seek to recover thy brother out of error: when
thou have obtained grace to amend thy ways, seek to recover thy brother out
of the bands of sin: and when thou have won true comfort of heart, unto thy
self, help to settle the peace of thy brothers conscience.

Andrew having found Jesus brought his brother Simon to him. Philip having
found him brought Nathaniell to him. And the woman of Sichar having found the
Messiah, called her (...)* ^129.
neighbors saying, Come see a man that has told me all things that ever I
did* is not he the Christi* When thou have found God, yea rather have bin found
of God in any mercy showed unto thee, teach thy brother how to go forth to
seek the Lord, that he also may find him and be found of him.

For no man receives any blessing of God for his sole private use, but that he
should communicate the same to others It is a good saying of Chrysostom; It
Hom. 10. in 1. Corin. in ^rali.
belongs to him that receives, to communicate his good to others: and he
proves it by the members of the body, that communicate their faculties to the
whole body, and turn private possession into public use: and by the
professors of arts and sciences that communicate their skill and work unto
others. And he doubts not to affirm that whosoever refuses to communicate
the skill and blessing whatsoever, that he possesses, to the benefit of
others, hurts, yea destroieth both himself and others. Study therefore to
make common the mercy showed to thee. This does David having found comfort by
turning his grief upon God, he teaches others to do the like. Thus much of
the person instructing.

CHAP. 3.
THE person instructed is deciphered Observation from person instructed.
by his condition, intimated in the name of burden, when he says, Cast thy
burden: namely the man that in his soul is ouercharged with griefs and cares
and fears, as with a heavy burden: such as the Lord speaks unto in the
Gospel, Mat. 11. 28
saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you.
If a burden be heavy it ladeth, if it lie long upon us, i^ wearieth: to men so
laden and wearied, the Lord Jesus offers comfort. And unto the same men, to
prevent ouerlading and weariness, as also to procure their ease that are
ouerladen and wearied, David gives this instruction. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall nourish thee. etc.

Of men so burdened here are we taught, to have compassion, and to labor by
counsel and all good means to procure their comfort and ease. Thereto
pertaines that precept of God, Comfort Esai. 40. 1.
ye, comfort ye my people, will your God say: Speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, (in the Hebrew it is speak to the heart of Jerusalem: Which phrase
S. Jerome thus interprets He that speaks to him that Ier^n* in Esai 40.
mourns, and is unto him a pleasing comforter, he speaks to his heart,) and
cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned,
for she has received of the Lords hand double for all her sins. So that when
God has humbled his people by any cross, that for the correction of their
sins he laid upon them, his compassion presently moves, and he pittieth
them, as if they had borne twice more then they deserved: and thenceforth he
commands al men that regard his voice, to comfort them with all good words,
and to assure them of his favor. Yea to speak unto their heart, that is, all
such words as may minister comfort to their hearts.

The Apostle Paul gives a like charge unto us, saying, Comfort the feeble
minded. 1. These. 5.
And most excellently in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Remember them that are
Heb. 13. 3.
in bands, as if ye were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as
if ye also were afflicted in the body. We should esteem the afflictions of
others as our own afflictions, and take upon us in compassion that which they
sustain in passion. And both in our inward affection, and outward diligence we
should study and work their relief, as we should study and work our own.

For we are all of the same kind, condition, and quality: and nothing is
befallen them, that may not quickly fall upon us: also we are, and should
acknowledge our selves to be members of the same body, whose property (if they
be neither dead, nor divided from the body) is to feel the affliction of their
fellow members, and diligently to seek their relief. But especially finding
God to be rich in mercy to us, and even a father of consolation, we should be
merciful as our heavenly father is merciful, and should study to comfort them
whom the God of all consolation loves.

It is the precious use that God does give us of good men's company in this
life, and it is the thing wherein good men do prove themselves to be such,
when they with the balm of comfortable words heal the wounds of our grieved
souls. It is the saying of S. Austin: Good men even in this life afford us
Aug. epist. 121. cap. 1.
no small comforts: for if poverty pinch us, if sorrow make us sad, if pain in
our body afflict us, if banishment or any calamity vex us, if good men be
present, which know how to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with
them that weep, and in conference to speak healthful things unto us, those
sharp things are made maruellously gentle, those heavy things are made easy,
and those adversities are borne and overcome. For in a good man that has
bowels of compassion, it is most true, that one says, aegrotanti animo medicus
est oration, his words will heal a grieved mind. Thus much of the person
instructed.

CHAP. 4.
NOw we come to the instruction. Instruction.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall nourish thee: he will not suffer
the Parts of the text a precept, and a promise.
righteous to fall for ever.

This instruction consists of two parts, the first is a precept of advice,
the second is a promise of recompense. The precept is in these words, Cast thy
burden upon the Lord: The promise is in the rest, and he shall nourish thee: he
will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. This promise gives assurance
of mercy from God according to our want and desire: and the precept directs
us a sure course to seek and speed of that wanting and desired help.

In the precept, Cast thy burden upon the Lord: for the better understanding In
the precept*
thereof, it will be good to consider, first what this burden is, secondly what
it is to cast this burden upon God. These things understood, the precept is
understood.

The name of a burden is familiar: What burden means
many poor men live by bearing burdens, and know well the meaning of that name,
when they feel the weight upon their shoulders. But here it is used in a
borrowed sense, for any thing that is heavy to the mind, breeding fear care
and grief: of which burdens there is great plenty in the world: and every man
high and low, at one time or other, is feign to play the porter, and bear some
of these burdens, some more heavy and some more easy, but every man some.

For order sake we may endeavor to bring these burdens unto certain heads,
under which, if not all (for this fruitful world breeds new burdens daily)
yet the most may be comprehended.

And because in some of these burdens we have immediately and at the next hand
to do with worldly matters, and with men, in things belonging to this life: in
others we have immediately and at the next hand to do with spiritual matters,
and God himself, in things belonging to our souls, and the life to Burdens
secular and spiritual.
come, therefore I will divide them into secular and spiritual burdens.

The secular burdens shall again be First secular worldly cares.
reduced to four ranks, whereof the first shall be the burden of worldly
cares, when a man's charge is great and his maintenance small, and he takes
care how to pay his debt, how to get meat and clothes, and other necessaries
for him and his; which burden is made heavy upon us* sometime by the immediate
hand of God, sending times of dearth, and losses by fire and water, and other
ways: sometime by other men, as by oppressors, deceivers, thieves, bad
debtors, false servants, and riotous children: sometime it is increased* by our
own fault, through idleness, through play, through foolish bargains, through
daintiness of fare, costly apparel, and other courses of riot. And this
burden may be called the burden of the multitude.

The second rank shall be of domestical Secondly, secular domestical troubles.
troubles, either in thy self, thy family, thy kindred, or thy habitation. For
where there is wealth at will, and that way no cause of care, yet Job may
languish being full of diseases, David may have a scornful Michol to his wife,
Abigail may have a churlish Nabal to her husband, Rahel may mourn for her
children because they are not, the son may be riotous and disobedient, the
daughter may be dishonest, and between Amaon, Absolon, and Thamar, the father
of the family may have grief enough: servants may be unfaithful, and perhaps
maintain factions, thy kindred may be unkind, or fall into some calamity, and
thy next neighbor may be thy near and great enemy, or thy house may be
visited with sickness, so that thy trouble shall breed even in the nest of
thy rest, in thine house, at thy table, in thy bed, and in thy bones, and
there, and from thence shall thy vexation grow, where, and from whence thou
did promise thy self comfort.

A third rank of these burdens shall be Thirdly, secular more remote troubles.
troubles more remote, growing from enemies and occasions further of. For many
men have peace at home, joy in their obedient and loving wives, comfort in
their dutiful and sober children, content in their trusty and faithful
servants, and sweet fellowship with their kind neighbors, so that their home
and habitation is their happy paradise: and yet their* estate may be
undermined, by oppressors and deceivers, their names may be disgraced by liers
and slanderers, and their lives brought into danger, by blood thirsty and
malicious enemies: and they touched with the calamities Fourthly, secular
difficulties of our calling.
of their brethren abroad.

A fourth rank of these burdens shall be the difficulties following the duties
of our callings. For though it be our honor and our crown to perform the
duties of our callings, yet they grow diversely to be burdens unto us: sometime
when more is required at our hands then we are able to perform, either by the
fault of other men, when we are called unto public services, before we be
^ipe and fit for them: or by our own great fault, when we, either couetously
or ambitiously, intrude into callings, that we are insufficient for, seeking
the reward and honor of the place, without regard of the service to be done in
it. Sometime we are sufficient, and also painful, and yet either God denies
success, to exercise us thereby, or men oppose against us, as Elimas did
against the preaching of Paul. Sometime men are sufficient, diligent, and
effect the service laudably, but envious men misinterpret and misreport their
doings, as the Pharisees did the works of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in stead
of praise they are rebuked and reproved, and in stead of deserved and expected
reward they are in danger of punishment. In all these cases the duties of our
callings in themselves honorable, yet become heavy burdens unto us. Under these
four heads I suppose all secular and worldly burdens may be comprehended.

There are other burdens, wherein we have to do immediately with God, in
things that belong to piety, to peace of conscience, and to the life to come.
Those may be reduced to two heads. The first 1. Spiritua sinful lusts.
head and rank of these burdens, are our sinful lusts, our inbred
corruptions, and infirmities, and the law of sin in our members rebelling
against the law of our mind, whereby it comes to pass, that even the best
regenerate man, that fears God, and loves righteousness, that has both his
understanding enlightened and his will sanctified, so that he wants neither
knowledge, zeal, nor humility, yet can neither do the good, that gladly he
would, nor leave undone the evil that his soul abhors. This is no small
burden to the man that would please God, and do his duty, that he becomes his
own troubler against his own will, and crosses himself by corruption, in
that wherein he takes pleasure by sanctification. This made Paul the Apostle
to cry out in these words, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver Romans 7.
24.
me from this body of death? It was death to him that such corruption was so
preualent in his frail body. And in another place he calls the same law of
sin, a prick in the flesh, the messenger of satan to 2 Cor. 12. 7
buffet him; because it was ever serviceable to satan, and armed his hand
against the holy feruant of God, so that whenever the Apostle did set his
heart to do well, the devil did beat him with the weapons of his own
corruption. This is no small burden to an honest minded man.

The second rank of these spiritual burdens are accusing thoughts, checkes 2.
Spiritual accusing thoughts.
and terrors of conscience, the worm in thy bosom gnawing thine heart. This
burden often follows the former, as Zophar speaks, When wickedness was
Job. ^0. 12.
sweet in his mouth, he hid it under his tongue, and favored it, and would not
forsake it, but kept it close in his mouth: then his meat in his bowels was
turned, the gal of aspes was in the midst of him. That is, at first, sin in
the committing of it is sweet, as ratsbane and poison often is, goes down
merrily, and is meat and drink to the sinner, and he can not be won from
it, because it is his delight: but at last the time comes according to the
saying of God in the Psalm, I will Psalm. 50. 21
reprove thee, and set them, (that is thy sins) in order before thee.
According to this saying, God mustereth his sins together, and presents a
view of them before the soul of the sinner: where the devil as a great
officer in that camp, sets them forth in their colors, that all the
contempt of God and of his commandments, all their unthankfulness, and
forgetfulness of their duty, all the violence, filthiness, fury and disorder
that accompanied their sins, appears fresh to the sinners understanding:
and what wrathin heaven, what shame on earth, and fire in hell, he has made
himself worthy of, and must now look for. And this turns the meat in his
stomach into (...), this is more deadly then the poison of aspes can be: then
fear increases and nope decreaseth: then the wicked are confounded, and could
wish ^illes and mountains to fall upon them to cover them from the face of
God: and thinking to fly deserved destruction, they often times cast themselves
into eternal destruction, and with Saul, Achit^phel and Judas, kill themselves.

Yea the best servants of God, when it pleases him to lay this burden in any
toller^ble measure upon them, are exceedingly affrighted for a time. David's
words being pressed with this burden, show the heavy load of it. There is
nothing sound in my slesh, because of thine anger, Psalm. 38 3.
neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin: For mine iniquities are
gone over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. His
affliction was great, when the grief of his mind changed the health of his
body, and left no soundnes^e either in flesh or bones. And so was it with the
Prophet, and the only cause of this so great disease was, the remembrance of
his sins, and the fear of Gods ange^ by those sins deserved. Another time
laden with this burden as he was before, he complained Psalm 40. 12
of his load as he had done before, saying Innumerable troubles have compassed
me: my sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea
they are more in number then the hairs of my head; therefore my heart has
failed me Needs must the assault of innumerable troubles follow the
remembrance of innumerable sins: and these troubles, where they lay hold, do
depresse the heart, that the ouercharged weight cannot look up to the mercy
feat of God. Yea where faith wageth battle against fear, and keeps the
field well strengthened with many promises, and in the end prevails,
restoring peace to the conscience yet there for a time (until the hour and
power of darkness pass over) terrors are great, when the charge of sin
lies upon the soul.

See it in him that had the greatest assurance of all the sons of men: when
the glorious son of God, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, for our redemption
was to take up, and bear the burden of our sins, it did put him to
unspeakable pain, and was upon his mighty shoulders a mighty burden. Hence
came Mat. 26. 39
that tripled prayer; O my father if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Thence came that agony that
Saint Luke speaks of, that being in an open garden, and kneeling on the bare
ground, about the midst of night, in a cold season of Luke 22. 44.
the year, he fell into a great sweat, and his sweat was like drops of blood,
trickling down to the ground. Thence came that cry upon the cross, which was
not the singing of a Psalm, but the true dittie of sorrow, and of a depressed
soul, speaking as was before prophesied of him, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken Mat. 27. 46
me? All these grew from the burden of our sins laid upon him, that he
bearing our sins in his body upon the tree, we might be delivered from sin,
to live in righteousness. The burden therefore of sin, when accusing
thoughts once press and charge the conscience, citing us to appear and answer
before God for our offenses, is a most heavy burden; the burden of the humble,
and broken hearted man: these are the two ranks of spiritual burdens.

Now under these six ranks, four of secular burdens, two of spiritual; I
suppose all those burdens may be comprehended, which lie heavy upon us in this
world, and cause fear care and grief unto us; first care of the world:
secondly, domestical troubles: thirdly troubles more remote: fourthly, the
difficulties that follow the duties of our callings: fifthly the sinful lusts
of our flesh fighting against our souls: lastly accusing thoughts, breeding
terrors of conscience.

CHAP. V.
YOu have heard what the What it is to cast our burden upon God.
burden is: now let us consider what it is to cast this burden upon the Lord.
And hereof I will speak first generally, without relation to any particular
sort of these burdens: and then particularly, with relation to the particular
sorts of burdens before named: and in such order as they were named, but first
generally. In general


What it is to cast our burden upon the Lord, we may see by the words of Saint
Peter, repeating this precept of our Prophet, and adding a reason in his words,
and these are his words, Cast all your 1. Pet 5. 7
care on him, (that is, on God) for he cares for you: that is when afflictions
lie heavy upon you, and careful thoughts, how to be freed from those
afflictions, troble your hearts, quiet those thoughts in your selves, because
your wisdom is defective, and your power is weak, and you are unable to
bring enterprises to pass: and doing that, which in such case; God commands
and allows to be done, commend your business and the success of it to God
by faithful prayer: his wisdom is infinite, his power is omnipotent, and by
him enterprises are brought to pass. This is Peter's advice, using our Prophets
words, and only changing the name of burden, into the name of care, because our
burdens do breed our care: and this reason he adds in his own words, for
he cares for you: that is, he takes upon him, and will dispose and effect
all things for your ^ase and safety.

This exposition of casting our burden upon the Lord, is further warranted by
the council of Saint Paul, saying thus; Phil 4. 6.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be showed to God in
prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks: that is, whereas others
wrestling with the burden of their business, take much care how to accomplish
what they desire, and gaze upon their strength, their wealth, their wit and
friends, to see what help these can afford: do not you in such sort trouble
and turmoile your selves; but modestly considering and using such means as you
have, and giving thanks unto God, whether your means be great or small,
entreat him in your faithful prayer to prosecute the business for your not
betraying your own business by sloth and negligence, yet trusting only to
God, and depending only upon his blessing for success, fail not continually
to solicit him with your prayers.

David that is the speaker here* does in another place by another speech of
his, excellently interpret this, saying: Psalm. 37. 3.
Trust thou in the Lord, and do good, dwell in the Land, and thou shall be
fed assuredly: delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts
desire: commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass: and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noone day* wait patiently on the Lord, and hope in him.

Here he gives many precepts, and every precept has his annexed promise. The
precepts do follow one another in a most kindly order* and together do teach
us what is to cast our burden upon the Lord.

First he commands us to trust in the Lord, that is, to call to remembrance
Verse 3.
the covenant that God made with us, and the many promises that he has given
us: and seeing he is faithful and true in all his promises, to trust to that
covenant, and to ground our faith upon those promises.

Secondly, he commands us to delight Verse 4.
our selves in the Lord, that is, to cheer up our hearts in God, and to
rejoice in him, seeing we have a God both wise, mighty, mercisull, and
saithfull, tied unto us by so large promises, more worth then all friends,
favorers, and helpers in the world. And this reioicing kindly follows trust
in God.

Thirdly, he commands us to commit our ways to the Lord: that is, after
Verse 5.
our trust is settled in the covenant and promises, and our joy conceived in
having God so tied unto us, then, to fall to prayer, and to entreat God that
he will take our cause into his hands, that he will be pleased to prosecute
the business for us: and seeing he is the gouerner and disposer of all the
world and of all causes in the world, that he will vouchsafe among all other
causes, to have care of ours.

Lastly, he commands us to wait Verse 7
patiently upon God and hope in him: that is, when trust has begotten
rejoicing, and trust and rejoicing have together showed our desires unto God in
prayer, then to expect in quietness of our mind such issue as he shall be
pleased to give, not failing to hope for all goodness at his hands.

Among which degrees of our demenour to Godward, for the referring of our
cause^ to him, he forgets not to insert this advise* that we do good
Verse 3.
and dwell in the land; that is, that continuing in our place and standing, we
take no in direct courses, that may offend God, and pull a curse upon us in
stead of a blessing: but that we do the offices of our callings, behauing our
selves in all things as becomes wise and honest men, as in the sight of God,
that we may in all good conscience expect his blessing. Thus does he teach us
to cast our burdens upon God.

These rules being observed, then he promises in all things ease of our
burdens. First he promises sufficient maintenance, saying; Thou shall be fed
assuredly. Verse 3.
Secondly, he promises content of heart. saying; He will give thee Verse 4.
thy hearts desire. Thirdly, he promises convenient dispatch of all thy
business, saying; And he shall bring it to pass. Verse 5.
Fourthly, he promises justification of all thy well doings against
mis-construction and slander, saying; He shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day: which all men clearly
discern. These promises pertain to the second part of my text, and they
greatly commend the soundness of those rules of advice, whereto they are
annexed.

And the rules of advice do interpret the casting of our burden upon God. That
my text speaks of: and they show us, that this is truly to cast our burden
upon God, namely, in our trouble to remember the covenant of God, and the
promises of help, which as he gave in mercy, so he will fulfill in truth: and
to trust unto that covenant, and unto those promises, that is, unto that God
that made that covenant, and gave those promises: and thereupon to take heart
unto us, and to cheer our selves in God, which he calls delighting in God,
reioyeing that we have so wise, so mighty, so merciful, and so faithful a
God, so strongly tied unto us by so faithful promises: and then in this
gladness of our hearts to commend our business unto God by prayer, and to
make him our advocate, our Atturny, our solliciter, our factor, our agent,
putting over our cause wholly to him, reserving nothing to ourselves, but to put
him in remembrance from time to time by our prayer, and carefully shunning all
unlawful shifts, that flesh and blood may persuade unto, doing that only that
he by his word does command us. And having thus left the cause in the hands of
God, to wait patiently and quietly for such success, as God shall be pleased
to give, thinking that always best, which he shall be pleased to do* This
by David's own interpretation is that casting of our burden upon the Lord,
which in the words of our text he advises unto.

For illustration of the doctrine, rising Examples of this casting off our
burden.
out of these places of Scripture; Let me allege an example or two, wherein
you shall see the true practice of these holy rules. While Abraham, having
left his servants, went with his son Isaac, to the place where he was
commanded to offer him up for a burnt offering unto Genesis 2217.
God, Isaac spoke unto Abraham his father and said, My father, and he answered,
Here am I my son: And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is
the Lamb for the burnt offering? then Abraham answered, My son, God will
provide him a Lamb for a burnt offering. Here is a notable example of casting
our burden upon God. Abraham was a true believer, and in a case of no small
trouble, and burden to his soul, he faithfully intended to do, as God had
commanded him: and for the success of all the business, he laid all upon God,
and left it to the disposition of his good pleasure, saying, God will provide;
so must we do: and this is to cast our burden upon the Lord.

When Jacob, to shun the fury of his brother Esau, from whom he had won his
father Isaacs blessing, and also to the end that he might marry in his
kindred, and not with a daughter of Canaan, as Esau had done, was sent by his
father Isaac in poor estate, with his staff in his hand toward his uncle
Laban, by the Genesis 28. 20
way he vowed a vow, saying* if God will be with me and will keep mein this
iourny which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and cloths to put on, so that
I come again unto my fathers house in safety, then the Lord shall be my God,
etc. And upon this vow and prayer ma le, Jacob went forward. Here was a right
casting of his burden upon God, while desiring moderatly things necessary for
him, for his food, for his clothing, for his safety, and for his return, he
seeks them by no wrong courses, nor afflicts his soul with care for them,
but meekly by prayer beggeth them at the hands of God.

When David fled from Jerusalem, be cause of the rebellion of his son
Absalom, and it was told him that Ahitophel that great politician was joined
with Absalom, being then in great heaviness, as having a great burden fallen
upon him, going up the Mount of Olives, with his head covered, his feet bare,
and weeping as he went, he prayed unto God and said, O Lord, I pray thee turn
2. Sam. 15. 31.
the counsel of Ahitophel into foolishness. And afterward, when in his way
Shemei had railed upon him, and Abisha^ in his heroical indignation would have
taken off the railers head, David said to Abishai and to all his servants:
behold my 2. Sam. 16. 11.
son, which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life: then how much more
now may this son of Iemini? suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden
him. It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and do me good
for his cursing this day. Here does David turn his burden upon the shoulders
of God, while he refers all to his pleasure, and makes request unto him for
help, vfing in the mean time much patience.

The places of Scripture before alleged, and these examples added for
illustration, do teach us in general manner for all burdens whatsoever, that
th^s is to put them off from our own shoulders, and to lay them upon the
shoulders of God our strong helper, namely, if in our troubles we remember
God, think upon his covenant and promises, his truth and faithfulness, his
wisdom, mercy and power: and thereupon pray unto him for his help, referring
our business wholly to his pleasure, patiently expecting, and thankfully
accepting what issue he shall be pleased to send. Thus much for this point,
what it is to cast our burden upon the Lord, considered generally without
reference unto any particular branch of our burdens.

CHAP. VI.
NOw we are more particularly To cast our burdens in particular.
to consider of this point of casting our burden upon the Lord, with particular
reference unto those ranks of our burdens remembered before.

But before I begin with them, seeing we must speak of particulars, I will by
Two burdens not to be (...) upon God.
way of caveat tell you of certain particular burdens, that men do cast upon
God against his liking: and they are not so much burdens lying heavy upon
themselves, whereof they seek to be cased by the strength and mercy of God as
they are burdens which with pleasure they bind, and cast upon God to vex him
withal. Such burdens we are not here warranted to cast upon God.

These burdens are of two kinds, by First is a formality without pity.
two kinds of men prepared. The first kind of these burdens is the ceremonious
worship of God, not accompanied with true reverence in our hearts, nor with the
conformable practice of godliness in our lives. This burden God does complain
of by the Prophet Esaias, saying. Bring no more oblations in vain, incense Esaias
1. 13.
is an abomination unto me, I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Saboths, nor
solemn days (it is iniquity) nor solemn assemblies. My soul ^ateth your new
Moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am weary to
bear them. And when you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you They were formal in the outward service of God: therein they did
well; but because they wanted the reverend fear of God, and their hands were
defiled with the blood of their oppressions and cruelties, therefore their
dutiful formality was abhorred of him that loves truth in the inward
affections: though the ceremonies of that formality had been appointed by
himself.

This burden is the pleasure of hypocrites, and by them prepared to weary the
Lord withal, by such as fear men more then they fear God: and love the
praise of men more then the praise of God: and draw near unto God with their
mouths, and honor him with their lips, but they remove their hearts far from
him, and are like unto painted Sepulchers, shining without, and stinking
within, so they appear unto men to be holy, but within they are full of
hypocrisy, and in secret commit all iniquity. This inward and hidden
wickedness is it that disgraceth their (otherwise laudable) outward and open
obedience. The second is an open wicked life


The second kind of these burdens is an open wicked life, when men cast off
both the fear of God, and also modesty, so that they neither make conscience
of their doings in regard of God, neitheir make dainty of doing open evil for
fear of the opinion of men. Of this burden the Lord complains by the Prophet
Amos, saying: Behold I am pressed Amos 2. 13
under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. If a Cart be
ouerladen, it lies heavy upon the Axeltree, that makes a whining and groaning
noise, and sometime breaks, laying both Cart and load in the dust. So press
they God with the load of their sins, until he groan under them, and
complain by his Prophets, and at last overthrows them, casting both them and
their sins by his just judgment into hell.

This burden is prepared by bold and contemning sinners: by men that rise early
to follow drunkenness, and are strong to drink strong drink: by men that
commit adultery, and assemble themselves by companies in harlots houses, and
rise in the morning like fed horses, every man neighing after his neighbors
wife: by men that lay wait as he that sets snares, and makes pits to catch
men, and fill their houses with the fruit of deceit as cages are filled with
birds: by men that have two kinds of waights and measures, and use to swear
falsely: by men that say desperately, we will do whatsoever thing goes out of
our own mouth, and our strength shall be the law of unrighteousness: by
mockers that say where is the hope of his coming? and as the Prophet Esaias Esa.
5. 19.
testifies of them, draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with
Cartropes. Of which audacious men that neither fear God nor man: and are
neither religious to regard conscience, nor civil, to regard good name, the
world is full.

These are the two kinds of burdens, the ceremonious worship of God, without
truth and piety, prepared and thrown upon God by dissembling hypocrites: and
the bold transgression of all law and order, prepared and cast upon God by
wicked contemners: these are those particular burdens, which by way of caveat I
thought fit to warn you of, that you meddle not with casting these upon God,
least he cast both you and your burdens into eternal destruction in hell.

But our heavy burdens that press our souls, and breed fear, care, and
grief unto our minds, whereof we desire to be eased, those we may and must
cast upon God, and are, not only allowed, but allured also to turn them off
upon him.

CHAP. VII.
OF these burdens, some are Secular burdens.
secular, concerning this world, and no way touching Heaven or Hell: and some
are spiritual merely concerning our souls, and the life and death thereof,
and the service and favor of God. Of the secular there be four kinds.

The first secular burden is worldly The first is worldly cares.
cares, when a man's charge is great, and his maintenance small: the common
burden of the poor; though sometimes also wringing the back of the rich. This
burden grows heavy, sometimes by the work of Gods hands, sending more
charge, less gains, dear times, and unexpected losses: sometimes by the
malice of other men, some oppressing by power, some deceiving by fraud, and
some wasting by riot whom thou did trust: and sometime by thine own fault,
as by sloth, by sumptuous courses in apparel, diet, building, and by foolish
bargains. This burden makes men groan out these words, what shall we eat?
what shall we drink? wherewith shall we be clothed? how shall I pay my debts,
maintain my credit, and answer the charges of my place?

To cast this burden upon God is to What it is to cast this upon God.
proceed by these rules: First to consider the bounty of God that gives to all
both life and breath and all things. Secondly, upon consideration of this
bounty, to fall to prayer, that he will be pleased to extend that bounty unto
thee. Thirdly, to apply thy self diligently and faithfully in some honest
calling, wherein God may bless thy hand to fill thy mouth, fleeing all
unlawful shifts. Fourthly and lastly to take heed of excess. This excess is
double, first the excess of desire, which we calcouetousnes when a man is not
content with that that is sufficient: secondly, the excess of spending which
we call riot, when a man has a humor to waste intemperatly.

The first rule is to acquaint our selves First to learn Gods bounty.
with the bounty of God that we may conceive hope of help from his hand, whereof
the Prophet says, thou openest thine hand Psalm. 145. 16.
and fillest al things living of thy good pleasure: this bou^ty of God will
appear unto us, partly by the testimony of the Prophets partly by the evidence
of his own works and liberal deling with his cretures.

His bounty is testified by the Prophets, Testified in his word. Psalm. 104. 14.
and other holy men. David thus speaks of it: He causes grass to grow for
the cattle, and herbs for the use of man: that he may bring forth bread out
of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of man* and oil to make the
face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's heart. This is a marvelous work
of Gods providence, and an evidence of great bounty, that out of the dry earth
he brings forth food for us. Of his special care among men, to deal
bountifully with them that fear him, the Prophet Esaias gives testimony,
saying, Esa. 65. 13.
thus says the Lord God, behold my servant shall eat, and you (that is the
wicked, for to them he speaks) shall be hungry: my servants shall drink, and
you shall be thirsty: my servants shall rejoice and you shall be ashamed. When the
wicked shall want and in their want be confounded, the righteous shall abound,
and in their abundance rejoice. Excellent is the testimony of our Savior Christ
in the Gospel of S. Math. saying, Mat. 6. 26.
Behold the fowls of heaven, for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into
the barns, yet your heavenly father feeds them: are ye not much better then
they? if God extend his bounty to creatures of so small regard, to whom also the
means of providing their food by sowing, reaping, and reserving is denied, that
notwithstanding he sends them sufficiency: how much more will he provide for
the children of men, that are of better regard with him and to whom he has
given means of providing their own food by sowing, by reaping, and by reserving
their store. Excellent is the testimony of Saint Paul among the unbelieving
Gentiles at Listra, unto whom he commends the true God that made the world,
before the vain Idols which they served, saying, he left Act. 14. 17.
not himself without w^nesse, in that he did good, and gave us rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. Such
was his bounty even toward them that worshipped idols, and being his creatures,
he failed not to supply them with necessaries^ how much more will he not fail
his own children, which worship him in spirit and truth. Such testimony do the
Prophets and other holy men give of the bounty of God, that opens his hand,
and fills all things living with his goodness.

And the evidence of his works is very Testified by his works.
clear, to approve unto us the same goodness. He gives daily and yearly
store of food, and nourishes life in all his creatures that participate life.
But because the work of God in his ordinary providence is not observed and
esteemed as it ought to be; let him that is burdened with the cares of this
life, by reason of want, consider the records of Gods bounty, making provision
by miracle, when ordinary provision failed. How he provided for Israel in the
wilderness Exo. 16. 35.
forty years, sending them bread from heaven every mourning. How he provided
for Elias in a time of dearth, 1. Kings 17. 4.
causing the Ravens to bring him bread and flesh every morning and every
evening, his drink being the water of the river Kerith. And how after the
river was dried up, he multiplied the meal in the Widows barrel, and the
Oil in the 1. Kings 17. 14.
cruse, so that there was sufficient for her self, her son, and the Prophet
her guest. How he multiplied another widows oil, 2. Kin. 4. 4.
so that many vessels were filled, and a great sum of money was raised to pay
her debts and to relieve her self and her son. And how he provided for the
people of Samaria, when the famine 2. Kin. 7. 1.
was great among them, so that over night the head of an Ass was sold for
foure-score pieces of silver, and the next day a mesure of fine flower was*
sold for one sicle, and two measures of Barley for a sicle: a thing so unlikely,
before it came to pass, that a great man hearing the promise of it over night,
said, though 2 Kin. 7 2.
the Lord would make windows in heaven could this thing come to pass? these
and many other like records do approve to us the care of God for men, and his
bounty toward them to be such, that if ordinary provision fail, by reason
of any judgment of his, he will by miracle provide for his, rather then they
shall want. And for the man burdened with care by reason of want, that would
be eased by casting his burden upon God: this is his first rule, to consider
those and such other testimonies of Gods bounty, that there may be grounded in
his heart a good persuasion of Gods care, that has given life, to give
nourishment to maintain the life that he has given.

The second rule, and next step of Secondly, to pray for this bounty.
casting his burden upon God, is, out of this well persuaded heart, to pray
unto the same bountiful God, that gives food unto all flesh, and feeds the
young Ravens when they call upon him; and offers the pray to the young lions,
that roaring in their hunger, seek their meat; and clotheth the grass of the
field with admirable beauty, that he will be pleased to send food and
clothes, and other necessaries for thee and thine. Therein G^. 28. 20.
thou have Jacob for an example, who going toward his uncle Laban, by the
way, in his vow made unto God, prays for food, and clothes, and preservation;
and thou have the Lord* Jesus for thy warrant in so praying, who in the Gospel
teaches us, and commands us to pray unto our heavenly Father, for all things
necessary for this life, in these words, Give us this day our daily bread.
Whose Matt. 6. 11
precept and prescribed order, does not only command us to pray for these
things, but does also give us comfortable hope to obtain all things that we
pray for.

A third rule and further degree of casting Thirdly, it is to follow some
lawful calling.
this burden upon the Lord, is, that we take heed of all unlawful shifts, as
of theft, of oppression, of fraud, and of idle begging (by which courses men
cast their burden, not upon the back of God, but of the devil, seeking ease
and help at his hands) and that we apply our selves diligently in some honest
calling, that we may first earne, and then eat our bread, according to the
doctrine of the apostle Ephe. 4. 2^
Paul, saying; Let him that stole steal no more, but let him rather labor,
and work with his hands the thing which is good etc. And in an other place
speaking of inordinate walkers that refuse to work, he says, Them that be
such we command and 2. Th. 3. 1^
exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat
their own bread. And to such, honestly traveling in some good calling, GOD
will give bread and all things needful, as the Prophet says: Trust thou in the
Lord and do Psalm. 37. 3.
good, dwell in the Land, and thou shall be fed assuredly. And afterward he
says in another Psalm, Blessed is every one that Psalm. 128. 1
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways: when thou eatest the labor of
thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well with thee. Tremelius,
according to the Hebrew reads it thus, Thou shall enjoy, or thou shall be
fed with the labor of thine hands. So that God blessing the labor of his
hands, that trauelleth honestly in a lawful calling, will give him food and
needful things, and ease the burden of his charge.

Whereas the man that refuses to travel in an honest calling, rebelleth
against Gods order, and makes the burden of his want to be heavier. He
rebelleth against the order of God, that casting Adam Genesis 3. 19.
out of Paradise to till the ground, established this as a law for him and his
posterity, In the sweat of thy face shall eat bread, till thou return to the
earth. Therefore ease and sloth must not be the delight of him that would win
case of his burden of want at Gods hands. And that he makes the burden of
his want heavier, that refuses to labor, Solomon teaches us in the Proverbs,
saying to the sluggard; Yet a little sleep, a Prou. 6. 10.
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, therefore thy
poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the way, and thy necessity like an
armed man. The traveler comes to thine house, when thou do not look for
him, and when the armed man comes he will not be shut out. In this manner,
stealingly as the traveler before thou art aware, and forcibly as an armed
man, that cannot be driven away, will poverty and necessity come upon him that
will not take pains to earne his own bread. Yea it is the justice of GOD to
whippe with want the idle droane, and he forbids bread to be given unto
them, as Paul's words to the Thessalon* declare, saying, When we were ^. The. 3.
10
with you this we warnd you of, that if there were any that would not work,
that he should not eat: if this discipline of the Apostles were put in
practice, a number of idle men and women swarming in the Land, would quickly
be reformed. But while justice sleeps among magistrates and officers, and
charity is become foolish among well disposed people, sloth and idleness,
the breeders of all ungodliness, unrighteousness, and uncleanness, live and
grow fat and lusty among us: and true poverty (in the little ones of Jesus
Christ) is defrauded of her due relief, intercepted by sturdie droanes. But
our laden wight, whose burden is want and worldly care, must for his ease apply
himself unto some honest course of life.

The fourth and last rule, which pertaines Fourthly, it ^ to fly all excess.
to the right casting of thy burden upon the Lord, when the cares of this life,
by reason of want, are heavy upon thee, is, to take heed of all excess. Now
this is double, the first is the excess of desire to get, the second is the
excess of thy mind in spending: the first excess knows not what is enough,
and therefore is ever caring, though there be no need: the second excess
consumes more then enough, and therefore makes want, and by want brings
care where none* needed to be, if moderation had been steward. The first
excess is covetousness, the second is prodigality.

Many men by Gods mercy are provided Excess of desire to have.
of sufficiency, but they are not therewith contented, and will still take
care when they need not. Solomon in his time among the vanities under the
Sun, observed it for one, saying, There Eccles, 4. ^
is one alone, and there is not a second, which has neither son nor brother,
yet is there no end of al his travel, neither can his ei^ be satisfied with
riches. He had no great family to nourish, he had no posterity to provide
for, and yet could he never be satisfied; the more he had, the more he
desired, and his thirsting after wealth increased with every draft of gain
and advantage that he took. He that so exceeds in his desire, how can he be
eased of the burden of worldly cares? for, what God gives for his ease, he
conuerteth into a new load; such men increase their burden, and make it heavier
by endless desire.

Of this excess Christ warns us to take heed, saying unto us, Take heed
Luk, 12. 1^
and beware of covetousness, for though a man have abundance, yet his life
stands not in his riches. The greatest store makes not the most secured
life: and he^ that thinks to live long in plenty, is often suddenly taken away
from all, and in his abundance did ever live in want, because his boundless
desire never thought him self to be full, when yet he possessed superfluity.
Therefore is contentedness so much commended in the Scripture. 1. Tim. ^. 6
The Apostle Paul says, Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with
that he^ has: for we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that
we can carry nothing out: Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us
there with be content. This virtue of contentedness he must strive for, and
intertaine, that desires to be cased of his burden of worldly cares. And let
him remember a notable saying of the Prophet in the Psalms, A Psalm. 37. 16
small thing unto the just man is better then great riches unto the wicked. It
is not so much the measure of thy possession, as Gods love and favor with thy
possession, that makes it to be an case of thy burden: and let him learn to
follow as near as he can, the example of S. Paul, who thus prosesseth of
himself, saying, Phil. 4. 11.
I speak not because of want, for I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content: and I can be abased, and I can abound: every where in
all things I am instructed; both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound,
and to have want. This lesson of contentedness with things necessary, when our
desires are kept within due bounds of moderation, helps greatly to case him
that is pressed with the burden of worldly cares, by reason of some wants.
Excess of ^ending.


The other excess is the excess of spending: that excess is vnthristinesse,
prodigality and waste, whereby many that had no burden of this kind, and were
well provided for do make unto themselves a burden of want, to break their
own back withal. And I think there was never age, wherein this excess was
so excessive as in this age, while some man loses at play in a day, more then
he gathers of his reuenew, or wins by his labor in a week, perhaps in a
yee^e: some man spends in idle iournies, or in merry meetings abroad, that
which would serve to seed and clothe the family at home: some man spends in
beautifying the house for show, in furnishing the table for gluttony, in
pursuing idle pleasures for vanity, far above the proportion of their
estate: and in decking the body with rich attire, all moderation is exceeded:
so that a young man wastes more silk in his garters and shooe-strings, then
his grandfather (upon the greatest feast day) did wear in all his apparel. And
I know it, that some have all the points they use tagged with gold, as little
looked after, and as soon lost as if they were of brass. By which courses,
before they are aware of it, they bring a fair portion to beggary; for excess
and riot are in a man's estate as moathes in his garment. The m^ath makes a
garment to be rags before bare threedes be seen: even so excess and riot
beget in a man's estate want and need before it be espied. It is the saying of
Solomon; He that loves pastime Pro. 11. 17.
shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich. Vain
pleasures and sumptuous fare make a man poor. And in another place, The
drunkard and Pro. 23. 21
the glutt^n shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags.
Excess of meats and drinks makes a man a beggar: and ^lenesse will suffer no
wealth to cleave unto him. These are the two excesses, desire to have, which is
covetousness, and spending that thou have, which is prodigality: that he must
take heed of, that would be cased of the burdens of care growing from want.

Call these rules to mind; in them thou have sure direction how to turn the
burden of thy care, growing from want, upon the shoulders of God for thy ease.
First make thy soul acquainted with the bounty of God in providing for his
people, by considering the testimonies and evidences thereof, that thou may
trust in him. Secondly, being persuaded of Gods bounty, pray him to extend
that bounty unto thee. Thirdly, use faithful diligence in some honest
calling, shunning all unlawful shifts, which are never blessed. Fourthly, take
heed of all excess; of the inward excess of desire in thy heart, and the
outward excess of waste in thy spending. He that does these things, casts
his burden upon God in the cares of this life, and shall not be disappoynted.
To him pertayne these promises, and all such like, Thou shall be P^. 37. 3* 19.
fed assuredly; and again after, In the days of famine they shall have
enough. Thus much for the first particular branches of burdens, even the burden
of worldly cares.

CHAP. 8.
THE second branch of these The second secular bur den is domestical troubles.
particular burdens, is the burden of domestical troubles, which may be
heavy upon him that is far and free from the former burden, having for
wealth the world at will. I call them domestical troubles, when the matter and
occasion of his troble is near unto a man: as in these cases; When strife and
offense arises between husband and wife, between parents and children,
between masters and seruan's, and between neighbor and neighbor: or when
the hand of God, in some grievous calamity, in some dangerous sickness, or in
death is heavy upon thy self, thy wife, thy child, thy servant, or some
other of thy family, or some near friend. This is a grievous burden, when a
man's vexation breeds in the very nest of his rest, as in his house, his
table, his bed, and his bones. And this is domestical trouble. To cast this
upon God, rules general and particular.


This burden you may see by the cases before named to be very variable. For the
casting of this burden upon God, there are many rules: some are more common to
be observed in all domestical troubles; some are more private, fitting for
this or that domestical trouble. In this chapter I will set down those rules
that are common to all these troubles. The first general, i^ patience.


And first of all, it is a common rule, in all these troubles, pertaining to
the right casting of them upon God, that we arm our souls with patience, and
quietly bear whatsoever God is pleased to lay upon us. For shall we be willing
only to receive good things at the hands of God, things agreeable to our
hearts wish, and when he is pleased, either for our trial, or for our
correction, or for any other holy cause, to lay upon us evil and hard things,
unpleasant to flesh and blood, shall we then murmr against his work? God
forbid. Job justly reprooueth such a course, saying to his wife; Shall we
receive good things at the ^. b 2. 10.
hands of God, and not receive evil? As when good things come, it is fit to
acknowledge Gods free mercy, and to be thankful: so when evil things come,
it is fit to acknowledge Gods holy justice, and to be patient. And this course
of casting our burden upon the Lord, our blessed Savior the Lord Jesus Christ
commends unto us, and a sure way of finding ease, saying unto us, Take my Mat.
11. 29
yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly of heart, and you
shall find rest unto your souls: that is, whatsoever burden falls upon any of
you, either after my example, or for my sake, (which I account to be my
burdens, for I labor in him that labors under those burdens) let him not
murmr, let him not spurn impatiently against it: but let him take it meekely
unto him, as I did my death. This shall bring ease to his soul, for this is to
cast his burden upon God, while for Gods sake he is willing to bear his good
pleasure.

This patience a while continued, will make thy yoke easy, and thy burden
Patience eases by breeding joy.
light; and whilst others cry and complain, thou shall rejoice in God:
therefore have the Apostles, both in their practice and in their doctrine,
joined together patience and rejoicing in the times of trouble, because
continued patience breeds joy. Of their practice joining patience and
rejoicing together, Paul speaks thus; Also we rejoice Romans 5. 3.
in tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Such was
their practice. Which while he reports, does he not there with all
deliver, that troubles patiently borne, do give experience of Gods favor,
give hope in Gods mercy, and breed a confident and undaunted spirit ^ and
these three, experience, hope, and confidence are the grounds and true
supporters of joy. Of their doctrine preached to others, James the Apostle
shows us what it was, saying, My brethren, count it exceeding joy, James 1^
when ye fall into diverse tentations: knowing that the trying of your faith
brings forth patience: and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may
be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. In their practice, could this course be
kept in wisdom* In their doctrine, could this rule be given in soundness,
if the patient bearing of all our troubles were not a ready and very
sovereign way of casting our burdens upon the Lord for our ease? therefore
have care of this in the first place, to possess thy soul in patience.
Reasons why to be patient.


And if it seem to any man a hard thing to be patient in trouble, let him not
fear to attempt, even by this course of patience, to cast his burden upon the
Lord. For there are many reasons, that persuade thereunto. First, the burden,
while it continues, is a sure testimony of Gods love unto thee. Paul in his
Epistle to the Hebrews says, My son, Hebr. 12. 5
despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of
him: for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son
whom he receives. The chastisement of the Lord by these troubls, is an
evidence of his fatherly love: and therefore we ought with the patience of
children to bear it. Secondly, while God out of his love continues the burden
of this trouble upon thee, he does it only for thy good. As the same Apostle
teaches us in the same Epistle, Heb. 1^. 10
saying, He chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
holiness^. The effect of those troubles intended of God, is our benefit, that
we may be brought to have nearer fellowship with God in holiness; and
therefore they are to be borne with patience. Thirdly, though God seem to
continue our burden long, and in the mean time to show small kindness unto
us, yet sure the end of them will be with a blessing. As Moses says of the
work of God, leading the children of Israel for many years together through a
weary wilderness, that he did it to prove them, that he might do Deuteronomy. 8. 16
them good in* the latter end. And if the conclusion of our trouble, like the
wrestling of Jacob, shall be with a blessing, it is to be born with all
patience. A fourth reason there is to be regarded above all other reasons, and
of force to make a man patient even in the fire, namely, that if we suffer
with Christ, we shall reign with Christ, and when we have endured patiently a
while on earth, we shall be rewarded honorably for ever in heaven. Hereof the
Apostle Paul thus speaks; Our light affliction, which is but for a season, 2
Go^ 4. 17
causes unto us a furre most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.
Affliction shall be rewarded with most excellent glory: light affliction with
a weight of glory: and momentanie affliction with eternal glory: therefore to
be borne with all patience. He that considers these things, that if God do
send trouble, it is of his fatherly love unto us as unto sons: that in these
troubles he only intends our good, to bring us to have fellowship with him
in holiness, that our troubles shall bring peace and a blessing in the end: and
lastly, that GOD will bring us from a Cross to a Kingdom, and turn our
Crown of thorns into a crown of glory: He that considers these things will
bend his heart to bear his burden patiently. Whereby he certainly turns
his burden upon God for his great ease, making a heavy burden to be light,
(which while it is patiently borne) melts and falls off from the heart,
like rain falling from the high grounds: so that after a while he despises
the troubles, that at the first were fearful unto him; and they seem unto
him moale hills, that at the first showed (a far off) like mountains. This is
the first common rule of casting our burden upon God, always to be observed.

By this rule, if it be Husband or Wife Use of this patience in domestic all
troubles.
that causes unquietness, we are taught to suffer their unquietness, whom
we can neither reform nor remove, and not to make a great flame of a small
spark, by provoking the unquiet to more unquietness. If it be Parents or
Children that cause unquietness, Parents must be honored, and Children must be
cared for, though in some things they grieve us: and God may amend them at the
last, if we in the mean while, bearing patiently their infirmities, continue
our duty to them, and our prayers for them. If it be Masters or Servants that
cause unquietness, the Servants in patience must be subject to their Masters
with all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward:
they can not shake off their Masters, while the days of their servitude
continue: and the masters in patience must do unto their servants that which
is just, not omitting any means whereby they may reform them: and in the end,
the master has power to ease himself of an incurable evil servant, by
dismissing him. If it be neighbor against neighbor that causes unquietness,
this rule teaches, not to render evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke; but
contra^iwise in patience to bless, and to do all good offices in need,
whereby thou shall have peace in thy heart, howsoever thy neighbor be
disposed to contention. And if thy home-trouble be painful sickness, either
upon thy self, or upon some of thy household, or some* other near and dear
unto thee: this rule teaches thee (whatsoever other means for recovery of
health be used) to bear thy visitation meekely, humbling thy self under the
mighty hand of God in every thing. If thy trouble be the death of any whose
life thou did desire, this rule will teach thee (knowing the death of the
righteous to be unto them the beginning of true life) to give glory to God
with a quiet mind. This patience in all things will give thee ease of thy
burden, according to the saying of our Savior; Take Mat. 11. 29
my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. This is one common rule.

A second common rule in all these The second general is prayer.
troubles, pertaining to the right casting of them upon God, is, that we pray
unto God, craving his help, who for ought we know, has therefore laid these
troubles upon us, because we have been negligent in prayer: that now feeling
sensibly in our sorrow, our need of his help, we might amend our old
negligence, and fall to prayer. And surely, whether God did send our troubles
for that cause, or no; yet this is most sure, that prayer is a most profitable
course for the easing of our trouble: which God commands with promise of
ease, saying by the Prophet, Call upon me in the Psa. 50. 15
day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And the
Saints have always used it with happy success of ease. As the Prophet
testifies, saying, These called upon the Lord and he Psalm. 99. 6.
heard them. So did Jacob, when returning from his uncles, he heard that Esau
was coming forth against him with four hundred men, he said thus unto God, I
pray thee deliver me from the hand Ge* 32. 11.
of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come, and
smite me, and the mother upon the children: And according to his desire, God
delivered him from his fear: for his brother and he met in peace, and
departed one from another in peace; so did Moses, when the Aegiptians pursued
the Israelites, and the Israelites feared the Aegiptians Ezo. 14 15
before the red Sea, The Lord fayd unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me?
for Moses in his heart prayed earnestly unto God, and God did deliver him from
his fear, opening a passage for the Israelites through the waters of the red
Sea, and drowning in the flood the Aegiptians that presumed to follow: so that
Israel saw the Aegiptians Exo. 14. 30
dead upon the Sea bank. We need not stand upon particular examples, having
a general rule that never fails, the Prophet saying, The Lord is near Ps.
145. 18.
unto all that call upon him, yea, to all that call upon him in truth: he
will fulfill the esire of them that fear him, he also will bear their cry,
and will help them. Now seeing the saints do thus in their troubles pray unto
God for ease, and do thus at the hands of God obtain ease when they pray in
their troubles, it is evident, that to pray unto God in our trouble, is a
worthy rule of casting our burden upon God in all domestical, yea in all
whatsoever troubles.

And let no man say, there is no need Need of prayer.
in these troubles to trouble God with our prayers, because he knows both
what we suffer, and what himself has determined to do, for these reasons thou
ought the more gladly to pray, because God does understand thy want before
thou complain, and is determined to succor before thou entreat him* thy
labor with such a God cannot be in vain.

And this know, thou have great imploiment for thy prayers in these and such
like troubles. First thou have need First for thy self.
to offer up prayers unto God for thy self that he will give thee patience and
wisdom to demean thy self aright under these troubls, that thou may
neither be a murmurer against God, grudging at those troubles nor increase thy
troubles by dealing indiscreetly, and frowardly with them that are the causers
and occasion of thy troubles: nor may err, and be wanting in using good
remedies to heal and reform them that are the causers of thy troubles. And if
thy domestical trouble be sickness in thine own body, how necessary it is to
pray unto God, to give thee patience to send thee health, to forgive thy sins,
and to prepare thee for death? when James the Apostle exhorts to rejoice for
temptations, and to continue in patience, till patience have her perfect work,
because these things require an extraordinary wisdom, he further advises us
to pray unto God for that wisdom saying; If any of ^ou lack wisdom, Iam. 1.
4.
let him ask of God, who gives unto all men liberally Giving to understand by
that advise, how necessary it is in the time of trouble, to use pra^er for thy
self, that thou may demean thy self patiently and wisely* to glorify God
in thy trouble, to profit by the same trouble, and not to increase the same;
but safely to grow out of it, and to recover peace and health.

Secondly, thou have need to offer up Secondly, for them that trouble or grieve
thee.
prayers unto God for them by whose means thou art troubled, or for whose sake
thou art grieved.

Sometime thou art unkindly used, either by thy husband or wife: either by thy
parents or children, or such as have stepped into the room of parents and
children, and have those names by law given them, not by nature due unto them:
or else by thy master or servant: or by some friend or neighbor. For these
thou have great cause to pray unto God that he will give them better minds, and
let them see their fault with mislike of it, and see what becomes them to
do, and give them a heart to do it. If they continue in their frowardness,
shall they not continue to be troublers unto thee? then as thou desire an end
of the trouble that they put thee to, so desire that God will give them a
better and wiser heart. This rule is included within that more general rule of
our Savior Christ in the Gospel, I say unto you, love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good Mat. 5. 4^*
to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you, and persecute you. If
we ought to pray unto God for all that hurt us, then also for them of our own
house habitation and kindred that hurt us: and so much the rather for those at
home, and so near unto us, because they have more opportunity to hurt us, then
they that are farther of. And what are we to begin prayer for them? Two things:
one that God would forgive their fault, which we also must forgive. Another
that he will give them a heart to see, and to amend their fault. God in his
holy justice does therefore many times stir up domestical troubles to men,
because they are negligent in domestical prayer never comme^ding unto God
either husband or wife, child, servant, kinsman, friend; or neighbor, never
making any request for grace and wisdom to be given unto them. When David
had brought the Ark of the Lord into the place that he had prepared for it
upon the hill of Sion, and had offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, it
is said, that he blessed the people in the name of the ^. S^* 6. 18.
Lord of hoasts, that is, he prayed the Lord of hoasts to power down his
blessings upon them: and having distributed flesh and bread and wine among
them, and they therewith being departed home, it is said that then David
returned to bless his house, that is to pray unto God 2. Sa. 6. 20.
for them of his house, that they might prosper, and that he might live a
comfortable life among them. Also Isaac Genesis 25. 21 Genesis 49. 48
prayed unto the Lord for his wife. And Jacob blessed all his sons, every one
of them blessed he with a several blessing. And Booz the Bethlemite coming
into the field, among his servants and reapers, saluteth them with a prayer
unto God Ruth. 2. 4. Dan. 6. 10.
for them, saying, the Lord be with you. And Daniels custom was, three times a
day in his house, to pray unto God, who praying in his family, could not in his
prayers be unmindful of his family. From so holy and worthy examples, learn
thou to pray for thine: while thou enioyest peace with them, pray that they may
not prove a trouble unto thee: and when thy troble grows from the^, pray that
God will give them a mind more agreeable to peace. So fit for the ease of thy
burden, is prayer for them by whom thou art troubled.

Sometime thou art not unkindly used by them, yet thy trouble grows from
them, while thou art grieved for some calamity happened unto them, and take
care for ^he helping of them. In this case there is special need of prayer to
be made for them. And it is a special point of casting thy burden upon God.
God speaking to the Israelites, says of himself, I am the Lord that heals
thee; that Ex. 15, 26*
is, all the health and help both of thee and thine must come only from my
hand. And in another place, I kill and give life, I wound and I make whole. That
is, I send sickness danger and hurt, to make Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
men seek unto me* and again I restore health safety and peace, when men do
seek unto me. And these things being the works of Gods own hand, they
should fail very much, of casting their burden upon God, that being burdened
with grief for the sickness and calamities of their neighbors, friends,
kinsfolk, and family, should forget and neglect to pray to God for them. David
prayed for his child in a most humble and earnest manner when it was sick. For
David besought God for the child, and 2. Sam. 12. 26
fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. The Centureon whose
faith is commended in the Gospel, prayed unto the Lord Jesus for his sick
servant, saying Mat. 8. 6.
unto him, master my servant lies sick at home of the palsy: and when Herod
had cast Peter into prison, with purpose, after the feast, to bring him forth
to the people to be slain, earnest prayer was made of Act. 12. 5.
the Church unto God for him. The saints of God have always observed this as a
most safe and sure rule of casting their burdens upon God, when they were
troubled and grieved for the sickness and calamity of others, to pray unto
God for them, to restore their health, their peace, their liberty, and their
comfort: that in the recovered comfort of them that were afflicted, they might
recover comfort that were afflicted for them There is therefore in these
domestical troubles imploiment for thy prayers to be offered to God for them,
either by whose means thou art troubled, or for whose sakes thou art grieved.

Thirdly, thou have need to offer up Thirdly, for all the, rest.
prayer unto God for the rest of thy family, of thy kindred, of thy friends,
and of thy neighbors, whether thou be wronged by the unjust and unkind dealing,
or else grieved for the calamity and sickness of some: that neither the sin
of them that wrong thee, nor the calamity of them for whom thou art grieved,
may spread any further, to the corruption and damage of the rest. If Esau
grieve his father Isaac, and his mother Rebecca, by taking a wife of the
daughters of Canaan, have not Isaac and Rebecca cause to pray to God for
Iaacob their other son, that he may not do as his brother had done? when
certain of the followers of the Lord Jesus Christ had left him, taking offense
at some words of his (concerning the eating of his flesh and drinking of his
blood) which they understood not, Jesus said to the twelve, Ioh. 6. 67.
will ye also go away: he was careful that an evil example might not spread
like a contagious sickness, to corrupt the whole company of his disciples. And
(more agreeable to the cause that we have in hand) when Judas one of his
family (the devil entering into his heart) had couenanted with the Priests and
pharisees, to betray his master into their hands the Lord Jesus, heavily
charged with a burden of trouble, growing from his treason, takes occasion
from his wickedness, to pray unto his father for the rest, saying, Those thou
gave me, have I Ioh 17. 12.
kept, and none of them is lost* but the child of perdition, that the scripture
might be fulfilled. And now come I to thee, and these things speak I in the
world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves, etc. The child of
perdition ( Judas the traitor) being lost, the Lord has care of the rest and
prays for them, that they might ever rejoice in him. Even so every loving
man, that can take pleasure in the health and honest carriage of his friends,
neighbors and family, when one is ill at ease, and when one does give offense,
he will heartily pray to God to preserve the rest, that they may continue in
health, and that they may continue to deal justly, honestly, and dutifully.
This triple imploiment for thy prayer thou have i^ the time of thy domestical
trouble, for thy self that art troubled or grieved: for them by whose means
thou art troubled, or for whose sake thou art grieved: and for the rest. This
is the second common rule of casting thy burdon upon God in domestical
troubles, namely that thou fall to prayer: according Iam. 5. 13.
to the saying of S. James, is any among you afflicted, let him pray. Now let
us see what other rules, as more particular, are to be added to patience and
prayer.

CHAP. IX.
THese domestical troubles being Particular rules of casting these troubles
upon God. These troubles are wron^s or griefs.
of diverse sorts, let us first distinguish them into two ranks: because it is
either sickness, death, or some calamity, that is happend to thy self, or to
some other neighbor (...) ^d kinsman, or of thy family, for which thou art,
out of thy love and compassion to others, and out of sense of thine own evil
grieved: Or else it is some wrong offered unto thee by others, in their
unthankfulness, disobedience, injustice, or forwardness, out of which
springs ^vnquietnesse and vexation to thee: with this latter member of wrongs
let us first begin and see what it is to cast this burden upon God.

First here let the wronged person that Wrongs occa^oned sometime by our selves.
bears the burden consider whether the occasion of these burdens grew of
himself or no. For so it oftentimes comes to pass, that the unkindness of
the husband provoke the wife to some such course, as turns after to the
husbands trouble. And likewise the disobedience of the wife may drive the
husband unto that course that after becomes her heavy burden. Can the party
that first did wrong without provocation, be offended with the party, that in
the second place did amiss being provoked? sometimes the fondness and
negligence of parents, that will not instruct, nor (when needess) correct their
children, nor in any thing restrain them of their own will, or else the evil
example of the parents, makes them become wanton, disordered, and evil
conditioned, as it fell out in Hell his children: and in the end the parents
see and hear things of their children, that grieve their hearts, and out of
their disobedience, and insolency they are wronged, and it cannot be otherwise,
folly cleaning to the soul of the child, but that, when the soul is not
husbandly tilled by the discipline of the parents, it must bring forth weeds
of evil behavior: sometime the child that complains of the unkindness of
parents, has by his own folly, by his disobedience and riotous courses given
unto his parents (of themselves tender and loving enough) cause to be unkind,
to change their countenance, to shorten their allowance, yea to shut the door
against him, and to settle his inheritance upon some other. So likewise the
m^ster sometimes has no care at home to teach his servants to know and fear
God: and if he go to the house of God himself, he cares not to bring his
servants with him: or if he bring them with him, he looks not whether they
stay there or no: or if they stay, whether they mark and learn any thing or
no: these are not the studies of his heart. He suffers them also to exceed
decorum and comeliness of servants in their apparel, and to be abroad at
unseasonable times, with other young persons (and what youth and liberty,
wanting an ouerseer, will do, wise men know:) also by his own evil example
of riot and vnthristinesse, he becomes unto his servants a plain corrupter,
they thinking themselves out of danger of reproof, while they tread in the
steps of their masters and governors: or else an evil master deals
unjustly and unkindly with a faithful servant, and being so brought up, and so
provoked, no marvel if at length they breed their Masters trouble. Sometime
the servant, being both well taught and well entreated and having no just
exception against the government and usage of his Master, out of the lewdness
of his own evil heart, or harkening to the counsel of ill company, becomes
disobedient and unfaithful, and provoke his master to take strait courses
with him. Sometime also an indiscreet man, dwelling by a neighbor of peaceable
disposition, presumes upon his neighbors softness, and offers him wrong in
such manner, as overcomes patience, and makes the quiet man to stir again:
and then has he trouble in his habitation, and feels himself compassed with
troubles more then he looked for: in all these and like cases, the grieved man
is the occasion of his own burden, in these domestical troubles.

When he finds this: then to cast his How to cast those wrongs upon God.
burden upon the Lord for his case, is to reform the errors of his own
misgo. uernment, and to look better to the ways of his family: and to reform
the errors of his own life, that he give better light unto his own
household, and draw them back to goodness by his example, whom he had
corrupted before, and to give satisfaction to his neighbor whom he had
wronged, and to abstain from after-wronging of him. Thus stopping the
fountain of cause given by himself, the stream of offense taken by others
will soon dry up (the common rules of patience and hearty prayer to God, withal
not neglected.)

If thy unkindness to thy wise, and thy bad husbandry made her unquiet, use
her more kindly, and prove a better husband, and she shall be quiet. So let the
wife by more dutiful and modest behavior recover her husbands love.

If neglect of discipline, with too much remissness in governing children and
servants, and thine own evil example among them were cause of their disorder,
use thy fatherly and masterly authority better, and give a better example, and
thou shall have them in better obedience. The child also and servant, becoming
more obedient and more faithful, shall soon recover the love and favor of
their Parents and Masters.

And if thy neighbor were provoked to vex thee, because thou had first
injuriously vexed him, make thy peace with him for the first wrong, and abstain
from offering a second, and he will live in peace with thee.

Surely if the occasion of a man's domestical trouble grew from himself, this
is to cast his burden upon God for his own ease, in the fear of God to
remove the occasion, to reform the disorder in himself, to give
satisfaction, to seek reconciliation, and to hold a better course afterward:
and to do this in patience, joining withal prayer unto God, that he will give,
both to himself, and to them that were his troublers, wisdom and grace, that
he may no more give, and they may no more take any such offense.

But if a man's domestical troubles Not occasioned by our selves.
grow not from himself, giving the occasion, but only from their own evil
heart, that troubled him, so that he can say as Samuel did: Whom have I done 1.
Sam. 12. 3
wrong to? Or whom have I hurt? And as David said, O Lord my God if I have done
Psalm. 7. 3.
this thing, if there be any wickedness in my hand, if I have rewarded evil
to him that had peace with me, (yea I have delivered him that vexed me without
a cause) then let mine enemy persecute my soul and take it. If the burdened
man be himself faultlesse, and the evil heart of the evil doer be the only
fountain of his evil deed; as the Scriptures testify, and daily experience
shows it to be most true, that there are such neighbors, and such domestikes,
that of themselves without cause given, are troublesome: as froward wives, with
whom it is as unquiet dwelling as with a Dragon: and evil husbands that have
neither wisdom nor honesty to respect the weakness of the woman's sex, and to
entreat them with due mildness; and children riotous and disobedient, that
will be ruled by no counsel nor order of parents: and parents so unnatural
and careless, that they have no regard of their children: and servants so
slothful, unfaithful and murmuring, that they will never be good: and masters
so unreasonable and cruel, that their servants live under them a miserable
life: and neighbors and companions to whom it is a pastime to do evil,
according to Salomons words, As he that faineth himself mad, casts
firebrarnds, arrows, Prou. 16. 18
and mortal things, so deals a deceitful man with his friend, and says, am
I not in sport? Thus falls it out many times, that the quiet man giving no
occasion, yet receives injury to his great molestation.

In this case, this very testimony of his How to ca^ these upon God.
heart, that he is falultesse, glueth much quiet to his soul, and gives much
boldness of heart to him, to commend his cause unto God, and to crave his
help, that is the patron of all innocence. And it is a goodly rule of casting
his burden upon God, in this case to bear patiently his burden, till God
entreated by humble prayer send relief: And this rule is commended unto us by
the Apostle Peter, saying, If when ye do well, ye 1. Pe. 2. 20.
suffer wrong, and take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. He therefore
that hops for ease, must quietly bear in the mean time, according to the
pleasure of God.

The trouble may be a present injury, Troubles not continued nor iterated.
passing away with the deed, not to be continued, never to be iterated, as the
railing of Shemei upon David: to bear patiently that, which impatience cannot
help, gives hope* of ease and recompense from the good hand of God, as David
said of Shemeis cursing, it may 2. Sam. 16. 22.
be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and do me good for his cursing
this day* Therefore to suffer it patiently, not rendering evil for evil, no^
rebuke for rebuke, is to cast that burden upon God. Troubles continued.


If it be a wrong iterated, or continued and prosecuted, still patience with
prayer is to be used: for by patience we possess our souls, and by prayer we
obtain help at the hands of God. If for a short time.


In this continuing and iterated trouble, it may please God for thy trial thy
exercise and thy good, to continue it long, or else in mercy to deliver thee
from it be times. If he interpose his hand of deliverance, to make it of short
continuance (which is to be prayed for) then he will put an end to thy trouble,
either by changing the mind of thy troubler, or by weakening and crossing his
malice, or else by removing thy troubler from thee, or thee from thy troubler:
wherein till his will be revealed by his work, he is to be attended in
patience, and to be entreated by prayer.

And because he may remove the burden This tro^ble may be removed by reforming
the troublers.
of thy domestical troubles, by reforming the troubler: it is a maine point of
the casting of thy burden upon God, to pray unto him for the reforming of them.
And to put to thy hand to so good a work.

By this rule, if a man be troubled with an unquiet wife, and would be eased
by the good work of God, in reforming her, he must pray unto God, that he
would be pleased to give he^ a better heart. And he himself must in all
loving manner teach her what is comely for her to do as a woman, as a wife, as
a mother, as a mistress, and as a neighbor, wheresoever he has found he^ to
err, and by her error to have been the cause of his trouble. So did Job
check and reform the error of his wife, when she provoked him to curse God,
saying; thou speak like a foolish woman: What? Job. 2. 10.
shall we receive good things at the hands of God, and not receive evil?

So on the other side, if a woman be troubled with a bad and unquiet husband,
and would be eased by the good work of God in reforming her husband, she must
pray unto God, that he will be pleased to give her husband a better heart: and
she her self must in all dutiful manner help that change, actempting it,
partly by gentle words in season spoken, and partly by her own loving and
modest behavior, that is very forcible to reclaim even a froward mind. By
words Abigail attempted to reform the churlishness of Nabal her husband,
choosing a fit season to tell him of the danger thereof, the next day after,
when he had slept away his drunkenness. She observed opportunity, and so should
all women do. Therefore does Bathsheba Pro. 31. 26
say of a virtuous woman, She opens her mouth in wisdom, and the law of
grace is in her tongue. And such words of wisdom from the tongue of his wife,
an honest man should not refuse to hear, and unto wise words spoken in season,
let her adioyne her mild and humble behavior, by which much good may be done
upon him, as testifies Saint Peter, saying; Likewise let the wives be subject
1. Pet. 3. 1 ^
to their husbands, that even they which obey not the word, may without the
word be won by the conuer sation of the wives, while they behold your pure
conversation, which is with fear: So ought the wife, both both with mild
words and good behavior, help the reformation of her husband.

These prescribed rules, for the man to desire, and help the reformation of
his wife that is froward: and for the woman to desire, and help the
reformation of her husband that is disordred, when the one proves the others
burden by their error, give no countenance unto the disgracing complaints,
unto the uncivil taunts and checkes, unto the brawling words and blows, and
other evil usage, that pass now and then between man and woman, when one is
offended with another: surely God is not the author of such dealings, neither
do the married that use such dealings* cast the burden of their domestical
troubles upon God, os take any course to make burden lighter, but they do
increase it, and make it heavier.

By the same rule, parents and masters, burdend with disobedient and disordred
children and servants, and desirous to turn off their burden upon god, are
taught to pray to God for the reformation of their children and servants, and
to put their own helping hand to the work, using their fatherly and masterly
authority, and wisdom to draw them back from iniquity. In which godly
attempt, fathers and masters have alowa^ce from God; yea they are not* only
warranted of God to do it, but it is a charge laid upon them, children and
servants being committed to them, not only to do them service, and to be at
their commandment, but rather to receive education, and instruction from them.
And when parents and masters fail, and become careless of the instruction of
their children and servants, and in the right government of them, God does
often (in his justice) punish the fathers and masters neg ligence, with the
childrens and servants disorder. And when parents and masters are careful to
instruct and govern aright their children and servants, then God (in his
mercy) requiteth that care and diligence with the obedience and faithfulness
of children and servants. Solomon says in the Proverbs, The rod and correction
Pro. 29. 15
give wisdom, but a child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. Here
justice repayeth with disorder in the child, the neglect of instruction and
government in the parents. The same Solomon says a gain, Correct thy son,
and he will Pro. 29. 17.
give thee rest, and will give pleasures to thy soul. Here mercy repayeth with
contenting obedience in the child, the wise and careful government of the
parents. To masters also, that their servants may not breed their unrest,
Solomon in the same place gives these Items, by which he might well suppose,
that wise men would take warning, A servant will not Pro. 29* 19
be chastened with words* though he understand, yet he will not answer. This
is plain enough, that for some servants, and the right government of them,
something more then words is sometime necessary. Pro. 29. 21.
And again he says, He that delicately brings up his servant from his
youth, at length he will be even as his son. This is plain enough, that a
delicate life with liberty and pleasure, is not to be allowed to servants by
any rule of good government, left to thy grief he take upon him to be more
then a servant.

Yet these rules for parents to desire and help the reformation of disobedient
children: and for masters to desire and help the reformation of disordered
servants, gives no defense unto unnatural parents, that are tyrants to their
own children: and to cruel masters, that increase the proportion of work, and
number of strip^s, but dimin^sh the due allowance of meat, and clothes, and
sleep, and are never pleased, but ever brawling. Saint Paul says unto
parents, Ephesians. 6. 4.
Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath. Lenity must be used, though not
cockering, and too much sufferance. And to masters he says; Masters, do unto
your Coloss. 4. 1
servants that which is just and equal. Equity must be used toward them, though
not remissness.

To the same purpose may it be said for children and se^uants, if while they
have carried themselves duetifully, and deserved well, their parents or
masters, out of their own unkindness, and cruelty, do prove a heavy burden
unto them: because it may please God to ease them of that burden, by changing
the minds of their parents and masters, it belongs unto them, as a special
point of the casting of their burden upon the Lord, to pray unto God for their
parents and masters, that he will be pleased to open and amend their hearts,
that they may see their error, and may reform the same, and learn to deal
more kindly (which belongs to parents) and to deal more justly (which
belongs to masters;) and whereas they have no authority to admonish, to
teach, to correct, as their parents and masters have, yet with due reverence
they may be bold, observing opportunity, and using decent and humble speeches,
sometimes to tell them what they think to be fit. How reverently, when Saul
wronged David and had spoken to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants,
that they should kill David, which was Ionathans grief, because he loved
David: how reverently did Jonathan labor to make Saul his father see his
error, saying unto him, Let not the King sin against his servant, 1. Sa. 19.
4.
against David: for he has not sinned against thee, but his works have been
to thee very good: for he did put his life in danger, and slew the Philistim,
and the Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou saw it, and thou
reioycedst: wherefore then will thou sin against innocent blood, and slay
David without a cause? And when Naamat the Syrian took great indignation at
the Prophet Elisha, because he came not out and laid his hands upon his
leprousie to heal it, but commanded him to wash himself seven times in the
waters of Jordan, which he judged nothing so virtuous as the waters of
Damascus; which indignation of Naama^, the Lord and master grieved all his
servants, how reverently did they say unto him, Father, if the Prophet 2* Kin.
^. ^3.
bad commanded thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? How much
rather then, when he says unto thee, wash and be clean? Such words of
mildness, spoken in fit season, and with reservation of due reverence, may by
servants and children be used to their fathers and masters, to induce them to
see their former error, that it may be a means under God to change their
minds.

But this liberty can no way justify the insolence and vnduetifulnesse of many
children and servants, that being restrained by the severity of their parents
and masters, grow into discontent, and speak contemptuously and raylingly,
without all reverence, and without all regard, either of the authority of
their parents and masters, or of the subjection and duty that they owe unto
them.

By the same rule is every one, whose domestical trouble grows by the error
of his neighbor (if he would be cased, which may be the changing of his
neighbors mind) taught to pray unto God for the bettering of his neighbor:
and to put his own helping hand to so good a work, by admonishing his
neighbor neighbourly. And he has precepts from GOD to warrant that course.
Moses says, Thou shall not hate Leu. 19 17
thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and
not suffer him to sin. So that there wants charity in him that will not
lovingly tell his neighbor of his error. And God does often in his justice
make thy bad neighbor, to be a cause of trouble unto thee, because thou,
knowing his disorders, have not told him of them, that he might amend. A like
commandment gives the Lord Jesus, saying, If Man. 18. 15
thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between him
and thee alone. That is, if his faul* be bent against thee, as the chosen
object of his malice: or directed another way, it light upon thee, to the hurt
or hazard of thy life, thy peace, thy profit, or thy good name: or if his
misdeede were neither intended against thee, nor did light upon thee, but only
thou art grieved in thine honest soul, to behold so ungodly dealing: in these
cases thou art commanded of the Lord to tell him of his fault, that if he be
curable he may amend. And because thou know not but that it may please God
to ease thy burden of domestical troubles, making them of short continuance by
reforming the troubler, it is a special point of casting this burden upon God,
to pray for the amendment of thy neighbor, and to put thy helping hand
thereto, by gentle and neighbourly admonitions.

But this liberty of telling thy neighbor his fault, gives no allowance of
railing, and reproaching, and public disgracing of men, by casting their
infirmities and faults in their teeth. A christian man must abhor all such
bitter courses, remembering what the Apostle Peter says* Love covers a
multitude of 1. Pet. 4. 8.
sins: That is, a right charitable man, though he seek to reform his
neighbor, by telling him of his sin, yet he will not disgrace or shame his
neighbor by publishing his sin.

It may please God to ease thee of the By weakening the power of the trobler
burden of thy domestical trouble by weakening the power, and crossing the
malice, and abating the pride of thy troubler, that either he shall not dare,
or shall not be able to proceed any further in thy vexation: as he daunted the
Pride of Laban, when he pursued Jacob, for he meant evil to Jacob; but by the
way, God came to Laban the Arnmite^ Genesis 31. 24
a dream by night and said unto him, take heed that thou speak not t^ Jacob
aught save good. And by this threatening of the Lord Labans stomach was taken
down, as he confessed to Jacob the next day, saying, I am able to do you
evil, but the Genesis 3^, ^9
God of your Father spoke unto me yester. night, saying, Take heed that thou
speak not to Jacob aught save good. And GOD crossed the fury and violence of
Saul, when he thought to have slain David, Saul intended to s^ite David to
the w^ll 1. Sa. 19. 10
with the spear: but he turned asi^ out of Saul's presence, and he ^ote the
spear against the wall, but David si^d, and escaped, etc.

In this case it is not lawful for thee to How then to cast it upon God?
pray unto God for the death, the sickness, the impouerishing, or any way the
hurt of thine enemy, leave him to the judgment of God, and pray unto God to
forgive him his wicked malice. Yet is it lawful for thee to pray unto God,
that he will be pleased to confound the devices, and to cross the attempts,
and to scatter the prepared power of thine adversaries. So we read that David,
in the time of Absoloms treason, when he understood that Ahitophel that great
politician took part with him, he feared his counsel, and first prayed unto
God, saying, O Lord, I pray thee turn the council 2. 5^. 15. 31
of Ahitophel into foolishness. And afterward sent his wise and faithful
friend Hushai the A^chite to be an opposite unto Ahitophel, by whose means
indeed Ahitophels counsel was rejected, to the danger of Absalom, and safety
of David, and many like prayers we have in the Psalms. In one place, Up Lord,
Psalm. 9. 19.
let not man prevail. In another place, Let not them that are mine enemy;,
unjustly Psalm. 35. 19
reioyc* over me, neither let them wink with the e^e that hate me without a
cause. And in another place, Let not the Psalm. 140. 8
wicked have his desire, O Lord, perform not his wicked thought, lest they be
proud. Thus we see that the Saints have made their prayer unto God, against
the malice, power, and cunning of their adversaries, that God would be pleased
to abate their pride, to assuage their malice, to confound their devices, and
delude their cunning, that they might not prevail to do the mischief that
they intended. And so far it is lawful for thee to pray for their
disappointing.

And because sometime the servants of God, have made request unto him, against
the persons of their enemies, praying for their destruction; as Eli^ did
against the messengers of the King of Israel, saying, If that I be a man of God
2. Kin. 1. 10
let fire come down from heaven, and devour thee and thy fifty. As David in
diverse places of the psalms, let them be confounded and put to shame that
seek after Psalm. 35. 4.
my soul, let them be turned back and brought to confusion that imagine mine
hurt. And in another place, set thou the wicked over him, and let the
adversary Psalm. 109. 6
stand at his right hand, when he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and
let h^ prayer be turned into sin. As Peter the Apostle prayed against Simon
Magus, thy money perish with thee; that, is both thou Act. 8. ^0.
and thy money perish. And Paul the Apostle against Alexander the Coppersmith,
saying, Alexander the Coppersmith 1. Tim. 4. 14.
has done me much evil, the Lord reward him according to his works. Let none
of us think that for the procuring our ease, and deliverance from our near
troubles, it is lawful for us to bend the force of our p^aiers against the
persons of our adversaries, and to desire their destruction or hurt. For those
whose examples are before remembered, were the Prophets of God, and Apostles of
the Lord Jesus Christ, who knew the reprobation of those against whom they
prayed, and so rather pronounced the known judgments of God, then the private
affections of their own hearts: and if they pronounced their own affections,
they were affections conformed to the known judgments of God, not contending
to guide and move Gods judgments. So does S. Austin affirm August. in Psalm.
35.
of all such prayers, saying, those things which are spoken in the form of
wishing, are things opened by a spirit of prophesying and when they say, let
that be done, and let that be done, it is no other then if they had said such
and such a thing shall come unto them No^ we have no such knowledge of any man's
reprobation, he may prove a sheep of Christ, whom as yet by his fruits we find
and therefore esteem a wolf. And we have no such spirit of prophecy by which we
can foretell, what wrath from God shall fall upon them. And also our Savior
has given unto us, this rule which we must follow. Mat. 5. 44.
Pray* for them which hurt you and persecute you. Therefore if God be pleased
to ease us of the burden of our troubles by* weakening the power, asswaging the
pride, and malice, and by disappointing and scattering the purposes and counsel
of out enemies, we in seeking this grace at his hands, may pray against their
devises, but not a against their persons. And therefore by this rule is no
countenance given to the dire imprecations, and bitter curses that many
uncharitable men power out against their troublers.

Perhaps it may please God to ease By removing the troubler from thee, or thee
from him.
thee of this burden of domestical troubles, making them short, either by
remoouing thy troubler from thee, or by removing thee from thy troubler. And
this remove all may be made, either by death or by some other course. And
thereto some rules pertain, in the right observation whereof a wise man for
his ease casts his burden upon God.

If the remove be to be made by death: If his remove b^ by death.
this is a thing that God may do at his pleasure, because he is the Lord of
life, to give it and continue it. David says unto God; With thee is the well
of life. Psalm. 36. 9
And to him also pertaines all power over death, to haste^ it and bring it
forward. The same Prophet says of the same Psalm. 68. ^0
God; To the Lord God belong the issues of death.) This manner of remove by
death it is not lawful for thee to desire, much less by thy hand to further,
either in the death of thy self, or of thy troubler. If God be pleased to do
it for thee, either in removing thy troubler from thee, or in removing thee
from thy troubler, it is every way a work of his mercy toward thee.

If God by death remove the troubler from thee, it is his mercy to thee. When
God by death had removed Absalom, that had greatly troubled his father and made
him fly from Jerusalem, then was that domestical trouble at an end, and David
returned in peace to Jerusalem. That remove of the trobler by his death was
Gods mercy to the troubled. So likewise if God by death remove thee from thy
troubler, that also is Gods mercy to thee, for so he gives thee rest, as the
Prophet Esaias speaks, saying; The righteous perishes, and no man considers
Esai 57. 1.
in his heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that
the righteous are taken from the evil to come. This is also Gods gracious
mercy delivering him from trouble.

But for thee to be an actor in these things, it is altogether unlawful, God
having given to thee a commandment to the contrary; Thou shall not kill. David
Ezo* 20. 13
would never so be eased of his troubler Saul: he would not do it himself,
nor suffer others to do it, though he often had opportunity, but waited on the
hand of God, saying to Abishai, that would have smitten him while David and he
stood by Saul's beds side; As the Lord lives, 1. Sa. 26. 10
either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die* or he shall
descend into battle and perish: the Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon
the Lords anointed. And at last he was eased by Saul's death without laying his
hand upon him, it is the remedy of tyrants and bloodthirsty persons, to seek
ease of their troubles, by procuring the death of their troublers. And it is
the remedy of faithless and desperate men, to ease them of their burden of
troubles, by removing themselves from their troubles and troblers by their
death. So did Saul, Ahitophel, and Judas. Those men that so remove themselves
and others, cast not their burden upon the Lord, who is the giver of life, but
cast it upon the diuel^ back (and themselves withal) who was a murderer from
the beginning.

But if a remove for thine ease may be If it be by shift of place.
effected by shift of place, that may both be desired and used without sin.
Isaac sent his son Jacob away from his brother Esau, when Esau in his anger
had sworn to slaie him. David fled from the hand and Iauelin of Saul, and
shifted for himself by removing from place to place: and he conveyed all his
fathers house into the land of Moab from Saul's reach. The Lord Jesus oftentimes
withdrew himself from the fury and rage of the Jews. And he gave his
disciples a rule for times of persecution, saying, when they persecute you in
this city, fly unto another. Mat. 10. ^3
And many honest men have removed their habitations, to avoid ill neighbors,
and to be out of the reach of too near troublers. And many have purged their
houses of unquiet spirits, both children and servants, as they might do, when
they could not amend them in the house.

But yet I must tell you, that if children and servants increase the burden of
Rulet concerning remove of children or servants.
thy domestical troubles, this turning them out for thine ease, must be the
last remedy that must be used; and all other means for their amendment must
first be attempted, because children and servants are not sent of God into
thine house, only for thy pleasure and ease, but they are committed unto thee
to be brought up under thee, and to be trained by thee to grace and good
behavior. And that is a thing that thou must look unto somewhat more then
only to thine own quiet, that thou may be able to answer God for their
souls. If any member of the body be diseased and out of temper, putting the
head and whole body to pain, a man will not at the first cut off that member,
but first he uses all means to cure it, and does with much patience endure
the weakness of it, and will suffer a blind eye, rather then pluck it out of
the place; and a lame hand rather then cut it of; and a sore leg rather then
let the saw come to it: and that shall be the last work, if he do it at all.
And children and servants are members in the body of thine house; therefore he
is but a bad head and governor, that presently, because children and servants
are troublesome, that thrust them out of doors to seek their ease. By removing
them must be the last attempt. But if other attempts first made by thine own
authority and wisdom then after by the counsel of neighbors and friends, and
lastly by the power and countenance of the magistrate, will do no good upon
them, but they persist in their wickedness, and prove incurable, to the hurt
of thy self and others in thy family; Then the eye, the hand Mark. 9. 43
and the foot that offends may be cut of. If children or servants, or any
other that may be turned away, be as tender and dear as thine eye, as
serviceable as thine hand, as necessary as thy foot, let them depart. The whole
is to be respected before a part, and the head before a member. Thus God may be
pleased to shorten thy sorrow by a remove and shift of place between thy
troubler and thee.

If God be pleased to continue thy (...) thy trouble continue long.
trouble long, all the former aduises must be practiced as time affords
opportunity, because thou know st not what happy hour of thine ease God has
set down in his good purpose. And those two common rules of patience and
prayer must never be neglected.

And for the mittigating of thy sorrow Consolations to comfort in long troubles.
under that burden, consider these things that follow, and they will bring much
ease unto thy mind. First that it is the common condition of all Adams
children, in this world to have troubles; as Job speaks most truly, Man that
is borne of a woman is of a short continuance, Job 14. 1.
and full of trouble. And if it be common to all, without exception of any (how
great how godly soever) thou should be too delicate to desire to be exempted.

Secondly, in a more near manner, it is common to all the Saints of God to
have troubles in this world, more then the wicked, by reason of the enmity that
the wicked world bears to the godly, being unto them a stepmother, while
like a natural mother, she affords all the delight she can unto her own. The
Apostle Paul says, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. 2. Tim. 3. 1^.
And if it be common to all Christ's followers to bear a cross and follow him,
thou must not look to be free.

Thirdly, thy troubles, if they should continue unto the last hour of thy
life, yet are they but short, for life it self is short, and no trouble, but
is shorter. They end and give place one to another, and God interposeth between
trouble and trouble spaces of quiet and gladness, and they are mixed with much
cause of rejoicing, not only in regard of future mercies hoped for, but also in
regard of present mercies possessed. Which mixture is as good and pleasant, as
the ending of troubles: and therefore they are to be esteemed short: as also
the Apostle calls them, saying, Our light affliction which is but for a
season, and he that shrinketh for short troubles, is but fainthearted.

Fourthly, thou have Christ joining his shoulder to thine, and bearing part
with the in every burden of thine, and he bears both in compassion to pity
thee, and also in his divine power to assist thee, that thou may not sink
under thy burden. Therefore does he call thy yoke his yoke, saying, Take my
yoke on Matthew. 11. ^9.
you. Therefore when he speaks of the unkindness showed to his followers, he
speaks on this manner, I was hungry Math 25. 42. ^
and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink. And speaking to
Saul, then perscuting those that called upon his name, he said unto him; Saul,
Saul, Acts. 9. 4.
why persecutest thou me? Thus he makes himself a party in all the sufferings
of his servants: and what Christian man shall grudge to bear his part in that
burden, wherein he has the Lord Jesus so kindly and so strongly bearing with
him.

Fistly, let him consider that those troubles that disquiet his life, were not
raised up against him without Gods appointment: as David said of Sheme^, Suffer
2. Sam. 16. 11.
him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him. And if thou did grue to
receive or disdain to put up the offered wrong at the hands of the offerer,
yet receive them without grief, and put them up without disdain at the hands
of God, and for his pleasure sake.

Lastly, let him consider that troubles auile much to the practice of
Christianity, they make us remember God more often, and pray to him more
fervently then otherwise we would. They make us remember our selves that we
are but dust, and have offended God: they pull down pride, and provoke unto
repence: they work in us bowels of compassion, causing us to pity others in
trouble: they make us less to love this present world, and more to desire and
long for heaven. These considerations put together, are of great power to make
any Christian man to bear them patiently, and to esteem them no burden,
though God in his wisdom suffer them to lie long upon us. The rules hitherto
delivered, teach kindly how to cast our burden of domestical troubles upon
God. When our trouble is caused by the wrong offered unto us by others, in
their unthankfulness, disobedience, injustice, or frowardness.

Sometime thy home-trouble is occasioned If thy troble be grief ^ not wrong.
by sickness, death, or some calamity happened unto thy self, or to some
other, either kinsman, neighbor, friend, or of thine own family.

If it be sickness, fear of death, or any calamity upon thy self, we know
that every man is readily sensible of his ow^ evil: If it be sickness, death,
fear of death, or calamity whatsoever upon others, we know that some one is
more near and dear unto thee then some other, and accordingly thou art more
o^ less sensible in their evils. How in these cases we may cast our burdens
upon the Lord, let us consider.

First if sickness, fear of death, or any If grief grow from sickness in
thy self.
other calamity be happened to thy self, patience and prayer, commended before
for common rules in all troubles, are here to be used. And if it be sickness
in thine own body, these things observed will give ease to thy mind, and
perhaps health also to thy body; and so either remove wholly thy burden, o^ make
it more easy. First remember that it is the visitation of God, even of him
Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
that says of himself, I wound, and I make whole, that is, I send painful
sickness* and again* I send saving health. This rule will lead thee into many
other, whereof every one will greatly help thine ease. It will teach thee, as
the Apostle Peter also teaches thee, when he says: Humble 1. Pet. 5. 6.
your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.
For it will make thee patiently to yield to the Lords pleasure. Secondly, it
will make thee look into thy life past, and to acknowledge thy sin provoking
God, as it moved David, saying, Thine Psalm. 32. 4.
hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is turned into the
drought of Summer, then I acknowledged my sin unto thee: for I thought I will
confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
punishment of my sin. And thirdly, with a resolution to depart from thy
former iniquity, it will move thee to pray unto God for health, and to vow
praise and thanks unto God, as the sickness of Hezekiah Esa. 38 2.
wrought zeal of prayer and thanksgiving in him; Then Hezekiah turned his face
to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and said, I beseech thee, Lord, remember
now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. And for his resolution of praising God,
it follows in the same place; The grave Esa* 38. 18.
cannot confess thee, death cannot praise thee, they that go down into the
pit cannot hope for thy truth, but the living, the living, he shall confess
thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall declare thy truth. The
Lord was ready to save me, therefore we will sing my song, all the days of
our life, in the house of the Lord. The first acknowledgement of Gods hand,
will produce all these things following, as patience, confession of sins,
prayer, and vows of thanksgiving: and every of these at the hands of God, will
obtain ease of thy grief. Then lastly, it will move thee in all the means
thou use for the recovery of health, to look higher then either to the skill
of the Physician, or virtue of the medicine, that thou may not fall into the
mischief of Asa 2. Chro. 16. 12.
King of Judah, of whom it is written; Asa in the nine and thirtieth year of
his reign, was diseased in his feet, and his disease was extreme: yet he
sought not the Lord in his disease, but to the Physicians. So Asa slept with
his fathers, and died. Thus available to the easing of thy burden of sickness
in thy self, it will be, to acknowledge therein the visitation of God.

And if it be any other calamity of If it be any other calamity.
whatsoever kind fallen upon us, (and diverse they are that may fall upon us:
as for example, Joseph was sold unto strangers, and imprisoned in Egypt: the
men of Zeklag were spoiled of all that they had, in their absence with David:
Abiathar of the house of Eli, was cast out by Solomon from being Priest unto
the Lord: war and famine, and the anger of Princes, yea many inferior causes,
breed many calamities) the only sure way of casting our burden upon God, is to
acknowledge the work of God in our calamity, patiently to bear what he lays
upon us, and heartily to pray unto him for succor. That we ought to
acknowledge Gods work in our calamity, and patiently to bear his pleasure,
Job does teach us saying, Shall Job* 2. 10*
we receive good things at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Surely we
do never deserve any good at the hand of God, and we do continually deserve
evil: what reason then have we to desire ever to receive good that we never
deserve: and never to receive evil that we ever deserve? Patience therefore in
bearing the calamity that God lays upon us, does well become the sons of
men. And that in our calamity we ought to pray unto God, if we would have him
to ease us of our burden, is so clear, that we need no proof for it. What
man is he, religious or profane, beleuer or unbeliever, that does not in his
calamity remember God, look up to heaven, and pray to God? the Mariners in the
ship, whereinto Jonas was entered, when he fled from God, when the storm upon
the sea was sore, and the tempest proved a calamity unto them, so that they
threw the wares out of the ship into the sea, to lighten the ship, for safty of
their lives, without instruction they could then, according to their knowledge
of God, fall to prayer. For so it is written; The Mariners were Ion. 1. 5.
afraid, and cried every man unto his God. Though it be not general with all
men, being in calamity and misery, to bear it patiently, yet it is general
with all men in calamity and misery to pray for ease. So that a religious man,
being burdened with any calamity, needs not so much to be taught, that it is
fit for him to pray, as he needs to be comforted, by being put in hope, that
God will in due time answer his prayer: as surely he will, if he be called upon
in the name of his beloved son. For so has the Lord Jesus assured us,
saying. Job. 16. 23.
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my
name, he will give it you. Let him pray therefore unto God the father in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and patiently attend the Lords leisure, and in due time
he will have mercy upon him. This is when any calamity is fallen upon us, to
cast our burden upon the Lord, for our ease.

If it be the fear of death, that is thy If it be fear of death.
burden: and perhaps with regard unto others that shall be in some danger by
thy death, as wife, children, servants, and others that have their education
and maintenance under thee. First the burden of fear of death, is made easy
to a godly man by many considerations, in all which he cas^eth his burden upon
the Lord. First he will consider that it is common to all Adams posterity. A^
David being ready to die says unto his son Solomon; I go the way of all the
1. King. 2. 2
earth: therefore death ought not to seem fearful to thee, that is common to
all. Secondly, he will consider that he cannot die before the time appointed
of God, that gave him life, and assigned from everlasting the certain length
of it; as Job says, Is there not an appointed Job 7. 1.
time to man upon earth? And shall any desire longer life, then the giver of
life allows* Or shall any be grieved to resign his life into the hands of
him that gave it? Thirdly, he will consider that the end of life shall be the
end of trouble unto him, and that his death shall bring him rest from all
troubles, as the Spirit of God from heaven has proclaimed, saying, ' Blessed
are the dead that die Reu. 14. 13
in the Lord, for they rest from their labor. Rest and ease from weary labor,
is obtained by our death and departure out of this life. Fourthly, he will
consider that the sting and danger, and all bitterness of death is taken away
by the death of Jesus Christ, and death unto the Saints is made the gate of
life: the Apostle saying; O death where is thy sting? O grave 1. Corin. 15 55.
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. But thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Lastly, for his ease, of fear in the approach of death, yea
for the filling of his heart with all true comfort in death, that he may rather
desire and long for, then any way fear the hour of his death, he will
consider, that his death shall be the gathering of him unto Christ his redeemer:
as the Apostle says, Desiring Phil. 1. 23.
to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. For while we live
in the world, we are absent from the Lord, and we walk by faith and not by
sight. But when we depart this world, we are gathered unto him to dwell for
ever with him. And that is performed which he promised, saying, Though I go
to prepare John 14* 3.
a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where
I am, there may ye be also. By these considerations is the burden of the fear
of death made easy to a believer: and in all these considerations does he
cast his burden upon the Lord for his ease.

If he therefore fear his own death, because others shall want him: his wife
shall be a widow, his children shall be fatherless, his servants shall be orphans,
and many shall miss him, that now have a helper of him; and for their sakes,
rather then for himself, he is afraid to die. This burden is to be cast
upon God, by commending them unto his providence, who gives food to al flesh,
because his mercy indureth for ever: and who is the keeper of Israel, that
neither slumbereth nor sleeps. And that he may do this the more
comfortably, for the ease of his heart, let him remember that the Lord says,
All souls are mine, ^zoc. 18. 4
both the soul of the father, and also the soul of the son are mine. He
that created thee, and had a care of thee as the work of his hands to
maintain thee, created also thy wife, thy children, thy servants, and thy
poor friends, and therefore has also a care of them as the work of his hands
to maintain them, And he that gave his Son for thee to redeem thee, and
therefore had a fatherly care for thee, to do all things for thy preservation
and salvation, did also give his Son for them to redeem them, and therefore
also has a fatherly care of them, to do all things for their preservation and
salvation: so that thou may most safely commend them to his mercy. And let
him remember what the Prophet has said of God, pertaining particularly to this
grief, as if it were intended for his ease in this case: He is a Father of the
fatherless, and Judge Psalm, 68. 5.
of the widows, even God in his holy habitation. So that thou shall not leave
thy wife without a husband, thy children without ^ father, thy servants without
a master, and thy poor friends without a helper, when thou commendest them to
God. He will be all in all unto all and every one of them. And therefore in
this grief, remembering Gods providence, thou castest thy burden upon GOD,
and easest thine own heart, when thou commendest them unto him.

And if it be not thine own sickness, If thou ^rt grieved (...) others.
death, or calamity, that grieueth thee, but the sickness, death, or
calamity of First help, to ease the^ what thou can.
some other near unto thee, as of thy husband or wife, thy parents or
children, thy master or servant, or some neighbor, or friend that was near
and dear unto thee: (with commendation of thy compassion, that ought indeed
to stretch it self to all these, and further also: for the servants of God
must not be without natural affections.) This is, in the case of their
sickness and calamity, to cast thy burden upon the Lord, first to minister
what help and comfort thou art able unto them, both with good words and also
with real services, that they recovering the sooner out of their sickness and
calamity, thy heart may the sooner be freed of that grief, that thou
sustainest for them. And in this ministering of comfort and help unto them, thou
seruest the Lord, and becommest the means and instrument of his mercy to the
afflicted. Therefore it is said of the woman of Shumem, Elishaes good
hostess, that her sick son sat on her ^ Kin. 4. 20
knees till noone: that is, she was grieved for his sickness, and with a most
willing heart gave him the best help and comfort that she could. Hence grow
all those works of mercy, that the Lord Jesus says, he will remember and
reward when he comes in his glory. Hence comes the feeding of the hungry,
the refreshing of the thirsty, the clothing of the naked, the intertaining of
the stranger, the visiting of the sick, and releeuing men in bonds. Hence grow
all these works of mercy, namely, that men and women of tender hearts, which
have bowels of compassion in their bodies, are grieved to behold the want, the
miseries, and calamities of others, and do ease their own hearts, by using
all means to ease the others calamity: so casting in a most sweet manner the
burden of their own grief upon God, who will certainly comfort them that
labor to comfort his afflicted ones, Unto this rule pertain all the precepts
of ministering to the necessities of the Saints.

But because while thou art thus casting The^ patience and prayer.
the burden of thy grief upon God, by using all good means to relieve them for
whom thou art grieved. Because (I say) they are not presently freed from their
calamity, nor thou from all thy sorrow conceived for their sakes: therefore
unto this diligence of helping and succouring the miserable (if thou will
soundly and fully cast thy burden upon God) patience must be added, and prayer:
patience to bear quietly their sickness and calamities whom thou love, for
the Lords sake that has appointed it so, glorifying him in all his works: and
prayer, to entreat the God of mercy to remember (in his mercy) those thy
miserable friends, and to raise them up whom he cast down. Here remember
David praying for his sick child: Daniel praying for the return of the
captivity: the Centurion praying for his sick servant: and the Church praying
for Peter imprisoned. I will instead of all examples, add the precept of the
Apostle Paul, making patience and prayer the chief rules of obtaining ease of
all burdens, Phil. 4. 5.
saying, Let your patient mind be known to all men, the Lord is at hand: be
nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be showed unto God, in
prayer and supplication, and giving of thanks. Thine own diligence in showing
mercy and helping, thy patient attendance upon God, with thy faithful prayer
for the asflicted, are the mean^ of casting thy burden upon God, when thou art
grieved for the sickness and calamities of others.

But if it be the death of some dear If it be for the death of others.
friend that thou art grieved for, wherein perhaps thou think thy grief
remediless, because thy dead can not live again: even for this very cause,
ought thou to bear the death of thy friend quietly, because thy dead cannot
live again. And herein we have David an example of godly fortitude unto us,
who having a child sick, did while it yet lived, afflict his soul. For it is
written, David be sought GOD for the 2. Sa. 12. 16
child, and fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. Then the
Elders of his house arose, to come unto him, and to cause him to rise from the
ground, but he would not, neither did he eat meat with them. Thus while
there was hope of remedy, he gave way to the sorrow of his 2. Sa. 12. 18
heart. But it follows; On the seventh day the child died: and the servants
of David feared to tell him, that the child was dead: for they said, behold
while the child was yet alive, we spoke unto him, and he would not bearken
unto our voice: how shall we say unto him, the child is dead, to vex him
more? But when David saw his servants whispered, David perceived that the
child was dead: Therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead?
And they said, he is dead: then David arose from the earth, and washed, and
anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the
Lord, and worshipped, and after came to his own house, and bade that they
should set bread before him, and he did eat. His sorrowing ended when he once
saw, that there was no hope of enjoying any longer the company of his child.
Now this course seemed to his servants a new and strange kind of philosophy,
that he should mourn in the danger of death, and yet rejoice, or at least
comfort himself with any content in death: and therefore his servants said
unto him, What thing is this that thou have done? 2. Sa. 12. 21
thou did fast and weep for the child while it was alive: but when the
child was dead, thou did rise and eat meat. And what reason had he for this
strange and unwonted behavior? He said, while 2. Sa. 12. 22
the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, who can tell whether
God will have mercy on me, that the child may live: but now being dead,
wherefore shall I now fast? can I bring him again any more? I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me. Behold, the same thing that makes thee to
mourn, namely, that thy dead shall not return to thee: the same consideration
David made the ground of his quiet and content, and thereupon he comforted his
heart, and would not continue in heaviness for that that could not be helped. So
that it is (to a right understanding man) ground enough to build content and
quietness of heart upon, that God has done his work, which thy sorrow cannot
revoke.

But, for the further quieting of thy mind, know that thy dead shall live
again: as the Prophet Esaias says* Thy Esa. 26. 19
deadmen shall live, with my body shall they rise. There is a day appointed of
GOD, wherein they shall return out of the dust again, and live again in their
bodies then glorified. Yea, know that for thy comfort, that thy dead do now
live, and howsoever their bodies lie without life in the grave, yet their
souls do live, and shall live for ever with God. And with these considerations
of the present life of the soul, and the future life of the bodies, the
Apostle would have wise Christians comfort themselves over their dead, and not
give way to their affections, to mourn without measure, saying, 1. these. 4* 13
I would not brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that
ye sorrow not as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus is
dead and risen, even so them which sleep in Jesus, God shall bring with him.
For this say we unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which live, and are
remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which sleep. For
the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a showt, and with the voice of
the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them in the
clouds* to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these words. Let them mourn for
their dead, that know not the hope of the dead, and suppose them extinct that
are departed: but let them which in the school of Christ, have learned what is
the condition and hope of the dead, how their souls do presently live with
Christ, and that their bodies also shall be raised up in glory at the last day.
Let them rejoice in the behalf of their dead, and throw off that burden of
sorrow, which is so heavy unto them. And thus much for the second branch of
secular troubles, namely, for domestical troubles, and the casting of that
burden upon God.

CHAP. X.
THe third branch is of troubles The third secular burden is troubles more
remote.
more remote, having a beginning further of, when those by whom thou art
wro^ged, are not of thy family, neither of thy kindred, near acquaintance, nor
neighbors; but strangers of another kindred, family, or habitation, yet having
so much knowledge of thee, and acquaintance with thee* as to make thee the
mark of their malice, and object for their envy and evil hearts to work
upon. And those, for whom thou art grieved, are not of the same house, stock,
village, or country with thee: yet because they are men, and have fellowship
with thee in common nature, or because they are christians, and have fellowship
with thee in the same common religion, thy heart is grieved by way of
compassion, to hear of the calamities that are happened unto them. And these
remote troubles and griefs may happen to him that has peace in his own house,
lives quietly with his neighbors, and lovingly with his friends, and has
comfort and joy in their health and prosperity.

The rules given for domesticke troubles, Generally (...) pati^ce
are also very sitting for these: first therefore arm thy self with patience,
and and quietly suffer till God send ease. And for the confirming of thy
patience, consider that the hearts of all me^ being in the hands of God, these
should never have had any will to offer the wrong, if God for some holy cause
had not stirred them up, as he is said to have stirred up troublers to Solomon,
when he fell to idolatry: 1. Ki. 11. 14
Then the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, even Hadad the Edomite,
etc. And therefore though thou grudge to bear at the hands of men, yet bear
with patience and humility the good pleasure of God, who knows when and how
to make thee amends. David with this consideration confirms himself in his
patience, saying I should have Psalm. 39. 6.
bin dumb and not have opened my mouth, because thou did it. Saint Jerome
reads it, I have been dumb, and will not open my mouth. Tremellius reads it,
I am dumb, and do not open my mouth. The meaning is, that either he should
have kept silence, or he had kept silence, or he did keep silence, or was
resolved hereafter to keep silence: or else altogether, for time past, present,
and to come, he held himself bound as by way of duty, in his trouble to be
mute and dumb, from murmuring, raging, and all works of impatiencie, upon this
only reason, because thou did it, that is, because he knew it to be the handy
work of God.

And unto patience add prayer: for And ^se prayer.
though it becomes a godly man in his trouble to shut his mouth against all
words of murmuring, yet it becomes him not to shut his mouth in the time of
trouble, against words of humble prayer. For by silence from murmuring, it is
manifest, that God is feared, and his pleasure approved: but by silence from
prayer, it is manifest, that God is neglected, and his help little set by* In
these troubles therefore, and in all troubles, it is a principal point of
casting our burden upon God, to seek his help by prayer. And the same
consideration of Gods deed (in stirring up the adversary that serves to shut
our mouths against words of murmuring, serves as strongly to open our mouths
for words of humble prayer. That child, that bearing the fathers displeasure,
and in the fathers displeasure suffering want of some wonted case, does refuse
to make request unto his father, for the withdrawing of his displeasure, and
the restoring of wonted liberty (especially being by the father commanded to
make request, and assured by his fathers promise that when he does make request
all shall be forgiven) that child plainly appears to bear too big a heart
against his father. And a wise father (not willing to be contemned of his
child) will not restore his child to his wonted grace and liberty, till he
humble himself, and entreat his father. Even so that christian man that has
displeased God (and who has not justly deserved his displeasure) and feels
upon him the hand of his displeased God, in troubles, that these remote enemies
(stirred up of God) do put him unto, and does not humble himself, and pray
unto God for his favor, and ease (seeing God has both commanded him to pray,
and has also promised to hear him, and help him when he prays) that man
shows a heart over swollen against his God, and God in justice can do no less
then deny to send him relief, so long as he refuses to entreat for relief.
This therefore is a special point of casting our burden upon God, in these and
in all troubles, that men do learn to make humble prayer unto God.

But from these general rules let us Particularly for wrongs.
consider of the particular, and here, as I said before of domestical
troubles. I^ us first consider of them that grow unto us from enemies that
wrong us. After of our grief for friends.

Of these some bend their malice against our estate, and by cunning and fraud
in bargaining, by violence (...) power in oppressing, by robbery in the high
way, and by advantages offered to their covetous and merciless hearts* seek to
enrich themselves by t^ spoil, or at the least to weaken and ouerthro^ thine
estate, and to scatter thy riches as a spoil.

Some bend their malice against thy good name, and by railing and open
exclamations to thy face, after the manner of Shemei, and by slandering and
close tales behind thy back, after the manner of Doeg, by misconstruing and
mis-reporting thy just doings, and by imputing unto thee those bad deeds, that
thou never had thine hand in, seek to blemish thy reputation in all places,
and to bring thee into disgrace.

Some bend their malice against thy life: and either vow and attempt themselves
to kill thee, as Ioab did Abner: or hire and sot on others to murder thee, as
Absalom set on his servants to murder Amnon: or accuse thee to men of more
fury and violence then themselves, betraying thee into their hands, to be
sacrificed to their wrath: or stir up and arm by false accusations the
Magistrate against thee, that under show of justice thou may be unjustly
overthrown. Let us see how the burden of these troubles is to be cast upon
God.

Consider here first of all whence the If thou gave the occasion.
occasion grew; and if thou find thy troubles provoked by any private error
of thine, seek to satisfy them whom thou did wrong, and be not of the
stomach of them that will maintain what they have done, be it never so
injurious, and acknowledge thy fault, make reasonable amends, seek
reconciliation, and by all means assure unto them thy resolution to abstain
from offering like wrongs any more. Shemei, though none of the honestest, nor
wisest men, yet when he considered that his wrong done to David might breed
him that enmity that might become a burden, heavy and dangerous to his peace
and life; for his ease and safty his wit served him to confess his fault, to
seek peace submissiuely, and to offer better service for the time to come: when
David after the overthrow of Absalom, came back over Jordan to return to
Jerusalem, Shemei came with haste to ^. S^. 19. 18
meet David at the rivers side, and he fell before the King, when he was
come over Jordan, and said unto the King, Let not my Lord impute wickedness
unto me, nor remember the thing that thy servant did wickedly, when my Lord the
King departed out of Jerusalem, that the King should take it to his heart: for
thy servant does know that I have done amiss. Therefore behold, I am the first
this day of all the house of Joseph that am come to go down to meet my Lord
the King. And this submission of his, confessing his fault, and craving pardon,
prevailed with David, so that he did not let his wrath fall, as a heavy
burden upon the neck of Shemei, though there were some men present that did
much provoke David to revenge.

But if thou be free, having given them no occasion, and only suffer wrong,
If thou give not the occasion.
the fault being wholly in thine enemy: I tell thee, this very testimony of
thy conscience is a great easing of thy burden, if thou suffer not for thy
sin, but for their malice. So did the Lord Jesus suffer among the Priests and
Pharisees. The greater half of the burden is by this means turned off, when
peace of conscience abides with thee: other griefs and wrongs may be the more
easily endured. Solomon says in the Proverbs, A Pro. 15. 15
good conscience is a perpetual feast. This is no small pleasure to a good
man, that has been urged and vexed with unkindness abroad, that when he
comes home, he enters into his closet, and examineth his heart, and finds
that he is in no fault, and can plead his innocence before God: it is a feast
to him: he sits down boldly and cheerfully by the mercie-seate of God, and
despises with a godly scorn, both the wrong done, and the wrong doer, saying
in his heart, by the mercy of God, this wrong shall turn to my good, and this
wrong doer shall not prevail against me: and with great confidence of heart
he powers out his desires before God. Saint Peter has a saying that agrees
well with this point; that we have now in hand; Let none of you suffer 1 Pet.
4. 15
as a murderer, or as a thief, or as a busiebody in other men's matters, but if
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God in this behalf. Here is right thy case: having examined thine heart, thou
find tha^ thou art no murderer, nor thief, no^ evil doer, nor busie-bodie,
in the causes pretended by thine enemy, as reasons of his violence against
thee: but thou find that thou suffer as a Christian, that is, thou
suffer without thy desert; therefore thou have cause to glorify God, thou
have no cause to be ashamed. This innocence of thine makes thy burden to be
much lighter.

And if God have purposed to shorten If God will reform the troubler.
thy trouble by conversion of thine enemy, though thou have not such
opportunity to help him with wholesome council, being a remote enemy, as
thou have to help a domestical: yet as opportunity is offered, remember and
practice that precept of the Lord Jesus, Mat 18* 15
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. And otherwise let it be
the wish of thine heart, and pray to God for it, that God will be pleased to
give him a better heart. Some have observed, that Saint Stephens prayer helped
much the conversion of Saul (after called Paul) being one of those remote
troublers to him, and a very furious one. When Stephen that blessed Martire of
Jesus Christ was put to death, Saul was a busy doer against him. The witnesses
Acts 7. 58.
(to whom it belonged to throw the first stone at the condemned person) laid
down their clothes at a young man's Acts 8. 1.
feet whose name was Saul. And Saul consented to his death, and otherwise made
havoc of the church, and breathed threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord. It pleased the Lord Jesus in his wonderful mercy to
meet this persecuter in the heat of his fury, near to the City of Damascus,
and to convert him, and to make him a disciple.

And the effect of that conversion was peace to the Church, that had been
oppressed before with a heavy burden of troubles by means of that troubler. As
it is written, Then had the Churches Acts 9. 31.
rest through all Judea, and Galile, and Samaria, and were edified, and walked
in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost.
And this conversion of Saul, with the churches peace growing thereby, some have
ascribed unto Stephens prayer, as an intermediate cause, who while they stoned
him, kneeled down, and cried with Acts 7. 60.
a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. Of which prayer of
Stephen, Austin in his fourth Sermon of the Saints has this saying* If Stephen
Aug. Ser. 4. de Sanctis.
had not thus prayed, the Church should not have had Paul: but therefore was
Paul (being fallen from his horse) raised from the earth, because when Stephen,
with bowed knees was fallen to the ground, he was heard in his prayer.
Therefore though thou have not opportunity to admonish thy remote adversary, yet
pray unto God for his conversion. Thou know not whether God will hear thy
prayer, and shorten thy trouble, by changing the mind of thy troubler.

If it be to bewrought by a remove* and that remove to be made by death, If God
will remove by death.
therein thou have nothing to do beforehand, but to maintain that resolution
that always ought to be in all Christians, namely, to yield to the will of God,
and to approve his work, as well in killing as in giving life, and as well in
our selves as in others. And if it please God to take away thine enemy, then is
it thy part to praise his name, that suffers thy peace to out-liue thine
enemies fury: but neither work it, nor desire it, nor rejoice in it as a
calamity happened to thine enemy, or to his house: much less offer violence to
thy self, that may free thee from short troubles, but it will surely plunge
thee into eternal troubles.

If God have appointed to shorten If God will remove by shift of place.
thy troubles, by removing either thy troubler from thee, or thee from thy
troubler by distance of place, that you may be yet further a sunder, and the
one out of the reach of another: as opportunity is offered, wisdom will advise
thee what to do. For the departure of an enemy, Themistocles.
a wise man said, A bridge of gold should be made, to further his speedy
passage, rather then to stay him with any impediment. And it is at thy liberty,
flying from the swords point of persecution and malice, to remove from one
City to another.

But if God be pleased to maintain against If God will continue thy trouble.
thee, the enemy that he has stirred up; thy chief casting of thy burden upon
God, is by patience to possess thy soul, bearing quietly what thou can not
shake off: and by hearty prayer to solicit the majesty of the most high God,
to free thee from thine enemy when it pleases him, and in the mean time to
give thee wisdom to suffer as thou ought, to his pleasure. Thus much how to
cast the burden of remote troubles upon God, when thy troble grows from the
malice of remote enemies that offer wrong unto thee.

Sometimes thou art not hurt by remote If thy trouble be grief (...) others.
enemies, but rather art grieved for remote frindes, or strangers, for whose
calamity thou are affected with heaviness. Sometime in regard of common humane
nature, because they are men, as thou art, and it grieueth thee that any of
thine own kind should suffer such calamity: sometime in regard of common holy
religion, because they worship the same God, and believe in the same Savior,
that thou do; and it greueth thee, that any of thy faith and religion, and
any true worshipper of thy God should endure such misery.

For direction to cast this burden upon Not usual to be grieved for others.
God, there needs no long discourse, because I fear there are not many, that
bear any such burden of sorrow for others misery, or upon whom it lies heavy
if they sorrow at all, or upon whom it abides long if it be heavy. Selfloue
permits us not to mourn for the calamity of other men, when we are at case
our selves. The Butler in Pharaoes court, when he had once recovered his own
place and honor, never regarded, nor was moved with Joseph's imprisonment. The
chief Butlar did not remember Joseph, Genesis 40. 2^
but forgot him. And those wounds never enter deep in our hearts, which we
only see or hear in others, and feel not in our selves: and the tears that
fall from our eyes for other men's miseries, quickly dry up. If Amos lived in
this selfe-delighting and neighbor contemning age, wanton and excessive one
way, but wanting and pitilesse another way, he would surely cry out again, as
before he did, saying, They drink wine Amos 6. 6.
in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but no man is
sorry for the afflictions of Joseph: that is, every man cherishes himself
delicately, but no man regards how other men fare.

Yet because God has always his, a What to do in grief.
merciful father merciful children: because some there are of tender hearts,
that mourn with them that mourn, and have put on, as the Apostle speaks,
tender mercy and kindness; to satisfy Col. 3. 1^.
them, I pray them to call to remembrance, the three rules given before, i^ the
case of like grief for frindes most near. First, so far as distance of
place between thee and them, the small acquaintance that thou have with them,
and thy weak means will suffer, afford them thy best help. Egypt afforded
food to Canaan, when famine was sort in that land. The King of Moab gave
entertainment to David's father, and to his whole household, when Saul's
displesure was heavy to them in Israel. David had Ziklag given him to dwell in,
when he could not be safe in Judah. Mercy by hospitality succoureth many
strangers, that by famine, war, and other calamities cannot remain in safety
at home. If thou be grieved for the calamity of them that dwell far off,
affourd thy best help: thou shall make less thy sorrow for their calamity,
while thou make less their calamity by thy mercy. Therefore did the brethren
among the believing Gentiles, make collections to send to the poor Saints at
Jerusalem. Secondly, use patience in this case: and till God put an end to
their miseries, glorify thou God in his judgments, that so exercises truth,
humbles, corrects, and punishes. Lastly, pray unto God for them, that in
his judgments he will be pleased to remember mercy; and to spare the sheep of
his own pasture, if they be true worshippers: or at least that he will spare
the work of his own hands, whatsoever they be, and forgiving their sins,
that he will give them repentance, that they may come to the knowledge of him
and of his truth, and in the end be delivered from his fiery wrath. In these
three things, i^ helping mercifully, in bearing patiently, and in praying
fruently, consists the right manner of casting our burden of grief and
sorrow for other men's calamities upon God. And so have we considered of this
third secular burden of more remote troubles, which has great affinity with
the burden of more nigh and domestical troubles and differs only in respect
of the persons, by whom thou art wronged, and for whom thou art grieved, in
that they are further from thee.

CHAP. XI.
THE fourth and last branch of The fourth secular burden, difficulties of our
callings.
our secular burdens, is the burden of difficulties that follow the duties of
our callings. The callings themselves, whether superior or inferior, whether
in a private house, or in an ample City, in the whole kingdom, or in the
Church of God are the ordinances of God, as Paul says of the magistrate; The
powers that be, are Romans 13. 1.
ordained of God; and as might be showed for all other callings from the
highest to the lowest. Therefore they are honorable, and in them we serve the
Lord, as so many officers in his house. And the offices that we are tied to
perform by the nature and condition of our callings, they are enjoined unto us
(to every calling distinctly) by God himself in his word, wherein is set
down, what the King, the Judge, and every Maiestrate, what the Minister, the
husband, the wife, the father, the child, the Master and servant, must do;
and therefore those officers are holy. The ends of them are, the glory of God,
the peace of the kingdom, the edification of the Church, and the prosperity
and good of every private person: and therefore it is honorable to us to be
employed in those callings and to perform those good offices; for in those
callings and offices, we serve God (whose service is perfect freedom) while
others, neglecting to serve in these callings, and to perform these offices,
serve their own lusts, the world, and the Devil, to their dishonor. Yet
those offices so holy and so honorable, by reason of certain difficulties that
accompany and follow them, do bring a heavy burden of troubles upon us.

Sometime we are insufficient for If we be insufficient
those callings, and unable to perform those offices. And that happens
either by our own fault, or by the fault of some others. By our own fault,
either in our entrance, ambitiously or couetously thrusting into callings (for
the honor and fee of them) that we were never fit for: or after our entrance,
losing our gifts through sloth and idleness, and so growing insufficient, as an
instrument that is become rustie for want of use. By the fault of others, when
they which had power to call and admit unto any place, and perhaps authority
to impose, having a go^d opinion of thy gifts, have singled thee forth
somewhat too soon, being willing rather to wait for a suller growth of thy
gifts, then to lose a man of so great hope. In all these cases of our
insufficiency the duties of our callings prove a heavy burden unto us.

Sometime we are sufficient for the If we be sufficient, but are crossed.
service that our callings bind us unto, and we use faithful diligence; but
some froward men oppose against us, as Elimas the sorcerer with-stood the
preaching of Paul. By means of which opposition, and cross working of those
men, it comes to pass, that either thou can not bring to prosperous issue
the good things that thou labourest in, or thou effectest them with much more
labor. This makes the services of thy calling to be much more heavy unto
thee. If we do well and be misconstrued.


Sometime thou art sufficient, and art diligent, and have effected things
happily to thy mind: but then envious men misconstrue, mistake wittingly, and
misreport thy doings, as the Scribes and Pharisees mistake and mis-reported the
holy and most absolute works of the Lord Jesus. And then instead of love and
commendation, which thou did look for, thou art blamed; and insteede of
reward and encouragement, which thou did deserve, thou art in danger to be
punished: this proves a great burden. In all these cases, ye see how heavy
burdens grow from honorable and honest callings, besides the continual care
that every good man has to do his duty in his place. Let us see how we may
cast these burdens upon God to be eased.

If thou be insufficient through thine I^ we be insufficient by (...) own
fault.
own fault, ambitiously or couetously intruding into thy calling, to possess
thy self of the honor of the place, or of the fee that belongs unto it,
without examining thy strength how able thou were to do the service of it, or
not regarding, though thou know thy strength to be altogether insufficient;
of which sort are many men both in the common wealth and Church. Such are many
ancient men, that having plenty of wealth, and p^nury of wisdom, that for
their worship, make means to be in the commission for the peace, having no
knowledge (or very little) of the laws of the kingdom, to help to compound
the controversies of the people. And such are young gentlemen, brought up in
idle pleasures, that being younger brethren, for their better maintenance, make
suite to have the charge and leading of companies for the war, and would be
Captains the first day, having never yet been good soldiers; they know how
to behave themselves in the house and among friends, but they know not how to
behave themselves in the field and against enemies. And such are many ignorant
and slothful men, that seek to be admitted into the ministry, and to get a
good benefice, that they may live easily, and eat the milk of the flock,
having no ability to seed the flock, yea no care thereof. These men, when
they are called and urged to the services of their places, then begins their
burden to way heavy, and their insufficiency makes them subject to danger
and disgrace. How shall these men cast their burden upon God, for their ease?

If thou be not very far from sufficiency, And be not far from ^ sufficiency*
but that counsel from others, thine own study and travel, the view of
other men's doings, some practice made by thy self, and other like good means,
blessed of God (whose help thou must pray for) may bring thee unto some
reasonable dexterity in time, use and apply all these means, and let prayer
be used with every other means, and remember what thou have undertaken, and
that thou can not without danger neglect the work of the Lord, and God will
second thy desire and travail with his blessing. The twelve, when they were
first called, and admitted of the Lord Jesus, were not so fit for their places;
as afterward they proved. I speak not these things to imbolden any man to
thrust into ^ calling without due preparation, but only to advise for the
best, those that are already entered, themselves being hitherto very unready.
Let them use good means, and make trial of Gods mercy. It has fallen out,
that men very raw at their first entering, by diligence after used, have grown
very fit, while others, of good fitnes at their entering, by negligence and
idleness have lost their gifts, and become very unprofitable.

But if thou be far from sufficiency, so If we be far from sufficiency.
that after thy entrance, all thy diligence assisted with prayer unto God,
cannot enable thee, at least in some mediocritie to do thy duty; then know
that God has not called thee to that place. Then the only way of casting thy
burden upon God, i^, in the fear of God to give over that calling, to resign
that place, and no longer, either for honors, sake or wealths, to stand a
blanke, a cipher, ^ blot, and an impediment either in common wealth or Church,
and to be an offense in the eye both of God and all good men: and to seek to
get his living by honest labor in some other calling, that he has been better
fitted for, as Zachary reports the words of some idle Prophets* in their
repentance; as namely, That he should no more wear a rough Zechar. 13 5.
garment (that is the robe of the Prophets profession that he was unfit for)
and he should say I am no Prophet, I am an husband man* for man taught me to be
an heardman from my youth. That is, I was never brought up and fitted for the
service of a Prophet, where into I did foolishly thrust my self, and therefore
I will leave that calling unto more sufficient men: and whereas I was brought
up to the trade of a husbandman and heard-man, I will henceforth follow that
calling, that I may eat my bread with a good conscience, and with Gods
blessing, though my reputation and maintenance be less. This is to cast thy
burden upon God.

If thy ambition and covetousness did not make thee intrude, but men had If we
be not insufficient by our own faults.
good opinion of thy sufficiency, as Pharao had of Joseph's wisdom, and thou
have used no cunning to draw them to have such opinion of thee, but they
simply, out of their own observation judged well of thee, and imposed a
charge upon thee, not being yet so ripe in judgment, and otherwise, as thou
would be, and had need to be: in this case there is a good calling of
God, to give thee hope of his further help, though as yet thou be but as David
was, the youngest among many brethren. And the testimony of thine own
conscience, cle^ring thee from intrusion, is some ease of thy burden. Plead
thine honest calling, plead thy clear conscience before God, and crave his
favor: and if they that did choose thee will not discharge thee, pray to God
for increase of strength, and crave the help of their prayers, that laid the
burden upon thee, and bend thy self with good hope unto thy business. It is
written, that out of the mouths of babes Psalm. 8. 2.
and sucklings, God ordains strength, hope well therefore, in thy diligent
endeavor, of the assistance of God, and remember what the Lord Jesus answered
to Paul, my grace is sufficient for 2. Cor. 1^. 9.
thee, my power is made perfect through weakness: and what the Apostle says of
himself assisted with this sufficient grace Phil. 4. 15.
of Jesus Christ. I am able to do all things, through the help of Christ that
strengthens me: and make use of these testimonies, studying, striving,
praying, and using all means and helps for increase of sufficiency. And take
that as spoken to thee, that Paul spoke to Timothi^, 2. Tim. 4. 15.
These things exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how
thou profitest among allmen. This is the way of casting this burden upon God.

If thy sufficiency be good, and thy If we be sufficient, but crossed, what
then to do.
diligence answerable, so that thy conscience witnesses, that thy labor in
the Lords Vineyard is faithful labor, but the effect answers not, and the
work goes not forward, because the re are that oppose their utter most power
against thy labors, to cross the success of them. And there is scarce any
one good work, that a man of public calling can take in hand, but the Devil
has one instrument or other to cross the attempt, and hinder the success: so
did the Sorcerers of Egypt withstand the message of Moses and Aaron, coming
unto Pharao in the name of the Lord. So did Rehum and Simshai, with their
companions with Tatuai, and Sauballat and T^biah withstand to their uttermost
power and cunning the work of the Jews, in building the Temple and wales of
Jerusalem, after their return from the captiutie. When Elias had slain the
Priests of Baal, and sought to bring back Israel to the worship of the Lord,
Iesabel opposed hi^ self, and made Elias to fly for his life. And while the
Apostles preached the Gospel of Christ to the Gentiles, the unbelieving Jews
stirring up the Gentiles, withstood them in all places: as the Apostle charge
them saying, They have persecuted us, and God, 1. These. 2. 15.
they please not, and are contrary to all men, and forbid us to preach unto
the Gentiles, that they might be saved. Thus usually, through Satan's envy, it
falls out, that scarce any attempteth any commendable work, but that one or
other instrument of Satan arises, opposing himself against it, to hinder the
performance of it, increasing his burden that trauelleth about it. How shall
men thus vexed, cast their burden upon the Lord?

First, when thou see their malice and opposition, be not driven from thy
patience and peaceable mind, lest thou also should either say or do amiss
in thy unquiet passion. Secondly, unto this patience join prayer unto God, and
in thy prayer crave these things of God. First, that God will oppose his help
against their opposition, and hinder their hindering attempts, as the Prophet
does saying. Let not the wicked have his desire Psalm 140. ^.
O Lord, perform not his wicked thoughts. Secondly crave the assistance of
Gods hand upon thy labor, and good endeavor, to help thee against thine
opposites; as the Prophet does, saying, Give us help Psalm. 108. 12.
against trouble, for vain is the help of man, through God we shall do
valiantly. Lastly that he will take thy good enterprise into his hand, and use
thee as his instrument to effect so good a work by; as also the Prophet does,
saying, Let Psalm. 90. 17.
the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct the work of our hands
upon us* even direct the work of our hands. Surely in this case, this is to
cast our burden upon God: if withal, when we see the end to fall out contrary
to our godly purpose, we glorify God therein, supposing, that as God would not
let David build his Temple, but reserved it to be performed afterward by
Solomon: so God for some secret cause will not have that good work finished by
thee, but res^rueth it for some other time, and some other person.

Lastly, if thy sufficiency be good, and If thy deed be misconstrued, what to
do^.
thy diligence answereable to thy sufficiency, and the work effected through
Gods help, be answereable to thy diligence, but the malice of me^ misconstrue
thy work, and misreport it, and so bring thee into danger and trouble: as
Amaziah the wicked Priest of Bethel, misreported the godly service of the
Prophet Amos, and accused him to the King, saying, Amos. 7. 10.
Amos has conspired against thee, in the midst of the house of Israel. The
land is not able to bear all his words. So seeking, betray his life into the
hands of cruelty under shows of justice.

Then the casting of our burden upon God is first, in his name to protest ou^
innocence, and that we have done our duty with an honest heart as God
commanded us. So did Amos after Amaziah had accused him, saying for himself,
The Lord took me as I followed the Amos. 7. 15.
stock, and said unto me, Go, prophecy to my people Israel. That is, I have
in those sermons which you call Conspiracy, faithfully followed the
commandment of the God of Israel. So also did Jeremy, when the Priests and
false Prophets, and the multitude of the people had laid hands upon him in the
Temple, and went about to kill him for his preaching, he protested his
innocence saying. The Lord has sent me to prophecy against Iere. 26. 12
this house and against this City, all the things that you have heard. And
thine innocence being thus protested and made known, then secondly turn thee
unto God, appeal to his iudgeme^^* and rest upon him. He is the true discerner
of all men's doings, to who^ it is manifest both what things are done, and with
what mind they are done: and he is the judge of all men and of their doings,
and he will reward them that truly serve him: therefore taking no discomfort at
the injustice and unthankfulness of men, pray God to justify thy well doing
against misreporters. Thou have a promise of such mercy, made by the Prophet,
Psalm. 37* 6.
saying, He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment
as the noone day: and pray him to remember thee, and give thee thy reward in
heaven, because on earth good services are not worthily valowed: and in
expectation of that reward at Gods hands, comfort thy soul in this case. And
thus have we spoken of the four secular burdens, wherein immediately we have
to do with men, in matters concerning this life, and showed how the burdens
may be, and ought to be cast upon God for the ^ase of our souls.

CHAP. XII.
THere are diverse troubles, ^urdens of spiritual troubles.
wherein the man that is troubled, has to do immediately and at the next hand
with God, and the things wherein he has to do with God, and looks directly
upon him, do concern our soul and inward man, and the good estate thereof for
holiness and happiness both now and hereafter. And in regard hereof, those
troubles I call spiritual troubles. And those I reduce to two heads. The first
of these spiritual burdens, is the powerful lusts of the flesh, enemies to the
holiness of the soul. The second is the fearful accusing thoughts that are
enemies to the happiness of the The first spiritual burden, lust^ of the
flesh.
soul. The first is the burden of the lusts of the flesh fighting against the
soul. The multitude of our corruptions and the law of sin in our members, so
potent and strong, that we cannot do the good we would (in doing whereof God
should be served) and the evil we would not, that we do (by doing whereof the
devil is served.)

This is a grievous burden to an honest Grievous to the honest man.
minded man, that is desirous to please God, and keep a good conscience. He
considers who made him, and desires to glorify his creator. He considers
the manifold mercies of God toward him, and desires to approve himself a
thankful man. He respects the end both of his creation and of his
regeneration, and desires to come near unto God, and to have fellowship with
his redeemer, and to resemble* him in holiness and righteousness: he
seriously thinks upon the end of virtue, and reward of vice, the first to be
eternal life, the other to be eternal destruction: and with his whole heart
and soul he desires and strives to avoid evil, which he abhors, and to
do good which he loves. And while he strives to go on in this course,
nothing hinders him more then the root of sin, that is deeply fastened in his
own flesh. The Devil offers a temptation, and his false flesh yields
presently unto it. The flattering world presents shows of vanity, and the
flesh greedily imbraceth them. Occasions are offered and presented to our eyes,
and our traitorous flesh suddenly apprehends them; and our actions fall out
to be sinful and evil, sometime at unawares, before we have leisure to
consider what we ought to do. Sometime against fore-fight: yea against
repugning will. For that corruption that is in our flesh, (which for the
authority that it usurps, and for the power that it exercises in us, the
Apostle calls the law in our members) Romans 7. 23
that corruption rebelleth against the law of our mind, and leads us captive
into all actual sin. And we are compelled in the camp of our enemies to
serve against our beloved Lord. And this is no small grief unto a sanctified
soul* that desires to serve and worship God in spirit and truth. How heavy
this burden is, the Apostles words do teach us, crying out, by reason of it,
in this manner: O wretched man that I am, Romans 7 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? It was unto him more bitter
then death, that sin was of such power in his mortal body.

Upon men groaning under this burden, These men are to be potied*
compassion ^is to be taken, both in regard of God, whom it grieueth them to
offend and dishonor, and also in regard of themselves, so entangled and
endangered, not by any fo^aine malice, but by their own inbred sinfulness.

Therefore for the case of such ouercharged Matter of comfort for them.
souls, to give them some comfort, notwithstanding the continuance of their
burden, these things are to be considered. First, that where God has given an
heart grieved for these infirmities, he never imputes unto them the sins
that they so unwillingly, and grieuedly commit, their broken and displeased
hearts being a pleasing sacrifice to him. According to the saying of the Psa.
51. 17*
Prophet, The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a contrite and a broken
heart O God, thou will not despise. So that God takes more pleasure, to see
them sorrow for their committing sin, then he does displeasure for the sin
that they commit: for to commit sin is common to all mankind, and we cannot
choose but to do amiss, while we live in this flesh: but to mourn, and to be
grieved for sin, to strive against it, and not to commit it, but with dislike
and offense taken for it, is proper only to them that truly love the Lord.

Secondly, though they cannot attain unto such perfect holiness upon earth
as they desire, nor unto such an absolute conquest over their corruptions, and
such a full measure of mortification, that sin shall have no life nor power of
mou^ng in them: yet their good will, being true and unfeigned, and their holy
desire, being sound and not dissembled, is before God as well accepted, as if
they were altogether without sin. Therefore is it that God requires the
heart, saying, My son give Pro. 23* 26.
me thine heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways. He that can by the
mercy of God attain unto this, to delight in in the ways of God, and to have
a sound heart within his weak body, he has attained unto as great perfection
of holiness, as this present life is capable of, if that desire and delight of
his be joined with knowledge and understanding: so that he be free from their
error, whom the Apostle speaks of, saying; They being ignorant of the Romans
10. 3
righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. A single good intent
without knowledge, is the devotion of fools, it has no true comfort tied unto
it, it saves not from destruction, it leads men blindefolde and sleeping
into hell. But when men have learned out of the word of God, what he
requires, and what is their duty, and unto that knowledge join a true desire
to do their duty, then unfeigned desire is before God esteemed a perfect
work. Therefore Romans 13. 10.
does Saint Paul say, That love is the fulfilling of the Law. And in another 1.
Tim. 1. 5.
place. The end of the Law is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned. The Law requires no more but love, (which will never be
idle;) and that obtained, the Law has attained his true end in us. And to him
that thus loves, as much is due, as unto him that perfectly fulfilleth the
commandment.

Thirdly, to him that thus in heart desires, while he lives here, full
perfect and absolute holiness (being grieved, that the lusts of his flesh
should stand up in his way with such strength as they do) that which he
desires shall in due time be granted, with increase of grace in the mean
while. For when death comes, in which he pulls off sinful flesh, he shall
put off sin and al corruption together with the flesh, and thenceforth he
shall offend his God no more, nor be in any danger of offending him For the
Apostle truly says, He that is dead Romans 6. 7.
is freed from sin, both from the act of sin, and from all lusting after
sin. And when he shall receive his body again in the resurrection, he
shall receive it cleansed and purged from that corruption that was in it
before. For 1. Corin 15 (...)
so does Saint Paul testify, saying; The body is sown in corruption, and is
raised in incorruption. By which incorruption he understands, not only an
estate of strength and health, whereby it shall be freed from that decaying
that it was subject to before, in regard whereof we have relieved it with daily
food, to repair the daily decaies: and also freed from sickness and pain
that it suffered here before, in regard whereof we take much physic to ease
the pain of it, and to maintain the health of it: but he understands rather
by incorruption, an estate of pureness and holiness, whereby it shall be
freed from sinning and offending God, and shall stand and remain for ever
purged and cleansed from all sinfulness, and in as perfect sanctity, as the
blessed Angels of God. And our true holiness begun here, shall be
consummated, and become perfect holiness there.

These are matters of comfort to This comfort is some case of his burden.
cheer his heart, that is grieved with the burden of his own corruptions,
not suffering him to serve God as he would: his defaults displeasing him,
shall not be laid to his charge. His love and true desire shall be accepted,
as if his life were without fault; and hereafter in due time he shall be wholly
freed from all corruptions. And these comforts are some ease of his burden,
that though his lusts be still as strong as they were, yet his g^iefe for them
is not so much as it was. But let us see further how a man may cast this
burden upon God, to be eased of it, and get masterie over his lusts.

For the casting of this burden upon To cast this burden upon God, first study
the Scriptures.
God, these are good rules and profitable, serving to procure case, and whereby
strength against the corruptions and lusts of the flesh is obtained. First, let
him be diligent in the study of the word of God, which David calls, A
lantern unto our feet, and a light unto Psa. 119. 105
our paths. Because in the spiritual darkness which ouershadoweth our souls
in this world, so that of our selves we cannot see nor find out the paths of
righteousness wherein we should walk, if we take unto us the word of God,
it like a shining light, will reveal unto us the old way, which is the good
way, that we may go forward in it. It will teach us what to do, and what to
leave undone, and will guide us aright, against the dangerous seducings of our
own evil lusts

And great force it has to keep us in our way, even in those men, in whom
their lusts and corruptions are most strong. As for example, in young men, in
whom there is more pride of wit, and more stubbornness of will, then in men of
other ages: in them, the word of God is powerful, to make them advised and to
humble them. David asks this question* Wherewith all shall a young Psa. 119. 4*
man redress his ways? and he gives answer in the next words, saying, In
taking heed there to according to Gods word. Such an excellent help, against
the seducing lusts of the flesh, is the word of God, for the redressing of our
ways. So that if a man burdened with his corruptues, and desiring to obtain
strength against them, do give himself to study the word of God, and do take
heed unto it, though he were as proud witted, and as stubbornely wilful, as
were those young men, the sons of Jacob, that committed the outrage at
Shechem, yet the word of God will bring down his proud wit, and reclaim the
forward wills of the very dissolute gallants of the world.

And this does David, being yet but a young man, out of experience in himself
affirm, saying, By thy commandments Ps. 119. 98.
thou have made me wiser then mine enemies, for they are ever with me: that
is, I am a continual student in thy commandments, I have more understanding
then my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation: that is, my mind is
always upon thy testimonies. I understand more then the ancient, because I
have kept thy precepts: that is, age teaches much by observation and
experience, but Gods word teaches more. So that while a man is careful to
study the Scriptures, as David was, and makes them his meditation, he shall
soon become more wise then his teachers, and more able to direct himself,
then the ancient, that think themselves able to give council. There shall not
move nor stir a corrupt lust in his heart, attempting to draw him aside to sin;
but he being exercised in the study of Gods word, shall presently be able with
judgment to check that desire of his heart, and to oppose against it Gods
own will. Secondly, use the company of good men.


Secondly let him frequent the company of good men, in whom he sees great
power to subdue and keep under disordered lusts then is in himself: and let
him observe and imitate their behavior: this will help him much. For if the
word of God on the one side give him a rule how to keep under his raging
lusts, these men on the other side will be unto him an example and pattern,
showing him how to do it, and a very simple workman, when he has not only
rules given him to direct his judgment, but a pattern also laid before him to
direct his hand, will very easily with this double help, learn to do his
work in some reasonable good manner, and unto this help under God, the
Apostle Paul does send us saying, Brethren be Phil. 3. 17.
followers of me, and look on them which walks so as you have us for an
example. A man merrily ignorant of his way, if he follow carefully, step for
step, a skillful guide going before him, will very safely come to the place
that he desires: so shall thou do in the way of godliness, if thou keep
company with the godly, and mark their behavior to do thereafter. Augustine
having respect of Saint Psalm. 56.
Paul, says in one place, If thou fail in the precept, be strengthened in the
example: that is, if by looking only to the precept, thou can not bring to
pass to keep it, look to the example of them that do after it, and their
example shall much strengthen thee.

Men are very apt to be led by examples, and are easily transformed into the
manners of those whom they keep company with: neither will their fellowship
hold long, that do not conform themselves to the manners of their company.
David in one place has Psa. 18. 25
this saying, With the godly thou will show thy self godly, with the upright
man thou will show thy self upright, with the pure thou will show thy self
pure, and with the froward, thou will show thy self froward. The Prophet
speaks these words of God, and we may safely speak them of men, among the
godly, thou must show thy self godly, learning and practicing their godly
behavior; else they will have small pleasure in thy company: and among the
wicked thou must do as they do, else they will soon be weary of thee, and
sly thy fellowship. The company therefore of the godly, cannot but be a great
help unto thee under God, to learn by them to subdue and keep under thy
unruly lusts, if thou converse with them, and daily striuest to conform thy
self to their manners. This is a good degree of casting this burden upon God.

Thirdly let him shun all occasions, Thirdly sly occasions that may stir thy
lusts
that may a^lure and provoke him unto these sins, that by the corrupt lusts
of his heart, he finds himself most subject unto. For example, if his
infirmity be pronenesse to anger and wrath, let him avoid the company of
contentions and froward persons, that are ap^ to provoke: let him not take
knowledge of every pet^y wrong that is done unto him: nor harken unto them that
will tell him this or that tale, what other men say of him, lest suddenly he be
distempered. If his infirmity be a pronenesse to drunkenes, (as th^re are but
too many, that when they are at it, can keep no measure) let him fly the
company of pot companions, let him shun the places, and ^bhorre the ceremonies
of great drinking: and let him not delight himself to behold the color and
sparkling of the Wine. If his infirmity be a pronenesse to adultery, and such
uncleanness, let him shun the haunt of Harlots, and their houses, and all wanton
company; and let him not cast his eye upon deceitful and bewitching beauty:
and so concerning all other sins that his heart lusts after.

This rule the holy Ghost gives us in many places. Solomon says, Keep thee
Pro 6. 24.
from the wicked woman, and from the slattery of the tongue of the strange
woman: desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her
eyelid, Her company, her countenance, and her words, all these are enticing
occasions: and all these Solomon warns him to shun that world not be betrayed
by his own frailty to commit whoredom. In another place he says, Make no
friendship Pro. 22. 24
with an angry man, neither go with the furious man, least thou learn his
ways, and receive destruction to thy soul. Company and fellowship with the
froward, will draw thee whether thou will or no into many brawles and quarrels,
and otherwise also breeds danger unto thee, and therefore to be shunned of
him, that fears his own evil nature, too prone unto anger. Again, Look
not Pro. 23. 32
thou upon the Wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup,
and goes down pleasantly: in the end thereof it will bite like a Serpent, and
hurt like a Cockatrice. The beautiful color, and pleasant moving of the Wine
in the cup, are prouocations to drinking: he that would not be overtaken with
drunkenness, knowing his own appetite and weakness, must shun these
prouocations. Generally this is a veriy good rule for him that fears the
violence of his own sinful lusts, to sly all occas^ions, alluring and
provoking unto sinne^ he that would not be strangled with the hook, let him
not play with the bait, and lie nibling at it* the Devil and the world deceive
by such means, he that is hurdened with the lusts of his flesh, and desires
case to his gu^ed soul, by casting his burden upon God, let him shun these
occasions dilig^ntly: he that would not be hu^t with the Lions claws, let him
not come near unto his foot.

In the fourth place, let him often think Fourthly think upon judgments and
mercies
upon the judgments of God threatened against sin, and executed upon sinners,
that yield, and suffer themselves to be led away by their lusts: the
threatenings he shall find every where in Gods word, and the executions he may
see abroad in the world. Let him also meditate upon the mercies of God promised
unto virtue, and performed unto the virtuous that walk in the spirit, and
putting upon them the Lord Jesus Christ, do take no care for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof: the promises he shall meet with every where in
Gods word, and the performances he may see abroad in the world* but especially
in the church, and among the godly, whose company he was before advised to
frequent. These things observed, (...) breed in him the fear of Gods power,
and the love of Gods mercy: which two will be unto him, helps of great service
against the lusts of his own heart; while on the on side, the fear of God
will make him walk in humility: and on the other fide the love of God will
make him to serve God with gladness. This is a very good way of casting this
burden upon God.

Fifthly and lastly, (but continually and (...)pra^er.
fervently) let him pray unto God for his grace, to be given, continued, and
increased to him. For as the flesh (that is corruption ^n us) lusts against
the spirit; so the spirit (that is the grace of God in us) lusts against the
flesh. So Paul encumbered with the messenger of Satan, bu^eting him (by which
name he understood the burden of his troublesome corruptions) prayed unto God,
if it might be, to be freed from it. For all power to prevail against sin,
and to get the mastery over corruptions, is obtained by the gift of God, and by
the work of his grace in us. Therefore does David pray to God in this manner,
Teach me o Lord the way of thy statutes, Psalm. 119. 33.
and I will keep it unto the end: give me understanding, and I will keep thy
law, yea I will keep it with my whole heart* direct me in the path of thy
commandments, for therein is my delight; incline mine heart unto thy
testimonies and not to covetousness. Thus earnestly does he contend with God
by prayer to be assisted with his grace; which if he may obtain, he fears
not to promise unto God some obedience, notwithstanding whatsoever corruption
abiding and moving in his flesh. And so must every man do that is encumbered
with his own withdrawing lusts. This course will not be idle. What answer God
will give unto such prayer, we may see by the answer given to Paul's prayer, by
him offered to the Lord Jesus upon like occasion: for when he had entreated
God, that his troublesome lusts might depart from him, he received this answer:
My grace is sufficient, for thee: my power is made 2. Cor. 12. 9
perfect through weakness. He was promised sufficient aid from the grace of
Jesus Christ, that in his weakness, being unable to extinguish those lusts,
the power of Christ should perfectly appear in strengthening him not to be
overcome of them. And if with Paul thou make the same prayer unto the Lord
Jesus, the giver of all grace, with Paul thou shall obtain the same answer, to
be continually assisted with his sufficient grace, to preserve thee from being
carried away by thy fleshly lusts. They shall have being, to exercise thee in
the warfare of this life: they shall not have power to subdue thy heart to them.

To take these courses hitherto prescribed. As first to exercise thy self in
the study of holy Scriptures: Secondly, to frequent the company, and observe
the conversation of holy men: Thirdly, to shun all occasions that may move thy
corrupt lusts to attempt evil action: Fourthly, to think often of the
judgments of God threatened against sin, and executed upon sinners; and of
the mercies of God promised to virtue, and performed to the virtuous: and
lastly to m^ngle continual prayer with the former courses. This is to cast
this burden of our sinful lusts upon God for our ease.

CHAP. XIII.
THE second branch of spiritual Two Spiritual burden, accusing thoughts.
troubles and burdens, is accusing thoughts, disturbing peace, and breeding
terrors of conscience, when it pleases God to bring to our remembrance our
sins past, and to set them in order against us, allowing Satan to be master*
Who being privy to our sins, and to all circumstances concurring in the doing
of them, does present them unto us in their true colors: amplifying and
aggravating our ignorance that would not learn, our contempt of God, whose will
we know, yet had no care to do it; our unthankfulness, our pride, our
cruelty, and over uncleanness; with whatsoever other thing, that may make our
sins fearful unto us: not forgetting to let us see withal, what wrath from
heaven, and what torment in hell those our sins have deserved.

This a most grievous burden, breeding A most grievous burden.
disperation in the wicked, and unspeakable fear in the elect; he that of all
the sons of men, was best able to bear this burden, and had the greatest
assurance against it, even Jesus Christ the son of God, when he bare the
burden of our sins imputed unto him (being in himself most pure from sin)
he did by reason of this burden, offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, and was in fear, and did sweat blood, and complained
as one forsaken of God. So that this burden is very heavy, and it much
concerns us to learn how to cast this burden upon God.

And in this business, because the devil To cast thi^ burden upon God, look
into the circumstances of the sin.
takes advantage from every the least circumstance of our sin, that may make
for him against us, to increase thereby our fear and trouble of mind:
therefore it shall be meet, that we also, for our advantage against him, do
examine and mark the circumstances of the sin we are charged with, to see if
we can find any the smallest hole, through which the light of hope may shine
unto us. And it may fall out unto us as it did to the Prophet Ezechiel, who
being entered in at the gate of the court, he looked, Ezec. 8. 7.
and behold an hole was in the wall. Then the Lord bad him dig in the wall,
and when he had diggd in the wall, behold there was a door. The little hole
which at the first he espied, while he attempted to dig, became a door, by
which he entered with ease. So may it fall out to thee in thy care of casting
this burden upon God for thy ease. The least hole that we can spy in the
circumstances of our sins, through which hope of Gods mercy may shine unto
us, if we take unto us the instrument of prayer and dig therewith, may and
will prove unto us a door of mercy. For the mercy of God is like a flood that
ouerfloweth. But where the waters of a flood find but a small hole to issue
through at the first, by continuance, they wear the hole greater, make passage
for themselves, and run at the last like a strong stream, that cannot be
stopped. So the mercy of God appearing first at the hole of a small
circumstance, if thou continue in prayer, and attend upon God, will work it
self freer passage, and in the end shine with full brightness in thy
conscience, and the devil shall not be able to darken the comfortable and
glorious light of it.

First therefore let the afflicted sinner If thou he^ urged generally.
consider and weigh well the manner of his tentation, whether he be urged in a
distinct manner with any particular sin, ^r whether he be more co^fusedly urged
and in a general manner, that he has an evil heart, and is an hypocrite,
and loves not the Lord (and if the afflicted person cannot himself discern
the condition of his te^tation, his judgment being oppressed and darkened by
his affliction; let the judicious comforter, whose help he seeks, observe it
for him) for Satan (that by Gods permission urges against him this tentation)
finds in some men particular matter of enormious sins, as of murder in Cain,
of adultery in David, and of idolatry in Manasses: into which particular sins
they have broken licentiously with great boldness. Where he has this
advantage from our former violent courses, he will be sure to urge it to the
uttermost (as making much for him) to drive us into despair, to say with Cain,
My punishment is greater Genesis 4. 13.
then I can bear. Or as Musculus reads it, agreeable, as he says, to the
Hebrew, Mine iniquity is greater then can be pardoned. In some others he
finds no such particular gross sin, but they have walked ciuilly and
modestly: and where they did sin, (though that were very usual) yet they
sinned of infirmity rather then of pride, and upon provocation rather then upon
free choice. Here he has not advantage as in the former. And therefore in a
more general and confused manner, he urges against them their corruptions,
but specially hypocrisy, and an unsound heart, that they did abstain from
gross sins, not out of any hatred that they did bear against such vile
sins, but only for fear of the peoples speech: and rather for want of
means and opportunity to accomplish them, then for want of any good will, if
time, and place, and other things had been answerable.

And if thou find that thine is such a general and confused tentation, as
There is ease in that that thou have not fallen into gross actual sin.
namely, that thou did never rightly know, nor love, nor fear God; and
that thine heart was always, or now is, an evil, an hypocritical heart; thine
estate is so much the more easy, that in the days of thy security (while thou
did walk according to the course of this world, and after the prince that
rules in the air, even the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience) God suffered not the Devil to thrust thee into presumptuous
sins, after the manner of others, and into gross and desperate sins
against all rules of honesty, wherewith he might now in this time of
temptation, torment thy conscience. This affords much advantage unto thee,
that the devil can find no gross particular sin to urge and press thee
withal.

Here let the afflicted man first consider, Such is the original estate of
every man conceiue^ in sin.
that hitherto his case is no whit worse then the case of every man that
comes into the world. For David does tell us, that the best man, even he that
proves afterward a man after Gods own heart, yet out of his mothers womb,
yea out of his fathers loins proceeds a sinful creature, with an evil
heart empty of the love of God, and continues so, till God bestow some
particular grace upon him for the conversion of him. And he makes himself an
instance hereof, speaking thus, Behold, I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51. 5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me. He was from the womb and loins a
sinner taken in general terms, for a man in whom there was an evil heart,
not knowing, not loving, not fearing God. And Saint Paul does tell us, that the
holiest man, even he that was from the beginning a chosen vessel to bear
witness to the name of Jesus Christ before kings and nations, yet in his
original estate, and first years, he is the child of wrath, and dead in
trespasses and sins, as all other men, till God in mercy look upon him, and
renew him. And he makes himself among others an instance thereof, while he
thus speaks; You has be quickened, Eples. 2. 1
that were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in times past ye walked
according to the course of this world, and after the Prince that rules in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience: among
whom we also had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, in
fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the
children of wrath as well as others. Paul was a bad as the Ephesians, and the
Ephesians as bad as all other men, til God in mercy converted both him and
them. And the Prophet Jeremy tells us, that there is both generally and
particularly, in all men, and in every man, a heart both wicked and
hypocritical: wicked to do that which is evil, deceitful and hypocritical to
dissemble in the doing of it, and to make shows, pretenses and excuses, that it
might be thought not to do evil. And this wickedness and hypocrisy to be so
deep and cunning, that it deceives, not only other men, but even the wicked
man himself, that flattereth and pleases himself with his own pretenses, and
persuades his own soul, that all is well, and only God is able to find out
his hypocrisy: for thus he says; The heart of man is Iere. 17. 9^
deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it? I the Lord search the
heart, etc. Other men cannot know it, and search it out. For the apostle says,
What man knows the things of a man, save the ^. Cor. 2. 11
spirit of a man which is in him. A man^ own heart may be acquainted with his
own thoughts, but another man cannot discern them; a man himself often times
is not able to discern his own wickedness, a vain and false opinion
misleading his blinded judgment; but God searches it out, because as the
Apostle says, There is not any Hebr. 4. 13
creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open
to his cies, with whom we have to do. Such is the depth of the wickedness of
man's heart, such is his deceitful hypocrisy, that no eye but the all-seeing
eye of God, no judgment but his that never erreth* can see the same. And
Solomon tells us, that there is no man just upon Eccles. 7. 22.
the earth* that does good, and sins not. And knowing this to be generaly
true, he challenges every man that thinks that he can say any thing to clear
either himself, or any other, saying, Who Prou. 20. 9
can say, I have made my heart clean? I am clean from my sin. So that this
is the condition of all men, till God in his mercy mould them anew by his
grace: till then they are altogether such as thou in thy troubled heart art
charged to be; men of an evil heart, full of wickedness and hypocrisy, that
neither know God, nor love God, nor fear God.

Therefore when thou art charged Yield to be as thou art charged, and make it a
warning to cra^e Gods help.
with such a general and confused tentation, yield it to be true, that thou
art charged withal, and stand not to make thy self better then thou art, and
withal, say unto thy soul; for that I have no more cause to despair of Gods
mercy, then David had, that was such a one in his birth; then Paul had, that
was such a one, until the day of his conversion; then any other, and all other
of Gods elect and best beloved children, that were every way such, conceived in
sin, borne in iniquity, children of wrath, full of unsearchable wickedness
and hypocrisy, neither knowing, nor living, nor fearing God, till he was
pleased to look upon them in his favor, and to convert them, by creating a
new heart, and renewing a right spirit in them.

And now that mine eyes are opened by this affrighting of my soul, to see my
bad condition, which I saw not before, I will make have unto the Lord, and will
crave that grace at his hands, that I now want; neither can I, nor will I
understand this work of his, in letting me see by this fearful temptation my
sinful estate (which in the days of my peace I did not see) to be any other,
then the fruit of his love, by making me to see my misery, to stir up my soul
(long drowned in former security) to seek with all earnestnes of ^eale for
his help. When a sick man feels pain in his flesh, he does not faintly
yield to death, because he is sick: but from the feeling of his weakness, he
takes occasion to seek out some learned Physician, and craves his help: and
the more sick he is the more he desires, and the more earnestly he sueth for
his help, and spares no cost, and puts himself into the Physicians power
to be ordered by him. Even so I, feeling fear in my soul, crept in by reason
of these accusing thoughts, that make me too sensibly to feel the dangerous
sickness of my soul, will not faintly yield unto death that (I confess) I have
deserved, and might justly fall upon me: but even from this fear, growing
from my now revealed sickness, I will seek out the Lord, that is the only
Physician of our souls, who kills, 1. Sam. 2. 6
and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and raises up. And I will
entreat him to make me his patient, and to take me into his charge: and the
more I am pained, the more I will sue for his help: and I will spare no cost
of prayers, of sighs and groans, I will pour out my whole heart unto him, and
I will put my self wholly into his power, who has also commanded me, in such
times of distress to seek unto him, yea, and has promised when we so seek
him; to be Psalm 50. 15
found of us, saying. Call upon me in the day of troble, so will I deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. This is my day of trouble, therefore will I
call upon God, that me obtained deliverance, I may glorify him with praises.
And seeing the Apostle Rom 11. 32.
Paul has said, that God has shut up all inunbeleese, that he might have
mercy upon all, why should I do so great wrong, either to my own present
misery, or unto Gods infinite mercy, to believe otherwise, but that God has
holden me thus long shut up and fast bound in the prison and fetteres of my
own unbelief and natural infidelity and wickedness, (which now I see) to the
end that I might the more dearly esteem of his mercy in freeing me (which I
will now call for) and that his mercy might be, even to his own name, the
more honorable in converting me. Thus may the afflicted sinner troubled with
this general and confused kind of accusing thoughts, cast his burden
comfortably upon God, for in this kind of temptation, there is this hole in the
wall, wherein while he diggeth by continual prayer, it may and will prove a
door of mercy, easy to be entered.

And I further advise this afflicted man, And have care of the body to help the
weakness of it.
when he feels himself entered or entering into this fear, and confused kind
of temptation, that he will have some care of his bodies health, and crave the
advice of some godly and learned Physician: for such confused fears are not
always merely spiritual temptations; but they do often arise from some
natural decay in our bodily health, and from some distemper of humors in us.
Great is the affinity between the soul and the body, and the proper passions
and diseases of the one (by reason of that affinity) make the other to be
evil affected. If therefore the body be crazed, it will make the mind also to
be diseased; and where the humor of Melancholy is predominare, and is not kept
in any even proportion in us, it naturally drives us into deep and dull, into
sad, heavy, and fearful thoughts and imaginations, and causes doubtings and
distrust: and with a little help of the wicked adversary, it will quench all
comfortable hope, and breed woeful despair in us; and the Devil is cunning
to judge of our distemperature, and where he finds such weakness, he will
work upon it; as he works upon the sanguine and pleasant man's disposition,
to make him wanton and careless of God: and as he works upon the choleric
and hasty man's disposition, to make him wrathful and sudden in mischief: and
as he works upon the fleginaticke to make him slothful, cold and negligent
of doing his duty, and a lover of sloth and idleness: so he will not fail to
be busy with the man, in whom melancholy abounds, to make him full of fear,
and void of hope. And lamentable are the effects, which often follow, where he
finds such matter to work upon. The wise Christian therefore, that is
affrighted with this confused kind of temptation, in terms of general
accusation, must not neglect to relieve his body, and to remove from Satan's
hand that evil humor that he makes so dangerous use of. This is a thing that
the afflicted man often contemns as carnal counsel: and indeed it were
carnal counsel, if it should be required alone, without recourse unto God by
prayer: but it has been found by the mercy of God, to have been profitable
counsel. And it is not to be neglected of him, that in this confused kind of
tentatio^, desires ease to his soul. And to take this with the former
prescribed course, is to cast this burden upon God.

CHAP. XIIII.
BUT if it fall out that In d^inct and ^cular ^sations.
thou be charged more distinctly with some particular enormious sin, one or
many: then has Satan espied against thee some especial advantage in thy
doings. It behooves thee now to look closely to thy self, and to mark, if
thou can epsy any hole in the wall of hope to dig in, that a door of mercy
may be opened unto thee.

In this case, consider whether that or Consider if in were done in the time of
thy ignorance.
those sins were committed in the time of thine ignorance, when thou knew
not well what was lawful or unlawful for thee to do, or in the time of
knowledge, when thine own heart could tell thee that such things were not
lawful to be done: for if they were done in the time of ignorance, when
perhaps thou might think it lawful and free to be done, yea perhaps good,
perhaps also profitable and necessary, as Saul after called Paul, thought it
lawful, good, and necessary for him to persecute the name of Jesus, and to
cast into prison them that called upon that name: as he said before King
Agrippa; I verily Acts. 26. 9.
thought in my self, that I ought to do many contrary things against the name
of Jesus of Nazareth. Or if thou did not think it to be lawful, good and
necessary for thee, yet thou did not think, or at the least did not know
it to be evil for thee to do it, and any such danger to hang upon it, with
Gods high displeasure, as now thou perceiuest: then this very circumstance
makes thy burden lighter, and in the wall of hope, a hole appears, wherein
if thou dig by prayer, a door of mercy will be opened unto thee.

For though ignorance does not excuse, Ignorance makes thy sin the sooner
pardonable.
much less justify our sins, and the discharge of that sin will cost thy
soul some tears, and prayers, and other like courses of a contrite heart: yet
with more ease will the terror of it be overcome, then if it had been done
against knowledge. Hereto pertaines that saying of our blessed savior, That
Luke 12. 47.
servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he that knew it
not, and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with fewer
stripes. By these stripes some of the fathers understand, not torments in hell
of different rigor (though it cannot be denied, but the condition of some in
hell, shall be more tolerable, then of some others) but thereby they
understand rather those gripes of conscience, that provoke prayers,
supplications, strong cryings, and tears, out of a heart beset and straightned
with fierce accusations, a convinced conscience, and feared condemnation: and
these assaults they say, shall be more hard against the conscience of him that
siuned against knowledge, in a presuming manner, then against the conscience of
him that sinned of ignorance, in a weaker manner, that is yielding rather out
of his weakness, then daring out of his pride: for it may be alleged for the
ignorant man, that if he had known such a thing to be evil in the sight of
God, he would not have done it. No such thing can be said for him that presumed
against knowledge, for such an one shows contempt of God and of his revealed
will, which the ignorant man cannot be charged with all: he groneth only under
the burden of humane error and frailty, but the other lies under the burden
of malice and presumption.

Therefore when our afflicted man, pressed distinctly with some particular
sins, finds that they were the sins of his ignorance, let him not think
himself thereby free: for to be ignorant of that which is our duty, required
of God, is of it self a great sin: and if his ignorance be affected
ignorance, as in them that refuse to be taught, and contemn the means of
knowledge, when God does offer them, such ignorance differs little or nothing
from malice. But let him pray unto God in hope, and let him plead before God
his ignorance, not as an excuse, much less as a justification of his fault,
but as a motive, by Examples of then (...) that some of ignorance.
which the Lord is often led in his free mercy to forgive sins.

And for the encouraging of his heart, let him remember the examples of them,
to whom, upon their ^epentance and conversion to God, mercy to the forgiveness
of their sins of ignorance has been granted. Peter in a sermon of his made
unto the multitude, that came together to see the lame man whom he and John had
healed, charge them with a grievous sin, saying. You denied the holy one
and the just, and desired Acts. 3. 14.
a muraerer to be given you, and killed the Lord of life, whom God raised from
the dead, where of we are witnesses. This was a great sin, to kill the son
of God, and to make more reckoning of, and to show more favor unto a known
murderer, then to the Lord of life that came to save them. But this their fact
he says was of ignorance. And now brethren I Acts 3. 17.
know that through ignorance you did it, as did also your governors. For though
the lews were very maliciously bent against Jesus, yet many of them knew him
not to be the Lord of life, and to be the holy one of God: neither did they
persecute him in that name. Therefore does Saint Peter sa^e unto them in the
same Sermon. Amend your lives and turn, that Acts 3. ^.
your sins may be done away. Here is mercy offered and assured unto them,
that amend their lives and turn to God, namely this mercy, that all their
enormious sins, and even among the rest, their sin in refusing the Lord
Christ, and putting him to a shameful death, should be forgiven, and the
rather, because they did it ignorantly.

And memorable is the example of the blessed Apostle Paul. His sin was
persecution against the name of Jesus Christ: his proceeding in it was furious,
without all compassion, raging both against men and women that called upon that
name, and casting them into prison in all places, where he could find them,
and had power against them. In such sort, that he became famous, or to speak
more truly, infamous for his cruelty, so that Ananias in Damascus could say to
the Lord Jesus of him. Lord I have Acts 9. 13.
heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints in
Jerusalem: moreover, here he has authority of the high Priests, to bind^ all
that call upon thy name. And yet this man had his sins forgiven, and was
received into favor, and had all the degrees of holy honor done unto him,
that can be done upon earth, to any among the followers of the Lord Jesus. For
first he was called to the knowledge and faith of the Lord Jesus, and was made
a true believer: Secondly, he had honor, not only to believe in him, but also
to suffer for his sake, and was made a true confessor and marter. Thirdly, he
was also an excellent instrument to draw other men to the knowledge and faith
of Jesus, and was made a teacher and an Apostle. And all this was the more
freely done to him, because when he was a persecurour* he finned of
ignorance, and knew no other, but that it was lawful and holy for him to do
so. Hear what himself says of that matter, I thank him that has made 1.
Tim. 1. 1^
me strong, that is, Christ Jesus our Lord, for he counted me faithful, and
put me in his service, when before I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an
oppressor* but I was received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly through
unbelief. Ignorance and vabeleese are not things pleasing to God, by their
virtue and merit, obtaining forgiveness of all the sins growing out of them:
neither does the Apostle remember his ignorance and unbelief obtaining his
pardon, as out of worthiness of them: rather know them in themselves to be
grievous sins, deserving hell as fully as any notorious sin that issues from
them: but he that sins out of ignorance, more easily finds favor, then
he that sins against knowledge. For the sin of the ignorant man has not
in it like evidence of rebellion against the revealed will of God, as the sin
of him that has knowledge; As the words of the Lord Jesus show, spoken to some
of the Pharisees; If ye were blind, ye should not have John 9. 41.
sin: that is, if ye wanted knowledge, and were blind in your understanding,
your fault should not be so great, so notorious, so blameworthy, as now it
is, by reason of your knowledge.

There is therefore (though no merit of favor yet) much hope for him, that can
say truly in his heart unto GOD, Lord thou know, that blindly and
ignorantly I ran into this sin, not knowing that it was against thy will,
and so odious in thy sight. And this is for him, that is distinctly charged
with particular sins, and finds that he committed them out of ignorance; a
door of hope, in which these examples may encourage him, to dig by prayer,
wherein if he do truly, and with a right penitent heart humbly and earnestly
travel, he casts the burden of his sins upon God; and shall find case.

CHAP. XV.
BUT say it was sin against If it were done agenst thy knowledge.
knowledge, and thou had warning given thee many times to take heed of that
same sin: and warning by the word of God, so that thou could not but know,
that to do so as thou did, was a sin highly displeasing to God. Sometime
thou were warned by a public Sermon, sometime thou were warned by thine own
private reading, sometime by the loving admonition of some neighbor or friend.
And thy judgment was grown to a mislike of that same sin, and thou were
offended at others, that committed it: and yet thou have fallen thy self into
the same sin. Surely this is a hard case: and the tempter has great
advantage against thee.

But what! must the charged sinner Consider if thy w^ was not over. sw^ed by
some strong temptation
sincke eternally under this burden? is there no means to cast even this
burden upon GOD for the sinners case? Yes verily: and Satan has not yet
driven us so close up to the wall, but that we may, by Gods mercy, slip
safely out of his hands. Here let the sinner consider in what case he was,
when he committed this sin, whether he were his own man (as we speak)
that is, whether it were in the choice of his own will to do it with liking, or
without liking. For great is the weakness of our nature, and oftentimes the
regenerate, and best minded serve ^s of God (though they should yield to die a
thousand deaths, with most exquint^ torments, rather then commit ^nie sin, to
the offense of God,) yet, either suddenly affrighted with the appearance of
danger, they commit sin, before they have time to consider what they should
do, and to settle their resolution against it: or else, weighing at leisure
both their duty to God, and their present danger, pusillanimity and weakness
of heart makes them to shrink and yield at the present. And must a sentence
irreuocable presently come forth against this weak sheep? Is there no balm
in Gilead? Iere. 8. 12
is there no Physician there? is there There is (...) hope in this circ^.
no mercy in heaven for this sinner? is there no gracious pardoner there? Such
a rule must needs have sent to hell many of Gods beloved Saints, that now are
with him in heaven: who while they lived on earth, were sometime urged with
sudden, and sometime with violent temptations, and have yielded, sometime
without consideration, and sometime with consideration: and yet after, by the
mercy of God, have recovered themselves, and have glorified GOD, both in their
life and death, and are now glorified of him in his kingdom. And why should
not thou, if thy sin be like theirs, having to do with the same God of
mercy, hope to find the same favor that they found? Surely this very
circumstance, that thou were surprised by a sudden or violent temptation, and
led captive to do evil, against thine own liking, that did take no pleasure
in it; yea were exceedingly grieved, that thou had not strength and grace to
withstand it, is a hole in the wall of hope, through which light shines, and
wherein if thou dig by humble and hearty prayer, it may prove a door of mercy
for thee to enter by, and come near to God, to be eased of thy burden.

Here consider the example of the Apostle Peter: his sin was a grievous fin,
Examples of men pardoned that thus sinned in the time of knowledge.
for he denied before men his master the Lord Jesus Christ: he did so, once,
twice, and thrice, and each time more vehemently then other: for first he
simply denied him, and passed it over with this saying, I know not the man. At
the second time he augmented his sin with addition of an oath, and forsweares
him. The third time he yet augmented his sin more, with addition of grievous
execrations, and cursed himself; that is, wished himself accursed, if he
know him. And he did this in the time of knowledge, after he had learned, that
to do so was sin, and dangerous to his soul. For he had heard his Master
openly before speak thus; Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I
confess before my Father Mat. 10. 32
in heaven: but whosoever shall deny me befnre men, him will I deny before my
Father which is in heaven. And though it were a true saying, out of a liars
mouth, skin Job 2. 4.
for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he give for his life. Yet this
is true also, and to be regarded above the other, that all that a man has,
even skin and life also, he must give, cast away, and esteem as vile, that he
may follow Christ to glorify him by true confession. Which course only has
power to secure life. As Peter also had heard from the mouth of his Lord,
saying, If Mar. 16. ^4
any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and
follow me, for whosoever will save his life, shall loose it: and whosoever
shall loose his lifs for my sake, shall save it. This Peter had heard, this he
knew. And besides these general caueats long before given, Peter was also
privately forewarned of this thing, even the same night a little before he did
it: when he also took knowledge of that warning, and resolved with himself not
to do it; yea, made open vow not to do it. For when the Lord Jesus Christ,
after his last Supper, a little before his apprehension, he told the
Apostles, that they that night should all be offended by him. Peter boldly
answered and said unto him; Though all men should be offended, yet will not ^
be offended. To Mat. 26. 33
whom the Lord said in the next words* Verily I say unto thee, that this night,
before 34
the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Peter had no meaning to do so, but
rather a resolved heart not to do so. And therefore answered presently; Though
I should die with thee, yet will I 35
not deny thee. And he spoke no more than he truly intended, he was no
hypocrite, only he considered not his own weakness, but was over confident
in the opinion of his own strength. And therefore when Jesus was taken and
carried to the high Priests hou^e, Peter followed a far off, and entered into
the high Priests hall, and put himself among the servants and officers, and
drew near to the fire (for it was cold) and first a maid challenged him to
be one of the followers of Jesus* after, some of the men seconded her
challenge, strengthening it by adding (...) suspicion; that his speech bewrayed
him to be a Galilean, and Jesus came out of Galilee, and therefore he was not
unlikely to be one of his followers. At last a coosin of his, whose care Peter
had smo^e off in the garden, flatly affirmed, that he did see him in the
garden with him. Peter affrighted suddenly with these challenges, and being in
the midst of them whom he esteemed his enemies, seeing at the present no way
to escape; yea, having no leisure to think what was fittest for him to do,
denied his Master, and bound his denial with oaths and curses.

Was not this a sin against the knowledge of his heart? and what have thou
done, in the particular sins, that thou ar^ charged withal in thine heart,
that Peter did not in this sin of his? and in what points are thy sins
greater and more grievous then his? then what lets thee that thou may not
pray for, and hope for the same mercy, for the forgiveness of thy sins,
which was freely granted to Peter for the forgiveness of his sins. Go forth
therefore with Peter in the sight of thy sins, pour out the tears of
repentance before God as Peter did, and he that received Peter to grace, will
also receive thee. He was pardoned upon no peculiar mercy proper to him, and
denied to others, but upon that universal mercy, and most ample grace, that
God is ready to extend to every co^trite soul, and then afforded to Peter,
that he, out of his experience, might after commend it to others. Therefore did
the Lord Jesus say to him aforehand, when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren* Luk 22. 32
That is, when peace is restored to thy soul, upon assured pardon of thy
sins past, and grace given unto thee, to stand more firm for all times
following: then labor to comfort the hearts of others that have sinned as thou
did: assure unto them, upon their contrition, the forgiveness of their
sin past, and the presence of Gods grace for the time to come. So that I am
not the man, but Peter: nor Peter out of speculation, and from his own
conceit, but out of experience, and upon most sure authority, from the mouth of
his Master, the son of God, the savior of mankind, the Judge of quick and
dead, that is warranted to tell thee, that there is mercy with God, to forgive
thy sins committed* against knowledge, if in this sorrow and fear of thine
heart, thou turn to God, and heartily prayest unto him for pardon, with purpose
no more to commit the like sin.

I could add the examples of many of Gods Saints, that sinned against
knowledge, being carried away with a sudden and violent temptation, so that
either they had no leisure to think what was fittest to do, or they wanted
power to withstand the present assault, and they after found favor with God,
and their sins being forgiven, they live with him in glory. Jacobs lie,
maintained to his father Isaacs face, that he was not Jacob the younger, but
Esau Genesis 27. 19
the elder son, was a sin of this kind, against knowledge: but his mothers
words as a potent temptation, led him to the doing of it. Iudaes adultery
committed with Thamar his daughter Ge. 38. 15*
in law (though not known to be Thamar) was a sin of this kind, against
knowledge (for how could Indah be ignorant of the Law of God against
adultery, written in men's hearts, that would have done execution upon Thamar,
when he heard she had played the whore) but the temptation was sudden and
strong, fitted with so many opportunities; he was a young man, at that time
without a wife, she sat disguised as an harlot, it was in the field out of
the view of men, and she was soon entreated and yielded unto him: these
opportunities strengthening the temptation, made it so potent, that Judah sinned.
David's hasty sentence, giving the estate of Mephibosheth unto 2. (...)* 16. 4
Ziba, was a sin of this kind, against knowledge; (for David could not be
ignorant of it, that there are many false accusers, that a righteous Judge
should give the accused party leave to speak for himself, before he proceed
to sentence) but the temptation was strong, and sudden; Ziba came with a
bribe, he brought it in a time when David had need of it. The time was
troublesome, Abs^lon was up in rebellion. Why might it not be true, that in
this trouble of the state, Mephibosheth being the right heir to Saul, might
seek to make a faction for him. And David had need now of friends, and
therefore thought fit to make Ziba sure on his side. These and like
considerations darkening David's judgment, gave strength to the temptation. And
he sinned in condemning the innocent, and rewarding the wicked accuser, and
that against knowledge, for he was not ignorant of the duty of a Judge. And
yet all these have found favor, and their sins have been forgiven unto them.
Why then should thy heart faint, and thy hope fail, because thy conscience
tells thee, that thou have sinned against knowledge. Repent and turn to God,
pray and thou shall be heard. This very circumstance, that thou we^ not freely
master of thine own will, but the sudden or violent temptation led thee
captive, is an hole through which hope shines: dig by hearty prayer, and by
true contrition, and a door of mercy shall be opened unto thee. This is in
this case, to cast thy burden of accusing thoughts upon God for thine ease.

CHAP. XVI.
BUT perhaps thy heart Is it were d^n a^niast knowledge, and wi^ f^ consent of
(...) will.
tells thee, that the particular sins that thou art charged withal, were not
only done in thy days of knowledge, when thou had learned before, that such
things ought not to be done: but they were also done in the freedom of thine
heart, not surprised with sudden fear, nor led away captive by any violent
temptation: but with full consent of will, thy heart at leisure considering,
and freely choosing (against all check whatsoever) to do those things
venturously, boldly, presumptuously, and (as we say) desperately casting behind
thy back at that time, all fear of God, all regard of his law, all
remembrance of his mercy, and all bonds of thy obedience; only seeking to
satisfy thine own lusts, and preferring the pleasure of sin, and wages of
iniquity, before the service of God, though thou did know, that those
pleasures were of that constancy, and would breed eternal torments: and that
the wages and gain of sin, was of small worth, and fading, and would breed
unto thee the eternal loss of thy soul.

This is a hard case indeed: and if Satan This is d^ngerous: yet there (...)
help.
have this advantage against thee, then has he driven thee up into a narrow
straight, and hemmed thee in very dangerously. But yet by the mercy of God,
there are good and sure means, by which to escape even out of this straight,
though with some difficulty: for here has that saying of the Lord Jesus
place, That servant that knew his Luke. 1^* 47.
masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes. Many and sore gripings shall his conscience
feel, before he recover his peace against this accusation, and it will cost
him many tears sighs and groans, which I do the rather remember, to make men
fear to offend in this manner, and to suffer sin so to reign in their
mortal bodies. But yet it is possible for the sinner thus burdened to cast his
burden upon the Lord, and to obtain ease. There is yet a hole in the wall of
hope, wherein if thou dig by humble and hearty prayer, it may prove a door of
mercy unto thee. It has been so with others.

For who ever sinned more wilfully and As appears in the example of Manasses
sinning against knowledge.
more presumptuously, then Manasses, though he were young when he began to
reign, being then but twelve years of age, and in that regard, all his acts
might seem to be grounded in ignorance, that had not learned at the first to
do well, and after would not learn: yet considering the piety of Hezekiah his
father, it is likly that he had been carefully taught, and that his father did
no more leave him without counsel at his departure out of life, then David
when he was ready to die, did leave his son Solomon. When the 1 King. 2. 1
days of David drew near that he should die, he charged Solomon his son
saying, I go the way of all the earth: be strong therefore and show thy self
a man: and take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God to walk in his ways
etc. Thus out of his care, did he not cease, while there was life and strength
in himself to teach his son his duty to God. And of Hezekiah it is
testified, that he did uprightly i^ ^. King. 18.
3. the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father David bad done: and
therefore it is not likely, that either in the time of health or in the time of
his sickness, he neglected the instruction of his son, that should succeed
him. It must needs be therefore that Manasses sin was against And with f^ll
course of will.
knowledge, even in his childhood, much more afterward. Sure it was with full
freedom of his will, even with a high hand: of whom it is thus written, He did
evil in the sight of the Lord, like the abomination 2. Chr. 33. ^.
of the heathen, who^ the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel for
he went back and built the high places, which Hezekiah his father had broken
down: and he set up Alters for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the
host of Heaven, and served them. Also he built Alters in the house of the
Lord, where of the Lord had said; in Ierusulem shall my name be for ever. And
he built Alters for all the host of the heaven in the two courts of the house
of the Lord. And he caused his sons to pass through the fire in the vallie
of Benhinnom: he gave himself (here was full sway of his own will) to
witchcraft and to charming, and to sorcery, and he used them that had familiar
spirits, and soothsayers: he did very much evil in the sight of the Lord to
anger him, etc. Here was a man violent, headstrong, yea mad and furious in his
sin, and not in small, but in the greatest sins; not only against the
second table, but much more against the commandments of the first table, in
all kinds of idolatry, and all ungodly profanations; and yet he And yet
finding favor.
found favor at the hands of God, who first brought him to repentance by
(...), and then forgiving his sin, restored him to peace. The history whereof
is thus recorded; The Lord brought 2. Ch^. 33. 11.
upon him the captains of the host of the King of Ashur, which took
Manasses, and put him in fetters, and bound him (...) chains, and carried him
to Ba^ell. And when he was in tribulation, he prayed to the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his father, and prayed unto him; and
God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer and brought him again to
Jerusalem into his kingdom: then Manasses know that the Lord was God. Now
after this he built a wall without the City of David, on the west side of
Gihon in the valley, even at (...) entry of the fish-gate, and compassed about
Ophet, and raised it very high, and put Captains of war in all the strong
Cities of Judah. And he took away the strange Gods, and the image out of the
house of the Lord; and all the Alters that he had built in the mount of the
house of the Lord* and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City. Also he
prepared the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings, and of
thanks* and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel. Consider
seriously this example, weigh therein on the one side the sin of the man, on
the other side the mercy of God. In Manasses thou shall see the height of thy
sin equalled, if not exceeded: and in God thou shall see mercy exceeding all
sin. And where such mercy appears, what should make the sinner doubt of
finding favor, while he seeks it with a true purpose of leaving his sin,
and true faith and hearty prayer. I might ad And in the th^efe that s^ffered
with Jesus
hereunto the example of that thief, that was crucified at the same time, with
the Lord Jesus upon his right hand; to whom, making his paier to Jesus in these
words; Lord remember me when Luke. 23. 42. 43.
thou co^mest into thy kingdom. The Lord again m^de him this answer, full of
most rich mercy, this day thou shall be with me Lu. 23. 42. 43.
in Paradise. This man living among the people of Judah, could not be ignorant
of the commandment of God forbidding theft; therefore his sin was against
knowledge. And making a trade of theft; thereby to maintain himself, there
was no violence offered to his will, but freely, willingly, and with choice, he
followed that course, and was even a covenant servant of sin, reaping with
delight the wages of iniquity, in the spoil that he made of the inocent. And
yet he found favor, and had his sin forgiven him* and entered into life. Who
shall then despair of the mercy of God? Saint Ambrose calls the history of
this man, ^ulcherrimum affectandae conuersionis C^m in Lu* chap. 23. 10.
exemplum: A most Godly example to move men to turn to God. And these
examples, let our afflicted sinner consider seriously. They are writt^n for our
instruction, in them he shall epsy an hole in the wall of hope, which will
prove a door of mercy for him to enter, if he dig by hearty paier.

And for the further confirmation of There is one only sin ^npardonable.
his hope. Let our afflicted sinner know, that there is only one kind of sin
unpardonable, and he shall find the sin that he is charged withal, not to be
that sin, and therefore to be pardonable. And this is no small incouragme^t to
know his sin, how great so ever, yet to be pardonable* when a sick man
understands his disease, that will be mortal to him. if he neglect it, yet
to be curable, if he look to it in time, and apply apt medicines unto it, he
will take much comfort in that knowledge, and thenceforth he will diligently
seek for remedy. And so must our afflicted sinner when, he shall understand his
sin to be such as may be forgiven, comfort his soul with that consideration,
and thenceforth diligently use the means, that God our Physician prescribes
and the effect by the mercy of God, will be health, peace, and salvation.

Now that sin that is unpardonable, Called blas^hemie against the Holy Ghost
is called in the Scripture blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Whereof our
Savior speaks in these words, saying, Verily I say unto you, all sins
shall Mark. 3 2^
be forgiven unto the children of men, and blasphemies wherewith they
blaspheme: but he that blasphems against the Holy Ghost, shall never have
forgiveness* but is culpable of eternal damnation. Which sin, if we consider
the circumstances of the place, where the Pharisees are charged with it,
especially as that matter is recorded by Saint Matthew in his twelst Chapter, we
shall find it to be, not any particular transgression of any, or of all the
precepts of the law: but a wil-full ^at this blasphemy i^.
opposition of our heart against (as I may call it) the body of religion; first
rightly understood, and certainly known to be the true religion of God: and
upon no other cause, but out of mere envy.

The Pharisees heard the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and saw his
miracles, and knew him to be that son of David, that Messiah that was
promised: they knew his doctrine to be holy and heavenly* and his works to be
wrought by the finger of God. Yet because the people honored him, and upon the
sight of his miracle, when he healed the man that was possessed of a devil,
and was both blind and dumb, Man. 12. 2^ 24.
because they then cried out saying; Is not this that son of David? They
therefore out of envy and malice, without any other cause, gave it out
concerning him, saying. He casts out Devils no otherwise, but by Beelzebub the
prince of Devils: Indeuoring by these words to persuade the people that he was
a wicked man, risen up out of Hell, set up by the Prince of devils, and
assisted with his power, to publish the doctrine of devils, and to uphold his
kingdom: so slaundering the person of Christ, the works of Christ, and the
doctrine of Christ: all which many of them knew to be heavenly and of God.

If they had not known him to be thee son of God, they had not been guilty
of that great sin. As the Lord John. 9. 41.
said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should not have sin, your ignorance
would have cleared you from this wi^full malice. But they knew his person to
be sent of God, his works to be done by the finger of God, and in his doctrine
that he taught truly the will of God. John 7. (...).
The Lord himself said unto them, Ye both know me, and know whence I am. Yet
did they out of envy detract from the glory of his works, that they might by
that means bring both his person and heavenly doctrine into contempt.

And they ceased not this course of slandering his person, of disgracing his
works, and obscuring the truth of his doctrine, laying wait also for his life
(for God gives not repentance for this sin) till they had bought him with
money of the traitor, judged him to be worthy of death upon the known false
testimony of suborned witnesses, extorted with their clamours his condemnation
from an unwilling Judge (pronouncing him just, whom he condemned for their
pleasure) added unto his unjust death what reproach they could, and after his
resurrection, corrupted the soldiers with money, so causing it to be by them
divulged, that his disciples stole away his body out of the grave, and that he
did not rise again from the dead: by that course laboring (out of envy) to
suppress the Gospel and doctrine of Jesus Christ, which yet they knew, by the
illumination of the holy Ghost, to be the very truth of God.

This malicious opposition of theirs against religion, known to be the
religion of God, was their unpardonable sin. It was not their vncharitabe
proceeding against an innocent man: their hiering of a servant to betray his
master: their suborning of false witnesses against a just person: their
corrupting of a Judge to give sentence to their liking, though unjust: nor the
hy^ing of bold men to spread a lie among the credulious multitude: nor yet the
cruel and unjust murdering of the Lord of life. Though all these were grievous
sins, for many were pardoned, both of the people, and of their gouerners,
that had their hands in all this injustice (though they had not so deep a
rea^, and so envious a purpose, of overthrowing by his overthrow the religion,
which they knew to be of God, as most of the Priests and Pharisees had) many, I
say were pardoned, that had their hands in the injustice done to our savior,
for he prayed for them, saying, Father Luke. 23. 34.
forgive them, for they know not what they do: and that prayer of his could
not be in vain.

But in the cunning fellows, both among the people and their goueruors, that
knew him, and whence he was, and how he wrought, and what he taught, and that
all was of God: this was their vupardonable sin, that they used all that
falsehood, corruption and cruelty, both during his life, and in his death, only
to this end, to hinder the course of his doctrine; as they say plainly in
their council, If we let him thus alone, all men John 11. 4^.
will believe in him. When they knew that doctrine taught by him, wherein they
would not have the people to believe, to be the very truth of God. This is the
unpardonable sin, called blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, because it
flaundereth and disgraceth the truth of God, which was made known unto them,
and so made to shine in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, called the spirit of
truth, because it leads into all truth.

This sin is a common sin of devils, T^ sin ^nnot be (...) sin.
that know God, and maliciously seek his dishonor; that know the grounds of
true and holy religion, and enuiously seek to depra^e them, to corrupt them,
and if they could, to abolish them out of the world, desiring nothing more then
to disgrace the truth of God among men. This sin is sometime, but rarely found
amongst men, and in examination, thy sin will be found not to be this sin,
and therefore not to be unpardonable: which is a great ground of hope to build
upon.

First, the sin of him that is pressed It' can not be (...) that (...) with
general accusation.
with the general and confused accusation of an evil and hypocritical heart,
cannot be this sin; that being naturally the estate of all men that come into
the world: they are borne with a heart deceitful and wicked above all things.
But no man can be borne guilty of blasphemy against the holy ghost, because no
man is in his birth enlightened with the knowledge of true religion, which
knowledge must necessarily go before this fearful opposition.

Neither can this sin be found in Nor his that sinne^ of ignoranc^*
them that are distinctly charged with a particular sin or sins, that were
committed in the days of ignorance: it cannot be those sins For he that may
fall into this unpardonable sin, must first have a full and clear knowledge
of true religion, with persuasion that it is the truth. But the ignorant man
wants that clear knowledge. And he is far enough from this sin.

Neither can it be found in them that Nor his who^e (...) is ouerruled
sin against knowledge, but out of weakness, either surprised with a sudden
temptation, or led captive with a strong and violent temptation: for when these
men are at liberty to consider what they have done, they have no pleasure in
it. But that unpardonable sin is a voluntary, wilful, and malicious
opposition against the known truth, out of their envy, not enduring the glory
of Christ in his Gospel.

Neither can any particular breach of Nor his that breaks any moral ^re cept.
any one Commandment, nor all the breaches of all the Commandments, howsoever
committed out of ignorance, or out of knowledge, out of weakness, or out of
malice, suddenly, or with premeditation, be this sin against the Holy Ghost:
for that is a malicious striving to disgrace the name, or at the least the
Religion of Jesus Christ, known to be the true Religion, rather then any proud
and licentious act in transgressing the precepts of Gods Law.

It is the sin that never any of Gods Nor the sin of any of Gods elect.
Elect fall into, though they fall into many particular enormious sins, as of
^olatry, witchcraft, blasphemy, contempt of the Sabbath, rebellion, murder,
adultery, drunkenness, theft, lying, perjury, and such like: wherein many of
Gods dear children fall often, and yet, by Gods favor, rise again by
repentance. Of that sin, and of the exemption of Gods elect from it, is that
saying of Saint John to be understood: Whosoever is borne of God, sins not,
for 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
his seed remains in him: neither can he sin, because he is borne of God.
No man regenerate, nor any of Gods elect, can fall into this sin: nor every
reprobate* for many of them, through their ignorance, that never come to know
the truth of holy Religion, cannot possibly become guilty of this blasphemy,
though for other sins, whereof they obtain not grace to repent, they justly
perish from God, and suffer Therefore thy sin is pardonable
the pains of eternal death.

When thou therefore find, that thou have not sinned that unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost; and that thy sin whatsoever, and howsoever committed,
though deserving a thousand Hels, is yet by the mercy of God pardonable, where
he is pleased to give repentance of that sin, and upon that repentance to
blot out the remembrance of it. Do thou not see a sweet possibility of
deliverance from thy sin, fit to be pursued with all strong desire and
diligence of thy soul? Do thou not see a hole in the wall of hope, through
which some light (though very small) does shine? Then let it be thy care, to
dig in that hole by hearty prayer, and by humble devotion, that God may be
pleased at last, to open a door of mercy unto thee, and by faith and amendment
of life, to assure thee that thy sins shall never be laid to thy charge. Thou
have his promises, in which he will not be found a falsifier and a
couenant-breaker. He says by the Prophet, If the wicked will returns E^ec.
18. 21
from all his sins that he has committed and keep all my statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not die. All
his transgressions that he has committed, they not be mentioned unto him,
but in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. Make use of this
and such like promises, and faint not in thy prayers. This is to cast this
burden of thine upon the Lord.

CHAP. XVII.
HItherto in an eue^ course Henceforth there sol^ diverse objections.
the sinner is brought to se his sin be pardonable. When hereupon he should
address himself, to serve for that that may be obtained, and to seek for
that that may be found, even the forgiveness of sin, for the quenching of
his accusing thoughts, and peace of his conscience. Behold he prepares
himself (being instructed and prompted by the subtle enemy) to object
against the possibility of obtaining forgiveness; so weakening his own hope,
and drowning his own comfort. Let us hear his objections, that by answering
of them, we may at the last, if God be pleased, help him out of his fear, and
bring him to rejoice in God his Savior.

First, he obiecteth saying: Though my sin that I am in conscience charged
This first objection is: his sin com^ near that unpardonable sin.
withal, be not blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and therefore not
unpardonable: Yet seeing I have sinned notoriously, not in time of ignorance,
but in time of knowledge, when I was able to teach my self and others, that
such things ought not to be done: and I was neither surprised with a sudden
temptation, that gave me no time to consider what was fit to be done: nor
forcibly led captive by a strong temptation, whereto my weakness was not able
to make resistance: but I did run upon it wilfully, wildly, furiously,
striving to delight my self with the pleasures of sin, and to enrich my self
with the wages of iniquity: even with contempt of God, whose judgment at the
same time I remembered, and yet would not fear him^ whose mercies and goodness
to me and mine I remembered, and yet would not love him: and whose commandments
(requiring the contrary) I remembered, and yet would not obey him: seeing I have
sinned in this manner so boldly, and so prowdly, my sin, if it be not that
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, yet it comes very near unto it, and so
near, that I fear the angry eye of heaven will see no diffrence betwixt them:
and then where am I with this possibility? secondly, Though par donable, yet it
is punishable.
though that blasphemy be only vnpatdonable, yet I am sure it is not the sin
only unpardoned, it is not the sin that is only punishable, and that shall
only be punished: my sin is also punishable, and may be punished (for so it
deserves) and then what am I better to hear it is pardonable, when I perish
in it. Lastly, I know that less sins And less s^nes are punished.
then mine, and more easy to be excused, are punished in hell with
everlasting death. What then must I look for but the flames of unquenchable
fire? and have I not already by my abominable sin, kindled that fire, even
the fire of Gods fierce wrath against me, which has already begun to torment
and waste my conscience.

This objection consists of three Answer to this objection
branches: the first is this, that his wilful sin comes so near to the
height of that unpardonable sin, that the angry eye of heaven (he fears)
can and will see no difference between them. This will easily be answered.
And to begin our answer, I must entreat this afflicted sinner to remember,
that it has been already declared, that his sin, though grievous, yet is
pardonable. And let him to this purpose, again hear the words of our Savior
Jesus, All sins shall be forgiven unto Mar. 3. 28.
the children of men, and blasphemies wherewith they blaspheme. And how near
soever his sin comes to the unpardonable sin, yet, not being it, it
remains pardonable. And this ground of truth can never be overthrown.

And the anger of heaven, being always To the first part of it.
just even and holy, does neither shadow the understanding, nor disorder the
justice of God, that he should not be able to discern the difference of
things that are not the same, or infold them rashly, and disorderedly in the
same sentence. Anger is not in God a disturbing passion, as it is in men: But
it is the most even and holy carriage of his justice, as becomes the
righteous Judge of all the world, pouring out his plagues upon sinners, and
executing vengeance upon contemners, according to the rule of his own word,
where with he has made us aforehand acquainted, and according to the merits
of men's works, against which their own consciences (justifying God in his
judgments) shall not be able to make any exception, to say, that in any thing
he has erred from the straight rule of justice. And this justice is that,
which (in terms agreeable to our conceit) is called his anger. His eye
therefore cannot be deceived in esteeming of men's sins. I remember a good
speech of Saint Ambrose to this purpose, God lies not open to passion, In
psalm^ 37.
that he should be angry, seeing he is subject to no passion: but because he
reuengeth, he seems to be angry, to us this seems, because we use to
revenge with a troubled mind: So that as anger signifies a disturbed passion
of the mind, troubling our understanding, and perverting our justice, there is
no anger, there can (by this Fathers judgment) no anger be in God: but Gods
just revenge we call anger, because our revenge is mingled with anger. Away
therefore with this conceit, that the anger of Heaven should not discern
between thy sin, and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. The anger of Heaven
is nothing else but the just revenge of Heaven.

A second branch of thine objection To the second part of it.
is this, that though the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost be the only sin
unpardonable, yet it is not the only sin unpardoned. It is not the only
sin punishable, nor only punished: thine also is a sin punishable, and may
prove a sin punished. I confess all this to be true, what then? Does it
follow, that needs thou must be punished, because thou may be punished?
that consequence must not be granted, for then it would follow, that there
should be no place for any forgiveness at all, for sins are punishable, and
deserve eternal death. To reason so, were to spoil God of his honor that he
obtains by forgiving sin, where of the Prophet Micah speaks, saying; Who
is Mica 7. 18
a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage, etc. It is Gods great honor to
pardon sins that are punishable. And it is an intolerable injury offered to
the riches of his grace, to affirm that he will not forgive in mercy, because
he may punish in justice. And such reasoning as this, would also make false
all his promises, and make vain and unprofitable the hope of all his saints
grounded upon those promises, for there is none of them that has not
committed many punishable sins, which yet they hope shall never be punished.
Yea it would make void the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, and deprive him
of the honor due unto him by the saying of John Baptist, Behold the Lamb of
God John 1. 29.
that takes away the sin of the world. For verily even those sins for
which this Lamb was slain and sacrificed, and which by the virtue of that
sacrifice of himself he takes away, are punishable sins, sins deserving
the most heavy wrath of God, and the most cruel torments of hell. Away
therefore with this idle reasoning, my sins are punishable, and therefore it
helps me nothing to hear that they are pardonable. Where sin abounds to
deserve punishment, there grace abounds much more to remit punishment.

The last branch of thy objection is To the third part of it.
this, that less sins then thine, and sins more easy to be excused, are
often punished; then why not thine? There is no reason that this thing should
offend thee, that smaller sins are punished. The Creditor may see reason to
forgive to one debtor many pounds, and yet not to forgive another a few pence.
The punishment of hell is due to all sinners, leave God the Judge to the
freedom of his own will, to show mercy where it pleases him to show mercy,
and to forgive, where, and what and how it pleases him to forgive. Little
sins, when men continue them, and regard not to repent of them, are brought to
judgment as well as great ones. And great sins, when men forsake them, and are
careful to repent of them, are put out and forgotten as well as the smallest.
It is not the greatness and smallness of sins that makes them to be retained
or remitted, but it is repentance that ^reeth from al together. This is plain
by the words of Esaias, who having called for repentance, that the people should
cease to do evil, and, learn to do well: immediately adds, Esaias 1. 18.
saying, Come now, and let us reason together, (says the Lord) Though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were red
like scarlet, they shall be as woll. Though the spots of them were never so
foul, and though the stain of them were never so deep, yet God will forgive
the sin, and forgiving it, he will cleanse and purge the sinner, This great
mercy for the forgiveness of most great sins is promised to repentance. Where
repentance is wanting, the smallest sins shall bring the transgressour to
judgment; but where true repentance is found, the greatest sins shall be
done away. Be careful then to turn from thy former evil ways, and bring
forth fruit worthy amendment of life, and God will free thee from all thy
sins.

And thus it appears, that all the fear (that bred this objection;) first,
that thy sin comes so near that unpardonable sin of blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, that the angry eye of heaven can see no difference between them.
Secondly, that thy sin, though pardonable, yet is punishable, and therefore
must be punished. Thirdly, that smaller sins then thine come to judgment,
and therefore thine being greater, cannot in justice be passed by* All this
fear is needless fear, and thy sin still remains pardonable, and thou
may comfortably hope for, and shall assuredly obtain forgiveness of thy
sins, if thou turn to God, ca^lest upon him, and amendest thy ways.

CHAP. XVIII.
BUT fear which is not His second objection from the justice and holiness of
heaven.
easily removed proceeds to another objection, the afflicted sinn^r pleading
thus against his own peace, the justice of heaven is so pure and holy, and
withal so strict and so severe, that it will never suffer such sin as mine
is to pass unpunished: and the holiness of heaven is so clean spotles and
undefiled that it will never suffer so unclean a person as I am to enter into
life. For this I can allege the express word of God, and therefore am sure,
that my fear is not vain, the Prophet David speaking to God, who would soon
have checked his speech, if it had not been true, says. Thou art not Psalm. 5.
4.
a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee: the foolish
shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them that work iniquity:
thou shall destroy them that speak lies, the Lord will abhorthe bluddie man
and deceitful. Here is deprivation of Gods love, expulsion from dwelling with
him, and from standing before him, here is the hatred of God, and in his hatred
destruction, threaned to them, as to men abhorred of God, that work wickedness,
that are doers of evil, that in the foolishnes of their hearts committed
iniquity, that in their talk speak lies, that have bluddie hands, cruel
hearts, and cunning and deceitful heads. But such an one am I* I have wrought
wickedness, I have done evil, I have through the foolishnes of mine heart
committed much iniquity, I have been a liar, my hands are full of blood, I
have been cruel and deceitful, therefore I am deprived of Gods love, I shall
not dwell in his kingdom, not be able to stand before him in judgment* I am
justly hated of him and, shall be justly destroyed by him, and he must needs
abhor me as a thing most vile. Who can speak against these things grounded on
such authority? must not the severe justice of heaven condemn such sins as
mine are? must not the pure holiness of heaven exclude such vile sinners as I
am? surely it may be called prodigal mercy, if such sins as mine escape
unpunished, and if such a sinner as I may ever be saved.

This objection seems to consist of Answer to this objection from the
justice and holiness of heaven.
two parts, inregard of justice that cannot suffer sin to escape unpunished,
and in regard of holiness that will admit no unclean person to have fellowship
and cohabitation with it. But they join together in one to increase this poor
man's fear, yet let us help him with our answer. It is a comely thing to to
think reverently of the justice and holiness of heaven: for certainly justice
will not suffer the least sin to escape unpunished, neither will holiness ever
suffer any unclean thing to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Yet that cannot
hence be concluded that thou gatherest, namely that therefore mercy can find no
free passage, to forgive thy sins, and to bring thee to glory, for the
wisdom and power and love of heaven (which are able to work wonders above the
reach of man's understanding) will find; yea have found; out a way, to satisfy
justice by the punishing of sin* and to satisfy holiness by the purging of
sin, and yet to save the sinner that committed that sin. Lift up thine
heart and ears, and harken to that that shall be delivered, and thou shall find
an helmet of the hope of salvation to cover and save thy head withal. First
concerning justice.


The glorious Trinity by an eternal decree, (ordained defore all time, and
effected in the fulness of time) sent down the eternal word, the second
person, called the son, who being conceived by the holy Ghost, took flesh,
and was borne of the virgin Mary (of the lineage of David) and was made man,
true man, the son of man, the son of Adam, of Abraham, and of David, in all
things like unto us, yet without sin: and him the father gave unto us to be
our mediator, and to be the Lord our righteousness, and to the satisfying of the
justice of heaven, God laid upon him our sins, and he willingly submitted
himself, to the burden of our sins, to the curse of the law, to the death of
the cross, and to the wrath of his father, for those sins of ours. Excellent
to this purpose is the testimony of Esaie speaking more like an Evangelist, or
an apostle, then like a Prophet, saying. He was wounded Es^y. 53. 5.
for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisment of
our (...) was upon him and with his stripes are we healed: all we like sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own wai^* and the Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us all. We are the men that have sinned and
gone astray from God: stripes wounds and death were due to us for sins: God
imputed to him our sins, and he was contented to stand before God a sinner in
our name. The stripes, the wounds, the death, that we deserved, he received
sustained and endured for us. Thus justice is satisfied and our sins being in
him punished, it were injustice to punish the same sins again in them that
plead the suffringes of Jesus for them. Thus are his stripes our cure, his
wounds our health* and his death our life. Unto that saying of Esaie, let us
ad another of the Apostle Gal^. 3. 3.
Saint Paul. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was
made a curse for us, for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on
tree, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the gentiles through Jesus
Christ. The law curses every one that abides not in all that is written in
that book to do it, and we have failed in all, or in most, and the sentence
of the curse did lie upon us, then it pleased the Lord Jesus Christ by yielding
himself to the cursed death of the cross, to take upon him the curse that
should have fallen upon us. So was justice executed according to that sentence
of the law, and justice so satisfied gives way to mercy, for the curse being
borne by Jesus Christ, the blessing promised to Abraham is our inheritance.
Here the one half of thy fear is removed, because in the death of Jesus
Christ justice has received satisfaction for thy sins, if thou plead this
satisfaction, by what justice art thou to be punished for thy sins.

The other half of thy fear is this, Secondly concerning holiness.
that the holiness of heaven will never suffer such an unclean sinner, as thou
art to enter into the kingdom of God, to remove this fear, understand that
the same Lord Jesus Christ, that bare ou^ sins imputed to him, and suffered
for them, to satisfy justice, does also inuest and cloth us with his perfect
righteousness both original and actual impu^ed to us, that all our
unrighteousness and uncleanness both original and actual, being therewith
hidden and covered from the view of God most holy, we might appear clean and
spotles in him, to the satisfying of the holiness of heaven. Therefore is it
that Paul says, speaking of Jesus. God has made him to be sin for us, which
knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. This
place plainly shows, that God made an exchang between Jesus Christ and us.
He knew no sin, that is, he had no acquaintance nor fellowship with sin, in
him was no sin, to deserve death. That sin abounded in us, and God laid it
upon Jesus, and he died for it. On the other side we had no righteousness, no
righteousness of God, that is no such pure and perfect righteousness as God
requires, and as might commend us unto God, to be admitted for it into heaven.
That righteousness was in Jesus Christ who fulfilled all righteousness, keeping
the law, bearing perfect love both to God and man, and performing all offices
pertaining to that love: and that righteousness of his does God impute unto us,
making us righteous in him. Therefore is it that the Prophet Jeremy calls
him the Lord our righteousness. And this Ierem. 2^. 6.
is the name whereby they shall call him the Lord our righteousness. Not our
iustifier, that pardoning our sin^, pronounces us righteous, by holding us
excused (which thing also verily he does for us) but our righteousness, because
in him we are accepted, and his righteousness offered unto God for us, is
accepted as our righteousness, and the reward of it is given unto us. His
righteousness is our righteousness, yea he himself is our righteousness, and in
him we are righteous. not without reference unto that place of the Prophet
Jeremy, does the Apostle Paul say thus of him. You are of 1. Cor. 1. 30.
him in Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. First he is made unto us wisdom, that is, in
him, and by the knowledge of him, we attain unto that wisdom, which only is
worthy of that name, which philosophy, and all the religions in the world (the
Gospel of Jesus Christ excepted) could never afford us, for this wisdom
makes us wise unto salvation. secondly, he is made unto us righteousness, that
is, by the imputation of his righteousness unto us we are accepted as righteous
and holy, and are in him righteous and holy. Thirdly he is made unto us
sanctification, that is, in him, and by the virtue of his death and
resurreotion, we are recovered out of the dominion of sin, and have power
given us to keep under, suppress, and mortify our earthly members, and
carnal lusts, and do, even in this sinful world, make beginning to serve God
in holiness and righteousness, with sincerity and truth of heart. Lastly he is
given to be unto us redemption, that is, when we are once made wise by the
knowledge of him, and are justified by his imputed righteousness, and sanctified
by his quickening grace, we shall in the end undoubtedly come to full redemption
in heaven by him. And by his means, thou which of thy self art an unclean
person, such an one as the holiness of heaven may justly deny entrance unto,
art made in Jesus Christ a most holy and pure person, worthily admitted by the
holiness of God to enter into glory. And this other part of thy fear, and so
thy whole objected fear is removed: the justice of God that will have sin
punished, and the holiness of God that will suffer no unclean thing to stand
before him, both having received full satisfaction in the mediation of Jesus
Christ: Justice in his death suffered for us, and holiness in his perfect
obedience and righteousness imputed unto us: and so free way is made for the
mercy of God (which thou foolishly call prodigal mercy. For nothing ever
was with more wise provision bestowed) to come unto thee, and to forgive thy
great and abominable sins, and to save a great and an abominable sinner.

Now therefore fall to prayer, and in the Encouragement upon this answer
name of so gracious a mediator, entreat the most merciful and loving God, to
forgive thy sins, and to receive thee to favor.

And for thy encouragement, first understand, that without exception of any
Because he is permitted and commanded to ask forgiunesse.
sin, whether in time of ignorance or of knowledge, unadvisedly or advisedly
done, the Lord Jesus Christ has given thee leave, yea he has commanded thee
to crave the forgiunes of thy sins, teaching and commanding thee to say unto
God. Forgive us our sins. Look then upon the sins that* lie so heavy
Lnke. 11. 4
upon thy conscience, and mark the^ well, and if thou find them to be thine
(as i^ most like thou shall) know that thou have leave given thee, and art also
commanded, to be a suitor for the forgiveness of them, whatsoever they be, being
sins.

And consider by whom this leave, and this commandment is given thee: even by
him that is appointed to be the judge of quick and dead, who while he gives
thee leave and commandment, has also himself drawn the petition for thee,
by which thou art commanded and permitted to crave the forgiveness. And surely
it is a beginning of mercy granted, to grant thee leave, and to imbolden thee
with a commandment to ask for mercy, his rule being. Ask and Mat. 7. 7.
it shall be given thee. And it is not with out hope, yea great hope of
forgiveness of sins, when the judge that has power to grant it, does both
permit thee, command thee, and instruct thee how ^o crave it. This being also
on of his rulers, in the fore remembered place. Seek and ye shall find. Mat. 7.
7.


Secondly to incorage thee further, understand, that without exception of
Because God has promised to grant forgiveness.
any sin whether in time of ignorance or of knowledge, unadvisedly or
advisedly done, almighty God, against whom thy sin is committed, and whose
heavy wrath for thy sins thou art so greatly afraid of, has promised both
to forgive and forget thy sins, saying. I will (...) 3^. 34
forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no more. And when
does God give this promise, but when he makes a covenant with his people,
whereby he binds himself unto them And what shall we say? was not God
advised of his own meaning, and considerate, when he made this promise who can
say otherwise of the most wise God, but that he was advised. Or did he
dissemble, or promise this fainedly? when he had no meaning to perform it? who
can say otherwise of the God of truth, but that he fully intended to perform
his promise? or has he forgotten now* what he promised then, that by this
means, his promise should be as no promise, because not remembered to be ever
given? who can imagine this of that God, who knew all his own works from* the
beginning, to whom all times both past and to come are ever present, and of
whom the Prophet says. He has always remembered his covenant, Psalm. 150. 1^.
and promise that he made to a thousand generations. Look then again upon
the sins, that are so heavy upon thy conscience, and mark them well, and if
they be thy sins (which thou can not deny) as the Lord Jesus has given
thee leave by his commandment, to ask forgiveness, so God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, has promised to grant thee forgiveness of them. Here is a
door of mercy set wide open; enter confidently, but humbly with thy prayer in
the name of Jesus the mediator. Thou have the promise of the God of truth, of
that God whose word is his deed, who says. As I have spoken, so will I bring
it Esaias. 46. 11
to pass. And what, or whom should thou now be afraid of.

CHAP. XIX.
BUT the afflicted sinner His third objection, he may not ask forgiveness for
he cannot call God his father.
that cannot easily cast off this cleaving burden, to his own further trouble
obiecteth against the incouragment given him from the commandment of the Lord
Jesus to ask forgiveness of sins: affirming that that gracious
commandment, giving so frank leave, and so large hope of asking and obtaining
forgiveness, neither does nor can pertain unto him: pleading against
himself, in this manner. This commandment of Christ, that gives leave to
ask and hope to receive forgiveness of sins cannot belong unto me, neither
have I any right to the benefit and advantage of it, because that commandment
is given to them that can call God their father, for so begins the Lords
prayer wherein that commandment is comprehended, our father which art in
heaven. Luke 11. 2 His life does not show (...) to be a child of God. Matt* 5.
48. 1. Pet. 1. 14.
But cannot call God my father, neither have I any reason to think my self his
child. First the child ought to resemble the father. Our Savior says. Ye
shall therefore be perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect. But
there is in me no part of the perfection of God* either in the virtues of my
mind, or in the works of my life, and the Apostle Saint Peter says. As
obedient children* fashion not your selves unto the former lusts of your
ignorance, but as he which has called you is ho^y, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation, because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy. And
if ye call him father which without respect of person judges according to
every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. By this rule
of Peter, they which call God their father ought to be holy as he is holy, but
I am altogether profane. They ought to pass the time of their life reverently
in the fear of God, but I have been and am a contemner of him: and their
doings should not be after the lusts of their own heart, that bear sway in the
days of ignorance, but I never followed other rule, then the lusting of mine
own heart, I never strove to suppress and mortify them. Yea my whole course
of life does prove me to be the child of another father that has no place in
heaven, but was cast out thence for sin. The Lord Jesus said unto the Jews:
Ye are of your John ^. 44.
father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Much more
rightly (by trial of my deeds) may it be said to me, thou art of thy father
the deull, and the lusts of that father of thine thou have done. While my
sins thus daily come to remembrance how can I call God my father.

And who can call God his father, that has not the spirit of God dwelling in
And he has not the spirit of adoption. Romans 8. 15.
him, as the seal and earnest of his inheritance, of which spirit Paul
speaks thus. Ye^ have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry abba
father: the same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. But this spirit dwells not in me: if this spirit were in me,
I should feel at one time or other and in one measure or other, the
comfortable testimony of that spirit: but I feel nothing but fearful horror
in my conscience: oh that I had and might feel the comfort of this spirit, my
present tentation witnesses the absence of it. Also if I had the spirit of God
in me, the fruits of that spirit would bud, and show forth themselves in me:
but all is contrary. The Apostle Paul says, the Gal. ^. 22
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance. There is none of these to be
seen in me, but the fruits of the flesh are plentiful in me. With them I am
ouergrowen both in body and soul. The Apostle reckons them up in this order.
The works of the flesh Gal. 5. 19.
are manifest. which are adultery* fornication, vncl^annesse, wantonness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath, contention, seditions,
herefies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like. And in these
sins I have lived, and dwelt, and delighted, if not in all, yet in many of
them, and if not in many, yet in some of them, enough to quench the spirit of
God, if the fire thereof had at any time been kindled in me. How then can it
be that I should have the holy Ghost? And not having the holy Ghost, how can I
call God my father? and if I have no right nor power to call God my father,
that leave to crave the forgiueuesse of sins, and that hope to obtain
forgiveness of sins, which are grounded upon that commandment of Jesus,
pertain not to me.

Alas how ingenious men are, in the Answer to this obies ction.
days of affliction, when the burden of accusing thoughts lies heavy upon
them, to dispute against themselves. They have not understanding enough to
apprehend and taste any thing that is spoken for their comfort: but they have
wit to find out, and utterance to pronounce, and fervent passion to urge any
thing that may make for their discomfort. But let us help to remove these
stumbling-blockes, from before these men's feet, that they may walk on in
hope, and come unto God by prayer.

Thou think that by that commandment of Christ, there is given to thee, no
leave to ask forgiveness of sin, ^orhope to obtain forgiveness of sin,
because it is to be craved of an heavenly father. And thou can not call God
thy heavenly father, thou think the he is not thy father, and that thou n^
not his son. And thou have two reasons to prove this to thine own heart.
First because neither thy virtues no^ thy actions do in any thing resemble
God* but* rather prove thee to be the child of another father, opposite to God,
and secondly because thou have not the spirit of adoption to cry Abba Father.
For thou neither feel the restimony o^ that spirit in thine heart, neither
do thou see the fruits of that spirit in thy life, but al things every where
contrary. This man's cose is like the Prodigal in the Gospel.


I mislike not that thou do hold^ mean opinion of thy self, and cens^rest
thy self unworthy the title of God^ child: and that thou think honorably of
the spiritual kindred that is between God and his saints. But be of good
comfort. God sa^leth not to be thy father, because thou think him not to be:
neither failest thou to be his child, because thou dare not think thy self
to be his child. And these words urged against thy self, are no other then
the words of the prodigal unthrift spoken of in the Gospel, who in his
virtues and actions did nothing (as yet) resemble his father, for he hanted
harlots, and lived riotously being every way as sinful, as thou can (with
any words) make thy self: and when by adversity he was brought to consider of
his life and estate, as thou now do, he had that opinion of himself that
thou now have, thinking it not fit to take unto himself the title of a son.
His words are thus set down by Saint Luke. I will a Lu^e 15. 18
rise and go^ to my father, and say to him, father, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Compare
thy self with him, thou can not be worse then he, not in thy life more
unlike thy heavenly father, neither can thou be in worse case then he was. He
for sooke his fathers house, and was departed far from God, knowing very well
from whence he was departed. He never had mind to return back again till
misery compelled him, of whom we need not fear to say (for it is plain and
clear) that no love to his father, nor to his fathers house, but pinching
necessity, and extreme misery made him a convert. And while he was abroad,
what was his Luke 15. 13
course? the evangelist tells us, he w^sted his goods with riotous living.
That is, all the blessings of God, bestowed upon him, (whatsoever) in mind, in
body, or in estate, he wa^led them vainly without any fruit, either to the
praise of God or good of his saints: yea wickedly, to the dishonor of God, and
great offense and hurt of his saints. His elder brother said truly of him to
his father. He has Luke 15. 30
devoured thy goods with Harlots. He was a deuourer rather then a spender,
because he followed wholly the flatterings and entice ments of the flesh and of
the world: he pursued earnestly and greedily the pleasures of sin: he
polluted the whole man, both body and soul, in carnal and spiritual
fornication: and he dishonored his merciful Father, while to his sinful
courses for the furthering thereof, he converted all the gfits and graces, that
he had received of God. This was his behavior, being departed from his
father. In the end, by misery justly fallen upon him, he was touched, ashamed,
and confounded, as thou art: (see thou not thine estate lively described in
the estate of this prodigal man?) yet after all this wandering and wicked
behauior, and much misery that he indureth, he remembers his fathers house,
he repents, he returns, and humbly prays: and the success was, he is
graciously received into favor.

Take this example unto thee, and view it well, dwell upon it with holy
meditation. Such as he was in his wandering in his wickedness, in his trouble
of mind, such thou art: such as he was in his repentance, in his return home
to his Fathers house, and in his humble prayer unto God, such be thou: and such
favorable intertainment as he found at his Fathers hands, thou also shall
find. Are not these things written for our learning, that we through patience
and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope. God proved to ^e ^ur Father,
though we be sinners.


And, because thou do not yet resemble God, either in the virtues of thy
mind, or the actions of thy life, say not therefore, that he is not thy Father,
and that thou art not his Child. Why will thou add this to the former
discomfort of thy soul, and to the former errors of thy life? and wrong,
either God in his goodness, or thy self in the grounds of thy hope.

Thou know the words of Mose^ to the people of Israel: if thou know them
not, hear* and let thine heart understand them. Is not he thy Father the Deuteronomy.
32. 6.
bought thee? he has made thee, and proportioned thee. If he be thy Father
that made thee and proportioned thee, the^ surely God is thy Father; for he,
and none but he that made heaven and earth made thee. The Prophet says of God,
It is he that has made us, and not we (...) Psalm. 100. 3
selves. And if he be thy Father that hat^ bought thee, and purchased thee;
then, whether thou approve i^ or no, God is thy Father, for he has bought us
with a price, not of corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the price
of the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot.
Therefore the Apostle says to the Corinthians, Ye are not your own, for ye
are 1. ^or* 6. 1^
bought with a price. And being once his, all thy wanderings cannot weaken his
right in thee, but he still shall remain thy Father that bought thee. If a
sheep run astray from the fold, and wander long in unknown pastures, does
it therefore cease to be his, that is Lord and owner of the flock? and if it
return, or be brought home, with the fleece lost, and left behind hanging upon
every hedge, and with the skin, and flesh also torn, will he not acknowledge
it, and receive it? Yes, he will receive it with joy. Read the fifteenth
chapter of Saint Luke: and meditate upon that thou read. So far off is it
that the indignation of heaven should reject thee, that as it is there said,
There Lu. 15. 1^.
is joy in the presence of the Angels of God for one sinner that conuerteth.
Make joyful the angels of heaven by thy return to God, and that joy shall
shine upon the face of thy conscience: And (not to forget what we have in hand,
to prove God thy father) consider some words of the apostle to the Hebr. We
have had the Hebr. 12. 9
fathers of our bodies, that corrected us and we gave the^ reverence: should we
not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, that we might
live? He calls men that begat us, fathers of our bodies, and he calls God
that created us, the Father of our spirits: because in the generation of our
bodies men are used, but in the creation of our spirits God only works, who
is also the principal age^t in the framing of our bodies, and men are but
isntrumental agent^ therefore while there is a spirit dwelling in thy body,
quickening and moving it, thou can not deny God to be thy Father: whose
glo^ous habitation being Esa. 57. 15
in heaven, as he says by Esaias, I dwell i^ the high and holy place. Thou have
a Father in heaven. And therefore by the commandment of Jesus Christ willing us
to say to God, forgive unto us our sins, tho^ have both leave given thee to
ask forgiveness of sins, and hope given thee to obtain forgiveness Use
therefore cheerfully (but withal, reverently and thankfully) this leave, and
obey duetifully and gladly this commandment: for God is thy Father. And thy
service in calling upon him shall not be fruitless.

And say not, because as yet, thou neither The holy Ghost is i^* him, or may be
obtained
see the fruits of the holy Ghost i^ thy reformed life, nor feel the
testimony of it in thy cheereful conscience, that therefore that blessed Spirit
is not in thee. When thou speak of the fruits of the Spirit, thou make the
Spirit to be as seed sown in the heart, that should bring forth fruit* And so
indeed the holy Ghost within us, is the seed of our regeneration and new life,
as the Lord Jesus teaches us, saying, Except John 3. 5.
that a man be borne of wat^ and the spirit, the water of Baptism, and spirit
of Sanctification. And John plainly gives the name of Seed to the Holy Ghost;
saying; His seed remains in him. And 1. John 3. 9
when thou speak of the testimony of the Spirit, thou make the Spirit to
be as a witness that testifies the fatherly love of God unto us. And so
indeed the Holy Ghost within us, is unto our hearts a true witness of Gods love.
Paul to this purpose says, Ye have received Romans 8. 15.
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. The same spirit bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. And Saint Peter in
his speech before the Priest and Captain of the Temple, calls the Holy Ghost
a Witness, saying, We are his witnesses Matt. 5. 32.
concerning these things which we say, yea and the Holy Ghost, whom God has
given to them that obey him. For the Lord Jesus has two sorts of witnesses, to
confirm to the consciences of men, the truth of his death and resurrection,
and his power of sanctifying and saving. The one sort is, the Apostles and
Ministers, who by their doctrine do bear witness to the outward man, and the
other is the Holy Ghost, who opening the understanding, and leading into all
truth, does bear witness to the inward man.

Now for seed, we know that when it is cast into the ground, it does not
presently bring forth ripe fruit: nay, it does not presently spring up and show
it self, but it rests for a while in the womb of the earth, hidden from the
eyes of men, till convenient time comes: and if any man in the mean time
should say, I see no fruit above the ground, therefore there is no seed in the
ground, he might be deceived, and the Husbandman and Gardner that had sown
the ground, would censure him both of ignorance and boldness, and time would
disprooue him.

And as for witnesses, we know, that they do not speak, so soon as a man is
provided of the^, nor yet so soon as they appear in public place; but being
first prepared, and after brought to the place where they should give
testimony, they yet stay, and keep silence: and when the Judge or Examiner is
at leisure, then they are called for, and speak their knowledge. And he that
reasons thus, there has yet no witness spoken forsuch a man, therefore he has
no witness to speak at all for him, should show himself a rash man, and by
the timely voice of the witnesses would be convinced.

Even so it is too much rashness in thee, to say, that because thou yet
hearrest not the testimony of the Holie-Ghost in thy heart, witnessing with
thy spirit, that thou art the child of God, therefore there is no such witness
at al to speak when God shall appoint. And because thou yet see not the
fruits of the spirit in the actions of thy life: that therefore there is in
thee no seed of the Spirit that may bring forth these fruits in due time.
Learn to have patience, and wait upon the good pleasure of God, and in time
thou shall see a blessed change, and hear that testimony which yet thou
hear* not, and see those fruits of the Spirit, which yet thou see not.

And if it were as thou speak, that thou had not at all the Spirit, as
seed lying in secret, and attending the time of Spring, or as a witness
prepared to speak when God shall call him fo^th to give his testimony; yet the
Spirit that is not received, may be received, and shall be given thee, if thou
pray unto God for it. We know the words of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel,
If you Lu. 11. 13.
which are evil can give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them that desire him. So that if there
be in thee a true desire to obtain the Holy Ghost, ask and it shall be given
thee, for the Lord is more ready to give then thou can be to ask. All that
matter therefore of thy fear, for that commandment of Christ, that gives
leave to ask, and hope to obtain forgiveness of sins, that it should not
belong to thee, because it must be asked of them that have God for their
Father, and thou think him not to be thy Father, because thou do neither
resemble him as yet, either in the verues of thy mind, or actions of thy life;
and thou have not the spirit of adoption, by which thou may cry Abba Father,
for thou neither see the fruits, nor feel the testimonies of that spirit:
all this matter of thy fear is vain.

That commandment of Christ belongs to thee: God is thy Father, thou
ought to pray unto him for forgiveness, thou may pray unto him for
forgiveness, and if thou pray, thou shall obtain forgiveness. Pray therefore
as Christ has commanded thee, and the observation of his order shall prove
thine ease.

CHAP. XX.
Our afflicted sinner was encouraged to pray, and to hope for forgiveness of
his sins, not only by the commandment of Jesus Christ, which gives leave
and hope, but also, and more strongly by the promise of God, assuring in plain
words that it shall be granted to him. I will forgive their iniquity, Iere.
31. 34
and will remember their sins no more. But the nature of his temptation,
suffering no comfort to enter and abide with him, armeth him with an objection
against that encouragement in this manner. I know that God has made The fourth
objection; promise of forgiveness to Israel.
such a liberal promise. I know that he made it advisedly, understanding
himself what he promised, that he made it in truth, meaning to perform
faithfully as much as he promised: and that he remembers his promise for ever,
for time can not work forgetfulness in him, nor any shadow of alteration, and
therefore it shall be most truly and fully performed. But it pertains not to
me for any advantage and benefit of mine: for the Prophet tells us it is a
covenant made with the house of Israel, for these are his words; This shall be
Ier. 31. 33.
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,
says the Lord. But I am no Israelite, howsoever But I am no Israelite.
you shall take the name: for if you understand it in the natural
signification for the children of Jacob, in the twelve Tribes of Israel, I am
not of that kindred, I am of the Gentiles. And if I were naturally of the seed
of Israel, yet might I very well loose all lawful challenge to that promise,
because Saint Paul says, All they are not Israel which are Romans 9 6
of Israel: But if you take the name in the spiritual signification, for a
child of promise, an heir of grace, and a preuailer with God (and in that
sense was it first given to Jacob. when he wrestled with the Angel, and
prevailed, not letting him go, until he had blessed him) in this
signification. It does yet much less agree to me, that am rather an Egyptian,
a Cananite, an Edomite, and an enemy of God, rather then a preuailer with him.
I never wrestled with God by faith and prayer (as Jacob) to prevail with him:
but rather I have wrestled with God by pride and malice as a professed
adversary, I have bidden defiance to God in the contempt of my proud heart,
and I have made fierce war against God in my many sins, striving to prevail
against him, never desiring to prevail with him: and thence is it, that now in
justice and power, he bears himself so strongly against me. Therefore being
no way an Israelite, and that covenant wherein God promises to forgive and
forget sins, being made with the house of Israel, what claim can I make to
that promise? even none at all.

The nature of this disease is very Answer to this fourth objection.
strange, that turns into poison what soever is applied to it by way of
medicine, or at least way strives to extinguish all the virtue of those
medicines, least it might be cured. But this must move us to have the more
compassion, and to take the more pain, to see if God at the last will send
comfort and saving health.

Thou think that this promise of forgiving and forgetting sins does not
pertain unto thee, because it was made with the house of Israel, and thou art
neither Israelite in the flesh nor by promise, but take thy self rather
worthy to be esteemed an Egyptian, a Cananite, an Edomite. And if thou will, a
Dog, and what soever other name thou can remember or devise. And yet I will
show and prove, that this promise made with the house of Israel pertains unto
thee.

But first, to begin withal, let me here Mar. 15. 2^.
remember unto thee an history recorded in the Gospel. A certain woman of
the seed of Canaan, dwelling in the The woman of Canaan and this sinner
compared together
coasts of Tyrus and Sidon, had at home at her house a daughter that was
possessed with a devil: she came unto Jesus, craving mercy at his hands for
the healing of her daughter, saying unto him. Have mercy on me O Lord, thou
son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with a Devil. The Lord Jesus
rejects her as a stranger from the common wealth of Israel, and as some beast
of wild and fierce nature not fit to be folded up among his mild sheep*
saying unto her. I am not sent but unto the lost Mat. 15. 24.
sheep of the house of Israel. He pronounced as much of her, as thou
pronouncest of thy self, she was no Israelite. And when this answer, which
thou art so much afraid of, coming but from thine own mouth, could not,
though it came from the mouth of Jesus, check that boldness and confidence of
spirit in which she came, but that she still continued her suit, he dealt more
roughly with her, and signified unto her inplaine words, that he made no other
account of her then of a Dog, in comparison of the children of God, to whom the
bread of Gods mercy, by the hands of the savior, is to be broken, saying unto
her. It is not good to take the childrens Mat. 15. 26.
bread, and to cast it to whelps. That is, I were not fit to have the
government of Gods house, if the mercy, which is the portion of his children, I
should cast away among Dogs, such as thou art. Tell me what thy heart can
object against thy self, to exclude thee from the common wealth and house of
Israel, and to cut thee off from being partner in that promise for forgiveness
of sins, or in any other promise of God what soever, that is not here
objected by the Lord Jesus Christ against this Cananite, to exclude her from
all hope of obtaining any mercy at his hands. He denies her to be of the house
of Israel, he does not acknowledge her to be a sheep of his fold, and in
plain terms, to the understanding of all that hear his words, he places
her among Dogs rather then among children. And this is it, that thou chargest
thy self to be, and therefore secluded from having any part in that promise.

But that poor woman would not be answered so, but still she persisteth in
prayer: and knowing and believing that Jesus the son of David was able to
infranchise her, and make her a Citizen and member of the common wealth of
Israel, and to change her, and of a Dog, to make her a sheep of his fold, yea
a child of Gods family, she intr^ateth him to admit her to the portion of an
allowed dog, saying unto him, Truth Mat. 15 ^7.
Lord yet in deed the whelps eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters
table. And to maintain in her such faith and such feruencie, she had no
promise so particularly answering the evil that oppressed her heart, as that
promise does particularly and most aptly answer to the evil, that lies so
heavily upon thy conscience, only she had heard that Jesus had helped others.
And this her enforced importunity, and (as a man would think) her
unreasonable and unmannerly soliciting, prevailed for her, and she obtained all
that mercy that her soul desired. What shall I say then unto thee, that so
foolishly vrgest against thy self, the shadow of thine own suspicion, and
thine own fantastical fear: and refusest to call for that mercy, that God
has already promised to grant? a Cananite and a dog (neither Israelite, nor
sheep, nor child) prevails, and thou, discouraged only by thine own
conceit^ dare not adventure.

But it runs in thy head that thou art no Israelite. And according to the
natural signification of the name, for a son of Jacobs loins, thou art none
and thou regardest not to be one, because that manner of being an Israelite
would nothing benefit thee. But thou also think that in the other
signification of the name, thou likewise art none: and affirmest him in that
^ence to be an Israelite, that is a child of promise, an heir of grace, and a
preuailer with God, a citizen with saints, and of the household of God, which
thou art not.

Thy definition of a true Israelite is That this sinner is an Israelite.
good, and to be maintained. But for thee to deny thy self to be such an one,
is not good, nor to be maintained, for art not thou descended of Christian
parents, and thereby a Citizen with the Saints, and a child borne within the
household of faith. And an holy one from the womb: the Apostle Paul, speaking
of the children of believing parents, has these words. Else were your children
unclean, 1. Cor. 7. 14
but now they are holy. Wherein he does pronounce them to be holy, that is, to
have a title to the covenant of grace, and to all the privileges of the Church,
and therefore to be of the house of Israel. And this is their birthright, and
their just inheritance, if either the father or the mother be a right believer,
though the other parent be an infidel: but both thy parents made profession
of the faith of Jesus Christ, therefore this birthright on both sides is
confirmed to thee, and who shall deny him to be a true Israelite, that is borne
holy, being of that Holy 1. Pet. 2. 9.
nation and peculiar people, that Saint Peter speaks of. Also thy parents
received the promises of Gods mercy not only for themselves, but also for
thee, as the Apostle Peter preached to his hearers, saying. The promise is made
unto you, and Acts. 2. 39.
to your children, and to all that are a far of, even so many as the Lord our
God shall call. And this affliction, which now lies so heavy upon thy
conscience is nothing else then the calling of God, seeking by this trouble to
bring thee home unto himself, that have so long in in thy former security
gone astray from him: and therefore that promise of forgiving iniquity, and
not remembering sin, and all other promises of his mercy, are made to thee,
and do belong unto thee, as to a true Israelite, thou being the child of such
parents as did inherit the same promises before thee, and thou being also by
thy affliction called of God.

And say that thou were a stranger and If he be not an Israelite, he may be.
forrener, and as hard-hearted as the stones in the street, that are nothing
fit to receive the form of a serviceable vessel: Yet such is the power of the
hand of God our Potter, that he is able to make the hard stones softer then the
clay, and to work our hearts as wax to take the impression of his Law: he is
able to make us vessels of honor, for holy and acceptable services in his
house: and he is able to make us Abraham's seed, and true Israelites. You know
the words of John the Baptist, spoken to the proud Jews, that gloried so much
in this, that they were Abraham's seed, and in Abraham's right were heirs of the
Covenant. He spoke thus unto them, Say not within your selves, we have Luke 3.
8.
Abraham to our Father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham. So that of him, that is no Israelite, that is
no child, that is no heir, God is able to make an Israelite, a child, an
heir. Of Gods goodness toward them that were no Israelites, and no people,
the Prophet Hosea speaks in this manner, I will have mercy upon her that was
not pitied, Hos. 2. 23
and I will say to them which were not my people; Thou art my people, and they
shall say, thou art my God. If thou were therefore of that company that is not
pitied, thou may yet find mercy at GODS hands: and if thou were of that
company that is not Gods people, thou may yet become one of his. The fear
therefore that thou fainest unto thy self has no ground.

Consider him whom thou have to deal withal, and hope in his mercy, that is
so liberal in his promises, and is also most faithful in the performance of
his word. Thou have sinned, and he has promised to forgive thy sins.
Appeal unto his promises, he cannot fail to effect that which he has given
his word for: of which word of his, himself says thus, It shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper
in the thing Esa. 55 11.
whereto I sent it. So that, having sent forth that gracious word of promise,
to forgive and forget thy sins, it shall not return to him void, it shall
not be found a false or faulty word, but a word of truth and power. Pray unto
God for the effect of it, and it shall prove prosperous to thy peace.

CHAP. XXI.
ALl that has hitherto been said, is not able to calm A fifth objection,
others perish, why not he? and what is to be done that I perish not?
the storm that is raised in this poor sinners conscience; but his restless
mind still replies, arguing against himself in this manner; If this leave of
asking, and this promise of granting forgiveness of sins, be so free for every
one, borne of believing parents, as you would make me believe: how comes it
then to pass, that so many perish in their sins, not only of them who are
borne and brought up, of, and among unbelievers, that know not the true God:
but of them also that are descended of believers, and all their time brought up
in the bosom of the church, Lu. 13. 2^.
that can say before the Judge, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. Yea they proceeded further in the business of
the church, and ca^ say to the Judge, Lord have Mat. 7. 22.
not we by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and by thy
name done many great works? and yet unto them the Lord will answer, and make
profession, say ing, I never knew you, depart from me ye that 23.
work iniquity. The way that leads to death and destruction is broad and
easy, and many walk in it, and perish, and I am one among others, that have
run in that way, and I am yet in it. But the way that leads to life and
salvation is a narrow way, and few do find it: and I am one of them that cannot
find it, I am now out of it, and indeed never had any pleasure to seek it,
that I might walk in it. And yet you make the promise of the forgiveness of
sins to be very large, and given to al within the church. And why may not I,
notwithstanding so gracious and large a promise, miss of forgiveness, and fall
into condemnation, as well as others? yea before many thousands of others? having
deserved condemnation as worthily as any other, and moreworthily then many
other? therefore I think that there is something required to the obtaining of
forgiveness of sins and salvation, that I yet know not, and not knowing it,
it is very like I have it not, and not having it, I remain still under
condemnation, and must perish eternally. And I feel it so in the fear of my
soul, for notwithstanding all that you have spoken to put life and hope into
my soul, yet the burden of my sins, and the fear of damnation is no less
heavy upon me, then before you began to speak unto me. I confess indeed that
the things that have been spoken, offer great comfort, but I want a right hand
to take it withal. Help me therefore through, and show me what are the
conditions upon which God forgiueth sins: that hearing them, I may know
whether I be capable of that desired happiness: and if I be not presently, that
yet I may endeavor in time to be, and so at the last obtain it. For though you
have not delivered me from al my fear, yet you have wrought in me a great
desire to recover, and get out of it, not without some hope, that it may one
day, by the mercy of God, be happily effected to my salvation.

This objection is tempered with some mildenes, and while the storm is
something His objection answered.
laid, hearken, and I will teach thee what the conditions are: so shall thou
know, both why others perish in their sins, notwithstanding this promise,
namely by neglecting these conditions: and also, how thou may obtain
forgiveness of thy sins, according to this promise, by the obedient and
careful keeping of these conditions.

The conditions required at our hands, Conditions upon which God keeps
promise to forgive sins.
if we think to obtain forgiveness of sins, are in number three. The first
of these three concerns our selves and our renouation. It is called
repentance; a departure from sin, and a return to God in holiness and
righteousness: for it is meet for him that would have his sins past to be
forgiven him, to cease from sin, and hate the works of darkness, wherein he
took pleasure before. Which ought to be hated, first in regard Repentance is
the first condition.
of God, because they are displeasing to him that is most holy, and he that is
most glorious is dishonored by them: Secondly, they are to be hated in regard
of our selves, because they cast us out of Gods love, into his just hatred, and
robbing us of true peace, do fill our hearts with fear and horror. And for
thine own part, I hope thou find that the works of darkness are to be
hated, and have a will also to hate and abhor them, seeing what woeful fear
and danger they have brought thee into. And this repentance, and turning to
God, will surely deliver thee from thine old sins, so that they shall never
be laid to thy charge. It is a true saying of Saint Augustine, Non nocent
Sermon. 181. de Tempore
peccata praeterita, si non placent praesentia: Sins past hurt us not, if
sins present please us not. If we take no pleasure in unrighteousness from
henceforth, God will put away and abolish all our old offenses. And this saying
of his is grounded upon the Scripture, which must be thy stay before all the
sayings of men. The Prophet thus speaks, If the wicked Ezec. 19. 2^
will return from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and
shall not die: all his transgressions that he has committed, shall not be
mentioned unto him. Yea upon our repentance, and ceasing from sin, where it
had stained as deep as Scarlet, and like Crimson double died, in a color not
easy to be changed, yet there will God cleanse the sinner, and make him as
white as snow, and as clean as the fleece of wool new washed and skowred.
Read to this purpose the words of Esaias in his first Chapter. 16* 17 and 18.
verses; it is a place of much comfort.

And when thou hear repentance to God helps unto repentance.
be a condition of the obtaining of forgiveness of sins, be not discomforted
in the conscience of thine own weakness, and insufficience of keeping the law
of God, as if it should be impossible for thee to obtain forgiveness upon this
condition. I know thou can not but be unapt for good works now at the first,
having so long before accustomed thy self to a contrary course of
ungodliness. But attempt with resolution to reform thy ways, and study
withal thy heart to serve God according to his will in his word revealed. God
esteems the will for the work: yea he will work in thee both to will and
to do of his own good will, for he gives repentance as well as remission of
sins by Jesus Christ, whom he has appointed and enabled thereunto. As Peter
says of him. Him has God lift up with his Acts. 5. 31.
right hand, to be a prince and a savior, to give repentance to Israel and
remission of sins. And therefore (as a good degree of casting thy burden upon
God) pray unto God to give thee repentance for thy sins, that thou may
also obtain forgiveness. And learn of David to say unto God, Create in me a
clean heart Psalm. 51. ^0.
O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And crave it in hope, for God has
liberally promised to give it. Thus he says by the Prophet. Then will I pour
clean Ezeki. 36. 25.
water upon you, and you shall be cleansed. yea from all your filthiness, and
from all your idols will I cleanse you: a new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you: I will take away the stony heart out of your
body, and I will give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them. What is it that belongs unto repentance, either in the inward
man, for the renewing, and humbling, and sanctifying of the heart: or in the
outward man, for the altering, amending and reforming of the life, that God in
these words does not promise to give. And what he promises, that will he
truly give, if thou make suite unto him, as it is fit and necessary for thee.

The second of the three conditions Charity to our brother is the second
condition.
concerns our brother, and the merciful using of him, and it is a mild kind
of charity, by which we must be willing to forgive unto our brother all the
wrongs and trespasses that he has done against us, seeking if we can to
reform him, but not to shame him; yielding to do all offices of mercy and
love unto him in his necessity: not seeking to be revenged, and to render
evil for evil and rebuke for rebuke. And this is agreeable to justice and
equity, that if thou would receive what thou want, thou should be
willing to supply the want of others as thon art able: and if thou would
find mercy with God, thou should show mercy to men: for what measure we
meat to others, the same shall be meat to us. James the Apostle says; There
shall be judgment merciles to him James. 2. 3.
that shows no mercy, and merry reioiceth against judgment. If thou will not
remit unto thy brother, then look for no remission at Gods hand: but if thou
charitably remit unto thy brother, then cheerfully promise thy soul remission
at Gods hands. Very clearly to this purpose speaks the Lord Jesus, saying;
Mat. 6. 14.
If you do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also
forgive you: but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
father forgive your trespasses. This text is plain and needs no
interpretation, but forgive and it shall be forgiven to you: forgive unto men,
and you shall be forgiven of God. Reasons why we should redily forgive our
brother.


At the hearing of this condition there needs no discomfort arise in thy
conscience, from fear of thy insufficiency, for all rests in thy will. It
is no more but this, be willing, and the work is done; desire not to be
revenged, and thou have forgiven him: continue kindness unto him, as if no
such wrong had been done unto thee, and this condition is fulfilled. Reasons
why we should redily forgive.


And if thou think, it will be hard unto thee, by reason of thy froward heart,
hear a few reasons that may move thee to think, that it is a matter of
nothing, considering what thou desire to obtain of God. First, it is not
much that ^
thou have to forgive thy brother, small and few are his wrongs done to thee:
but it is infinite that thou seek forgiveness of from God, many and grievous
are thy wrongs done to him. Secondly, ^
between thy brother and thee there is no such difference, with advantage of
dignity on thy self, that thou should disdain in regard of thy
excellency to put up wrong at thy brothers hand, for thou (as he) art no
better then dust and ashes: but infinite is the difference between God and
thee, with all advantage of full excellency on Gods side, he being of infinite
glory and majesty, so that he might justly disdain to put up wrong at the
hands of such a vile worm as thou art. Thirdly, thy brother is, neither 3
by subjection to thy authority, nor by kindness received from thee so bound
unto thee, that in his doings, which thou interpretest for wrongs, he can be
challenged of any great rebellion, and any gross unthankfulness against thee:
but thou, both by subjection to the authority of God, and by daily blessings
received from God, art so bound unto him, that in thy sinful deeds done
against his known commandments, thou art evidently guilty of high treason
and rebellion, and most wicked vnthakfulnes. Every of these reasons do enforce
upon thy heart (be it never so froward and swelling) that it is a trif^e and
matter of noe worth, for thee to forgive the wrongs of thy brother done to
thee, if thou desire and expect that God should forgive unto thee thy wrongs
done against his divine majesty. But in the fourth place, mark 4
well this, and let it enter into thy froward heart, if thy peace were
presently settled, and thou had received from God as clear and as assured
discharge of all thy sins, as David had, when Nathan said unto him from God.
The Lord has 2. Sam. 12. 13.
done away thy sin, thou shall not die. Cruelty against thy brother reuoketh
Gods promise, which has ever included in it, this condition of showing mercy
to thy brother, and forgiving him. It is a true saying of Saint Augustine.
Redeunt dimissa peccata vbi: fraterna charitas Ser. 2. de ser Domini super
montem
non est. The sins forgiven return again where there is no brotherly
charity. And this is plain in the parable of the king and his servant, that
ought him ten thousand talents: the king being humbly entreated, forgave him
the debt (that is, promised to forgive it him:) this servant went forth, and
met with a fellow servant that owed him an hundred pence, and cruelly he cast
him into prison, which when the king heard of, he was highly displeased, and
calling this unmerciful servant before him, he said unto him. O evil
servant, I forgave the^ Mat. 18. 32
all that debt, because thou praiedst me: oughtst not thou also to have had
pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee So his master was wroth, and
delivered him to the gailer, till he should pay all that was due to him. His
unmerciful dealing with his follow, to whom he would not forgive small
offenses, revoked the liberal promise of Gods most large mercy for the
forgiveness of his many and grievous sins: therefore suppress all frowardnes
of thy swelling heart, and after the council of Solomon, say not, I will do
Prou. 24. 29.
to him, as he has done to me, I will recompense every man according to his
work. But be courteous, merciful, and tenderhearted, forgiving thy brother,
and so God will graciously forgive thee.

There is a third condition to be observed Faith in God is the third condition.
of them that think to obtain forgiveness of sin, and that concerns more
directly God, and his glory and praise, namely faith in God, faith in Jesus
Christ the son of God. That is, firmly to hold persuasion of the mercy of
God, that it reaches to the forgiveness of sin, without exception of any
sin, or any sinner; as if for sin, there were any greater then his mercy,
and therefore such as he neither would nor could forgive: and for the person,
that there were any so far out of favor, that upon his repentance God would
not and could not be merciful unto him: Micha. 7. 18.
the Prophet Micah saying of God for his mercy in this point; Who is a God like
unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage? he retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy
pleases him: he will turn again, and have compassion on us. He will subdue
our iniquities, and cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea. And
firmly to hold persuasion of the merit and virtue of the death and blood
sheding of the Lord Jesus Christ, that it is effectual to take away the sin
of the world, as John Baptist says of him, Behold the lamb of God, that
takes John. 1. 29
away the sins of the world. Without exception of any sin, or of any
sinner, as if for the sin, there were any so grievous, that the blood of
Jesus Christ were not able to wash out the stains thereof: and for the sinner,
that there were any so wicked, that the sacrifice of the son of God were not
sufficient to make atonement with God for him: the Evangelist John concerning
sin saying, The blood 1. John. 1. 7
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And the Apostle to the Hebrews,
concerning sinners, saying. He is able perfectly Hebr. 7. 25.
to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession to God for them. This is faith in God, to hold this entire
persuasion of the mercy of God, without making exception, which none can justly
make: and this is faith in Jesus Christ the son of God to hold this entire
parswasion of the merit of his precious blood and bitter passion, without
making exception; which none can truly make. And this entire perswassion
without exception includes particular application, for he that excepteth no
sin excepteth not his own sin, and he that excepteth no sinner, excepteth
not himself. Of the virtue of this faith to obtain forgiveness of sin, and
all other graces at the merciful hand of God, and for the merit, and by the
virtue of Jesus Christ the mediator, these and many other places of Scripture
do speak fully and plainly: Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye
believe, Mat. 21. 22
ye shall receive it. And in another place, If thou believe, all things are
possible Mar. 9. 23.
to him that believes. These things are spoken by the Lord Jesus himself. And
Saint Paul says, Believe in the Acts, 16. 31
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

It may be the remembrance of this Thou think thou have not faith.
third condition breeds some discomfort unto thee, as threatening unto thee no
forgiveness, because thou think that thou have no faith, thou think that
thou have it neither in possession, nor in power. whether thou have faith in
possession, or no, it may be a question, because Thou may have, it and not
know it.
thou may have it without present feeling of it. And sure if ever thou had
it, thou have it still. For as the Apostle Jude says, The faith is once given
to the saints. Faith Jude. 3.
has his summerly beauty, and winterly barrenness, it admits increase and
decrease; but as the tree lives in the winter, though it be bare, and when
cold storms are past shows his life by building in the spring* so faith
p^ncht and benumbed with the ^ipping cold of frostie temptations, as soon as
it pleases God to send ease of trouble, shows it self by rejoicing and
praising God, as it were in a spring, and then manifestly declares the
continuance of his being, when yet it could not be discerned. But If thou want
it, thou cans^ not take it of thy self.
if thou be indeed without it, it is out of question that thou have no power to
command it, it is not a matter of that facility to believe in God unto
salvation, that some do account it, who use to say, they can believe what they
list. For to command silence to accusing thoughts, and to stop the mouth of
Satan that accuses thee of thy sin, and to suppress the sentence of Gods
law that condemns thee for sin, and to bind the hands of Gods justice that
is ready to do execution upon thee for sin, and to quiet a conscience
disturbed, and s^t on fire with the fear of deserved wrath and condemnation,
(and to believe in God unto salvation, is to do all this) is a work of
greater difficulty, then he understands, that says, he can believe what he
list. Credulity to think this or that to be true, because some body tells us
so, or because we have read it, or because we so think of it, is one thing:
but faith to rest upon Gods promises for the forgiveness of sin is another
thing. The first, namely credulity, when men are light of belief, is a sault
and infirmity of nature; the second, namely faith, whereby all accusations are
avoided, and all the fiery darts of the devil are quenched, is the virtue of
the spirit, and merely the gift of God. The Apostle Paul says, By grace ye
are saved through Ephe. 2. 8.
faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Yea the same
Apostle makes it a work of no less power of God, to bring a sinful man unto
this saving faith, then it was to raise Jesus from the dead, as appears by
his words written to the Ephesians, where he prays for the opening the eyes
of their understanding, that they might know, what is the exceeding Ephe. 1. 19
greatness of his power to us which believe, according to the working of his
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. So
that if any man be able to raise up the dead, and quicken them if he lift, then
he is able to believe unto salvation if he lift; and else not. Surely faith
unto salvation is not in the power of man to take unto himself at his
pleasure, and when he lusts.

But while I make faith not to be in But it is obtained of God.
thine own power, I do not thereby take from thee all possibility of
obtaining it, if it were wholly wanting. For I have showed thee that it is the
gift of God. He that quickens the dead, he it is that makes sinners to
believe: and if thou would believe, and wile Partly by prayer.
pray unto him to give thee a heart to believe, God will hear thy prayer, and
grant thy desire, and that without faile^ if thou pray unto him in his Sons
name, who says unto us, Verily, verily John 16. 23
I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you. And while thou praiest, thy faith will grow, and while thou beleeuest,
thou shall have more heart to prayer, and these two within thee, Faith and
prayer, will afford mutual help either to other, and they will grow together,
and thou shall become strong in faith, and fervent in prayer. Augustine has an
apt saying to this purpose, Vt oremus credamus, and vt Ser. ^6. De verbis Do^.
ipsa non deficiat sides qua oramu^ oremus: fides fundit orationem, and fu^a
oration fidei impetrat firmitatem. Let us believe in God, that we may pray unto
him, and let us pray, that the faith by which we pray fail not: faith powers
out prayer unto God, and prayer powered forth obtains strength of faith from
God. Pray therefore imboldened by the promise of the Lord Jesus. And seeing the
chiefest Partly by the study of the word.
means whereby God works faith, is his word, even the word of the Gospel,
which therefore the Apostle calls the word of faith; that is, the word
begetting faith, the word in which, and by which we believe, saying; The word
Romans 10. 8.
is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, this is the word of faith,
which we preach. Therefore give thy self to the study of the word, hear it,
read it, meditate in it: there shall thou find the sweet promises of mercy:
there shall thou find Jesus the Mediator, in whom all the promises of God are,
yea, and amen; there shall thou find assurance for thy soul, to bring it to
true rest. For thy private reading, and what thou shall gain thereby, hear the
saying of our blessed Savior, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39
for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me: There shall we find the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and eternal
life. And for the diligent hearing of the word preached, and for the fruit thou
shall reap thereby, Paul does sufficiently inform thee when he s^ith, Faith
is by Romans 10. 17
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. In which words he gives thee to
understand* that that faith, which is the condition that we do speak of (if
it were wanting) is obtained by hearing the word of GOD, as by that ordinary
means which God has appointed to bring the unbelieving Gentiles thereby to
the faith of Jesus Christ, as somewhat more fully he showed in the same place
before, saying. How shall they Romans 10. 14
(that is the Gent^les) call on him in whom they have not believed? And how
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they
hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? Here
is the ordinary ^ay described, by which God calls the ignorant and
unbelieving Gentiles to faith and sa^uation. First he puts the word of
reconciliation into the mouth of some chosen Messenger, and sends him to
preach, without which sending he could not go: then by his preaching, these
ignorant and unbelieving come to hear the word of faith and saltion, without
which preaching they could not hear: Thirdly, by that hearing he works in
them knowledge and faith in the Redeemer, without which hearing, they could
neither know nor believe: Then lastly, by that faith are they imboldened to
pray unto God, without which faith they could have no courage nor comfort to
pray. And unto their prayers growing from that faith is salvation given,
according to a saying of the Prophet Joel, which the Apostle alleges,
Whosoever shall call Joel 2. 32. Romans 10. 13
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. So that thy diligence in hearing
the word of God with gladness of heart, will help thee to faith, and by faith
to forgiveness of sins, which is salvation of soul. And for thy meditating
in the word of God, and what benefit thereby thou shall obtain, the Prophet
David teaches thee in the first Psalm, where he pronounces him to be a
blessed man, that has his delight in Psalm 1. 2.
the Law of God, and in his Law meditateth day and night. Diligent moditating
in the Law of God makes a man to be blessed, but blessedness comprehends the
forgiveness of sins, that follows faith, the same Prophet saying, Blessed
Psalm. 32. 1
is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: blessed is
the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. In one word, to show thee
fully how available to the obtaining and increase of faith, the study of the
Gospel will be, the reading, hearing, and meditating thereon, consider the
saying of Saint Paul writing to the Romans; I am not Romans 1. 16
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, to
every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also the Grecian: for by it
the righteousness of God is revealed, from faith unto faith, as it is written,
the just shall live by faith. It is the doctrine of faith for Jew and Gentile:
it breeds, nourishes, and increases faith, bringing it forward by degrees
unto full ripeness: it justifies the believer, and saves the justified man,
and effects these things powerfully as the instrument of God, for he calls
it the power of God to save, that is, the instrument by which he powerfully
saves. Though therefore thou have not power to settle thine own heart, by
giving says unto thy self, yet thou have no cause to be discomforted; for by
prayer unto God, and by study in the word of GOD, it is obtained at his hands.

These are the conditions between The three conditions repeated.
God and man, which God requires, where he forgiueth sins: three in number.
One that concerns most directly thy self, that is repentance, renewing thy
heart to hate sin, and to love virtue, and reforming thy life, to sly sin
and practice virtue. A second that concerns most directly thy brother, that
is, charity and compassion to forgive unto him the wrongs done unto thee, and
to comfort him, and to do good to him, as thou would that God should
forgive unto thee the wrongs that thou have done unto him, that God should
comfort thee, and do good unto thee. A third that concerns most directly God
himself, revealed unto us in his sin Jesus Christ, namely, our faith, that
we neither think basely of the mercy of God, nor of the merit of Jesus
Christ, as if there were some person that it could not relieve, and thy self
that person; and some sin that it could not do away, and thy sin that sin.

And now may thou understand Others perish for not observing those
conditions.
what it is that causes so many to perish in their sins, and how it comes
to pass, that so few are saved, when yet without exception of any sin, the
Lord Jesus commands, and by commandment gives leave to ask, and hope to
obtain forgiveness of sin; and likewise, without exception of any sin,
God the ^ather of our Lord Jesus Christ promises to forgive sin.

First, they have no ca^e of repentance to forsake sin, yea with delight they
dwell in it, live in it, and die in it: and they will rather forsake God, and
renounce heaven, then leave their pleasant and gainful sins. Secondly, they
have no care of charity and compassion to their neighbor, they regard not the
rest, the credit, the prosperity, the peace and safety of their neighbor:
and being full of pride, of wrath and fury, they prosecute the least wrong,
till they be revenged. Thirdly, they regard not to know how ample the Lords
mercy is: and the death of Christ, and doctrine of salvation are foolishness
to them: they pray not for faith, and they stop their cares against the word
of God. And hereby it comes to pass that they perish in their sins: not
that their sins are so great that they cannot be pardoned, or God so
merciless, that he will not pardon them, or Jesus Christ so defective in his
mediation, that he has not done and suffered enough to discharge them, but
themselves are so careless, so proud, so contemptuous, so desperate, that they
will not leave to sin, they will not love their neighbors, they will not
know God, but they will go on in their courses, like them whom Jeremy
complains of, saying, They are all adulterers, and an assembly Ierem. 9. 2
of rebels, and they bend their tongues like their bows for lies, but they
have no courage for the truth upon the earth, for they proceed from evil to
worse, and they have not known me says the Lord. This is the cause why they
perish.

And here may thou understand how Thou m^ist by these con ditions obtain
forgiveness of sins.
to reap the benefit of the leave that Christ has given thee by his
commandment to ask forgiveness of thy sins, and how to reap the benefit of
the promise that God has given thee to grant forgiveness of sins. First,
forsake the sins that have been so chargeable unto thee, and having already
found the reckoning to be so heavy unto thee, diet no more at the Ordinary of
fleshly lusts, where the soul must pay for it in hell, and the inheritance
waste that God has dearly bought for thee. And finding how great need thou
have of mercy and forgiveness, to keep thee from being eternally miserable.
Learn to be tender hearted toward thy brother, and afford him thy
forgiveness, that thou may obtain the same measure of mercy at the hands of
God. And let it be the chief of thy daily studies, to understand more
clearly then yet thou do, how infinite and boundless the mercy of God, and
the merit of Christ his blood is. In the word of God thou shall find these
things. And while thou are occupied with desire in these studies, faith in the
mercies of God will grow apace, and in a short time bring thy conscience to
that happy quietness, that S. Paul speaks of, saying, Being justified Romans
5. 1
by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus is
thy fear, growing from the multitude of them that perish, and from the small
number of them that are saved (notwithstanding the commandment of Christ,
giving leave to ask forgiveness, and the promise of GOD offering forgiveness)
showed to be an idle fear, if thou will have care of these conditions, upon
which God grants forgiveness of sins.

CHAP. XXII.
BUT hear again the afflicted A sixth objection. He has neither repentance,
nor love, nor faith.
conscience breaks out into grievous complaints, and faith* If these be the
conditions required, where sins are to be forgiven* I must never look to
grow unto any agreement with God for the forgiveness of mine, for I have not one
of these three things in me. For first, I want repentance, sin abounds in
me, and whether I hate it or no, I cannot tell, though I know I have no cause
to love it, that proves now so grievous unto me. And secondly, I hold my self
to be void of love to my neighbor; I fear least I shall envy other men their
happy peace of conscience, and their happy hope of salvation: and that stands
not with love. And sure I am that I have hurt them often with the unjust act of
my sin, and have grieved and offended them with the ungodly example of my
sin. And these things have no agreement with love. And as for faith, of all
three it is furthest off. If despair could obtain forgiveness of sin, I
should soon speed, for I am not far from that; but if salvation must be
apprehended by says, I am most far from it; for I have little or no faith, the
present fear that I am in, is directly opposite to faith.

This is the miserable condition of Answ're to this sixth objection.
this burden, that they which are pressed with it, do quickly apprehend, and
too well remember any thing that may increase their fear: but they are dull
too apprehend, and do soon forget any thing that might give them comfort. If
this troubled sinner could but remember (while the three conditions were spoken
of) what was said unto him, why he should not be discomforted, at the hearing
of these conditions, as if they, or any one of them did breed impossibility of
obtaining forgiveness of sins, he would not now make this f^uolous objection.
But let us help his memory, that when God shall be pleased to look
graciously upon him, his fear may be removed for the ease of his heart.

First thou may have all these things, Thou may have them, and not know it.
and yet not know it, and therefore it is great rashness to say thou have them
not. For as before this time thou will confess* that there was in thee
wickedness of life, envy against thy neighbor, and infidelity against God,
and yet then when it was so, thou did not think it to be so, nor could be
induced to believe it to be so; so at this time, there may be in thee
repentance, and charity, and faith, and yet in this astonishment of thy soul
thou can not see it to be so. Security at that time, suffered thee not to see
what was amiss in thee: and fear at this time, suffers not thee to see what
is good and orderly in thee.

Again if thou have them not, yet thou Thou art not far from them.
art in the way of them, and thou art not far from them. Thou art grieved to
find thy self guilty of so much sin, and thy heart is pricked, and thy
soul is wounded to think that thou art so laden with thine iniquity. Surely
this is the beginning of true repentance, when a man is grieved at the sight of
his sin* Indeed it is love that commends unto God our repentance and
conversion to him, but it is fear, that first opens the heart unto God, whom
being once entered, we do after intertaine with love: so was it with Peter's
hearers in the Acts. After he had brought them to the fight of their sin, in
crucifying the Lord of life it is said of them. When they heard it, Acts. 2. 37.
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other
Apostles, men and brethren, what shall we do? Then began they to have care of
amending their life, when they saw the error of it, and were afraid at the
fight of it. And it is a true saying of Saint Gregory, Sancta electorum Moral.
li. 1. chap. 27.
ecclesia simplicitatis suae et rectitudiuis vias timore inchoat* sed
charitate, consummat. The holy Church of Gods elect begins the ways of her
simplicity and vprightnes in fear, but does perfect them in love. So that
even this fear that thou art in, by reason of thy sins, is the beginning of
repentance, giving thee to understand, that it is not good, nor safe to
continue in them. Proceed in the fear of God, for thou art not far from
repentance. And thou think other men to be happy in their peace of
conscience, and desire to have fellowship with them in the fruition of Gods
favor. And is not this love, or at leastwise a preparation to love? to have in
admiration the saints of God, to think them to be happy that are in his
favor, above the condition of other men, that enjoy the glory of the world
without Gods love, and to desire to be united unto them* No man can think well
and honorably of them whom he hates, no man can desire to be joined in
condition and fellowship with them whom he does not love, or at least, think
well of; and therefore this opinion, that thou hold of them, and of their
happiness, shows, that thou art not far from love* When Balaam, having
considered the condition of the people of God, both in their life, and death,
speak these words* Let me die the death ^f the righteous, and Number* 23. 10.
let my last end be like his. He began to love the Israelites, and though
after he showed fruits of hatred against them, yet at that time when he
spoke those words he loved them, his change of mind grew from his own
covetousness: he desired Balaks reward, and therefore sell from his love; as
Gregory notes of him, that there was Nequaquam perseue Mor^l. lib. 33. chap.
27
ra^tia continui amoris, no perseuering in continued love. He began to love
the^, but the covetousness of his heart brake off his love. Continue thou in
love, and strive to increase. Thy present good opinion, that thou hold of
them, and of their happiness, is an evidence that thou love, or art not far
from love. And thou have a longing desire to recover the love of God: thou
gladly hearkenest to the report of his mercy, and would think thy self an
happy man, if thou could grow to any comfortable persuasion thereof: and
does not the man thus minded follow after faith? was there any more in the man
that came to Christ for his son that was possessed of a devil? when he said
unto him, Lord, I believe, Mark. 9. 24
help my unbelief. He freely confessed, that all the faith he had was no
other, and no better, then unbelief: yet his desire of faith was esteemed for
faith, or obtained faith, for the effect of faith followed. Christ (that said
unto him, If thou Mark. 9. 23
can believe it, all things are possible to him that believes) healed his
child, because he believed; and shall not thy desire of faith in like manner,
either be esteemed for faith, or obtain faith, that the effect of faith in the
forgiveness of thy sins may follow. Surely, that desire of thine shows,
that thou art not far from God.

But be it granted, that thou art altogether Thou may obtain the^, if now
thou want them.
without them, and at this time most far from them: does it therefore follow,
that thou can not obtain forgiveness of sins, for the present want of
them? Not so, for though now thou have them not, yet thou may obtain them,
and then forgiveness of sins, now seeming impossible, will easily be
obtained. They that were borne without them, die with them, and reap the fruit
of them, bearing the testimony of them into the grave (in the sweet peace of
their conscience) that never brought them, not any preparation unto them out of
the womb. And therefore hope in the Lord, and pray unto him, and practice all
the good council, that was given thee, when these conditions were first
remembered unto thee. Repentance God gives repentance.
is the gift of God, and he is the Lord most holy, that renews our hearts by
the spirit of Sanctification. He it is that made this promise, I will pour
water Esaias 44. 3.
upon the thirsty, (he means him that thirsts after righteousness) and
stonds upon the dry ground (he means barren hearts that bring forth no good)
I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buds. By the
name of Spirit, he gives us to understand what he meant by Water and Floods
mentioned before, even the graces of his renewing and sanctifying Spirit, this
promise is made to the Church, whereby GOD does assure her that he will bless
all her children, how dry and barren soever they be, with that grace, the
moisture whereof shall make them fruitful of all good works. And thou art a
child of the church, bred and brought up in the bosom thereof, thou art the
seed, thou art one of the buddes of the righteous: pray unto God that gives
repentance, and has largely promised, and in ti^e thou shall find favor. Also
charity is God gives true charity
the gift of God, he is love, and it is he that makes men to be of one mind
in an house, that is, in all societies he knitteth men's hearts together in
love, and makes them to keep the unity of the Spirit in the band of peace.
It is he that has promised in the Church of Christ, and kingdom of the
Messiah the rod of the stock of Ishai, to do this; The wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and Esaias 11. 6.
the leopard shall lie with the kidde, and the calfe and the lion, and the fat
beast together, and alittle child shall lead them: and the cow and the bear
shall feed, their young ones shall lie together, and the lion shall eat straw
like the bullock: and the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the aspe
and the weaned child shall put his hand upon the cockatrice hole. By the
wolf, the leopard, the lion, the bear, the aspe and the cockatrice, he
understands men of proud and cruel minds, apt to do al hurt, because they
are void of al love: by the lamb, the kid, the calfe, the fat beast, the cow,
the bullock, the sucking child, and the new weaned child, he understands men
of an humble and mild heart, apt to do good, unwilling to do hurt, because
they are full of love: by the harmless society of these so unlike people, he
gives us to understand, that he will take away from men, their pride, their
fierceness, their cruelty, their unmercifulness; and in place thereof, he
will give them humility, mildenes, love and mercy. This is a work that he
does, and this he will do: pray therefore unto God, who is love it self, and
he will give thee a heart to love thy brother. Faith likewise is his gift, and
he God gives says.
himself is a most faithful God, worthy to be trusted, the God of truth, that
neither can nor will deceive them, that according to his covenant and promise
of mercy, do trust in him. The Apostle tells us, that faith is his gift,
saying, By grace are ye saved through faith, and Ephesians. 2. 8
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Every good gift, and every
perfect giving comes from him, who is the Father of lights: pray him
therefore to give a believing heart unto thee, and he will not fail thee. So
that if thou have neither repentance, charity, nor faith, which are the
conditions upon which God gives forgiveness of sins, yet thou may have
them, for GOD does give them: pray then unto God, and thou shall in due time
obtain them. For the want of this triple grace, thou have a triple commandment
to call for grace, with a triple promise to obtain Matthew. 7. 7
all grace. The Lord Jesus saying, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and
ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Then ask repentance,
and it shall be given thee: seek for charity and a merciful heart, and thou
shall find it: and knock at the gate of heaven for faith, and it shall be set
wide open unto thee. Wherefore is it, that God at this time does make thee see
thy want, but because he would have thee to call for his help.

CHAP. XXIII.
But still objections arise A seventh objection* his heart is ever full of evil
thoghts
in a trobled conscience, and the poor burdened sinner complains that his
estate must needs be desperate. For, says he, I feel a continual swarm of
evil thoughts, in extreme disorder, stirring in my heart. Thoughts against
the majesty of the most glorious Trinity: thoughts against the verity of the
divine and humane natures, personally united in the Lord Jesus Christ: thoughts
against all the Articles of the Christian says: thoughts rebellious against
authority, and seditious against peace: thought malicious against my
neighbor, and unnatural against my self: thoughts unchristian, uncivil,
inhumane, thoughts monstrous, and fearful: I tremble to think that I have
such thoughts. And these must either spring and arise out of mine own heart,
and then woe unto so wicked heart. It is like unto the Inn, unto which the
virgin Mary came with the Lord Jesus in her womb: there was no room for her
in the Inn, all the Chambers were filled with other guests, she was glad to
creep into the stable, and there she brought forth her first begotten. So, if
any come to bring Christ, or any christian thought into my heart, there is no
room in the Inn, all the corners of my heart are taken up with other
thoughts, they must seek a resting place elsewhere, and not with me. Or if
they spring not from mine own heart, then are they thrust into my heart by
Satan, who did thrust the thought of treason against his master into the heart
of Judas: and then surely the devil has already possession of my heart, and
either he sends these thoughts, as new inhabitants to dwell there, and to
keep possession of my heart to his use, as the king of Ashur sent new
inhabitants into Samari^, to keep the City and Country to his use: or else
he sends them as so many hagges, and furies (what should I call them?) so may
executioners with firebrandes to torment me: and being so fully in his power,
it is too late to think of deliverance.

Now the Lord of hosts help thee, poor Answer to this objection.
afflicted soul, and case thee of this burden that presses down so heavily.
And for thy comfort understand, that if these thoughts arise out of thine own
heart Thoughts h^rt not, if we yield not to them.
(as they are in thy heart) and grow in the field in which they spring, they
are yet but as the first graffe of sin, and have neither blade, nor ear, nor
fruit to poison and kill withal, if we take not liking of them, nor suffer
our judgment to be corrupted by them, taking them for rules of truth, and
intertaining them as embraced opinions, nor suffer our will to be seduced by
them; interpreting them as rules and directions to lead us into action. James
the Apostle has an excellent saying to this purpose. Every man is tempted when
he is drawn James. 1. 14
away by his own concupisence, and is intised: then when lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished brings forth death. By
concupisence he understands the first flattering thoughts, the first evil
motions that stir in our hearts, that make the first proposition to our
judgment and will, to try whether they will take hold or no: and howsoever
the feeblest evil thought be sinful in Gods sight, who loves truth in our
inward affections: and it is an evidence of that sinful nature that we bring
into the world with us deserved unto us from our first parents, through all the
interceding generations: and howsoever the same evil thought, being sinful,
deserves (in the justice of God) eternal death: yet the Apostle James,
(looking unto rules of mercy, and speaking according to those rules) tells
us, that it is not dangerous unto us, neither brings forth sin unto death,
except a man be enticed, and drawn away by it. For when the judgment
yields, and is corrupted by it, approving as good, that that is evil, and
approving as true that that is false: and when the will yields, and is
seduced by it, intertaining the motion with assent and liking: then from the
first thought there is a progress made unto some sinful action, and in that
action, men continue sometime impenitent unto death. This is indeed a dangerous
course, and if thou give such way unto these evil thoughts, and first sinful
motions, that thou allowest their appearance without check, and suffer
their daily return without controuling the^, and harknest unto them with
pleasure, or at least, with patience; then thou art (as James says) enticed,
and drawn away: and then it is likely that those thoughts will conceive (by
the company of thy will) and bring forth some monstrous birth of sin;
whereunto when thou art once entered, it is dangerous, and doubtful, whether
thou shall find grace to return by repentance or no. And this first deformed
birth of sin brings forth another deformed and fearful birth, namely death.
The first of these foul births, namely sin, is thy shame: and the second of
them, namely death, is thy snare and destruction, as the Apostle Saint Paul
says, What fruit had Romans 6. 21.
you then in those things, whereof you are now ashamed* for the end of those
things is death. But if at the first appearance of these thoughts and evil
motions, thou check them, and show thy just dislike of them, if thou arm thy
judgment and thy will against them, withholding thy Judgment from approving
them, by showing how false and ungodly they be: and withholding thy will from
assenting unto them, by showing how sinful and abominable they be: if thou use
all diligence to expel them out of thine heart, as thou art able, and call
in better thoughts, to occupy their places, falling into some holy meditation
of the glory, the greatness, the holiness, the riches, the bounty the justice
and power of God: or into some meditation of the right worship of god, and of
thy duty to him, as thou art a christian by general calling, or as thou art
bound by any other particular calling among christians, or into some other
meditation of the glory of heaven, of the purchase of it for believers by the
death of Jesus Christ, of the means by which we may come to the fruition of
it, and what manner persons in their conversation they ought to be, that take
themselves to be coheires with Jesus Christ of that glory. If thou fall into
such meditations, when thou art at leisure, or set thy mind upon thy work and
business, if thou then have any in hand, that by this good imploiment of thy
mind and body, there may be neither room nor liberty for those evil
thoughts to abide and wander in thy heart. Certainly those thoughts (though
very busy with thee) shall not be able to hurt thee: they shall no more be
imputed unto thee for sin unto death, then the motions of P^tiphars wise were
unto Joseph, when she said unto him, come lie with me, was imputed unto him.
Gen 39. 7.
And this course (last remembered) is the only way in such a case, of casting
thy burden upon God, if thou be careful withal to pray unto God for his
grace to help thee to overcome these swarms of evil thoughts, as he helped
the Israelites to overcome the swarms of the Amalekites, Philistims, and other
enemies: and that also thou take heed of idleness, and chiefly, idleness joined
with solitarines. Idleness is the sin to be shunned: solitarines does but make
the ^dlenes to be more dangerous. But certainly they that are troubled with
the assault of such thoughts, to them nothing is more dangerous then idleness,
and want of imploiment for their minds. Then are they at leisure for the
devil, then are they like the house, spoken of in the Gospel, whereunto the
devil entered. Mat. 1^. 43
As it is written. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
throughout dry places, seeking rest, and finds none: then he says, I will
return into mine house, whence I came: and when he is come, he finds it
empty, swept, and garnished: then he goes and takes unto him seven other
spirits worse then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there, and the end of
that man is worse then the beginning. Mark well this saying. He found it
empty swept and garnished, that is, he found it idle, vnimploied. God was not
there with good thoughts becoming his presence; and therefore the devil
entered with wicked thoughts becoming his presence. Where the heart is not
carefully manured by the owner thereof to bring forth good thoughts, it will of
it self, to an idle owner bring forth evil thoughts. It will be like to the
field of the slothful, that Solomon passed by, Prou. 14. 31
And lo, it was all grown over with thorne^ and nettles hard covered the face
of it, and the stone wall thereof was broken down, as it was in this ground:
because the owner through sloth, did not sow good seeds in it, evil weeds
overcame the same. So will it be in thy heart, if through idlene^ thou have no
good thoughts, tending to Gods glory, and the service of his Church, thy heart
of it self will abound with evil thoughts.

But if these thoughts rise not out of Evil thoughts suggested by Satan are
his sin, and (...) thine.
thine own heart* through thy idleness and evil studies, but be the suggestions
of Satan, thrusting them into thine heart, as he did thrust that thought of
treason into the heart of Judas* ^f thou do not open thy heart by thy sloth
and other sins, unto those thoughts, and be prepared for the intertainment of
them, as a man waiting at the door of his house, to open it to those guests,
whose entrance he desires, or is pleased withal: (for so did Judas, he did
open his heart to the devils suggestion by his envy and covetousness: for when
the woman powered the precious ointment upon the head of Jesus, and Judas
murmured at the waste, saying, it might have been sold for much, and given to
the poor; and Jesus had defended her fact, saying, she did it to prepare him
to his burial: then presently Judas, who carried the purse, received the alms
given to his master, and now missed this prey out of covetousness and envy
hereupon went presently to the high priests, offering to betray him for a
reward, and was as ready to entertain that thought, as the devil was to offer
it unto him, and his envy and covetousness held open his heart unto it) if thou
by thine idleness and other sins do not set open thy heart to such
thoughts, the offer of them in thy heart* is the devils sin, and not thine.
And if thou repel them, as before has been showed, they shall no more hurt
thee, then the suggestions of Satan in the wilderness offered to the Lord Jesus
did hurt him. What those suggestions were, the Evangelists do show, and that
the devil audaciously, like a tempter, did offer them to the Lord Jesus, they
also show: but in what manner they were offered to him, they speak not; as
whether the devil spoke them audiblie to his ear, or (which is more agreeable
to the nature of the devil) whether he did speak them spiritually and
inwardly to his understanding, hereof they speak nothing. Only Saint Luke
says, that the devil did show unto Jesus the glory of the kingdoms of the
earth, In the Luke. 4. 5.
twinkling of an eye. Which sure was a spiritual manner of presenting: and why
may we not as well think that he used a spiritual manner of speaking? but
howsoever it was, the devils work in thrusting those ungodly thoughts into
th^e heart, is like that devils work, that offered those sinful motions unto
the Lord Jesus. The devil sinned therein as a tempter, that would have drawn
another to wickedness, but the Lord Jesus sinned not in them; while he gave
no place unto them, neither was drawn by them to do evil, but confuted them
by the scriptures, those suggestions were no hurt unto him. Even so in those
thoughts thrust into thine heart, the devil sins in them as a tempter, that
would draw thee to commit wickedness, but thou sinnest not in them, if thou give
no place unto them, and suffer not thy self to be drawn by them to do evil,
but confutest them by the scriptures. Surely those thoughts, if thou carry thy
self thus, shall do no hurt to thee. Again let me remember thee to call upon
God for the assistance of his grace against those evil thoughts. And to take
heed of idleness and solitarines, remembering Salomons, Vae soli; woe unto him
that Eccle. 4. 10
is alone.

And here I will also advise the sinner which is troubled with these swarms of
evil thoughts to confer with some godly and learned Physician, and to use his
counsel, for there is often in the assault of such thoughts some mixture of some
distemper in the body, which he that is wise in God, and desires true rest
unto his soul will not, yea must not be careless of. The devil bath leave to
tempt, not power to overthrow.


And whereas in the frame of thy objection, thou say, that if those thoughts
be the suggestions of Satan in thine heart, then the devil has already
possession of thy heart, and thou art fully in his power, and it is too late to
think of delivering thee ont of his hand. This is but a false fantasy, the
fruit of thine own fear, without any truth in it, for the devil has often
leave to tempt, when he has no power to overcome. Thou heardst even now how
he had leave to tempt the Lord Jesus in the wilderness, but he had no power
to overcome him. And thou know the history of Job. The devil had leave to
tempt him, and and that was limited leave: he was not able to touch a sheep
tail of Jobs, till God permitted him, and he could not pass a step further
then God allowed him: and whatsoever he did to Job, either in his possessions,
or in his own body, yet had he no power over his mind to make him to
blaspheme God, which was the d^uels cheifest desire, and whereof he had accused
Job before. And thou know what Jesus says of the Apostles, that the devil
made suite to winnow them as wheat, but he interposed his prayer for them,
that their faith might not fail in the most hot and violent temptation. So
that the devil has no power at all, either to trouble by tempting, or to hurt
whom he troubles. But as God in his holy wisdom gives him leave. Malice and
desire to hurt abounds in that enemy, but power he must obtain at Gods
hands. And in thy self thou may see it plain by the very manner of thy
trouble, that though he have leave by these thoughts to tempt thee, yet thou
art not wholly in his power: for if he had power to hurt thee with deeds, he
would not trifle the time with thee, to trouble thee with thoughts: for the
devil ever goes as far as ^is commission extends in doing hurt to the
sons of men: he^ has no mercy and charity to spare where he may do a
mischief.

And if he had as full possession of thee, Where he has most power, yet
deliverance may be ^ped for.
as ever he had of any child of disobedience, yet were it not therefore too
late to think upon, and to seek deliverance out of his power. For the
Apostle says, that he himself, and the Ephesians to whom he writes, walked
sometime, Ephesians. 2. 2.
according to the course of this world, and after the prince that rules i^ the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. He
sometime prevailed in Paul and the Ephesians further then to molest them with
ungodly thoughts, for they walked in their deeds after his course, and yet
they were delivered out of his power, and made the faithful servants and
obedient sons of God. Indeed the Devil is a strong man armed, that to his
uttermost power keeps those things that he possesses in peace: But the Lord
Jesus says in the Gospel, When a stronger Luke 11. 22
then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from him al his
armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils. And this stronger then
Satan is our Lord Jesus Christ, wholeadeth even captivity captive, and by
suffering death in his flesh, has destroyed death, as the Prophet speaks: O
death Hose^ 13. 14
I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy destruction. And him also that had
power of death to hurt us withal, as the Apostle says, That he might destroy
Hebr. 2. 14
through death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. And to
what end has he subdued this enemy, but that he might divide his spoils, and
set at liberty those whom he held captive: as it follows in the same place,
That he Hebr. 2. 15
might deliver all them, which for fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage. Where we see deliverance granted to them that the devil
had possession of, and held in peace, as the spoils that he had taken. And the
same may be seen by an other saying of the Apostle writing to Timothy,
Instruct them with 2. Timot. 2 25
meekness that are contrary minded, proning if God at any time will give
them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to
amendment out of the snares of the devil, which are taken of him at his will.
Mark it, and make use of it; those whom the devil has taken at his pleasure
(are not such men in his power) and whom he has ins^ared with the cords of
ignorance, and of wickedness, in the blindness and stubbornenesse of their
hearts, those God delivers and sets free, bringing them to the knowledge
of the truth, and to amendment of life. And does it by the mild instruction of
Timothy, that is, by the word of the Gospel, under the free ministry whereof
thou live happily in the bosom of the Church. The power of which word (if
thou hearken unto it) in overthrowing the power of Satan, and dividing his
spoils, we may yet further see by that that is written in the Gospel. The
Lord Jesus sent forth seventy Disciples to preach the Gospel, sending them two
and two together: and after their ministry was fulfilled, the Seauentie
returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject to us Luke 10. 17
through thy name. And he said unto them, I saw Satan like lightning fall down
from heaven. The preaching of the Gospel is a ministry of power, it is the
strong arm of God to destroy the kingdom of Satan. Where it is preached
truly and diligently, the walls of Satan's kingdom are undermined, and when
the people hearken unto it, the devil is cast out of them, and he falls with
violence from his sovereignty over them, even suddenly, as the lightning, which
breaking forth in the East, is suddenly seen in the Weast. Therefore, if
Satan had that full power over thee that thou fear, thy diligent attendance
to the Gospel preached, will surely work thy freedom. Let Jesus Christ
therefore find thee a diligent hearer in the Temple, and thou shall find him a
merciful Savior in thy heart, and thou shall be freed from all power of that
adversary. And though he trouble thee with many wicked thoughts, yet thou shall
be as a prey plucked out of his paws. And it pertains to the casting of this
burden upon God, that thou do attend to the preaching of his word. And thereto
join thy humble and hearty prayer unto God, and in due time he will give
rest to thy soul from these evil thoughts.

CHAP. XXIIII.
YEt has not our troubled sinner any constant peace^ An eight objection: the
Law curses tra^s goessours, and he is a transgressor therefore cursed.
but having his eyes fixed upon the Law of God, and having no power to look up
to the Gospel of peace, out of his fear he makes a new objection, crying and
saying, Does not the Law of God accurse every transgressor, that abides not in
all that is written in that Book to do it? And have not I broken all the
commandments of the law? Yes I have broken them, in thought, word, and deed,
and not only out of ignorance, weakness, or unadvisedness, but I have
broken, them boldly, prowdly, contemptuously; therefore sure I am that Gods
curse lies upon me, I feel the weight and fury of it, and I am no heir of
blessedness.

Indeed here appears the great malice A fraud of Satan d^scouered, with
warning to take heed of it.
and subtilty of Satan, which it behooves all men to look unto with great
care, and to take heed of it in the days of our peace and security, he
suffers us not to look into the Law of God, lest from thence we might take
any direction for the well ordering of our lives: but then he drives us
forward after the line of our own lusts. And then, if we have any remembrance
of God, he only suffers us to think upon his mercy and goodness, and bears
us in hand, that we cannot do that evil, which he will not forgive, and
therefore we need not greatly care what we do; we shall repent in time, and
all shall be passed over in mercy: and so makes us to abuse by contempt, the
riches of the bounty, and patience, and long-suffering of God. And if we have
any occasion to think upon the word of God, he turns us away from the Law,
and presently thrusts into our mouths the promises of the gospel, and drives
us upon that rock of destruction, that the Apostle Paul speaks of in these
words, What shall we say then? Romans 6. 1.
shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? The Gospel preaches the
mercy of God in Christ, to teach, that where sin did abound deserving
damnation, there the grace of God in Jesus Christ abounds more by the
forgiveness of that sin unto salvation. Heereuppon many that abuse the
grace of God unto wantonness, do resolve to commit sin more abundantly,
that so grace in the forgiveness of their sin might more abound. This wicked
resolution of contemptuous sinners, he recites with words of detestation,
saying, God Romans 6. 2.
forbid: how shall we that are dead to sin live yet therein? The true
condition of a Christian man that shall find grace to the forgiveness of his
sins, is to be dead to sin, and no more to hearken to, and to obey the
commandment of sin, then a dead servant can hearken unto, and obey the
commandment of his master: but to be alive unto God, that is, readily to
hearken unto, and diligently to obey Gods commandments, as a living servant
hearkneth unto, and obeys the voice of his master. And if this be the
condition of Christians, then how shall they that by their profession are dead
to sin, live in sin, presuming that super abounding grace shall deliver him
from all danger* But upon this rock, in the time of our peace and security,
does the devil seek to throw us, keeping us from all view and consideration
of the Law (when we have most need to be brideled by it) and making us with
the wrong hand to take hold of the Gospel, when we have no need of it, nor
skill how to make any right and holy use of it: and by this means he does in
those days of security, entangle us in many sins.

And after, when he has us fast in his bands, having made us guilty of
infinite transgressions, then he seeks leave to set our sins in order
against us, and to raise up storms of fear and terror in our souls. And
this leave obtained, and these storms raised, then he withdraws the Gospel
from before our eyes, and suffers us only to gaze in the glass of the Law,
that by sight of our own deformities, he might altogether confound us: and
then he suffers us to have no other remembrance of God, but of his justice
and severity. Then he presents him unto us such a one as Moses describes him,
saying; The Lord thy God is a consuming fire and Deuteronomy. 4. 24
aiealous God. And such a one as the hypocrites in Sion, in the day of their
fear conceive him to be, when they say, Who Esa. 33. 14
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? And then he suffers us not to think upon any word of
God, but the condemning Law, the accu^sing Law, the killing letter: then he
remoueth from us all remembrance of the gracious Gospel, of the free, liberal,
and faithful promises, and of the merciful mediator, and sweet Savior Jesus
Christ. Then he tells us, we have no right to any of those things, they belong
to the Saints, to the righteous, to penitent sinners, not to such bold
contemners as we are. And then he makes us object against our own souls, as
the troubled sinner here does, that the Law without favor accurseth
transgressors, that we without measure have transgressed the Law, and that
therefore without remedy we are accursed creatures. But let us see how we may
relieve the affrighted soul of this sinner, and against this objection, teach
him, with comfort, to cast his burden upon the Lord.

Thine eye is upon the Law: I mislike An answer to this eight objection.
it not. The Law shall make thee a full amends for all this fear that it puts
thee into. Paul writing to the Galathians speaks thus of the Law; The Law was
Gala. 3. 24.
^r Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous by
faith. This Law that accurseth thee with such ^igour and severity, even in that
curse serves as a Schoolemaister to instruct thee, by driving thee from all
liking of thine own ways, to seek thy justification by Jesus Christ that
died for thee. As the tempest by Sea makes men fly with all speed and skill
to safe harbor; and as a storm by land makes men fly with all possible
haste into the house: Even so the thundering of the Law denouncing curses
against transgressors, makes them with all speed and skill to fly unto Jesus
Christ our Savior, who only is the sure harbor, and house of rest and
safety, to all poor and weather-beaten and distressed sinners. To him truly,
and in the first place, belong those words of the Prophet, That man shall be
as an hiding place from the Esa. 32. 2.
wind, and as a refuge for the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and
as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. And as hunger and thirst kindle
a desire of meat and drink, and as pain and sickness felt and known,
kindles a desire of the counsel and help of the Physician, so fear and
anguish wrought in our hearts by the rigorous sentence of the Law accursing us,
kindles in us a desire to sly unto this man, even the man Jesus Christ, our
hiding place, our refuge, our fountain of living waters, our shadow that
refreshes: that in him we might find defense against the storm of curses that
the Law powers down upon us. Be not therefore afraid of the Law, but be
advised by it, and confessing thy sins, fly, as the Law compels thee, unto
Jesus Christ, who as the Apostle Peter says. His own self bare our 1. Pet.
2. 24
sins in his body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin might live
in righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.

Turn thee therefore from the ^igorous face of the Law, to the far more
cheerful countenance of Jesus Christ, and behold him hanging upon the tree,
where he suffered for sins, not for his own (for in him was no sin, nor
guile in his mouth) but for thy sins imputed to him, as the Prophet Esaias
teaches us, saying, All we like sheep have gone astray, Esaias. 53. 6.
we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all. Look therefore from the Law that was given by Moses unto
Jesus Christ, by whom grace and truth are revealed: behold him sweating in the
Garden, till drops of blood fell from him to the ground: behold him scourged
with whippes, and crowned with thorns, till the blood issued from all parts of
his body: behold him nailed to the tree, there reviled most disdainefully by
the Priests and all the people: hear him crying out under the weight of thy
sins; and of Gods displeasure endured for them, My God* my God, why Mat 27. 46
have thou for saken me? Behold him giving up the Ghost, and his life search,
whether it were departed from him or no, with a spear. Then O troubled sinner,
then did he sustain the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for us, as
Saint Paul te^cheth saying. Christ has redeemed us Gal. 3. 13.
from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for us. For it is
written, cursed is every one that hangs on tree, that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the
promise of the spirit through faith. Does the law thunder out curses, Jesus
Christ stepped in between the law and us, and received the stroke of that
curse upon his own head, whereof he gave all the world assurance, when he
humbled himself to the death of the cross, which manner of death was by a
particular sentence of the law, pronounced accursed: and why should the law
threaten again the curse of God against thee, which already before, it has
not only pronounced but executed upon another for thee? Thou art discharged
from the curse of the law, in the curse that Christ sustained for thee: yea
thou art so fully discharged of the curse, that in place there of thou art made
heir of the blessing promised to Abraham, for so are the Apostles words. That
the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. Now
this blessing of Abraham is the firm favor of God to be our God, according
to the covenant which he made with Abraham, and his seed after him in their
generations for ever Which seed is not to be accounted by carnal birth, but by
spiritual faith, without regard of line^l descent in blood, for god is able of
the stones, (that is, of the heard and stonieharted Gentiles) to raise up
children unto Abraham. For which cause it was said unto him, In thy seed shall
all the nations Genesis 22. 1^
of the earth be blessed. By seed in this place, he means the Messiah, the
redeemer that came of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, and David: and in him all
nations (without respect of persons) believing in him, as Abraham's heirs,
walking in the steps of his faith, shall become blessed by inheriting the
covenant, even Gods favor according to the covenant, and thou among the rest.

Fear not therefore the sentence of the law, but from the law turn thy face
to Jesus Christ, and the feared curse shall not fall upon thee. Reverence the
law as it teaches a rule of life, and fear it not as it pronounces sentence
of death. God made his son under the law to redeem them that were under the
law. And the same son of God is called by Saint Paul, The end of the law for
righteousness, Romans 10. 4
unto every one that believes. If therefore being in the hands of the law,
thou will look unto Jesus Christ, tho^ have attained to the end of the law,
and so art no more under the law, but under grace. And remember what Jesus
Christ has said in the Gospel, As Moses John. 3. 14.
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, s^ must the son of man be lift up,
that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have eternal life.
Look up therefore unto that serpent, lift up upon the tree of the cross, and
the sting of death which is thy sin, and the strength of sin which is the
law, shall never hurt thee* Against all danger of death of sin, and of the
law, hear what the Apostle says, Thanks be unto God, which has gi^en us 1.
Cor. 15. 57.
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXV.
ALL that is hitherto spoken A ninth objection. He cannot pray therefore shall
not speed.
cannot give peace to this troubled mind; but as one wave follows another in
the sea, so one fear follows another in his heart, and new fears afford new
objections. Now he pleads thus against himself, I have no reason to hope for
mercy, for I have no heart to pray for mercy. I want all things that pertain
to true prayer.

First I have no God to pray unto, that will lend any care to my prayers. I
find this saying of Gods, recorded by Esaias, Esaias. 1. 15.
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and
though ye make many prayers, I will not hear, for your hands are full of
blood. By blood he means soul and bloody sins, my hands are full of this
blood, for my sins are many, therefore if I should lift up my heart with my
hands unto god in the heavens, he will neither behold the stretching out of my
hands, nor hear the desires and groans of my heart. Also I find this saying of
the Prophet, set down as a rule, that shall stand. Your iniquities have Esaias.
59* ^.
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from
you, that he will not hear. Iniquity seperateth between God and us; I am full
of iniquity, therefore there is a wall of separation shutting him out from
me, and me from him. And sin causes him so to turn away his face that he
will not hear, but I am guilty of innumerable sins, therefore God has hid
his face from me, and ^ee will not hear. How then can I pray, seeing I have no
God that will lend any ear to my prayer?

Secondly, I have no mediator in whose name to pray, and for whose sake I may
hope to be heard when I pray. For men and Angels, whom some do make their
mediators, are no mediators: the Apostle says, There is one God, and one 1.
Tim. 2. 5.
mediator between God and man* which is the man Christ Jesus. This saying
excludes all other mediators. And the only mediator, the man Jesus is no
mediator for me: for I have denied him, and he has said, Whosoever shall deny
me before Mat. 10. 33
men, him will I also deny, before my father which is in heaven. And I am sure
that I have denied him before men, if not in words, because these days of
peace have given me no cause so to do (which I know I should have done, if
da^es of persecution had urged me) yet I have denied him by my deeds. The
Apostle has this saying of the men of his time, which is most true in me,
They profess Titus. 1. 16.
they know God, but by works they deny him. He may be denied by ungodly
works, but I am full of ungodly works, therefore have I denied him before men.
And having thus denied him, he must and will deny me before God. So have I no
mediator.

Thirdly, if I should offer to pray, I must pray without any promise: but so to
do were to pray idly, for then only do men pray according to the will of God,
and with comfort to be heard in their prayers, when they ground their prayers
upon the promises of God. But I never took heed to the promises of God, and
at this time I cannot call them to remembrance, and if I could call them to
remembrance, I were never the better, for God is not bound to perform his
promises to any, but to them alone, that out of their love to him strive to
keep his commandments. For Moses thus speaks of him, Thou may Deuteronomy. 7. 9.
know, that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps
covenant and mercy unto them that love him and keep^ his commandments, even to
a thousand generations. If any love not the Lord, out of his love to keep the
commandments of the Lord, he can make no claim to the covenant of God, or to
any promise of his; neither is God bound in his truth and faithfulness to
perform any promise to him: but such a one am I, that have not loved the Lord,
nor out of love studied to keep the commandments of God, but have broken them
all, therefore I have no promise to ground my prayers upon, and for that cause
I cannot pray.

Fourthly, I know not how to pray, how to begin, and how to make any
proceeding: and if at any time I incline my heart to pray, I am disturbed I
know not how, and other thoughts draw away my mind. While I think to ask
forgiveness of sins, my mind runs out into a wild remembrance of my
sins, with much pleasure to think upon them. While I think to pray for
grace to assist me against the power of sin* the lusts of my heart call
back my thoughts, and I am devising how I may compass it to commit sin, and
my will wholly inclines that way. While I think to pray for the inheritance of
heaven, my love to this world carries away my mind, and I am studying how I
may win the pleasures and preferments thereof. And ever my good desires that
should lead my mind, are crossed and put down by my bad desires, and I cannot
raise up, or if I raise it, I cannot hold up my heart to God and holy things
with any staiednes, I know what is requisite unto prayer by the Apo^les words.
Pray always with all manner Ephesians. 6. 18.
supplication in the spirit, and watch there unto with all perseueranc^. If I
pray, it is with my lips, I do not make supplication in the spirit; and to
watch unto prayer, that is diligently to attend with all the powers of my
soul, without either drowsinesse, fainting or wandering of my thoughts, is
most farte from me. And being so unskillful, and so unable to pray, how can I
pray, to prevail by my prayers?

And lastly (which is my greatest mischief) when I think to pray, or when I
do pray, or when I have prayed, there is something within me, that gives me
my answer, as soon as I have prayed, and sometime before I have prayed, and I
am far from attending upon God, till he do give me answer, as if I did not
pray unto God, but rather unto my self. The Prophet David says, Wait patiently
upon Psalm. 37. 7.
God, and hope in him: the meaning whereof I take to be this, when we have
showed our desire unto God in prayer and supplication, that then we should hope
in him to receive a gracious answer, and wait patiently for that answer, till
it please God to show us mercy in his appointed time. I do not so, I have
neither hope nor patience to wait upon his hand, but mine own heart makes
answer without God; And that answer is always a negative answer, a flat
denial, a plain repulse. So that I have less hope, and less comfort in and
after my prayer, then before I prayed, and where others find themselves much
eased in heart, after they have by prayer powered out their desires into the lap
of God, I am much more troubled, esteeming even my prayer to be turned into
sin: all these things together make me most unable to pray. Answer to the
ninth objection.


This is a grievous objection: but in framing this objection the troubled
sinner fares like a blind man in an unknown house, who wandering without
^guide, goes he knows not whether, and stumbleth often upon the same
threshold: so does he in several branches of this objection stumble at the
same offenses that have been answered and taken away before. But let us lend
^and to bring him into the way.

First he *a^th he cannot pray, because That he has a God to pray unto.
he has no God to pray unto, that will lend an ear of hearing to the prayer
he makes, because he has sinned against God. And yet he was taught before,
that leave was given him, yea that he was commanded to pray unto God, even for
the forgiveness of those sins, that made the separation between him and his
God: and also that God had promised to forgive those sins yea all sins
without exception. And whereas he objected against the commandment of praying
for forgiveness, that it pertained not unto him that could not call God his
father; and against the promise of forgiving, that it pertained not unto him,
that was no Israelite. These things were answred and removed, and it was
clearly proved unto him that God was his father, and therefore he might and
ought to pray for forgiuesse: and that he was an Israelite, of the seed of
Abraham, and of the household of faith, and therefore God had promised unto him
forgiveness of sin. And while these things stand good, how can he say that he
has no God that will hear him, because he has sinned against him. Let him
remember what David says unto God in one of the Psalms, Against thee, against
thee Psalm. 51. 4.
only have I sinned, and done evil in thy fight, that thou may be just
when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. Here is a true confession, that
he had sinned against God. Does he therefore think that he has no God to
pray unto, that will lend him an ear of hearing? What is that whole Psalm but
a prayer unto this God? In the first verse he prays thus: Have mercy upon
me o God according verse. 1.!
to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy compassions put
away mine iniquities. In the second verse he verse. 2.
prays thus, Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
sin. In the seventh verse he prays thus, Purge me with Hisop, and I shall
be clean, verse. 7.
rash me and I shall be whiter then snow. And so in many other parts of this
Psalm. So that it appears by David's practice, that our sinners rule fails,
pleading that he has no God to pray unto, that will lend an ear to hear his
prayer, because he has sinned against ^im; for David prayed unto that God,
^ot doubting of gracious hearing, against whom he freely confessed that he ^ad
sinned, and sinned grievously. And whereas in some places of scripture by our
afflicted sinner remembered, and in diverse other, the holy Ghost tells us that
God will not hear sinners, and hides his face from them; they are to be
understood, as spoken of impenitent sinners, that take pleasure in sin, and
continue in it, refusing to turn from their sin unto God, and yet presume
that all shall be well, and that God cannot deny their requests. Like them
spoken of by leremy the Prophet, Will you ^er. 7. 9.
^eale, murder, and commit adultery, and s^tare falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye know (...), and come and stand before
me in this house, whereupon my name is called, and say we are delivered,
though we have done all these abominations. And like them spoken of by the
Prophet Micha, Hear Mich. 3 9.
this I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of
Israel, they abhor judgment, and pervert allequity: they build up Sion with
blood and Jerusalem with iniquity the heads thereof judge for rewards, and the
Priests thereof ^each for hier, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money: yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? no evil can
come upon us. Such men there are in the world, that flatter themselves in their
sins, and when they hear the judgments of God denounced against sin, yet
for the pleasure they take in sin, and for the gain they make of sin, they
will continue in it, and not leave it, and think with prayers and some other
outward humiliations to blow away as a fether or some light thing, the
judgments and wrath of God, These are the men that have no God, because they
depart away from God by their own wickedness; these are the sinners whom God
will not hear, because they delight more in sin then they do in God. But the
humble, the penitent, the brokenhearted sinner, to whom his sins are his
burden, a displeasing burden, from which he desires to be delivered, as our
sinner does this day. He that is grieved for his sins, that hates and
abhors them, and if ^ee might once get clear from his sins past, intends
no more to be acquainted with them, and esteems them as his plague and his
death. Him the Lord most willingly, and with delight hearkneth unto. The
Prophet says, The sacrifices Psalm. 51. 17.
of God are a contrite spirit, and a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. So that thou were never so fit indeed to pray, as now thou
art with thy contrite and broken heart; thy prayers now will be a sweet and
pleasing sacrifice to him. He is thy God, and will most readily hear thee.

Secondly, he says he has no Mediator, That be has a mediator in whose
name to pray.
in whose name to pray, and for whose sake he may hope to be heard. And yet
remembers the words of Scripture that call Jesus the Mediator between God and
man. Those very words prove thou have a Mediator, even the same Jesus,
except thou will deny thy self to be a man; for he is Mediator between God
and man, and therefore mediator between God and thee, if thou be a man. So
that to say thou have no mediator in whose name to pray, and for whose sake thy
prayer should be accepted, is but an unthankful speech put into thy head
without any good ground; for Paul says of Jesus, that he ever lives to make
intercession Hebr. 7. 25
for us. Yet our afflicted sinner thinks he has reason to say so, because he
has denied Jesus before men. And did not Saint Peter deny the Lord Jesus
before men? and yet he after prayed and was heard in the Mediators name,
because he stood not in his denial, but repented. Yet thou have not denied
him in words before men as Peter did. That thou think to be no advantage to
thee, and referrest it to the days of peace, not urging thee, rather then to
the constancy of thine own heart (thou love to be thine own accuser) and
what thou have not done in words, thou think that thou have done in works,
by them thou have denied him, while thou did not live like a Christian. But
must it therefore follow, that he is now ^o Mediator for thee, and will deny
thee before his Father in heaven? Know thou not what John the Baptist faith
of him; Behold the Lamb of God John 1. 29
that takes away the sins of the world. He himself when as an unspotted Lamb
he was sacrificed for thee, took away, and by the virtue of that sacrifice,
still takes, and ever takes away thy sin: where is now that real denial
of thine, when those sins, in which thou did deny him, are done away? Yea
thy sins are so far from making him no Mediator, no Reconciler, that for thy
sins he is thy Mediator and thy Reconciler. The Evangelist John says, If any
man 1. John ^. 1.
(...), we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, and he is
the reconciliation for our sins, and not for (...) sins only, but also for
the sins of the whole world. We have an advocate with the Father to plead
our cause. When? If any man sin. And he is our reconciliation that brings us
again into favor, and makes our peace. For what? For our sins. And who is
this Advocate with God the father? who is this reconciliation for our sins?
Jesus Christ the Just. Where is now the denial of thy works, that should make
Jesus Christ to be no Mediator for thee, that should make him deny thee before
his Father in heaven? He takes away those sins: He is thy reconciliation
for those sins. Repent of those thy sins, and fear not to pray to God in
the name of Jesus.

Thirdly, he says he has no promises That he has the promises of God to
ground his prayer upon
where on to ground his prayers. And without promise to pray unto GOD, were to
make idle and unstable prayers, That is most true. But who told him that Gods
promises, which are made to all, belong not unto him. This point was handled
before, when he objected, that Gods promise for the forgiveness of his sins,
belonged not to him that was no Israelite. And it was then proved, that all
Gods promises belong to the seed of the righteous: the Apostle Peter saying,
The promise is made unto you, Act^. 2. 39.
and to your children. So that if it were a proved truth, that thou thy self
were unrighteous, and in thine own right, thou could make no claim to any
promise of God: yet seeing thou art a child of the righteous, a child of
belee^rs, in the right of thy parents thy progenitors, thou may make claim
to the promises of God, and upon thy repentance and conversion they shall be
performed to thee. And if this title contents thee not, claim them in the
right of Jesus Christ, of whom the Apostle says; All the promises of God, in
him are 2. Cor. 1. 20
yea, and are in him Amen. That is, to every one that comes humbly and
reverently unto GOD, in the name of Jesus Christ, seeking mercy and grace,
mercy and grace shall be granted according to the promises of God, whose truth
pertains to them that are in Christ Jesus, and come unto God by him. But thou
do not now remember any of Gods promises, neither did thou heretofore take
heed unto them, when thou ^rdst them, to lay them up in the treasury of thy
heart, against the times of need. Indeed this was thy fault, which being now
seen, must hereafter be a^ended. Hence forth hearken unto them, and when
thou hear, lay hold upon them, and treasure them up more carefully, for he
is the happy man and blessed, that hears the word of God and keeps it. But
though thou have them not in the storehouse of thine heart, and can not find
them there: yet there is an other storehouse wherein they are laid up, and
where thou may readily find them, and that is the book of holy Scriptures.
Jacob in Canaan had his private storehouse wherein provision was laid up for
him, and his family: and other men likewise had their private storehouses,
for their private provision: but when the years of famine came, and provision
failed in men's private storehouses, then the public storehouses of Joseph in
Egypt were opened, and al men fetched thence what they needed, and especially
Jacob and his family was from thence supplied. Even so for every man's private
comfort, his own heart is his storehouse, in which he that is wise will
treasure up the promises of Gods mercy to save the necessities of soul in
times of fea^e: but if there come such years of famine, such days of
distress, that the ^ouision in the private store house of the ^eart will not
serve the turn, send to the storehouses of the Scripture. The Lord Jesus
says, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 3^.
for in them you think to have eternal life, ^d they are they that testify
of me. There ^lt thou find the large promises of Gods mercy, upon which thou
may with much comfort ground thy prayers, all holy Scripture is written for
our instruction and comfort, and it should be thy sin and unthankfulness to
God, and treason against thine own soul, to ^eglect in this time of fear to
search for these promises in the Scriptures. And whereas thou say that Gods
promises belong to them that love him and keep his commandments, and to no
other: and thou have not loved him, ^ou have not kept his commandments: learn
to amend this error of thine heart and of thy life. Amend the error of thy
heart and love the Lord, amend the error of thy life, and keep the
commandments of God; so shall all this fear wear away, and thou shall with
^uch strength of faith ground thy prayers upon Gods promises.

Fourthly, he says he knows not how He is taught how to pray.
to pray. I believe it; oft-times Gods dear children are so astonished with
the burden of their trouble, and even with this burden of sin, affirighting
their soul, that they know not how to pray. Hezekiah says of his astonished
Esa. 38. 14.
soul, in the time of his sickness: Like a Crane or a Swallow so did I
chatter, I did mourns as a Dove: mine eyes were lift up on high: O Lord it has
oppressed me; comfort me. The sorrow of his heart did so oppress his soul,
that though he remembered God, and looked up unto him, and had all his desires
waiting upon the hand of God, yet he was not able to pray in any distinct
manner like a well advised man, his praying was all out of order, it was more
like the mourning of a Dove, and more like the chattering of a Swallow, then
like the holy and orderly prayers of a wise and godly man. And Saint Paul does
affirm it to be a more Romans 8. 26.
common thing and usual withal the servants of God in times of affliction;
saying: We know not what to pray as we ought; They know not what to ask nor
in what order to ask. And this being so common among Gods children, shall thou
be afraid to be a suitor unto God, (...) thou know not how to pray? shall
thou therefore be out of comfort? if thou can not pray distinctly and
orderly; yet (lifting thine eles up on high) with Hezekiah charter like the
Swallow; mourn like the Dove: Weep with the Apostle Peter: We read not in
what words he prayed, but we read in what bitterness of heart he wept. Let
thy tears flow where thy words can find no free passage. Saint Barnard Ser.
30. in cantica.
calls the tears of sinners the wine of Angels. And concerning the true
vigor of prayer, Saint Augustine in one place says it stands more in tearee
then in words; for instructing a certain rich Widow how to pray unto God,
among other words he h^th this saying. (...) hoc negocium plus gemitibus Ad
(...) epist, 121. capit. 19.
(...) sermonibus agitur, plus fleti^quam ^fatu: This business of prayer for
the most part is performed rather with gronings then with words, with weeping
then with speech. Let God therefore hear thy sighs and groans, let him see thy
tears, when thou can not show him thy desire in words: water thy couch with
tears, as did the Prophet, and God will gather up and put every drop into his
bottell; thus doing, when thou think that thou have not prayed, thou have
prayed most powerfully. For as Saint Ier^mi Ier. in ^sa*.
says: Oration deum lenit, lacr^na cogit: Prayer gently moves God, tears
forcibly compel him. He is allured as it were and won with the words of prayer
to hear us, but with the tears of a contrite heart he is drawn and enforced
to hear and help, where otherwise he would not. And in this affliction
growing upon thy heart, because thou know not how to pray, hear a notable
comfort that the Apostle gives thee, saying, The spirit Romans 8. 26.
helps our infirmities, for we know not how to pray as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes request for us with sighs that cannot be expressed.
Where thin^ own strength and wisdom fails in this service of praying unto
God, there the wisdom and power of Gods spirit kindlet^ in thee strong
desires, and earnest longings after the mercy of God. And the meaning of those
desires and longings God perfectly understands, and needs not to be informed
by thy words. So (...) though thou can not pray as thou ^oghtest to do, yet
that service goes forward well, while thou heartily desire Gods favor. Of
which desire in thee, ^ere needs no other argument, but ^en the grief of
thine own heart, seeing in thy sin cause of Gods displeas^re and that other
thoughts come into thine heart, when thou bendest thy self to pray, marvel
not at it, neither therefore be so far discomforted, that thou should give
over praying, but (...) the more to pray, and to watch thereunto in the
attendance of thy thoughts, and lift up thine heart unto God, and keep it with
all thy care, looking still to him. These thoughts of thine heart partly arise
from thine own weakness and corruption, that art more fit for any thing, then
to attend with set^ed reverence upon God. And partly they are mustered
together, and thrust ^o unseasonably into thine heart by the wicked enemy, that
would not have thee pray, because he knows that the mercy of God is most
easily obtained by hearty and constant prayer: therefore he seeks to hinder
thee in that business, that thy mind being, occupied about other cogitations
thou might est let f^ll to the ground the petitions that thou are offering unto
God* but the more he seeks to trouble thee, the more earnest be thou in
prayer* remembering that saying of our blessed Savior, given for a warning to
his Discip^es, Wate^ Mat. 26. 41
and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

Lastly* he is offended and discouraged Wa^rning to take heed of giving
himself any answer.
in his praying by an intruded answer that offers it self presently after
his prayer, and sometime before his prayer be either ended or begun, not
suffering him to wait patiently upon God, and to hope in him: and this intruded
answer is always uncomfortable, It comes ever in the negative and ^pulsiue
form, whatsoever he has prayed for, or intendes to pray for, it tells him, he
shall not have, he cannot have, he i^ not worthy to have, he must not look
to have, the justice of God will never grant it unto him: Which answer is
nothing else, but (if I may so speak) the smoke of those fiery darts of
Satan, whereby he has set the poor man's conscience in combustion, bringing
his sins ^o remembrance, setting before him the ^ath of God kindled by those
sins, (...) from hence extracting and drawing this heavy conclusion, look
for no ^rcy where thou have deserved so ^ch wrath. It is no other then a very
(...) of his disease, the fruit of his own (...) over hastily answering
himself, ^ot ^arying to receive answer of God; t^s he must take especial heed
off, that for as much as he makes prayer to God and not to himself, he wait
for his answer from God, and receive none from himself, and if his heart will
be foolish to suffer any such uncomfortable answer unto him, that he reject
it, and wait on the hand of heaven. About this point the sons of men er^e
very dangerously, and fail in extremities, and few or ^one can keep the right
mean, to expect and receive their answer from God. While men live carelessly in
sin, and provoke God every day, if they chance to offer any petition to
heaven, or by a^y means be occasioned to think upon answer of their hopes
from heaven, they ever boldly answer themselves with promise of all prosperity,
though in justice it cannot be, like unto the man whom God complains of
saying, that Hearing the words of the curse, blesses Deu. 29. 19.
himself in his heart saying, I shall have peace, though I walk according to
the stubbornness of mine own heart. God gives no such answer to such men. It
follows in the same place; The Lord will Verse 20.
not be merciful unto him. Blessings belong to them that fear God, not to
them that conte^ne him. He that inqul. reth for Gods will revealed in his word,
shall find another answer belonging to the petitions and hopes of such men.
The threatenings of Gods judgments are all denounced against them, as in the
fore-remembred place of Deuteronomy; Deu. 19. 20
The wrath of the Lord, and his lealousie shall smoke against that man, and
every curse that is written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord
shall put out his name from under heaven. On the other side, when men are
humbled in the sight of their sins, and have great remorse in their hearts, if
they power out any sighs and groans unto God in their prayer, and by any
means be occasioned to think upon answer of their desires from heaven, they
ever fearfully answer themselves, like those men spoken of by the Prophet
Ezechil, that say, Eze. 33. 10.
If our transgressions, and our sins be upon (...), and we are consumed
because of them, (...) shall we then live? That is, our sins deserving death,
and those being now ^id to our charge, and the hand of God being heavy upon us
for them, there is no hope of life. God gives no such answer to contrite
hearts, and to humbled spirits, he does not so reject the dejected man. He that
inquireth for Gods will revealed in his word, shall find another answer of
comfort and health appointed for them, the promises of mercy run all upon
their side. The Prophet Moses speaks these words unto the people, When thou
art in tribulation, Deu. 4* ^0
and all these things are come upon thee, at the length, if thou return to
(...) Lord thy God, and be obedient to his voice (for the Lord thy God is a
merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the
covenant of thy fathers, which he swear unto them. Unto this I might ad many
promises of like nature, assuring health and comfor unto humbled spirits, that
seek^ mercy at the hands of God with tears, and sighe^, and groans, their
hearts refusing to take joy and delight in any thing, till they may recover
again Gods favor, and once again see the light of his countenance. David
commends God by this gracious property of comforting such dejected
creatures, saying. The Lord vpholdeth Psalm. 145. 14
all that fall, and lifts up all that are ready to fall. And in another
place. He heals those that are broken in heart, Psalm. 147. 3.
and binds up their sores. Pray thou therefore unto God in the name of Jesus
Christ, and pray with comfort of heart: and when thou have made request unto
God, accept no answer but from God. First he answers comfortably in his
word, to all such as thou art, coming unto him. With that first answer
appease thy troubled mind, till God in his rich mercy, by his deed of
deliverance, give thee a further answer. Observe these rules, and if thou were
at this present in as bad taking as the Ephejians were at the first, of whom
Paul speaks (...), Ye^ were at that time without Christ Ephe. 2. 12
(...) were alines from the commonwealth of (...), and were strangers from the
coue^ of promise, and had no hope, and were (...) God in the world. Yet thou
shall ^ortly become as they became afterward, of (...) is said in the next
^ords, But now in Christ Jesus, ye which Ephe. 2. 19
(...) were far^ of, are made near by the (...) of Christ. And a little after,
Ye are no more strangers and foreners, but Citizens with the saints and all
the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. Here i^ a change
worthy to be observed, they which were without God, without Christ, without
hope, and strangers from the communion of Saints, are made the sons of God,
the Disciples of Christ, the heirs of the promises, and Citizens of heaven,
filled with all hope, and grounded upon that foundation of truth against which
the gates of hell shall never prevail. Put away therefore all these offenses,
the Lord is thy God his ear will harken unto thee: Jesus Christ is thy
mediator, pray in his name: the promises of God in him are, Yea, and Amen: thou
shall find them in the scriptures. And when thou, know not to pray, power
out thy heart unto God in sighe^ and tears and groans: repel wandering
thoughts when thou praiest, and lift up thy mind unto God (...) trust in him
when thou have prayed, waiting patiently for his answer. These things do with
all cheerefulnes as thou art able, and the God of peace shall send thee peace.

CHAP. XXVI.
YET is not the mind quiet, A ^uth objection, he is forsaken he is lost, he is
a reprobate.
nor indeed can be, till God bring the temptation to an issue, and remove his
burden. In the mean time, though he cannot charge himself out of any reason,
yet he cease not to charge himself out of fear, and says, that this
condition is not doubtful and questionable, whether he may obtain mercy or
no (if it were no worse, there were some hope) but his condition is certainly
evil and miserable; for says he, I am forsaken of God, I am a lost child, the
very son of perdition, and I am a reprobate, a far more vile sinner then many
reprobates, and therefore you labor in vain that offer comfort to me, and
that take so much pain to answer my objections: you may well devise answers
before me and other men, but they are unanswerable before the judgment seat
of God, where I must appear for my sin.

Ah Lord God, whereof thou know An Apost^ophe (...) God.
we be made, thou understand that we are but dust: and will thou permit so
weak creatures to be assaulted with so strong ^tion: yea Lord, thou will* to
thy glory thou will, that thy power may be made perfect through weakness, and
that the sufficiency of thy grace may be known by helping, and that thou
may be found worthy of that honorable name, that the Apostle gives thee,
calling thee, The father ^. Cor. 1. ^.
of mercies, and God of all comfort. Help therefore with thy mercy, help with
thy comfort, instruct me to speak thereof; and give to this afflicted sin^er
the powerful feeling thereof, to who^ now I turn my speech in thy name.

In this temptation I hope the devil Answer to this tenth objection.
has spit his last poison. If this brunt may be endured and overcome, I hope
peace will grow speedily, by the blessing of the God of peace. And for answer
unto this objection, first I say. That if these words had been spoken by the
Lord himself, I would have stood astonished at the hearing of so fearful a
sentence: I would have kept silence for reverence of the speaker, and without
reply I would have laid my hand upon my mouth, and have glorified God in his
judgments, and I would have said unto him as Job said; Behold I am vile, what
Job. 39. 37.
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth: once have I spoken, but
I will answer no more; yea twice, but I will proceed no further. But I do
understand from whence these words do come, and from thence I take unto me
comfort of replying; for I find them to arise out of that soil, that breeds
errors and lies. Therefore they are subject to exception.

Thou thy self art in mine ears the Himself b^ng s^eaker ^ no^ ^o be regarded
immediate speaker: and against thee, and this speech of thine I have just
exception. First, the thing whereof thou presumest to pronounce, is a thing
exempted from man's judgment, and whereof no man has leave to pronounce, till
God by some evident tokens do manifest his own purpose. Three things there
are (says one) which are exempt from man's judgment. The first is, the word of
God, what he has spoken, that must stand; man has no power to judge it,
otherwise then in humility to reverence it. The second thing is, Gods eternal
counsel, which is only known unto himself. And no m^n can say, it is thus,
or thus, until God by his apparent work do manifest it. The third thing is,
the reprobation of particular men, whereof no man is able to pronounce, nor
indeed ought to judge, either himself or any other to be of that number. God
saves and condemns whom he will, not whom we assign and nominate. Often times
they are vile in the sight of God whom we approve and honor, and often times
they are honorable and precious in Gods eyes, whom we think meanly of. Paul
says of him, He has mercy on whom he Romans 9. 18
will, and whom he* will, he hardens. It rests wholly in the will of God,
and it is not as we fancy, think, or judge. Of every particular man the same
Apostle says. He stands or falls to his own Romans 14. 4.
Master, that is, as God our Master shall be pleased, either to show mercy,
or to execute judgment, so shall every man stand or fall, escape or perish,
not as either he himself, or any other shall judge and pronounce of him.
Therefore this point of particular reprobation, being exempted from man's
judgment (for God shows mercy, and gives faith and repentance at his
pleasure, even while the thief hangs on the tree) ^ust exception lies
against this unkind objection.

Secondly, if the matter were such as man might judge and pronounce of, yet I
may without offense (if I see reason for it) deny to credit thy words, because
as all men are, so art thou (when thou art in best tune) apt to be deceived,
and prone to receive, embrace, and deliver a li^. David has these words in one
of the Psalms, I said in my fear, all men Psa. 116. 11
are liers. And what the Prophet spoke in fear, that the Apostle Saint Paul
without fear, and in a freer mind has confirmed, saying; Let God be true, and
Romans ^. 4.
every man a liar, as it is written. And I am not bound to keep silence to
every word that comes from the mouth of a liar, when I have reason to think
otherwise then he speaks, as I have at this time to think otherwise then thou
speak.

Thirdly and lastly, I have at this time just cause of exception against thy
words, because thy present disease, thy disquietnes of mind, thy fear that
thou art in, trouble both thy understanding and speech, that thou can neither
apprehend things as they are, nor pronounce them as thou understand them.
And thou laborest under a temptation, directly bent against thy faith,
persuading thee those things that are prejudicial to thy soul. And out of
some violent fit of that temptation, thou make this unkind objection against
thy self. Thus in regard of thee that art the immediate speaker in mine ears,
I have just liberty to reply against this objection.

But howsoever thou art in mine ^are the immediate speaker, yet in my
understanding, The devil being author of this objection, it is to be rejected.
the words of this objection have another, a more remote, and a more dangerous
author. The Spirit of GOD which is the Spirit of John 15. 26
truth, and leads into all truth, is called in the Scripture a Comforter,
When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the spirit of truth which proceeds of the Father, he shall testify of (...)
This spoke the Lord Jesus calling (...) Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of
truth, a comforter. But the words of this objection sound not like the words
of a Comforter, therefore I cannot judge them to be the words of that spirit
that is the spirit of truth. But there is another spirit, that as the Lord
Jesus says, abode John 8. 4^.
not in the truth, because there is no truth in him: when he speaks a lie,
then speaks he of his own, for he is a liar, and the father thereof. To that
spirit is the name of Satan given, which signifies an adversary, because he
seeks our hurt, and in all things deals with us as a sworn adversary; of
whom under the name of an adversary Saint Peter warnes us to take heed,
saying; Your 1. Pet. 5. 8.
adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may
denoure, whom resist steadfast in the faith. And the words of this objection
were never put into thy mouth by any friend. And they plai^ly show an
adversary, even that adversary to be their author and suggester: who being
himself eternally forsaken of God, utterly lost without hope of redemption,
and a reprobate Angel, bound in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the last day, would make thee believe, that thou also art
forsaken, lost, and reprobate in like manner as himself. Now such an one, a
lier, and an adversary, being the prompter of these fearful things unto
thine heart, thou ought not to give any the least credit unto them, much
less to maintain them against thy self. He being a lying spirit, piety does
teach thee not to believe him; and being an adversary, wisdom (if thou
haueany) persuades to distrust him. And both from thee the speaker, and from
him the author of this ungodly objection, I have much confidence, and am much
imboldened to make reply. And against thy uncharitable affirmation, saying, I
am forsaken, I am lost, I am a reprobate, I will oppose a more charitable
negation, and say, thou art not forsaken, thou art not lost, thou art not a
reprobate. And I will see how I can maintain my saying, and overthrow thi^e,
that thou may not be overthrown.

First, thou say thou art forsaken. If He may be forsaken for a time, and
after again received to favor.
by this speech thou meanest that now for the present, God having laid trouble
upon thee, withdraws his assisting power and hand from thee, and leaves thee
under the cross to cry and groan, and to take notice of thy infirmity; in
this sense I grant thou may be forsaken. But this is a temporary forsaking,
it is not a final forsaking. And to them that a^e so forsaken, God after in
his time returns with salvation, and there is hope for them. Hereof let this
be an argument unto thee, that the best servants of God are in this manner
forsaken often times, and feel themselves so to be, and complain heavily for
it, and yet after obtain help. So was it with David when he said, My God, my
God Psa. 22. 1.
why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health, and from the words
of my roaring? If we should say that these words were words of fear rather
then of truth, it might be with show of reason maintained, for God was not so
far departed from him as he feared: but grant that they were words of truth,
and that God was indeed departed from David, and had forsaken him, did not God
return again unto him? and had not he (even then) hope of Gods return? did
not God receive him again into his protection, and help him? and had not he
(even then) hope of such help from God? that he had such hope of Gods return
to his help, he declares by his prayer unto God, continued in the same
Psalm, where he says, Be not thou far Psa. 22. 19.
of O Lord my strength, hasten to help me. He that could thus pray, wanted
not hope of Gods return to his help, though he were for the present
forsaken. And that God did return unto him, and help him according to that
hope of his, he also declares in that Psalm, speaking of himself, though he
uses the third person as if he had spoken of others. He has not despised
nor Psa. 22. 24.
abhorred the affliction of the poor, neither has he hid his face from him,
but when he called upon him, he heard. So that though he were forsaken, it was
but for a time, when the Lord was pleased (for the exercise of the Prophets
faith) to hide his face from him. The Prophet by his prayer quickly found him
out where he was hidden* and at the cry of that prayer, he heard and came
forth to his succor. I might here add the example of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who hanging upon the cross, and being under the same temptation for
other men's sins, which thou art under for thine own sins, used the same
words that David did, saying. My God, my God why have thou forsaken Mat. 27. 48
me? I entreat this afflicted sinnet, hearing the son of God complain that
he was forsaken of his father, to tell me his opinion; whether he thinks he
was forsaken eternally, or was forsaken only for a time? and whether after
this forsaking, God did not return unto him, and deliver him from all his
fear? If he should answer, that he thinks he was eternally forsaken, and
that God ^turned not to deliver him, and that he was never delivered from his
fear; it ^ere an absurd answer. For the history is plain and clear, that
though he were forsaken unto the death, and lest unto the will of his enemies,
and sealed up in his grave, yet as the Prophet, in his person, had spoken to
God before, saying; Thou will not leave my soul in the grave, Psa* 16. 10.
^ither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. So God dealt with him,
he was not left in the grave, he did not see corruption; for on the third
day, God raised him up again to life. Forty days after that he ascended up
into heaven, even with his body, and now in all fullness of glory and majesty,
he sits at the right hand of God. So that his folly would fully bewray it
self, if he should answer, that Jesus was eternally forsaken, and that God
returned not to deliver him from his fear. And if he answer (as truth will
compel him) that he was forsaken only for a time, and after inioyed again,
and still inioyeth the favor of his father: then it will follow by his own
confession, that all that are forsaken, are not eternally forsaken, and some
are only left for a time to be tried, exercised, and humbled, and after trial
taken of their faith, after patience perfected, and true humility wrought in
them, he that had forsaken them, does gather them again into his lap, he that
had left them to themselves, does again receive them into his charge. And why
then may not our sinner, that cries out thus, that he is forsaken of God,
suppose himself to be only forsaken for a time.

And if our sinner, complaining that He cannot say that he is eternally
forsaken: reasons to the contrary.
he is forsaken, thinks otherwise, as namely that God has forsaken him for
ever. I answer him, first, that he speaks foolishly, and out of ignorant
fear, that being a matter of Gods secret counsel, where of it is not possible
that he should have certain knowledge, that has not so much knowledge as he
should of Gods revealed will. Let him go first, and make himself better
acquainted with Gods revealed will, let him study to learn and know the
promises, the threatenings, the precepts and rules contained in Gods word. And
as for the secret counsel of the Lord, so much as concerns him to
understand, God ^ill in time by his work make known unto him. In the mean
time let him learn to keep silence, that has no certain knowledge of the
thing whereof he presumes to pronounce.

Secondly, I say unto him, that the Th^se whom God (...) saketh for ever, be
uses to give peace unto, that they may not ^ee and bate their sins.
^nner of his temptation argues and concludes (against his own saying) that
he is not forsaken for ever. For if God had purposed to forsake him for (...),
he would not have laid upon him this temptation, to make him thereby to see
his sin, and the danger that his sin brings him into: for the sight of
these things is a very ready way to repentance, for it makes a man to be
truly displeased with his sin, and it ^aketh him restlesly careful and
desirous to wind himself out of the danger, and it does awake him with a
witness out of his old security. But rather if the Lord had intended his
eternal re^ection, he would have rocked him asleep in his security with
continual prosperity, and much peace (after the manner of the world) that he
might have had no cause to fear sin: so long as the prodigal sons
prosperity lasted, he never thought of returning home to his fathers house.
That surely is the way to scale up sinners in their security, and to keep them
from all thought, or all desire, or at least, from all resolution with speed
for to leave sin: And so uses God to deal with them whom he forsakes for
ever: As Job observed, saying Job. 21. 7.
unto God; Wherefore do the wicked live, and wax old, and grow in wealth? their
seed is established in their sight with them, and their generation before their
eyes. Mark in the next words what follows, Their houses are peaceable,
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them. They are not troubled with
any temptation like thine. Their Bullock gendereth and fails not* their Cow
calueth and casts not her Calfe. They send forth their children like sheep,
and their sons dance. They take the Tabret and Harp and rejoice in the sound
of the Organs. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly go down to the
grave. Thus, for the most part, God deals with them whom he means to
forsake for ever. And this continual prosperity most kindly locketh up all the
powers of their soul in security as in a dead sleep, that they never intend
repentance, but are confirmed in their sin, and in the contempt of God. As
Job in the same place notes, in the very next words saying; They say also unto
Job. 21. 14.
God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways* who is the
almighty that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we
should pray unto him? Thus continual prosperity shutt^th up the heart in
security, and bring^th the wicked asleep in sin, whereas no temptation that
can come unto a man, does so kindly waken the heart, and open the eyes of a
sinner, to see his sin, to hate his sin, to forsake his sin, to turn to
God, and to seek pardon by repentance, as does this tentati^ of thine. Think
rather, that God is g^thering thee to himself, and lays this burden upon
thee, to stay thee from r^nning still from him, then that he has eternally
forsaken thee.

But against this fearful persuasion o^ final forsaking, the best of all
arguments is the gracious manner of the Lords merciful dealing with his people
(whom yet he deals withal no less sharply, then he has now dealt with
thee. The Prophet Esay^ sets down that manner of the Lords dealing, and
delivers it in the words of G^d himself, saying, For a litl^ Esa 54. 7.
while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: For
a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee says the Lord thy redemer.
This is Gods manner, these are his own words. Now let us compare thy words
with these words of God, and see how near thou come to his truth. I hou
say God has forsaken me for ^uer: and God says, for a little while have I
forsaken thee. Thou say God has hid his face for ever, and thou shall never
see again the light of his countenance: and God says, for a moment in mine
anger I hid my face from thee for a little season. Thou (...), God has cast
thee away for ever, and thou art fallen finally out of the lap of his love and
tender compassion: and God says, with great compassion will I gather thee, and
with everlasting mercy have I compassion on thee, being thy lord and redeemer.
How agree these sayings of God and of thine? Just, as yea and no, as light and
darkness. And yet thou would have thy words be taken for words of truth,
and would have no reply be made against them. Rather do thou take the words
that God has spoken for words of truth (as verily they are) and rest in them,
without making any reply against them, for so it becomes thee.

But thou use variety of speech in Thou art not lost without remedy.
thine objection, and thou say thou art lost, and thou art a child of
perdition. Well, be it so, is there therefore no remedy? if thou think so,
thou art deceived. We read in the Gospel, of a sheep that went astray, and
was lost. But the owner of it left the flock in the field, and went forth, and
sought for it, and found it, and brought it home with joy; and called his
neighbors and friends together, and said unto them, Rejoice with me, for
Luke. 15. 6.
I have found my sheep which was lost. In the same place I read of a woman,
that ^auing ten pieces of money, lost one, and then lighted a candle, and swept
the house, and searched all corners, and at last found it, and called in her
friends and neighbors, and said unto them. Rejoice Luke. 15. 9.
with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost. There also I read of a
young man, the second son of his father, that wandered long, wasted his
fathers goods, fell into misery, and by misery was compelled to return home:
whom his father espying a far off, ran unto him, and with much copassion and
joy entertained him, and made a feast for gladness, and gave this reason of his
gladness; This my Luke. ^5. 24
son was dead, and is alive again, and he was lost, but he is found. Thou
say thou art lost; I hear thee, and I say with thee, the sheep was lost,
the piece of money was lost, the son was lost. But what became of them when
they were lost? perished they? no: what then? they were found again: the
sheep was found, and safely put together with the rest in the fold: the piece
of money was found, and with the rest was safely laid up: and the son was
found, and kindly received again into his fathers house. And can thou not
see in them what is like to become of thee, that art lost as they were?
whatsoever is written of that sheep* and of that piece of money, and of that
son, is all written to teach thee, what thou may, and what thou oughtst to
pray for and to hope for, perceiving thy self to be lost. Thou art that lost
sheep, and Jesus Christ is the Shepherd and Lord of the flock that seeks
thee: thou art that lost piece of money, and the church, the spouse of Jesus
Christ, is that careful woman, that by the ministry of the Gospel, as with a
light in her hand, searches every corner for thee: thou art that lost child,
as thou (but with an evil mind) call thy self, and God in Christ, even God
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that most loving and kind father, that
is ready to intertaine thee, and if thou would but turn thy steps toward
him, he would meet thee: as it is said of that father, When he was yet a
Luke. 15. 20
great way of, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neeke, and kissed him. Be not then discomforted in thy lost estate, as if there
were no hope of recovering thee, and restoring thee.

The name of lost is used in two several senses. For sometime we say a thing
Things are said to be lost two mannaner of ways.
is lost, when he that had it in possession or keeping, knows not what is
become of it: the thing in the mean time, being perhaps very safe in some
unknown place, and it is only lost to him that had it in his keeping, and now
knows not where it is, and what is become of it, but it is not lost in it
self. As when some horse or other beast is straied out of thy ground, thou
know not where it is, and it is in some good pasture of thy neighbor very
safe, and not far from thee; and sometime we say a thing is lost, when it is
spoiled and perished, remaining still in the possession of him, that had it
before in keeping, and he knows both where it is, and what is become of it: as
where thy horse or other beast, being yet within thine own ground, were fallen
into some pit and drowned, or by some other mischance were killed: in both
these cases a man says, I have lost such a beast. The opposite to loosing, and
being lost, in the first sense, is to seek the thing that is stayed, and out
of the way, until thou find it, and recover the possession of it. And the
opposite of loosing, and being lost, in the second sense, is to save the thing
that was ready to be spoiled, and to perish. If a man come in time, and to use
all good means for preservation of it, and by those means to preserve it and
save it from perishing Now I would entreat this The sinner thinks himself
lost (...) these ways
afflicted sinner tell to me, in which sense he thinks himself to be lost. I
believe, that though he have not thought upon it before, yet he will answer
me, that he is lost, both in the first, and also in the second sense. First God
looks not after him, he takes no knowledge of him, as he does of those whom
he has any ca^e of, and so he is lost in the first signification of the word,
being out of the knowledge of him that was heretofore his keeper: for God uses
to say to such wicked men as he is depart, I know you not, workers of
iniquity. And secondly, God having brought his sin to remembrance, and for
those sins, having powered out a vial of wrath upon him in this his great
affliction, he is lost in the second signification of the word, as a thing
perished, for he feels himself ^are to destruction, appointed to
destruction, and already delivered into the hands of cruel executioners, by
the just sentence of God to be destroyed. Thus does he think himself every
way lost.

This were a heavy case if it were so, If ye were every way lost there i^
remedy.
But let it be granted to be so, yet there is hope of recovery for thy lost
soul; for there is one that will seek thee, and find thee wheresoever thou
art, and will bring thee home into the knowledge, possession and custody of
thy first keeper, so to recover thee from being lost in the first sense and
meaning of that word. And there is o^e that will save from destruction those
that are ready to perish, and thee among others; that will deliver from
damnation those that are already judged, and thee as well as others, and that
will pluck out of the jaws of death, out of the snares of Satan, and out from
the gates of hell, those that were ready to be swallowed up and devoured as a
pray, and thee as soon as others, so to recover thee from being lost in the
sense and meaning of the word. And this seeker is of that diligence and wisdom
that he cannot be disappointed of finding: and this savior is of that goodness
and power, that he will not, and cannot be let from saving whom he
intends to deliver* of whom the Apostle to the Hebrews says. He is able
perfectly Heb. 7. 25.
to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.

And who is this diligent seeker that Jesus Christ does seek and save them
that were lost.
can and will so certainly find? and who is this mighty Savior that can and
will so certainly preserve? it is the Lord Jesus Christ, the son of God, the
savior of mankind, of whom the Evangelist (yea himself, the Evangelist only
reporting his words) says; The son of Luke. 19. 10.
man is come to seek and save that which was lost. So that if any man be gone
astray, if any man be out of the knowledge and care of God his keeper, Jesus
came to seek him. And if any were worthy to perish, and already by sentence
given adjudged to perish (and such is the condition of all men) Jesus is come
to save him. And it is worthy observation, that he says, The son of man came
to seek, the son of man came to save: as making this seeking and saving of
them that were lost, to be the only end (as indeed it was) of his coming into
the world. For this cause was he conceived by the Holy Ghost, for this purpose
was he borne of the Virgin Mary, to this end, and for the effecting of this
salvation, was the son of God made the son of man; yea for this, and for
this only, did he fulfill all righteousness, and yielded obedience, even to the
death of the cross, that he might seek and find them that were gone astray,
and that he might recover and save them that were lost, so that he that shall
deny these things to be truly intended, and fully performed by Jesus Christ,
does make idle and fruitless the incarnation and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and denies the virtue of the death and bloudsheding of the son of
God. Let our afflicted sinner consider these things, and set his heart on work
to meditate upon them, and it will come to pass, that whereas before, the
remembrance of his lost estate was cause of heaviness unto him, the same very
condition shall give him comfort and hope, and save him as an argument to prove
him to be one of those, for whom Jesus Christ died to save them. For if it be
true, that the lord Jesus came to seek, and to save them that were lost, and
be also true that ^e is lost; then it must also be true, that Jesus Chist came
to seek and to save him. The Lord Jesus said to the woman of C^naan, I am not
sent but unto the lost Mat. 15. 24.
^eepe of the house of Israel, Unto those lost sheep he was sent and to none
other. So that if our afflicted sinner see himself to be a lost sheep, there
is hope that the Lord Jesus was ^ent for yea, it is most sure, that he was sent
for him, sent to seek him, sent to save him: whereas if he had a proud opinion
of himself, as had the Pharisees, that he were not as other men (for so gloried
he, saying, O God thank thee* that I am not as other Luke. 18. 11
men) or if he nourished a careless opinion of himself as do the contemners of
the world, that he were in no danger (for so do they flatter themselves,
saving, We are delivered, though we have done all Iere. 7. 10.
these abominations.) Then Jesus indeed should not profit him, for he came for
none such. He says of himself, I am not come to call the righteous, but the
sinners to repentance. In this very name therefore that he is a lost sinner, a
sinner worthy to perish, he may comfort himself in Jesus Christ, and hope to
be saved by him, that came to seek and save that which was lost.

Let me in a few words briefly and The estate of a Christian, how it is in
himself.
plainly, open to this sinner his estate, what it is in himself, and what it
is in Jesus Christ, that as in himself he sees cause of grief and fear, so
in Jesus Christ he may see cause of hope and reioicing if he look into
himself, and consider what he is by birth, what he is by kind, and what he
has manifested and declared himself to be by his life and conversation,
surely he is and shall find himself to be a lost creature, and a child of
wrath, for he shall find nothing in himself, but sin deserving eternal
dest^uction: he shall find that he was conceived in sin, that he was borne
in iniquity, and that he lived in sin, not only in the days of his first
ignorance, while sin reigned without resistance in his mortal body, but also
in the days of knowledge, sin yet remaining, and misleading him into many
errors: and it ^ thus, not only in him, but even in all ^en, and among all
others, even in the elect of God, in Gods own peculiar people, even they, at
home, and in themselves are lost creatures, dead in sins, and by sins
deserving eternal death. The Angel appearing to Joseph, said unto him of the
child conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary, She shall Mat. 1. ^.
^ing forth a son, and thou shall call his ^me Jesus* for he shall save his
people from their sins. Those whom his father gave unto him, therefore called
his people, them he saves, and he saves them from their sins. By which
speech it is plainly intimated, that even they, considered in themselves, are
lost by their sins. And so is our afflicted sinner; considered in himself,
with respect to his kind, to his birth, and to his life, he is lost, he is a
child of perdition, and therein he has cause to be humbled, and to fear the
justice of God.

But let not the sinner gaze so long upon this his natural estate, that his
dazzled eyes should after be, unable to look any higher, such a view of this our
natural condition, as may serve to beat down the pride of flesh and blood,
and to bring us unto true humility, and to the denial of our selves before
God, is sufficient. Let him therefore after consider him self in another, and
view his condition and estate in Jesus Christ, by virtue And how it is
considered in Christ, by virtue of his holy calling.
of his holy calling, and of his second birth (namely his regeneration) and he
shall find himself another man. He shall find, that God has drawn him out of
the loins and womb of believing parents, that inherited the covenant to the
benefit of themselves, and of their seed after them in their generations for
ever. That God admitted him from his very birth into the fellowship of the
Saints, and marked, yea sealed him for his own by the water of Baptism
sprinkled upon him in the name of the holy Trinity, as one adopted by God the
father, redeemed by God the son, and from that time sealed up unto the day of
full redemption by God the Holy Ghost. He shall find that God has brought him
up in the bosom of his Church, the Schole of eternal life, and in this Schole
has taught him, to know God and himself, God his creator, himself the work
of Gods hands, God his savior in Christ, and himself one of his saved people.
He shall find that God has put upon him the name of his holy Son, and from
the glorious title of the Messiah, which is by interpretation, the Christ, has
graced him with the title of a Christian, as a member and follower of that
Christ. Yea ^e shall find God out of his free love ^ath given unto him his
only begotten son, that the obedience of Jesus Christ might be this sinners
righteousness, that the sufferings of Jesus Christ might be this sinners
ransom, and that the conquest won by Jesus Christ might be unto this sinner
a rich inheritance: that so Jesus Christ might be unto this sinner wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: and that the sinner in Jesus
Christ might be wise unto salvation, righteous by imputation, sanctified by
regeneration, and fully redeemed to inherit salvation. He shall find himself
to be now no more a stranger and forenner, but a citizen with the Saints, and
of the household of God. He shall find forgiveness of sins, peace with God and
hope of everlasting salvation. This is the condition of every servant of God in
Jesus Christ. And herein he has cause to look up, and to lift up his head
with comfort and joy. He that in himself is a lost sinner, is in Jesus Christ
a saved Saint.

But thou say also that thou art a reprobate, Thou can not affirm thy
self to be a reprobate, seeing it depends upon the unknown counsel of God.
and a viler sinner then many reprobates. This latter speech, namely, that thou
art a viler sinner then many reprobates, may be pronounced, believed, and
granted. But the first speech, namely, that thou art a reprobate, is neither
to be pronounced by thee, nor granted by me, nor believed by any. The name of
a reprobate is to be understood with reference, not unto our natural
corruption, which makes us all children of wrath and worthy of reprobation, but
rather unto the eternal and secret counsel* unto the just and holy purpose
of God. And therefore the name signifies not every man that is a most vile
sinner, but him that is ordained by God from everlasting, to perish justly in
and for his sin, that God by declaring in him his power and his justice, may
be glorified in the work of his own hands, as of right belongs ^o him. This
description of a reprobate (...) to be proved out of the words of ^* Paul,
saying, What and if God would, to Romans 9. 22.
(...) his wrath, and to make his power ^ne, suffer with long patience the
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. The ^en (for their reprobation) are
called vessels of* wrath: their reprobation is showed, when it is said of them,
that they are prepared to destruction: the end of their reprobation is
signified to be the glory of God in the declaration of his justice and power:
when he is said to suffer them with long patience, that when their ripe
wickedness calls for vengance, he might show in them his wrath and power;
where by Gods wrath, we are not to understand any disturbed or disturbing
passion, as that which we call wrath in man, but the holy and se^ere execution
of his justice upon sinners, without respect of persons, to declare his
dislike of the sin that he does punish. This is it that the Scripture calls
his wrath, even his holy, even, and most upright and impartial justice: and
for the manifestation of this his Justice and power, that for it he may be
honored among his creatures, he does endure these reprobates (sometime long in
their sins) and in the end, does destroy them, as he had from everlasting
determined. And that it does of right belong unto God, and that he may glorify
his own name by manifestation of his justice and power, and may appoint
aforeha^d so to do, the whole question in those words of the Apostle above
alleged, and the whole discourse of the Apostle in that place do plainly
prove it. For as the Potter has power of his clay, out of the same lump, to
take one piece to make a vessel for honorable service, and another piece to
make a vessel* for baser service, the service of both being necessary. So God
that is the Potter and fashioner of mankind, has full power ou^ of the same
lump of humane flesh (made in the creation of Adam, and multiplied by the gift
and power of procreation) to take one piece, and thereof to make a vessel of
me^cie prepared unto glory, and to take an other piece, and thereof to make a
vessel of wrath prepared to destruction, both these services of the glory of
the one, and the destruction of the other, being necessary and furthering to
one holy end, which is the honor of God, in and among his creatures. Thus you
hear what it is to be a reprobate, the name not having reference to our
original sinfulnes, which makes us all by nature children of wrath; but to
the purpose of almighty God, seeking justly his own honor and glory, by and
in his own creature. How then can this afflicted sinner pronounce himself a
reprobate, seeing the truth of that name ^ightly understood, depends not upon
the known sin of man, but upon the unknown and secret purpose of God? Sure
that speech is a presuming speech, wherewith he greatly wrongeth himself, and
which in humility and reverence to God he must revoke.

If the sinner for maintenance of that The sinner secketh to prove by orgument
that he is (...) reprobate*
first bold and desperate speech, shall further add and say: I see in my self
all ^gnes of reprobation, and therefore not presumptuously, but iudiciously,
that ^s, from ground of reason I pronounce my self to be a reprobate. For
first, I (...) a slau^o sin, I am wholly subject to the dominion of it, it
reigns in my mortal body. And I find no resisting grace against it in my
immortal soul. Secondly, the wrath of God lies heavy upon me, I am already
under execution, the worm that never dies begins already to live and sting
most horribly in my conscience. And what makes or manifests a reprobate, but
these two; his own sin deserving destruction, and Gods wrath working
destruction. And to manifest me to be a reprobate, I have prowdly committed
sin against God, and he has justly powered out wrath upon me. I have reason
therefore to pronounce my self a reprobate.

This bold and desperate reason, to His argument answered and taken away.
maintain his former bold and desperate assertion, plainly be wrayes the
nature of this temptation and burden of accusing thoughts and terror of
conscience: it cease not to accuse, and to enforce those accusations that it
prefers, it wresteth all things for evidence to increase fear. The things that
he has now last spoken, may be granted him to be true, that sin has hitherto
raigno^ too powerfully in him, and that he has sinned against God most
grievously, and that the wrath of God is fallen upon him for that sin. But
the collection that ^ee makes and infers hereupon, as that therefore he is
a reprobate, these being signs and evidences of reprobation, that must not be
granted unto him. His argument as weak and of no good consequence must be
denied.

For first, sin even powerfully reig^ing Sin though deserving, yet no argumet
of reprobation.
is no sign of reprobation, though every child of man that is a reprobate, and
that is appointed to destruction, does afterward by his sin deserve his
reprobation and destruction, yet every man whose sin deserves reprobation
and destruction is not a reprobate and appointed to destruction. When thou
^eest a man to wallow in sin, thou may be bold to pronounce him a wicked
man, and of a wicked heart, for his wicked sin wherein he lives with delight
proves so much. But thou may not therefore pronounce him a reprobate, for
God may give him repentance, and upon repentance forgive his sin. And what
God will do to him thou can not tell; and thou have more cause to hope of
Gods mercy, then pronounce of his justice so long as this sinner lives in the
Church, and under the ministry of the Gospel, where God does allow the means
of repentance, and makes daily offer of forgiveness of sins. God calls
some in their youth, and some in their age, as the householder hired laborers to
work in his vineyard, some in the morning and beginning of the day, some at
the eleventh hour, when the Sun was ready to set.

Therefore, whereas before in his objection The sins of the elect may be
more vile, then the sins of the reprobate in our eyes.
he had said, that he was a viler sinner then many reprobates; that was
granted to be true, and he may be so, and yet no reprobate. For oft-times the
elect of God do sin more grievously (to the judgment of man) then
thereprobate do, and after obtain repentance, which the reprobate do not. To
this end let us compare together the sins of an elect child, and of a
reprobate, as the Scripture gives testimony of them. Saul was a reprobate, his
end proved him so to be. David was one of Gods elect, for the holy Ghost
testifies, David's sin and Saul's compared together.
that he was a man after the heart of God. Look into the sins of their
lives, and it will appear unto our eyes, that David's sins were more vile
then Saul's. Saul was commanded to stay the Amalechites, and to destroy them
utterly, both man and beast: in the execution of this judgment of God,
contrary to the commandment given him, he saved alive Ag^g the King of the
Amalechites, and the best of their kine and sheep, and brought them home as a
pray into the land of Israel. For the extenuating Much may be said to ex^us
Saul, that will seem reasonable.
of this disobedience, how many excuses (reasonable in our eyes) might be
alleged. First for the sparing of Agags life, it may be pleaded; Agag was a
man, and it was humanity to save a man's life, and being an enemy, it was noble
mercy to save an enemy, the cowardly and ti^erous heart never do so: and being
a King it was royal mercy to save him, if he did it in reverence to royal
Majesty. If he did out of politic respect, either to teach his own subjects
ever to reverence the person of a King, or to enrich himself and his kingdom
with the ransom of a King, it was a point of commendable wisdom. Then for the
sparing of the fat cattle it might be said, would you have had him make war
with flocks of sheep, and herds of kine? That had been rather to play the
part of a mad man, then of a noble warrior. And if they must be slain, was it
not better to kill them, some to day, and some to morrow, so as they might be
meat for the people of God, then to kill them at once, and so to leave their
carkases to rot and stink above the ground, and to be meat for dogs, and for
the fowls of Heaven? And was there not many a poor man in Israel that was not
worth a Cow, and many a poor Widow in Israel that was not worth a sheep,
that might be enriched, at least relieved with this pray? Further, was it not
meet that God, who had given them a notable victory against their enemies,
should be remembered with sacrifices of praise? And this pray would plentifully
serve for that holy service, so that the Altars of God might smoke with burnt
offerings, and yet the people of Israel not be impouerished, or in any measure
burdened with the charge. These and such other excuses in the judgment of man
reasonable, though against an express commandment of God nothing worth might
be alleged to extenuate the ^ault of Saul.

Let us now hear the recorded sin David's sin declared.
of David, and consider if any such reasonable excuse may be made to extenuate
it, and whether his or Saul's will appear unto us to be the viler sin. David
rose up from his bed of sloth, whereon he had slept in the heat of the day, and
walking on the roof of his Palace, from thence he saw a fair woman washing
hirselfe in a Garden. Lust that commonly accompanies sloth, seized upon his
heart, and he began to desire that woman's company. And inquiring of her, he
learned that she was the wife of Vri^, a valiant servant of his, that was now
abroad in battle in the service of David Exo. 20. 17
against the Ammonites. To her he sends the messengers of his lust: she
comes unto him: and notwithstanding Gods commandment, whereof David was not
ignorant, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, he did covet her. And
notwithstanding the commandment, which also he well knew, Thou shall not Exo.
20. 14
commit adultery; he committed adultery, and did lie with her. She conceived
by him in her husbands absence, she sends him word of it. Now David fearing
the public reproach among men that might light upon him for this soul fact,
studieth how to cover it, and sends to the Camp for Vriah: entertaineth him
kindly all the day, and sends him away at night, hoping that he would go
home to his own house, and lie with his wife, and so cover the fault that
David had made. But Vriah having taken leave of the King, went not home, but
like a soldier takes up his lodging among the Kings Guard, and visits not his
wife. The King hearing this in the morning, stays him also that day, and makes
him drunk at supper, hoping that being heated with wine, he would desire to
go home to his wife, but he again takes up his lodging where he did the
night before. Then David seeing that this device would not help him, resolved
upon a more wicked and cruel course, and sends Vriah to the Camp, and writes
by him to Ioab, the General, that he should place Uriah in the forefront of
the battle, and in the time of danger should withdraw all help from him, and
leave him alone in the midst of the enemies, that he might be smitten and die
by their hands. And this commandment was by Ioab fulfilled at the next assault
made upon the City Rabbah, and Vriah was there slain. Then was his wife a
widow, and free from all men; and David takes her home to him, and she became
his wife. And thus he covered the shame of his first sin, with a second, as
bad, if not much worse. And No excuse can be made to extenuate the sin of David.
what honest man, that knows how he ought to keep his vessel in holiness
and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles do which
know not God, can frame any reasonable excuse for his adultery? And what sober
man, that has learned to walk honestly as in the day time, not in surfeting
and drunkenness, can excuse his fact in making Uriah drunk? and what
charitable man, that tendereth the life of his neighbor, and knows Gods
ordinance, that he that sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed, can
by any good words extenuate the sin of his rraiterous murder? It may be that
wantons, that riotous persons, and bloudy-minded-mercilesse men will say, it
was bravely done; but no man of continency, of temperancy and of charity can
excuse him. Surely the sin of Saul and David compared together* it appears
to us that David sinned more vilely then Saul, in the act of their
disobedience, howsoever for the heart yielding to sin, much may be said for
David, that cannot be said for Saul. Which difference of their hearts appeared
presently, when they were put in mind of their disobedience by the Prophets
Samuel and Nathan. For when Saul was challenged by these words of Samuel,
Wherefore have 1. Sam. 15. 19.
thou not obe^ed the voice of the Lord, but have turned to the pray, and have
done wickedly in the sight of the Lord? He denied the fact, maintained his
denial with argument, and lastly being enforced to confess himself a
transgressour, yet he did it faintly and never repented. But as soon as Nathan
had said unto David, 2. Sam. 12. 9.
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord: to do evil in his
sight? thou have killed Variah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his
wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the sword of the children of
Ammon. He confessed it freely, grew into displeasure with himself for it, and
heartily repented, making his humble prayer unto God for forgiveness, and
thereupon penned the one and fiftieth Psalm in testimony of his repentance;
his heart was not so wicked as was the heart of Saul: but in the outward face
his sin to the eyes of the world was more vile then the sin of Saul. Shall
David was not therefore a reprobate because he sinned more vilely then a
reprobate.
David therefore say, I am a reprobate, for I have sinned more vilely then Saul
that was a reprobate? this were first to step too presumptuously into to the
throne of Gods judgment. Secondly it were to be unthankful unto God, for that
faithful and most constant love of his, that even with such sins was not
extingushed. Thirdly it were to be unkind and injurious to his own soul,
denying unto himself the hope and comfort that he might and ought to seek in
the infinite mercy of God: therefore though our afflicted sinner have sinned
more vilely then many reprobates, it follows not that he himself must
therefore be a reprobate: and though they that be reprobates, do by their
sins after committed, deserve the damnation, whereunto by the decree of
reprobation they are appointed, yet he and others committing sins worthy of
condemnation, are not therefore to be judged reprobates: and his sin though
grievous, (as he affirms it truly to be) is no sign nor evidence of
reprobation.

Secondly he alleges the wrath of Gods wrath upon me for sin is no
evidence of reprobation
God, now heavy upon him for his sin, to be another evidence of his
reprobation: which likewise must not be granted. For if this should be a true
rule, that wheresoever Gods just wrath falls upon men for their sins, they
upon whom this wrath falls should be reprobates, then would these great
absurdities follow. First that all that suffer with Christ in this world should
be reprobates. For there is no calamity that falls upon men, in bearing
whereof they become sufferers, but it falls upon them for their sins. And
the calamity so falling is a stroke of Gods wrath. For the first thing, that
the calamities that make us sufferers, fall upon us for our sins, the words
of Jeremy are plain, saying, Wherefore Lam. 3. 39.
is the living man sorrowful man suffers for his sin: we suffer no
calamity, but our sins (deserving more) has brought that upon us. And for
the second thing, that the same calamity coming upon us for our sins, is a
stroke of the wrath of God, that is, of his holiness abhorring sin, and of his
justice correcting for sin, appears by the words of the Prophet Micha, speaking
thus of God, He Mica. 7. 1^.
retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him: he will turn
again, and have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast
all their sins into the bottom of the sea. That is, for a while he punishes
in wrath the sins of his people, and after some short affliction endured, he
forgiueth their sins, and receives them again into favor. In that saying
of the Prophet, the work of God in laying calamity upon his servants for
their sins* is called his wrath. So that all the evils that fall upon men,
which suffer with Christ in this world, come upon them for their sins, and
are the stroke of Gods wrath against sin, (not to destroy, but to correct)
therefore if it were a true rule, which our afflicted sinner speaks, that
where Gods wrath falls upon men for their sins, that wrath should be an
evidence, of the reprobation of the person upon which it is fallen, then those
men which suffer with Christ in this world, should be reprobates: which is
most absurd and untrue, for that suffering is rather an evidence of their
election unto salvation, because it is written, It is a true saying, 2. Tim. 2.
11
for if we be dead with Christ, we shall live with him: if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him. But no reprobate shall reign with Christ, that is
the blessed preferme^t of them only that are the elect of God.

Secondly, if all that bear the wrath of God for sin were reprobates, and
that wrath an evidence of their reprobation, then this absurdity would follow,
that God should never be displeased with his elect whatsoever they do, and
should never lay any judgment upon them, that might be interpreted to be an
evidence of his wrath, and just displeasure against their sins. Whereas the
contrary is most true, and God often lets his wrath fall heavily upon his elect
for their sins. To that end hear the words of Gods Church, speaking to the
malignant company of her enemies, that Micah. 7. 7.
rejoice at her trouble, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for God my
Savior, my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I
fall, I shall arise; when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be alight unto
me; I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me: then will he bring me
forth unto the light, and I shall see his righteousness. The Church confesses
that she bare the wrath of God, she confesses that that wrath fell upon her
for her sins, and therefore promises to bear it patiently, because she bare
it justly, and she takes not that wrath of God for any evidence of reprobation,
neither cease to esteem her self the chosen of the Lord, that shall inherit
his favor. And therefore she exercises her faith in looking up unto the Lord,
and out of faith promises her self all gracious respect with God in her
prayers, and shows her self rich in hope, that God himself will in due time
plead her cause, and bring her out of the darkness of her trouble into the light
of joy, and so magnify his love and favor to her, that her adversary the
malignant congregation shall be ashamed. Therefore certainly God does often let
his wrath fall upon the elect for their sins, and the manifest strokes of
Gods wrath cannot be said to be infallible evidences and signs of
reprobation, as our afflicted sinner affirms to his own great hurt. And if
hapily upon hearing of these things thus spoken, his diseased mind should begin
to cavil and to say, that if other judgments and strokes of Gods wrath be not
evidences of reprobation, yet that judgment and stroke of wrath that is fallen
upon him is a plain evidence of reprobation, his judgment being accusing
thoughts and a wounded conseience, the most heavy of all Gods judgments,
whereof Solomon says, A Pro. 18. 14.
wounded spirit, who can bear it? For that stroke is the beginning of
intolerable punishment, it is the very gate of h^ll, i^ is that worm that
shall live ever in the bosom of the damned, it is even no other then hell upon
earth. And why should God set a man's sins against him in so terrible a manner
as he does in this temptation, but because his meaning is to condemn us for
our sins, and aforehand to let us see that he shall do it most justly, our
sins being so many and solothsome? against this cavil, and for The
particular stroke of a wounded conscience is no sign of reprobation.
the removing of this offense from his heart, I will add this unto that that
has been already spoken, that God does lay even this particular stroke of his
wrath, namely a wounded conscience in the sight of sins, upon his elect, and
therefore that wrath is no evidence of reprobation. The prophet David bore this
stroke of Gods wrath, whereof he speaks thus, Thine arrows have light upon
Psalm. 38. 2.
(...), and thine handlyeth upon me: there is nothing sound in my flesh because
of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones by reason of my sins: for
mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too
heavy for me. Here was a stroke of the wrath of God, fot he complains, that
Gods hand was heavy upon him, and that Gods arrows had pierced him, and it
was not a weak stroke, or slight touch, but forcible and fearful, so that it
made the whole man languish, and for the anguish of his soul his body also was
consumed, and oppressed with pain and feeblenes, so that neither in his flesh
nor in his bones remained any soundnes. And what stroke of Gods wrath was it?
but even this particular stroke of accusing thoughts, and of a wounded
conscience by reason of sins that were so heavy a burdthen, that the
vexation of them was his consumption? and was David upon whom this stroke of
wrath fell, was he a reprobate? if he were, he was such a reprobate as the
Lord Jesus Christ was (and no other, nor otherwise) whom the builders refused
and cast aside as unfit for the building* but God made him the chief corner
stone, as Peter says, This is the stone Acts. 4 11.
cast aside of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. So in the
kingdom of Israel, Saul, Doeg, and other busy doers, despised and cast aside
the son os Ishai, but God did choose him to build the kingdom of Israel. This
therefore is most certain, that even this stroke of Gods wrath, when he
sets our sins in order against us, is no more a sign of reprobation, then
any other stroke of Gods wrath whatsoever. This part therefore of his
objection, when he calls himself a reprobate, is a bold and desperate
speech, wherein he shows himself presumptuous against GOD, and uncharitable
against himself, and whether he be a reprobate or not, he ought not to
pronounce himself to be one, the name of reprobation having reference unto the
unknown and secret counsel of God, not unto the known and manifest sin of
man. And though our sins deserve reprobation, and Gods wrath falls upon
them that are reprobate, yet neither the sin that we are guilty of, nor the
wrath that is fallen upon us for that sin (though it be this particular
stroke of a wounded conscience) can be said to be arguments of reprobation. Our
answers are such as will stand before Gods judgment seat.


And whereas he says that we devise answers to his objections, that carry show
of strength among men, but those his obictions are unanswerable before God, and
our devised answers before him will be of no virtue. Let him know that the
answers which we have made to his objections, are all grounded upon the word
of God, by which word he shall judge all men, and all the causes of all men.
As the Lord Jesus says, The John. 12. 48
word that I have spoken, it shall judge in the last day. And therefore our
answers being grounded upon that word, shall stand as rules of truth before
the judgment seat of God, when all the objections that he has made, growing
only from fear, and from a weak heart, distempered with a temptation of
unbelief, shall be found to be of no force. And with this assurance of the
sufficiency of our answers, we wait to hear what he can further object, why
he may not hope for the forgiveness of pardonable sins, seeing Jesus Christ by
his commandment has given him leave to ask forgiveness of sins, and God the
father of our Lord Jesus has promised to grant forgiveness of sins, as has
before out of the word of God been truly declared.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Fresh assault this afflicted An eleventh objection. His sin deserves
death, he must die, and must do the execution upon. himself.
sinner makes upon us, and against himself (for this fiery dart is not
easily quenched.) And again, he obiecteth most unkindly, saying, My sin
deserves death, and I must die: I have wronged the Lord of life, I have
provoked him to anger, and by his just sentence I must not live. Also I have
spent the days of my life on earth so wickedly, that I must live no longer:
There the earth is ouer-loaden with my transgressions, and refuses to bear
the burden of them. And as for the life of heaven, it were folly and madness in
me, yea it were shameless presumption in me, to hope for any fruition of i^. I
know no other place of life but these two; earth where life is mortal, and
heaven where life is immortal: and heaven will not admit me to live there, and
the earth has endured my life too long. Therefore I must die. This is the
sentence of God. The Prophet Ezekiel says, The soul that sins it shall
die. And the Ezeki 18. 4 Romans 6. 23
Apostle Saint Paul says, The wages of sin is death. Who can control this
judgment of God? who shall open his mouth against it? I do my self approve
it. And therefore I am become my self an enemy to mine own life, yea heaven
does abhor it, the earth does loath it, it must not continue, to the offense
of God and his Angels, to the grief of the Church and all true members of it.
And therefore I that heitherto have had no care to serve and glorify God wi^h
the continuance of my life, will yet at the least and at the last serve and
glorify God with the end of my life, intending to be the executioner of Gods
holy sentence upon my self. So shall I cease to sin any longer against God.
As the dead cannot praise him, so the dead can not blaspheme him, and as they
have no place to do well, so I think they have no place to do evil; and by
such course I shall deliver my self from this violent temptation, I shall
obtain an end of my fear. Does not Job say of death and of the grave, The
prisoners rest together, Job. 3. 18.
and hear not the voice of the oppressor, there are small and great, and the
servant is free from his master. There shall Ire^ having put off this heavy
burden. What greater oppressor can there be, then an accusing and condemning
conscience? And there he says I shall not hear the voice of the oppressor (O
place to be desired, O sweet grave I long to be laid up in thee) and am I not
a servant and a slave to sin? is it not now a most cruel and tyrannous
master to me? and there I shall be freed from his tormenting power. This being
so just in regard of God, so full of advantage and ease unto my self, it must
be done, it shall be done, and I must do^ it, yea I will do it; dissuade me
not from so just and so gainefull a course, wherein I am resolved.

O malice of Satan! this is thy voice, An appostro phe to Satan.
this is thy counsel in all the former objections wherein thou have been a
medler, thou have showed thy self; but in this thou exceedest thy self. He
that knew thee not before, by this objection may know thee to be as saint Peter
calls thee, A roaring lion, that walks about 1. Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom he may devour. Hereby thou may be known to be as S. John
calls thee, the great dungeon, that old Reave. 12. 9.
serpent called the devil and Satan, which deceives all the world. In this
temptation thou seek to devour, but the prey shall be plucked out of thy
jaws; in this thou think to deceive, but thy dangerous falsehood shall be
discovered and avoided. The victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah the root of
David shall rescue and deliver his seely sheep. The Serpent that was lifted up
upon the cross shall b^uise thine head, and heal the wound that thou like a
fiery serpent have made. The Lord rebuke thee Satan. The Lord tread thee down
under the feet of this afflicted sinner, and that shortly.

But thou, O sorrowful sinner, hearken Answer to this objection.
to the council of God; let not the serpent that deceived our first parents,
deceive thee: stop thine ear against his lying words, and be ready to hear
what shall be taught thee in the name of God. God says by the Prophet, Hear
Esaias. 55. 3.
and your soul shall live. Hear, that thy soul may live. Thou art urged to
desire deser ued death, thou art urged, and yeldest with thine own hands to
hasten, his death. Thy resolution to hasten it seems to be grounded upon
these reasons. First thou have wronged and provoked to anger the Lord of life,
and therefore deseruest in his justice to die. Secondly, thou have burdened the
earth (the place of mortal life) with thy sins, and art not worthy to live
any longer upon the face thereof, and then to think that thou may live in
heaven (the place of immortal life) thou hold to be shamlesse presumption.
Thirdly, thou hold thy life to be loathsome (it is so to thy self) because
it is offensive to God and to his Angels, to the church and members thereof.
Fourthly, because thou have not served and glorified God by the continuance of
thy life, thou will serve and glorify him by hastening the end of it. Fistly,
thou have multiplied sin all the days of thy life, and thou think that
thou shall cease to sin if once thou be dead. Lastly, whereas thy life is full
of fear sorrow and bitterness, thou think by death to be freede at once
from all. These are the reasons upon which thou groundest thy resolution to
hasten thy death with thine own hands, they may prevail as reasons with them
whom God has left in the power of him, whom the Lord Jesus calls, a John 8.
44.
murderer from the beginning. But whosoever remains in the protection of the
Lord and giver of life, to him these allegations carry not the estimation of
persuading reasons: o^ if they bear any such estimation with them, yet God will
n^uer suffer them so to prevail that they shall take effect, but he will
prevent their execution as ^e did with the affrited Jailer of Philippi^ whom,
being ready to fall vp^ his sword, when he perceived the effects of the
earthquake, and feared that his prisoners were ^led, the merciful GOD
preserved him by the voice of Paul.

My heart trembles to think of this objection, and it breaks out beyond the
bounds of my conceit, that thought the precedent objection to have been the
height of Satan's malice, and of this poor afflicted sinners danger. But this
exceeds all height: here is extremity of malice in the tempter, here is
extremity of danger in the tempted. If the Devil prevail in this temptation,
he xedeth not to use any other. And if the ^ner give place to this temptation,
it is nothing worth to (...) and over come ^lother. In answering this
temptation, ^il first examine the point that he says ^is resolved upon, and
then the rea^ons upon which he groundeth his resolution.

The thing that he is resolved upon, is The iniquity of the thing that he
intends to do.
^o cut the thread of his own life, in plain ^ords, he intends to kill
himself. In the whole history of the Bible that con^neth the records belonging
to the Church of God, and to the people that ^tend to have any knowledge of
God, ho^ many has he heard (...) that did so? and what were they? in the first
age of It is rare as being the height of al wickedness
the world that lasted from the creation to the sloud, sixteen hundred fifty
and (...) years, we read of much wickedness, ^ow Kain unnaturally killed his
brother Habel, how Lamech transgressed Gods ordinance for marriage, and gloried
in ^is own cruelty saying to his wives in his wicked pride, I would stay a man
in Gen 4. 23.
(...) wound, and a young man in mine heart. We read of the carnal
licenciousnesse of the men of the best line. How the sons Genesis 6. 2.
of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they looks them
wives of all that they liked. Yea of the whole race of mankind we read that
the earth was corrupt before God, for the earth was filled Genesis 6. 11.
with cruelty, then God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And their wickedness was so
vile in the sight of God, that he repented to hane made man upon the earth,
and he brought a flood upon the earth, where with he destroyed every creature,
in whose nostrels was the breath of life. And in all this time it is not read
that any grew unto this height of wickedness, to incroch so far upon the right
of God, and to be so unnaturally sinful as to kill him self. In so many
years the Devil that was a murderer from the beginning could not prevail so
far among the most wicked, as to persuade any to lay violent hands upon
himself. This wickedness was then unknown from the flood to the nativity of
our Lord Jesus Christ, for the space of two thousand three hundred and eleven
years, we read of horrible wickedness, of war among nati^s, of the tyranny
of Nimrod, of ^e building of Babel, of the vnclea^esse of the Sodomites, of the
slaughter of the Sichemites, of the tyranny of Pha^, of the sin of the
Cananites, of the ^bellion of Korah, of the covetousness (...) Balaam, of the
sornication of Zimri, (...) infinite ungodliness in every age of (...), in
every generation; but of this ^ind of unnaturalness, for men to lay ^iolent
hands upon themselves, we have (...) few examples. Saul fell upon his 1. Sam.
31. 4.
own sword and killed himself, because ^e would not come alive into the hands
of the Philistims that prevailed against ^im in battle, and his Armor-bearer
^couraged by his Lords example did ^e like unto himself. And not many ^eares
after, Ahitophel the great coun^ller 2 Samuel 17. 23.
that followed Absalom, upon discontent left Absalom, went home to his ^ne
house, and hanged himself. We ^ad of a fourth whose name was Zimri, 1. King.
16. * 18.
^at being besieged in Tirzah, and not able to defend himself and the place,
^ent into the Kings Palace, and setting the house on fire, burned himself, and
these are all that the Scripture records guilty of this impiety, for we are
not to number Sampson among them, whose Iud. 16. 30.
purpose was not to kill himself, but to execute the judgment of God upon the
Philistines, which was a work of his calling, in the faithful and zealous
performance whereof he lost his life. And I wittingly pass over the history
of Razis* 2. Match. 14. 41.
that fell on his sword and slew himself* that he might not come alive into
the hands of them* whom (...) sent ^
to take him, leaving the credit of that History to the authority of the
writer. Whom yet if we add to the former, the number is not much increased by
him. So few they were in so many years, with whom the ancient murderer could
(...) to make them enemies of their own (...). And if we consider what manner
persons they were with whom he did so far prevail, their wickedness will se^e
to warn any man that has any dram* either of piety or wisdom, or care of his
own credit, not to put himself into the company and rank of them. Saul was a
man envious, traitorous, perfidious, cruel and profane. His envy appeared in
this, that he hated David because the Lord prospered him, and because the
people lio^oured him, for that and for no other cause did he seek to take
away his life. His traitorous mind appeared in this, that under pretenses of
love, and sh^wes of the greatest favor he sought to kill David, giving his
daughter Michol to David to be his wife, that she might be the train to
destroy him. How persidious and false of faith he was, appeared in this, that
often giving his promse to David to do him no harm, and giving it into him
advisedly, upon sight* and proof of David's innocence and faith to him, he yet
ever brake it, and upon every the least opportunity, went out against him with
his Army to take him. His cruelty appears in this (besides other 1. Sam. 22.
9. etc.
proofs thereof) that upon the report of Doeg, telling him that Ahimelech the
Priest had asked counsel of the Lord for David, and had given him victuals, and
the sword of Goliath, he sent for Ahimelech, and all the Priests of his fathers
house, even fowre-score and five 1. Samuel. 2^. 19.
men, and caused them all to be slain, and destroyed also Nob, the City of the
Priests where Ahimelech dwelt, ^miting with the edge of the sword, both man and
woman, both child and suckling, both Ox and Ass, and sheep with the edge of
the sword, in most barbarous and inhumane cruelty. How profane he was without
due fear and reverence of God, the former act done upon the Priests of the
Lord without regard of the service whereunto they were separated to minister at
the Altar of the Lord, does plainly show. And his preventing the time appointed
of God in offering his Sacrifice, when the people were scattered from him, and
Samuel was not come unto him. But chiefly his profaneness appeared in
consulting with the Witch at Endor. As it is written of him, Saul 1. Sam. 28. 7.
said unto his servants, seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit, that I
may go to her, and ask of her: and his servants said to him, behold, there is
a woman at Endor that has a familiar spirit, then Saul changed himself, and
put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the
woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, conjure unto (...) by the familiar
spirit, and bring me him up whom I shall name unto thee. This is an ^sallible
argument of a most profane heart* in times of trouble and danger to (...) help
of the Devil, to place hope in him, to regard his word and answer. These
things ought to be done unto God only, his help only should be sought in
the time of danger, in his merry and truth only we ought to trust, (...) to
give credit to his word which shall stand for ever, and from the God of truth
to (...) for counsel to the father of lies, and from the Savior to fly for
help to the destroyer is most profane and his Armor-bearer was not unlike
(...), for commonly such as the master is, such will the servant be, such as the
King (...), such will the Courtier be. As for Achitophel, he was a great
statesman, but he was also a great traitor: he was very wise in matters
pertaining to rule, but he was also very wicked. He assisted the subject
against the King, that was treason: he assisted the son against the father,
that was unnatural treason: he ass^sted a wicked son, proud and bloody
(...), against a godly father, even against religious and holy David, this was
impious treason. Zimri likewise was a traitor against his Master Elah, whom he
^lew in the second year of his reign, and invaded the kingdom of Israel.
Such were the men with whom the ancient murderer prevailed in three and twenty
hundred years, few in number, and men of most wicked hearts and lives. And
shall our afflicted sinner think to match himself with such forlorn me^. In
wickedness so rare will he be so forward? and with men so vile will he join?
for the time after the coming of the Lord Jesus in the flesh, we have record
in holy Scripture only for seauenty years. In these years we read of much
wickedness, of the rage of the Jews in crucifying the Lord Jesus, of the
persecution of Saul, wherein Steven was stoned, of the persecution of Herod
wherein James was slain with the sword. Of the malice of the Jews in every
place forbiding the Apostles to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. And of
their endless malice against Paul being now converted and become a witness of
Jesus. And among all the enraged sinners of this time, in whom the prince of
this ^orld exercised his power most impe^ously. We neade but of one that (...)
^iolent ^ands upon himself, even (...) the Apostle, and he is marked out ^y
the ^nes of ^ ^raitor, a (...)* and (...) child of per^ion, so (...) this (...)
q^itie in compar^son of other (...), (...) so incurably and not or (...) ^uill ^
(...) these men in comparison, of other (...). And shall our poor sinner
(...) to increase this number, and to ^
(...) if not to (...) these m^n (...)of the sin (wherein the (...) ^eemeth
to have some modesty, (...) ^ring to (all (...) many to such (...)
wickedness) and the (...)inqui^e of the (...) (as if the (...) though^ i^
(...) to tempt any to a great wickedness, but such as (...) out ^unne his
allurements by (...) own forwardness in sin) let (...) things stay the
resolution of our (...), and make him fear to execute It is the excess of
cruelty without all mixture of charity.
(...) injustice upon himself.

In which fact (to make al hearts de^) there is the extremest height of all
cruelty, without all mixture of charity on mercy* the thief that murdereth by
the highway side, is cruel, yet in his cruelty there i^ mixture of some
charity, for ^e intends his own supposed good, in seeking spoil to to
maintain his life. More cruel is the tyrant that sheddeth innocent blood, and
presents unto death Gods Saint^. As (...) sh^d innocent blood exceeding ^.
(...). 21. 16
much, ^ill (...) replenished Jerusalem from corner to corner. And ^s Herod
stretched forth his hands ^exe certain Acts 1^. 1
of the Church, and he killed James the brother of John with the sword. Great^
this cruelty that is maintained by power; and count^ by authority, and false
show of justice* Yet is there in this ^ mixture of charity. For such tyrants
suppose them whom they kill to b^ enemies, either to their religion, or to
their rule, for defense whereof they use their cruelty. Greater is the cruelty,
when under pretenses of love and peace murders are committed. As when those two
servants of Ish^oseth pretending ^. S^m. 4. 6
trade as Merchants, Rehab and Baanah his brother came into the midst of the
house, as if they would have wheat, and they (...) him under the fifth robb^
and (...)* For when they came into the house, (...) slept on his bed, in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and (...) ^eaded him, and took
his head, and (...) them away through the plain all the ^ght. And when Ioab
took A^er a side i^ the gate to speak with him, peaceably, 2. Sa. 3. 27.
(...) smote him under the fifth ribbe, that he bed, for the blood of Asael his
brother. Here was great treason, here was cruelty covered with pretenses of
love and ^eare. Yet in this cruelty there was some mixture of love. For the two
bre^ren that slew Ishboseth, did it for Da^ sake as they affirmed. For when
they had slain him, They brought the 2. Sam. 4. ^
head of Ishboseth unto Hebron, and said i^ the King, behold the head of
Ishboseth S^uls son thine enemy, who sought after, thy life, and the Lord
has avenged my Lord the King this day of Saul and of his ^ede. And either they
bare this love to David, to free him from an enemy as they pretended, or else
they did it out of love unto themselves, hoping to receive some reward at
David's hand for their service. And the fact of Ioab in murdering Abner was out
of love t^ Asa^l his brother whom Abner had killed before. This their cruelty
was exceeded by the murder committed by Cain, in killing his brother Abel,
wherein it cannot be denied, but there was love unto himself, for this was the
quarrel, it grieved him that his brother was accepted in his sacrifice, and
he refused. Herein he held himself wronged, and intended that way to do
himself right. We read of a cruelty exceeding this, in a degree against
nature above the murder of brothers. For when Senacherib was returned from the
land of Israel to Niniue, on a day when ^. K^. 19. 37.
he entered into the Temple of Misroch his god, Adramelech and Sharezer his sons
slew him with the sword. The sons of his loins that should have been the
staff of his age, and the guard of his person against his enemies, became his
mortal enemies, they that received their life by propagation from him, and had
not been, if he had not first been, they unnaturally requited him, and
spoiled him of his life, and did to their uttermost extinguish his being. What
heart of man abhors not these cruelties? and yet in all these, there is a
mixture of some love (I confess a wicked love, yet some love) and some purpose
they have to benefit some, by making their life more happy: themselves at
least, and their own life, if no others. But in the fact of Saul, Achitophel,
and Judas, and such like persons that lay violent hands upon themselves, there
is no intent of doing good to others, no no^ of making their own life more
comfortable or happy, they are no friends to other men, and they are greatest
enemies to themselves, where no other love remains in wicked men, yet self
love remains, and persuades them things beneficial to themselves. But in
this finne where no love to other men appears, there is love least of al to
themselves, while they work their own destruction. What could thy enemy
desire to do more unto thee, then thou do unto thy self? What could justice
by the hand of the Magistrate in ^nishing? What could violence by the hand of
the cruel in revenging, do more unto thee then thou do unto thy self? Could
the Philistims have done any more to Saul then kill him? and to escape their
violence he killed himself, seeking no other remedy of the mischief, then by
throwing himself into the mischief? could David prevailing against Absalom,
have done any more to Achitophel then to take away his life? and to escape the
stroke of David's justice, he took away his own life himself, preventing the
judgment of another that he feared, by pronouncing and executing the same
judgment himself upon himself. If we judge of the affections by the actions
of men, and guess what the heart desired by that which the hand has done (and
there is no surer rule, for the Lord Jesus says, By their fruits ye shall
Matt. 7. 20
know them) yea may we say, that where hatred made the Philistims enemies to
Saul, and Justice gave power to David in all severity to take away Achitophels
life: neither hatred in the Philistims, nor justice in David, could make them
to be greater enemies and more dangerous, then Saul and Achitophel were unto
themselves, for they made haste to do the evil unto themselves, that the
others came more slowly to do: for though the Philistims made have to kill
Saul, yet Saul made more have to do it then the Philistims could: and whereas
David perhaps in his mildenes might have bin intreaded to spare Achitophels
life, Achitophel like a cruel judge hating himself, made have by speedy
execution to prevent all pardon whom loves he that loves not himself? whose
friend can he be, that in this manner and measure is his own merciles enemy?
Go then, and be more cruel then ever was murdering thief, oppressing tyrant,
bloody Cain, or Senacheribs ungracious impes, go and be more cruel then any
cruel beast, that though it be an enemy to the life of other creatures, yet is
a resolut defender of it own life, if thou strive for the name and shame of
most cruel, yea more cruel then man or beast (I will ad also, or then devil,
for the devils study not to do themselves hurt) then go and do that
violence that thou intendest against thy self, but if thou be willing to let
the cruellest of men, the fiercest of beasts, yea the devils themselves to go
before thee in merciles cruelty, then preserve (...) own life, if thou or any
for thee say, thou do it out of love to thy self, intending thereby to
prevent future evils. The vanity of this speech shall be showed when we come
to the last reason whereupon thou groundest thy godles resolution.

There is not only merciles cruelty It is the loss of all patience and of
faith.
in this sin of self murder. But there is also total want of those two
cardinal Christian virtues, that belong to the time of affliction namely of
patience and faith, the Lord Jesus requirs no more in us for our advantage at
that time then these two, remembering faith before patience, and saying, Come
unto me all ye that are Mat. 11. 28
weary and laden, take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that am meek and
lowly in heart, He requires faith in the first words come unto me. He would
have us come, Non pede sed fide, Not with our foot but with our faith, And
nonpassus sed precibus, not with our shifting steps, but with our constant
prayers. His meaning is not that we should set our feet within his courts,
but rather that we should with hope present our desires before the throne of
his grace, for this is the work of faith to draw near to Gods mercy seat. And
he requires patience in the next words, Take my yoke on you, Let there be no
murmuring nor grudging against the yoke that God offreth to lay upon your
shoulders, spurn not against it, but take it meekely upon you, and learn to
submit your self unto it. And Saint Paul requires no more in time of troubles,
but these virtues of patience and faith, remembering patience before faith,
saying, Let your patiente mind be known Phi. 4. 5.
unto allmen, the Lord is at hand and says in the next words be nothing
careful but in althings let your request be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication with giving of thanks. He requires patience in the first words
plainly, Let your patient mind be known unto all men, and he requires faith
in the next words; describing faith by her effects and saying. Be nothing
careful but let your requests in all things be showed unto God in prayer.
Unto these virtues of patience and faith continued and practiced in the time of
trouble, when we are wearied with our long and laden with our heavy burdens,
both Jesus the Lord and Paul his minister do promise and assure all
deliverance and case. The Lord Jesus in these words, I Mat. 11. 28.
will refresh you, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. And the Apostle
Paul his minister in these words. The peace of Phil. 4. 7.
God which passes all understanding shall preserve your hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus. What can thou require more in thy hottest conflictes, then to
be refreshed by Jesus Christ? What can thou desire in the greatest load of
thy soul but to be eased of thy burden? what can thou wish and long for more
then this in thy greatest vexation, that the peace of God that passes
understanding should preserve thy heart and mind in Jesus Christ? and this is
promised by Christ the truth and by Paul the witness of truth, to them that in
their troubles do suffer with patience and pray in faith. But thou in this thy
desperate resolution have lost all patience, and cast away thy faith, for if
thou had patience thou would not be unwilling to endure Gods visitation,
and to suffer his good pleasure: and if thou had any faith in God thou
would trust to his help and with much comfort wait for the day of
salvation. Consider the quality of this sin, and thou shall see, that it
does more spoil thee of thy helps, and makes the more naked of all good
covering (if more may be) then were our first parents spoiled and made naked by
the fraud of the serpent in the Garden. For patience and faith being the
covering of the soul for such stormy times, thou have lost all this
clothing: thou refusest to be refreshed by Jesus Christ while thou refusest
to hold the course, wherein he promises to refresh thee. thou refusest to be
eased by the help of his strong hand, whilst thou refusest the course in which
he promises ^ase. Thou ^stest from thee that peace of God, of inestimable
price by which thy heart and mind should be preserved in Jesus Christ, while
thou refusest the means by which that peace is to be obtained, how ^comely is
it for the creature to be impatient at the work of his Creator? how disordered
a thing is it that the professed Christian should fail to put his trust in
Christ his Savior? a greater error then this into which thou runnest, it is
not possible for any man to fall into this is to say to the judge whom we have
offended, I will endure no chastisment at thy hands: this is to say to the
redeemer that is ready to save us, I despise thy salvation and rather make
choice to perish. There is a madness of the body when the brain is
distempered: but verily this is the madness of the soul running into ruin: and
while thou art yet sober, will thou wittingly run mad, foreseeing the mischief
that will follow?

Besides consider whose thy life is, who It is against the right of God who
only is Lord of life and to whom only the issue of death appertain.
quickened thee at the first, who preserved thy life heitherto, who has numbered
thy days and appointed thy time, to whom the service of thy life belongs to
use while he pleases, to whom the issues of death do appertain, and who has
the keys of Hell and of Death, and in whose hands the rule of all these
things remain the so sh^lt thou discern whether thou have any power and
authorite or no to meddle in this business. Did thou appoint the beginning of
thine own life? Did thou fashion and quicke^ thy self in thy mothers womb?
does not the Prophet say, speaking unto God, Thine hands have made me and
Psalm. 19. 73.
fashioned me. He confesses god to be the work master, himself to be Gods
work, wherein he did no more then the pot does, that takes not his own
shape, but receives it from the potter. Hereof he speaks more fully in
another place. Know ye, that even the Lord he is God, he Psalm. 100. 3.
^th made us. and not we our selves. And will thou pull down the building that
God has set up: go to then; and pull down heaven which God has spread, ^owle
it up in a bundle and cast it into the deep, scatter in the air the water of
the sea, and fling abroad the drops of it till it be dry: pound the earth into
^st and raise a mighty wind to scatter the same, that the place of it may be
sound no more. If thou have a purpose to destroy that God has made, and
would oppose thy hand in destroying against the hand of God in building,
attempt some of these things and try thy strength, that thou may survive thy
fact, and live to reap the glory of it. If these things be to great for thee,
then cease to hold this conceit, to attempt the pulling down of that which God
has built up, oppose not thy self against his work, especially in pulling
down the frame of thine own life, where thou must needs perish with thine
own work, and not live to glory in that that thou have done. And as God made
thee at the first a living wight, so it is he that has preserved thee all thy
time, in the feeblenes of thy insancie, in the carelesnes of thy youth in the
rashness of thy riper years, all which seasons of thy life, made thee subject
to many decaies, thorough their proper frailties. But God made thy feeble
infancy strong with his strength: he made thy ignorant and careless youth
advised and wise by his wisdom: he made thy rash and hold manhod to be safe
through his providence. He that keeps Israel and neither slumbreth nor
sleeps, it is he that has kept thee. The Prophet speaks thus unto God in
one of the Psames. Thou Psalm. 22. 9.
did draw me out of the womb, thou gave me hope even at my mothers
breasts: I was cast upon thee even from the womb thou art my God from my
mothers belly. By which words he gives us to understand that the same God
that gave us life in our mothers womb, is he that keeps us from the womb
to the grave, he preuenteth dangers, he gives ^oode, he heals our sickness,
he disapointeth our enemies, he is our guard to defend us, he is our shield
and buckler to save us from all hurt. He has done this for thee for thy
conception unto this day: and will thou in one hour attempt to overthrow and
destroy that, which with so much care God has cherished so long? will thou be
hateful to oppose thy self against his love? wilt ^ou be maliciously
unthankful to oppose thy self against the work of his fatherly care? while
he is desirous to keep thee in safety, will thou strive (more then all the
world besides) to work thine own decay? The Angels in heaven, understanding
the care of God for thee, do willingly pitch their ^ents about thee, and
refuse not for thy safety, to be are thee in their hands, and keep thee in thy
wars. The devils of hell by Gods providence are kept off from thee as with a
strong hedge, which they can neither clime over, nor break through, whereby
they impeach not thy safety. And while the creator of all things remains thy
keeper, the creatures are in league with thee, and thou live in pace among
them, and while the work of God that preserves thy life, has this power
among all creatures, that the creatures of heaven will not attempt thy hurt,
the creatures of earth do not attempt it, and the creatures of hell cannot.
Will thou alone unmercifully seek to cross the care of God in working thine
own woe? Then thou art worthy whom the heavenly creatures should abhor, whom
the earthly creatures should forsake, and the hellish creatures embrace,
received into their company, with this greeting, this is he whom God would have
kept; but against the love of the Angels of heaven, against the peace of the
creatures of the earth, and beyond the malice and power of us Angels of
darkness, he has destroyed himself. Besides, it is God that has assigned to
every one of us the measure of our time, he has appointed the number of our
days: our life did not begin till he appointed the first day of it, and so
long it must last until he say, this is the last day of it. No man did set
down for himself when he would come into the world: and no man must set down
for himself when he will go out of the world. God sent us in giving us life,
when we came into the world: and God must call us out of the world, taking away
our life, when we go hence. It is the saying of Job, Is there not Job. 7. 1.
(...) appointed time to man upon earth: and (...) not his days as the days
of an hireling? Man has his time appointed to him, when it shall begin, when
it shall end, he cannot lengthen it when the end com^th, and he ought not to
shorten it before the time be come. His days are as the days of an hireling;
an hireling is entertained for so many days, longer the^ his covenant he may
not stay, shorter then his covenant he ought not to stay: such is the life of
man, he is Gods hireling, for so many days and years, God ^ath hired him in
this world, as in Gods vineyard, to work in some honest calling: when we have
served out our time here, we may stay no longer, and till we have served out
our time, we must serve so long. Thou will therefore be found to be a fugitive
servant from God, if thou depart his seruic: before thy time be full out. And
that belongs to God, and not to thee to set down. The Prophet David says of
God in one of the Psalms, To the Lord God, belong the Psalm. 68. 20
issues of death. To God it belongs and not to man, to set down and
determine who shall die, when he shall die and by what means he shall die, he
uses sometime the hand of the magistrate, sometime the hand of the violent,
and so ends one man's life (as we think) by counsel and work of another
man, but never did he give license to any man to kill himself. He has
forbidden murder by his commandment, Thou shall Exo. 20. 13.
not kill. He condemned it in C^ine from the beginning of the world, to whom
having slain Abel his brother, he said* Genesis 4. 10.
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
ground. Now therefore thou art cursed from the earth, which has opened her
mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thine hand* And after the flood when
he began again to replenish the earth with inhabitants, he made a law
against murder, to restrain both man and beast from committing it, saying,
Surely I will require Genesis 9. 5.
your blood wherein your lives are: at the hand of every beast will I require
it: and at the hand of man, even at the hands of a man's brother will I require
the life of man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
for in the image of God has he made man. So oftensiue unto God it is for a
man (without warrant and authority) to kill any; because man was made in the
image of God, a creature of understanding, endued with excellent virtues of
knowledge and righteousness, with resemblance in these virtues to God himself,
in the making of whom it pleased God to show his excellent power, his wisdom,
and his mercy. No man, no beast can destroy this creature and be innocent
before God. It belongs only to him that gave life to take it away; where he
takes it away, who can give it? and where he^ has given it who shall take it
away. So that the whole rule of life must remain in the hands of the Lord of
life: who of himself says, I kill, and give life. Except Deu. 32. 39
thou can do both, attempt to do neither. First make a living man if thou
can, and then kill him whom thou gave life unto, thou shall hurt no work
therein but the work of thine own hands. But if thou can not give life,
presume not to take away life, thou shall therein violate the work of another;
and if thou may not kill any other, thou may not kill thy self, one God
made thee and them: and if thou shall be guiltle of blood in killing thy
neighbor, thou shall be guilty of blood in killing thy self: if thou may
not touch the life of thy neighbor, thou may not touch the life of thy
self. When Elias was weary of his life, being persecuted by Iezabel, he said
unto God, It is 1. King. 19. 4.
enough O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. He desired
to be out of this present evil world, he was weary of the travels and
dangers of it: did he therefore kill himself; did he lay violent hands upon
his body, and let out his soul before his time? No: such thoughts were far
from him, he remembered that God had placed his soul in that earthly
Tabernacle, and he entreats God to set his soul at liberty. He held his
hands, howsoever his heart was affected. So do thou: hold thy hands from any
fact of violence, and lift them up with thy heart unto God in heaven, and
desire him to take thy soul when he thinks good. When the Apostle Paul was
in a straight between two, and wist not whether he should desire life to
continue in the world, or death to go out of the world, because his life
should be profitable to the Church, but his death gainefull to himself: he
expressed the inclining of his heart to death for his own advantage in these
words, Desiring Phil. 1. 23.
to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. His reward was in
heaven, he desired to obtain it: his redeemer was in heaven, he desired to be
with him: and because he could not come to enjoy his reward, and to be with
his redeemer, except by death he should pass out of the world, therefore he
was willing to depart, and to that end to be loosed and set at liberty from
his flesh. But did he incline to set himself at liberty, to loose the bands
of his own life, by which his soul was tied and fast bound, to the fellowship
of his body? no: he desired to be a patient, not an agent, to be a sufferer,
not a doer in this business: his words are, Desiring to be loosed. Not desiring
to loose my self. This he longed, and this he waited for, and in time obtained
it. In these men behold and see, how to crave and demean thy self, learn of
Elias and Paul learn of them that fear God: learn not of Saul and Judas,
learn not of wicked men, me^ that went astray intheir doings.

And tell me if at any time thy life Will thou loose thy life for thy own
pleasure that never were willing to loose it for Gods sake.
was so vile in thy sight, and the pleasure and glory of God so dear unto
thee, that thou were content and desirous to give thy life unto God, to put it
in hazard for his name and for his trueths sake* Where have thou despised the
threatening of tyrants? where have thou contemned the sword, the fire, the
halter, or any other death? have thou been cast into the fiery furnace with
Ananias, Azarias and Misael, rather then thou would commit idolatry, and
worship any God but the Lord? Have thou at any time with Daniel bin cast into
the Lions den for a prey to their teeth, rather then thou would give over
and cease to pray unto thy God? Have thou been whipped with Peter and John?
have thou been imprisoned with Paul and Silas? have thou been stoned with
Steven? or has thy neck been under the stroke of the sword with James the
brother of John? have thou suffered rebuke, or any loss of goods, or any
linen, for the name of Jesus thy Savior? In these cases, if thy life had
been vile in thy fight, it had been a commendable thing in thee, to prefer
the pleasure and honor of God, the truth and glory of Jesus Christ, before the
safety of thy life: for in this course, thou seruest with thy life, him that is
the God of thy life: thou yeeldest it up (being called for) into the hands of
him that gave it. And thou have the examples of the Prophets of God, and the
Apostles of Jesus Christ, to be thy pattern, who were ever ready and willing
to lay down and loose their lives in the service of God: they did not kill
themselves to be delivered from the fury of tyrants, but they yielded
themselves to the cruel will of tyrants. As Jeremy, saying to them that went
about to kill him for preaching as god had commanded him, As for me, behold
Iere. 26. 14
I am in your hand, do with me as you Iere. 26. 14
think good and right. It was all one to him, and equally welcome to die or
live, so that he might faithfully do his office* of the like mind was S. Paul
the Apostle, saying to the elders of Ephesus, Behol^ Acts ^0. ^.
I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what things shall come
unto me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that
bands and afflictions abide me. But I pass not at all, neither is my life
dear unto my self, so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the
minstration which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of
the grace of G^d. Here was a godly contempt of frail life, with resolution to
use the benefit of it while it lasted, in setting forward the service committed
to him, and to let it go without shrinking, whenever the rage of men (by the
sufferance of God) should by violent hands take it from him in the Lords
quarrel. If thou had resolution in any like quarrel to yield thy life
when there should be any attempt made to take it from thee, thou have the
Prophets of God, and the Apostles of Christ thy example and thou have also the
promise of the Lord Jesus to recompense that loss of life with the gain of
eternal life, saying, He that will save his life shall loose it, Mat. 10. 39
and he that loses his life for my sake shall save it. That is, i^ any shall,
to save his life, deny to confess me before men, his life shall be taken from
him by some such judgment of God, as that he shall have no comfort in the
loss of it, and he shall after die eternally: But if any constantly confess
me, putting his life in danger, either God shall miraculously deliver him, and
he shall save his life in this world, or for the loss of his life here (in
which loss he shall have abundant comfort) he shall have eternal life in
the kingdom of heaven. Here are comforts for thee, if thou have come, or shall
come (in these cases) into danger, if thou retain this resolution, to lay
down thy life for God* and his glory, for Jesus Christ and his truth. But
there was never in thee any such resolution: thou did not love God so well
and thy self so ill, to die for virtue, to die for truth, to die for the glory
of God, to die for the name of Jesus: thou did never esteem the Gospel,
true religion and righteousness at so high a price. O vile man, O unworthy
sinner, would thou not gratify God with contempt of life, and will thou
gratify the Devil with it? would thou not loose it for him that is the
truth, and will thou loose it for the father of lies? was not he worthy (in thy
sight) to be served with this manly resolution, that gave thee this life, and
for the loss of it is ready to recompense thee with eternal life; and is he
worthy to be served with it, who was ever an enemy to thy life, and when he
has spoiled thee of this life, makes thee ^me^ds with a higher mischife* to
plunge thee in eternal death? O monstrous absurdity, to be admitted among the
professors of Christianity. Pause a while, and consider of this *point, that
if it be possible thou may be recovered from this desperate purpose. Think
what it is to have held God off at the staves end, and never to have yielded in
thy heart; die for his love, though he gave thee life, to loose one drop of
blood for his sake, though he filled thy vein^s, to have thy breath stopped for
his glory, though it was he that breathed into thy nostrels the breath of
life, and made thee a living soul, and now to embrace the devil in thy
bosom, as if he were thy God, to tell him that he shall have thy life, thy
blood shall flow for his sake, if thou get a sword or knife, and thou will
strangle thy self and stopthy breath for his love, if thou can get a halter.
Where is thy wisdom, that resoluest so foolishly? where is thy justice that
resoluest so injuriously? where is thy love either to God or to thine own
soul (to whom thou owe thy love, to God, to procure his glory, to thy soul,
to procure the salvation of it) that resoluest so hatefully? for more foolishly
for himself, more injuriously against God, and more hatefully, both against
himself, and God, did any man ever conclude and resolve in any thing, then
thou do in this* Most foolishly thou determinest for thy self, that runnest
into that destruction, from which thou should fly with all possible speed,
as the Israelites fled from the tents of Korah and his company, when the earth
swallowed them up. And most unjustly thou dealest with GOD, to take that is his
without his leave (for we are his, and not our own. They are the words of the
Apostle Paul, Ye are not your own. And a little after, 1. Corin* 6 19, 20
speaking of our bodies and spirits, he says, they are Gods) and before his
face, without any reverence and fear of him, to destroy them both at once* for
thou destroyest the body in killing it, and thou destroyest the soul that must
perish for that murder. And most hatefully thou proceedest both against God and
thy self in this resolution, hatefully against God in destroying his creature,
and hatefully against thy self, in destroying thy self, The fact of the
Philistims stopping up with earth the wells that Abraham had dug, to the end
that Isaac his son should not use them for his ca^tell, is interpreted to be
an evidence of their hatred, Isaac saying unto them, Wherefore Genesis 26* 27
come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, etc. How much more must thy fact be
interpreted to be an evidence of hatred both against God and thine own soul,
that fillest up and choakest the well of life, that God dug and opened for
thine use, and desire to water at the piece of death and hell, where thou
shall not obtain one drop of water to cool thy tongue when thou art in
torments. How comes it to pas^e among deceived men, that when as in the case
of suffering for God, where death is accompanied with comfort, and rewarded with
glory, they shrink and fear, withdrawing themselves, shifting for their
lives, which then are sweet unto them, and death is bitter unto them: and in
this case of laying violent hands upon themselves, where death is accompanied
with terror, and shall be rewarded with eternal damnation; here they step
forth and are desperately bold: life now is bitter unto them, and death is
sweet. This is a dangerous error, wherein the ancient murderer has been thy
counselor, the giver of life never persuaded there unto: the very fact
bewraies from what head the advice came, even from him that desires the
destruction of man.

Lay these things together, and I hope Conclusion concernin^ the act that be
intends to do.
the thing that thou art resolved to do, will appear so foul and odious
before thee, that thy resolution will vanish and s^de away. This sin of
selfe-murdering is so abominable, that in the first age of the world, when
abominations were so multiplied, that the most patient God was justly
provoked, with a general flood, to destroy from the face of the earth, every
thing in whose nosthrils was the breath of life, and among other abominations,
murder crept in, and that betimes, in a grievous manner, the brother murdering
the brother: yet this sin could find no entertainment. The Devil was not
then so impudent to tempt thereunto, and men were not so wicked to yield
thereunto. In the next long age of the world, from the flood unto Christ's
coming in the flesh, for more then three and twenty hundred years, all sin
increasing, this sin also crept in, but in all the sacred history* among the
people that had knowledge of the living God, there were not found above four
or five that yielded to this cruel sin: monsters they were among men,
monsters among sinners, their ra^enes shows them so to be. And after the days
of Christ, for seauenty years, (the Sacred history reaching no further) there
was found but one Judas, the traitor, the thief, the devil, that betrayed
his Master the Son of God, into the hands of his enemies: a monster whom
the world has not equalled, nor can equal with a match: so that in more then
four thousand years, among the people that knew God, though there were many
idolaters, many blasphemers, many given to witchcraft, and other devilish
hearts, many traitors, many murderers, many whore masters, many oppressors,
thieues, false witnesses, and sinners of all kinds, yet there were not above
six self murderers. And with these monsters will thou join? considering also,
that in this sin, there is no mixture of love, in all other sins, there is
some mixture of love, if not to any other yet unto him self, but he that
commits this sin, shows no love, neither to God, to his neighbor, nor to
himself. His sin is totally hate, himself totally hateful, and whereas the
virtues of Christianity, pertaining chiefly to the days of affliction, when
God makes his elect like unto the Image of his Son, that suffe^ing with him
in this world, they may after reign with him in heaven, whereas the virtues of
christianity pertaining to this time, are patience to suffer the will of God,
and faith to trust to Gods mercy: this sin is the banishment of all
patience, it is nothing else then fury in the highest degree, and it is the
overthrow of all faith, hastening and pulling on destruction. where it should
pray and wait for deliverance; it is a violent opposition against the work of
God, it is a violent intrusion and invasion upon the right of God. For life is
the gift of God, he made us living creatures, and this sin violently
overthrows the work of God. And God being the Lord of life, and having all
authority over life to give it, to continue it, and to end it at his pleasure,
and for his service, this sinner inuadeth upon Gods right, and without leave
from God, without any advice or authority from him; yea directly against the
commandment of God forbidding murder, he presumes to cut off his own life.
And he that never could find in his heart to lay down his life for God, and
for his glory, though God gave him the life that he has, and when that is
lost in his service, and for his sake has promised to give him life eternal;
yet in this mad and desperate resolution, is ready to step into the place of
the tyrant, the persecuter, the executioner, and hangman: and for the devils
pleasure, not to lay down, but to take away, even his own life, and to make
himself with his own murtherous hands a sacrifice to Beelzebub, who did not
give unto him the life that yet he holds, but was ever an enemy to the
safety of it: and when that life is lost, shall reward him with eternal
death, and hell torments for ever; such is the act thou resoluest to do, the
woeful effect of damned despair, throwing thee into intolerable and eternal
torments. And therefore with all care to be avoided. And the most mighty
Preserver change thy mind, and keep thee from this ruin.

CHAP. XXVIII.
WHen our sinner signified The vanity and weakness of the reasons by which he is
drawn to intend this act*
his resolution to this act, he signified withal, the reasons by which he was
induced to be so resolute. Those reasons I will now examine, and show the
weakness of them, that the sinner seeing his deceived judgment, may repent
him of his wicked purpose in time, and stay his hand from doing that mischief,
which once done can never be helped; the reasons were fix in number. The Three
reasons serving to proo^e it a matter of i^stice*
first three seeming to prove it a matter of justice, and the last three
seeming to prove it a matter of advantage. The first three pretending justice*
were these. First, he has sinned against God, and 1
deserved death, and therefore must die, this being a thing of necessity, he
holds it as good to die now as to tarry longer, and to die by his own hand,
as to expect the stroke of another. Secondly, 2
he has laden and ouercharged the earth (the place of his present life) with
the burden of his sins, it groaneth under that burden, and can no longer
bear it, it must be eased, and he that has laid this burden upon the
shoulders of the earth, is the most fit to remove the same: he has hands
wherewithal to do i^, and his heart serves him. And with this second reason
he inuolueth and wrappeth another foolish conceit, that seeing he is unworthy
of mortal life upon earth, it were folly and madness in him, yea it were
shameless presumption to hope to obtain immortal life in Heaven. Thirdly,
he says his life has been^ 3
loathsome to heaven and earth, in heaven to God and his Angels, in earth to
the Church and all the true members thereof. And so great an offense must
needs be removed, that God and his Angels, the Church and her children may
receive content. These things prove it just, that he should die. And that it
should be a part of his enjoined penance to see the thing done himself. Now
because my speech is intended for the health of the sinner, I will direct it to
the sinner.

Thy first reason is, thou have sinned against The weakeness of his first
reason.
God, thou deseruest to die. This reason is no reason to infer that which thou
would infer. That therefore thou must die, and especially by thine own
hand. For all men sin against God, and all men deserve to die: must all men
therefore die? especially must they die by their own hands? This I doubt not
but thou thy self think absurd for others, and yet thou think it reason
for thy self. But God himself denies this argument to be of any strength,
while he says, or commands the prophet ^zec. 33. 12
in his name to say, Say unto them. As I live says the Lord God, I desire not
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live;
turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will you die, O ye house
of Israel? Is not God the Judge? Is it not he against whom thou saiedst thou
have sinned, and deserved death, and therefore must die? It shall be granted
that thou have sinned: It shall be granted that by that sin thou have
deserved death: but where is that must, where is that necessity of dying, that
thou speak of? when God says it, and swears it by his life (who lives
ever) that he desires not the death of a sinner. Thou dreamest of some
inexorable severity in God, and some inevitable necessity of death in the
sinner: God says no to both. There is no such severity in God. He is far
from urging, that desires not the death of a sinner. And there is no such
unavoidable danger to man* while God does offer him the way of life, even then
when he has by this sin deserved death; saying, As I live, I desire not the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live. See
thou not the vanity of this first Argument? where of truth afforded the
premises? for thou have sinned against god, and thy sin deserves death. But
error, danger* death* and the devil drew in the conclusion against truth:
for there is no necessity, seeing God the Judge requires no such death. ( As I
live I desire not the death of the wicked:) and contrary to that conclusion
shows a way of life, to his mind more ag^eeable, to the sinner more safe. (
But that the wicked turn from his way, and live,) return this argument to the
devil that lent it thee: it may be retorted upon him in full strength. For he
has sinned against God, and by his sin deserved death: and therefore must
die, for God desires the death of wicked angels* having shut them up in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the last day, and
has not showed unto them any way of life. But for thy self learn to argue
better, and frame thy argument so, that God may allow of it. I have sinned
against God, therefore I must repent, I must turn from my ways unto God, and
learn to walk in his ways. And again, my sin has deserved death,
therefore I must turn from my ways, that I may live, for God has sworn^,
that he desires not the death of a sinner, but that the sinner turn from his
wicked way, and live. These Conclusions are inferred according to Gods will,
who desires both thy conversion from thy former sins, and also thy salvation
contrary to the merit of thy sins, saying, Turn you, Ezec. 33 11
turn you from your evil ways, for why will you die, Oyee house of Israel?
These conclusions have holiness in them, agreeable to all the commandments of
God, whereas thy former conclusions inuit to murder contrary to GODS
commandments: and these conclusions contain life and salvation in them,
according to all the promises of God, whereas thy former conclusions contain
death and destruction contrary to his promises. If by thy former sins thou
have incurred the just displeasure of God. This manner of reasoning that I have
taught thee, shows thee how to recover his love and liking, and if thy former
sins have brought thee into the danger of death; this manner of reasoning that
I have taught thee, shows thee how to recover life and salvation. Throw
therefore thy foolish reason (I have sinned, and therefore must die) in the
face of him that framed it for thee: and remember ever that comfortable Ezec.
33* 11
speech of God, As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live: And frame thy
Arguments by the direction of this word. I have sinned against God, therefore I
must turn from my wicked ways. And my sin against God has deserved death.
Therefore I must turn from my wicked ways* so shall I live, this ma^er of
arguing being as thou see agreeable to Gods word, is both pleasing unto God,
and safe for thy self.

Thy second reason grounded as thou The weakness of his second reason.
think upon justice, is this. I have laden and over charged the earth with
the burden of my sins, it groneth under that burden and can no longer bear
it, therefore it must be eased by the removing of me. And forasmuch as I have
been the man that have laid this load upon the earth, it is meet I should
also be the man to remove it. This latter part of thy reason, that thou
should be the man to remove the burden, that have been the man to lay on
the burden, I hold to be most reasonable, he that did the wrong, ought to make
the mends. But let us agree of the true burden that has been laid on by
wrong, and must be removed by right. That burden thou speak of in the first
part of thy reason, wherein thou arguest thus; I have laden the earth with the
burden of my sins, which it can no longer bear: therefore I must by death be
removed. Do thou not behold and see an error in this arguing? yea a wicked
and most deceitful fraud of Satan seeking subtly to destroy thee, while in
the antecedent of thy argument thou speak of the burden that presses the
earth, thou namest thy sins, and they indeed make the earth to groan: and when
thou come in the conclusion of thy argument, to speak of removing this
burden, thou ^aiest nothing of removing the sin, but speak altogether of
removing thy self: thy sin is the burden, and thou concludest not to remove
the sin, but to remove thy self. If a man wounded by another, and desirous
to be healed, should apply his means to the party that made the wound, and not
to the wound it self, do thou not see, that man that made the wound may be
removed, and the wound remain still as dangerous as it was at the first: but
if he apply his means to the wound that was made, the wound shall be healded and
so removed, the man that made it remaining still. Thy case is altogether like
it, thou have given the earth a wound by the burden of thy sins, if the
means for the easing of the earth, be applied, not to the sin to take away
it, but unto thee to take away thee, thou may be removed, but the guiltines
of thy sins shall remain unto judgment. But if means be rightly applied to
take away the sin, the earth is eased of her burden, and thou also remainest
in safety, thy argument therefore should be framed thus. The earth groneth
under the burden of my sins, therefore these sins must be removed. He is
unwise that cannot, and he is unjust that will not discern between the man
that sinned, and the sin by him committed. It is a true saying of Saint
Gregory. Man is the work of God, sin is the work of man, Lib. 4. Epist. 80.
let us therefore discern what God has made and what man has done, and
neither for the error that man committed, let us hate man whom God made, nor
for the man, that is Gods work love the sin that man has committed.
According to this rule, discern between thy self that art the work of Gods
hands, and thy sin that is the fruit of thine own invention. I hope thou will not say that the work of Gods hands is a burden to the earth, and for the
ease of the earth must be removed, then thou as thou art a man and a living
creature of Gods making, art not the earthes burden, neither is it the remedy
to take the man away. But the sin that thou have committed is the burden of
the earth, and the remedy of this evil is to take the sin away: which is
done on thy p^rt by repentance, by ceasing from sin and by working righteousness
as Esaie ^eacheth saying (in the person of God) to the people of Israel, take
away the Esaias. 1. 16
^il of your works from before mine eyes, ^ase to do evil, learn to do
well. Then on the part of the sinner is his sin removed, when he repents
him of his sin cease to do evil, and sets his heart to work
righteousness. And one Gods part our sin is taken away by forgiveness which
always accompanies man's true repentance as Ezakiel teaches us saying* if the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and Eze. 18. 21
keep all my statutes* and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live and shall not die, all his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him, etc. Sin is removed, on man's part by
repentance, on Gods part by forgiveness: and thy sin (not thy person) being the
burden of the earth, if thou will d^e a work of justice, and ease the earth of
the burden under which she groneth, by removing the same, then remove the sin
wherewith thou have oppressed her, and let thy self alone, repent of thy
sins past, amend thy way for the time to come, and thy sin is done away. So
says Saint Peter, Amend your Acts 3. 19.
li^es, and turn, that your sins may be put away. Amend therefore the first
speech i^ this second reason and frame the argument thus. I have laden and
ouercharged the earth with the burden of my sins, it groneth under that
burden, and can no longer bear it, therefore it must be eased by the removing
of my sins, and then ad on Gods name the second part of thy speech in that
reason, and say; Forasmuch as I have been the man that have laid this load
upon the earth, it is meet I should also be the man to remove it, and now
become as resolute to ease the earth of the true load, which is thy sin, as
before thou did profess to be in removing thy self which art not the load.

And as for the conceit which thou did infold in this reason, or infer upon
this reason, that seeing thou had Being unworthy of l^fe on earth he is more
unworthy of life in heaven aswered.
oppressed the earth with thy sins, and were unworthy to live any longer in
the earth which is but the place of mortal life, it should be folly and madness
in thee, yea shameless presumption, even to think to live in heaven which is
the place of everlasting life. Indeed he that (...) unworthy of mortal life,
and of a place on earth, is much more unworthy of immortal life, and a place
in heaven. But let this thought vanish, together with the ^raudulent reason.
For he that is worthy of neither, may (by the favor of God) enjoy both. Jacob
confesses himself unworthy of all Gods blessings saying, I am not worthy of
the least Ge^. 3^. 1^
of all the mercy, and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant.
He confesses his unworthiness, and yet confesses with all, that God showed
him that mercy and truth, that he held himself so unworthy of; and unto this
unworthy man (so considering himself) did God make promise of his free favor
in these words. I will not forsake thee, until I have performed that, that I
have promised thee. So that it is not the worthiness of the receiver, but the
promise of God that he respects in showing mercy and bestowing his
blessings. And if thou will take order by repentance (as has been taught
thee) to remove the burden of thy sins* wherewith all thou have oppressed the
earth, thy unworthiness with thy sins shall be done away, and after the days
of thy mortal life on earth finished, thou shall enjoy immortality with God
in the kingdom of heaven.

The third reason persuading this cruel The weakness of his third reason.
act as a work of justice is this. My life is loathsome both to heaven and
earth: in heaven to God and his Angels, in earth to the Church and her
children, and therefore it must not to be continued. This is not a new reason,
but the first enlarged with addition of the names of the Angels in heaven, of
the Church and her children on earth. For in the first thou did affirm that
thou ^adst* offended God (that is made thy life to be loathsome in his sight).
And now thou ad^est further mention of his Angels a^oue and Saints beneath,
thou have also ^en offense unto them, indeed upon ^e love and hatred of God
depends ^e love and hatred of all his servants in ^auen and earth. If by thy
wickedness ^ou make thy life loathsome to God, ^ou make it also loathsome to
them: ^d if again by repentance thou make (...) life pleasing to God, thou
make i^ ^o pleasing to men. For as Solomon ^ith. When the ways of a man
please the Prou. 16. 7
lord, he will make also his enemies to be at ^ace with him. So that if thou
repent ^ee of thy former lewd life, if thou cease to do evil, and learn to
do well, ^ou have reconciled thy self to God, ^d he will make all his
creatures to be ^iendes with thee, even them which ^ere most offended before:
and for ^ine own good consider, what it is that ^th made thy life so loath
some to hea^n and earth, to God, to his Angels, to ^e Church, and to the
children of it, is it ^ot thy sin? is it any thing but thy ^ne? then if thou will be careful as thou have been taught, to put away sin by repentance,
all the offense is removed: heaven does no longer hate thee, and the earth
has not cause any longer to be an enemy unto thee: what they loathed before,
is now done away, and that succedeth in place which they have cause to love,
and do love. That the offense which God took, is done away by thy repentance,
appears by that which is said in the Gospel. Joy Luke. 15. 7
shall be in heaven for one sinner that converteth, more then for ninety and
nine just men, that need no amendment of life. And when he says there shall
be joy in heaven, he does not exclude the God of heaven, for what joy can be
in heaven and among the cratures of heaven, if the God of heaven remain
displeased? therefore thy repentance remoueth all cause of loathing from God,
and receives therein all content, and in particular, it gives content to the
Angels of heaven. All cause of loathing and offense is taken from them, and in
place thereof they rejoice and are glad for thy conversion. It is said in the
same place of the Gospel, Likewise I said unto you, there is joy in the Luke.
15. 10.
presence of the Angels of God for one sinner that conuerteth. See how thy
conversion alters the case: thy sin makes the Angels to loath thee as a
filthy and abominable creature* thou art no sooner converted and changed by thy
repentance, but they which loathed thee before, do now love thee; they which
held the abomminable before, do now esteem thee as honorable. What need is
here of taking away of life, to take away and remove the offense of the Angels?
repent and it is done, amend thy ^se, and thou have their love, and as thy
^epentance recouereth love and grace i^ heaven, so does it in the earth, in
the Church, and among her children. What else is the Church, but the number of
them, that by the calling of God are tur^ed from their wickedness and
infidelity? And can the Church hate the children that by repentance and
regeneration are borne again unto her? the Church inuiteth and calls to
repentance, saying, Come and let us go up to ^say. 2. 3.
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Lacob, and he will teach
us his ^ies, and we will walk in his paths. The Church altogether calls to
repentance the watchmen and pastors in the Church lift up their voice as a
trumpet, and reprove the sin of the people and teach them the way and will of
God, and call by doctrine: the people and flock set up the example of their
life, according to the commandment of our Savior. Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. And they call by example, all that are
truly turned unto God, do desire that all other may truly turn to God. And
how then can it he? if thou repent thee of thy sin, and turn to the Lord in
amendment of life, but that the Church and her children, that lothed thee
before should now love thee: and what is then become of this great and
fearful objection? what need have we of killing and murdering the sinner?
mortify thy earthly members, war against thy fleshly lusts, cease from thy
sin, and do that which is right in the sight of God, and these reasons that
seemed injustice to urge, a necessity of thy death are vanished away. And thou
may live to glorify God, and finishing thy days on earth with comfort, and
may and shall live here^fter in heaven. Al which is ouerthrown with thy
wicked resolution.

Besides these reasons that seemed to Three reasons seeming to ^roue i^ a
matter of advantage.
prove it a matter of justice (when yet nothing can be devised more unjust)
^ou have other reasons that seem to ^ooue it a matter of advantage (when ^deed
it were the greatest of all losses (...) can hoppen unto thee.) First thou 1.
^kest by doing execution upon thy (...), that thou shall glorify God in thy
^th, whom thou never had care to ^lorifie all the days of thy life: and
this cannot but turn to thy advantage, to (...) found so zealous of Gods
glory, that (...) art willing to further it with the (...) of thy life.
Secondly, thou think 2.
(...) by cutting of thine own life thou (...) then cease to sin, which
during (...) life thou have not done, but have continued to multiply iniquity
every day. And indeed he that is dead is freed from ^ning after the manner of
the living. ^or when Achan was stoned, he could ^eale no more: When Zimri was
thrust ^orow the body by Phin^as he could commit fornication no more. When
Achitophel had hanged himself, and Ioab had smitten Absalom, they could
conspire in treason no more. And this cannot but turn to thy advantage, that
thou shall no more sin against God. Thirdly, thou think that thy death
shall (...) with it an end of all thy troubles, of all thy pain, of all thy
fear and indeed it brings with it an end of all the momentary troubles of
this life, both past, present, and to come. Famine having once killed, the
famished shall hunger no more: the sword having once slain, the dead shall
never fear wounds any more: If sickness have devoured and brought to the
grave, the consumed parts shall groan and languish no more. The fire, the
water, the prison, the rack, the tyrant, the hangman, can torment and kill no
more. And in one word, death delivers from all the labors, troubles,
dangers, and evils of this life (if there be not other troubles and evils of
another world, it freeth from all) and this thou esteemest so great an
advantage, as that even the most fearful should for it desire seek and
embrace death. These reasons also let us examine, that thou may not be
deceived and perish.

The first reason seeming to prove it a The vanity and weakness of the first
of these reasons.
^atter of advantage is this, thou think by doing this execution, that thou
^alt glorify God by thy death, whom thou have had no care to glorify all the
days of thy life. And some beneficial reward must needs be due unto thee for
so great care of glorifying God. I might wonder justly to hear this reason
come from thee, for they which intend to do (...) such thing unto themselves,
have little care or thought of Gods glory: and I am sure they have no rule for
it, that by destroying themselves, they do gloryfie God, and may think that
God would have them by any such course, seek to glorify him. This was a
trick of the prince of darkness, cunningly ^ut upon thee, who turning his
self into an Angel of light, when he goes about both to destroy thee, and to
dishonor God by this ungodly fact, would make thee believe that it were a holy
and virtuous action, serving greatly to the glory of God. And with this cunning
the subtle Serpent has prevailed too far with many weak ones, God deliver
thee from him. Indeed God is honored greatly by the destruction of the wicked,
as he says to Moses. When the children of Israel going out of Egypt, were
directed to go by the way of the Red Sea through the Wilderness, Pharao Exo.
14. 3.
will say of the children of Israel, they are tangled in the land, the
Wilderness has shut them in, and I will harden Pharaos heart that he shall
follow after you: So I will get me honor upon Pharao, and upon all his host.
And after when Pharao with his host was come forth after Israel, and God had
commanded Moses to go toward the sea, to lift up his rod, and streich out his
hand upon the sea, that a way being opened in the divided waters, Israel might
go through, he said, Behold I will harden the hearts of the Exo. 14 17.
Egyptians, that they may follow them, and I will get me honor, upon Pharao,
and upon all his host, upon his Chariots and up. on his Horsemen. Then the
Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honor upon
Pharao, upon his Chariots and upon his Horsemen. And how was this honor
gotten but by destroying those wicked men? for after they were entered in
between the wa^ts, at Gods commandment, Moses Exo* 14 17
stretched forth his hand upon the sea, and the sea returned to his force early
in the ^ning, and the Egyptians fled against (...), but the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea. So the water returned and covered the
Chariots and the Horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh that came into the
sea after them, there re^ained not one of them. Here was honor gotten by the
destruction of the Egyptians. But mark how he speaks of it. I will get me
honor upon Pharao, and upon all his Host. He got it, they did not give it
him: they had no intent to do him honor, and to make his name glorious: but he
took it, he wrought it out for himself by his mighty power in their
destruction he made himself ^nowen, to be a just a mighty and upright God,
that gives to every man according to his works, and respects to man's person
and is able to bridle tyrants, and to cut of the ungodly whatsoever they be.
Thus he glorifieth himself by winning the praise of a holy just and omnipotent
God, when he cutteth off the wicked, and brings them down into destruction.
They that perish had no intent to glorify him, nor may they look for any
thanks or reward in regard of the glory that God has by them, for they never
studied to yield him any such praise, he won it altogether against their
mind and purpose. And so in thy case, if thou should persist in thy ungodly
purpose, and should out of thine own days by killing thy self, thy
frowardness and wickedness should turn to his praise, his justice should
appear to his great glory. But to thee no thanks nor reward should be due, as
if thou had intended and labored to bring glory to his name, for what
have thou do^e that thou can think agreeable to his will? and worthy of his
acceptance and reward. Did he ever give thee any authority to take away the
life of any? show thy commission and warrant from God, that thy obedience and
care to set up Gods praise may appear in thy lawful and warrantable action.
Many trespasses of subjects deserve death, and it is the Kings honor that
wickedness in his people be punished: but is it lawful presently for a
private man to kill that trespasser, because he has justly deserved death? he
that does it without authority and warrant from the King, shall he not be
culpable of murder? If authority be given thee, it is thy praise to do
justice, if thou have no authority that act of justice will be thy sin, it
will be justice to him that is slain, but it will be murder in thee that
did take away his life. So howsoever thy sin do deserve death, yet if
thou kill thy self without authority (and God never gave authority, nor will
give to any to kill himself) thou sinnest presumptuously, and insteede of
honoring God, do dishonor him, first in committing wickedness, and
secondly in preventing the noble honor of God, which he might have won in
forgiving thy sin. Gods glory is sought and often wrought by aduenturing thy
life in his service, yea by loosing thy life in his service: this he often
requires, and ever rewards. Therein a man truly shows that he prefers
Gods glory before his own life. Thus the Prophets and Apostles, and all holy
Martyrs have glorfied God by aduenturing first, and loosing at last their lives
in his service. It is their comfort, their glory, their salvation, so to yield
up their lives to the service of the giver of it. But Gods glory is not sought
nor wrought by them, that in their discontent, and impatience, grudging at the
troubles that he has laid upon them, and despairing of his help to support
and deliver them, do kill themselves, because they will not suffer. Therein
they truly show themselves enemies of Gods glory, grudgers at Gods will,
preferring (even to the loss of life) their own will before Gods will, their
own unjust will, refusing to bear the correction of God, before his just will
in correcting them. Can there be a more proud, a more wilful, a more wicked
and obstinat opposition against God then this? that a man shall say, I will die
before I will endure this at Gods hands, and after to do it because he may
not have his will against God. Never any Prophet, never any Apostle, or holy
man ever did so. There is no comfort nor glory in it, but despair, horror and
eternal confusion in it. This therefore is a most false and wicked reason. Thou
shall truly glorify God if thou amend thy life, thou shall but dishonor and
offend him in ending thy life.

Thy second reason grounded upon The vanity and weakness of the second of
these reasons.
supposed advantage is this. Thou think that by cutting of thy life, thou
shall sin no more. And to cease from sin thou hold to be very pleasing
unto God, and so it will prove beneficial to thee. This reason is full of
fraud. For first where thou think that after death How the dead may be said
not to sin.
thou shall sin no more, I deny it to be true in all men, otherwise then
thus, that they can no more sin after the manner of this world, they cannot
between death and the resurrection, give their members (that lay leueles in
the grave, and turue to dust.) As weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: Ahabs
false Prophets being dead can lie unto him ^o more, Ioab being dead can murder
^o more, the swearer, the adultery, tho thief being dead, can with their
tongues blaspheme no more, with their hands rob and spoil no more, nor pollute
their members by uncleanness any more, but does it follow therefore that they
sin The wicked continue to sin even when they are dead.
no more? is not the hatred of God sin? impatiency in suffering deserved
damnation, is it no sin? can any imagine that damned souls have laid off al
maliciousness? and that those men, that while they lived, and were called upon
to serve the Lord, were allured by many blessings given, and by promise of many
more, were threatened with Gods judgments, and felt also some favorable and
easy corrections, would yet never hearken to the voice of God, would never
love him, never fear him, never cease from sin, never regard to amend their
ways, but continued obstinate, and died in their ignorance, stubbornness,
malice and all their sin? can any imagine that these, as soon as they are
dead, should become free from sin, and holy Saints, to please God by
abstayning from evil, and to merit favor? O most absurd imagination, to think
that a man should become holy in Hell, that was profane unto the last point of
his life on earth. Hitherto properly belong the words of Solomon saying, If the
tree do Eccle. 9. 3.
fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place that the tree falls
in, there it shallbe. In that place he exhorts to liberality and virtue while
we live, because when death comes, then there is no place of bearing after any
fruits of goodness, after death there follows no alteration of this kind,
to make either the good man worse then he was, or the evil man better then
he was: if the tree fall toward the South it turns not it self after to the
North, and if it fall toward the North, it turns not to the South. The good
man's goodness continues with him, and is increased rather then diminished,
because he then inioyeth the goodness of God in Heavenly manner, to raise his
love unto God to the highest degree and measure: and the wicked man's wickedness
after death continues with him, and is increased rather then diminished,
because he now feels the wrath of God in the heauiest manner, to raise his
hatred against God unto the highest strain. Death can make no such change in a
man that he that was a sinner unto death and in death, should cease to be a
sinner after death; this reason will deceive thee: if earth was able to make
the a contemner, then Hell is able to make thee a blasphemer, for if correction
(intended for thy amendment) could not make the cease from sinning while thou
did live. How much less can punishments, laid upon thee, not by way of
correction, but by way of condemnation make thee cease from sinning? the mind
of the condemned, how it stands affected toward God, we may see by that which
is written in the Book of the Revelations, Men boiled in great heat, and
blasphemed Ma^t. 16. 9
the name of God, which has power over these plagues, and they repented not to
have given him glory. When sinners are once tormented in those flames, they
are so far from repenting of their sin, to cease from it, that their whole
carriage is rage and blasphemy. They can do nothing else; and therefore,
though being dead, thou can do no evil, after the fashion of this world, yet
it follows not that therefore thou shall not If they do com^ it no new sin*
yet they must perish ^r the old unpardoned.
sin.

But say thou can not commit any new sin, what advantage is that unto thee,
when thy old sin is vnforgiuen, for want of repentance before thy death: yea
thy very death, wrought by thine own hands (without warrant from God, yea
directly contrary to the commandment of God) adds unto thy condemnation
deserved before. Does it help the thief fast shut up in prison, that he
steals no more, when for the old theft unpardoned, he must be hanged?
Surely no: and his ceasing to steal while he is a prisoner, will not be
interpreted to proceed from my new grace, and purpose of amendment, but to be
want of liberty, want of means and opportunity. He does ^ot steal, because
he cannot steal, it is no new mind in him, but the streight^esse of his
imprisonment that makes him for bear, and though he commit no new robberies,
yet he must die for the old. And if thou could sin no more* after thy
death, the not committing of new sins would be as small advantage unto thee,
that perishest for the old unpardoned: and thy forbeating in thy grave, will
not be interpreted to be any fruit of repentance, and a renewed heart, but to
be a necessity imposed upon thee, thy earthly members being tied and
restrained by the condition of death: and therefore though thou commit no new
sin, thou must perish eternally for thy old, not repented by thee, and
therefore not pardoned of God. There shall not be laid to the charge of them
that shall hear this sentence at the last day; Depart from me ye Mat. 25. 41
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Any other
sin then those which they committed upon the earth, where they lived among
the little ones of Christ: for thus shall it be said unto them, I was an
hungered, and Mat. 25. 41
ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger,
and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not: sick* and in
prison, and ye visited me not. These were no sins committed after they were
gone out of the earth, while their bodies were in the grave, and their souls
in hell fire, Christ was not there among them in his members, hungry, thirsty,
wandering, naked, sick, and in prison: and they there had neither bread, nor
drink, nor clothes, not lodging chambers to relieve him withal, they are
their old sins unpardoned, not any new sins after death committed, that
the wicked shall be condemned for at the last day. And so much Saint Paul does
teach us where he says, We must all appear before 2. Cor. 5. 10
the tudgement seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are
done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil. When thou shall come to judgment before Jesus Christ, that shall judge
both quick and dead, at his appearing, and in his kingdom, thou shall not be
questioned for any thing done out of thy body, when thou art dead, but only
for those things, which thou did dest in thy body, while thou were alive. Where
is then that advantage that thou dreamest of, by not sinning any more after
death? See thou not by this time, what a strange delusion it was, that thou
sholdest sin no more after death, and that ceasing from sin should win
thee some favor with God, and be taken for true repentance, and that therefore
it should be a benefit unto thee, to cut off thine own life, that so thou
might withal cut off the (too long continued) course and custom of thy
sin? if thou have any such purpose indeed to cease from sin (which I
beseech God to give thee, if thou have it not, and to continue in thee, if thou
have it) nourish thy life, that God has given thee, and while thou art in the
body, cease to do evil, and learn to do wel^: make haste to turn to the
Lord, and put not off from day to day: and whilst thou have time, bring forth
fruits worthy amendment of life. This will be taken for true repentance: this
will cause all thy former sins to be put out of all remembrance. And then,
whenever God shall be pleased to call thee out of thee out of the world, thou
shall end thy days in peace and comfort, and then thou shall indeed cease
from sin, and thy works shall follow thee, to the gain of eternal life. This
do, and repent thee of thy former resolution, for hitherto the reasons
whereupon it is grounded, are vain and dangerous. The vanity and weakness of
the third of these reason.


Thy third and last reason grounded upon supposed advantage, is this, thou
think that thy death shall bring with it an end of all thy troubles, of all
thy pain, and of all thy fear. And I verily believe, that all the former
reasons, were but idly pleaded by thee, that thou were nothing at all moved
with them, and that thou did only allege them, to make show of doing that
with reason, for which indeed thou can have no reason: and this last
alleged reason (though as weak, as vain, and as deceitful as all the
other) was the only thing that carried thy resolution. For all they that
resolve upon such desperate courses, do it out of a conceit to rid and free
themselves from shame and troubles. But verily this act, if thou should do
it (which God defend thee from) can not deliver thee from trouble, from danger,
or from shame. It is one of Satan's lies: as truly as he told our first
parents, that by breaking Gods commandment, they should be as gods, so truly
does he tell thee, that by this act, which is a manifest and violent breach of
Gods commandment thou shall free thy self from troubles. There is not a more
ready way to throw thy self into endless troubles.

And let us consider seriously of this There are ^vo k^des of (...), o^ ^ in
this life* another after this life.
point, that thou may see thy error. There are troubles, dangers, and
shames that belong to this world, and to the life of man in this world: this
world is their proper place, and thy life here is their proper time. Some
other there are that belong to an other world, and to the time that follows
our departure out of this world. Hell that receives the wicked, is their
proper place: and the time that succeeds this life, their proper time. Of the
first sort are poverty and inexpert losses, wearines, weakness and
sickness, in our body, disquietnesse in our house, slanders and disgraces,
banishment, imprisonment, public shame, displeasure of Princes, persecution
and such like. Of these the Prophet speaks, saying, Great are the Psalm 34. 19
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. Of the
other sort are the worm that dies not, and the fire that never goes out,
which Esaias speaks of, shame and perpetual contempt, which Daniel speaks
of: outward darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, which our
Savior speaks of: everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels,
tormenting flame, abiection from God, the second death, and the bottomless
pit, whose smoke ascends for ever. Of these speaks John the Evangelist,
saying. Death and hell were cast into the Reu. 20. 14
lake of fire, this is the second death: and whosoever was not found written in
the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire. The first sort belonging to
this life are short, tolerable, and mixed with many comforts: the second sort
belonging to the time after this life, are eternal, intolerable, and no
comfort is mixed with them, not so much as one drop of water to cool the
scorched tongue. The first sort is common both to good and bad men, and may be
borne, yea overcome with patience: the second sort is prepared only for the
wicked, even for the appointed vessels of wrath, and they give no place to
patience. And among all these troubles, one I find, that seems to be common
to both these places, and that is accusing thoughts (thy present burden) but
with this difference, that in this life it is but a matter of fear (though a
tormenting fear) and after this life it is matter of torment (even a most
fearful torment) in this life both good and bad are affrighted with this
tormenting fear, after this life, only the wicked and the reprobate are
tormented with this fearful torment.

Now from which of these troubles From what troubl^s death does, deliver.
does death free us? and in what estate does it leave us, when it has freed
us? These are material considerations for a man in thy condition, and
therefore hark diligently, that thou may not be deceived in thy account,
and fall into endless and intolerable troubles, while thou striuest to free
thy self from short and easy troubles. Death does put an end unto the
troubles of this life, not because it takes away troubles, but because it
takes away life, and with the end of life, needs must there be an end of the
trouble that is proper to life. For death does not help our pain a^*
Physician, but as an executioner; the Physician cures the grief, and
preserves life, the executioner cures the grief, by taking away the life:
for by cutting off the head, he frees the patient from ever complaining of the
toothache. And Imtreate thee to regard this manner of deaths cure. If thou were
sick of the gowt, or palsi^, or other disease, would thou send for the
common hangman to cure thee with a sword, or with a halter? This is not to take
away the disease, but to assist the disease, too weak of it self to destroy
thee speedily, and therefore thou call for help, not to assist thee against
the disease to overcome it, but to assist the disease against thee, to overcome
thee, I persuade my self thou would not send for the hangman, but would
send for the Physician, to cure thy disease with safety of thy self, whose
knowledge and fidelity might oppose against the danger of thy disease, and
comfort thee to overcome thy disease, and weaken the disease, that it might not
overcome thee: so deal with thy self in the time of thy Spiritual disease.
Send not for death the hangman (death came into the world by the Justice of God
as a punishment of our sin) but send unto God the Physician, that is able to
remove thy disease, and preserve thy life. God heals by preservation, not by
destruction, deaths act (in this manner required) if it may be called a healing,
heals by destruction, not by preservation, though I must confess, that with
death there comes an end of all present troubles, from sense and feeling
whereof, he is delivered that is dead.

But in what case does death leave In what case death leaves the^ that are de
liuered so from troubles.
them that are thus delivered from present, short, and sufferable troubles?
surely, it leaves not all in like case, the difference is great between the
dead. When death comes by the ordinary work of Gods hand (to whom the issues
of death belong) and the party that dies, is well prepared by faith in
Christ, to leave this world at the will of his GOD, that he may be gathered to
his Redeemer, which is best of all. Death It leaves the godly i^ a blessed
estate.
leaves this man in a blessed estate, it is the period of his present
troubles, and then begins his eternal rest. Unto this man death has left his
sting, and is made unto him the way and bridge, by which he passes over to
enter into true life. And this comes to pass, not by any secret virtue of
death it self, but by the virtue of the death of Christ, making that by his
grace to be our medicine, that sin had made to be our poison. Augustine
entreating of this point, that De Ciuitat. Dei^ lib. 13. cap. 4.
death which he calls poenam vitiorum, and supplicium peccator is, the just
pain of wickedness and punishment of sinners, should become as he calls it,
arma virtutis, and iusti meritum, the armor of virtue, and merit or happiness
of a righteous man, he says this comes thus to pass, non quia mors bonum
aliquod facta est quae antea malum fuit, not because death is now become a good
blessing, that before was an evil curse. Sed tantam Deus fidei praestit it
gratiam, vt mors quam vitae constat esse contrariam, instrumentum sieret per
quod transiretur in vitam: that is, but God did afford so much grace unto faith
in his Son, that death which is known to be contrary to life, should be made
the instrument or way by which we might pass into life. So that death coming
by the order of God, to a man prepared by faith in Christ, that neither through
impatience hasteneth death before his time, nor through love of this world, or
ignorance of his future happiness, cowardly shrinketh, desiring to live beyond
his time: death coming to such a man in this manner, delivering him from his
present short and sufferable troubles, leaves him in a blessed and happy
condition, absolutely freed from all troubles, for the second death has no
power over him, and he is presently received into glory. To him pertain these
words of Christ, He that John 5. 24.
hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. As
the believing thief passed from the Cross to Paradise, and as soon as he was
delivered from his present trouble, entered into eternal glory, and never felt
eternal troubles: so every believer, when God calls him out of this world,
from earth passes to heaven, as Lazarus did from his houell into Abraham's
bosom, and death leaves him in a most happy state. For, Blessed are the dead
which die in the Reu. 14. 13
Lord, even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors. No more
trouble, no more danger, no more sorrow shall come to them.

But death does not prove so beneficial It leaves the wicked in a most
wicked estate.
to all. For when a wicked man dies, whether he perish by fire as did the
Sodomites, or perish by water as did Pharao and his Egyptians, or be swallowed
up of the gaping earth, as was Korah and his company, or were stoned to death,
as was Achan, or be slain with the sword, as was Ioab, or perish of some foul
disease, as did Herod, or die a fair death in his bed, as the greatest number
do, or fall by his own hand, as Achitophel and some other did; howsoever he
come to his end, with honor or reproach, with ease or with pain: the wicked
man by death (though delivered from the troubls of this life, yet) is left in a
most woeful estate, being led into the depth of all miseries. For from the
earth they pass to hell, from short to eternal, from tolerable to
insufferable crosses, from trobles mixed with comforts, which also in their
bitterest condition may be indu^ed, and overcome with some little patience, to
troubles mixed with no comforts, making even the remembrance of that sweet name
of comfort to be a new addition of discomfort, and which give no place for the
least measure of patience to abide with them. Of the end and endless condition
of the wicked, when death has fetched them from hence, the Prophet speaks in
the Psalm, Psalm. 73. 18
Surely thou have set them in slippery places, and castest them down into
desolation. How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed,
as a dream when one awaketh, O Lord, when thou raisest us up, thou shall make
their image* despised. There prosperity before death is slippery as Ice, there
is no firm standing upon it and when death comes, that seems to give ease
and end of some intermixed troubles, they fall with violence, and there fall is
remediless, they perish in it, and remain miserable for ever, and whatsoever
conceit they nourished of lasting and continued ease, it becomes like a
dream, which proves idle when the dreamer awaketh: Job speaks excellently
of the wretched condition unto which death brings the wicked, saying, Job.
21. 17
How often shall the Candle of the wicked be put out, and there destruction come
upon them? He will divide their lives in his wrath: they shall be as slubble
before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries away. God will lay up
the sorrow of the father for the children, when he rewards him, he shall
know it: his eyes shall see his destruction, and* he shall drink of the wrath
of the almighty: for what pleasure has he in his house after him, when the
number of ^is months is cut off? This good man Job knew something, in what
condition death leaves a wicked man, when it has fetched him out of this
world: then is he delivered up to the violent storm of Gods just indignation,
the stubble is not more easily nor more confusedly scattered then he: then
comes the reward of all his wickedness, he was a doer before, from that
time he becomes merely a sufferer: then the fury of the almighty ceazeth
upon him, his daily drink shall be nothing else but the wrath of God: his
pleasure after his death is altogether ended, and eternal woe lights upon
him. Let us not stand only upon sentences, which may perhaps be esteemed as
laws, which great men easily break through and delude. Let us look into the
acts of God, and consider his real proceeding: we have a notable example
commended unto us by our Savior Christ, to whom the father has committed all
judgment, and therefore he should not be ignorant of Gods carriage. He
remembers a great man, a rich man, which was clothed in Purple and fine
linnin, and fared well and dilicately every day. His wealth and great estate
could not protect him from the stroke of death, that made an end of him, and so
of the troubles of his life, if his life were acquainted with any.

But in what case did death leave him? our Savior tells us in these words.
The rich man died, and was buried, and being in hell in torments, he lift up
his eyes and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom, then he cried
and said, father Abraham have mercy upon me, and Lu. 16. 22.
send Lazarus that he may dippe the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame: but Abraham said son remember that
thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus pain:
now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. There was his answer,
stoping his mouth, and leaving no place for any further hope of any good. While
he lived he was well, if any thing were a little amiss, it was fully
recompensed with many pleasures: in the end he died, and in that death his
troubles (if he had any) ended and his pleasures also. And where did death
leave him? in Hell: in what estate there? in torments: with what hope of help?
he had liberty to cry and call, but there was no relief: and it seems the
man understood and feared so much, and therefore in his request he was very
moderate (if I may call it moderation, which was rather the faint request of a
despairing heart) for he desired not to be taken out of Hell, to be placed in
Heaven where Lazarus was: he desired not to be quitted wholly of his torments,
and to possess the joys of Paradise: he knew it was in vain to hope for or
crave any such thing: And therefore like a saint-harted, fearing, doubting, and
despairing creature, he begged a drop of cold water, a thing of nothing,
soon dried up in the heat of that Furnace of fire where he fried. In the
measure of his request he showed the measure of his hope, he craves a thing
of nothing, as knowing that nothing was to be obtained.

This is all the deliverance from trouble, The sinners misery, that by killing
himself seckes to be free from trouble.
that thy act in killing thy self, and adding that unnatural sin unto all
thy other sins, can help thee unto: namly to deliver thee from sickness, by
thy death, and that death eternal, to deliver thee from needless fear, by
certain danger, and that danger for ever remediless: to deliver thee from a
little greese, by endless woe, and that we also insufferable: to deliver thee
from some discontent, by eternal vexation heaped up beyond measure: to deliver
thee from the slight offense of a little sun-burning, by casting thee into the
flames of Hell fire, that never shall be quenched: to deliver thee from some
disgrace among men, by making thee, as Esaias speaks to be an abhorring to all
flesh. This is that Esa. 66. 24.
sweet advantage that thou dreamest of, that thy death shall bring with it an
end of all thy fears, troubles, and disgraces, indeed it is the most sure way
to bring upon thee all fear trouble and disgraces; it ends present, and
begins future troubles. It ends short, and begins eternal troubles, it
ends easy and tolerable evils, it begins woeful and intolerable evils. So
that there is no deliverance to be hoped for this way, it turns in
conueniences into mischiefs, and turns offenses into hellish torments: in
one word it turns a weary life that may be helped, into a woeful death that
cannot be helped. He that hates thee with a deadly hatred, cannot devise to
do or wish unto thee a greater mischief, then this, that thou vnwisly
concludest against thy self, therefore change thy mind while yet thou have
time, hurt not thy self, please not thine enemies, offend not thy God, quench
not the light of life that he has kindled in thy breast, break not the prison
of thy body, in which God has shut up thy soul as a prisoner for a season: it
is neither a matter of justice for thee without commission to punish thy self
with death: neither is it a matter of advantage for fear of falling into
danger, to throw thy self headlong into danger. Bear thy cross with patience
yet a little while, and trust in the mercy of God by Christ. So shall thy
sins be forgiven, thy life shall be saved, and in due time peace shall be
restored to thy soul.

CHAP. XXIX.
THE sinner by this time A twel^th objection be i^ unworthy of life, and must
not nourish it: be is unworthy of good things and must not use them.
partly afraid and partly ashamed of his former unjust and dangerous
resolution, and seeing the iniquity and absurdity of it, lets it fall upon the
ground: but is not yet won to that care and love to the preservation of his
own life that should be in him: and therefore obiecteth again in a less
violent manner (but very unkindly) saying, If I may not kill my self that have
deserved to die, yet why should I cherish my self, that am not worthy to live?
is not life a gift and blessing of God? is it not a talent of his wealth that he
has committed to our occupying, that we might be faithful, and he might
be a gainer by the right use of it? and first of all, as it is his gift and
blessing bestowed upon me, I have been unthankful to him for it, the
unreasonable beasts, the senseless trees and plants have been more thankful
for a viler and worse-qualified life, then I for my life: yea the stones and
dead earth that have no life, have been more thankful for a bare being, then
I for my life adorned with excellent qualities. And shall so unthankful a man
think to continue the use of so great a blessing? And as it is his goods, and
that Talent that he has committed to me to use to his advantage, that he
might get glory by his own possession, I have been very unfaithful, and have
wasted the days thereof not only unprofitably, but also hurtfully: many days
have been spent in ignorance while I knew not my duty: many days in sloth and
idleness while I had no care to do my duty: many days in vanity while I
sought my pleasure: many in wickedness while I sought the satisfying of mine
own lusts. And shall so unfaithful a servant think to have still in use such
goods of his masters that he has done no good withal? was it not said if the
unprofitable servant, take the Mat. 25. 28
talent from him, and give it unto him that has ten talents. And was it not
said to Luke 16 2
the wastfull Steward, How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of
thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. Such a Steward, such a
servant am I, I have made waste of the days of my life, I have brought no
glory to God by them, therefore I hold my self unworthy of life, and will not
seek to nourish it: besides I am not worthy of meat, I will not eat: I am not
worthy of drink; I will never quench my thirst: I am not worthy of my clothes
to cover my wicked carcass, nor of my bed to rest my ungodly bones upon: I am
not worthy of thy company, of thy comfort, of these merciful words of counsel
that thou give me: I am worthy of nothing: cast me out to the dunghill as a
crumbe of unsavory salt, speak no more unto me, do no more service for me,
give nothing unto me, let me perish: I know how vile I am before God, and I am
as vile in mine own sight, and let me be no dearer in your ^ies: my sins
make me unworthy of all good things, and worthy only of death, and therefore
in reverence to God I will abstain from the use of all good things, and wait
for deserved death.

O poor afflicted soul, these words Answer to this twelfth objection.
do much move my compassion toward thee, to see that humility should become
hurtful to any poor servant of God, and that the confession of our
unworthiness should prejudice our comfort in God, and our relief from God, even
then when God does ofter relief, and in those things wherein God does offer
comfort. Here is an error that must be helped. This error is not in thy
confession of thine unworthiness, therein we and all Gods children will join
with thee, and every man confess that we are not worthy of the least of Gods
mercies, because we have been unthankful for the comfort that we have
reaped by them, and have also been unfaithful not improueing them to the
praise of God, we will say with Jacob unto God. I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies Genesis 32. 11
and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. We will confess
unto Christ with the Centurion, and say, I am not worthy that thou should
come Mat. 8. 8.
under my roof: And with the prodigal child, privy to his own riotous
courses, we will say to God, as he said to his father, Father I have sinned
against heaven Luke. 15. 21.
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. If
unthankfulness can make thee unworthy, we cannot be worthy, that have been as
unthankful: and if unfaithfulness can make thee unworthy, we must stand by
thee, and confess as much against our selves* if any man's sin may make him
unworthy, then are we as unworthy as any man, for we also have sinned and
justly displeased our God. But the error Wherein the error of this obi^ction
heth.
is in this, that, because thou do judge thy self unworthy of the good
gifts of God, therefore thou should forbear to use them: alas what should
become of the creatures of God, if all should forbear to use his guiftes that
are unworthy of his guiftes. This must needs produce a general decay of all
Gods creatures.

Understand therefore these things God allows his blessings to the unworthy.
following. First God does allow his blessings, not to the worthy only, but
to the unworthy also. Of him the Prophet Psalm. 145. 9
says. The Lord is good unto all, and his mercies are over all his works.
Because the creatures are the work of his hands, therefore (without regard
whether they be worthy or not worthy) he will extend his mercy unto them. Of
him the Lord Jesus says. He makes his Sun to Mat. 5. 45.
arise upon the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust.
God is not ignorant either of the worthiness of the good and just, or of the
unworthiness of the evil and unjust, but he regards the necessities of all,
and therefore because their grounds equally have need, in time of droght of
the dew of heaven, and in time of winters cold, of the refreshing warmth of the
sun, therefore he gives the heat of the sun, and moisture of his clouds,
to make all their grounds fruitful, be the owners of those grounds good or
evil, yet he will be good unto them. Secondly, The unworthy crave, obtain,
and use Gods blessings.
those men, that have in judgment found and acknowledge their own
unworthiness, yet in their necessities have made suite unto God for those good
things which they wanted, and have thankefully received and cheerfully used
the good things that God sent them. Jacob that acknowledged his unworthiness,
even then made request unto God for his mercy to be showed him, saying. I pray
thee deliver me from the Genesis 32. 11
hand of my brother from the hand of Esa^, for I fear him, least he will come
and smile me* and the mother upon the children* for thou said, I will surely
do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, etc. He earnestly
craves grace and mercy at Gods hands: and that he may obtain what he
desires, he is bold to remember unto God his gracious promise: and he does
all this even when he had in the same pra^er ackdowledged his unworthiness. The
Cent^rion that held himself so vile, that he was not worthy to receive Christ
into his house, yet even then entreated mercy at his hand for his servant,
saying. Speak, the word only Mat. 8. 8.
and my servant, shall be healed. And his faithful prayer found favor, for his
servant was healed, yea that prodigal child, that is the pattern of all
pen^tent sinners, when he did acknowledge his unworthiness, yet even then he
made request for his fathers loving favor, saying, Make me as one of thy hired
servants. Luke 15. 19
And his prayer was heard, himself was ^eceiued into grace, and he obtained
at his fathers hand whatsoever blessing a son might look for, so that never
any well advised child of man, howsoever ^nowing himself unworthy of the love
and mercies of God, did yet either re^ to use them when God did grant them, or
to entreat God for them, when (...) felt want of them. Thirdly, the good God
gives his blssing^ that they should be used to his praise.
blessings of God, by him given unto us, are therefore given that we should
use them, that by the use of them we being refreshed, (...) see therein the
fatherly ^are of God for us, and his continual ^ountie and love to us, and
might so be ^oued to give him thanks, and to trust in his mercy, and being so
given, they ought not to be refused, yea they cannot without our great sin be
refused, for in refusing them, we refuse God, and the free offer of his mercy,
that he gives his blessings to be used of us, Saint Paul teaches us saying.
Trust not in uncertain 1. Tim. 6. 17
riches, but in the living God, which gives us ubundantly all things to enjoy.
He gives all things: he gives all things abundantly: and he gives that
abundance to be used and inioied. Therefore does the Prophet David say. He
Psalm. 104. 14.
causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the use of man, that he
may bring forth bread out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of
man, and o^e to make the face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's
heart. All this increase of Gods blessings, the Prophet affirms to be given
for man's use, and also in some sort limiteth that use, showing us what good God
intends that we should reap of his guiftes, and he intends his own
praise in this bountiful giving of his blessings. And therefore is it, that
Saint Paul at Listra commends to those gentiles, the God that made the heaven
and earth, commending him by his bounty in giving those things, so to make his
goodness known. And therefore he speaks thus of him. He left not himself
without witness, in that Acts. 14. 17
he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness. This good did God for the Gentiles, he gave them
the dew of heaven, and fatnes of the earth, with his guiftes, he filled their
hearts, that is satisfied their desires, and made them to rejoice in the use of
those guiftes. And all this he did for them, to this end, that they might know
the boundles goodness of this God, and that his blessings, as so many faithful
witnesses might preach and declare this goodness of his, if by this means at
the last they would turn back from their idols to serve and please him: and
to this purpose serve the words of Moses unto the people of Israel, saying,
When Deu. 8. 10.
thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for
the good land which he has given thee. In these words be plainly signifies
unto us, that when God has given us fruitful habitations, and given us food
and all necessary things, his meaning is, that we should receive and use his
guiftes, and give him thanks for his goodness. Whosoever therefore refuses to
use the guiftes of God for their comfort, contemn his bounty, and deny him
his due praise, while they refuse the things for which they should praise him.
And most excellent are the words of the Prophet Joel, promising in Gods name
these his blessings to the people, and requiring their thanks for them to be
returned unto God, saying, The barnes shall be full Joel. 2. 24.
of wheat and the presses shall abound with wine and oil, and I will render
you the years that the Grasshopper has eaten, the cankerworme, and the
caterpiller and the palmerworme, my great host which I sent among you, so shall
you eat and be satisfied and praise the name of the Lord your God, etc.
Consider rightly of these words: in them the Prophet teaches us, that when God
sends the fruits of the earth, his good blessings unto us, his meaning is
that we should eat, and in eating be satisfied, and for this satisfaction
bless Gods name. This is Gods meaning in sending them and thou will not
receive them, thou will not eat that thou may be satisfied, thou will not
use them to the comfort and gladness of thine heart: is there not in thy course
manifest contempt of Gods goodness? as if thou did say unto him, let him keep
his guiftes to himself, let him give me none, I care not for them, I will not
receive them, I will not use them, I will not be beholding to him for them,
veriely this is the stubbornes of an untoward child, that being in his foolish
and froward nature, displeased with his father, refuses to receive bread at
his fathers hands.

Lastly understand that this resolution This abstinence is (...) dangerous to
thy life, as violence can be.
to refuse the comforts of life, differs but little from the former
resolution to hasten violently thine own death: for that which thou thoughtest
before to do with Saul's sword or Achitophels ^lter, thou will now do with
foolish and wilful abstinence, most idle pretending thy unworthiness, as if in
mere humility thou would kill thy self. And if the matter be wisely
considered, this course of weakening first, and after overthrowing thy life,
will be found a more cruel act, then that of Saul or Achitophel, for they
quickly rid themselves out of the pains of death, but thou like a cruel
executioner, do kill thy self slowly, with a lingering kind of torment. The
Prophet Jeremy says, They that be slain with the sword are better, Lam. 49.
then they that are killed with hunger, for they fade away as they were
stricken through for the fruits of the field. Let these words weigh with thee,
and take heed that thou be not a most cruel tormenter to thy self. The
profane histories report of a noble Roman, whose name was Marcus Portuis
Latro, Portuis latro.
that being weary of a quartan ague, that he had endured long, and whereof he
could not be healed, he killed himself with his sword. And they make like
mention of one Eratosthenes a Cirenaean, Eratosthenes.
the keeper of the famous Library of Ptolome in Egypt, that being long vexed
with a disease, whereof he could find no remedy, in the end by absteining from
meat killed himself. Both out of discontent ended their own lives, one by
laying violent hands upon himself, the other by withholding helpinghands from
himself: the one by applying that that did destroy life, the other by denying
that that should preserve life: which of these can thou excuse of murder? of
the unnatural murder of himself? and if both were murderers, which of them
was the more cruel in the (...) and judgment of the world? surely the second,
that absteined from the good things that he might and ought to have used, for
he prolonged his first grief, and joined a second grief (even the teeth of
famine) to it, and so with a double prolonged plague consumed himself: whereas
the other made quick dispatch, this fondnes therefore in refusing to use the
good guiftes of God, because the conceit is entered into thy fantasy that
thou art unworthy of them, is not a fruit of Christian humility, inspired by
the Holy Ghost, it is foolishnes, it is extreme dotage: yea if I should call
it by the right name, I should say it is high cruelty against thy self,
besides that, it is vile unthankfulness against God, and the aduiser was no
other then the old serpent that deceives the whole world.

Lay all these things together: first the The conclusion of the answer to this
objection.
bounty of God that gives his blessings not only to the worthy but also to
the unworthy, because the necessity both of the worthy and of the unworthy
does require it: and by unworthy, I do not mean the godly, that in true
humility do judge themselves unworthy of Gods favor (for God esteems them
worthy) but I mean the wicked* whatsoever they think of themselves for God
does esteem them unworthy) even unto them does God allow his good blessings.
Secondly, the behavior of all the wise and well advised sons of Adam, who
even then when they see and acknowledge their unworthiness, yet in the feeling
of their necessities and wants, do make hearty prayer unto God, that he will
be pleased to bestow his blessings upon them: and it is not only a liberty
that nature takes to seek for help in time of necessity, but it is the
liberty that God in his mercy gives to his servants, and which in piety and
faith they do use, namely to fly to God their helper in all necessities.
Thirdly the purpose of God the giver of all good things, who gives them not in
vain, but for our service and help, that we might use them, and being cheared
by their use, might return unto him with thanks for his goodness, so that
whosoever refuses to receive them and use them, deludeth as much as in him
lies the good purpose of God, rejects the offered mercy of God, and
intercepteth the praise of God, while he refuses to receive and use that, by
which God seeks to merit and win praise at his hands. Lastly the nature and
quality of the thing it self, namely the refusing of good things that God
gives and thou need, it is a wilful killing of thy self, while thou do
obstinately refuse to use the things that may preserve thy life: and it is a
most cruel kind of killing thy self, while thou do consume and waste thy
self by little and little, tearing thine own bowels with the teeth of
enforced famine, continued and increased from day to day, for it is a more
grecuous thing to be slain by famine then by the sword: lay all these things
together, and thy doc prove, this abstinence of thine grounded upon pretense of
unworthiness, to be a foolish, ungodly and a cruel course. Put it therefore
from thee, and use the love of thy friends, the help of the Physician, the
counsel of thy minister, the cheerful service of them that are about thee,
use thy bed, thy clothes, thy meat prepared for thy ease, thy covering, thy
nourishment, use all the creatures of God in their kinds, and praise God that
thou may have them. S. Paul says, Every creature of God is good, and
nothing ought 1. Tim. 4. 4
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by
the word of God and prayer. It ought not says he to be refused, it ought to be
received with giving of thanks. And if we use prayer unto God, that it will
please him to bless unto us his own gift, which the word of God allows us
to use, he will sanctify it for our good: For God that gives these things is
good, the things themselves that God does give are good, therefore the effect
of them being Christianly used cannot but be good. Continue the opinion of
thine own unworthiness, but reject thy unwise purpose of refusing to use Gods
creatures for thine unworthiness.

CHAP. XXX.
OUR poor distressed sinner, A thirtenth objection. He fears death for two
causes.
reclaymed from the conrses, that in his last objections he remembered, the
first being a quick violent and apparent purpose of ending his own life, the
second being a slow dangerous and close purpose of wasting his life, is not yet
so freed from the troubled thoughts of death, that he can with a quiet hope of
life look to the God of life: and thus further out of remaining fear
obiecteth, to the disquieting of his own heart; though I may not hurt my life
with violent hands, as first I thought to do, and must nourish my life with
serviceable hands, which in the second place I thought not to have done: yet my
life must come 'to an end by the condition that all Adams children are subject
unto. God said to Adam in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till Genesis
3. 19.
thou return to the earth, for out of it wast thou taken, because thou art
dust, and to dust shall thou return. This was the condition of the first man,
this is the condition of all men, and among all it is also my condition, I must
die, if I cherish life never so carefully. And this remembrance of death
(considering my present woeful estate) is fearful unto me two manner of
ways. First I fear lest death First least he die before this temptation
cease, that were to die without faith.
should take me away before I be delivered from this temptation, as it may
well do; for I may die to day, or to morrow, yea I may die presently. And if I
should so hastily die while this fear (directly contrary to faith) lies yet
upon my conscience, I should die in my infidelity, I should die without faith
in Christ: and so to die without faith in the son of God, is the highway to
eternal damnation* for the Lord Jesus says, he that believes not, is
condemned already, Ioh. 3. 18.
because he believes not in the name of the only begotten son of God.
Secondly Secondly, least the accusation be renewed after death
if there should be any ceasing and intermission of these accusing thoughts
before my death, yet I fear death, because after death this accusation may be
renewed, and the precedent ceasing prove no doing away for ever, but only a
deferring for a time of this plague. And I have cause to fear such a thing,
because the right time of preferring accusations against sinners, is the time
after death, when men must come to judgment: as the Apostle says, it is
appointed unto men Heb. 9. 27..
that they shall once die, and after that comes the judgment. After death the
soul comes to judgment, the book of conscience must then be opened, and
accusations then or never must be heard: and if these accusations now be so
grievous unto me, now while judgment is far off, while there is place for
repentance, and hope of forgiveness, surely they will then be much more
fearful, woeful, miserable, horrible: therefore the remembrance of death,
come it sooner, or come it later, come it before or after the stay of this
temptation, is fearful unto me.

This objection is not hard to be answered; Answer to this objection.
thou fear death two manner of ways. First, lest it come before thou have
overcome this temptation, and recovered peace with God by faith in our Lord
Jesus. And thou fear this hasty coming of death for two causes, one is
because it is possible that it may so come, for we may (and must if God call)
die presently: another because it is dangerous so to die, thou take thy
temptation to be directly opposite to faith, therefore if thou die before it
be overcome thou die without faith, and to die without faith is sure
damnation. Thus thou fear deaths hasty coming, and to thy fear of death
this way growing we will first make answer.

Against thy fear of death coming There is hope that thy temptation shall end
before death come upon thee.
before thy temptation be overcome, God gives comfortable hope, that death
shall not come before thy temptation be overcome. And it comes not at all, but
by the appointment of God, neither sooner nor later then he appointed it. For
he sent us with life into the world, he has appointed the length of our life
in the world, and the time and manner of our dying and departing out of the
world, lies only in his pleasure, of whom the Prophet says, To the Lord
Psalm. 68 20.
God belongs the issues of death. The set time for the produceing of all his
appointed works rests in his own counsel when the Apostles questioned the
Lord Christ (after his resurrection) for the restoring of the kingdom to
Israel, he made them answer, It is not for Acts 1.
you to know the times, or the seasons, which the father has put in his own
power. And if the time of all his works be put and placed only in his power,
then the time of thy death, which is one of this works is put only in his
power. But his God that has the sole disposing of thy death, has, as I said,
given thee comfortable hope that death shall not come before this thy
temptation be overcome. For this we have his gracious promise, delivered by the
pen of the blessed Apostle Paul, saying; God is faithful, that will 1. Cor.
1^. 13*
not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but will give the issue
with the temtation that ye may be able to bear it. Here he promises an issue
of every temptation, and also that the man burdened there with shall be able to
bear it and overcome it. And hitherto though this temptation has been
grievous unto thee, and in bearing of it thou have felt and found thine own
weakness, yet God has supported thee, and thou have been enabled to endure
weary days and comfortless nights. And in the mean time, while this
temptation has lasted, for thy further strengthening thou have inioyed many
mercies of God, both in thy soul, and body, and estate, and friends; for he
has not smitten thy soul with the stroke that fell upon Nebuchadnezzar, thou
have had, and still have thine understanding free, to inquire after God, and
harken after his mercy, and he has not smitten thy body with the bile of
Egypt* but thou have been able in body to stand under thy burden, and to
perform many good services in thy calling: and he has not smitten thee in thy
children, friends, and goods, with the rod of patient Job, but thy estate
remains safe, thy friends are cheerful about thee, such mercies of God have
accompained thy affliction, and ministered comfort unto thee in the time of it.
And in these things, one part of that promise delivered in Gods name by the
Apostle has been performed unto thee, (God will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you be able.) He himself that sent the temptation, gave thee
strength to bear the temptation, and unto this day thou bear it, though not
without grief, yet not without hope. Why then should not thou withal
cheerefulnes, hope and pray, that God would perform unto thee graciously the
other part of that promise (but will give the issue with the temptation etc?)
Does not the Apostle, when he gives us that promise in Gods name, use a preface
to persuade our hearts to hope for it, and pray for it, commending God, in
whose name he gives it, by the title of faithful, saying, God is faithful
that will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye be able? Hope then in
that faithful God, pray unto that faithful God, who has already approved his
faithfulness, in performing unto thee theone part of his promise, and as he is
true and faithful, he will (having freely bound himself) perform his whole
promise, and give an issue of thy temptation, and thou shall live to overcome
it. And here I will acquaint thee with an holy rule, which God observes in
the temptations of his servants, which rule offers hope of deliverance from
thy grievous temptation before death.

The rule is found in Deuteronomie, where Moses speaking to the people of
Israel, and remembering their weary wandering through a roaring and terrible
wilderness, and the many heavy accidents that in that wilderness came unto
them, says, that God led them that way, to humble them, and to prove Deuteronomy. ^.
16
them, that he might do them good in the latter end. Gods meaning was, after a
hard beginning to bring them to a comfortable end, when they were first humbled
and proved. And very meet it is that Gods servants should be humbled: and it
is right in God to prove his servants, whether they love the Lord with all
their heart, and will endure with patience his good pleasure and whether they
will cleave unto him in danger, and put their trust in his mercies: and this
proof is best made by crosses and troubles: for this cause does God send
troubles to his servants whom he loves, but always with a reservation, in his
good purpose, to do them good in the latter end. Apply this unto thy self: It
was fit that thou should be humbled, to acknowledge thy self before God to
be dust and ashes, and laden with iniquity: to humble thee in this sort, God
has sent this cross, do 1. Pet. 5. 6.
thou therefore humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt thee in due time. It was fit that thou should be proved, that thou
might see thine own strength to be but rotten^es, and dust, and that thou
might show thy love, thy patience, thy faith in God, that it might appear
whether God or thine own case were dearer unto thee, and whether thou will
glorify him in adversity, as thou man kest show to do in days of peace and
prosperity: and thus to prove thee he has sent this temptation: therefore
now show thy self a man, show thy self a Christian, shrink not from God,
murmr not at his visitation, suffer with patience, and pray in faith, and be
constant unto the end. And he that has brought thee into this temptation, as
it were into a roaring wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, will
surely do thee good in the latter end. Surely this rule offers unto thee
comfortable assurance, that before the end of thy days, thou shall see an end
of thy temptation, and such an end as shall bring thee more joy, then thy
affliction does now breed thee grief.

But say that death do take thee away, If death com before, yet there is faith
even where this temptation is strong.
before thou have overcome this temptation, and thou fear it may do so,
grounding thy fear upon two reasons, one is the possibility of it (thou
may die presently) the other is the danger of it (thou think that then
thou shall die in infidelity and without faith) if this danger were not, the
possibility of dying, and death it self, whenever coming, could be no
just ground of thy fear: for the Patriarks and Prophets, yea Christ himself
the Son of God, and his holy Apostles died, and all the Saints of God die.
And it can not be hurtful to any, that is so common to all, except there be
some special danger annexed to it, that makes it hurtful to one, that is not
hurtful to an other. This danger thou say is thine infidelity. And thine
infidelity and want of faith, thou proouest by the quality of thy temptation,
which thou take to be directly opposite to faith, and the banisher of all
faith. If therefore it shall appear, that though thou die before thou have
overcome this temptation to thy liking, yet thou wa^test not faith in Christ,
even faith unto salvation, then there is no cause of fear.

Indeed this temptation argues a In this temptation there is infidelity
root of infidelity to remain in thee: for seeing the Lord Jesus has borne
our sins in his body upon the tree, and in bearing them has taken them away,
and has washed and cleansed us in his blood: and seeing God the father of our
lord Jesus Christ, receiving satisfaction in the sacrifice of his Son, has
by an irreuocable word promised to forgive our sins, and to remember our
iniquities no more: and these things both concerning the meritorious sacrifice
of Christ, and concerning the faithful promise of God, are known, and have
been made known unto thee: Surely this temptation of accusing thoughts would
long since have received an answer, if there had not been some root of
infidelity But where there is infidelity, there may be faith.
remaining in thee, to give continual nourishment unto it. But because there
is some infidelity in thee, does it therefore follow, that there is no faith?
That is not so: there may be both together either in his measure and degree.
Does not Saint Paul tell us, that in himself, at the same time, there was one
power which he calls the Law of his mind, leading him to God and to the
love of his law, and an other power which he calls the law of his members,
leading him from God: and leading him to sin, his words are, I delight Romans
7. 22
in the law of God concerning the innerman, but I see another law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the
law of sin which is in my members. Can any things be more opposite one to
an other, then these two laws of the mind and of the members, either striving
to draw the man in whom they remain, a contrary way, the one to God, the other
to sin? and yet they continue in the same man, at the same time, for his
exercise, so long as he lives. The same Apostle tells us concerning every
renewed servant of GOD, that in him, at the same time, there remains, both
natural corruption, which he calls flesh, and infused grace, which he
calls Spirit, and either works, striving each against other. His words are,
Gala. 5. 1^.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other: so that ye can not do the same things
that ye would. The spirit in them, that is, infused grace, lusts against
corruption, to draw them unto goodness, and the flesh in them, that is,
natural corruption, lusts against grace, to draw them unto wickedness.
Faith and infidelity, the one being the work of the spirit, the other the
work of flesh, are not more contrary one to another, then the flesh and spirit
from whence they grow, and yet they are present together: therefore with thy
infidelity there may be faith in thee. The condition of a Christian man in his
holy calling from darkness unto light, is like unto the appearing of day after
a dark night. It is a similitude much used by the holy Ghost in the
Scriptures. Paul says, The night is past, To. 13. 12.
the day is at hand: That is, the time of darkness, in which you erred
altogether is past, and God has sent his word among you, by which, as by the
light of the day, you may see the way to walk in. And in another place, Ye
are all the 1. These. 5. 5
children of light, and the children of the day, we are not of the night,
neither of darkness: That is, we live not in ignorance, we walk not in
ignorance, but God has called us to knowledge, and by the light thereof we
see the way before us, and walk on safely in it. Now we all know, that when
the day begins to break, there is remaining a shadow of darkness a long
time, and that first growing light, is far from the clear and full light that
shines at noon day. But will any man say, that because of the remainder and
mixture of darkness in the beginning of the day, that therefore there is no
light at all? every man would control that assertion. Even so, God showing
mercy to them that were shut up in infidelity, gives them faith, which
begins to grow like the day light, in the first breaking forth of it, and
with some faith there remains much infidelity. Shall any man therefore say,
that because there is some infidelity still remaining, there is no faith at
all; that saying were injurious to the new converted and weak Saint, and it
were an unthankful censure of Gods gracious work begun. Remember what thou
have read in the Gospel, of the honest man, that came unto the Lord Jesus, to
entreat for his son that was possessed with a devil: he said unto our
Savior, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Mar. 9. 24.
He professed his faith, while he confessed his infidelity, he doubts not of
the presence of the one, because he saw and felt the presence of the other:
but knowing his faith to be tender and young, and his infidelity to be old and
strong, he craves the help of the Lord Jesus to weaken his infidelity, and
to strengthen his faith. Such altogether is thy case at this time, weak faith
oppressed by strong infidelity, strong infidelity keeping the upper hand of
weak faith: say unto the Lord Jesus as that man did, Lord I believe, help my
unbelief. And if thou think his prayer to be defective, because he only
craves help against infidelity, and desires not increase of his faith, unto
the words of his petition, join the words of the petition, that the Apostles
together Luke 17. 5
made unto the Lord, saying, Lord increase our faith. These words put together
make a perfect prayer for this peculiar grace, that the Lord Jesus, of whose
fullness we receive grace for grace, will be pleased to increase our faith,
which we find to be weak, and to weaken our infidelity, which we find to
be strong. This do, and by the mercy of God, and goodness of our most mild
Savior, thou shall find an happy alteration in good time growing; and thou
shall have no cause to fear to die without faith, whenever death shall come,
yea though thou should be taken away before the full vanishing of this
temptation, because he dies not without faith, in whom, at his death, there is
remaining some infidelity; neither dies he without hope, in whom at his
departure, there is remaining some fear: and unto God, thy covered, and almost
smotherd faith will appear, when If the temptation he once rightly ouercom it
shall not return after death.
the same is hidden from thine own feeling.

But thou fear death, not only this way, least it should come before thou
have wholly overcome this temptation, but thou fear it also, though there
should be a ceasing of the temptation before, namely that after death this
accusation may be renewed, because (as thou say) the right time of preferring
accusations against sinners is, when after death they appear before the Lord
in judgment: and if the accusation now, while there is yet time of repentance,
and hope of forgiveness, ^e so heavy and fearful as thou do find it and
feel it, it must needs be then much more heavy and fearful, when there is
left no time of repentance, nor any new course to be taken for the obteining of
forgiveness. To this I answer, that if once thou overcome this temptation
before death, thou need not to fear the return of it after death, if now
it be overcome and quenched rightly by such means as God has appointed for
the quieting of consciences, whereof it behooves thee to be very careful: for
if thy temptation be overcome by the knowledge and faith of the infinite mercy
of God toward humble and contrite spirits, and of the virtuous mediation of
Jesus Christ that lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, gathered
by harkening to the doctrine of the Gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation: and if this knowledge and faith be accompanied with the love of God,
that is so merciful a father, and of Jesus Christ that is so gracious a
redeemer, and with the love of thy brother, and with the hatred of sin that
is offensive both to God and to thy brother, assure thy self that these
accusing thoughts so silenced and quenched, shall not be revived after death:
and thy peace so grown by knowledge and says so accompanied, is not a
deferring of this temptation unto a fitter time, but a total abolishing of it
for ever. He that in this manner overcomes his accusing thoughts on earth,
shall never hear of them before God in heaven. Wherefore else does the Lord
Jesus say of the determination and censure of his servants (to whom he has
committed the word of reconciliation) either assuring forgiveness to the
penitent believer, or denouncing judgment to the impenitent and unbelievers?
Whatsoever ye Mat. 18. 18.
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Wherefore does he speak thus of their determination
and of their word, but that according to that good hope, which thou have
gathered unto thy soul from the word of God, in the writings of his Prophets
and Apostles, and in the mouths of his faithful witnesses on earth, according
to that good hope he will do unto thee in heaven. And in his judgment, both
at thy last day, and in the worlds last day, he will not vary one jot from the
straight rule of his word whereon thy recovered peace is grounded.

Indeed, if thou should recover thy peace, and remove thy accusing thoughts
with the remedy of Atheists, that like David's fool, Say in their hearts,
there is Psalm. 14. 1.
no God, that is, there is no divine power governing the world in justice, and
rewarding every man according to his works. If thou should shake off thy
temptation, with that conceit of wicked men recorded in the book of wisdom,
that say, We are borne at all Wis. 2. 2.
adventure, and we shall be ^ereafter as though we had never been: for the
breath is a smoke in our nosthrilles, and the words are a spark raised out of
our heart, which being extinguished, the body is turned into ashes, and the
spirit vanishes as the soft air: our life shall pass away as the trace of a
cloud, and come to ^ought as the mist that is driven away with the beams of
the Sun, and cast down with the heat thereof. That is, no hand of God made us
at the first, to be served with the obedience of our life* and when we leave
the world, we shall not appear before the face of any God to give account for
our lives, for we were borne by no providence and appointment of any higher
power, but even as it happened, such a man to beget such a boy, such a mother
to bear such a child: and when we die we return into earth and air,
ourbodies become dust, our spirits vanish as a puff of wind, there is no
difference after death between man and beast, both vanish and come to nothing;
as we were not before we were borne, so we shall not be when we are dead. I^
with these wicked conceits we seek to stifle and choke our own conscience,
or falsely flatter our selves with the security of contemners, despising all
the threatenings of God, So that when they hear the words Deu. 29. 19
of the curse, they bless themselves in their heart, saying, we shall have
peace, although we walk according to the (...) of our own hearts: that is,
the threatenings of Gods displeasure are not to be regarded, I esteem them no
more then the wind that breaths over mine head, and I shall be well enough
whatsoever God say, and I will hold on my course without any fear of God. If
upon any such sandy and deceitful ground thou should build thy peace, and
by such device, should make dull, rather then quiet thy troubled conscience,
verily thy accusing thoughts would return like so many furies after death*
charging thee with all thine impieties before the face of thy Judge. The
Atheist shall knowthat there is a God, as it is said in the Psalm, Doubtless
there is a God that Psalm. 58. 1^.
judges the earth. The Sadduce shall know that there is a life after this,
when he shall be called to answer, as it is said of the ^uill steward, Give
accounts of thy Luke. 16. 2.
stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward. And the contemner shall
know the power of Gods displeasure, when the wrath of the Lord and his
i^alousie shall Deu. 29. 20
smoke against that man, and all the curses written in Gods book shall light
upon him* But if thy accusing thoughts be put to silence by the knowledge and
faith of Gods mercy, and of Christ his merit, accompanied with repentance and
true conversion to God, as has been said: if by the promises and rules of
Gods word, thy peace while thou live be recovered, assuerdly thy sins shall
never be laid to thy charge after death, for otherwise there were no
faithfulness in God, nor truth in his word, wherein he has thus spoken, I will
rememher their (...). 31. 34
sins no more. And in another place, All Eze^ 8 2^.
his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him. Theresore if it shall please God, by the means that is applied unto thee,
out of his word, to deliver thee from the storm of this temptation whilst
thou live, thou have no cause to fear the renewing of it after death, nor in
that name to fear death.

And because thou art troubled with Death i^ not to be feared for anything of a
good man
such fantastical fears of death (that indeed is naturally fearful to all
men) let ^e acquaint thee with the condition thereof to a Chistian; it came
indeed into the world by the sin of our first parents, and by the holy and
just judgment of God it was imposed upon us as a punishment of sin,
depriving us of all present good things, and plunging us into eternal evils.
But when the son of God suffered death for our sins, and by his suffering
gave satisfaction to the justice of God, he then slew and destroyed death it
self by that death of his, and took away all deadly and killing power from
that dissolution of ours which we call death, and made it unto all believers a
gate and passage into life, putting an end unto all their present troubles, and
bringing them to the possession of endless happiness. So that it is to them as
the evening is to the labourer, when he both rests from his former weary
work, and also receives the reward for which he wrought. For the body
henceforth is laid up in the grave, as upon a bed of ease, where it shall
^euer after, either shake for cold, or faint for heat, where it shall never
after feel either hunger or sickness, or be wearied any more with painful
labor. That is it that the Prophet means when he says, Peace shall come,
they shall rest in Esaias. 57. 2.
their beds every one that walks before him. That is, the righteous man, that
treading in the paths of Gods commandments, walks with him in his holy
obedience, he^ at his iournies end, in his body shall lie down to rest in his
grave, as on his bed, and much peace shall be his portion; and as for the
soul, from thenceforth, being unclothed of his earthly covering, and removed
out of his Tabernacle and house of clay, it ascends up unto Jesus Christ, and
being clothed with glory, it has an happy abiding with him, in heaven, where
it inioyeth the most comfortable presence of Christ his redeemer, and the
desired fellowship of those redeemed, that are alreadle passed out of the
wilderness of this wicked world into the paradise of eternal delight. So did
the Lord Jesus promise to the dying these, when he said unto him, This day
thou shall bewith Luke. 23. 43
me in paradise. So did the Apostle Paul wish unto himself, when he
expressed his mind in these words, Desiring Phil. 1. 23.
to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all. And the same
Apostle, speaking of the death of all the faithful, says in this wise, We
know that if our 2. Cor. 5. 1^
earthly house of this Tubernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of
God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. Here
is the change of the souls dwelling, from a ruinous house on earth, to an
eternal house in heaven. Afterward the same Apostle says. We are bold and
love rather to re^one 2. Cor. 85.
out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord. Here is the change of the souls
company; on earth it conuerseth with mortal men, in heaven it dwells ever
with the immortal God. This is all the hurt that death can do unto us (if
this were to be called hurt) it brings the body to rest in the grave, and it
brings the soul to present glory with God, and all the dangerous deadly and
killing power that originally it had, by any confederacy with sin, all that
is taken away by the death of Jesus Christ. And if it were sometime to be
feared as a poisoned serpent of the old serpents brood, yet it is so spoiled
by that serpent that was lifted up upon the cross, that it has neither tooth,
nor sting, nor any poison left to hurt any believer. Hear to this purpose the
words of Saint Paul, O death where is thy sting? O grave 1. Cor. 15. 55.
where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law: but thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Death therefore cannot be hurtful to the believer. And if
while he live, he take such order, and find such favor, that God will be
pleased in Jesus Christ to send him a discharge of his sins by faith in his
son, he has no cause after death to fear the reviving of his accusation,
though the legions of lying devils, whose malice makes them accusers of the
Saints before God, should altogecrie out against him, as Saint Paul teaches us
saying. Who shall lay any thing to Romans 8. 33.
the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it
is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at
the right hand of God, and makes request also for us. Thou have no cause to
fear death, or any thing that follows death, if while thou live thou return
to God, and recover his favor in Jesus Christ: for there is full discharge
against accusation and condemnation (both in this life, and after this life) in
the free love of God, and most meritorious intercession of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. XXXI.
THE storm is over: A fourteenth objection, all things are grievous to him,
that are pleasant to other men.
our afflicted sinner by this time sees no cause any longer to dream of
terrifiing death: and were it not that one d^am of bitterness disseasoneth the
comforts of life that God has lent unto him, he should grow to some reasonable
temper. But one thing he has cause to complain of, and let us hear him,
that we may (understanding his grief) be the better able to help him. He
tells us of a heavy case, his sleep he says, is not quiet, but mixed with
fearful dreams: at his table his mind takes in more sad thoughts, then his
mouth does bits of meat: the voice and face of his old acquaintance and
former friends does now revive his grief, so often as he does either see them,
or hear them: the fairest rooms of his house, which he had trimmed up for his
delight, if he come into them, do strike him with grievous terror: and all
those things that he delighted in before, are new matter of sorrow and
heaviness unto him, and it is his only content (though without) to sit alone in
darkness. This he takes to be some curse of God following him, and an evident
sign of Gods just and fearful anger following him: for what should make Gods
good creatures, (other men's comforts) to be discomforts to him, but the only
displeasure of God?

To this I answer, that it is very likely Answer to this objection.
that it is so, and will continue to be so with him, so long as this burden of
accusing thoughts lies heavy, remaining upon his wounded conscience. It is a
very kindly effect of it, that has grown out of it, and will vanish with it.
Thou sleep and catest, with a wounded heart; and hence it is, that while
thou sleep and eatest, thou still feel the smart of thy wounded heart.
Thy ancient friends and former woonted delights appear unto thee now, when
thou art not fit to take pleasure in them, as before time thou did, and that
makes thee at the present to be the more troubled, thinking upon thine old
liberty now lost. And the things prepared for thy pleasure while thou were
capable of pleasure in the contrary disposition of thine heart, (bent
altogether to fear and sorrow) do now bring ^orth a contrary effect unto
thee, even increase of sorrow. And a desire of shadow and solitarienesse
(though they be hurtful) does follow a grieved mind, as Jeremy says of the
man that bears the yoke in his youth, He sits alone and keeps silence,
because I. am. 3. 28.
he has borne it upon him. And this desire of darkness and solitariness,
either is an effect of mortification in him that is crucified to the world
(seeing the world crucified to him) or else it grows, partly out of shame,
and partly out of anger, that things are in no better tune: and upon the
recovering of thy peace, and ceasing of thy temptation, this trouble will
certainly vanish away. In the mean time, give place to this grief as little
as thou can, and strive to rejoice in the Lord, and in the good blessings he
has bestowed upon thee, and pray him that bestowed good things upon thee, to
give thee a free heart to take comfort in his guiftes, that thou may be
provoked to praise his name. And withal, crave and use the counsel and help
of some learned and skillful Physician, for there is something in this grief,
that has need of his judgment and diligence. And the God of hope fill Rom
15. 13
thee withal joy, and peace in believing, that thou may abound in hope,
through the power of the holy Ghost. Amen.

And now after some delay in answering Conclusion concerning this burden of
accusing thoughts.
such objections, as the unquiet soul has made out of his grievous fear, let
us grow unto a conclusion, concerning this burden of accusing thoughts: and let
us gather together briefly and orderly, the scatterd grounds of hope, that this
burden may be cast off (when God shall be pleased to give his blessing) and the
scattered rules of advice, that teach how to cast it upon God.

And for grounds of hope, that this Grounds of hope that i^ may be cast off
upon God.
burden of accusing thoughts may be cast off upon God for the sinners ^ase, it
has been showed and proved. First, that his sin, not being that sin that
is called blasphemy against the holy Ghost, is a pardonable sin, though
certainly worthy of a thousand damnations. According to that saying of Christ
in the gospel, Verily I say unto you, Mark. 3. 28
all sins shall be forgiven to the children of men and blasphemies wherewith
they blaspheme. Secondly, that the Lord Jesus Christ has commanded him, and by
his commandment, given him leave to ask forgiveness of sins, and has
drawn for him a form of petition, by which to crave that forgiveness of our
heavenly Father, when he taught him in the Gospel to say, Forgive us our
sins, Luk* 11. (...)
for even we forgive every man that is indebted to us. Thirdly, that God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is rich in mercy to all that call upon
him, has promised, both to forgive, and to forget all our sin and iniquity.
In thos^ gracious words record^d by Jeremy, I will forg^ue their iniquity, and
remember Ier. 31. 34.
their sins no more. Fourthly, the condi^ions to be observed on our part,
which God requires where he forgiueth sins, and upon which he does most
assuredly forgive sins, have been showed to be these three.

First, repentance bringing forth in us amendme^t of life, according to that
saying Eze. 18. 21
o^ the Lord in Ezek^el, I^ the wicked will return from all his sins that he
has committed and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, and shall not die: all his transgressions that he
has committed, they shall no: be mentioned unto him but in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. Secondly, love unto our brother, in forgiving
unto him whatsoever wrong he has done unto us: according to that saying o^ the
Lord Jesus in the Gospel, Math. (...). 14
If ye^ do^ forgive (...) their trespasses, your (...) Father (...) also
forgive you. Thirdly, says in God, expec^ing at his hands that mercy that he
has promised to grant, and ex^cting it, in, and (...) his son Jesus Christ
his son^e* Jesus Christ his (...), (...) all the promises of God are yea and
amen. According to that most precious saying Io^. 16. 23.
of the Lord in the Gospel, Uerily, verily (...) to you, whatsoever ye shall
ask the (...) my name, he will give it y^u. These are grounds of truth, giving
hope unto us, that the burden of accusing thoughts, may be cast off and turned
upon God, for the case of the poor sinner.

The rules of adui^e, in observing Rul^ of adui^, how to ca^l this burden upon
God.
whereof this burden is cast upon God, and the neglect whereof hinders the
ca^ling of this burden upon God, are these. First, that without denial, excu
sing, or extenuating of his sin, he do ingenuously and fully confess unto
God his sin, saying with the Prophet in the Psalm, Against thee, against
Psalm. 51. 4,
thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. For he that seeks by
any means to hide, extenuate, or excuse his sin before God, as if he had not
offended, or had not deserved wrath by his offense, shall not be pardoned, but
he that freely confesses, shall find favor. Solomon says in the Pro. 28. 13.
Proverbs, He that hides his sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses
and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Secondly, let him patiently bear, and
without all murmuring, the stroke of Gods hand, which his confessed sins
convince him to be most worthy of, and let him say with the Church, I will
bear the wrath Mic. 7. 9.
of the Lord because I have sinned against him. For murmuring and impatience
provoke God more. The Prophet says thus of God, With the froward thou will
Psa. 18. 26. 1. Pet. 5. 6.
show thy self froward. But patience wins favor at Gods hands for
deliverance. The Apostle Peter says: Humble your selves under the mighty hand
of God, that he may exalt you in due time. Thirdly, he must now hate sin that
has bin so chargeable unto him, and inquire after the will of God, and do it.
As Saint Peter likewise teaches us saying, amend Act. 3. 19.
your lives and turn, that your sins may be done away. For he that
continues with delight in sin shall never find favor, but heapeth up more
wrath unto himself, against the day of wrath: the Psa. 11. 5.
Prophet says, Him that loves iniquity does his soul hate. A fourth advice
is, that he have compassion upon his fellow servant, and forgive the offenses
of his brother, putting from him all purpose of seeking revenge for injuries
received. As Saint Paul advises saying, Forbearing one another, and forgiving
one Col. 3. 13.
another, if any man have a quarrel to another. For he that has no pity upon
his brother, and exacteth satisfaction of him, shall find no pity with God,
and shall be sold to pay the uttermost farthing of his own debt. As the Lord
Jesus has plainly said, If ye do not forgive Mat. 6. 15.
men their trespasses, no more will your father forgive you your trespasses. A
fifth advice is, that he in^orme himself daily more and more of the mercy of
God, and merits of Jesus Christ, by searching the Scriptures, that do bear
witness thereto, that he may by this means grow to believe in God, whereunto
the written word affords great help for the saying of John is true of all
the Scriptures. These things are written that ye might believe. Ioh. 20. 31.
And without faith that staieth our minds upon God in the merit of his son
there is no access unto God, as we are taught by the Apostle saying, Without
Heb. 11. 6.
faith it is impossible to please God. Lastly, he must with sighs and groans,
with humble and hearty prayers, solicit the majesty of God continually, that he
will be pleased to respect him with favor, and to forgive his sins; as the
Prophet Hosea teaches us, saying, O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for
thou Hos. 14. 1.
have fallen by thine iniquity: take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and
say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we
render the calves of our lips. The neglect of this duty of praying to God, is
esteemed to be a mark of a wicked man: For of them whom he calls works of
iniquity, the Prophet says, They call not upon God. In these Psalm. 53. 4.
^ew rules of confession, patience, repentance, love, faith, and prayer,
stands the right casting of this burden upon God. These things let him
practice constantly, and God will ease his wearied conscience. And thus have we
declared, what burdens are here meant; and what it is to cast every such
burden upon God.

Which things understood, we have the Prophets meaning, in this precept of our
text, Cast thy burden upon the Lord: That is, in all thy trouble seek help and
deliverance at (...) hand, depending upon him.

CHAP. XXXII
Now we come to the The promise of recompense.
promise of recompense, following in these words And he shall nourish thee, he
will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. The rules of holy counsel
given us of God, are always enriched with liberal promises of his blessing,
that we may know that it is not in vain to harken to his voice, n^r either
dangerous or fruitless to follow his direction. When the Lord Jesus said to
one that talked with him, This do, so giving him direction, Luke 10. 28
there follows a promise in these words, And thou shall live, assuring him of
good success, in following his commandment. And unto all the precepts,
instructions, and aduises of almighty God (as noting the sure success that
follows the keeping of them) may the words of the Prophet be added, If ye
Esaias 1^ 19.
consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land. That is, if ye
will hatken to the voice of God, and do what he commands, he will prosper
your ways, and you shall live comfortably in the land that he has given you
to dwell in. For all the precepts, instructions, and directions God gives, are
precepts, instructions, and directions of holiness, justice and wisdom, that
can not either hurtfully or fruitlesly mis-leade us. Job 21. 14.
The wicked say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways: who is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should
we have, if we should pray unto him? and the Prophet Malachie charge the
wicked of his time to have spoken stout words against God in this manner; Ye
Mala. 3 24
have said, it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
kept his commandments, and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts?
Therefore we count the proud blessed, even they that work wickedness are set
up, and they that tempt God, yea they are delivered: this is the opinion of the
wicked, that the commandments, instructions, and directions of God, carry with
them no assurance of good success: they can devise and appoint more safely and
more profitably for themselves. But God says to the righteous that hearken to
his courses, and follow his commandments, that when he has done according
to justice and goodness, both to the one sort, and to the other, then shall
you return, Mala. 3. 18
and discern between the righteous and wicked, between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not. Gods judgment shall make a sensible difference
between them, while the wicked miscarry and perish, that despised his counsel:
and the godly prosper that follow his counsel. For of all the counsel, and of
all the commandments of God, the Psa. 19. 11
Prophet David says, By them is thy servant made circumspect, and in keeping
of them there is great reward. For when a man does honor GOD by his obedience,
as a just commander, and a wise aduiser: then out of his goodness he
furthereth and strengthens that good success that depends upon his rule.
Hearken then unto the voice of God, follow his holy direction, and all things
shall go well with thee.

But let us look to the words of this The words of the promise are fitted to
his own present burdens.
promise, And he shall nourish thee, he will not suffer the righteous to fall
for ever. The promise has two parts. The whole is delivered by David in such
words, as might most fittely answer to those burdens, that at that time lay
most heavy upon his own soul: that, as having recovered comfort to himself,
he^ structeth others to seek the like: so instructing others how to win
their comfort, he might together confirm his own more and more.

Now the burdens that at that time Which were two, one was poverty and wa^.
were most heavy to David, were two: first, poverty and want of necessaries
for him and his followers: secondly, a great fall from the honor that he
lately enjoyed in Israel. His poverty appears plainly in the history of his
troubles. When Jonathan by his arrows ga^e him warning to sly, he left all
that he had, and came in bare estate to the house of Ahimelech the Priest, and
of him obtained the sword of Goliath (for he brought not with him, for haste,
so much as a weapon of his own) and certain loanes of show bread for him and
for his men. From thence he fled to Achish king of Gath, but durst not stay
there. Then came he into the wild country of Judah, a place of no plenty: there
his number increased daily to the increase of his necessity: and the
inhabitants became his enemies, not relieuing his want, but betraying him and
his haunts to Saul* Where while he stayed, there fell out a notable thing, that
shows how poverty pinched him. There was a certain rich man named Nabal,
that sheared his sheep, and prepared great cheer for his shearers. To him
David sent ten young men with this message given to them; Go to Nabal, 1.
Sa. 25. 5.
and ask him in my name how he does, and thus shall you say for salutation,
Both thou and thine house, and all that thou have be in peace, wealth, and
prosperity. Behold, I have heard that thou have shearers: now thy sheepeheards
were with us, and we did them no hurt, neither did they miss any thing all
the while they were in Carmel: ask thy servants, and they will show thee.
Wherefore let these young men find favor in thine eyes (for we come in a good
season) give I pray thee what soever comes to thine hand, unto thy servants,
and to thy son David. This petition, to beg from a churles dinner, favors
of no great abundance: and when he was repulsed of Nabal* and his young men
returned empty, bringing nothing to him from Nabal, but churlish words, he
became suddenly enraged, and armed four hundred men, and went that evening
with them, with resolution to slay the churl, and all that belonged to him
before the morning, which he had certainly done, if he had not been met,
and stayed in the way by Abigail the prudent wife of Nabal. Now we know what
makes the lion to roar, and the wolf to be furious, even hunger, when they
seek for their prey. And had not David been at that time a hungry lion, if
his state without touch of want could have borne that repulse of Nabal, he
could never have resolved upon so violent and cruel a course. This history
most clearly shows, that at this time a heavy burden of a poor estate
pressed his soul. Therefore in setting down this promise, he uses words of
encouragement to others, that agree fittely with his own condition, and serve
conveniently to confirm his own hope.

And as he was poor, so also he was His other burden was a fall from his
former honor.
fallen from the honor that he lately enjoyed in Israel, and in a manner lay
dejected at the feet of his enemies, to be trampled upon. For he had been a
great man in the Court of Saul, and in the eyes of all Israel. First in his
Fathers house, and in the midst of his brethren, by Samuel sent of God, he
was anointed to be King in Israel. Secondly, when the evil spirit, sent of
God to vex Saul did invade him, and he was in the fits of his fury, then
David was sent for to the Court, and played on his Harp before Saul, and
procured him ease, and a ceasing of his fits, for the evil spirit departed
from Saul. Thirdly, when a battle was between Israel and the Philistims, and
there came forth daily, out of the host of the Philistims, a mighty man named
Goliath, of the town of Gath, and defied Israel, from whom all the people fled:
then David accepted the Philistims challenge, and slew him, and put away the
shame from Israel, for which honorable fact, the women praised him in their
Song, say^ng, Saul has 1. Sa 17. 7.
slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand. Fourthly, Saul made him a
captain over a thousand men* and whithersoeuer David led them forth, he
behaved himself wisely, and valiantly; for the Lord was with him, and made him
to prosper, and all Israel loved him. Lastly, Saul gave him one of his
daughters to wife, and he became the Kings son in law: and he did eat
meat at Saul's Table: and Jonathan Saul's son, made a true league of amity
with him, and all the gallants of the Court regarded him. Such had been the
standing of David in a loft^ height of honor.

And now from this height of honor, he was fallen low into contemp^ before his
enemies. For, from his house, his wife, his dear (...) Jonathan, from the
Court, the City, and the Tabernacle; from his honorable office, company,
and estate, he was glad to she, and to sly into the wilderness, into woods,
and caves and holes to hide his head; where the company that he had, resembled
the place in baseness. For (besides those of his fathers house) there gathered
unto him, men that were in trouble for their evil deeds, that brought them
within danger of law: men that were in debt, and owed more then they were
worth, and durst not show their heads: and men that were troubled in mind,
oppressed with sorrow, affrighted with fears: this was his company, as it
were the skumme of the people, a rout of lawless ones. He was in the Kings
displeasure: and the Kings ears were ever open to all malicious and slanderous
reports made against David: and upon every discovery of David's abiding in any
place, Saul was ever running forth with his army against him. Thus was he
fallen from that height of honor in which sometimes he stood. And the
promise of Gods help, and of ease from God, that he gives to them that cast
their burden upon GOD, he delivers and puts down in such words as are
fitly answerable to his own present condition, fallen into such disgrace ( he
will not suffer the righteous to fall for ^uer) that while he gives to other
men a rule, how to recover comfort in their afflicted estate, he might withal
confirm his own conceived comfort more strongly.

CHAP. XXXIII.
BUT forasmuch as he delivers The first part of this promise is the poor
man's promise.
this promise for the encouragement of others, let us so handle it, as that
others may see their interest in it. And he shall nourish thee, he will not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever. This promise falls of it self into
two parts, the first is in these words, And he shall nourish thee: the seis in
these words, He will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. The first part
of this promise meets with the burden of poverty and want in this present
world, and therefore may be called the poor man's promise, who does not look
high about the point of nourishment and does not complain except he feel
some want thereof. In the poor man's house are not heard the complaint, that
great men make, as that the King frowneth upon him, and he is forbidden to
come into his presence: that his child is stolen from him, and meanly married
against his liking: that he has lost a great estate by the wrack of such a
ship, by the breaking of such a tradesman, and by the falsehood of such a
servant. These and such like are the complaints of great men, and never heard
in poor men's houses, but their complaints are commonly these: I am not able to
pay my debt, I am not ready to pay my rent, and I fear to be cast into prison
for the one, and to be thrown out of my house for the other: I have no
provision against the cold winter, nor money in my house to make provision:
the rain beats in at every corner of my house, and I am not able to repair
it: my wife, my self and children want both meat and clothes, and winter
comes on upon us: and these hard times afford much expense, and little
getting: charity is become cold, and her benumbed hands now give no alms:
Justice also is grown very sleepie, and scarce holds up her head to reckon
with the labourer, and to give him his hire: and how we shall be fed, clothed
and nourished, I can not tell* These are the poor man's complaints, and this
promise meets with these complaints, and assures nourishment, and therefore
it may very well be called the poor man's promise.

For the truth of this promise, that God will nourish his poor that attend
upon his hand.
God will nourish them that cast their burden of want upon him, that is, attend
reverently in well doing upon his hand for maintenance, it appears plainly
by the Lords bounty, he gave unto He sends enough for all in general.
Adam and unto his posterity, all the fruits of the earth, and all the
herbs of the field, he gave unto Noah and to his sons, all living things
that breed and live, either in the air, or upon the land, or in the sea: this
large grant is registered by Moses, saying, The fear of Genesis 9. 2.
you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon
every foul of the heaven, on all that moves on the earth, and upon all the
sishes of the sea: into your hands are they delivered, every thing that moves
and lives shall be meat for you, as the green herb have I given you all
things. Here is provision enough, fear not want: the great depths of the sea,
the spread plains of the earth, and the vast compass of the air, are Gods
store houses, filled with food and provision of all kinds for thee: so that
there must be no fish in the sea, no fowls flying through the air, neither
herb, fruit nor beast upon the face of the earth, if there be no food for
thee. Yea all living creatures must want food before man can want food,
because even all those other creatures are appointed and given to man to be his
food. God sends enough for all, but covetousness intercepteth it, and the
p^ore cannot get their part.


But thy present poverty makes thee to say, thou fear not but God will
always send enough for all, but thou see that craft, covetousness, and
oppression gather such superfluous abundance into some men's hands, that thou
art afraid, lest that out of that sufficient store that God does send for all,
thou shall not be able to get a sufficient portion for thee and thine. Thou
confessest that God in this world, as a great Lord in his family, makes
provision and allowance fully and plentifully: but men as unfaithful stewards,
make unequal divisions, and some have to much, to serve even their intemperate
and immoderate lusts; and others have too little to serve even their necessary
uses* and therefore though thou fear not but God will send, ye^ thou fear
how thou shall get sufficienc^.

To che^e thy heart against this fear, God gives his gifts by ^ particular
providence to every one.
know that God, sending his blessings, send them not blindely: as also when he
takes them away, he does not take them away blindely: but both in giving and
taking away, he appoints who shall be filled, and who shall remain empty,
by a providence reaching particularly to ever person, both great and small.
Therefore does he challenge it to be his work, when any becomes rich, or
remains poor, when any is filled with his blessings or remains empty: and
the saithfull do so acknowledge it. Hanna the mother of Samuel 1. Sam* 2. 7.
^aith of him, The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings low and
exalts. Yea God does challenge it to be the work of his hand, guided by
judgment and mercy, for the good of his Saints and servants, that feeling
their wants, do seek their maintenance of him, casting this their burden upon
him, as they have before been taught, The Prophet Esaias testifies so much
plainly unto us* having these words. Thus says Esaias 65. 13
the Lord God, behold, my servants shall eat and you shall be hungry (he
speaks to idolaters) behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be
thirsty* behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed. So that
if thou continue to serve God faithfully in thy place, thou shall be
nourished, and he will fill thy heart with food and gladness, when wicked men
shall want: yea the Prophet David knowing the care that God has of his, is
bold to say, In the days of famine, they Psalm. 37. 19.
shall have enough. Yea God will perform this, the godly poor that depend
upon him, when he is rich and wealthy, that seem to have the world at will, and
to be Lords of plenty and abundance, shall want and suffer penury as the
blessed virgin Mary the mother of our Lord Jesus, out of her observation,
testifies in her Luke 1. 53.
holy song, saying, He has filled the hungry with good things, and sent away
the rich empty. Consider these things, and thou shall see, that he that
sends enough for all in general, will send also enough for thee in
particular: and he that sends it for thee, will also convey it to thee, and
so convey it that thou shall receive it, and use it, and shall be nourished
with it, and see his goodness, and have cause to praise him for thy portion,
when others of wealthier estate, shall want, or in their abundance shall not be
kindly nourished, their abundance proving unto them, as the dainty Quails
proved to the lusting Israelites, wherewith they were choked while they fed upon
them.

For a perfect conclusion of this discourse, that God will nourish them, that
in their wants do wait upon his hand for their food and maintenance, I will
add that divine sermon of our Savior Christ in the Gospel of Saint Matthew,
Mat. 6. 15.
I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, nor for your bodies, what you shall put on: is not the life more
worth then meat? and the body then raiment? His Argument is this, God has
given us our bodies more worth then clothes, and he has given us our life more
worth then meat: and finding him bountiful in bestowing the greater things,
why should we distrust his goodness in the smaller things? Then follows in
the same place, Behold the fowls of heaven, for they sow Mat. 6. 26.
not, neither reap, nor carry into the barns, yet your heavenly father feeds
them: are ye not much better then they? which of you by taking care is able to
add one cubit unto his stature? His arguments in these words are two, the
first is this: God feeds those creatures, to whom he has given no skill at
all to make provision for themselves, and they are also vile and of no price in
his sight: then why should we that are precious in his eyes, and to whom he
has also given means and skill to make provision, and to lay up for our use,
why should we distrust his goodness? His second argument is this: our
distracting care can effect nothing, therefore it is vain for us to take care:
and it is good and safe quietly to rest upon him. He adds further in that
speech, And why care ye for Mat. 6. 28.
raiment? learn how the Lillies of the field do grow, they labor not,
neither spin, yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory, was not
araied like one of these: wherefore, if God so cloathe the grass of the field,
which is to day, and tom rrow is cast into the oven, shall he not do much
more unto you, O ye of little faith? For apparel, one part of our care, his
argument is as before for food: God beautifully clotheth the grass, that has
not skill to provide or fashion apparel for it self, and it is also vile in
his sight: then why should we that are precious in his sight, and have both
means and skill to provide and fashion clothes for our backs, why should we
distrust his providence. Lastly, he adds, Therefore Mat. 6. 31.
take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
wherewith shall we be clothed? (for after these things seek the Gentiles) for
your heavenly father knows that ye have need of these things: but seek ye
first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be ministered unto you. His argum^nts, for food and clothes together, to
persuade us to rest upon God are these: it is ^eathenish to take such care for
these thing, therefore it is uncomely for Christians to take such care.
Secondly, the giver of all things, that cares for us, knows our wants,
therefore we need not to afflict our selves with care for them. Lastly, the
sure way of obtaining these things at the hands of God, is (not to take thought
for them but) in our calling to obey God in righteousness, that he may reign
in our hearts. If we take care of this, then God without our care will provide
us of all necessaries. Such is the Divine sermon of our Savior Christ,
assuring us that God will nourish us.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
WE have considered the The second part of the promise.
first part of the promise in these words, And he shall nourish thee: which I
call the poor man's promise, that desires nourishment, and therewith res^eth
contented. The second part of the promise follows in these words, He will not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever. These words answer aptly to his fall
from that height of honor, wherein he lately stood in Israel. And being by him
delivered to other cares, it serves them more generally, to assure them of
recovery from every fall. And therefore it may well be called the common
promise, given for the comfort of all men, that are born down by, and fallen
under the weight of any burden.

For the better understanding of this How many kinds of sa^ there be.
promise, let us consider of the falls that Gods servants do usually take,
which are many, not only in number (their particular being reckoned) but also
in kind (the several sorts being counted:) Solomon says, Aiust man falls
seven Pro. 24. 16.
times a day, and rises again, not so often falling still in the same kind,
but diversely falling in several kinds, and obtaining help to rise again from
every fall: and these many falls may be reduced unto two general heads, for
either a man falls into sin, or he falls into some misery and trouble
that sin makes our life to be subject unto. And under these two names of
sin and misery, we will speak of these falls, and consider how true this
promise is, that GOD will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

The first of these falls, is our falling One kind of ^all, (...) to fall by
sin.
into sin. For the commandments of God, being (as so many paths) beaten out
before our faces; for us to walk in, he that keeps them, is as one that
walks uprightly with God: and he that transgresses and breaks them, is as
one that stumbleth in his way and falls down flat, to his great danger.
Therefore do we call Adams sin, the fall of Adam. Therefore do we call the
lighter errors of the Saints their slidings, and their grosser errors we call
their falls. And this name of fall is given to the sin that we commit by the
Prophet Hosea, saying, O Israel, return Hos. 14. 1^ This kind of fall is most
dangerous.
unto the Lord thy God, for tho^ have fallen by thine iniquity. This is a
dangerous kind of fall, whereof it behooves us to take great heed. Heli the
Priest fell from the seat whereon he sat, and brake his neck: Ahaziah the
son of Ahab King of Israel, fell through the Lattisewindow in his upper
chamber, and bruised his body, whereof he died. Yet is not such a fall, as
either of them have taken, any thing near so dangerous, as to fall into sin.
This fall of sin made the Angels fall out of Heaven, and out of the favor of
God irrecouerably. And it made our first parents fall out of Paradise, and from
that bl^ssed estate of innocence and immortality wherein God created them. And
many of their posterity, by salling into sin, do fall from God, and sink
down into hell, and there perish eternally. It behooves all men therefore to
take heed of it, as the Apostle advises saying, Let him that 1. Cor. 10. 12
stands, take heed lest he fall. There is no man of so sure footing, that
can walk steedily in Gods commandments, without sliding and falling: for as
Sant James says, In many things we sin Iam. 3. 2.
all. And the more weak our footing is, the more warily we had need look unto
our ways, that as much as is possible, we may escape falls: especially
considering how dangerous it is, in this kind to fall. He raises by repentance
them that are fallen by sin.


But ^et such is the mercy of God, that he will not suffer the righteous to fall
for ever, but in due time, he will raise up them by repentance that are fallen
by their sins. To which end he gives unto us his word, that teaches us the
way whe^ein we should go: and sends unto us his messengers with that word in
their mouths, that they may be our guides: to that end he prepares our ears
for the hearing, and our hearts for the understanding of that word, that we may
learn and profit thereby. After this he humbles our will and brings into
order all our affections, that our knowledge may not be idle, for want of
willing obedience. And because neither knowledge nor willingness are able (by
reason of our weakness) to effect any thing without him, he also strengthens
us, and works in us what he would have wrought by us. As the Apostle Phi. 2.
13.
speaks. It is God which works in you both the will and the deed out of
his good pleasure. Thus he proceeds in his good work to raise up by true
repentance, them that were fallen by their sins. And to assure us there of,
that we may with comfort hope for the help of his grace, when our weakness has
made us fall into sin. He has given us many gracious promises. For thus he
says in the Psalm, I will instruct thee Psa. 32. 8.
and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, and I will guide thee with mine
eye. Thus he promises in the Prophecy of Jeremy, I will put my law in their
inward Ie^. 31. 33.
parts, and write it in their hearts. And thus he speaks by the Prophet
Ezekiel. Then will I power clean water upon Eze. 36. 25.
you, and you shall be clean; yea from all your filthiness, and from all your
idols will I cleanse you: a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your body,
and I will give you a heart of flesh: and I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do
them. These and many such gracious promises has God given unto us, to assure
us, that when the righteous fall into sin, he will raise them up again by
repentance. Hence have issued the calling of the Gentiles, and the conversion
of all unbelievers, that for many succeeding ages lived in ignorance and sin,
and yet in the end obtained mercy to return to God by repentance. Hence has
issued the regeneration and new birth of the Saints, that being originally shut
up in unbelief, and naturally dead in trespasses and sins, have been
quickened by Gods grace, and begotten again by the word of truth to be the
first fruits of his creatures: and by his merciful work have been brought out
of darkness unto his glorious light, to live thenceforth, not as children of
darkness and of the night, but as children of the light and of the day. Hence
has this issued, even that God will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever:
and from their daily slidings he does raise them, that when they have sinned
as Adams children, they may repent and amend as the children of God. The
Prophet says in the Psalm, The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that
fear him, and his covenant to give them understanding. Let the righteous
therefore, that either find their own ignorance, in mischoosing their way, or
feel their own weakness in walking in their way, let them pray unto God for
grace, that he will not suffer them to err, and fall for ever: and let them
say unto God with the Prophet, Teach me thy way O God, and lead me in a right
path. This is the first kind of fall to fall into sin, and it is the worst,
because it draws with it the second kind of fall, which is to fall into
misery.

CHAP. XXXV.
THE second kind of The second kind of fall is to fall into misery for sin.
fall, in which God will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever, is an
effect of the former, produced by the just judgment of God, namely a falling
into misery. This kind of fall, mankind had never been acquainted withal,
if they had not taken the first fall, for if man had never sinned against God,
God would never have suffered man to have felt any misery. This kind of fall
into misery is of infinite variety, no man can number the several miseries and
troubles, that sin has made our life subject unto: These miseries are of two
sorts inward and outward.
yet they may be reduced to two general heads, for either they are judgments
upon the inward man, inward miseries and afflictions upon the soul: or else
they are outward judgments upon the outward man, in outward things that touch
not the peace of the soul.

The inward judgments and miseries, What are these inward miseries and
judgments
which follow the fall into sin, and wherinto for sin man falls, are either
the blinding of our understanding, and the hardening of our heart, often
inflicted as punishments of foregoing sins (and such was the iudg^ment of God
upon Pharao, whose heart God hardened, and such a judgment and misery the
Apostle Paul tells us the Gentiles fell into as a punishment of precedent
sins when he says, Wherefore also God gave Romans 1. 24.
them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, to de^ile their own bodies
between themselves. And in many more words he records that judgment) or
they are those fears and terrors of heart, that cast us down from hope, that
empty our souls of comfort, fill them with fears, and make us as it were to
stagger, shrink, and fall in our faith: of this kind is that judgment that
God threa^neth by Moses, in these words, the Lord shall simite thee with
madness, and Deu. 2, 28.
with blindness, and astonishment of heart, when a man is amassed and
confounded with his fears, that he knows not which way to turn him for
comfort and help, and deep fallen into this misery were they whom Esaias
speaks of saying. The sins in Sion are afraid, a Esaias. 33. 14.
fear is come upon the hipocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings: They conceived no
otherwise of God then of a consuming fire, and therefore fear possessed
altogether their hearts, hope vanished, faith had no abiding there. And all
these inward miseries, falling immediately upon the soul, and the faculty
thereof, tend chiefly to this, to overthrow our faith, and by decay of it to
overthrow us, for faith is the firm standing of our soul, grounded upon the
assurance of Gods mercy. Therefore does the Apostle use this phrase. Watch
you, stand 1. Cor. 16. 13.
fast in the faith, quit you like men, and be strong. Because he that has the
stronger faith, stands the more strong and steadfast, and he that has the
weaker faith, stands more weakly and loose, and thoug the faith of the
Saints of God, once given unto them, never totally decaieth, (for as the Lord
Jesus says, he prayed for the continuance and confirmation of Peter's faith,
to whom he said, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail Luke. 22. 32.
not. So he prayed for all his chosen ones that believe in him, when he said to
his father. I pray not for these alone, but for John. 17. 20.
them also, which shall believe in me thorough their word) Yet the faith of
the Saints suffers sometimes an eclipse or deceasing, and at some other
times an increasing whereby as in the increasing of their faith they stand fast
and are full of comfort, so in the deceasing of their faith their footing
becomes slipperie, and they take many sore falls, and feel their hearts
oppressed with fear: as it was with David, when he cried out, My God Psalm. 22.
1.
my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health, and from
the words of my roaring. And when he complained at another time, saying, Mine
Psalm. 55. 4.
heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me:
fear and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible fear has covered me.
In this manner, their faith at that time being in the wane, the righteous
oppressed with a weight of anguish and fear, do often fall through the
shrinking of their faith, and feel themselves sore bruised in their souls.

But yet such is the mercy of God that He raises them up that are fallen into
these inward miseries.
he does not suffer the righteous, being fallen into these inward judgments
and miseries, to fall for ever. And if it be a blinded understanding, or a
hardened heart, that they are fallen into, he raises them up out from a blinded
understanding by sending the knowledge of the (...). As the Lord Jesus sent
Paul among the ignorant Gentiles with this commission, I send thee to open
their (...), Acts. 26. 18
that they may turn from darkness to light, etc. And he raises them up from
hardness of heart, by mollifying their hearts, as he promises by Ezekiel,
saying, I Eze. 36. 26.
will take away the ston^e heart out of your body, and I will give you an heart
of flesh. And if they be fallen into any fear and (...)
terror of conscience, he raises them up by repairing their faith, and by
reviving their comfort. To that end he brings to their remembrance the large
promises of his grace, the boundles measure of his mercy, the riches of his
free and unchangeable love: and then does he make them remember, that they
have a mediator that died for their sins, and rose again for their
justification, and ascended into heaven to prepare a place for them, and
sits on the right hand of his father, in highest favor and greatest
authority, to make intercession for them, continually urging the virtue of his
death and bloudshedding, that has taken away the sin of the world, who is
the prince of peace, that has made their peace, and is that beloved son in
whom the father is well pleased, making us accepted in that his beloved. To the
same end does he spread the beams of his loving countenance, and cause the
light thereof to shine within their consciences, sending down the spirit of
adoption into their hearts, to bear witness with their spirits, that they are
the sons of God: so raking together the sparks of their almost smothered
faith, from among the cold ashes of anguish and fear, where it lay deep
covered, giving heat and life unto it with the warming fire of his comfort: so
that they begin to lift up their heads, and to rejoice their hearts, and to
shake of their their sorrow and fear, and to glory in God, saying with the
blessed virgin, My Luke 1. 46
soul magnifieth the Lord* and my spirit reioiceth in God my Savior. And with
the Prophet David, Thou have tnrned my Psalm. 30. 11.
mourning into joy, thou have loosed my sack, and girded me with gladness. And
that God does thus, not suffering the righteous to fall and languish in these
inward miseries for ever, besides the experience of Gods elect, daily renewed
with light and grace, and daily refreshed with comfort and peace, the
scriptures also do testify it to be the gracious manner of Gods dealing with
his chosen. The Prophet says of him. He heals Psalm. 147 3.
those that are broken in heart, and binds up their soars. These words can
be referred to no other work of God: for the more sure and full performance
whereof, God sent his son into the world, who came to call sinners unto
repentance, and to seek and save them that were lost, giving repentance unto
Israel and remission of sins, so lifting up them that were fallen down, by
any inward judgment of God, any way punishing them in their souls for their
first fall into sin.

This was the inward misery, upon the What are the outward miseries whereunto
men fall.
inward man, whereunto men fall that have fallen into sin. There is another
misery into which men fall for their sins, God in his just judgment thrusting
them forward, which I call outward misery, because it is not the stroke of the
heart, though the heart afterward be grieved for it. This kind of outward
misery into which men fall is full of variety, and under one head there are
diverse branches contained: for some of these fall upon us by the good work of
God to try us, to exercise our faith, to correct and humble us: and some do
fall upon us by the malice and in justice of men and Angels, to overthrow us in
our faith or our piety (as the devil hoped by Iobes losses to make him
blaspheme God) or at the least to vex and grieve us, and to make us murmur: so
differing in regard of the author from whom they come, and of the end for which
they come. They differ also in regard of the subject matter of them, for some
of these outward miseries happen to us in our name and credit, wounded and
impaired by lying, standering, and the spite of evil tongues: or they happen
to us in our bodies, and reach even to the danger of our lives, by sores and
sickenesses, by blows and bruises, by maimes and wounds: on they happen to us
in our estate and goods, when we are deceived, robbed, spoiled, and deposed
from offices of profit and worship: or they happen to us in our liberty, when
we are banished from our native country, or confined to some restrained
bounds which we must not pass, as Solomon confined Shemei to his house in
Jerusalem, or we are committed to some prison: or they happen to us in our
friends, by death taken away from us, that were our maintenance, our
countenance; our credit, and safegarde, and they being removed, we are left
naked and Orphans in a pittiles world. By which outward miseries (of so great,
and greater variety) we fall from estimation and lone of the people, from
health, strength, and beauty, from riches and plenty, from freedom and
liberty, from comfort and refuge, into suspicion and an evil name, into
weakness and leanenes, into poverty, thraldom, and much contempt: and
advantage is given unto our adversaries, to insult and glory over us, and many
men have been dangerously bruised with such falls of this kind. God raises
them that are fallen into these outward miseries.


But yet such is the mercy and goodness of God, that he will not suffer the
righteous (fallen into these miseries) to fall for ever, but in due time he
will raise them up, and deliver them. The slander of Susanna was wiped away,
and she was discharged of the foul imputation, laid upon her by the wicked
Elders, with honorable repair of her credit. The imprisonment and affliction
of Joseph after some years was done away, and he was brought forth and made a
great commander in the land of Egypt. Job was spoiled of his goods, robbed of
his children, miserably afflicted in his body, and brought most low, for he
could not fall more low, and live; but God did graciously restore Job in all
his losses, and he ended his days in honor and peace. Mordechai and the Jews,
by the wicked devise of Haman, were fallen deeply into contempt and danger of
death, yet by the means of Hester it pleases God, to cast down their enemies
into destruction, and to raise up the Jews, both to repaired credit, and to
secured life. Saint Paul confesses writing to the Corinthians, that being in
Asia, he was with afflictions and sickness, Pressed out of measur^* passing 2.
Cor. 1. 8
strength, so that he altogether doubled even of life, yea he received the
sentence of death in himself. But when he was fallen and brought so low, God
raised him up by restoring health, and would not suffer the righteous Apostle
to lie forever, as also he confesses in the next words, saying, God which
raises the dead, delivered me from so great a death, and does deliver me, in
whom I trust that he will yet deliver me. I might easily fill many leaves with
examples of the rightsous servants of God, whom being fallen into these outward
miseries, he mercifully raised up but I will forbear, and remember only a
testimony or two, that manifestly show, how God in these, as in other kinds
of falls, though he suffer the righteous to fall, yet he does not suffer
them to fall for ever, but will raise them up and reduce them to a better
estate. Heereto pertain the words of Eliphaz, speaking of the almighty. He
makes the Job. 5. 1^.
wound and binds it up, he smites and his hands make whole: he shall
deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch
thee: in famine he shall deliver thee from death, and in battle from the power
of the sword. Thou shall be hid from the snare of the tongue, and thou shall
not be afraid of destruction when it comes: but thou shall laugh at
destruction and death, etc. If God send the evil, he will send the remedy: if
he send danger, he will send deliverance: if he affright with fear, he will
comfort with salvation: if he cast down, he will raise up again, and will not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever. And he will do this not at one time
alone, but at all times: not in one manner of misery alone, but in all kinds
of miseries. The Prophet David says of this merciful work of Gods hands
raising up out of miseries. Great Psalm. 34. 19.
are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all,

And if happily this be not effected in If not in this life, yet most certainly
after this life.
this world, and during this life, yet most certainly God does raise up the
righteous that were fallen, and frees them from all, both outward and inward
miseries in an other world, and after this life. The Prophet Esaias does tell us,
that when the righteous perish (for so the world censureth their death) and
when merciful Esaias 57. 1
men are taken away, then the righteous is taken away from the evils to come
r^ their death is a full delivering of them from al troubles, and therefore a
lifting of them up from all the miseries into which they were fallen. And for
proof hereof, it is most clear, that the Lord Jesus reports of the poor
Lazarus, in the gospel of Saint Luke, that man was fallen low into the pit of
poverty, so that he was compelled to beg for his maintenance at other men's
doors: and he was fallen as deep into the gaping gulf of sickness and
diseases, for he was full of sores, and the dogs licking him were his best
leeches, his poverty could not purchase the help of any other (to cure him)
in this world. And during this life he was never raised up from this fall, and
yet God did not suffer him to fall forever. For at the last he died, then
ended all his miseries, then came glorious exaltation, Lu 16* 22
for he was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Where, of his
entertainment (far differing from his late condition in this world) Abraham
said to the rich man, Now is he comforted 25
and thou art tormented. So that if GOD do not raise the righteous from these
miserable falls while they live, yet he will surely do it after death: and
if he do not exalt them, and set them up on high in this world, yet he will
surely lift them up, and exalt them in the world to come, and place them
together in the heavenly places, far above the reach of Revel. 21
all misery (where there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain) and where among the queeres of holy
Angels, and in the midst of all true and eternal delights, they shall for
ever rejoice and praise god. For of gods house, where the righteous departed
shall have their dwell ling places for ever, David says, In thy Psalm. 16. 11
presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. Thus have you heard how GOD will help the weary and laden, that cast
their burden upon him, he will nourish them that want, and raise up them that
are fallen.

CHAP. XXXVI.
NOW let us for a Conclusion, The conclusi^n of all.
Consider wherefore these promises were added. Every one may readily perceive
and understand the purpose of the Holy Ghost in it: namely, to encourage men to
practice the advice given them in the precept before, knowing, and assured by
these promises, that their labor shall not be in vain. Then let us make such
use of these promises, and seeing God will nourish his poor that wait upon his
hand, and will raise up his righteous servants that crave his help, and though
he see, and suffer them to fall, yet will not suffer them to fall for ever: Let
us come unto him with our burdens, and call to this strong helper to ease us,
to whom the Prophet truly says in the Psalm, Thou Lord have Psa* 9. 10.
not failed them that seek thee. They that trust to other helps, even to
helps that are in their own hands, being men of power, lik^ly to break through
all difficulties, they shall miss: but they that seek help of the Lord, and
cast their burden upon him, shall not miss. The Prophet says, The Lions do^
lack and suffer Psa. 34. 10.
hunger, but they which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. The
lion is the Lord of the forest, he has strength and courage to catch the
prey. Such as be the strong and commanding lions of the world shall be
disappointed, when the sheep of GODS pasture, seeking unto him, shall be fed
and preserved. And the rather seek him, because he offers himself to be
found; the rather bring your burdens unto him, because he calls for them.
Hear his voice, and take that course, that may turn to your souls peace. God
speaks thus in the Prophecy Esaias 55. 1.
of Esaias* Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters* and you that
have no silver come buy and eat, come I say, buy wine and milk without
silver, and with money: wherefore do ye lay out silver, and not for bread?
and your labor without being satisfied? Hea^ken diligently unto me, and eat
that which is good, and let your soul delight in fatness: Incline your ^are,
and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live. And I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Here God
offers all mercies, all deliverance, all salvation; and offers it freely,
without desert, merit, price, or recompense, only if we will come unto him,
will pray unto him, hearken unto him, and rest in him. You therefore that are
hungry, and weak, that are thirsty and faint, that are poor and empty,
that are sick and pained, that are sorrowful and heavy, and that are laden
and weary; come unto the strength of Israel* come unto the Lord of Hosts,
come unto this mighty and strong helper, that offers to bear your burdens,
and to give you case: and after the counsel of the Prophet, Cast thy burden
upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee, he will not suffer the righteous to
fall for ever. And unto this great Lord, our strong helper, even to GOD the
Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one immortal
and only wise God, be honor and power everlasting, Amen.

2. Tim. chap. 4. v. 18. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and
will preserve me to hi^ heavenly Kingdom: to whom be praise for ever and
ever. Amen.
Finis.

