THE EQVALL WAYS OF GOD: TENDING TO THE RECTIFYING OF THE CROOKED WAYS OF MAN.

The Passages whereof are briefly and clearly drawn from the sacred SCRIPTVRES.

BY T.H.

EZEKIEL. 18.29. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal?

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARKE, and are to be sold at his shop under St
Peter's Church in Cornehill.

1632.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader the Author wishes Grace, Peace, Salvation.
CHristian Reader, GODS ways revealed are not only written for man's perusal,
but also put to his consideration, as being beyond all exception; for God
demands of him, Are not my ways equal? Ezekiel. 18.29.
As if what the better sort of men readily acknowledge, the worst could not in
reason deny; what the one set their hearts on, and freely bless God for, the
other, convinced by evident truth, could not but approve. These ways of God I
have endeavored to trace out so far as clear Scripture gave me light, and
common consent of men's judgment went along with me. Further disquisition might
perhaps trench on things unrevealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
which are a tree of knowledge still forbidden by God; or prove (...), 1 Ti^. 6.4.
strife about words and vain disputes, which tend not to godly edification.
The former being as culpable as it was to press too near Gods holy Mount; the
later proceeding usually to envy, contention, railing, evil surmising.
Moreover in laying open these equal and plain ways of God I have not used
subtle, either discourse or dispute, which elsewhere has its place and use: 1 Timothy 6.25.
sua se jactet in aula; but such, as Paul calls, wholesome words of Christ,
borrowed from the Scriptures treasury; such as his practice allows, Act. 26.25.
words of soberness and truth, Plat. in Sym.
and have made, as Socrates desired, truth my chiefest aim. As for the
structure of my speech; it is, if not, as Socrates further said, (...), such as
offered it self; yet far from the quaint strain now affected. Eurip. in
Phoe^.
(...)^ Truth is amiable and commendable of it self, and needs not to be
clothed in phrase fashionable to the time, and the humor of curious ears;
especially seeing we find, that the style of speech accounted by the Mint
masters thereof very elegant, holds fashion not an age, yea not much longer
than the variable garb of our outward habit: for having showed it self to
the world, it comes to the touch, and soon is exploded (for so usually it falls
out) as being affected or fantastical, or otherwise liable to some just
exception. But truth is constantly the same, still keeps the same splendor,
still beholds us, as the Sun, with the same glorious eye. And where it meets
with most masculine and true eloquution fitted to the matter and circumstances
thereof (in which regard it is praise worthy) it gives more grace and luster to
the speech, the^ possibly it can borrow from the same. Again, I have
endeavored for truth and plainness; for plainness, that I might not be
misconceived, nor have what I reach out with the right hand, to be laid hold on
with the left; for truth, that I might avoid contention; for Socrates found by
experience, Plat. Symp.
that it was an easy matter (...), to gainsay Socrates, but not the truth:
much more may I, who am less able to propound it. Furthermore may you please
to understand, that in the first composure of this discourse, it was only cast
into certain heads, and intended by me for mine own better understanding of
these matters, without any mind to make it public; and now is made yours by
the Press at the instance of some loving friends, who entertain better
thoughts of it, than I my self could hope, or perhaps it deserves, for in a
friends censure sometimes it happens, Vt veris addat multa faventis amor. Some
indeed have conceived that the plainness and briefnesse thereof may be useful
to men of plain hearts and of not so deep apprehension; and to such, whose
time is much taken up with variety or frequencie of employment. Which surely
it is more likly to do; If as I in setting the whole frame together laid aside
all prejudice and partiality: So the Reader come to the perusal thereof with
like affection. Which I humbly entreat you to do. And then know, that what you
herein find sound and good, is Gods; give him the glory of it; what weak and
defective, is mine, I acknowledge it; and shall be ready to do what in Plato I
am advised. (...), Plat. de Rep. lib. 3.
not so to like mine own, but that I will use and yield to what others have
better and more exact. 1 Cor. 13.9.
The best man here knows but in part; and if each would bear his part without
jarring, the music would be sweet and harmonious. No man can attain all, and
therefore must not hope in himself, nor expect from others an unerring
perfection. Wherefore much the rather I am emboldened to entreat, and assure
myself to find your Christian love, and favorable Candor in the reading and
reflecting your thoughts on this treatise, which I earnestly crave of you: and
committing it to your perusal and your self to Gods blessed guidance; beseech
the same God, who is the God of truth, to lead us into all truth: who is the
God of peace to go along with us in the way of peace: who is the author of all
our good; during the time of this life to keep us in his fear and favor: and
in the life to come to bring us to eternal bliss, purchased for us by Jesus
Christ.

Yours in all Christian services, T. H.

The contents of the several CHAPTERS.
IN Chap. 1. Are set down four general positions concerning Gods dealing
with man. Conclusions deduced thence.

Chap. 2. Positions showing more particularly what c^u^se God on his own part
takes to bring man to salvation. Conclusions thence.

Chap. 3. What course and order God prescribes on Man's part to be taken; and
practiced by them, on whom he conferres salvation. Conclusions thence.

Chap. 4. Our salvation is of the Lord of his mere mercy, and is effected by
his powerful work in us. Conclusions thence.

Chap. 5. Man's perdition is of himself, and first by default of Rulers
apostate from God, as of Cain, Nimrod, Jeroboam, etc. before Christ's time; of
the Jews Rulers, of the Pope, of the Turk, etc. since Christ: So as yet such
as be under them and follow their steps die in and for their own sins.
Conclusions thence.

Chap. 6. In the second place man's perdition is of himself, by each man's own
default, where Rulers and teachers do their duties. Conclusions thence.
Lastly, conclusions from the former and this last chapter jointly considered.

Faults escaped in some copies.
Page 13. line 16. confome for conform. p. 18. l. 14. assured for allured. l.
24. Ellas for Ellasar. p. 22. l. 3. acdhere for adhere. l. 4. ^ildren for
children. p. 23. l. 26. tdhere for adhere. p. 27. l. 12. God for Gods. p. 38.
l. 4. Chriss, promised in: for Christ promised, in.

THE EQVALL WAYS OF GOD: Tending to the rectifying of the crooked ways of man.
CHAP. I. In which four general positions are set down, as the groundwork
of all: Conclusions deduced thence.
FOr the opening and clearing of the equal ways of God, Ezekiel. 18.29.
obvious to humane search, we must still keep in mind these four Positions.

1. God from all eternity decreed to do, what the Scripture tells us, that in
time he has done, or does do, or (absolutely says) he will do.

2. God (before whom all things are naked, Heb. 4.13. Ier. 17.10. Psalm. 139.2.
who is the searcher of man's heart, who knows our thoughts long before) from
all eternity sees, whatsoever in time comes to pass.

3. The decrees of God for the making of the world, CHAP. 1.
and for his dealing with the creatures therein, are not in time, one former or
later then another in God: But are all at once simul and semel, from all
eternity decreed by him.

4. All Gods decrees are infinitely wise, holy, just; tending to his glory:
and have no external cause, but are squared according to the rule of his mercy
and justice.

These positions are evident and granted (I suppose) by all sides. Hence these
general inferences (as also diverse others) may be concluded.

I. That God, who will hereafter glorify a certain number of men; and adjudge
a certain number of men to everlasting torment, both numbers known only to
himself, has decreed the same from all eternity, before man had done good or
evil.

II. God by his infinite wisdom sees from eternity what will be the estate
of all men; and what in mercy and justice will be his dealing with them, first
and last. So that whatsoever he has absolutely decreed, and does foresee, that
very thing does undoubtedly come to pass; most certain salvation to some,
most certain damnation to others.

CHAP. II. Particular positions about Gods dealing with man, to bring him to
salvation. Conclusions thence.
IN the next place we descend more particularly to these positions.

1. God from all eternity decreed to make the world, and all things therein
exceeding good, and man after his own image.

2. God seeing man fallen from this happy estate to have brought on himself
death, and vanity on the creatures, from eternity decreed, that the second
person in Trinity should assume humane nature, and being God, and man also
without sin, should shed his precious blood, and offer up himself by death a
sacrifice of infinite merit, and in it self sufficient for all mankind.

3. God also decreed for making this sufficient sacrifice effectual, to speak
to man himself (as to Adam, Cain, Moses, Balaam, etc.) and by holy men his
prophets, as Enoch, Noah, Moses, David, Esaias, etc. who spoke ( as they were
moved by the holy Ghost) sometimes by word of mouth, sometimes by writing; and
by other his servants, 2. Pet. 1.21.
the priests, and Levites, to instruct man. And in the last times of the world
(for the perfecting of that doctrine) to speak to man by his son Jesus
Christ; by his Apostles, and their successors; Heb. 1.1.2. and 2.3.
with whom Christ promised to be always even to the end of the world: Mat.
28.20.
1. Cor. 3.9.
so that they were to cooperate with him by their preaching the word. CHAP. 2.


4. God decreed to give man certain religious rites; as of old, types,
sacrifices of diverse kinds, circumcision, the passover; and since Christ's
time Baptism and the Lords supper; as to instruct man, so on Gods part to seal
the covenant made to them, who rightly use the same: that he is their God in
Christ.

Romans 1.20. Hos. 5.15.
5. God decreed by the visible things of the world, by several punishments, and
judgments, persecutions, captivities, wars, famine, etc. and by miracles,
Romans 15.19.
etc. (which the spirit of God wrought by the ministry of his servants for the
conversion of man,) to humble and instruct man.

Genesis 6.3. Acts 7.51. Esaias 63.10. Nehe. 9.30.
6. God decreed by his Spirit to strive with mankind for the bringing them to
repentance, and faith, both of old and in these later times; but not always to
strive with them: And therefore in his unsearchable mercy and justice, has
fixed certain limits for the same; which are known only to his divine
wisdom: unless sometimes he reveal them, as in the hundred and twenty
years set for the old world. Genesis 6.
So there was a fixed time in Gods decree, Luke 19.42.44.
a day of the Jews, until which God by his Spirit working together with the
preaching of his prophets, sent early and late, and lastly by the preaching of
his Son sued to the^ to turn unto him. In which day of visitation, seeing they
knew not the things which belonged to their peace, and would not be gathered to
God; God strove no longer with them: but left the generality of that nation to
themselves.

7. God also from eternity, seeing the falling away of the Gentiles of old,
and of the Jews, in these later days, from the true Church (to whom belonged
the promises in Christ, and the privileges of the fame) decreed to leave a way
open to the Gentiles, then, for their coming into the true faith and worship
of God: Exodus 12.38. and 48.
and now sets open the gates of the spiritual Jerusalem on each side of the
City, for all nations to come in. Reve. 21.25.


These decrees (distinctly laid down for our better understanding) in God, are
not one former or later then another; but all at once upon his sight of all
things, from all eternity, by his infinite wisdom, goodness, and justice,
most holily decreed the word of God telling us, that these things in time have
been, are, or shall be done and performed on Gods part.

Now from these positions it may be inferred,

I. That God by making man at first in an happy estate; and when man was
fallen, by providing a Savior in himself sufficient for all, by taking a
course on his own part for the salvation of all (so far as in mercy and
Justice he pleased) by swearing that he wills not the destruction of the wicked;
Ezekiel. 33.11.
and by lamenting at it, shows us evidently, that so far he wills the salvation
of all men.

II. God did not decree to pass by, nor to forsake the greatest part of
mankind in Adams fall, as not bound to them (as indeed he was not to any,) but
on his part decreed to take a course after Adams fall (so far as in mercy and
justice he would) for the recovery of all: And when the fixed time of his
striving with them was expired, then only (in the execution of his decree) he
left them to themselves: as Cain and his house: the Jews Apostate, and their
seed continuing in apostasy: and so of others in like sort.

III. God has taken a course on his part to keep man from sin, and is not
the author of man's sin; having made man at the first in such an holy estate,
as that he had free will to good: and (when that free will was lost) taking a
course on his part to have man guided by his word and spirit, a means in it
self sufficient to keep man from sins dominion: for he has promised to be
with his ordinance, and on his part will not fail.

IIII. It is of Gods infinite mercy, that the fathers, and Jews of old, that
any nation now, have Gods word for their guide and instruction, in any kind
whatsoever for their salvation: (and not any thing in themselves is a cause
thereof.)

V. All good in man, whatsoever, whether natural, moral, or divine, etc. in
understanding, will and affections, is Gods free gift; either the remainder of
what was given man in the creation, or Gods gracious work since.

CHAP. III. What course and order God has prescribed on man's part. Conclusions
thereupon.
GOD (as on his own part takes a course, so) on man's part has appointed what
course they should take, for the making the decrees above effectual.

Namely, they ought (before the Law was written) to enquire of the former age,
and prepare themselves to learn of their fathers. The Patriarchs, Job. 8.8.
or fathers of families (being both kings and priests) were to be honored and
obeyed of their families; and did rule over their brethren: Genesis 4.^. Genesis
27.29. Genesis 18.19.
and likewise ought to teach their children and household their duties (as God
said, he knew Abraham would do his) to keep the way of the Lord, and to do
righteous judgment. Also to teach them Gods worship, which must be after Gods
own institution; else Abels offering had been will worship. Also to perform
religious offices for them, as calling upon God, Genesis 4.26.
and sacrificing: So Noah sacrificed for himself, and them that came out of
the Ark with him. Abraham often built altars and sacrificed: Melchisedek was
both king and priest. Job 1.5.
Job sacrificed for his sons every day.

And (after the Law was written) the chief Rulers, Kings and others, of what
title soever, Deuteronomy. 17.29. Ios. 1.8.
ought to study the Law themselves: and so to govern the people, that they may
live (according as God bids us pray) a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. CHAP. 3. 1. Tim. 2.2.


Also these chief rulers, when in regard of the increase of their people, they
were not able to bear the burden of them, should choose Elders out of the
people, men of courage, fearing God; men dealing truly, Exodus 18.21. Numb.
11.16. Deuteronomy. 1.13.
hating covetousness; who set over thousands, hundreds, fifties, tens, should
judge the less, and bring the greater matters to the chief Ruler.

Also afterthat GOD had taken to him the Priests and Levits in stead of the
first borne: The Kings or chief Rulers, Gods vicegerents, should have these
Priests and Levits their Spokesmen to the people for their instruction, (as GOD
made Aaron the Priest to Moses the King:) as also to enquire of God, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
and to offer the offerings and sacrifices of all both rulers and people.

Also the Ambassadors and Merchants in their navigation to foreign people,
should call them to Gods holy mountain and worship, Deu. 33.18.19.
(as Moses said of Zebulon and Ishachar) and warriors fearing GOD should, if
they conquered nations, strive to bring them to GOD, as the Israelites did
diverse Chananites, 1. Chron. 22.2.
and David some people of diverse nations. Or if they were conquered, should
advise their conquerours for their eternal good, and teach them, as the Jews
the Chaldeans; that the gods, who made not heaven and earth, Ier. 10.11.
shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens, and (as afterward
in the times of the Persians) draw many to their religion.

Est. 8.17.
And after that Christ (being incarnate and offering himself for man, Heb.
7.21. and 10.12.13.
and having ended the Leviticall preisthood) became both King and priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedek: he (the Church now being under the Roman
Infidel, and tyrannous Emperors) he, I say, set up a Kingdom not of this
world (though he was de jure King of the Jews) but a spiritual kingdom, and
taught the people as never man did. Mat. last. John 7.46.
And further appointed the Apostles to go and teach all nations, and baptize
them, and perform other religious offices: 1. Tim. 5.17. Tit. 1.5, 6.
who also did ordain Bishops and Elders to rule and teach in their several
Cities: which were to be qualified as the Overseers and Elders chosen by Moses
above. Besides, Christ the great Prophet which should come into the world,
foretold, that Kings (at length) should bring their glory, that is, Apoc. 21.24.
Prove. 14.28.
the multitudes of their people (for the multitude of people is the glory of a
King) to the building of the new Jerusalem, the Christian Church: Esaias 49, 23.
and 60.3.
and so become nursing Fathers to the same: which now has begun to have the
event; when Kings, whose ancestors had given their power to the Whore of
Babylon, Apoc. 17.
hate her, and make her desolate: and endeavor a reformation according to Gods
word.

Furthermore our Ambassadors, Merchants, Heb. 7.21. and 10.12.13.
and Warriers by our navigation abroad, upon all occasions offered therein
(following their example above) ought (as they pray first for Christ's kingdom,
and then for bread and the necessaries of this life, so) to strive in the first
place and principally for the advancement of Christ's kingdom, and in the next
place for matters useful for their country. This God appoints on the rulers
and their substitutes parts to be done.

God further appoints on the peoples part, what order and course they should
take. The sum of all in brief is; To fear God and keep his commandments.
Eccles. 12.13.
To read, hear, meditate on Gods word: to repent, to believe, to use Gods holy
ordinances and sacraments reverently, etc. To honor the King, and be subject
and submit themselves to every ordinance of man, Romans 13.1.
1. Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake; if both to Heathen Kings as supreme, as also to
under-governours as sent by them, then much more to Christian Princes and
subordinate rulers under them, who rule according to Gods word: And (to shut up
all in one word) to love their neighbors as themselves.

This course and order God has prescribed to be used on man's part. From whence
it may be inferred,

I. That God (not only in taking a course on his own part, but also) in
showing man a course and order to be taken on his part for the salvation of all
men, shows, that God thus far wills the salvation of all.

II. That Rulers both supreme and subordinate in their several places must
follow the course and order prescribed and appointed by God, as means, by
which God has ordered to confer salvation on themselves and others, being
such a means for the salvation of their souls, as the mariners abiding in the
ship, and doing their office there, was for the saving of theirs and their
passengers bodies, Acts 27.31.
whom God had promised Paul to preserve.

III. Chief Rulers and others studying Gods word, being thereby directed in the
ordering Gods people, and managing their most weighty affairs; and
substituting under them officers of all sorts, men fearing God, and of courage,
etc. Mainly striving to bring their own people to God; and by all good means
to plant the fear of God in nations yet living in darkness; Esaias 60.10, 11.
are the true nursing fathers of the Church, and bring their glory to the
New-Ierusalem, and are saved.

IIII. That people must persuade themselves (when their Princes appoint, that
by Bishops and Ministers they should be ruled and taught, and they rule and
teach them faithfully) that God has a chief hand therein, 1. Cor. 3.9.
and that the Bishops and Ministers do but cooperate with him: and that God
hereby strives with them; and that in disobeying any thing taught them from
Gods word, they strive against the Spirit of God, which Christ promised should
be with his Apostles and their successors, even unto the end.

V. That it is a wicked and ungracious speech of them, which say: If God has
predestined me to salvation, I shall be saved: and if God has decreed my
damnation, I shall be damned, in what manner so ever I live. For God, as he
has predestined any man to glory; so he has ordered and set this course:
that he repent and believe, and show the life of his faith by his works: having
chosen him before the foundations of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. 2. Tim. 2.19.
to be holy and without blame in love. Thus God having decreed a man's
salvation: not only his Rulers and Teachers must do their duties, but each
man himself must do his own duty also. CHAP. 4. Acts 27.31. etc.
As God having decreed the safety of all the people with Paul; not only the
shipmen must stay in the ship, and do their duties: But the passengers also
must by swimming and on boards, and broken parts of the ship use means for
their escape from death.

CHAP. IIII. Our salvation is of the Lord: of his mere mercy: And by his
powerful working in us.
GOd having so, as above, decreed on his part to deal with man: and appointed
and declared what on man's part ought to be performed for making the means of
salvation effectual: It is manifest (man being fallen from the happy estate in
which God made him) that the salvation of them that be saved, is not, 1. John
4.10.
Of or from their loving of God first:
John 15.16.
Or their choosing God:
Ezekiel. 36.26.
Or having a soft heart of their own:
Romans 9.16.
Or their own willing or running:
John 6.44.
Or their coming to God without drawing:
2. Tim. 1.9.
Or their good works:
Ephesians. 2.8.
Or of their faith, or any thing which is of themselves.


2. Tim. 1.9. Phil. 2.13. 2. Tim. 1.9. Ephesians. 2.7.
But God, before the foundations of the world were laid, according to the good
pleasure of his will, of his purpose and grace (of which there is (...) an
exceeding riches,) Out of his compassion of them:
Predestined them, whom he foreknew: Rom 9.16. Romans 8.29. 1. John. 4.10.
Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.30. Acts 20.32.

Loves and chooses them in Christ:
Decrees to call them:
Decrees to teach them by the word of grace preachead to them;
And by the working of his Spirit: John 16.13

Decrees to knock at their hearts: Rev. 3.20.

To stand there knocking:
To open their hearts as he did Lydia's: Acts. 16.14.

To draw them with cords of love: John. 6.44. Hos. 11.4. Ier. 31.3. John 12.32.
Ezekiel. 36.26. 2. These. 1.11. Heb. 12.2.



To change their stony hearts into fleshy hearts: to work powerfully in them,
so that they believe according to the effectualnesse of the power of God, who
is the author and finisher of their faith.

To conform them to the image of his Some: Romans 8.29.

If they fall, to uphold them with his hand: Psalm. 37.24.

To correct them fatherly for their good: Hos. 5.15.

To sanctify them, to justify them: Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 2.8. 2. Tim. 2.25: John
17.20.

To save them by faith, which is his gift:
To make Christ intercessor for them, that they may be kept safe, etc.
And finally to glorify them. Romans 8.30.

Yet they which are saved thus by Gods infinite mercy and powerful work, they
(I say) according to the order and course appointed by God, Hear Gods word:
Acts 10.33.

Attend to the things which be spoken: Acts 16.14. Acts 2.37. Psalm
119.10.143.5. 2. Cor. 11.7. Acts 2.38. and 41.

Ask what they should do to be saved:
Seek the Lord: Meditate on his statutes:
Are bumble minded:
Repent, and believe the Gospel: Mark 1.15.
Put up their prayers and supplication to God:
Acts 9.11. Acts 26.19. Psalm. 119.71. 1. John 5.18
Are not disobedient to Gods will revealed to them:
Are bettered by persecution and affliction:
(...), Look carefully to themselves:
John 14.21.
Love God, fear him:
1. Cor. 13.
Perform works of charity: etc.
Mat. 10.12.
Persevere unto the end.


All these and the rest whatsoever duties they do, they do them truly and
willingly, not by compulsion and necessitating: Phil. 2.13.
Yet so, as that God works in them the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure.

From that which has here been declared, it may evidently be inferred;

I. That the title that any one has to life eternal, is only from the free
grace and mercy of God.

II. No nation, man has any good thing in and of him self, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. See
page. 6. conclusion 4.
first to move God to send the word, or any furtherance to make way for Gods
working of his salvation.

III. The electing of them which be saved, is merely in Christ Jesus: in whom
alone God is well pleased.

IV. God does predestinate to glory, before the world was made, men seen
clothed with Christ's righteousness from eternity (as they shall stand before
God at the last day) and brought to God by such courses, as GOD of his infinite
wisdom and mercy uses to that end.

V. GOD elects not any for their Faith foreseen as a cause, why he wills to
elect them; his holy will is the square of his actions. According to this his
will, he at once decrees to elect them, to work faith in them, to sanctify
them, to justify them, and to glorify them. As (...), the change of the mind
by repentance and faith, sanctification, justification are in man, they go
before, Glorification comes after, but GOD at once decrees them, and is the
Author, cause and worker of them all.

VI. The Elect discern not, that is, make not themselves differ from others,
by any thing in and of themselves: But Gods mere grace works that in them; by
which they are discerned and made to differ from the reprobate.

VII. Men are (...), Acts 13.48.
set in order by Gods working on them, with his word and Spirit: and so
believe, etc. and have salvation conferred on them.

VIII. Men predestinate do not apostate or fall away, and be put out of Gods
book of life. For the work on Gods part is sure: and (though man in this life
is in himself frail, yet) God in the very predestinating of him, sees it sure
by his gift of grace on man's part also: Who trusts not to himself, but makes
God his rock: And submits and commends himself to his guidance.

CHAP. 5.
CHAP. V. Man's perdition is of himself, and first by default of Rulers
apostating from God: so as yet man dies in and for his own sins. Conclusions
thence.
NOtwithstanding that God has decreed a Savior in himself all sufficient for
the saving of all mankind: and taken a course on his own part in it self also
sufficient; and appointed a course and order on man's part, for the making the
same effectual: Yet it falls out, that many men attain not salvation, but are
seized on by Gods justice to condemnation.

Here observe. I. That seeing God has not made us acquainted with his counsel
concerning infants dying within the pale of the Church, and by the state of the
land, and their parents intended to be presented to God, for the receiving the
seals of his covenant in due time; or having received the seals, die before
ripe years; or coming to ripe years are destitute of understanding by defect
in the senses, which be the doors to let in understanding: or distemper or
indisposition of the brain the workhouse of understanding; if on man's part be
done for them what man is able, and they capable of; Modesty injoines us to
lay aside all curious disputes about them; and charity to hope the best.

II. concerning children borne of parents out of the Church, and dying in
infancy, or (when they come to riper years) being destitute or understanding
by defects above mentioned; whose parents either utterly despised the seals of
Gods covenant, or abused them by superstition; seeing Gods word has not
revealed, whether and how far his mercy may extend to such (considering his
compassion to them in Niniveh, which could not discern the right hand from the
left, Ion. 4.11.
in forbearing their destruction, at least, temporal) we ought not (be it
spoken with submission to better judgments) curiously to search into their
estates, much less harshly and rashly to censure them: They stand or fall to
their own master.

Wherefore forbearing to comprehend these in the following discourse: Of the
rest, many (I say as above) are seized on by Gods just judgment to
condemnation; either by default, First, of Apostate rulers, whom they follow,
as also their own lusts and corruptions; Or Secondly, by default of the people
themselves, who will not follow their godly rulers and teachers direction and
instruction.

First, 1.
by default of the said Rulers supreme and subordinate, Ezekiel. 34.10. Ezekiel. 33.8.
who are Gods Sheepheards and watchmen. For if by their default in their places
the people miscarry; the people die in their iniquity, and God requires their
blood at the sheepheards and watchmens hands. The Explication of this position.
Genesis 4.7.
Thus Cain (before the flood) a principal father and ruler over his
posterity, not ruling them in Gods ways and fear, nor teaching them Gods
worship aright, perished himself; and his posterity obstinately walking in
his steps, and in very great part corrupting the children of God of the godly
families, Genesis 6.2. etc.
were drowned in the deluge, and are spirits in prison; such only excepted as
died in the true faith. 1. Pet. 3.19.


Genesis 11.
Thus also (after the flood) Nimrod of Chams posterity, with the fathers of
many families and their people joining themselves to him, left the tents of
Shem and his godly family, and bandied themselves together for the making of a
strange great apostasy from God. Whereupon they were scattered by divine
Justice over the earth, and left to walk in their own ways. In which they
walked till the time of Christ, albeit God many ways assured them, and wrought
many wondrous and miraculous works to reclaim them.

For God made his people and worship (not only by the situation of the
Israelites land, which was most obvious to all then habitable parts of the
world: But also by many and admirable works done among them and for them)
famous. As namely by Abraham's conquest, Genesis 14.
with a small number of religious soldiers, over the conqueror Cedarlaomer, the
most powerful King in those times, and over the Kings of Shiner and Ellas: and
over the King of the Nations, and their far greater army of wicked wretches.
So that the dispersion being not yet into very remote parts; this must needs
be famously known. Genesis 19.
God miraculously destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. God first brought Joseph an
Hebrew, Genesis 39.
then his father Jacob and his family into Egypt, a place well known
(before) for traffic: (then) for Joseph, and for plenty by Gods goodness and
his providence. In so much that all nations came thither for relief, Genesis 41.57.
and found there the most godly family in the world in high favor; and Joseph
a member thereof, next the King in honor; ruling the Princes after his will,
Psalm. 105.21.
and teaching (why not as well forrainers humbled by famine, as) Pharaohs
Senators wisdom: doubtless that wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4. for the saving of their
souls, as well as political for preserving their lives. After this God
miraculously plagued a Pharaoh succeeding, Exodus 7. and 8, and 9. Exodus 14.
and finally drowned him and his host in the red sea; through which he led the
Israelites as on dry land: doing all this (as doubtless the rest of his
wondrous works) to show his powerful God head, Exodus 7.5, and 9, 16. Romans 9.10.
and to make his name known through all the world. God wrought many and
admirable miracles in the wilderness; Gave Iosuah a miraculous victory at
Jericho: and over the Anakims, and the high walled cities of Chanaan: Staid
the suns course, etc. Not to insist upon each particular; God made David and
his worthies admirably victorious; made Solomon far and near renowned for
his wisdom, honor, riches, the glorious temple, and skillful navigation. So
that the Queen of Shebah came from the ends of the earth, invited thereto by
his fame, 1. Kings 10.1.
to hear his wisdom. 1. Kings 10.24.
Yea all the world sought to see Solomon, and to hear the wisdom which God
put into his heart. God gave many and strange victories to other of the Kings:
he gave recovery from a grievous and deadly disease, and a miraculous sign
thereof to Hezekiah.

Moreover God preserved the three Princes, Ananias, Azarias, and Mizael, in the
fiery furnace. Whereupon Nebuchadnezar then Monarch of the world made a decree,
Dan. ^.25.
that all nations tongues and languages should take notice of the true God, and
of that wondrous work. God preserved Daniel in the Lions den: Dan. 6.25.
whereupon Darius wrote to all nations and languages that dwell in the world,
inioining in his dominions, that men should tremble and fear before the God of
Daniel. Ezr. 1.
Further God put it into Cyrus his heart, to make a proclamation of the great
God, that gave him victory over Babel: And that Gods people should return out
of his large dominions to build Jerusalem and the temple; and that they should
be releeved with many and necessaries, from all parts where they dwelt. Esth.
8. and 9.
The great favor which Achasuerosh vouchsafed the Jews in his 127. provinces
extending from India to Ethiopia, the downfall of Haman so highly esteemed; and
free liberty granted them to be revenged of their enemies, could not but make
the world to take especial notice of them. By these and many other strange
works of God for them, it must needs come to pass that diverse others of the
Gentiles, as well as they which left records found by Artashaste, Ezr. 4 20.
should understand the great might of Jerusalem and her Kings, Ezr. 5.8.
and call (as the enemies of God did) their God the great God: And acknowledge
that the Israelites were the only wise people and of understanding, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
and a great nation. 1. Kin. 10.5.
And bless the God of Israel, as did the Queen of Shebah. Notwithstanding all
these things at several times the chief people of Asia, Europe and Africa, one
after another, since their great Apostasy with Nimrod, maliciously and
obstinately bent themselves against God, and his people. As the wars with the
Chananites, Amorites, Iebusites, etc. with the Edomites, Amalekites, Moabites,
Ammonites, Philistines, Midianites, Aramites, Assyrians, Ethiopians, Chaldeans,
Persians, Medes, Syrians, Egyptians, etc. abundantly show. Amongst which
people, as any one grew more populous and mighty than the rest, for the most
part they fought against God, and walked in Nimrods idolatrous steps: or if
they got any glimpse of light and knowledge, wickedly turned it into fables and
lies; And till the days of Christ, continued in unbelief, except some few.
Psalm. 147.20.
So that God dealt not with them as with the Jews, neither had they knowledge
of his laws: such a Pearl was not to be cast to swine. Act. 17.30.
The time of their ignorance (as Paul told at Athens, the place among them most
of credit for knowledge) God regarded not: and Christ termed them dogs to whom
the childrens bread was not to be given. Matthew. 15.26.


Here I might add the apostasy of Esau, and the Edomites, of Ismael and the
Ismaelitess, etc. who falling away from God, misled their people. Thus their
people, all that continued in the same rebellion with them, dyed in their sin:
and God required their sins at the Rulers hands, and at the hands of
succeeding Rulers, persisting in the same obstinacy.

So that it is evident, that by default of apostate Rulers and subordinate, the
people under them die in their sins, wilfully running on in the steps of
their prime Governors, or in worse superstition added by their Successors, for
they would not leave the gods of their fathers, Ier. 2.11.
which are no gods; And so are without God in the world, adhere to wicked
traditions, Ephesians. 2.
are by nature the children of wrath, are dead in sins and trespasses, walk
therein according to the course of the world, and after the spirit that rules
in the air or darkness, even the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, Act. 14. Genesis 6. Romans 1.
and are suffered by God (who would not ever strive with the^) to walk in their
own ways: professing themselves to be wise, became fools persuading
themselves that they see, are blind. They said (as the revolted Jews in
Egypt) we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouths: Ier. 44.17.
namely burn incense to the Queen of heaven, (to Molech, to Baal, to Dagon,
etc. To Jupiter, to Mars, to Apollo, etc.) as we have done, both we and our
fathers, our Kings and our Princes. Es. 47.10.
Thus their wisdom (being in truth folly) causes them to rebel: in this case
God hides the true wisdom from the wise, such as be puffed up with a pride of
their own wisdom.

Romans 1.20.
And though GOD had not left himself without witness; but by visible things
showed them his eternal power and Godhead, Act. 14.17.
and given them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons; filling their hearts
with food and gladness: as also by the wondrous works above mentioned; yet
they, so far as they knew God, Romans 1.21.
worshipped him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations, etc. and
were without excuse; and so continued till after Christ's death. At which time
the partition wall was broken down, and liberty was granted to go into the
way of the Gentiles. Before which time that wall did not so bar out the
Gentiles, Exodus 12.38.
but that God left them a way to come into the Jews Church, and diverse
particular persons did return, by Gods great mercy, to the true faith, drawn
to it by such instruments and means as it pleased God to use. As namely the
souls which Abraham got and converted at Charan, Eliezer of Damascus his
Steward, Genesis 12.5. and 13.12.15.2. Exodus 12.38.
all or a great part of his 318. soldiers: a great multitude of sundry sorts
of people that went out of Egypt with the Israelites: also Iethro a Midianite,
Rahab a Chananite, Ruth a Moabite, Naaman a Syrian, (as many think) etc. The
strangers in the land called together by David at the fitting of stones for the
Temple: 1 Chronicles. 22.2. Exodus 12.44.48.
all servants bought for money and circumcised: Strangers at any time
circumcised. In Achafuerosh his Provinces many of his people became Jews. Est.
8.17.
So that even in the great Apostasy of the Gentiles, and long continuance in
the same, some there were, who by Gods great mercy returned to the true Church.

Besides this Apostasy at Babel, 1 King. 11.31.
Jeroboam amongst the people of God made watchman and shepherd over the ten
tribes, did fall off to Idolatry, and ill govern, and worse teach Israel. So
that neither Iudahs example adhering to the true religion at Jerusalem: nor the
withering of his hand, 1 King. 13.4.
when he would have laid hold on Gods Prophet: nor other miracles then done;
nor Ahijahs the Prophets message to him from God; Es. 5.
nor that God had done for his vineyard (of which Israel was a part) what he
could do in planting, hedging, and dressing it, etc. could reclaim him from
his false worship, and mis-leading the people, the flock committed to him.

In the sins of this Jeroboam the son of Nebat, walked the Kings of Israel
his successors: notwithstanding that God sent Elias, and Elisha, and other
Prophets to them, and by them wrought many miracles: notwithstanding that God
often punished them by wars, rebellions, famine and other calamities: 2 King.
18.11. Es. 5.
till at length God would no longer strive with them, but took away their
hedge and wall, 2. Chron. 36.16
and suffered the Assyrians, then most powerful, to tread them down, to lay
the Vineyard waste, to captive them to the Cities of the Medes, and parts
adjoining: where many perished, and only such as were humbled by affliction,
etc. were saved. In these parts they continued captives till the Medes and
Persians became Monarchs of the world, and sent out of their Provinces,
whosoever of that people would return. After which time they continued in the
land under much affliction, till Christ's incarnation. In this apostasy of
Jeroboam and his successors, with their people, there were many persons among
them which bowed not the knee to Baal: 1 King. 19.18.
many that left and fell off from his Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 15.9.
to the true worship in Judah.

When in the fullness of time Christ took our nature upon him, preached the
glad tidings of the Gospel, offered himself up to God a sacrifice in it self
sufficient for all mankind; commanded his Apostles now to preach to all
nations and baptize the^. Mat. 28.19. Act. 17.30.
The^ the Rulers of the Jews apostate and mis-lead the people, who in great
part held it reason sufficient: Do any of the Rulers believe in him? and are
persuaded to ask Barrabas and refuse Christ; John 7.48.
crying, crucify him, crucify him; and his blood be upon the^ and their
children. So that there is only a remnant of them according to the election of
grace, saved. The Lord of his abundant mercy in his good time call their
posterity, who since that time till this day continue in their wilful
blindness, and obstinate unbelief.

Upon their rejection comes in the calling of the Gentiles: for effecting
whereof, Act. 2.
CHRIST by sending down of the Holy Ghost in the apparition of fiery divided
tongues, conferred on the Apostles and others the gift of speaking diverse
tongues; a thing most miraculous to religious men of all nations under heaven,
who at that time were present at Jerusalem: whereby the glad tidings of the
Gospel might with more speed and convenience be preached to all. To which end
the Apostles, Paul and others traveled into Countries far and near, not
danted with dangers and persecutions, which often befell them; converted many
to the faith of Christ, and planted Churches in diverse parts of the world. So
that it is written, Their sound went forth into all the earth, Romans 10.18.
and their words unto the ends of the world. The miracle of tongues ceasing,
the successors of the Apostles were to cherish the knowledge of tongues: and to
preach the Gospel freely in the first plantation of it; more seeking them,
than theirs; where they spent their labors according to the Apostles example.

Ephesians. ^. Romans 11.25.
Notwithstanding this course taken by God, according to the exceeding riches of
his grace to us Gentiles, upon the unbelief of the Jews; which is a mystery
or secret, of which we must not be ignorant: and when we see it effected, Romans
11.33.
cry with St Paul, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearcheable are his judgments (before toward the Gentiles, now
toward the Jews) and his ways (of commanding the Covenant of peace in Christ
to be now preached to all nations, Romans 11.31.
and making it known that hereafter the Jews shall obtain mercy) past finding
out!

Notwithstanding this course on Gods part taken for calling all nations. The
City of Rome, which about the time of Christ's birth was at the full height of
her power, Luke 2.
both then and since has, and still does challenge rule over the Kings of the
earth; Apoc. 17.
and is the only City famously known by her seven hills, has first by her
Emperors (almost all wicked and persecutors) killed Christ, and cruelly
afflicted and murdered Christians, and afterward (when the Emperors were
mastered) by Popes pretending like Lambs to use the two horns of spiritual
and temporal power, Mat. 7.15. Act. 20.29. Apoc. 13.11.
but indeed turned Wolfes, exceedingly abused and mis-lead their sheep; let
the study of tongues decay for a long time, especially of the sacred tongues,
in which Gods original truth is written; locked up knowledge; commended
ignorance to the people; sought not so much the peoples salvation, as honor,
riches, sovereignty over all; making the people serve God by Images; pray
without understanding in an unknown tongue, etc. and further became drunk
with blood of the Saints, Rev. 1^.^.
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Christ, etc. Thus by default of these
wicked sheepheards their sheep perished in their sins. Yet eve^ at Rome there
was a little flock of Christ in Paul's time famous through the whole world for
their faith: Romans 1.8.
who by the Almighty protection of God did propagate true religion, even under
the worst and most tyrannous Emperors. And when Rome by the Popes pride
advanced it self, and made the Kings of the earth, Rev. 18.2.
and their people drunk with the wine of her fornications; Gods people (as
they are commanded) went out of her by disclaiming her doctrine and Idolatries,
and dyed for the witness of Gods truth; lest they should partake of her
sins, and receive of her plagues. And Princes have worthily begun to hate the
Whore of this spiritual Babylon, Rev. 17.15.
to demolish the walls of Rome in their Dominions, or turn them to uses more
for Gods glory.

Amidst the stirs and Idolatries of Rome, at length Mahomet arose, and the
Turks after him; they by sword and wicked and blasphemous doctrine mis-lead
their people and vassals: so that by their default they and their people are in
a damnable estate; except such as in their dominions retain the knowledge and
worship of Jesus Christ according to Gods truth.

Concerning the people most remote, as they of China, of Cathaia, of India East
and West, especially of America, of Peru, and the rest of the parts orbis
incogniti, (as it is called) of which little more than the ruder skirts are
known unto our men; seeing it is not well known, how long some of these parts
have been peopled, seeing some hold it disputable whether Solomon's fame and
Navigation (to speak nothing of Gods other wondrous works) extended to all of
them; and if but to some, then to which of them: and more especially, what
Countries Ophir, 2 Chronicles. 9.10. 2 Chronicles. 2.6. 1 King. 10.22. 1 K. 10.24, 15.
Pervaim, and Tharshish are, whence his gold came in such abundance: as also
how far that speech will reach, of all the worlds seeking to see Solomon, and
of the gifts of all Kings and nations: which may perhaps extend to places very
far distant, whence probably men might travel, seeing the Queen of Shebah a
woman came so far.

Seeing also that many will not easily grant, that in the Apostles and
Primitive times, the sound of the Gospel extended even to these parts: and
interpret Scriptures brought to prove this, differently: Romans 10.18. Act. 1.8.
Mat. 24.14.
Or that God might since then, by his merciful Providence, send among them
some light of the Gospel by other means, since the great increase of
navigation: and that our knowledge of their stories is small, as that we have
not without uncertainty. Seeing these matters (I say) are not clear and
manifest unto us, it will not be amiss to forbear defining any thing of them.
But seeing we know assuredly that GOD commanded the Gospel to be preached to
all nations; and we find that men of pharisaicall condition compass sea and
land with all earnestness to make Proselytes for Hell, it concerns all hearty
Christians rather gloriously to spend labor and cost for the planting Gods
religion among them. to the advancement of Gods Kingdom and glory; then either
peremptorily to determine, or (which is less) fruitlesly to travel, where we
have no surer footing.

Forbearing therefore to enter into further debating of these last matters: from
the former which are more manifest, and as by Gods word, so by the situation of
the people and commerce with them better known unto us: it may be concluded.

I. That God (having at once decreed from eternity the means for converting
man fallen unto him: and seeing on whom they would not be effectual, by default
on man's part; and decreed their condemnation) in execution of these decrees
left not, nor passed by Cain, Nimrod, Jeroboam, etc. and their adherents, but
upon their apostaste or malicious persecuting Gods truth, beyond their day or
the set time of Gods striving with them; the knowledge of which time God has
reserved to himself for the most part.

II. That Apostate and maliciously persecuting Princes and their substitutes
entrusted with a weighty business by God and the people, and ill managing the
same, incur the heavy judgeme^t of God by their own sins: and by making
others, or by giving occasion to others to sin. When either for profit or
pleasure, as Cain, for a name as Nimrod, for envy as the Jews; for ambition,
and having no King but Caesar, no sovereign Lord but the Pope; and other their
sins, most of them from this root: As the Emperors, and the Bishops of Rome
(in chief place after them) they reject or persecute the true religion.

III. They that did or do live under Rulers apostate from the true religion,
or maliciously persecuting the same, lost and do lose the title to happiness
jointly by Adams fell, in whose loins they sinned: and by default of apostate
and persecuting rulers and ancestors, in whom they apostated and persecuted,
and by actual continuing together with their successors in the same apostasy,
and resolution to persecute. For instance, the Grecians the posterity of
Iaphet fell in Adam: God providing a remedy for that fall by Christ promised:
in Nimrod and his accomplices they apostated from the hope of that promise: At
Christ's death the Gospel of peace is commanded to be preached to all nations,
and was taught and received in their country. Whosoever since then, or now
has or does apostate from the true religion taught by Gods Apostles in Grecia,
and join with the Turk or Pope in misbeleif and persecuting Gods truth, and
has or does continue in the same apostasy, lose the title to happiness. And
so of other people also.

IIII. That God has done at several times many miraculous works, and
inflicted on mankind most strange judgments etc. all very conspicuous, so that
even among the apostate nations before Christ, Exodus 9.27.
Pharaoh confessed, that God was righteous, himself and his people sinful:
And others could not but acknowledge Gods power, Ezr. 5.8. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Dan.
2.47. and 3.29. and 6.26.
and that he was the great God: That his Law is only wise: That no god could
do, as he did, etc. Besides, many nations did use sacrifices and offerings,
but without true knowledge; and superstitious: Yet in so doing, acknowledged
themselves sinners, and the goodness of a Deity to them, etc. being able to
say that we (...), are his offspring. Acts 17.
Insomuch that they, when as they knew God, worshipped him not as God, but
became vain in their imaginations, were given up to their hearts lust, and are
without excuse.

V. That some particular persons fallen in Adam; apostated from the promise of
Christ in their ancestors, have been called to the faith by Gods miraculous
works and judgments and such other means as it pleased God to use, and of his
mere mercy saved; Such as Rahab, Ruth, and diverse others above named. In like
manner some now in the Turkish Empire and Popish countries; who being vexed (as
holy Lot) with the abominations about the^ practiced, deplore these and their
own sins, believe the truth of God concerning redemption by Christ so far as
it is revealed unto them, endeavor to lead an holy life accordingly, and meddle
not with abuses, which they have no commission to amend.

VI. That they that know not their masters will and do things worthy of
stripes, Luke 12.48.
shall be beaten with few stripes. And that it shall be easier for them at the
day of judgment, then for those cities and places which have had the means of
salvation more plentifully imparted to them. As appears by Christ's speech of
Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum. Mat. 11.22.24.


CHAP. 6.
CHAP. VI. Man's perdition is of himself in the second place by his own
default: Where the Rulers and teachers do their duties. Conclusions thence.
Lastly, conclusio^s from the former and this chapter jointly considered.
2.
IN the second place, where Princes, their substitutes, Bishops and teachers do
their offices faithfully, some people (...) a^o^g ^n their own ruin.

For though God set watchmen over the^, which say, Ier. 6.17.
Take heed to the sound of the trumpet: some (as the Jews to Jeremie) say: we
will not take heed. Though Gods word be to them precept upon precept, Esaias.
28.10.
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there
a little; though God speak to them himself; Ier. 7.25.
though God send to them his servants the Prophets of old (and preachers now)
yet they will not hear; Ier. 2.25.
but go after the stubbornness of their own wicked hearts. They say
desperately, no; for I have loved strangers, and I will follow them. In so much
that God complains: My people would not hear my voice, Psalm. 81.11.
and Israel would none of me. So he gave them up to their own hearts lust. And
Christ complains of them, and bewailes their obstinacy: O Jerusalem, Mat.
23.37.
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered ye, as an hen her chickens, and
ye would not?

Job 21.14. Ier. 11.21. Job. 22.17. Job 34.9. Psalm. 73.11.
Nay, they say to God, depart from us: we desire not the knowledge of thy Laws.
Or bid the Prophets prophecy not. Or say, what can the Almighty do for us!
Or, it profits nothing to walk with God. Or, how does God know it? is there
knowledge in the most high? And so depart from the presence of God, as Cain and
his posterity, and Nimrod and his followers, etc. setting afterward their
actions, as (before, Psalm. 73.9.
) their mouths (as David says) against Heaven.

Or they rely on their own wisdom, and forsake God the fountain of living
waters, Ier. 2.13.
and dig to themselves pits, 1. Cor. 1.18.
even broken pits which will hold no water. They account the preaching of the
Cross foolishness, which is the power of God for the salvation of them that
be saved. As for their own wisdom (for so they esteem it) God turns it
into folly.

Or they follow the il examples of their fathers, Ier. 16.11, 12.
so that when their fathers have forsaken Jehovah, and walked after other Gods,
etc. Ier. 18.12.
They do worse then their fathers; and walk every one after the stubbornness
of their own hearts.

Or so addict themselves to pleasure and voluptuousnes, as that they cannot
come to the heavenly banquet of salvation, according to his answer, I cannot
come. Luke 14.20.
So the wicked before the flood (Noah being the preacher of righteousness to
them) ate, drank, married and gave in marriage: and so will they do before the
general day of judgment, Luke 17.26, 27
neglecting the call of Gods preachers: till destruction sweep them away, as it
did the old world.

Or, they suffer the cares of the world, Mat. 13.22. Luke 14.19.
and the deceitfulnes of riches to choke the good seed of the word, and forsake
the feast of salvation made ready, for to go after their farms, and oxen and
matters of profit.

Or, when persecution comes, because of the Gospel, they are offended, and
suffer the seed of God, Mat. 13.20.
for want of deep rooting to wither, etc.

Or for envy at the conversion of others, and the graces of God in them;
maliciously oppose and reject the Gospel: as did the Jews, when they saw the
whole city of Antioch come together to hear Gods word: Acts 13.45.
and were thereupon filled with envy, and contradicted those things which were
spoken by Paul, and railed. So also did the Elder son, that is, the Jew, Luke
1528.
repine, and would not come into the feast, when God the father reconciled
himself to the younger son the prodigal, Acts 7.51. Ne^. 9.30. Esaias 6, 10.
that is, the Gentile. This resisting is called a resisting of the Spirit of
God both in the fathers and also in those present Jews. And what did they in
the old world, 1. Pet. 3.18, 19, 20.
but resist the spirit, by which Christ was raised from the dead? For with that
very spirit Christ preached to them: And for resisting the same they are now
Spirits inprison.

God from all eternity seeing the rebellion and obstinate wickedness of
profane men (under the father, before the law was written, and after in the
Jewish Church, and now in the Christian Church since) in all of many of the
degrees above: as he willed that together with other means of salvation his
Spirit also should strive with them: so he willed that his spirit should not
always strive with them. But when their wickedness was come to the full, Genesis
6.3.
and Gods long suffering had many years waited for their amendment; Luke 13.7.
that they might agree with their adversary in the way; Luke 12.58.
when the limit of the time in which God gave them space to repent, Luke
19.42.44.
Their day in which they ought to know the things which belong to their peace,
(which day or fixed limit is known only to God, except sometimes it has
pleased him to reveal it) is past and expired: Then God will not hear their
cry, who before would not hear his call: Ier. 11. Mat. 11.25.
then God gives it not to them, to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
heaven: God hides those things from the wise and intelligent (in their own
proud conceit) because it so pleases him. 1. Kings 22.23.
God sends a lying Spirit into the mouth of Ahabs prophets and gives him power
to deceive them. Number. 22.12. and 19. and 22.
When Balaam was forbidden by God to go, or curse the blessed, and yet would
not rest, 2. Pet. 2.15. Acts 28.27.
but still showed his love and desire of the wages of unrighteousness; God had
him go, but was angry that he went. When the hearts of people are waxed
gross, their ears dull of hearing, and their eyes by themselves closed, lest
they should see, hear, understand, and be converted: Then God blinds, makes
deaf, and takes away their understanding. God hardens them according to the
most holy and just rule of his will, Romans 9.
who (being come to Pharaoh's case) harden themselves and so he hardens, whom
he will: And then is there no disputing with God. God sends strong delusions,
2, These. 2.11.
that they should believe lies, who would not receive the knowledge of the
truth.

Thus Gods al-seeing eyes beholding from al eternity, what courses he on his
part would take, and how among his people the Rulers and Teachers should
faithfully do, what he ordered and appointed for the salvation of their
people; seeing even them also who are not in Christ, not by his or the Rulers
or teachers default, but by their own consulting with flesh and blood, and
disobedience to Gods will revealed to them: Romans 9.
Simul and semel he decreed the condemnation of them most justly (as Esau's)
before actually they had done good or evil: and thereto tends Christ's speech;
He that believes not, John 3.18.
is condemned already.

These things being thus, it may be hence concluded; 1. That in wicked men's
neglecting or contemning Gods dealing with them, and the order and course
appointed by God for their salvation, some sooner some later fall off from, or
reject the means of their salvation. The Gaderens after one miracle done among
them, upon the loss of their swine, beseech Christ to depart out of their
coasts. The Jews at Antioch hear the Gospel preached to them one Sabbath:
but the next Sabbath drive the Apostles out of their city. They of Capernaum
and Bethsaida had many great works of Christ done among them; but repented not.
Demas heard the Gospel, walked with the Apostles for a time, but at length
fell off to the present world. Julian the Apostata heard the Gospel, professed
the same for a time, at length violently and maliciously persecuted it. Judas
heard the Gospel, preached it, continued a long time with Christ and the
Apostles; was unsuspected of the Apostles: till at length he betrayed his
Master; and died desperately.

2. That carelessness and want of due consideration opens a very great gappe on
man's part to his own ruin. As not to regard the trumpet of Gods warning them:
his miracles, promises, threats, etc. to prefer man's folly before Gods
wisdom in the mouth of his messengers; to prefer this worlds wealth before
the true treasure; momentany pleasures before pleasures at Gods right hand for
evermore: To fear men that can but kill the body, and not fear God, who can
destroy both body and soul; to envy other men's graces and conversion, at
which GOD, good Angels and men rejoice; not principally and mainly to seek
Gods Kingdom, and to use matters of this world, as if we used them not. In
this manner they that were invited to the banquet of salvation, (...), made
light of it, and went their ways, to pleasure, profit, Mat. 22.5.
etc. How shall (...) men neglecting so great salvation escape. Heb. 2.3.


3. That though Gods goodness and mercy is such that he knocks at man's heart,
Rev. 3.20.
and stands and abides knocking there; and notwithstanding many and great
sins of infirmity and ignorance, etc. still continues suing to be admitted
into the heart of man, drawing him to it by the preaching of the Ministers, who
work together with him; 2 Cor. 6.1.
as by other means also: yet if sinners proceed from one degree of sin to
another, and harden their hearts, that they cannot repent, following sin with
greediness, till the acceptable time, the day of salvation be past: and Christ
who commanded all to watch, 2 Cor. 6.2. Mar. 13.37. Luke 13.46.
and told them of his sudden coming, find them not well doing, but sleeping
in sin, they are cut off and have their portion with unbeleevers.

4. That the wicked which lived in the Church before Christ's time, lost their
title to happiness, jointly by Adams fall, and (sin coming in thereby) by
actual sins of their own, by wilful forsaking or otherwise losing the
benefit of Christ promised, by persisting in all or some of the sins above
named.

5. That the wicked, who lived in the true Church, since Christ's time, lost
their title to happiness jointly by Adams fall; and by falling off from the
hope in Christ, promised in their Ancestors at Babels building; and by each
man's own actual sin in some or all the degrees above named, falling from the
hope of salvation through Christ, already come and preached to them.

6. That God from all eternity decreed the hardening of them, that obstinately
harden themselves; the blinding of them, that obstinately blind themselves;
the forsaking of them, that obstinately forsake him; that will follow their
own courses, their wicked Ancestors steps; and impiously bid God depart from
them?

Furthermore from these two sections considered together, arise these
conclusions.

I. That the condemnation of the wicked is merely of and from man's default;
where the trumpet is not blown, both by default of Rulers and teachers, and
also in regard of their own sins, in which they dye. And where Rulers and
teachers do their duties, by the sins of each particular person.

II. That the wickedness of the damned is not the cause of Gods will to damn
them: for sin in man, which is evil, cannot produce justice in God (which is
holy and good, and an attribute of God before sin ever was) as its effect:
But Gods holy and just will is the square of his actions. Yet sin in man truly
his own work is cause of damnation in himself; a bad effect of a bad cause.
So treason is the cause of the traitors condemnation and death; but the law of
the land being the rule of justice, is the cause, that the Judge wills the
condemnation, and puts to death the Traitor.

III. The work of any of Gods free Graces and favors not merited by any man,
proceeds not de facto so far with some men, as with others, by default of
the men themselves. The benefit of his rain and sun extends to all, so also
many other outward gifts: Christ wrought one miracle among the Gadarens, but at
that time preached not the word in their Cities; for they would not. Christ did
many great works in Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum; preached there; when as
they repent not, he pronounces a woe against them. God caused the word to be
preached to Demas, gave him society with the Apostles; but left him to the
corruption of his heart embracing this present world. God caused the word to
be preached to Julian, according to which he walked for a time, and encouraged
Christians; but at length God left him to the cruelty of his own heart to
persecute Christianity. God made Judas an Apostle; he according to his office
walked a while, and preached the Gospel; but at length God left him to the
covetousness of his heart, to betray the Lord of life, and to desperation.

IV. They which be adjudged to comdemnation, discern and make themselves
differ from the rest by being disobedient and rebellious to the order and
course appointed by God for man's salvation. God made Paul differ from Demas and
other wicked men by the gracious work of his holy Spirit on him. D^mas made
himself to differ from Paul and other godly men, by yielding to his own
corruption in following this present world.

V. That they which knew their masters or Gods will, and prepared not
themselves for their Masters coming, Luke 12.47, 48
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; whereas
he that knew his Masters will, and did it not, is beaten with few; for unto
whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required; Mat. 11.22, 24.
so it is with Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum.

God for Christ Jesus sake guide us by his grace and good Spirit, that we may
do his will, and prepare for his coming; and of his infinite mercy pardon,
what here has been weakly delivered about these great mysteries; and more and
more illuminate our understandings in the knowledge of the same; and so
powerfully work upon us, that as on his part there is not, so on our part there
may be no default; that we may persevere his servants here, and hereafter
reign with him in the Kingdom of glory, for the merits of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. *

FINIS.

