THE TIMES, PLACES, AND Persons of the holy Scripture.

Otherwise entitled, THE GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOLY Scriptures.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Richard Ockould. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN Brograue Knight, his Majesty's Attorney
general of the Duchy of Lancaster.
RIght Worshipful, the written copy of this book coming to my hands, was
thought worthy the press by men of good judgment and learning, for that it
might be profitable to many, as well those that intend the study and
profession of Divinity, as to all other good Christians. The Author of the
book is uncertain to me: but his work manifests, that he was learned, and
religious: which moved me (though with no small charge) to impart the same to
all, and to make it public. And for that the same wants the Authors name, I
thought fit it should not want a Patron: neither knew I any other more worthy,
to whom I might recommend the Patronage thereof, than your worship, in regard
of that service, wherein I stand bound to your self, and that most worthy
society of Greyes Inn. It may please you therefore to accept the same in good
part. And I shall ever remain yours to be commanded.

Richard Ockould.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE CHRIstian Reader,
Having long purposed to bring into one frame, The general view of the holy
Scripture; and resolving the ease would been laying before your eyes, The
Times, Places, and principal Persons mentioned in Moses, and scattered through
the Prophets: Opportunity now fitting my purpose, I thought it good by this
Tract, to manifest the plainness of the Truth, which all either do, or ought
to know, that would enjoy eternal happiness, by knitting into one body, the
joints of Histories: The perfect understanding whereof, gives light to the
blind, eyes to the ignorant, and judgment to such as willingly embrace the
knowledge of heavenly wisdom.

A GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES.
Jehovah our God, Jehovah is one: Deuteronomy. 6.4


Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Jehovah, Is a name of great force, to drive us to the due reverence of Gods
eternal Majesty: for it contains the Wisdom, Power, and Eternity of God.

His Wisdom, In giving a name unto himself answerable to the glory of his
Majesty. This name was had in great reverence among the Jews: they trembled
to name or read it, but used the name Adoni, Lord. After their coming from
Babel, they never used the name Jehovah, but a name of twelve Letters,
containing Father, Son, and holy spirit. Jehovah has in it the five Vowels,
which are the sinews of all tongues. And as without them no tongue can be
expressed: so without the true knowledge of Jehovah, no flesh can be saved. It
signifies, Praise me the eternal God; it contains in it Father, Son, and
holy Ghost.

His Power, In that from Jehovah all Creatures have their breathing, and their
being, which also in Jehovah is closely expressed. For as it consists of five
Vowels: so also has it two hh, which scholars call aspirations, or
breathings: which two aspirations make up the number of 7, which is the number
of the Sabbath. Saint Paul, closely alluding to the name of Jehovah, says,
That from him we have our breathing, and our being, and in Esaias 57. the Lord
says, The blasting goes forth from me and is included in the body: I made
the breath. So often therefore as we breath, we are to remember the power and
majesty of Jehovah.

His Eternity, Is closely expressed in these 3. letters
whose terminations are Iod, Vaw, He,
is a sign of the future tense presen tense preterperfect tense.


This is made plain in Apo. 1. who was, is, will be to come.


Our God.
HErein is expressed the humanity of Christ: for it is neither added to the
Father the first person in trinity, nor to the holy Ghost the third person;
but to the Son the second person, who was to become ours by taking our nature
upon him. Some hold it not to be meant of the humanity of Christ, but for a
word of separation of the God of the Jews, from the gods of the Gentiles.

To remove such absurdity, the holy Ghost in Mark 13. (when there was no
difference between the Jew and the Gentile) repeateth the very words of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 6. The Lord our God, the Lord is one, thrice naming God, as
commanding us thereby to understand Father, Son, and holy spirit. For this
is always to be observed, whatsoever God speaks of himself, is to be
taken in the heauenlyest understanding that can be made of it.

Jehovah our God, Jehovah is one.
There be three in heaven, the Father, Word, and holy Spirit:
And these Three are one, 1. Ioh. 5.7.

THe Trinity is here described to be one united Godhead, distinguishable in
persons, but vndiuidable in coeternitie, one in three, and three in one, God
who created, redeemed, and sanctified all: one only wise God, who was showed
in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was seen among Angels, was
preached to the Gentiles, was believed of the world, and received up in glory,
1. Timothy. 3. Which to know, is the first and chiefest point of all salvation,
as John 17.3. This is eternal life to know the Father, and him whom he has
sent, Jesus Christ; which must be the true understanding of the Bible, as John
5.39. Search the Scriptures, and in them ye shall find eternal life.

Some will say, it is enough to know Christ crucified; Pilate, Herod, and Judas
the Traitor, knew that: yet went to eternal destruction. Wherefore salvation
consists not in outward knowledge, but in renewing the spirit of our
understanding, which stands first in the knowledge and fear of God, then in
the knowing of our selves, which are the first two steps to salvation: for
true knowledge is the mother of godliness. And as the eye is the light of the
body, so is understanding the light of the mind. This a man having truly
learned, he is to meditate of the graces of Christ offered unto us by his word.

God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, etc.
HErein we are to consider the loving kindness of God to exceed our deserts,
in loving us to salvation before we were. The Papists hold merit of
salvation, which cannot any way hold, seeing God of his unspeakable grace has
elected us unto salvation before we knew him.

This mystery of gods Election is not fully received of all, because men take
not words of scripture in their proper sense as they are laid down.

Election, is the eternal counsel of God for the saving and rejecting of some
before the beginning of the world. The Heathen never received comfort by this:
for being told before of things afterward to come to pass, they could not
know the reason, but thought that the actions of men were governed by the
motions of stars, and the course of nature, and not by the decree or
forepurpose of God, who works every thing according to the counsel of his
own will, and not according to our reason.

Then some will say, If God decrees every thing, why punishes he any thing?
It is answered, That punishment comes from God by the just desert of the
ranckor of man's mind. Election is of his free grace which he bestows upon
whom he will, as he says, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy.

Therefore the first thing we ought to know is our Election; the last is true
holiness.

That this Election or loving kindness of God toward us, is of the will of
God, according to the counsel of his own will, and not drawn from him by
force, by help of Saints, or as being by works meritorious of the same, it
may appear.

Esaias 43. Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted with us, but
thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, and of very loving kindness: thou have
redeemed us, thy name is everlasting. Romans 8. Romans 8.34. Esaias 43.25.
It is Christ only that makes intercession for us. Esaias 43. I am he only,
that for mine own selves sake, do away thine offenses, and forget thy sins:
For what have thou for thee to make thee righteous? Thy first father offended
sore, and thy rulers have sinned against me. Thou art like to a thing of
naught, thy time passes away like a shadow. Iere. I love thee with an
everlasting love: therefore by my mercy have I drawn thee unto me, and John
6. Ioh. 6.44.
No man can come to me, except the father draw him, as it is written. Esaias 54.
They shall be all taught of God. Esaias 26. Lord thou have wrought all our
works. Phil. 2. It is God that works in you, both the will, and also the
deed: Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor. 3.5.
even of his good will. 2. Cor. 3. We are not sufficient of our selves, to
think any thing as of our selves; but if we be able, the same comes of
God, which made us able. Esaias 51.12. Yea, I even, Esaias 51.12.
I am he that in all things gives you consolation.

Psalm. 130. For with the Lord there is mercy, Psalm. 130.7.
and with him is plenteous redemption.

1. Pet. 1. We are elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the father, 1.
Pet. 1.2.
through the sanctifying of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinckling the
blood of Jesus Christ.

Psalm. 90. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the
world were made, thou art our God, from everlasting to everlasting; Psalm. 90.2.3
thou turnest man unto dust, and say, return ye sons of Adam.

Romans 9. Before the children were borne, Romans 9.11.
and when they had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might
stand, not by works, but by the Caller: it was said, The greater shall serve
the lesser, as it is written.

Mal. 3. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated. Malach. 1.2.3.


John 13. I know whom I have chosen. John-13.18.


Psalm. 135. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth,
Psalm. 135.6.
and in the sea, and in all deep places.

Romans 11. There is a remnant left according to the election of grace. Romans
11.5.6.
If it be of grace, then it is not now of works: for then grace is no more
grace. But if it be of works, then is it now no grace, what then? Israel has
not obtained that which he seeks, but the election has obtained it.

2. These. 2. We are bound to give thanks always to God, 2. These. 2.13.
because that God has from the beginning chosen us to salvation, through
sanctifying of the spirit: and through believing of the truth, to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Romans 8. Moreover, whom he appointed before, them also he called. Romans 8.30.
And whom he has called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them
he also glorified.

Now follows the effect of Election, either in respect of the Elect, or
Reject.


And first for the Elect.
THe Elect, whom God in his mercy has saved for his righteousness sake, and
not for their deserts, he guides by the grace of his holy spirit, Romans 8.14.
as, Romans 8. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
Esaias. 43. All those that are called by my name, I have created, fashioned, and
made for my honor. Yet he leaves them sometimes unto themselves, that they
may acknowledge the weakness of their own nature, as Noah, Lot, Jacob, David,
Solomon, Peter and others, Esaias. 5 4.7.8.10.
but never suffers them to fall quite away, as appears Esaias. 54. A little
while have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I take thee up unto me.
When I was angry with thee, I hid my face from thee, for a little season, but
through everlasting mercy have I redeemed thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
The mountains shall move, and the hills shall fall down, but my loving kindness
shall not move, and the bond of my peace shall not fall down from thee, says
the lord thy merciful lover.

Psalm. 37.33.34.
Psalm. 37. The lord orders a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable
unto himself, though he fall he shall not be cast away, for the lord
vpholdeth him with his hand.

Psalm. 103.10.11.
Psalm. 103. He deals not with them after their sins, nor rewards them
according to their wickedness; but look how the heaven is in comparison of the
earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him, for he knows
whereof they be made, Psalm. 103.14.
and he remembers that they are but dust. He saves their life from
destruction, and crowns them with mercy and loving kindness.

Esaias. 54.17.
Esaias. 54. Lo, this is the heritage of the lords servants, and their
righteousness comes of me, says the lord.

The Reject, he leaves to their own selves, hardening their hearts, that he
may have occasion of Judgment against them. Esaias. 57. Esaias. 57.20.
They are like to the raging Sea, that cannot rest, whose water fometh with the
mire and gravel, for they have no peace with God. The wind shall blow them
forth, and vanity shall take them all away: they are like to dust before the
wind, and like to the chafe in a summer floor.

Psalm. 73.4.5.6
Psalm. 73. The lord suffers them to come in no perrill of death, but are
lusty and strong, they come in no danger like other folk, neither are they
plagued like other men, and this is the cause that they be so holden with
pride, and overwhelmed with cruelty; their eyes swell for fatness, and they
do even what they lust. They corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy:
their talking is against the most highest, Tush (say they) how shall God
perceive it? is their knowledge in the most highest? Lo, these are the
ungodly, and these have riches in posession. Such were Kaine, the wicked
mockers before the floode, Cham, the builders of Babel the unclean Cities,
Ismael, Esau, Pharaoh, Moab, Ammon, The wicked oppressors, Saul, Absalom, the
Kings of Israel, and the Kings of Babel, Antiochus, the vild Herod, Pilate, and
Judas the traitor, and many others, who brought upon themselves just cause of
eternal condemnation.

Psalm. 73. The Lord has set them in slipperie places, Psalm. 73.18.19.20.
and casts them down and destroys them. Oh, how suddenly do they consume
and perish, and come to a fearful end? Yea, even like as a dream does he
make their image to vanish.

Some folishly dispute, why God has not saved all things, seeing he made all?
they are answered, Ier. 12. The Lord is more righteous then that he should be
disputed with. Ier. 18. They are in the hand of the Lord, Iere. 12.1. Iere.
18.6.
as the clay in the hand of the potter.

Romans 9. God makes of one lump of clay, one vessel to honor, To. 9.21.22.
and another to dishonor. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, suffers with long patience the vessels of wrath appointed
to destruction? What art thou that disputest with God?

Esaias 45. It is I that created the light and the darkness, Esaias 45.7.8.9.10.
I make peace and trouble, even I the Lord do all these things. Woe be unto
him that strives with his maker, the potsherd with the potter, says the clay
to the potter, what make thou? or thy work serves for nothing? Woe be unto
him that says unto his father, why begettest thou? and to his mother, why
bear thou? Thus says the Lord, even the holy one, and maker of Israel.

That their sin is the cause of their Condemnation,
And God not the author thereof.
Prou. 29. The sin of the wicked, is their own snare. Prou-29.6.


Esaias. 50. For your offenses are you sold, and because of your transgression,
Esaias 50.1.
is your mother forsaken.

Esaias. 49. Their misdeeds have separated them from their God, and their sins
has hid his face from them, that he hears them not. They hope in vain
things, imagining deceit, and bringing forth evil, they breed Cockatrices
eggs, and weaue the spiders web: who so eats of their eggs dies, but if
one tread upon them, there comes up a Serpent: their deeds are the deeds of
wickedness, and the work of robbery is in their hands, their feet run to evil,
they make haste to shed innocent blood, all their counsels are wicked: harm,
and destruction, are in their ways, but the way of peace they have not known,
in their goings there is no equity, their ways are so crooked, that whosoever
goes therein, knows of no peace: and this is the cause. They look for
light, and lo it is darkness. They grope like the blind upon the wall, even as
one that has no eyes. They roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves, looking
for health, but it is far from them; for their offenses are many, and their
sins testify against the Lord. They will not confess and acknowledge their
sins, but do amiss, transgress, and dissemble against the Lord: and fall
away from their God, using presumptuous, and traitorous imaginations in their
hearts, casting away equity, truth, and righteousness, but the Lord holds
himself by his own power, and he sustaineth him by his own righteousness,
he puts on wrath in steed of clothing, and takes jealousy about him for a
cloak, like as when a man goes forth wrathfully to recompense his enemies,
and to be avenged of his adversaries. But unto Sion he is a Redeemer, and of
Jacob which turn from their wickedness, he is a Savior, and he will give
them an everlasting name that shall not perish.

Esaias 56. Thus says the high and excellent, even he that dwells in
eternity, whose name is the holy one, I dwell high above: and in the
sanctuary, and with him also, that is of a contrite and humble spirit, do I
pitch my habitation.

Psalm. 104.35.
Psalm. 104. As for sinners they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the
ungodly spall come to an end.

Psalm. 59.12.
Psalm. 59. For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips,
they shall be taken in their pride, and why? their preaching is of cursing and
lies.

Psalm. 62.4.
Psalm. 62. Their devise is only how to put him out, whom God has exalted,
their delight is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with
their heart: for they persecute him whom the Lord has smitten. And they talk
how they may vex him, whom he has wounded.

2. These. 2.11.12.
2. These. 2. Therefore shall the Lord send them strong delusions, that all they
might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, and obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. With everlasting
damnation shall they be punished from the presence of the Lord, and from the
presence of his power.

Psalm. 51.4.
Psalm. 51. That he may be justified in his sayings, and clear when he
judges.

EPHESIANS 1.10. That in the fullness of time, all should be brought under one
head.


FVlnesse of time, is here taken for the time of Christ's death, whose death
should accomplish the Ceremony and oblation, and break down the wall
between the Jew and the Gentile, when men should look no longer for salvation
only from Jerusalem, but should praise God every where; their hearts being
assured, that they were members of Christ the head. The heathen not taking
notice of this, could never come to salvation. The blind Jews not marking
this, joined with Chittim in the second degree, (which are the Romans) To
crucify Christ, the King of the most Holy; because he testified of himself,
that he was that day Star which was to appear, That Scepter that should dash
all the sons of Seth, The Ladder by whom the Angels of God ascended and
descended, Shiloh, Emmanuel, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, The root of
Iessay, The Stone which the builders refused, The true Manna, That spiritual
Rock, that would give waters of life, The true Bread that came down from
heaven, He unto whom the Crown and Diadem did belong, Michael who thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, The Stone that did punne Nebuchadnetzars
Image to dust, Palmoni the secret Numberer, He who waieth, numbreth and
divides. The great shepherd of his sheep, The true Vine, from whose sides
do proceed wine of everlasting life, He that came to do the will of his
Father.

John 4.10. He that met with the woman of Samaria at Jacobs well, to whom he
promised everliving water. The Stumbling Block to the Jews, The Light to the
Gentiles, The Eye to the blind, And an Help to the lame: For that is his name,
God is my strength and my righteousness, etc. Wherefore he has made them
Vagabonds over the whole earth, and has brought that Abomination of
Desolation upon them, whereby their City and Sanctuary is destroyed: and why?
because they would not know the Fullness of time, the day of salvation. The
Crane, the Swallow, and the Turtle Dove do know their time, but my people will
not know the time of my coming, says the Lord. Also our Savior Christ says,
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hipocrites: You can discern the wind
and the weather, but you know not the time of the coming of the son of man,
which they might have known from Daniel 9. Where the Angel Gabriel says, 70.
seuens, or 490. years are determined for the death of Christ the King of the
most Holy, to finish sin, to reconcile iniquity, to bring in Justice, to
seal the vision and Prophet, and to anoint the most Holy.

By which we are constrained highly to esteem of the knowledge of the times:
for they are of as great force to the understanding of the Bible, as the stars
are in the heavens for giving of light. No part of the Bible but consists of
time, place, or person. If of time as one third part, then the knowledge
thereof is to be embraced, and in no respect to be despised, as lightly
regarding the use thereof, lest striving for darkness, we become the children
of darkness, and so loose the light of eternal life, as the Jews and
Romans did, whose recompense has followed. The one deprived of their earthly
glory, the other advanced to glory to be a stain of eternal damnation.

The Treatise of Time.
JOHN 1. In the beginning was the word, etc.


THese words, In the beginning, are the first words of the old Testament,
whose first word in Hebrew is Bera, which consists, according to the Hebrews,
of three letters, which closely contain in them Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
as. for Ben, which signifies Son,. for Abba, which is Father: and.. for Rouach
Hachodesh, which is the Holy spirit. Thus the Trinity is closely contained in
the first word, but in the first verse is expressed in open words.

In the beginning God made heaven and earth, and the spirit of God moved upon
the waters, and God said, let their be light. This is expounded in John 1. in
these words. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that
word was God; showing, that Word in this place is taken for the Son of God,
by whom he made the world, as John 1. By him were all things created. And
Ephesians. 3. God made all things by his Son, who rules all things by his mighty
power. Wherefore Christ in the days of his flesh, chose the trade of a
Carpenter, John 6. and in Esaias 43. It is said, This Record you must bear me
your selves, says the Lord, that I am God, and even he I am from the
beginning, I do the work, and who shall let it? Thus says the Lord, the holy
one our Redeemer. Wherein is distinctly expressed, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

JOHN. 1. He was the Light, and that Light was the Life of man.


LIfe and Light is not here carnally meant, but spiritually: to which two
things, Aarons Jewel of Vrim and Thummim had a full relation. Vrim signifies
light of the mind, Thummim perfection of virtue, which brings life to the
soul.

Christ is the true light that lights every man. John 1.9.
And he that abides in this light, has everlasting life. God is light, and
in him there is no darkness at all. If we walk in light, even as he is light,
1. John 1.5.
then have we fellowship with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ shall give us
life, and cleanse us from our sin. We the Gentiles were darkness, but now are
light in the Lord. Ephesians. 5.8. The great Scholars of the Jews, spoke even in
the same words.

Philo the Jew commenteth upon these words, saying: God is the Sovereign
begetter, and next to him is the Word of God. Also there are two firsts: the
one is Gods word, and the other is God, which is before the Word, and the same
word is the beginning and the end, (...) of his good pleasure, intent, or will.
And in another place: Like as a City (says he) whereof the platform is but
yet set down in the mind of the builder, has no being else where, but in the
builder: so this world had no being else where, then in the Word of God, which
ordained all things. And this is not the meaning of me only, but also of Moses
himself. And in another place: This word (says he) is Gods younger son: but
as for the elder son, he cannot be comprehended but in understanding: for he
it is who by prerogative of eldership abides with the Father. And again, The
Word is the Place, the Temple, and the dwelling house of God, because the Word
is the only thing that can contain him: and to show the greatness of this word,
he could skarce tell what names to give it. He calls it the book wherein all
essences of all things that are in the whole world, are written and printed.

The Perfect pattern of the word, Day sun that is to be seen, but only of
the mind, Prince of Angels, First borne of God, Shepherd of his flock, Chief
high Priest of the world, Manna of men's souls, Wisdom of God, Perfecting of
the Highest, Instrument whereby God created the world, Altogether Light, God,
and the Beer that is of himself.


And he says further, that this Word is the express print or stamp of God,
and everlasting, as God himself is.

R. Azariel, calls him Spirit, Word, and Voice: saying, The Spirit brings
forth the Word and the Voice, but not by speech of the tongue, or by breathing
after the manner of men: and these three be one Spirit, to wit, one God, one
Spirit rightly living: blessed be he and his name, who lives for ever and
ever. Spirit, Word and Voice: that is to say, one Holy Ghost, and two spirits
of that Spirit.

R. Joseph, says thus: The Light of the soul of the Messiah is the living
God, and the living God is the fountain of the living Waters, and the Soul of
the Messiah is the river or stream of life: and none but the Messiah knows
God fully: he is the light of God, and the light of the Gentiles: and
therefore, he knows God, and God is known by him.

Mercurius Tresmegists.
I thy God, says God, am light and mind, and of more antiquity than nature of
moisture that is issued from the shadow: And this lightsome speech which
proceeds from the mind, is the Son of God: that which sees and hears
thee, is the word of the Lord: and the mind is God the Father. These differ not
one from another, as for their union, it is the union of life. And this speech
being the workman of God, the Lord of the whole world has chief power next
him, and is uncreated, infinite. Proceeding from him, the commander of all
things, which he made the perfect and natural first borne son of the most
perfect.

Numenius a Pithagorist says, The first God is free from all work: but the
second is the maker which commands heaven: and God the worker or maker
(says he) is the beginner of begetting, and God the good is the beginner of
Being: and the second is the lively expresser of the first, as begetting is an
image of Being. And in another place he says, that this worker being the Same,
is known to all men by reason of the creating the world: but as for the first
Spirit which is the Father, he is unknown unto them.

Iamblichus, says plainly, that God made the world by his divine word: and
the first God being before the Be-er, is the Father of a first God whom he
begets, and yet nevertheless abides still in the solenesse of his unity,
which thing far exceeds all ability of understanding. This is the
original pattern of him that is called both Father to himself, and son to
himself, and is the Father of one alone and God, verily good indeed.

Aemelius the disciple of Plotine, notwithstanding how great an enemy he was to
Christians, speaking of the second person, yields to this which Saint John
speaks. Surely (says he) this is the Word that was from everlasting, by whom
al things that are, were made As Heraclitus supposed, and before God (says he)
it is the very same Word which that barbarous fellow avouches to have been
with God at the beginning in the ordering and disposing of things when they
were confused, and to be God by whom all things were absolutely made, and in
whom they be living, and of whom they have their life and being. And that the
same Word, clothing it self with man's flesh, appeared a man, insomuch that
after he had been put to death, he took his Godhead to him again, and was
very God, as he had been before yer he came down into body, flesh, and man.

Another of Platoes imitators, speaking to the same effect, said, That the
beginning of S. John's Gospel was worthy to be written every where in letters
of gold. And the devil himself being asked of the King of Egypt, who he was
that reigned before him, and who should reign after him? answered in these
four verses.

Suidas. First God, and next the Word, and then their Sprite,
Which three be one, and join in one all three,
Their force is endless, get thee hence frail wight,
The man of Life unknown, excels thee.
Seeing then that Jews, Philosophers, and the Devil, are compeld to glorify
God in their speeches, making as it were large volumes of the creation of God
by his word, and that the same Word, is his son. How can they escape the
wrath of God, for not embracing it? And again, seeing they but through a mist,
did see a clearenesse of his brightness. How skillful ought we to be (whom
he has noursed in his own bosom, and comforted with the grapes of his own
vineyard, and fed with the bread of his own flesh, and bathed in the blood
of his own heart) in proving the truth of this doctrine, against Jew, Turk,
or Pagan.

Let us show a word or two, what the Poets themselves speak of the Beginning.
Architas says, that he accounts no man wise, but him which reduces all
things to one self same original. First to God, who is the Beginning, Middle,
and end of all things.

Empedocles has these verses.

All things that are or ever were, or shall hereafter be,
Both man and woman, beast, and bird, fish, worm, herb, grass, and tree,
And every other thing, yea even the ancient Gods each one,
Whom we so highly honor here, come all of one alone.
Simplicius says, Whatsoever is beautiful, comes of the first and chiefest
beauty. All truth comes of Gods truth, and all beginnings must be reduced to
one beginning, which must not be a particular beginning as the rest are, but a
beginning surpassing all other beginnings, and gathering the^ all into
himself, yea and giving the dignity of beginning to all beginnings, as is
convenient for every of their natures. Also one good (says he) is the
original and wel-spring of all things. It produces all things of it self,
both the First, the Middlemost, and the Last. The one goodness brings forth
many goodnesses, the one unity many unities, the one beginning many
beginnings. Now as for Unity, Beginning, Good, and God, they all be but one
thing. For God is the first cause of all, and all particular beginnings are
first settled and grounded in him, he is the cause of causes, the God of gods,
and the Goodness of goodnesses.

The understanding of the stories of the Bible, do give a great light to the
mind of man, and the practice gives life unto every one that embraces them,
as Deuteronomy. 8. and Mat. 4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
which proceeds out of the mouth of God. The despisers of Religion continue in
darkness, and light to them is death, as 1. Ioh. 2.9. He that says he is in
light, and yet hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whether he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. 1.
Ioh. 5.11. But God has given us eternal life, and that life is in his Son,
who laid down his life for his sheep. Ioh. 10.15. Wherefore while we have
light, let us walk and believe in the light, that we may be the children of
the light. Ioh. 12.36.

The first Adam, was made of the earth, earthly, etc. The second Adam, was made
a soul giving life, etc.
HEre, before the comparison between Adam and Christ, we are to consider the
creation: wherein we are to understand the creation of Heaven, Earth, and Sea,
and all the host of them, which do consist of wights visible, and invisible.
Invisible, as Angels; visible, as Sun, Moon, and Stars, fishes, fowls,
plants, herbs, grass, Beasts, and such like, which God created, before he
created Adam by Christ for Adams sake, because he purposed not to take the
nature of Angels or of any other creature, but of Adam, and that he might be
known in his power and loving kindness to Adam by his works. For he
fore-purposing to make Adam both King and Father of all the earth, would not
have his wits entangled with cares for this life, but to have his affections
settled on heavenly things, that he might continue holy and blameles before
him, as Mat. 6. Take no care what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor
yet for your body what raiment you shall put on. Behold the fowls neither
sow nor reap, and your heavenly Father feeds them, are ye not much better
than they, how much more then shall he do the same for you, for he knows
that ye have need of all these things: but first seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, for no man's life stands in the abundance of
things which he possesses.

Now follows Adams creation.
HE was made (the sixth day, as it is gathered, of September) of the dust of the
earth upon Mount Moriah, which is a Mountain adjoining to the gates of the
garden of Eden, into which garden he was put to labor the earth about six of
the cloak in the morning, as we account, when men commonly go to labor, as
should appear by Psalm. 104. Where it is said, Adam goes forth in the morning
to his labor. This is not particularly meant of Adam, but generally of all
men, no doubt alluding to the time of Adams creation. He had dominion given him
over all things, and wit like to an Angel to give names to all beasts, and
free liberty to eat of all the trees in the garden, the tree of knowledge of
good, and ill, only excepted. As if God should have said to him, (as Moses
afterward said to the children of Israel.) I set here before you life and
death, eat of the one and live, and eat of the other, and die eternally. Yet
could not be content with this glorious estate, but did eat of the forbidden
fruit, by the persuasion of a woman which God framed out of Adams ribbe, and
joined to him to be an help for him. Before they had continued in Paradise one
day, as it is written Psalm: 49. Adam being in honor, continues not a night,
but is like to the beasts that perish, which woman was deceived by the
subtlety of a Serpent, that is of the Devil speaking in a Serpent, which
beast was fittest to possess to the deceiving of her, because he excelled all
other beasts in the field in wit: For if an Ass had said so much to her as did
the Serpent, it is very likely she would have examined the cause further: but
he having once bin an Angel of light, but not keeping his first original, being
thrown down from heaven, continuing his knowledge though he lost his virtue,
was not to seek either for matter or opportunity, envying their states to
bring his murtherous purpose to pass, for so is he called the Serpent, the old
Devil, or Satan, who was a Murderer from the beginning, but knowing the
prohibition, comes to the woman, saying. Yea has God said, Ye shall not
eat of every tree in the garden? to whom the woman answers, saying: We may
eat freely of the fruit of the Trees in the garden: but as for the Tree in
the midst of the garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, nor touch
it, least happily you die. Out of which speeches the Serpent being a ramping
and a roaring Lion, going about seeking how he might devour her, quickly
sucketh advantage, finding her to have digressed from the words of the
commandment, adding thereto a trick of his own head, says to the woman. Ye
shall not die at all, but you shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. In that he
says gods, he means not the true God (for whatsoever he speaks, is to be
taken in the worst meaning that can be made of it) but he means you shall be in
the state of damnation, as Devils, which are called Princes, Gods of the world.
And likely enough that he touched the fruit, because that she added to the
Commandment the word touch.

Now the woman beholding the fruit, that it was good to eat. pleasant to the
eyes. a Tree to be desired to get knowledge.


She took of the fruit. did eat. gave also to her husband, and he did eat.
These 3. properties above, are expounded in John. Wantonness of the eyes. Lust
of the flesh. The pride of life.


By reason of which sin, Adam and Eve seeing their own nakedness, sowed
fig tree leaves together, and hid themselves from the presence of God,
among the Trees of the garden, their souls being then in the state of
Damnation, with a light shining in darkness, but their darkness not comprehending
the same, showing thereby the weakness of their nature, and of their posterity.
God but a little leaving them to their selves, that when they had sinned, they
had rather hide themselves in darkness, and seek to stocks and trees that
have no help in them, than to God that made them. But David afterward being
clothed with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, acknowledges the power
of God to ouer-reach the compass of man's vain imagination, when he says:
Whether shall I fly from thy presence? If I take the wings of the morning,
and fly to the uttermost part of the world, thou art there, If I climb up to
heaven, thou art there, If I go down to hell, thou art there also. For God
who made the eye, shall not he see all the dwellers upon earth? who has
weighed all men in a balance, numbering the days and very hairs of their
heads, dividing to every one their double portion according to the
fore-purpose of his election, being a righteous Judge, sparing not the person
of Adam though he were a King, and the stateliest King that ever should be,
but calls him to account in the cool of the same day wherein he was created
and fell, punishes him, though not according to the desert of his
transgression, like a merciful Judge that would save, and as a Father that
pitieth his own child, knowing whereof he was made, and that he was but dust,
says to Adam, What have thou done? and leaving him to consider of his sin,
goes to the woman with like tenderness, saying, What have thou done? as if he
should have said, Oh daughter, have I made the heavens and the host thereof,
that is, Angels, Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. to be thy servants; and the
earth, and all that therein is, to be obedient at thy call, breathing into thy
nostrils life, whereby thou becamest a living soul in the image of God, that
is, in righteousness and true holiness to be a temple, and a Tabernacle for
the holy of the holiest to dwell in; and have thou defiled the same with fond
lusts, regarding the words of the Serpent the Father of lies, not respecting
my power and my severity, that as I made thy body and soul, that I could
destroy the same, whereby thou have purchased the execution of my law
established at thy creation, to thee and thy husband, what have thou done? But
God having examined the matters, and finding them both guilty, and the malice
of the Serpent to be the cause of their guiltiness, never stays judgment,
nor vouchsafes once to reason the matters with him, but presently curses him,
and punishes Adam, and the woman, and curses for their sakes the earth,
plants, and whole course of nature, and made them of obedient servants,
rebellious enemies to Adam, and his posterity. And because Adam was not
deceived, but the woman became into the transgression he makes her will
subject to the desire of her husband, increasing her sorrows and her
conceptions. Thus he chastises them, but gives them not over, but pronounces
to the woman a short, but a pithy sentence, That the seed of the woman should
break the head of the Serpent. That is to say, I will cause one to be borne of
the woman's seed, which shall subdue the Devil, and the Devil shall do his
endeavor to trip up his heels by tempting him.

In this begins a controversy against the Jews of later times, who hold
opinion, that the Messiah or Christ whom we uphold to be the mediator between
Gods justice, and man's sin, shall be some great Emperor that shall deliver
them from bodily oppression: howbeit they cannot deny, but that by the death
which God threatens to Adam for his transgression, Rabbi Moses understands a
spiritual death, that is to wit, the death of the soul wounded with sin,
and forsaken of her life, which is God; and that by the venom of the Serpent,
he means sin it self, which shall cease, says he, under the Messiah: And
the Thargum of Jerusalem says thus expressly, So long (O Serpent) as the woman's
children keep the law, they kill thee: and when they cease to do so, thou
stingest them in the heel, and have power to hurt them much. But whereas for
their harm, there is a sure remedy to heal it; for thine there is none: for
in the last days they shall crush thee all to pieces with their heels, by
means of Christ their King.

The particulars whereof Adam neglected not to examine. And the woman likewise,
understanding from thence, duly marking and embracing the same, that God had a
purpose to save her, gathers from these words matter enough to save her, and
all the world after her, which receive like comfort of the same promise. For
she rightly understood that this seed must needs be Christ, who must come and
take Adams nature upon him, who should be subject to death, that he might
overcome him that had power of death. For she knew, and so did Adam, that if
ever man, being but only man, might work his own redemption, himself was
likelyest to have done it, because he was the chiefest of all the men that
ever should be in the world: but Adam being the goodlyest man, and not able to
do it himself, he knew it must needs be God, who must appear in the
similitude of Adams nature, and suffer death, that he might rise again to sit
at the right hand of his Father to make intercession for all the sons of
Adam: They both, the man and the woman embracing this, obtained the favor of
God, and Adam called his wife Euah, that is Life, to show that whosoever
believed as she believed, should be partakers of eternal life, as it is
written. Romans 10. Who so confesses with his mouth, and believes with his
heart, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, he shall be saved.

But Adam and Euah were driven out of Paradise, and Cherubins were set to keep
the way of the tree of life, and they were clothed with skins, as it should
appear, with skins of beasts to show their beastlines, which God for them had
slain to offer for sacrifice, to teach the^ the use thereof: for no doubt, God
would not destroy beasts to have them spoiled, seeing that Adam was not to eat
any. And we see that Kaine and Abel offered sacrifices, as being taught from
Adam, whose sacrifices were of two sorts. Abel offered, as appears in
sincerity of Religion: the other for outward ceremony, void of true
Religion, wherefore to Abel, and his offering God had respect: but to Kaine, and
his offering he had no regard. Wherefore Kaine being possessed with the poison
of the Serpent, envied Abel because his works were good, and his own evil,
and killed him: and being asked of God, why he had slain his brother? in stead
of asking pardon of God, he said, that his fault was greater, than that Gods
mercy could forgive it. Against whom Saint Augustine cries vehemently, that
by how much less the mercy of God could be inferior to the fault of Kaine,
seeing that to forgive is a thing proper to God; and to revenge and punish, is
far estranged from his nature: by so much more great was the offense of Kaine
in the words he said, than in the murder he did, seeing that by the stroke of
the sword, he took away but the life of his brother, but by the blasphemy of
his tongue, he gave death to his own soul. To kill his brother, was evil
done: but to despair in Gods mercy, was even a transgression of the Devil.
For more do we offend God to esteem him without mercy, than in any other
sin we commit against man. For which God curses him, giving him a mark of a
guilty conscience always, accusing him of sin against God, and inhumanitie
against nature: Whereupon he goes up and down wandering as one finding no rest
or peace, like an excommunicate person, from the place of true religion into
the land of Nod, which signifies Fugitive.

This Kaine was the eldest son of Adam, whom he named Possession: (for so
does Kaine signify) as if he had gained a goodly possession. But seeing what
might be the comfort of such possession, he calls his other son Abell,
that is, Vanity, to show that if a man have never so large kingdoms or
possessions, or be never so nobly borne, as Kaine was (except the son of
God) it is all but vanity, and a vexation of mind. It is not now to be
understood, that Adam had now no more children but Kaine and Abell: for
doubtless Adam had many more, as may appear by Kaines story. For it is said,
that Kaine departed into the land of Nod and knew his wife, who must needs be
Adams daughter, and married before the murder: for we are not to think that
Adam would afterward have bestowed his daughter upon a reprobate. The Holy
Ghost names only three of Adams sons, Kaine, Abel, and Seth, to make a
proportionable number answerable to the number of the letters of the words of
the holy tongue, or the tongue of Adam: for upon three letters does every word
in the tongue consist.

Kaine, to represent the afflictors of such as in this life esteemed the world,
and the pleasures thereof, Vanity, which is Abell, and Seth whose name
signifies settled or foundation, to show the assurance of his faith in the
promises of God to the confirming of our faith, which was, that from him must
come that seed of the woman that should bruise the head of the Serpent. This
sentence they, and we, and all the world were, and are bound to take notice of.
For this we ought to know and believe so assuredly, that we might show our
selves settled upon a sure foundation, not upon sands where sea and wind may
overthrow us, but upon the Rock Christ Jesus. That our building may remain as
the mount Sion, and as the heavenly Jerusalem which is builded four square, of
three foures of precious stones; that howsoever we be tossed with afflictions
of this life, we may stand firm, acknowledging Jehovah to be the one true and
everlasting God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and that his mercy is like to
eternal mountains that cannot be removed, wherewith he loved us unto
salvation before the foundation of the world. Thus duly considering his power
and wisdom in the particular actions of the creation, Adams fall, the promise
of eternal life, Adams faith, and his sacrifices, the shadows of our
Redemption, The seventh day, and the use thereof; we shall spend our days in
beholding our end, and never do amiss, sorrowing with a godly sorrow as
Enosh whose name signifies Sorrow, did; for as in our days, so in his, men
fell from the true Religion of Adam, Seth, and other godly men which were then
alive, turning the grace of God into wantonness, marrying wives of Kaines
poisoned seed, respecting beauty and other outward gifts, rather than virtue,
not remembering their Grandmother Euah, that for beholding the beauty of one
forbidden fruit, commending it to Adam for the pleasantness of the taste, and
the unlawful desire that she had of diuilish knowledge, not long before, was
driven out of Paradise; whose blessing of procreation, was joined with sorrow
of conception; whose innocent soul by breaking but one commandment, became
guilty of eternal death, and lost the whole glory of Paradise, and was driven
out into mountains, as not worthy to enjoy the benefit of the tree of life in
the garden of Eden. But Enosh being a godly man, and knowing that the fruits of
worldly sorrow, are likewise eternal death, and of godly sorrow, repentance,
(which word signifies a changing of judgment from ignorance to true
knowledge, to the renewing of the spirit) names his son Kenan, Contrite or
repenting, or a looking back into their impieties, detesting their vain
conversation, to the killing of sin in himself, and to the embracing of
righteousness. For it is not only required of a man to eschew evil, but
withal to do good, to flee darkness if we will enjoy light, to follow the
right way if we will not err, to avoid the mire and dirt if we will be clean
and without spot, and forbear to be evil if we will begin to be good: for it
is not enough for a valiant man to do what he may, but also he is bound to
attempt nothing, but what he ought. And as repentance is the fruit of godly
sorrow, so thankfulness to God for deliverance from like trials, proceeds
from repentance. Therefore Kenan the Contrite names his son Mahalaleel, my
praise God, which none can do effectually without a lowly mind, sanctified
first by grace, to the subduing of the flesh. Mahalaleel knowing that such
fruit is required of such a tree, names his son Iared the lowly, which gifts
of grace God bestows upon such only, as he accepts unto himself, as it is
written, Blessed is the man, unto whom God imputes not his sin, etc. So that
a man having thus purged himself from the iniquity of wicked men, marking the
rules of Gods eternal wisdom, he shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor
meet for the uses of the Lord, 2. Tim. 2. Therefore Iared the lowly, names his
son Henoch, the holy.

Now God commanding all men to direct their steps by the straight line of
his word, first lays down his will what we ought to do to please him, and
then induces us thereto, not only by hope of eternal life, but promises us
in this life long and happy days, as in the eternal law is expressed. Love
God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self, that thy days may be long in
the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, etc. Henoch therefore being
assured of the infinite mercies of God toward him and his seed, by faith
still beholding as in a glass, the redemption by the Son of God (the sum
of all salvation) names his son Methushelah, long life, or Speare-death. For
even as the point of a Spear keeps off that which would otherwise destroy:
even so Methushelah kept away the Flood a long time from drowning the World.
But because men should not think that any lives without calamities, least
outward happiness should make men to forget God; Methushelah having heard his
fathers, and himself also (being a Prophet) preach of the destruction of the
world by the flood, calls his son Lamech, that is Stricken or Hart-wounded:
which is to be understood, that in respect that he being near those times of
dangers, many of his posterity were like to be drowned, not only in the flood,
but eternally tormented for joining with the wicked mockers which despised the
preaching of the Fathers. But although God throws men's consciences down for
a while with grief of other men's just punishment; yet he rayseth them up
again, giving them hope of his assured promises, and a sweet comfort of
eternal life. Lamech being thus strengthened with the faith of his Fathers,
aiming still to the sentence of salvation pronounced in Paradise, calls his
Son Noah, Restorer or Comforter, saying, This Son shall comfort us
concerning the sorrow of our hands, and concerning the earth which the Lord
has cursed. Wherein he shows, that he both looked backward to the creation,
and forward to the Redemption by Christ the Seed of the Woman that should
bruise the head of the Serpent.

Thus much for the use of the names of the Ten Fathers before the flood in
general.
Now follow their lives and deaths in particular, and first for Adam.
There is a great doubt made of the time of the year of Adams creation, and of
the day of his fall: and is refused as a thing unprofitable to be known, and
impossible to be proved.
First for the time of his Creation.
IT is certain he was created in September, at the time that fruits be ripe,
which is at the fall of the leaf: and that was the fittest time, seeing in the
course of nature, there was no fitter time to express the nature of Adams
fall. And as the fall of Adam being answerable to the fall of the leaf,
because by his fall death was brought upon all: So the death of Christ, being
contrary to Adams fall, because it brought life to all, the fittest time to
resemble this life in the course of nature, was the spring: therefore Christ
dyed at the spring, to deliver us out of the spiritual prison, when as all
things show themselves to be delivered out of this earthly prison.

Now for the day of Adams fall.
IT was on friday, the sixth day, the day of Adams creation at the time of
eating. For we do not read that ever Adam did eat before he did eat of the
forbidden fruit. Therefore when by the story the time of eating cannot be
separated in time, reason shows us to join them in time: for Satan was a
Murderer from the beginning, and we must bring it from the beginning as near
as can be, not crossing any Scripture. The searching of this matter is not of
small importance: for from the true understanding of the creation we see the
cleerenesse of the Redemption, and not marking the creation aright, is the
cause of much folly: and they that miss of the laws of creation, are sure to
miss of the laws of Redemption. And Moses making mention of many times, he
would not have omitted the time of the fall, except it had been done presently
after the creation: thetefore Adams fall must needs be laid as near the
beginning as may be, not crossing the story. The bare narration shows, that
no famous action went between the commandment, and the fall: and the
shortness of the time does show the force of the adversary. Besides, it is a
great sin to say, that every man, except Christ, could fulfill any one point
of the Law: for thereby we darken the glory of Christ, and prove him not to
have performed the whole law. If Adam had continued until the Sabbath in his
innocence, no doubt he would have kept a perfect Sabbath: and if he had kept
a perfect Sabbath, he had performed some part of the Law, and thereby been
partaker with Christ in the work of our Redemption. Again, if Adam had
continued in the image of God, which is in righteousness and true holiness,
until the Sabbath, he would have performed the ordinances of the Sabbath,
which was to eat of the tree of life which was made for a Sacrament of
conservation unto him, and should not have needed a Redeemer. He did not eat
of the Tree of Life: for God after his fall sets Cherubims to keep the way
of the Tree of Life, least Adam eating should live for ever. Whereby it
appears, that if he had eaten thereof before, he had not fallen. Therefore
it cannot be that Adam continued perfect unto the Sabbath.

And further it is written, Psalm. 49. Adam being in honor continues not one
night, but is like to the beasts that perish.

Cedrenus a Greek writer says, that Adam fell the sixth day of the first week.

Saint Augustine says, the woman straight way after her creation before she
accompained with Adam, became into the transgression: otherwise Kaine had been
conceived without sin.

Theophilact upon Matthew says, that as man was formed the sixth day, and did
eat of the tree the sixth hour: so Christ reforming man and healing the fall,
was fastened to the tree the sixth day, and the sixth hour. And in the story of
the creation in Genesis presently after the fall, Moses speaks of the
Redemption. And without we compare the Creation with the Redemption, we miss
of all. For Adam to be compared with Christ, is the sum of all. And
wherefore should all the actions of the Redemption be accomplished in such
rareness, except to be aunswerable both to the fall, and to the time of the
fall? Wherefore it is needful we should know our thraldom, if we will
receive comfort by the Redeemer, thus:

First, Christ the Restorer was borne of a Virgin. Why? because by a Virgin
destruction came to the world.

Chrysostom compares Eve and Marie together thus: Eve being a Virgin,
hearing the words of the SERPENT, and believing them, brought forth DEATH.
The Virgin Marie hearing the words of the Angel Gabriel, and believing them,
brought forth Life. Again, why should Christ die on the sixth day, rather than
on the fifth or fourth? And why was there darkness until the cool of the
day, rather than till the Sun setting? but to make the Redemption answerable
to every part of the fall, because God according to the secret counsel of his
own will, before the foundations of the earth were laid, would make the Art
of salvation so easy, and the harmony of the Bible so tuneable, that no
music in the world can be more pleasant to the ear, than the meditation of
the love of God toward us in Christ, is comfortable to the heart of man.
Therefore the meditation of Adams fall, and the victory of Christ, ought to
be continually in our minds.

Now compare Christ with Adam.
Adam Christ The first Adam was made a soul, having life of earth earthly,
therefore by the earthly one, came -- disobedience, sin, judgment,
condemnation, death.
was created on the sixth day, and did eat of the tree the sixth hour. was made
a man without a Father. made not inferior to the Angels, lost all. was
tempted. lost salvation at the time of eating. was made ruler of the world, and
did not hold it. did fall in the Garden. his soul was in darkness, from the
sixth hour until the ninth hour. by breaking one commandment, lost all. was
called to account at the ninth hour. was debarred of the tree of life. was
driven out of Paradise. was the head of his Wife. was a King. Prophet.
Sacrificer.
lived a thousand years wanting seventy.
The second Adam was made a spirit, giving Life from heaven heavenly,
thetefore by the heavenly one, came -- obedience, grace, forgiveness,
justification, life.
reforming man and healing the fall, is fastened to the tree the sixth day, and
the sixth hour. was made a man without a Father. made lower then the Angels, is
crowned with glory, and all the Angels worship him being man, whereby we may
know the world was made subject to a man. was tempted. brought salvation to all
at the time of eating. was made ruler of the world, and did hold it. went into
a Garden to recover Adams fall in the garden. when he suffered, caused darkness
to cover the whole earth from the sixth hour till the ninth hour. by
fulfilling all the commandments, brought life to all. at the ninth hour,
yields up the Ghost, and goes to give account to his Father. is the true
Tree of Life. on that day opens Paradise to the poor thief. the head of his
Church. was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.
was borne seventy years before four thousand.


BEcause these two Tables consist only of numbers, and that numbers in the
scripture are great helps for the understanding of the same: before we come
to speak of Seth, it is not amiss to lay down what numbers are of most use
in the Bible, namely 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12.

1 Expressing the union of the Godhead, and from thence the unity of all
godly, as being members of one head Christ Jesus, which is made plain. Psalm.
133. Behold how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity, etc.

3 The distinguished Trinity, within which number many excellent things fall
out* still to put us in mind of the vndeuidable coeternitie of Father, Son,
and holy Spirit.

To show that neither in eldest, youngest, or middlemost, but in Gods free
election, stands our eternal happiness.
Adam
Kaine, Of Adam, the eldest extreme wicked. Abel, Of Adam, the eldest extreme
wicked. Seth. Of Adam, the eldest extreme wicked.
Noah
Iaphet, Of Noah, the youngest wicked. Sem, Of Noah, the youngest wicked. Cham.
Of Noah, the youngest wicked.
Terah
Haran, Of Terah, the middlemost was wicked. Nachor, Of Terah, the middlemost
was wicked. Abram. Of Terah, the middlemost was wicked.

Three Angels appeared to Abraham in his Tent.

Three Fowers of precious stones were set in Aarons breast.

Three Things reserved in the Arc,

Three Taken up in the old Testament, and 3 in the new.

The Book of the Law, The pot of Manna, and Aarons rod that did always
flourish.
Three Parts was Jerusalem divided into.

Three Letters the root of every word in the Hebrew tongue.

Three Captiuities of the Jews.

Three Times was the Temple grossly poluted by the Babilonians, Antiochi,
Romans.


Three Times a year were the Jews bound to come to Jerusalem, to give account
of their Religion.

Three Days and Nights, was Jonas in the Whales belly:

Nights and days was Christ in the grave.

John's, viz. John Baptist, Luke 1. John Evangelist, Mat. 4. John Mark. Act. 12.


Job saved 3 Eliphaz. Sophar. Bildad.
Daniel saved 3 Ananias. Azarias. Mishael.
Noah saved 3 Sem. Cham. Iaphet.

In the 3. seventh Iubile, the Jews felaway, and then Jeremy said, O earth,
earth, earth,
Hear the word of the Lord, etc. The title over Christ on the cross, was
written in 3. tongues, Hebrew. Greek. Latin.



Although it may not be urged, that all these Threes have full relation to the
Trinity, seeing they fall not out by chance, we are not to despise the
pleasant harmony, and comfortable use of them, but to think that the wisdom
of God has contrived salvation into such a sweet Art, that very children may
learn the same: and therefore the Scripture is called very fitly a shallow
water, and a deep fountain: shallow, that the Lamb may wade; and deep, that
the Elephant may swim.

Four
Is a square number, and usual. Heber the Fourth after the flood. Judah the
Fourth Son of Jacob. Square signifies true Religion. The Lord came in the
4000. year of the world. Moses Fourth Son in the 4. age, was sacrificer to the
tribe of Dan. Times 7 Iubiles, the time of Christ's death. The form of the
heavenly Jerusalem.
Five
The Letters of Jehovah. The 5 Vowels, the sinews of all tongues. Christ
feeds 5000. with 5 Loaves.
Six
The day of Adams creation, which number is oftentimes used in the scripture,
to put us in mind of the Creation. Hundredth Thousand fighting men came out of
Egypt. Hundredth years old was Noah at the flood. Times 7 standings had the
children of Israel in the Wilderness. Years was the Land of Canaan in
conquering. Cities of refuge for one that killed a man by chance, and not of
malice, had the Jews to fly unto. Times did the children of Israel fall
before David's time, in the time of the Judges.
Seven
The number of the Sabbath, which number of 7. as it is famous for the
creation, so God continues the same proportion throughout the Bible to the
redemption. For as God the Father made the world in six days, and rested the
seventh; so God the Son, having performed his Fathers will, rests the seventh
day in the grave. Is a year of Grace. Planets in the Firmament which Plato
compares to the number of Seven Stars in Ap. 1. Years was the Land of
Canaan plagued, for that Joseph the beloved of the Lord, should have been
slain by his brother. Stones in the Temple: Gods Seuen-fould wisdom or
providence in all his actions. Seven eyes to look upon the building of every
stone in the Temple of Jerusalem. Years the Land of Canaan was settled in rest.
Years the Temple was in building. Years Nebucadnetzer was a beast for
destroying it. Gates in the Temple before you come to the Holy of holiest.
Branches did the Candlestick in the Temple stand vrpon, which had 42.
knobbes, signifying the six days work, and the Seventh day of rest in the
creation. Months was the Tabernacle in building. Iubiles was the Arc in the
house of Joseph. Trumpeters is a great number that do always sound Gods
praise.
Henoch the seventh from Adam. Heber the seventh from Henoch. Isaac the
seventh from Heber. Moses the seventh from Abraham. Joshua the seventh from
Ephraim. Elias taken up in the seventh age from Samuel. Ioram the seventh from
David. Salomons Temple was consecrated in the seventh month answerable to the
birth of the Fathers. The ceremony of the Feast of Tabernacles continued seven
days. After the coming from Egypt, it was seven times seven days before the
law was given; Seven times seven days after Christ's resurrection, descended
the holy Ghost. The stories of the Scripture go by seuens. From Moses till
Christ's death, thus: Seven years the land of Canaan was in conquering. Seven
fifties for the glory of Joseph's house. Seven seuenties for the house of Judah.
Seven tennes for the captivity. From the captivity, to the death of Christ,
seven seuenties. Moses ceremonies for the most part were in the seventh month.
The Manna that was gathered on the sixth day, served for the seventh. The
seventh year the Jews might not plowe, sow, nor reap. In the end of seven
seuens was the year of Iubilee. In the seventh seven from Cyrus, the walls of
Jerusalem were built. Seven times seven Thousand of the Jews came from
captivity. Ioakim ends the seventh seventy with affliction. Seven years
plenty. Seven years dearth in the land of Egypt, figured by seven ears of
corn and seven kine. Noah lived seven Jubilees after the flood. Seven Thousand
in the book of Kings mentioned, that never bowed their knees to Baal. Kaines
house cut off in the seventh age. How often shall I forgive my brother? till
seven times? I say until seven times seventy times, alluding unto Daniels
Seuens.

Eight.
The number of the persons saved in the Arc. The day of circumcision.
Ten.
Ten is a full number, and the highest of last of simple numbers. All Nations
after the number of Ten begin again, for plain teaching, and plainness in
reckoning. Ten is the year of judgment or account. You have Ten words for
the creation of the world, and Ten words for the government of the whole world.
The Tenth is a holy number, as in Tithes, which is given to us to acknowledge
our duties. In the Tenth month, the waters of the floude abated. Sem lived to
see the Tenth age, a great blessing. Ten plagues were the Egiptians plagued
with, for afflicting Sems house. Ten spies in the Wilderness misbelieued. Ten
tribes fell away at Roboams time. Daniels beast has Ten horns, which do
represent Ten cruel Kings. The beast in the Revelation has Ten horns. The
Pope had Ten stately kingdoms to assist him. Noah is the Tenth from Adam.
Abraham the Tenth from Noah.

Twelve signs in the Zodiac. Twelve months in the year. Twelve Fathers
from the floude to Jacob. Twelve.
Twelve Sons of Jacob. Twelve Fountains in the Wilderness. Twelve stones in
Jordan. Twelve stones in Aarons breast. Solomon had Twelve Stewards, and David
Twelve valiant Captains. Solomon at Twelve years of age discided the
controversy between the women for the dead Child. Christ at Twelve years of
age is found, disputing among the Doctors. He likewise ordayneth Twelve
Apostles, and Twelve times did he appear after his resurection, and in the
revelation of every Tribe is sealed Twelve thousand. The heavenly Jerusalem is
described to have Twelve foundations of Twelve precious stones. Twelve gates,
and Twelve Angels, and the names written of the Twelve Apostles, and through
the City there runs a pure river, and on either side of the river the Tree
of Life, which bears Twelve manner of fruits, and bears fruit every
month in the year, and the leaves of the Tree do serve to heal the Nations
with.

NOw the reason why God in the beginning laid down in close signification, and
such easy proportions, the whole scope of his government to the worlds end, is
to show, that his wisdom is infinite, and that nothing in the Scriptures do
fall out by chance, but by his fore-purpose according to the secret counsel
of his own will, to make us still look back unto the Creation.

130. Seth borne ge. 5. when Adam is 130. years old.
ADam was made in the Image of God, but Seth is begotten in the Image of Adam:
to show that whatsoever is borne of the flesh is flesh, and whatsoever is borne
of the spirit is spirit. When Adam was 130. years old he begets Seth, being
(as may be gathered) not one day more, nor one day less. And the rule serves
for all the Ten fathers before the flood* The holy Ghost keeping an exact
Cronicle of the times, begins at Adam, and so goes forward, laying down
the particular ages of the fathers unto the floude, saying: when Adam is 130.
years old, Seth is borne. Now if he had been one day more, the number had not
been perfect: if one less, it had not been exacted. We may better therefore
conclude* that all the Ten fathers were borne on the sixth day, that is, the day
of Adams creation rather than on any other day, seeing it cannot well be
denied, and that it crosses neither story nor rule of religion.

Seth, Signifies Settled, or Foundation. He knew the Creator, and that the
world should be founded upon him.

Es. 58. The wicked have no sure foundation, but are like to the chafe in a
summer floor. But the Godly shall be like a fresh watered Garden, and like the
fountain of water that never leaves running, whose foundation is laid for
many generations. For as a tree that has sure roots, will bear many
branches: so to be settled in religion, as Seth was, many things will appear
to be of singular force.

Now compare him with Christ, thus.
Seth. His name signifies foundation. He was begotten in the image of Adam.
Christ is The Rock and sure foundation of his Church. The very character of
his Father.


105. Enosh borne. In these numbers, you have 10. multiplied by 10. and 5.
which is the number of the letters of Jehovah.
HIs name signifies Sorrowful. Every man is called sorrowful Enosh, and the
Hebrew tongue sometime calls a man Enosh, and sometimes Adam: The Caldeans
call a man Enosh, but not Adam, because they had not the antiquity of the
creation of the world. In Enosh his time Religion decayed in the house of God,
for which the flood came and drowned the world. This sorrow is called a godly
sorrow, to which the Lord has added a blessing, as Mat. 5. Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall receive comfort, and Ecclesiastes 7. Gravity is
better than laughter, for when the countenance is heavy, the heart is
reformed, but Luke 6. says, Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall
laugh.

CHrist being sorrowful for the negligence of the Jews, knowing that they
should be plagued for not embracing the promise to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
weepeth over Jerusalem saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, (1.) O sight of peace! O
sight of peace! If thou had known those things, that belong to thy peace,
and so with grief and sorrow of heart he leaves off, as not able to express
the sum of his sorrow. Again with like sorrow he says, How often would I have
gathered you together as a hen gathers her chickens, and you would not?

90. Kenan borne.
HIs name signifies Contrite, or small store. Matthew. 5. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for their is the kingdom of heaven.

Esaias 54. Thus says the High and Excellent, even he that dwells in Eternity,
whose name is the holy one, I dwell high above and in the Sanctuary, and with
him also that is of a Contrite Spirit do I dwell, that I may heal a troubled
mind, and a Contrite heart.

Psalm. 50. An humble and Contrite heart the Lord does not despise: therefore
shall every godly man praise the Lord without ceasing.

70. Mahalaleel borne. You have in this number ten seuens, or seven multiplied
by ten, which is seventy: which is the number of his nativity, wherein you
have a sweet resemblance of the creation: of which number many excellent things
are to be spoken, which I will handle afterward.
THis name signifies My praise God: Leah names her fourth son Judah, the
Father of Shiloh, Praise God: for so does his name likewise signify. The use
of this ought to be embraced of all, seeing it stretches to the salvation of
all. It appears hereby, that the godly fathers in ancient time had wonderful
regard in naming their children. For if you do mark the whole stories of the
Bible, you shall find very few notable men, whether they were godly or wicked,
but they contain rare matter in their names.

From Mahalaleel we are taught to praise God aright. First, in sincerity of
spirit, with sound knowledge grounded upon the truth of his word. David knowing
that praise giving to God, is not only required at our hands, but also at every
creatures in their kind, bids the whole course of nature, praise the Lord.
And in Psalm. 47. he says, O sing praises, sing praises unto our God, O sing
praises, sing praises unto our King: for the Lord is high, and to be feared, He
is the great king upon all the earth, sing praises therefore with
understanding. He shows us a reason in the 19. Psalm, where he says, The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work:
one day tells another, and one night certifieth another, etc. Therefore let
the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be always acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my Rock, and my Redeemer. Whereby we are taught, that the
true praise of God consists not only in outward acknowledging of his works,
and his judgments (for that the wicked are oftentimes compelled to confess,
as Pharaoh, Nebucadnetzar, and others) but we must praise God so, as that all
our thanks, and all our actions may tend to the acknowledging of the
Redemption by Christ: for so does David in this 19. Psalm. he begins with the
Creation, and ends with the Redemption. Let us therefore with him also say,
Psalm. 102. Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy name: which forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities,
which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness. And Psalm. 105. O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon
his holy name, tell the people what things he has done. O let your songs be of
him, and praise him, and let your talking be of all his wondrous works.
Rejoice in his holy name, let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord,
seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore.

65. Iared borne. For this number 65. it is the half of 130. His name
signifies Lowly or meek, he was 162. years old before he married, because
at that time he had knowledge of the flood that it should come. Therefore he
consecrated his son to God.
HOw precious a virtue this Meekness is, and how highly to be embraced, we
may know by open experience, if we examine how God from the beginning has
governed the world. For God respects not the person of any man, that he
should fear him. He overthrew the rebellious Nimrod, and the rest of the
Nephews of Noah, that would have a name, and turned their speech into babbling.
He plagued that flouting Ismael, and quailed that doughtie Esaias. He drowned
stout Pharaoh in the red sea, and overthrew the iron charets of Sisera at the
waters of Mageddon. He smote diverse nations, and slew mighty Kings: Sehon King
of the Ammorites, and Ogg the King of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan:
he foiled that proud Philistine, and hewed the horn of Agag in pieces. He made
Iesabel a pray for dogs, and wicked Achab to be slain in the valley of
Iesreel. He made King Ioakim to be buried like an ass, and profane
Nebucadnetzar to eat grass like an ox. He made drunken Baltasar to tremble
like a leaf, and Antiochus the vild to be devoured of worms: to show, that he
regards not proud looks, or fears the Kings displeasure, for he sets up
Kings, and puts down Kings, as Luke 1. He looked on the low degree of his
handmaid, he has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in
the imaginations of their hearts, he has put down the mighty from their
seats, and has exalted the humble and meek. As Joseph out of the dungeon,
David from the sheepecoats, Daniel from the Lions den, Peter and John from
mending their nets, and made them rulers over mighty Nations, and teachers to
the Princes of the earth. Matthew. 5. Therefore blessed are the meek, for they
shall receive the inheritance of the earth.

Christ being meek, was led as a sheep unto the slaughter, not opening his
mouth.

162. Henoch borne.
HIs name signifies Holy, or Dedicated to God. The name shows his fathers
affection in giving him unto God, answerable to Abraham in offering Isaac.
Henoch of Kaine was contrary in signification to this Henoch; the one
dedicated to God, the other to the possessions of this world. For Kaine after
his curse, wandering to the land of Nod builds a City, and calls it after
the name of his son Henoch. The other Henoch, though indeed a rare man, yet
was 65. years without any mention of his integrity, and after that his
holiness is made manifest in this, that he found favor with God. His calling
was very glorious, being made a preacher, to declare salvation to all that
would believe in Christ, and his own actions of life to be performed in the
highest degree of virtue. Whereby we are taught to be holy and blameless
before God, not giving our members subjects unto wantonness or pleasures of
this life, but esteeming the world as though it were not, and possess it, as
though we possessed it not, putting on the new man Christ Jesus, that we may be
holy even as he is holy.

7. You have here the number of seven, to show that Henoch is the seventh from
Adam, for so is he called in the Epistle of Jude. He was no doubt a very rare
man, seeing that he is commended of the holy Ghost to have walked with God, to
have his years answerable to the days of the sun, and registered to be the
seventh from Adam, a Sabbath keeper, for his years do agree with the number
of the Sabbath. Which number of seven or of the Sabbath throughout the Bible
does still put us in mind of the Creation, and so of the true keeping of the
Sabbath. For in the beginning God made the world in six days and rested the
seventh, and hallowed and sanctified the same, and commanded it to be kept
holy throughout all generations, and to resemble the same in his Creation
before there was a Sabbath. He made seven stars in the heavens, which
Philosophers call planets, which have force in the whole course of nature,
which he in his wisdom placed there, that the very heathen, and such as would
not take notice of the Sabbath, might have the name thereof in their mouths,
although they made no use thereof in their hearts.

65. Methushelah borne. His name signifies Long life, or Spear death.

187. Lamech borne.
HIs name signifies Stricken or heart-wounded. He is called so in respect of
some inward griefs that he should bear for the afflictions of the world. You
have an other Lamech of Kaines house, but of contrary nature to this Lamech.
Lamech of Kaine was a striker. Lamech of Seth, stricken: the one a Preacher of
destruction to the world; the other an example of impiety to the world: and
being 1600. years after Kaine, knew Kaines story. He had two wives it was not
so from the beginning. Some hold, that he was the first that had two wives: but
doubtless many others had the like, but God in one does show the manners of
the rest. He says to his wives, I will kill a man, etc. So that as the world
began with killing, so it continues in wickedness and violence. The other
Lamech does make a confession full of contrition, and in naming his son
Comforter 600. years before the flood, shows that he was a Prophet of very
lively skill.

Compare him with Christ.
CHrist is both outwardly stricken, and inwardly wounded. Outwardly, when in the
open hall he was buffetted, scourged, and spitted at, and upon the cross
pierced both hands, feet, and sides: Inwardly, when he was reviled with
blasphemous speeches at his death, and when in stead of drink to comfort him,
they gave him gall and mirhe mingled together: but most especially, when his
guiltless soul did suffer the torments of hell to redeem our guilty souls
and bodies from the thrall of Satan, as may appear when from his sides issued
water and blood.

56. Adam dies.
THe Hebrews descant very straungely upon the Arithmeticke of Adams years
which he lived, which were 930. Upon a sentence in the 24* of Job. where it is
said, All the days of man upon earth, are but a shadow. As if he should say,
all the days of Adam are but Abell, for Adam in Hebrew signifies earth, and
Abell signifies shadow, or vanity: whereby we are taught, that from the earth
we came, and to the earth we must return, according to Ge. 3. We are also to
understand from hence, that although God defer his punishments, yet he is
mindful of his promises: for not one tittle or jot of his word shall pass, as
appears in Adams death, which God before had promised, and was accomplished,
though it were 930. years after. Wherefore, howsoever we be settled on the
pleasures of this life, or be advanced to thrones of Majesty, as Adam was,
we are to know, that it is but a Steward ship bestowed upon us for a season,
and that in this world we are to look for no abiding place: for we are but
grass, we are consumed as smoke, our days come to an end. A Thousand years
in Gods sight, is as yesterday: He turns Adam to dust, and says, Return ye
sons of Adam. He brings our years to an end, as it were a tale that is
told Wherefore let us pray to God with Moses, to teach us to number our days
aright, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Adam comes short of 1000. years so much as is the days of man's life. Iared,
Methushelah, and Noah ouerreached Adam in long life, because of the power of
the word of God. He died about mount Moriah where he was made He lived till he
saw many kings, he himself the greatest, and until he had erected a stately
government, and taught them humane arts: And he was fittest to do it, being a
King to command whom he would, and what he would, and having wit excelling
all the men in the world. And as in a Princes Court, it is requisite to have
Noble men, some higher, and some lower, and men of all degrees: so Adam lived
until he might have a stately Court.

Now if a King should command a Divine to make Adams will from his story, he
would make it in this sort. O my sons, gather you together, and harken unto
the words of your father Adam, the last that ever he shall speak unto you. I
was void of salvation, and enjoyed not happiness, by disobeying: which
disobedie^nce I the^ practiced, when I harkened to the persuasion of Heua, and
did eat the forbidden fruit. I then felt the heavy judgments of God against
sin, and saw my nakedness, whereof I was ashamed. (...) not removed it, by
offering a blessing in the (...) of the woman. (...) you all the days of my
life as a father, that you may learn (...) governors which resemble fathers
in behavior. I have instructed you to love and obey their government: you
must know, that as my salvation r^^^th upon belief in the s^ede of the woman,
so must yours.

But the house of Kaine despising this, and killing Abel a figure of him, who
by dying shall overcome the power of the Serpent, will cause the flood to
destroy the earth. Few shall embrace this doctrine: for though eight be saved
by the Arc, yet seven only shall keep sincerely the belief in this promise
of the seed of the woman. My days have been long with the rest of your
fathers: but the end of all flesh is come upon me: for out of the earth I came,
and to the earth I must return.

113. Henoch is taken up. being 365. years old.

HIs years are answerable to the days of the sun: 65. years, a year for a
day. And as the sun excels all other stars in brightness: so did his
life excel all other men then alive in the world, for virtue. He is also said
to have walked with God, to be a preacher of righteousness, to be taken up.

These four special commendations are of equal glory: and we may be assured
by these testimonies* that his godliness was very rare. The Grecians say, that
he left a book behind him of his preaching. But thereby (as much as in them
lies) they call into question the truth of the Scriptures. For first, by this
opinion they derogate from the glory of Moses, that he should not be the first
writer. Secondly, from the wisdom of God, which took order to lay down the
lives of the fathers in so short Arithmatique, and would thereby have his
wisdom wonderful to those which should come after: which had been to small
purpose, if Henoch had left a book of his preaching. But the Grecians thus
being answered, it follows that Henochs prophecy was against the words of
the wicked, and against the contempt of religion which wicked men showed in not
believing the preaching of the flood. Saint Jude in his Epistle, from the
circumstances of the men and manners of the people to whom Henoch preached
gathered what might be the sum of Henochs preaching, in this sort: Behold,
the Lord comes, how? as at the giving of the law, with thousands of his
Angels, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among
them of all their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all
their cruel speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him. Upon which
words the Grecians, not knowing the course of the Hebrews, in their fained
speeches say, that Henoch left a book of his preaching behind him.

His taking up, did show what should be the state of the godly. He was taken
up in despite of the wicked, and in recompense of his own faith. He was taken
up 57. years after Adams death, all the fathers then being alive. And it may
be the fathers did see him taken up, as a figure of Christ's ascension. The
wicked might then say, where is the appearance of the flood? For Adam is dead,
and Henoch is taken up, and all things continue as from the beginning. In that
God bestowed so short life upon Henoch, it shows that he would bestow
greater blessings of him in another kind.

Now compare him with Christ.
Henoch Christ Was a Prophet: for he prophesied of the destruction of the world
by the flood. Walked with God. His days were as the days of the sun. Was
taken up being the seventh from Adam.
Was a Prophet, and prophesied of the destruction of the world. Did the will of
his Father. Is the bright sun of Justice, whose days in the Psalms, are
likened to the days of the sun. In the Scripture, is the seventh that
ascended: To wit,


1. The son of the widow of Sarepta. 1. King. 17. 2. The Shunamites son,
whom Eliseus brought again to life, 2. King. 4.32. 3. The soldier buried by
Eliseus corpse. 4. Iayrus daughter, Mat. 9. 5. The widows son, Luke 7. 6.
Lazarus. Luke 11. 7. Christ. That is,
3. in the old Testament new Testament
and the Lord was the seventh.

1042. 168. Seth died being 912 years old.

1056. 182. Noah borne.
HIs name signifies Comforter or Restorer. The faith of Lamech no doubt was
clear concerning salvation, by the seed of the woman, in that he named his
son Comforter or Restorer. As if he had said, though for impiety, all the
world be destroyed: yet I am assured that the promise made to Adam must of
necessity be performed, or else no flesh can be saved. In this faith Adam,
after he had transgressed by eating of the forbidden fruit, was saved. In this
faith Abell offered up a greater sacrifice than Kaine. In this faith Henoch
walked with God, and was no more seen, for he was taken up. In this faith all
the Fathers obtained eternal life. In this faith Noah became a preacher of
righteousness, and an executor of true judgment, and prepared the Arc to the
saving of his household, etc. Heb. 11.

10. This ten is to show that Noah is the tenth from Adam, multiply Henoch by
Noah, that is the number of of the Sabbath, by the full number 10. you have the
number 70. which throughout the Bible is famous, and of great force for light
in the story. In this tenth age Gods justice over all flesh was extended.

Compare him with Christ.
Noah Christ Was a preacher of righteousness. Found grace before God. Was a
King. Prophet. Sacrificer.

Was the true preacher of righteousness, Dan 9. Grew in favor with God and
man. Luke 2. Was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.



Enosh died 905 years old. Kenan died being 910 years old. Mahalaleel died
being 895 years old. Iared died 962 years old. While he lived there was no
proclaiming of the flood, but presently after there was.
480. 120. Years begin Genesis 6.
WHerein Noah made the Arc: for so long was he in making it, not because he
could not have made it sooner (for God could have commanded it to be made with
a word as well as he made all the world) but to show the patience and long
suffering of God in sparing his judgments, that they who would not hear the
preaching of Noah, might justly be condemned.

Many things fall out in the Bible, whose numbers are answerable to this of 120.

120. Nations paid tribute to bring the Jews home from captivity.

The government of the Persians was about 120. years.

120. Several nations, that is, some of every Nation, were at Jerusalem after
Christ's resurrection.

The Hebrews descant very strangely with the letters of Jehovah, and the 120.
years wherein the Arc was in making, thus: Multiply 120. by the letter which
is 5. then you have 600. Multiply 600. which is Noah's age at the flood, with
the letter which is 10. then you have 6000, The end of the world. This is the
consent of all the Hebrews.

Here is a doubt to be discussed, concerning the words spoken in Genesis 6. The
occasion of the doubt arises thus: God says in Genesis 6. My spirit shall not
always strive with man: his days shall be 120. years. In Ge. 5. Noah's age is
reckoned, and he is then said to be 500. years old, and begets Sem, Cham,
and Iapheth. when his age is reckoned again at the floude, the sum is but
600. so that if the 6 chapter be in time after the fifth, and in the fifth Noah
is 500. years old, and that afterward God says, the days of all flesh
shall be 120. years; then Noah at the floude must be 620. years: for put 120.
to 500. and you have 620 but his age at the floude is but 600. Therefore some
think, that either the Chronicle is false, or else the 20. years were shortened
like as it shall be in the end of the world, least else no flesh should be
saved.

To answer this doubt, we must observe that it is no reason in Divinity, that
because a matter comes or is made mention of in a Chapter afterward that the
time therefore of that story or action follows the Chapters or Actions going
before: For this is but a circumstance of method. For Moses in penning the
Scriptures uses this order: he lays down things of like nature together, as
Genealogies together, and such like, though they differ in time, because else
he should make often repetitions of the same things. The observation of this,
caused the Hebrews to set down this rule, that Moses in penning his story,
does not regard the cricumstance of first and latter. To wit, he does not set
down, that in the first place which is first in time, and so, that which is
later in time afterward: but sometimes that which is later, in the first
place, and that which is first in time, in the last, as the necessity of the
narration gives occasion. This being thus made plain, the doubt is easily
discussed, for neither is Noah 620. years old at the floude, neither are the
years of the floude any thing shortened, but the Chronicle is altogether true.
For if we refer the 120. years of the floude 20. years before that
Chapter, in which it was said, Noah was 500. years old and begot. Sem, Cham,
and Iaphet, then do we make all things agree without crossing one another. And
this of necessetie we must needs do: for seeing God has laid down the
Generals in proper and plain terms, we must so cast the particulers, that
they may make the general true, and no way alter it. Besides, we have a like
example, for though all the lives and deaths of the fathers before the flood,
are reckoned and summed up together in one chapter, we must not think that all
their lives are precedent to the Chapters following: for the Chronicle shows
that Lamech lived five years before the flood; and Methushelahs death, and the
beginning of the flood are very near. Even so here, this sentence of the 120.
years is to be counted before the fifth chapter, wherein Noah's age is reckoned,
and for the shortning of the days at the end of the world, the holy Ghost
says it shall be so. But for the shortning of the days at the flood, we have no
such warrant in Moses. Therefore we are not to believe it.

120. Years begin, Ge. 6. In which the Spirit of Christ preached while the
Arc was in making.
Upon this sentence there depends a great and weighty question. Whether
Christ descended into Hell in his humane soul? The cause why this question is
necessary to be handled, is, because diverse of the ancient fathers, hold the
opinion of Christ descent into hell in his humane soul, whose opinions having
been so superstitiously received, have drawn others of later time into the
like errors. But if men would follow the plainness laid down in the Bible,
and with humility search it, avoiding curiosity, they need not trouble
themselves with the errors of the Fathers. The words of the text, 1. Pet. 3.
are these. Christ was dead concerning the flesh, but was quickened by the
Spirit. By the which he also went and preached to the spirits in prison, which
in times past disobeyed, when once the long suffering of God abode in the days
of Noah, while the Arc was in making. Now the words whereupon this error is
grounded, are these. Christ being dead as concerning the flesh, went and
preached to the spirits in prison. Upon this they gather, that the spirits
mentioned there, are meant those in hell: and went and preached, that is, after
he was dead. But if we compare these words with the residue, and consider the
time when this preaching was, we shall see Saint Peter means nothing less,
than the descending of Christ's soul into hell. For first the text says, He
went and preached by the same spirit by which he was quickened. This spirit is
of necessity the Godhead. For what spirit was there that could loosen the
sorrows of death that they should not hold him, and raise Christ from the
dead, but the Godhead of Christ? Then the souls of all men, godly or ungodly,
being immortal cannot die, and therefore this quick^ing cannot be meant of his
humane soul, for it needed none. Besides, we must consider to whom Saint Peter
wrote, to wit, to the Jews. Now seeing Christ taught nothing but Moses and the
Prophets, and the Apostles nothing but what they learned of Christ; with what
conscience could Saint Peter write a story to the Jews of the severe justice
of God, which was never in Moses? for Moses never mentions Christ's descent
into hell, there to cause the wicked to be more tormented. Therefore seeing
this old opinion gathered out of the works of the fathers, and bred by them,
maintains manifest absurdities, we must seek for another exposition. If we
consider the old Testament, we shall find that Eliphaz in the book of Job,
preaches the same doctrine that Saint Peter does, and therefore will serve for
an exposition. Eliphaz reasons with Job thus: Haste thou, O Job, marked the
way of the world wherein wicked men have walked, which were cut off by time,
and whose foundation was covered with waters, which said unto God, depart from
us? And yet what could he do more for them? he filled their houses with good
things, yet they refused the way of the Almighty. So Saint Peter speaks,
that the spirit of God went in like manner as he is said, to come down at the
overthrow of Babell by confounding their tongues and when he destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah, and preached in Noah, to wit, the time while the Arc was in
making To whom? to the spirits now in prison* why? because they said to God
depart from us, we will none of thy ways. Thus you see the words of Saint Peter
made plain.

This time of 120. years, Saint Peter calls the patience and long suffering
of God. The Jews in a book called Zoar, expound S. Peter's words in this sort:
The Lord comes to plague the wicked for their unbelief: six months with
water, six months with fire, hot and cold, and sent them all to Gehenna,
which is hell; Not that they meant so, the story of the word by plain
eyesight controleling it, but that the anger of God was as grievous to their
souls, as the waters of the flood which wrinkled their bodies. Christ in the
Gospel compares the flood with the end of the world for in the days of Noah
they had rich Iubal to feast them, and cunning Tubalkain to delight them in
building or such like devises, and fair Naamah that they might marry according
as their eyes lusted, till the waters of the flood overwhelmed them: so shall
it be in the end of the world. Eliphaz counsels Job, that considering the
end of these men, he should be at peace with God, before our substance be
cut off, and the fire consume the rest of them.

Iaphet borne.
HIs name signifies Persuaded. He was the eldest son of Noah, whereof many
seem to doubt: which being examined by Scripture, will appear most certain
in Genesis 5. It is said, Noah being 500. years old, he begets Sem, Cham, and
Iaphet. Now it is certain, that they were not borne all at once: for the
plain story crosses that. In Genesis 6. Noah is said to be 600. years old, and
the flood comes, then he must needs have a son that is 100. years old. It
could not be Sem, for he was but 100. years old two years after the flood.
Genesis 11. Neither was it Cham, for he was younger than Sem: For Noah said he
knew what his youngest son had done. The reason of the doubt arises, because
Sem is named first, in Genesis 5. Whom Moses (penning the story long after)
placed first, to show that Sem was the most worthy, and had the prerogative of
first borne, because Christ was to come from him according to the promise made
to Eua in Paradise, The seed of the woman, shall break the head of the
Serpent.

Sem borne.
WHich signifies Name or Renown. Whereby we are to understand, that Noah had
a wonderful assurance of the promise in Christ in calling him Sem, or, as we
say, Name. And withal we are to seek by the like faith to be renowned, that
our names may be written in the book of life. For Solomon says, Pro. 22. A
good name is more worth than a precious ointment. But God will put out their
names from under heaven, that flatter themselves in their wickednesses, and
whose root bears gall and wormwood, as he commanded. Deuteronomy. 25. Put out the
name of Amalecke from under heaven: he is the beginning of Nations, but his
latter end shall perish utterly.

93. Lamech died
Five years before the flood, being 777. years old. His name runs upon
seuens. For what he wanted in long life, he had it in casting a sweet account.
If Lamech had the age of his fathers, he might have seen the flood.

98. Methushelah dies
Being 969. years old, and the seventh that died after Adam, as his Father
Henoch was the seventh that was borne after Adam. He died but a few days
before the flood, to show that he being a just man, kept away the flood; and
lacked but 31. year of 1000. Now it is not to be understood that he lived full
969* years: for he lived but a few days of his last year. For if his
years be cast, you shall see he dies in the year of the flood. Now the
flood came not in the first month, because Methushelah then lived: the tenth
day of the second month the flood came. Methushelah was dead before that time,
his days were the exact rule of the flood: for so long as he lived, the
waters could not ouerflow the earth: he being dead, the waters might ask God
whether they should now work vengeance to the wicked? No, says God, Noah
shall mourn him a month, as the children of Israel mourned Jacobs death.
Afterward, this month of sorrow being ended, then they demand of God again,
whether now the wicked should be overwhelmed with waters? God answers No, For
Noah shall have a Sabbath of preparation. This being finished, the flood
covers the face of the earth.

Methushelah Spoil death, or Spear death.
Christ
Died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead.
Suffered death, that by his death he might overcome him that had the power of
death.
This half, shows that at the flood, the days of man were shortened half in
half, as Psalm. 89. The Lord has shortened the days of youth.

These numbers are the sum of the years from the Creation to the flood,
which are gathered by the particular natiuities of the Ten Fathers before the
flood.

These particulers being added, they make the years of the world at the
floude. 1656.
Adam. 130 Seth. 105 Enosh. 90 Kenan. 70 Mahalaleel. 65 Iared. 162 Henoch. 65
Methushelah. 187 Lamech. 182 Noah. 600.
The flood is brought upon the old world, etc.
THe floude is a resemblance of the destruction of the world, and was the
greatest judgment of the world, till the world shall be consumed with fire.
Therefore the story of the flood does cause us to consider of things past, and
to have judgment of things to come. For in the floude are rare examples
concerning waighing, numbering and dividing. It was 40. days in rayning: the
like time in abating. God has numbered, waighed, and divided. The second day of
the seventh month, The times do show, that God does weigh and number
wonderfully all the affairs of men: but men did not then know what God would
do, because he had hardened their hearts, and scorning Noah all his life time,
they were ashamed then to fly unto him, but the flood came for the sins of
man; for the blood of Abell came the floude and washed them all away. Yea the
waters that were under the earth advanced themselves above man.

Further in this story of the flood, these three things are chieflye to be
considered, the Arc. Persons that were saved. Time of the continuance of the
floude.


And first for the Arc.
THe Arc was made about mount Lebanon, where the Cedars for Salomons Temple
were had, and it was six score years in making: which time in Saint Peter is
called the long suffering of God. The forty years in the wilderness was a
famous thing: but the making of the Arc was more famous, and the time thrice
so long: not any thing so famous as the Arc, except the Lords death. The
proportions of height, depth, and breadth, are described Genesis 6. The height is
the tenth part of the length. The beasts were in the middlemost place; the
fodder above, the dung beneath. And God bids us mark the quantity of all the
beasts of the earth, by the bulk of the Arc. There is much speech taken from
the Arc to the Church; but the consequent of the one follows not in the
other.

In the Arc were beasts clean and unclean. Some in the Arc did perish. They
that were out of the Arc did perish. The waters did hold up the Arc. In the
Church are faithful and unfaithful. Some in the Church do perish. So the
Turk being out of the Church, does perish. The waters do wash them clean away
that are without
The tossing upon the waters, does represent the troubles which the Church of
God is to endure in this life. Again, no man of modesty but may know, that it
was no pleasant life for Noah and his family to dwell an whole year upon the
waters, and to abide the noisomnes of all kinds of beasts in the Arc, which
came to the Arc at the appointment of God, to the condemnation of all the
world. For it appears, that the very brute beasts had more regard to
themselves, than the wicked workers which despised the preaching of Noah, and
the making of the Arc, who said, where is the appearance of his coming? Ever
since the Fathers died, all things continue in one state: winter, summer,
spring, harvest etc. And while they were thus saying, the flood commes and
washes away their foundation. But, says Saint Peter, in this they a^e
willingly ignorant, for even as before the flood, they married, feasted,
builded goodly houses, etc. even to the day that Noah entered into the Arc,
and never thought the preaching of Noah true, because all things continued
still in the same sort, they thought it impossible that the waters which were
beneath the valleys could cover the highest mountains fifteen cubits: and
yet this they might have known, that as the waters in the Creation covered the
earth till God commanded them to go to their channel; even so again at the
commandment of God, they could return to cover it. Saint Peter therefore
adds, that these men were willingly ignorant.

The Arc rested upon mount Ararat, which is a mountain in Armenia, and
signifies, Take away fear. Whereby we are to note, that whosoever dwells
under the defense of the most high, and shall say unto the Lord, Thou art my
hope, my strong hold, and my God in whom I put my trust, shall not be afraid
for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day, for the
pestilence that walks in darkness, nor the sickness that destroys in
the noone day. For a thousand shall fall at their right hand, and ten thousand
at their left hand, but they shall not be touched. With their eyes shall they
see the reward of the ungodly: for the Lord is their hope, and he has set his
house of defense very high. With long life will he satisfy them, and through
his loving kindness will he show them his salvation. Let every one therefore
say, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord
is the strength of my life, whereof then should I be afraid? for in the time of
trouble he shall hide me in his Tabernacle, and set me up upon a Rock of Stone.

Now compare Christ and the Arc together.
The Arc had a door, by the which Noah and his household entered in, to the
saving of them. Mount Ararat, Take away fear. Christ Is the door by whom we
enter into the holy of holiest, to the saving of our souls. Christ Is that
mount Ararat upon whose shoulders if we rest, we need not fear what man can
do unto us.
The persons were Noah Iaphet Sem Cham
and their wives. Psalm. 130. The Lord has brought my soul out of hell, and
kept my life from them that go down to the pit.

Hebrews 11. By faith Noah prepared the Arc to the saving of his household.
NOah walked with God, therefore it is certain, that the spirit of Christ
preached by him. For Saint Peter gives a rule: The spirit of Christ spoke in
all the Prophets. His calling was very glorious, being made a preacher to
declare salvation to all which would believe in Christ. How he was received, it
is manifest, seeing he prevailed with a very few: yet the word of God is not in
vain: for seeing they refused the mercy of God offered in Christ, it is
certain Noah would preach the judgments of God the other part of the Gospel,
which the Latins call excommunication. The Hebrews, The Lord comes. The
Hebrews, and with them the Greek Orators do use to feign Prosopopeia, which
is a conference or communication, when they mean to express things more at
full. So we may imagine Tubalkaine to say, Surely Noah is an honest man, and
pays well for his work, and he has with very great charge kept a great
sort of laborers these sixe-score years. What should he mean by this?
Surely, answers Iubal, I will tell you strange things. Seven of my best
Rams, and seven of my best Ewes ran from my flock right forth to the Arc,
and there they went in. And another standing by, replieth, I am sure I can tell
(says he) as great a marvel as this: for coming by a wood, I saw a
fearful Lion, and a fierce Lioness, and they went as gently by me as two
Lambs, not offering to do me any hurt, and came to the Arc, and there were
plankes set, and they went in. Yea (says another) I saw a huge Bear do the
like: and so they might speak of the rest of the beasts. This might drive them
to an amasednesse, but this could not save them. And hereby it is apparent,
that it is not in our power to repent when we list. For this is not repentance,
to be sorry for our sins: (There is no man so wicked but has done so) There
must also be a turning to God, which is never, except we be lightened by his
spirit. The Lord uses first to offer mercy, which if it be contemned, he
hardneth our hearts, that thereby we may be made more fit for his judgments.

Cham was saved in the Arc to be a scourge for all the rest. And if you mark
through the Bible, you shall find that God deals in the like severity. For
every good family has one of Chams impiety to persecute him.

Adam had The Serpent to tempt them. Abell had Kaine to kill him. Isaac had
Ismael to flout him. Jacob had Esau to pursue him. Joseph had His own brethren
to sell him. Job had His wife and friends to reprove him. The Israelites had
Pharaoh to afflict them*
David had Saul and Absalom
to persecute him.

The Jews had the Babylonians, Medes and Persians, Grecians, Sirogrecians,
to subdue them.

Christ had the Jews, and Romans,
to crucify him.

The time of the continuance of the Flood, is thus described.
IN the days of the Flood Moses teaches two things: the days of the month,
and the days of the whole year. For he writes, that the Flood began the
Seventeenth day of the Second month, and that the waters prevailed One Hundred
and Fifty days, and that the next day after One Hundred and Fifty, was the
Seventeenth day of the Seventh month. Six and Forty days had passed before
the Flood: for the Seven and Forty day (I mean the Seventeenth day of the
Second month) the Flood began. Join One Hundred and Fifty with Six and
Forty, they make plainly One hundred, Nintie, and Six days, which divided
by Thirty, leave Six exact months, and the Seventeen days of the Seventh
Month, in which Moses writes that the Arc rested. Hereby it is most evident,
that in ancient time they had Thirty days to a Month. Moreover a moderate
expounder of Moses shall find Three hundred, sixty and five days in the
year of the flood, Thus: The first day of the Tenth Month, Two hundred,
Seventy and One days from the beginning of the year, the tops of the
Mountains were discovered* Noah tarried yet Forty days when Three hundred and
Eleven days were past: then he sent forth a Raven which houered a long time,
he names not the time, but as Seven upon Seven in the Dove is expressed; so
Forty upon Forty is here to be understood. So then there are Three hundred,
fifty and one days; to which add the fourteen last, in which the Dove was
twice sent forth, then you have Three hundred, sixty and four days, after
the Fourteen days, in which the Dove returned not. Moses reckons the first
day of the Month, in these words. In the Six hundred and One of the age of
Noah, the first day of the first Month, the waters were dried up. Concerning
the five days, every six years they make a leap Month, and the odd
quarter of a day in One hundred and Twenty years, make a leap Month.

Thus much for the use of the Fathers before the Flood.
NOW FOLLOWS THE Fathers after the Flood, whose Story contains unto the
promise given unto Abraham, 427 years.
Some thing will I speak of the general use of them both.

WE have two stays: the Fathers before the flood, and the Fathers after the
flood. The sum of all is nothing else, but to know God, and him whom he has
sent, Jesus Christ. For surely the spirit of God has in such plainness penned
down the Story of the Scriptures, that all the world must wonder at the
wisdom of God laid down so shortly and plainly. Before the flood, he taught
nothing but the Gospel, adding to the doctrine thereof Kaines Murder, and
Lamechs Adultery. And after the flood we have not Ten notable Fathers as
before: for Terah the Father of Abraham fell away, and worshipped strange Gods.
And surely, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are glorious and excellent for
the distinguishing of times: so are the numbers of the ages of the fathers, and
through the Scripture for the clearenesse of the word. Times are general, or
particular; general, from Adam to the flood, and from thence to Abraham's
promise, from thence to the coming out of Egypt, then to the building of
Salomons Temple, then to the burning thereof, by the Babilonians, and then to
the end of the captivity, and from thence to the death of Christ. These are the
sum of all the times, the proof of these is scattered through the
Scriptures. Thus much for the two tables in general.

After the flood.
NOah, and Sem, be here handled again, because their story continued through
and after the floode.

Compare Noah with Adam, and you shall see that Noah is another Adam.
Adam Noah was an husbandman. Became into transgression by eating unlawfully.
And Euah after their transgression, seeing their nakedness, sowed fig tree
leaves to cover them, and the very same words that God spoke to Adam in
Paradise for ruling and increasing, the very same he renews to Noah. Had the
tree of life in Paradise, for a seal of conservation. Had two younger Sons
good, and the elder wicked.
Was an husbandman. Became into transgression by drinking unlawfully. After his
transgression having his nakedness uncovered, is covered by Sem and Iaphet. Had
the rainbowe as a covenant of preservation. Had two eldest Sons good, and the
younger wicked.
Kaine the eldest Son of Adam, was cursed. Cham the youngest Son of Noah, even
to Canaan, his youngest Son, was cursed.

The one against nature, killed his brother. The other against humanity
uncovered his fathers nakedness.

Adam before the flood might eat no flesh. Noah after the floode might eat
flesh, the blood only excepted, because in the blood of every thing is the
life, and the life of every thing will God require at every creatures hand:
from the severity of which, a commandment against murder was given to Noah.

The reason why they might eat flesh after the flood, and not before, may be,
because the days of man being shortened at the flood half in half, the
bodies of men were afterward of a more weak constitution, and then you read
first of planting of Vines for wine, which was added to be a help in
digestion, to the strengthening of the body, and quickening of the vital
spirits, as in Psalm. 104. Wine does make the heart glad, and oil does cause a
cheerful countenance.

Noah was drunk, and uncovered in the midst of his tent, and awaking from his
wine, he knew what his youngest Son had done, and said, Cursed be Canaan: a
slave of slaves shall he be (now Noah would not curse Cham, because God blessed
him, but he cursed Canaan his Nephew the Son of Cham, who as some suppose
derided also his Grandfather.) Blessed be the God of Sem, and God will persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Upon these three sentences do the chief
Stories of the Bible depend. For whatsoever plagues does befall the Egyptians,
the Cananites, Ethiopians, Blackemores, Babylonians, and such like, is
contained within Chams curse. Whatsoever blessing is promised or performed to
the Jews, is comprehended within Sems blessing. Whatsoever promises of mercy,
and saving health was prophesied of to the Gentiles, is understood under these
words, And God will persuade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem.

The Prophet Noah spoke not at random, when he said, Blessed be the God of
Sem. But what is there spoken short in due time, is drawn out longer, and the
not regarding the blessing of Sem, does make many things in the new Testament
to be neglected.

And first for Cham.
HIs name signifies Hot or Choleric, and those Countries did his Sons after
the confusion of tongues possess, namely, in Africa in the South Country.
Cham the Prince of Affricke, the spreader of wickedness, inhabited the fourth
part of the world with his families. His house never got any victory, but for
some especial punishment to be showed upon Sems house. Cham had a curse in
this world, and doubtless in the world to come.

He had four Sons, the first Cush, of whom came the Ethiopians, or in our
tongue, Burnt faces: the second Mitzraijm, of whom the Egyptians come, for
Mitzraijm does signify Egypt. The third Put, of whom the Lybians and
Blackamores come: and the fourth Canaan, of whom the Cananites come, in whom
the curse of Cham was pronounced, notwithstanding it falls out also in all
his other Sons. And as Canaan was a slave of slaves; so are they that are of
the like infidelity: so that oftentimes for the horrible impiety of one man,
the whole Nation fares the worse.

This Canaan had eleven Sons, and himself made the twelfe, and his Country
was called Canaan, which once was Paradise. And as Paradise to Adam resembled
the state of heaven: so did the land of Canaan to the Israelites, and the
Jews; for it was a land abounding with all good things. In Paradise was the
tree of life: In Canaan Christ was borne, the true Tree of life. Adam
neglecting the true service of God in Paradise, was driven from thence. The
Jews neglecting their Sabbaths, and finally, the knowledge of Christ, were
likewise driven out of Canaan. But, as notwithstanding Adams fall, salvation in
Paradise was promised to all the world: so, notwithstanding the sin of the
Jews, Christ in Canaan wrought the full salvation of all the world.

These eleven Sons of Canaan were settled in one soil, that is, in Canaan
(which is about One Hundred and Sixty miles from North to South, and Sixty
miles from Eeast to West. Their names are Zidon, who built Tyrus the glory of
the world for traffic of Merchandise. Heth Gebusi, who after Sems death (as
it should appear) possessed Jerusalem: Amori Girgashi, of whom there were
some left till Christ's time, as Mat. 8.28. Hiuits, of whom Abraham bought his
burying place, of whose kindred also, Esau took him wives: Arkite, Siuite,
Aruadite, Zemathite, Hemathite. It is supposed they had so many tongues, as
there were Nations: but it was no otherwise than our Cornish and Northern men
differ in their tongues. These were Lords of the whole soil, to plant, build,
and replenish it against time to come, that the twelve Tribes of Israel might
have Vineyards that they never planted, and houses that they never builded.
Whereupon Moses says. Deuteronomy. 32. When the most high God divided to the Nations
their inheritance, he appointed the borders of a people according to the
number of the Sons of Israel. And when God promises to Abram, Genes. 14.
that he will give his seed a Land that shall flow with Milk and Honey, he
bordereth it from Egypt to the great River, the River Euphrates, within which
borders are contained the several Lordships of Canaan, and his Sons, namely,
the Kenites, the Ken^sites, the Cadmonites, the Hethites, the Pheresites, the
Gyaunts, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Girgashites, and the Gebusites.

Because Cham scorned his Father, who was the restorer of all the world,
therefore his Country was to be given to Sems House, the Jews: and they were
driven out of their Land by the Sword of Joshua, except some few, who were
left in the Land, to be spurs in the sides, and thorns in the eyes of the
Israelites, who were to possess it, that when through the abundance of wealth
they grew to forget God, they might be chastened with his rod of
correction. Thus Kaines curse is extended even to Canaan his youngest Son,
and he is made a Servant of Servants to Sem, that the blessing to Sem might
appear, and the open cursed, should serve the open blessed, although it be
Nine Hundred years after Noah's prophecy, to show that although God suffer
the wicked a while, and does defer his punishments until the sin of the
Ammorites come to a full ripeness; that yet he is a righteous Judge, and
sits upon a fiery throne, from whose presence does issue Rivers of fire, to
consume all such as will not learn to know the seed of the woman, to be
able to break the head of the Serpent, nor desire to dwell in the Tents of
Sem, acknowledging the God of Abraham, the God of Isaach, and the God of Jacob,
to be the true God that keeps covenant with all, whose garments were washed
in wine, and his mantle in the blood of grapes: Nor mark that Shiloh is that
Emanuel, God with us, who is that Stone that can grind the mightiest Gyaunt in
the Land of Canaan to powder, who have eyes, and will not see how God with fire
from heaven consumed their Cities, turning Lots wife into a pillar of salt,
ouerthrewe their kinsmen, Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and made the walls of
Jericho to fall down without violent hands. Chams house was not plagued for
building Babel only, but for falling from the Religion of Sem: and his
posterity had a deadly mind against true Religion. And as Cham and the rest
are in Gehenna in darkness; so in the Scripture, they are left in darkness.
For there is no time of any of them mentioned when they died, but are left in
darkness.

The wicked men of Canaan would never yield to the truth, but praised Gods of
gold, brass, and stone.

Now follows for Iaphet.
HIs name signifies Persuaded. He had seven Sons Gomer, Magog, Madai, of
whom came the Meedes. Iauan, of whom the Grecians and the Romans come: and
Tubal, and Mesech, of whom the Muscouites come. And Tiras, of whom the
Thrasians come. Of these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their Lands.

Iaphet, he was partaker with Sem in the action of covering their Father, but
Sem had the prerogative of the promise concerning Christ; notwithstanding
Iaphet was the elder. And if you mark through all the Bible, you shall not
find the first borne of any of Christ's Ancestors to have the promise
pronounced to them in open terms, because Christ the first begotten of his
Father, would not come according to the lust of the flesh, or course of nature,
but by grace. Sem in regard of that, had the glory of God preached in his
Tents, until the acceptable Child did come, in whom all Nations should be
blessed. And when the glory of Sems house, which were the Jews, was extinct,
John was banished into Patmes, and is commanded to write to the Seven
Congregations in Asia the lesser (where Iaphets Sons were first settled, to so
many Congregations, as Iaphet had Sons.) Grace and peace from him that was,
and is, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits, expressed in Esaias,
11. which are before his throne, and from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful
witness, and first begotten of the dead, Alpha, and Omega, the first and the
last, who is alive, but was dead, and behold he lives for ever and ever, and
has the keys of hell, and of death, and gives light and life to Iaphet the
Gentile, who was in darkness, and in the shadow of death, persuading him to
dwell in the Tents of Sem, to be a dweller in the spiritual Canaan, and a
Citizen in the heavenly Salem, where there is no earthly Temple. For God
almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it.

Now for Sem.
SEm being one Hundred years old, begets Arphaxad two years after the
flood; so old was Abraham when he begat Isaac.

He is in virtue equal with any before the flood.

This Sem was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.


He signifies, A Name, to teach them that the should look to him in whom Sem,
and the whole world should be blessed.

He had five sons Elam. Ashur. Arphaxad. Lud. Amram.


Elam of whom the Persians. Ashur of whom the Assyrians. Arphaxad of whom
Christ. Amram of whom the Aramites. Lud of whom the Lidians.

There be diverse which condemn Genealogies, warranted thereby (as they affirm)
by Saint Paul's Council to Timothy: neither that they give heed to fables and
Genealogies endless, which breed rather questions, then godly edifying by
faith. Indeed seeing Genealogies are of great consequence to the proving of
Christ to be the Messiah: the Jews to cross this, feign diverse of their own,
which S. Paul calls endless, and therefore to be avoided, as also tales
invented by them, whereby they corrupted the story of the Scriptures. But this
condemns not the Genealogies, which the Holy Ghost penneth, but rather
approves them. And if we do but cross the account laid down by the
heathen, we do obscure the evidence of the Scriptures. Thus much for the
answer of this objection.

100. Arphachsad borne.
HIs name signifies Healing. Some hold that the Caldeans come from him.

CHRIST heals all our infirmities.

Shelah borne.
HIs name signifies Spoiling. He was the Father of the Shelanites: When he is
thirty years old, he begets Heber.

Heber a representer of the son of God, who beginning to be thirty years
old, builds up the decayed walls of the Gentiles.

Thirty years after the promise given to Abram was it before his seed began
to be afflicted. Joseph being thirty years old, expounds Pharaohs dream.

Heber signifies Pilgrim, or stranger: so says Abraham. I am a stranger and
Pilgrim, give me a place for money to bury my dead: So says Saint Peter,
repeating the same story. I beseech you as Pilgrims and strangers to abstain
from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. Hebers posterity went as
strangers, flitting from land to land, looking for a City whereof God was the
builder, Heb. 11.

Hereby we are taught that the world is not the end to which we were created,
but that the glory of God is the end or mark that we ought to level at. For
if we consider Man and the World, in man the senses, and in the world the
sensible things. Man as the beholder, the world as the Theater. Man as the
guest, in the world the Feast prepared of all things convenient for him: we
will presently say, not only that they be made one for another, but also that
in very deed the world was made for man and not man for the world. And again,
if we consider how the world affords content of pleasures to all the senses,
but nothing sufficient to content the mind, shall we not conclude, that as
the pomp of this pilgrimage cannot be man's end, so can it not also be his
full contentation? but man by a peculiar privilege has an Understanding wit,
which was given unto him, and Will, which he received frank and free: the one
to know and discern the level of his end, the other, to love and embrace
it. Seeing then the hither end of all creatures here beneath is Man, and the
furthest end of them is God: the nearest and immediate end of man is to know
God in the death merits of his Son Christ, and them to embrace as the
sovereign welfare and comfort of our souls, when from this handful of earth
our souls must go to God that gave it. And what gains it a man to get all
the kingdoms in the world by humane policy, and want grace to aim the end of
our pilgrimage at heaven? For what else is the getting of this world, but a
proof of want and poverty? And what are honor, vain titles, and Imperial
glories, but a stamp of the devils nature? Therefore, as the end of the first
man when he was in his perfect holiness* was to attain unto God, so the end of
us, who by regeneration are partakers of that righteousness, must tend wholly to
the mortifying of our worldly affections* and accounting of these transitory
momentaries, as though they were not. And to be short, like as the soul is the
shape of man, so is the knowledge of God the true shape of man's understanding:
and what desire we but the things that are? and what can he want, which
possesses him, in whom all things are? Then let us say, that as it had been a
happy case for Adam to have continued still in his first estate: so is it now
for us to return thither again: that is, to be set again in Gods favor, that
we may one day see his face yet again. And because this unspeakable
blessedness cannot be brought to perfection in this life so full of misery,
we must so dispose our life in this world, not to live still in the world, but
to die in respect of these dead things, and to live unto God, if we intend to
live the true and everlasting life: for our true resting point, is the turning
again unto God, from whose favor and fellowship we be departed.

Man is composed of body and soul, the body mortal, the soul immortal: now
if we set man's felicity in his body only, we do too great wrong both to the
soul and to the whole man. For if it consist in the body, it perishes and
fades with the body: and then what remains to the soul which ouerliueth,
but wretchedness? but we look for a felicity which belongs to the whole
man. In the soul joined with the body, we have three abilities, Life, Sense,
Understanding. The soul gives life unto the body: and the perfection of life,
is health. If our life then serve to no other end, than the outward things of
this pilgrimage; what had the first man to do with any of them, who was created
perfect, enjoying the benefit of the whole world? and if these things must be
the end of us now after our corruption, what is more unhappy, than man? and
what is more incapable of happiness, than man? A body subject to infinite
diseases: weak, frail, fraught with miseries within, wrapped in them without,
always uncertain of life, evermore sure of death, whom a worm, an herb, a
grain of dust may kill, who if he looked for no other happiness than this,
were much better to be a plant, than a man. And what man is he, that feels
not a law in himself, that goes about to bridle him, which feels not a
guilty and accusing conscience in the midst of his pleasure? or whose greatest
delights leave him not a sting of repentance behind them? And what happiness
can that be, whereof we be ashamed? Now then, seeing that we have a double
life, the one in this world, the other in another; the one dying, the other
immortal: the first which is here, tending to the second, as the worse to the
better: our seeking must not be for such an end, or such a felicity as dies
with us, but for such a one as makes us happy, quickneth us and refreshes us
eternally, which surely is not to be found in mortal things. Where is this
happiness then to be found? In wisdom, in religion, and in knowledge, which
are not attained unto by reason, but by faith. For belief mounteth higher than
our understanding. And a certain Arabian proceeded so far, as to say, that
the root whereby the felicity to come is contained unto, is faith, and what is
this faith in God, but a believing that our eternal happiness lives in him?
And what is the believing, but a hoping for it? And what is hope, but the
desiring of it? And what is the desire of it, but the having of it? And what is
the continuers belief of it here, but a bewraying that here we cannot enjoy
it? And if we have not faith, what have we but ignorance? And if we have
faith, what have we but a desire and longing, considering that the greater our
faith is, the more we despise the base things of this world? And the greater
our desire is, the more we hate our selves, and the more earnestly do we love
God. And to be short, what is blessedness before appointed: but we would see
it? The way unto felicity, but we would enjoy it? Look then what proportion
is between that which is present, and that which is to come; such proportion
is there betwixt the hope we have here, and the perfection of that good which
we hope to attain unto. It follows then, seeing the world was made for man,
man for the soul, the soul for the mind, the mind for God: that all our
doings can have no end to rest upon here but only in the life to come, which
is the beholding and true knowing of God. For who is he that would depart with
any piece of his own liking in this life, but in hope of better things? And
what were it for him to loose his life, if there were not a life more happy
after this? The taking up of that godly man Henoch out of this life, was to no
other end, but to set him in another life void of all evil. And when we read
the turmoiles of Noah, the ouerwhartings of Abraham, the persecution of Isaac,
the banishment and wayfaring of Jacob, the distresses of Joseph, Moses, and the
residue of the fathers; they all show unto us, that they surely looked for a
better life after this, and that there is a judgment to come. For had they
looked for no other comfort after this life, the flesh would have persuaded
them to have held themselves in quiet here. Noah among his friends, Abraham
among the Chaldees, Moses in Pharaohs Court, Solomon in his pleasures, etc. But
they knew that their shoot-anker was to live immortally united unto God.

Hermes in his Poemander, says, that God made man like unto himself, and he
linked him to him as his son: for he was beautiful and made after his own
image, and gave him all his works to use at his pleasure, and therefore he
exhorts him to forsake his body to manure his soul, and to consider the
original root from whence it sprang, which is not earthly, but heavenly.
Discharge thy self (says he) of this body, which thou bear about thee: for
it is but a cloak of ignorance, a foundation of infection, a place of
corruption, a living death, a sensible carrion, a portable grave, and a household
thief: it flattereth thee because it hates thee, and it hates thee because
it enuieth thee: as long as that lives, it bereaueth thee of life, and thou
have not a greater enemy than that. Now to what end were it for him to forsake
this light, this dwelling place, and this life, if it were not for a better in
an other world? therefore Chalcidius says, I go home again into mine own
country, where my better forefathers and kinsfolks be. And a wise man of the
Chaldeys exhorts men, with speed to return unto their heavenly father, and
to seek Paradise as the peculiar dwelling place of the soul. This is
confirmed in the Gospel, when Christ promises the thief that day he should be
with him in Paradise. And of Epicharin, we have this saying, If thou be a
good man in thy heart, death can do thee no harm: for thy soul shall live
happily in heaven. And Plato willed his soul to return home to her kindred,
and to her first original, that is, says he, to the wise and immortal
godhead the fountain of all goodness, as called home from banishment into our
own native country.

Seneca speaking of the Lady Martiares son being dead, says, he is now
everlasting and in the best state, bereft of this earthly baggage which was
none of his, and set free to himself: for these bones, these sinews, this
coat of skin, this face, and these serviceable hands, are but fetters and
prisons of the soul. By them the soul is overwhelmed, beaten down, and
chased away. It has not a greater battle than with that mass of flesh: for
fear of being torn in pieces, it labors to return from whence it came,
where it has ready for it an happy and everlasting rest.

We read of the Thracians, that they sorrowed at the birth of their children,
and rejoiced at the death of them, because they thought that which we call
death, not to be a death, but rather a very happy birth. Therefore Herodotus
calls these people the never dying Getes, and the Greeks the never dying
Thracians. For they were of opinion, that at their departure out of this world,
they went to Zamolxis or Gabeleize, that is, to him that gave them health,
salvation, or welfare. Herocles says, that the wicked would not have their
souls to be immortal, to the intent they might not be punished for their
faults, but yet that they prevent the sentence of their Judge by condemning
themselves unto death aforehand. But the godly endure many hard things in
the froward generations.

This Heber is from the Creation the fourteenth, two seuens, a double Henoch.
He is the fourth after the flood, as Judah is the fourth son of Jacob, of whom
Christ came. He is the seventh from Henoch, a man for rare blessings to be
compared with Henoch, and is the same in force, that Henoch is, although you
would think them clean contrary: and so they are in signification, but in
effect of divinity all one. For Henoch signifies Dedicated to God, and Heber
Pilgrim or Stranger: and he that is a stranger upon earth, despising the state
of worldly pomp, is a Citizen with God: therefore whosoever will be a true
Henoch, must also be a true Heber.

And if we will be holy before God, and acceptable vessels for the use of his
Temple, we must bear palm boughs in our hands, singing Hosanna to the
highest, and be estraunged from the vain conversation of this earthly
Paradise: so shall our names continue famous through many generations as Hebers
did, and we shall speak the praises of God in our own tongue: for we will not
consent with Nimrod to the building of our own confusion, whereby we might be
shaken of from the favor of God, as he and his adherents were.

Hebers glory is further enlarged in that the Hebrew tongue takes the name
from him. The Jews kept this sincerely till they went into captivity into
Babylon: but when they came from thence, they began to stammer; for there they
learned the tongue of the Babilonians. Malachie ends the old Testament and
the Hebrew tongue: for though scholars write Hebrew, yet upon the first sight
it is apparent to be the writing of man, so far it diffreth from the style of
the holy spirit.

There be one thousand, seven hundredth, fifty and eight roots in the Hebrew
tongue. And this is a wonderful thing, that the bare actions of the creatures
should express Hebrew words: as a horse running upon a causey, the sound of
his feet is much expressing this noise, Ratsat, which in Hebrew is to run. The
noise which birds make by clapping their wings when they fly, is of this
sound, Gnoth, which in Hebrew signifies a foul. The Grecians cannot find out
the roots of their tongue. The Lord took such order in penning of the old
Testament, that one skillful in the Hebrew tongue, will easily know if there be
a sentence, or a word put in; nay, if there be but a letter added: so that they
are very unwise that persuade others, or believe themselves, that the books of
Judith and Tobie are Canonical Scriptures. For they are not Hebrew, neither
were they received at any time by the ancient Hebrews, who were so perfect
and ready in the text of the old Testament, that they could tell how many
times the letter Alpha was used in the Bible: so that to believe these books
to be Scripture, is to cross the testimony of the Jews for their own story,
and if they knew our opinions herein, they would condemn us for missing of
Religion.

This Heber was a very happy man, and his happiness made manifest, in that
none which lived after him, came to his days. For he being a Prophet knew how
heavy the curse of God would be upon the sons of men for building the tower
of Babell: therefore he names his son Peleg, Divided. The Hebrew name is
half the abridgement of the story, as it falls out for the most part.

He had also great cause of sorrow and heaviness, in that thirteen families
of Iocktains sons to whom Heber was Grandfather, went quite away, and were
far from Jerusalem, and being out of the favor of God, were bereaved of
salvation; So that Chams house might seem to have greater blessings. For they
dwelt near to Jerusalem, and Jacobs sons in Egypt married with Chams
daughters. Jacob sons called themselves Hebrews, because the story of Heber is
the most famous of all the ancient fathers.

Heber, a pilgrim or stranger. The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests; but the Son of man has not where to hide himself.

1757. Peleg borne.
HIs name signifies Division. In his days the tongues of those that built the
Tower of Babell, were confounded. In the consideration of which Story, Time,
are to be understood. Time, at or a little before Pelegs birth* Place, are to
be understood. Place, a plain in the land of Shinear. Persons are to be
understood. Persons 70. of Sem. 27. Iaphet. 14. Cham. 29.



These 70. spoke one language, the tongue of Heber, and going from the East,
they found a plain in the land of Shinear, where they abode and made brick in
stead of stone, and slime in stead of mortar, and joining with Nimrod said, Let
us make us a Sem, that is, a name, even in despite of the blessing of Noah
bestowed upon Sem. But God scattered them from that place, into the upper face
of all the earth, and they left off to build the City, therefore the name of
it is called Ba-bell, (that is, Come confusion) because there the Lord
confounded the language of all the earth. Babell is Babbling, both in Hebrew,
and in English.

As at the confusion of tongues, there was great falling out about words,
because one could not understand another: so hitherto all the world is at
variance for the understanding of the words. And as the builders of Babell fell
to babbling: so the despisers of Divinity shall fall to babbling. Therefore it
were to be wished, that every man in the world understood the Hebrew tongue.
All Nations in the earth are compelled to take notice of this story, whenever
they hear any man speak in an other tongue which they understand not. For
entering into the consideration thereof, they are driven presently to examine
the story of the tenth of Genesis, in which they may see the just and severe
dealing of God, to such as envy the blessing of their brother: for going from
sin to sin, they had their tongues divided, and their dwellings scattered.

It appears by this story, that the dealings of Cham and his sons, were in
the same kind that Kaines were.

Kaine after his curse, wandering like a vagabond from the place of true
Religion, into the land of Nod, which signifies Fugitive, builds a city,
and calls it after the name of his son, Henoch. Cham after his curse, goes
wandering about from the place that Noah lived, and Sem sacrificed at, unto the
land of Shinear, which signifies Shake of, and there he built a City of
Confusion.

From which story also we may observe the judgments of God, that wherein a man
offends, he or his seed is commonly punished: for it is certain that all the
actions of wicked are a harmony with Gods dealings, though in respect of the
wicked they agree not with virtue.

The sons of Sem for joining with rebellious Nimrod of Cham, as it were
flouting their fathers blessing, to furnish up the number of 70. made brick
for the building of the tower of Confusion. 70, of Sems posterity 600. years
after, were forced to go into the land of Cham, and there compelled to be
bricke-makers under Pharaoh King of Egypt, because they despised the blessing
of Sem, and remembered not the story of the 70. Families that built the tower of
Babell: To show, that when in prosperity men forget God, turning his graces
into wantonness, and his blessings to foolish pleasures, that he will take
his blessings of bread and wine and oil from us, and drive us into foreign
Nations amongst Egyptian dogs, to seek relief: whose succor shall be yokes
of heavy bondage, to punish us in the same pleasure wherein we offended.

All the Seventy Families do afflict Sem for this, before he has his full
renown, and in scattering of Iocktanes Sons, they are placed furthest off
Jerusalem of any.

Peleg. divided. Christ is Palmoni the secret Numberer that weighs, numbreth,
and divides.

Unto the building of the Tower of Babel, we have Sem, Name, Arphachsad,
Hea^ing, Sale, Spoiling, Heber, Pilgrim, Peleg. Diu^ded.
Put these together, and you have a short sentence. A good name like precious
Oil, shall heal the spoiling of poor strangers: for God will d^u^de to
every one according to his works.

1787. Regu. borne, Evil. 1819. Sarug. borne, Bough or Plant. 1849. Nachor
borne, Dry. 1878. Terah borne, Smelling.

AN evil Plant that has lost his sap, and is become dry, being not watered
with the dew of heavenly grace, can give no good smell, which appears, in
that Terah quite forgetting that ever God created, and consumed the world and
brought the devises of the Sons of Noah his great Grandfather to open shame
of eternal memory, scattering them up and down like Vagabonds over all the
earth, figuring the calamities of their later ages, the punishment whereof
chiefly to be performed in his own kindred, became an Idolatrer, as Joshua.
24. Your Fathers in old time worshipped strange Gods, even Terah the Father of
Abraham, etc. But mark the event. For even as the Sons of Sem, for joining
with the rest, were scattered with the rest: so the posterity of Terah by
Abram, even the best of them, namely the Jews, were once scattered Vagabonds
over all the earth, for not embracing the covenant of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, but in mercy gathered together again to the Mountain of grace to
Jacobs Well, that gives everliving water to so many as would acknowledge
Christ the Rock; to the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey to Bethel, the
house of Jehovah, where they might see a Ladder reaching from heaven to earth,
with Angels ascending and descending; to that fresh springing hill of Sion,
which is watered with the dew of Hermon, from whence it runs like the
precious ointment that ran down from Aarons beard, to wash away their former
uncleanness, and to purge their filthy leaprousie, that they might be a sweet
smelling sacrifice unto the Lord, holy and acceptable before his Throne, having
an high sacrificer to enter into the Holy of Holiest, to make intercession for
them, that they might be free from confusion, and delivered out of the bondage
of the outward and spiritual Babel. But even as the dog that returns to his
vomit, and the hog to his wallowing in the mire; so these Jews of
uncircumcised hands and hearts, forgetting all those, and many more benefits of
God bestowed upon them, crucifying Christ the King of glory, the God of Sem,
and not remembering their former punishments, are once again so scattered over
the face of the earth, that while the world endures they shall be Vagabonds
and never gathered together again: To teach us, that if God spared not them,
nor suffered them to continue in their transgressions being his peculiar
people; that we are to look for no other recompense, than they had, if we
despise the knowledge of Christ, as they did.

Terah has three Sons, Haran, Nachor, Abraham,
as Adam, and Noah,
had.

1996. Peleg. died, being 229. years old.
He had not half the years of his Father Heber; the most aged man after the
flood, lived not to half Methushelahs years: to show the curse that came by
the flood. So every man in the world has part of Gods curse by the flood.

1997. Nachor died, being 148 years old.


2006. Noah died, being 950 years old.
He lived after the flood, 350 years, that is, Seven Fifties, or Seven
Jubilees of years, as many as were from conquering the Land of Canaan, to the
government of Samuel. Noah's whole life was a singing of salvation to the holy
Lamb, seeing all the world drowned, and he only saved. When Noah dies, Abram
was borne. So God stirs up one good man after another oftentimes.

2008. Abram Borne.
His name signifies His Father, being the Tenth from Noah, another establisher
of Religion, as Noah the restorer or comforter was the Tenth from Adam. And as
in Noah's days he being the Tenth from Adam, Gods Justice over all flesh was
extended: so in Abram, he being the Tenth from Noah, Gods mercy to all the
world is pronounced.

When Terah is 130 years old, he begat: So old was Adam when he begat Seth, a
foundation of Religion: Jacob a bringer of Religion into Egypt, is 130 years
old when he stands before Pharaoh. Iehoiada the high sacrificer, saves Ioas
the Kings Son from the malice of Athalia, which had destroyed all the rest of
the Kings seed, and dies being 130 years old. While he lived, Ioas kept
Religion, and worshipped the God of his Father. After his death he fell away,
and suffered incense to be offered in the groves, to whom Zacharias the Son
of Barachias said, Is this the reward of all my Fathers pains, that as soon as
my Father is dead, you forsake the true God, and worship the Gods of the
Nations? For which cause Ioas caused him to be slain between the Altar and the
Temple. So that as death is contrary to life; and as at the birth of Seth and
Abraham, the graces of God were manifested to the world: so at Iehoiadahs death
the Tribe of Judah lost all Religion.

It is a question, how Terah being an Idolatrer, could name Abram, Hie Father:
for so does the word signify. He might guess like a worldly man, that his
Son Abram should be likely to be rich and mighty, and so should have many
under him. Howsoever it was, this is certain, that God directed the tongue of
this Idolatrer to set forth and preach his glory, though his life had no show
of virtue.

Here is another question to be discussed of the age of Terah, when he begat
Abram.
Of Terah his age when he begat Abram.
SOme will have Abram to be borne at Terahs Seuentieth year, because in Genesis
11. it is said, Terah lived Seventy years, and begat Abram, Nachor, and
Haran. Whereupon they gather, that Abraham was the first borne, because he is
put in the first place, and that he was borne in that year of Terah, to wit,
the Seventy. But they mark not, that Terahs Sons are reckoned, not
according to their age, but according to their dignity, as Genesis 5. The Sons
of Noah, Sem, Cham, Iaphet are so rehearsed, that in the first place there is
mention made of Sem, who for all that was not the first borne, neither could be
borne in the Five hundredth year of Noah, since two years after the flood in
which year he begat Arphachsad, he was but an Hundredth years old. Now the
first of this opinion whom I follow, was Calvin that most famous Doctor of
the Church of Geneua, who in his Commentaries upon Genesis 11.27. expresses it in
plain words. Him followed Beroaldus, who did much in the illustrating of time,
and Mangoldus. This demonstration is set down, Act. 7. Abraham is said to go
out of Haran after his Father Terah died. Now Terah lived Two hundred and five
years. And Abram went out of Haran in the Seventy and five year of his age:
which years if you subtract from Terahs age, there remains One hundred and
thirty years, in which Abrams nativity falls. The same may be confirmed by
Sarahs age Abrams wife, who is thought to be the Daughter of Abrams Brother.
Abram exceeded her no more but Ten years: whereupon it follows, that he was
borne long after him that was both his brother, and father in law. Abram
therefore was called, and began his peregrination, in the Two thousand,
Eighty, and fourth year of the world, the very same day that his posterity
went out of Egypt, namely, the Fifteenth of Nisan, as it is said in Exodus 12.

The third ioynct of this first time, which contains the divine covenant of
Abraham, ends in the year when the law was given, in which the Israelites by
the goodness of God were brought forth, and delivered out of Egypt by many and
strange miracles. This contains four Hundred and Thirty years, which is
confirmed by the testimony of Saint Paul, who expressly says, Gal. 3.17. That
the Law began four Hundred and Thirty years after the confirming of the
covenant or testament. And concerning the confirmation of which covenant he
speaks, he expresses in that which went before, namely, of that same which
was made, when being called of God, he went out of Haran. For in verse. 8. he
cyteth the same promise, In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
which Genesis 12. is rehearsed in the narration of his calling, Verse. 3. Hitherto
also it appertains, which is written Exodus 12. Verse. 40. The peregrination of
the children of Israel, (as learnedly and truly translateth that worthy man
Beroaldus) which they dwelt in Egypt, was Four Hundred and Thirty years:
Which surely the Seventy Interpreters so translate, that they account the
peregrination of the Fathers made in the Land of Canaan, in this dwelling.

Neither does the place of Genesis 15. Verse. 13. concerning the seed of Abram to
be aflicted four Hundred years, hinder it. For Abraham's peregrination is to
be derived from his calling, and his seed began to be afflicted when Isaac the
Son of promise borne five and twenty years after his calling, being a
child peradventure of five years old, suffered the scoffings of Ismael borne
of the hand maid: which surely the Apostle Gal. 4.29. expressly names
persecution. Add hereunto the rest which Isaac and Jacob suffered among
strangers. Now that time wherein the Israelites abode in Egypt, that it is
far wide of four Hundred years, is cleerer than the light at noone day, to
them which consider that Kaath the Son of Leui went down into Egypt, and lived
One Hundred, Thirty and Three years, and that his Son Amram lived one
hundred, thirty and seven years, Exodus 6. and that Moses his Son was Eighty
years old when he went out of Egypt. All which make but Three hundred and
Fifty years, and if from these, those years be subduced, which they lived
after their Sons were borne, the years remaining would be few. But these
things Doctor Berwildus, and others have learnedly set forth. Those notable
men, Bullinger, Phlinspachius, Scaanger, and others agree unto it.

It is said, that Terah being Seventy years old begets Abram, Haran, and
Nachor. The Jews say, That Abraham was the eldest: but thereby they bring
notable absurdities: for they agree that Sara was Harans Daughter; she is but
Ten years younger than Abram, and then Abram being elder than Haran, and yet
married his daughter but Ten years younger than her husband. Haran must needs
beget her at Nine years of age, which is impossible. Therefore it is certain,
that Nachor and Haran were elder than Abram. For if we look to Genesis 12. and
consider that Abram being Seventy and five years old received the promise,
and to Saint Stephens Oration, Act 7. by which it appears that Terah was dead
before Abram had the promise, or else the promise might have had a reference to
Terah, as well as to Abram, we shall by good Arithmeticke, cast Terah at the
birth of Abram to be One hundred and thirty years old: for take Seventy and
five years out of two hundred and five, which is the time that Terah lived, and
there remains One hundred and thirty, the age of Terah when he begat Abram.
To enlarge this further.

If Abram had been the eldest, Sem would not have given him the blessing: for
then he should have died before Sem, and men do not give their inheritance to
their Sons which die in their life, but he would rather have kept it for
Isaac, with whom he lived Fifty years. This may be made plain by another of
the same sort. Rebecca being with child, and they both striving in her womb,
asks counsel what should become of her. The question is of whom? Sem being
dead, it is manifest, either of Heber, or of Abraham. Thus you may see, that
without the knowledge of the times, we could not avoid these errors.

2018. Sara borne.
She is thought to be Iiscah the daughter of Haran, and so she is: for Abraham
calls Lot brother, which could not be but in respect of marriage. For Lot was
the Son of Haran, and brother to Iiscah. Therefore in that meaning Abram
speaks truly.

Sara is the same in signification that Iiscah is. For Sarah signifies Queen,
so does Iiscah, her name was afterward called, Sarai, that is, My Queen.

You have a very easy reckoning of the times, if you begin at Sarahs
Fifteenth year of age, when she was fit, as it were, to be a Tabernacle for
Abraham.

These comparisons prove the providence of God to be plain, and his counsels
easy.
From Sarahs Fifteen years of age, to the building of Moses Tabernacle. 480
From thence to the Building of Salomons Temple. 480 Third of Cyrus, when the
proclamation went forth for building the second Temple. 480 Government of
Poncius Pilate, in whose time Christ did build his spiritual Temple. 480

The promise is given to Abraham.
2083.
That is, Christ is promised to Abraham after the flesh, Genesis 12. Four hundred
and thirty years, before the giving ^f the law. The promise to Adam in
Paradise, 430.
and to Sem after the flood, is here renewed to Abraham, when he is Seventy
and five years old. So many years old as there be Fathers of Christ from Adam
to Joseph.

Saint Matthew beginning at Abraham reckons them but Forty and two, that is,
three Fourteenes, or six Seuens; but Saint Luke reckoning them, brings them
him from Adam, and shows their number to be 75. Saint Mathews meaning was to
prove him King of the Jews, and Saint Lukes to show, that he is the Seed of
the woman.

Seventy five has in it, Ten Seuens, and Five the number of the letters of
Jehovah.

God changes Abrams name from Abram, to Abraham of Haman, a Multitude, because
in him all the Nations and multitude of the earth should be blessed, like unto
Noah, a new Comforter.

He left his Country, and his Fathers house, and went to a Land which God
would show him, so that Saint Paul teaches by faith. Abraham when he was
called, obeyed God, to go into a place which he should after receive for an
inheritance, and he went out not knowing whether he went. In this faith, Moses
a high Son, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, Saint Luke
testifies of him Act. 7. That the God of glory appeared to our Father
Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto
him, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and come into a Land
that I shall show thee. Then came he out of the Land of Chaldea, and dwelt in
Charran, and from thence when his Father was dead, he brought him into the
Land of Canaan: but he had no inheritance, in it, no not the breadth of a
foot. Yet God promised, that he would give it him to possess, and to his
seed after him, when as yet he had no Child. Wherefore, believing in God, it
was counted to him for righteousness. For the promise to Abraham that he
should be the heir of the world, was not given him or his seed through the
law, but through the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. In 2. Esdras 0. You have
there in the prayer of Nehemiah, an abridgement of all this Story, how the
Lord chose Abram, and brought him out of Vr of the Chaldees, and called him
Abraham, and found his heart faithful, and made a covenant with him to give
his seed, the Land, etc.

Saint Paul, Act. 17. reasons with the men of Athens thus, You Grecians, you
say that you are of Iapheth, and that your Country is Ionia; and ye are the
Sons of the earth. Be it known unto you, that God at the first made all
mankind of one blood, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and assigned the
seasons which were ordained before, and the bonds of their habitations: for he
divided unto them the Land, according to the number of the Sons of Israel,
Now ye heathen, your own Poets say, ye are the generation of God. And we may
observe, that in all the ceremonies of Moses, there is a great privilege laid
down for the heathen. And besides, Melchisedech being a heathen, and greater
than Abraham, and a resembler of the Son of God, is a manifest argument that
God would save the Gentiles in Christ.

And it is added by Saint Paul, God which justifies the wicked, even Abram
being an Idolatrer. The Gentiles are no worse, therefore they have no cause to
despair. And where it is said in this Story of Abraham, that he forsook his
Father, and his Fathers house, Saint Stephen. Act. 7. shows* that it was at
the time his Father was dead* for otherwise it had been an hard example, and
Gods actions must be so wisely disposed, that the very heathen must
acknowledge them to be just, which they would not have done if he had left his
Father, he being alive.

It is further added, that Abraham was rich* He was of behauior quiet: for to
avoid strife and contention betwixt his shepherds, and the shepherds of Lot,
he willed him to choose whether he would take to the right hand, or to the
left. Lot chooses the best for eyesight, though by the close counsel of God
ordering his choice, it proved far contrary.

Abraham was politic: for he had Three hundred and Eighteen soldiers of his
own family, which he himself had instructed. And thereby we may gather, that
he used recreation, and in curiosity did not contemn it: for otherwise he
could not have made his men so expert Warriors. And surely there is nothing
disturbeth Religion, more than curiosity.

He was a stately man, and courageous, and had authority of life and death:
else he could not have kept so many in good order. His moderation appears
also, in that he suffered Sara to rule at home. He was politic in choosing
the night to set on his enemies: for seeing he was in the favor of God he was
sure he could not walk in darkness, and it was the fittest time to make his
enemies afraid.

2090. Melchisedech King of Salem, A figure of the Son of God, meets
Abraham.
IT is a question who this Melchisedech should be. It is most certain, it is
Sem the Son of Noah. Which may be gathered from the circumstance of the
Story, being modestly expounded. Heb. 7. This Melchisedech King of Salem, who
met Abraham, as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings, to whom also
Abraham gave tithes of all things, first is called by interpretation, King of
righteousness, and after that, King of Salem, that is to say, King of Peace,
without Father, without mother, without kindred, and has neither beginning of
daye^, nor end of life, but is likened to the Son of God.

He was without Father, without Mother, when Abraham met him. Five last ages
above Abraham being dead, he was unknown of his own kindred. He had no end
of life in the old world, for he lived through the flood: and no beginning of
days in the new world.

Christ in respect of his Godhead had no mother, and in regard of his Manhead
he had no father.

Surely our men be very unadvised, that because Calvin and a few Grecians do
stacker in this opinion, whether Sem should be Melchisedech; therefore they
will not admit the truth hereof, as though they should be a rule of truth unto
them. But to answer them: First, the consent of all the Jews is, that Sem is
Melchisedech, and if he be not, then let us see what inconveniences will follow.

First, he must be a godlier man than Sem that crosses Sems blessing, Blessed
be the God of Sem. Besides, it stands not with Religion, that any man should
be rare in the highest degree, no prophecy going before it to warrant his
rareness. But this is the cause why men be deceived. The Grecians err in
this, and are the cause why others have erred. It was not possible for them to
know the truth thereof: for the Jews appointed by Ptolomeus Philodelphus to
translate the Bible, seeing there was such difference at the birth of men after
the flood, both in comparison with those before the flood, and those after;
that their story might not be flouted of the Egyptians, add of purpose 1500.
years to the Fathers after the flood. For seeing Terah begot Abraham at 120.
And because Sem begot Arphacsad at 100. years old, to every one where wants
an hundred, they put an hundred: As, Arphacsad lived 3^. years, and begot
Selah; they translate, Arphacsad lived 135. and begot Selah, and so in the
rest. By which reckoning, Sem is dead before the time he should meet with
Abraham.

Saint Ie^om, accquainted with the Hebrews dealings, knew that their consent
was that Sem was Melchisedech, and so he affirms. Besides, it is not likely
that any of Chams house should be like to the Son of God, being a cursed
generation. Again, if it be objected that Moses does not call Mel^hisedech
Sem, and therefore it is likely he was not Sem: This objection is thus
answered. Moses penneth his story short, because he knew all the Jews were
well acquainted therewith. And as for the Author to the Hebrews, setting him
down to be without father, without mother, we must consider in what sense and
meaning he speaks: for seeing it is added by Moses in Melchisedechs story,
that he was king of Salem; and it is not possible for a king to be borne
without Father, without Mother; and it was never the meaning of the holy Ghost,
to cross the course of the creation: therefore we must look for some other
exposition, than that which the bare litterall sense will afford upon the first
sight. This therefore is the Author to the Hebrew meaning: He was now to call
to the Jews mind, one who in their story was a figure of the Messiah. Now
seeing Christ the Savior of the world, as he was God, had no mother, and as he
was man, no father; therefore to make this plain, that is, to make
Melchisedech a figure answerable to this truth, he so speaks of him, as if
he were without Father or Mother, because he resembled the Son of God. Now
the Author to the Hebrews might very safely use this kind of speaking For Sem
being borne before the floode, and in Abraham's time being a Grandfather of
eight degrees, must needs be thought to Abraham's Soldiers, to be without
father, without mother, who had neither beginning of days, nor end of life. So
that a Soldier of Abraham's camp might ask of one of Canaan, Goodman of
Canaan, who is this goodly old man with a hoarie beard? He would answer
thus; He is called the just King, and his town is named the quiet Town. For
when all the other Kings his neighbors are at variance, he only lives in
peace. And when Elam overcame five Kings, no man offered him any violence. We
have in every village a several God: but he sacrifices to the God (as he
says) that made us, and them. And mark what I shall tell you: When he
offers an Ox or a Ram to his God, which (he says) made the heavens and
the earth, fire comes from heaven to consume it: and he seems to be so
strong, that none of us shall live to see his days. In this respect therefore
the Author to the Hebrews affirms that he was without father, without
mother, who has neither beginning of days, nor end of life. For in proper
sense it cannot be true.

2094. Ismael borne.
THe son of Hagar an Egyptian, whom Sara gave to Abraham because her self
was barren.

When Ismael was thirteen years old, as Genesis 17. Abraham took Ismael and
every man child among the men of his house, and circumcised the foreskin of
their flesh the same day as God had commanded. Which Ceremony of circumcision
continued unto Christ: but since his death it is abrogated with the rest of the
ceremonies of the law, and is of no force unto salvation.

As Gal. 5. I Paul testify, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing at all: for whosoever is circumcisied, is bound to keep the whole
law. And, as many as are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. For in
Jesus Christ, neither is circumcision any thing worth, nor uncircumcision. But
faith which works by love, as Abak. 2. The just shall live by his faith.

The day of Circumcision was the Eight day. The seal was answerable to
Baptism. We have no special story of Eight to be compared with this, but
the eight that were saved in the Arc. The ceremony of the day is answerable to
the number of the persons, and the seal it self answerable to the waters of
the floode, to the which answers Babtisme which now saves us.

Ismael had twelve sons and one daughter. Jacob had twelve sons and one
daughter. Ismael was answerable in outward blessings to Isaac and Jacob, but
not in spiritual: for he was borne after the flesh. And although he were the
son of Abraham, he was not the son of Abraham, as it is written. They are
not all children, because they are the seed of Abraham: but, In Isaac shall
thy Seed be called: that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are
not the children of God; but the children of the Promise are counted for the
Seed.

In the Bible there are two Ismaels: the one an Egyptian by the mother, the
other by the Father. The one of Abraham by the mother: the other of Abraham by
the Father. Both these were enemies to the True seed of Abraham. This Ismael
flowted the Promise in Isaac, the other Ismael kills Godoliah. He being
left a Governor of the seed of Isaac. Ismael was upon every man's head, and
every man upon his head, seeing he persecuted Isaac.

2096. Arphachsad died, being 438. year old. Genesis 11.


2100. Isaac borne. Genesis 21.
When Abraham is 100. years old, and Sara 90. years old, according to Genesis
17.
HIs name signifies, Laughter. When Isaac is promised, Sara Laughed: so did
Abraham: So did Ismael laugh at Isaac. These three laughters in Hebrew are
expressed by one word, but there is great difference. Sara Laughed as at a
thing unlooked for. For she said, I am now 90. years old, and my Lord 100.
shall I now give my self unto lust, seeing it cease to be with me, as
with other women? And the Lord said, is any thing impossible with God? Abraham
laughed, as rejoicing thereat: for it is said, Abraham believed in God, and it
was reckoned to him for righteousness. Ismael laughed, as flowting at Isaac,
as though he were such a goodly fellow in whom the Promise should be
established. You have this story renewed again in the New Testament. For the
Angel Gabriel says unto Mary; For with God nothing is impossible. Elizabeth
comes to salute Mary, and she says, Blessed is she that believes: for those
things shall be performed which are told thee from the Lord.

It is said of Abraham, that he laughed when the Angel promised he should have
a son; thereby signifying his rejoicing. Isaacks life was answerable to this
joy: for he had no affliction in Canaan: only he was driven to go to
Abimelech King of the Philistims, and dwelt in Gerar where he was somewhat
injured.

Abraham praying for Ismael that God would bless him, he says, I will make of
him a mighty nation, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

It is written, that Abraham had two sons, one by a servant, and one by a
free woman. But he which was of the servant, was after the flesh: and he which
was of the free woman, was by promise; which things are spoken by an allegory.
For these mothers are the two Testaments, the one which is Hagar of mount
Sinay: For Hagar or mount Sinay, is a mountain in Arabia, which gendreth unto
bondage, and it answers to Jerusalem which now is, and she is in bondage
with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all: for we are after the manner of Isaac, children of the promise. But as
then he which was after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the
spirit: even so is it now. But what says the scripture? put out the servant
and her son: for the son of the servant shall not be heir with the son
of the free woman: then we are not children of the servant, but of the free
woman. Gal. 4.

2113 Ismael, and Hagar, are expelled Abraham's house. Genesis 16.
It was said unto Abraham, that his seed should be afflicted in a land that is
not theirs, 400. years, and should serve them, and they should entreat them
evil. Now if we reckon the time of the abode of the children of Israel in
Egypt, we shall find it but 215. years, for Jacob goes into Egypt 185.
years after the Promise of the 400. yerees. So that they were not in Egypt
full 400. years: but they were afflicted first and last 400. years, For
Ismael the Egyptian flowteth Isaac, and begins the 400. year. And Pharaoh
the Egyptian in the end of 400. year afflicts the Seed of Isaac. And as the
Seed of Sem were afflicted by Cham* 400. years; so afterward about that time
were they also afflicted by Iaphet.

It may be objected, How is Ismael an Egyptian, seeing he is of Abraham? He is
by the mothers side an Egyptian: for Hagar was of that country. And by this
exposition it falls out to be true. We have for to warrant this, the like
in the story of the Kings, where one being an Egyptian, is called of the Kings
seed, because one of his ancestors married with a wife of Judah. This story is
mentioned in 1. Chro. 2. It is thus said, Shesan had no sons but daughters,
and Shesan had a servant an Egyptian named Iarchthange, and Shesan gave him his
daughter to wife. In 2. King. 25. After that the King of Babell had overthrown
Jerusalem, he left people in the land of Judah to til the ground, and to
exercise manuell trades, which were made tributaries, and he set Godoliah ruler
over them.

Then came Ismael the son of Nethaniah, to Godoliah, to Mizpah. And Godoliah
swear unto them, that they should not fear to serve the King: for by that
means it should be well with them, and they should dwell with them in the
land. But in the seventh month Ismael the son of Nethaniah, the son of
Elishama of the Kings Seed, came and slew Godoliah and he died. Here Ismael
which was by his fathers side Iarchthange an Egyptian, is called of the Kings
seed sixteen ages after, because his auncestor Iarchthange married one of
Judah. And surely it is likely by this, that the Kings seed was wonderfully
decayed, when as one by an Egyptian his great Grandfather, having only married
in Judah, should be called of the blood Royal. And without question Shesan was
very wicked in despising the glory of the tribe of Judah, which he openly showed
when he married his daughter to an Egyptian. His name in Hebrew answers to
Ismaels manners afterward: for the Hebrews affirm that Iarchthange is so
harsh and loathsome to be pronounced, as no word of like tediousness in all the
Hebrew tongue. So likewise Ismaels maner^ are as detestable as the earth can
afford. Thus you see how Ismael Abraham's son may rightly be called an Egyptian.

Sara reasons with Abraham concerning the sending away of Hagar and Ismael.
She might have great cause to be grieved at the flowting of Ismael. For we
may imagine her to have used such like speeches as these have bin content to
have gone with you from Vr of the Chaldeans from my fathers house, and mine own
kindred. Besides the tediousness of travel, I have sustained great vexation
and disquietnesse, by the fear which I might have when you went to fight with
the four Kings. For my behavior toward you, it has always been pleasing.
My self being barren, I gave you my maid, that yet by her I might have
children: for this, even Hagar despises me. It had been better for me to let
Eliazar of Damascus have enjoyed the blessing. Now God has sent me a son;
see how he is flouted. Surely, if you do me right, and that which
appertains to justice, you must drive out this bondwoman and her son: for
this son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac. This
dealing of Sara God approves, and wills Abraham to hear her voice though it
seem grievous to him. Here we see by the mocking of Ismael, that the wicked
ever persecute the godly. Asa makes a law, that whosoever will not seek the
Lord God of Israel, shall be slain. The wicked make as severe laws. But here
is the difference, the laws of the godly are so reasonable, that every one may
see presently the equity of them: on the contrary, it is enough in the laws
of the wicked, that it is the Kings pleasure, or that it satisfies their humors.

To return, we may guess that Isaac was five years old when Ismael mocked
him: for otherwise Isaac could not have perceived it. Ismaels flowting might
be after this sort; Is this he that shall have the promise, in whom the Nations
shall be blessed? a goodly one, I warrant you: what continuance or strength
can there be in him, seeing at the time of his birth, his father and mother
were very old, and decayed in strength, and yet when he is weaned, there must
be great feasting and iollie cheer? If we consider what an offense it is
esteemed, if one being a subject, or otherwise inferior, should contumeliously
and despightfully taunt and vpbraide the heir apparent to a kingdom: we will
think this an injury not sufferable. If we observe the time when the
children of Israel came out of Egypt, which was about Easter, and that this
time of flowting, and that time, makes 400. years; we shall find, that this
mocking was likewise about Easter.

2126. Sale died. Genesis 11. being 514. years old.
2140.
Josephus thinks that Isaac was appointed to be sacrificed at 35. years.
Codomanus is of opinion, that Isaac at this time was offered being now 32.
years old and three quarters, answerable to the death of Christ at his death,
seeing his death was a figure of the death of Christ. There is nothing
precisely determined by the Scriptures: and therefore it is left for us to
follow which we will.

This Isaac, in respect of the commandment of God, that he should be offered
up, and the obedience of Abraham in offering him, was dead, and was restored to
Abraham, as if he had been risen from the dead. He was offered on mount
Moriah, a part of the mountain of Sion, called afterward Jerusalem. Of this
Christ speaks: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou saw those things that
concern the peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes; therefore thou art
Iebus, that is trodden down. God alters the name of Moriah, to Jerusalem,
because he would have kept in memory Abraham's obedience, and Sems religion,
and therefore gives it a name comprehending both: for in respect of Abraham,
he calls it Iire. Abraham giving it the name Jehovah Iire, that is, in the
mount will the Lord be seen. In respect of Sem he keeps the name of Salem
still, and so it is called Iire Salem, the Sight of peace.

From this story the Jews might have known the death of Christ, seeing
Christ compares them together, and yet by putting Christ to death, have saved
the world, though not heaped condemnation on their own heads. For as it was
prophesied, that one man must die for all the people: so they might have thus
reasoned, We know this is the Messiah, and that he must die for the sins of
the people, Isaac being a figure, and this time wherein he now is on the
earth, agreeing with Daniels seuens. Therefore, as Abraham offered up Isaac,
so let the high sacrificer according to the law put him to death. But then, as
Saint Peter speaks, if they had known this, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory. But as the windows of Salomons Temple be narrow without,
and wide within: so Christ speaks of parables, that they are therefore
spoken, that in hearing they should not hear, and in seeing they should not
see, least they should repent and be saved. The Author to the Hebrews says,
By faith Abraham offered up Isaac; and he that received the promise,
offered his only begotten son: to whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy
Seed be called: for thee considered that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence he received him also after a sort. Christ in the
Gospel affirms, That Abraham saw my days, that is, in Isaac, and
rejoiced. God speaks from heaven to Abraham in this sort; By my self have I
sworn, because thou have done this thing, and haste not spared thine only
son, therefore will I surely bless thee. In Romans 8. Saint Paul speaks
thus: What shall we say then to these things? If God be on our side, who can be
against us? who spared not his own son, but gave him to death for us, how
shall he not with him give us all things also?

Compare Isaac with Christ.
Was not Abraham our father, justified by works when he offered his son Isaac
upon the Altar? Iam. 2. Isaac was bound. Isaac after 3. days was offered up
to death, and after a sort revived to life.
God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death. Christ was
bound. Having suffered death, rises up again the third day to life.



2145. Sara died
Being 127. years old. She was buried in Canaan in the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham bought of the Hittites: This place they would have given Abraham
freely: for they confessed that he was a prince of God amongst them, but he
would buy it, because they should not say that they had made Abraham rich:
wherefore we must know, if we will be godly, that all our life is but a
pilgrimage, and that we are but strangers, and that all our inheritance is
nothing else but a place for burial. The Hebrews expound Sarahs death, a
mortification and dying unto sin.

Rebecca is married to Isaac. Genesis 25. When he is 40. years old.

She is the daughter of Bethuel the son of Nachor, the son of Terah, and
brother of Abraham, her Grandfather Nachor was an idolatrer: but her
grandmother Milka is thought to be of a good Religion, in that two of her
sons, Bethuel and Kemuel have El. the mighty God, in their names. Isaac
goes to Mesopotamia for a wife of his own kindred: for in Canaan there were
none of his kindred, and of the women of the land he might not marry. Jacob
his son likewise goes to Mesopotamia to Laban the Brother of Rebecca, and
there takes him wives of the same kindred.

2158. Sem died. Genesis 11.
This Sem was a great King, and lived Six Hundred years, as Noah before the
flood. He is called Melchisedech, the King of peace. He dwelt at Salem, where
his name continued Sixty and five ages, half One hundredth and thirty,
answerable to Seth, till that the Apostles received the holy Ghost after the
ascension of Christ. He is resembled to the Son of God.

Sems house believed that Christ should come, till he came: and when he came,
they denied him, and were cut off.

2160 Esau, and Jacob, borne, Genesis 25.
The first matter in this story to be considered, is, how the two twins in
Rebeckahs womb, are called two nations. Malachi speaking in the person of God,
says, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau: So Saint Paul says to the Romans,
Cap. 9. Ere they were borne, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger, as
it is written, Esau have I hated, and Jacob have I loved.

ESaus description is thus laid down in the Scriptures. First, that he was
hayrie, that he was of great courage, and at his birth Jacob holds him by
the heel; God thereby showing at their birth, what should be the course of
their lives afterward. Homer makes mention, that Ulysses overthrew Ajax by
striking him on the leg, The Greek translators handle it so, and call him,
Thermistes, that is to say, a Heeler.

Esau was a Hunter, living like the Ruffians and Roysters of our time. He
sells his birthright for a mess of pottage: for Jacob would not give it
unto him, except Esau would first swear to sell him his birth right. Says
Esau, I am contented: for it will be so long ere it will be enjoyed, that I,
and my sons Son shall be dead first. So with an oath he sold Jacob his
birthright; therefore he was called Edom, Read pottage.

No doubt Isaacks men knew this to be a rare blessing: and seeing he had
despised it, they must needs, whenever they called him Edom, keep his
wickedness in memory: for by this sale he despised Noah, Sem, Heber, and
Abraham, and all his victories, in the faith of which blessing, Abraham
overcame so gloriously. This is the first combat by the which Jacob a Heeler
supplanteth Esau.

The whole posterity of Esau bare the name of this infidelity: he thought it
a long time to the performance of a promise to be accomplished almost Four
hundred years after: aiming, like a profane worldling, at the outward
inheritance of the Land of Canaan, and not respecting the blessing of the
spiritual Salem. He was the eldest, and extreme wicked: notwithstanding he
was the Son of a righteous Father, to show that the sincerest nature of the
godlyest men is extreme wicked. He was to Jacob, as Kaine to Abel, and as
Ismael to Isaac. And as in his own person, he persecuted and sought the death
of his Brother Jacob, so his posterity were continual enemies to the seed of
Jacob.

Amelech of Esau lay in weight for the children of Israel, when they came out
of Egypt, to destroy them: but God commanded them to put out his name from
under heaven. Wicked Haman would at once have destroyed all the Jews, but he
and his ten Sons were hanged.

Haman was of Agag the Amalekite, of Esau. In him is performed a prophecy in
Numb. 24. Ameleck is the beginning of Nations, but his later end shall perish
utterly. Herod of Edome likewise seeks to put Christ the true Israel, to
death: wherein you may see the malice of Esau to continue even till Christ.

Esau was hated of God before he was borne: therefore whatsoever he did, it
turned still into a curse unto him; he prepares venison for his Father, and
the whiles loses the blessing of eternal life: he would please his father by
marrying into Abraham's stock, and maryeth Ismaels daughter; he wept for the
blessing, but found no place of repentance, though he sought the blessing with
tears. In like sort is the repentance of every wicked man, when he is touched
with the conscience for sin, he will then acknowledge his sin, and with
tears show forth for his transgressions, but through the hardness of his heart
which cannot repent, he returns like to Esau to his vomit again.

Jacobs Story will appear the better by declaring Esaus, even as contraries
are set together, that thereby every one may show the cleerer.

His name signifies a Suplani or Heeler, and all his life shows him to be
contrary to Esau: The one an image of all impiety; the other a mirror of all
godliness: the one a persecutor, the other persecuted: the one a despiser of
grace, the other an embracer of virtue.

You have from the creation to Jacob two and Twenty Fathers, answerable to the
Two and Twenty Letters in the Hebrew tongue. So Epiphaneus in Ankorato
handles them.

Thus, by comparisons God makes his dealings easy to be kept in memory.
Jacob, though the Two and Twenty from Adam, yet the third Seventh of those
which were borne after Adams creation.

Now the Chronicle is ended for particular lives: for after Jacobs Story the
Scripture contains whole Stories of whole States and Kingdoms.

Noah is the Tenth from Adam: Abraham the Tenth from Noah: Jacob the Twelfe: so
you have the two and Twenty. The Hebrews admire the patience of God, that
Ten whole ages God gave them time to repent, and yet Esaias says, that the
Lord looked about, and saw that there was none good upon the earth.

The Seventy Interpreters translating the old Testament into Greek, thrust in
one Kenan, whose name is not in the Hebrew. If the reason be demanded why they
did so, this may be answered: The Seventy Interpreters knew, that a great deal
of wisdom was contained in the comparison between the Two and Twenty Letters
of the Hebrew tongue, and the Two and Twenty Fathers. Now because they envied
the Egyptians, and were loath they should gain any wisdom by them, of
purpose they add Kenan, to disturb this proportion, and so they make Jacob
the Three and Twentieth. Saint Luke setting down the Genealogy of Christ,
alleges Kenan following the Genealogy, penned by the Seventy Interpreters.
For Saint Luke was to take it as he found it, and he knew that all the Jews
were well acquainted with the reason why Kenan was added. Therefore there could
no danger grow in his time, though Kenan were kept still in the Genealogy.
Beza translating the new Testament, leaves him out; for the which the Jesuits
accuse him. Now Beza, to the end ignorant men should not stagger by finding him
in Luke which is not in Moses, leaves him out: and this may Beza do well
enough: for any one may know, that Saint Luke never meant, that Arphachsad
begat Kenan, seeing that he adds, being, as men supposed, the Son of
Arphachsad, to wit, of those men that knew not the meaning of the Translators.
Besides, Epiphanius being a Grecian, and being acquainted with the Greek
translation, yet concludes the Fathers under the number of Two and Twenty.

Jacob is called The beloved of the Lord, before he was borne: In which he is
answerable to David, whose name signifies Beloved. And to our Savior Christ,
of whom it was said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And further, we are to note in this story, how Esau by have, not willing to
stay for the promise till the time appointed, felt the heavy judgment of God.
We have the like example of this have, and the like punishment in Saul. Samuel
anointed Saul King, and willed him to go before him to Gilgall, and to stay
there for him 7 days till he came. Saul tarieth 7 days, according to the time
appointed, but Samuel came not, therefore the people were scattered. Saul
seeing the peoples minds severed, that he might unite them again, offered a
burnt offering. Then came Samuel and rebuked him, saying, Thou have done
foolishly, thy kingdom shall not continue, the lord has sought him a man after
his own heart. Thus you have the like example, both for Story, and prophecy.

Isaac is blind, Sem, Heber, and Abraham being dead, only Esau, and Jacob
alive to enjoy the blessing after Isaacks death. Now, if we examine the
sequel, we shall see, that if Isaac had not been blind, he would for his
part have brought destruction upon the whole earth: for he would have blessed
Esau, who upon any occasion would have sold it, and besides, being very
wicked in despising it, would have brought the heavy wrath of God upon his
posterity for disobedience. Therefore his blindness was a great blessing, even
as Saint Paul speaks every thing turns to the best to the children of God.

Isaac wills Esau to go and kill him some venison, that his soul may
bless him before he die. So the Prophets use to desire meat before they
prophecy, that being refreshed they may be the fuller of spirit and
cheerfulness. The Hebrews dispute from this place, whether Isaac was grown
into poverty. Some think he was, by reason of the famine which fell in
Canaan, and because the Philistines kept not covenant with him, for which cause
Sampson afterward takes occasion to plague them, and that justly. Aben Ezra
is of this opinion. Rebecca she hears this Commandment of Isaac, and
knowing that speediness in dispatching, is oftentimes a great cause of
advantage, wills Jacob to go and fetch a Kid, that thereof she might make
pleasant meat for Isaac. Jacob is afraid, she comfort him: for she had her
warrant from God, that the elder should serve the younger, and therefore she
boldly aduentureth. He comes to Isaac, who supposes him to be Jacob by his
voice, but feeling the roughness of his hands and neck, is persuaded that it
is Esau, and blesses him. When he was blessed, in comes Esau with his
venison, and prays his Father to bless him. Isaac was now astonished to
think of this subtlety. His spirit must needs be full of fear, to think
how he whom he would have blessed, the Lord would not choose. Isaac therefore
seeing the event, acknowledges the election of God in Jacob, and concludes
that he shall be blessed.

Now here is a question to be handled. When Jacob says, I am thy Son Esau.
And Isaac answers, It is Jacobs voice. Whether Jacob does lie or no. This
answer of Jacobs, if we expound in the best sense, is no lie: for then it is
no more but a kind of scoffing, called Ironia. So God speaks in Genesis 3.
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. So Christ in
the Gospel comes to his Disciples, and finding them a sleep says, Sleep
henceforth. We may answer it further thus: Jacob in respect of the purpose of
God, which chose him for the blessed, might very well be called the only
Son. Besides, in regard of civil right, now he was his eldest Son, seeing
he had bought the birthright of Esau: Whether it were a lie or no, we will
leave it to God: and we cannot altogether condemn this answer, seeing God
approoueth it by giving Jacob the blessing.

Plato says, When men are dead, we cannot ask them what they meant.
Therefore we must expound their speeches, and their actions to the best
meaning. And further, words are not always to be taken in proper kind of
speaking. For Abram defends himself, that Sara was his Sister, to wit, the
Daughter of his Father, but not the daughter of his mother: Joseph swears by
the life of Pharaoh, if you take the words as they lie in proper sense, he
sinned greatly, and was even for his oath, the worst of all Jacobs Sons. But
Salmo Iirki expounds him thus: by the life of Pharaoh you are Spies, that is,
Pharaohs life is a worms life, which in account is no life: even so are ye no
Spies in truth, though you may seem so to be. So likewise Hushai answers
Absalom; for when Absalom saw Hushai, David's Counselor, he asks him, Is this
thy kindness to thy friend? Why wentest thou not with thy friend, meaning
David. Hushai answers, Nay, but whom the Lord and this people, and all the
men of Israel chose, his will I be, and with him will I dwell. This sentence
has a double meaning, either that he meant to serve Absalom, or King David.
Therefore when things are spoken doubtfully, we must mark how men may in wit
expound them.

2183. Abraham died. Genesis 25.
Being One hundred, Seventy, and five years old, He was buried in Hebron.

2188. Heber died. Genesis 11.
Being Four hundred, Seventy, and five years old. He was the longest liver
of any that was borne after the flood.

2231. Ismael died, being 137. years old.
THe prophet Esaias, Cap. 66. prophesying of the calling of the Gentiles, names
the two eldest Sons of Ismael. Nebaioth and Kedar, saying, The Rams of
Nebaioth shall serve thee, and the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee.
Again, he names two of Abraham by Ketura, Sheba, and Seba: which two names
do also contain the Gentiles by Cham, and the Gentiles of Sem by Iocktan. So
that under the names of the most worthy Gentiles, which are the Gentiles by
Abraham, he shows the calling of all the Gentiles in the world. Whereby we are
taught, that Ismaels posterity was not wholly rooted out of the favor of God,
as Ameleck was.

2245. Jacob goes to Laban. Genesis 28.
HE goes into the Country of Mesopotamia to Laban. There he serves Twenty
years. This Laban was the Son of Bethuell, and brother to Rebecca, and of
the house of Nachor, the Brother of Abraham and Haran, who remained in the Land
of the Chaldees after Abraham's departure. So that Laban, though of Mesopotamia,
yet is near kinsman to Jacob.

Jacob in this Journey goes over Jordan with his staff and skrip, as closely
and secretly as he could, that thereby Esau might not know of his departure:
for Esau was mighty, and, as it appears afterward, had a band of Four
hundred men.

Alexander Polyhistor writes of this flying of Jacob for fear of his brother
Esau; of his abode in Mesopotamia, his seven years service, his marrying with
two Sisters, the number of his children, the rauishing of Dina, the slaughter
of Sichem, the selling of Joseph, and of his imprisonment, his deliverance for
expounding of dreams, his authority in Egypt; his marrying with Putifars
daughter, his two Sons by name that were borne of her, the coming of his
Brethren into Egypt, the Feast that he made them, the Five parts that he gave
to Benjamin, whereof this Author intends to yield a reason, the coming of
Jacob and his whole household into Egypt, of what age every of them was, and
how many children every one of them had: and so he brings us down from Noah
to the flood, from the flood to Abraham, from Abraham to Leui, and from Leui to
Moses: notwithstanding ever among faults in recording the times, with some
other additions of small importance. Which plainly show, that he had not those
Histories immediately out of the Bible, but out of some other books which he
had seen elsewhere.

Jacob going to Haran stays by the way all night, because the Sun was
down, and laid of the Stones of the place under his head, and slept. There he
sees the Vision of the Ladder, and when he awaketh, he says, Surely the
Lord was in this place, and I was not ware of it. Then he rose and took up the
stones, and made a pillar, and called it Bethel: for he said, This is no other,
but the house of Jehovah, and the gate of heaven.

He sees a Ladder, etc.
THis Ladder represents Christ: the foot on the earth, his humanity: and the
top reaching to heaven, his deity: The Angels of God ascending and descending,
the meditations betwixt God and us: And the Lord standing above upon it, the
readiness of the Father to receive our prayers. This is expounded, Ioh. 1.51.
Ye shall see the heavens open, and the Angels of God ascending, and descending
upon the Son of man.

In this Vision of the Ladder, we see the whole meditation of Christ is showed
to Jacob. And if we duly consider it, there could not be a fitter similitude
in the whole course of nature, to represent the meditation, than the Ladder.
For even as in the Ladder, if two or three steps be broken, the Ladder is to no
use, seeing we can neither ascend nor go down by it: even so the whole
meditation is so united and knit together, that by despising any one part, we
bereave our selves of the benefit of the whole.

After that Jacob was come to Haran, he served 7 years for Rachel. Laban gives
him Leah, and deceives him, and uses this excuse, That it was not the use of
the country, that the younger should be served before the elder. Leah is said
to be contrite. Here we may see what it is to enjoy the truth of Gods religion,
and to worship him truly. Leah commits a great sin: and though God make her
fruitful, yet this event excuses not the fault before committed. She knew
very well, that she could not enjoy salvation by staying with her Father: and
we are to make the best collection of the actions of the best women, and
therefore, no doubt the zeal that she had to know God, made her to venture so
far. No doubt, this was a great sin, and yet a far greater to have been
married to an v^faithfull husband: for thereby there was no hope left for
salvation. And we see that Christ chooses to come of Leah by Judah, rather than
of Rachel. God himself only knows how far he will pardon so great
offenses.

Then he serves 7 years for Rachel. Leah is fruitful: she has Reuben, and
says, The Lord has looked on my tribulation. Then she conceived, and bare
Simeon, and says, Because the Lord heard that I was hated, therefore he has
given me this Son. She conceived again, and bare Leui, and says; Now my
husband will be joined unto me: therefore she named him Leui, Joined. Then she
bare Judah, and said, Now will I praise the Lord. The heathen by the light of
nature will confess, that the Lord looks on their tribulation, and helps
them, that he hears their hatred, and reuengeth it: but they cannot for all
these benefits praise the Lord. Therefore she, as a prophet, knowing that
Christ should come of Judah, praises God for so glorious a blessing. Then she
left bearing a time.

Rachel gives Bilhah to Jacob: she bears Dan, Judgment, and says, God has
given sentence on my side: afterward, Nepthali, Wrestling.

Leah does the like, and gives Jacob, Zilpah, who bears Gad, a Company, and
Asher, Happy. Leah after bears Isachar, Wages, or Reward: then Zabulon, God
has given me a goodly Dowry: and last, Dina, a daughter, Judgment. So God
showed Judgment to the Sichemites for rauishing of her.

2260. Fourteen years after, Joseph is borne,
A rare man. And we commonly see that rare men have great expectation before
their birth. After this, Jacob like a good philosopher enricheth himself by
using rods of diverse colors. Joseph in Egypt uses a kind of policy to take
away the lands from the people, and to bring them to the King. These actions at
the first might seem unlawful, because the cause is hid from us, though
afterward, the purpose of God appearing, they are approved.

Judah borne.
HE was the fourth Son of Jacob, his mother names him Praise God: whereby it
appears, that she looked for Redemption by Christ, respecting the promise
concerning the Seed of the woman to be accomplished in him. It could not so
have appeared by naming Reuben, Simeon, or Leui. For a wise philosopher might
have given those names: but Judah, containing a name of heavenly comfort,
shows a spirit governed by the holy Ghost.

2264. Jacob goes from Laban. Genesis 30.
WHere he had been 20. years: two seuens, and a six: In which number is
contained the creation, and the Sabbath. And, 20.
as one may gather, closely expressed 7. years plenty, 7. years dearth.

As he returned from Laban, he feared his brother Esau: but the Angel of God
met him to comfort him: therefore calls the name of the place Mahanaim, that
is, Gods host. This camp of Angels is repeated in the song of songs, and
applied to Christ as the company of an army. So David likewise affirms,
that the Angels of God do pitch their tents about them that fear him. When
Absalom is destroyed, David and his camp were at Mahanaim, the place where the
Angel met Jacob. Wherein we are to learn, that God so disposes the actions
of his elect, that he regards their goings out, and their commings in, and
marketh all their paths, that whether they be at home with their father, or
abroad among strangers, they are shadowed under the defense of the most high,
whose dwelling is in eternity.

After this, he wrastleth with the son of God, (that is, in the likeness of
the same nature, which he afterward took upon him) until the break of the
day, and would not let him go till he had blessed him. Therefore he called him
Israel, a conqueror* This expounded in Oseas. By his strength he had power with
God, to show, that as he had power with God, he should prevail with men. Then
he erected an Altar, and called it Penuel: for, says he, I have seen God face
to face.

This story of Jacob is repeated in John 1. Where Christ says to Nathaniel,
Behold a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Nathaniel is called the
true Israelite, in that he acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, which he
might know by casting Daniels seauens.

Afterward he is reconciled to his brother Esau, and beyond Jordan he dwelt
near Sichem, where Dina is deflowred.

Er borne. Onan borne. Selah borne.
Er and Onan Were married to Thamar and committed grievous sins, before God:
therefore he destroys them.

2276. Joseph is sold into Egypit when he is 17. years old: so long was he
nourished at home of Jacob.
Joseph dreameth that the Sun, Moon, and eleven stars worshipped him. Genesis
37. Meaning his father, mother, and his eleven brethren, of whom in the
creation the twelve signs in the Zodiac had a full reference: showing
thereby, that God in his Counsel, at the creation, had a great regard to the
number of the sons of Jacob, which were to be borne more than 2000. years
after: He has the like regard at the confusion of tongues, in settling Canaan
and his eleauen sons in a soil, which Jacob sons should afterward
possess.

For declaring this dream. The poison of the serpent possessing his brethrens
hearts, they were moved with envy, and sold Joseph into Egypt. Judah caused him
to be sold, to save his life: but Judas Iscariot, (that is, which falls away
for reward) sold Christ, to loose his life.

Jacob deceived his father Isaac with a kid. Genesis 27. When Joseph is sold, his
brethren sprinkle the blood of a kid upon his partie-coloured coat, and brought
it home to their father, and said, a wild beast had slain him.

Jacob was 20. years from his Father Isaac, and did not see his face. Joseph
was 20. years from his Father Jacob, before he sees his face.
To show, that wherein a man offends, therein he shall be punished.

Joseph the son of Jacob fed Israel in Egypt, as putting meat into the
mouth of a child. Joseph the son of Jacob, takes the child Jesus, and his
mother Mary, and flees into Egypt Mat. 2. And properly puts meat into the
child's mouth
2280. Er and Onan died. Genesis 38.
ER and Onan, having committed horrible sin before God, are slain, and no
seed left unto them. Then, according to the custom, Thamar thought to have had
the third son Selah, to have raised up seed. But Judah neglecting it, she
attyred her self like a light woman, and lay in the way as Judah should go to
the sheep shearing; whom Judah knew, and at the time she bare two children
Phares and Serah: for which fact, Judah would have burnt her. Whereby we may
know, that before the law given by Moses, they had the same equity of justice
for punishing of sin, that they had afterward.

In Moses Law a Magistrate might not be condemned under three witnesses.

Thamar condemns Judah by three witnesses, his Seal, Bracelet, Staff.


From this deed of Judah we may understand, that the prerogative, That his
brethren should praise him, could not be meant of himself: but herein is
manifest the gifts of God to be of grace, and not of nature. For if Judah had
been rare for godliness, the prerogative of nature might seem to have caused
Christ to have come of him.

2288. Isaac died. Genesis 35. being 180. years old.
He is the longest liver after Heber, and lives longer then Abraham: To show,
that he was a child of Promise. For if Abraham begetting him when he was old,
he should have died quickelie, what rare blessing had it been to Abraham? And
therefore, that the power of God might be seen, even in the weakness of man,
Isaac has a longer life than Abraham, or any after him. Heereuppon it may be
concluded, the book of Tobias to be false, because it makes Tobies life so
long, and thereby seems to cross Jacobs blessing. Besides, we shall find
that in Nehemiahs time, they which came out of captivity do out-liue any in
the Scriptures that come after, and these men were accounted old. The longest
liver of them comes short of Isaacks age.

Ezrom. borne. of him nothing is spoken.


2298. Jacob goes into Egypt, Genesis 47. He is nourished of Joseph 17. years..
215
NOw for this number of 215. how is that performed Genesis 17. where God says
to Abraham, Thy seed shall be evil entreated in a land that is not theirs 400.
years. Seeing they continue in Egypt but 215. years, they were afflicted by
some of Egypt 400. years. For Ismael the Egyptian by Hagar mocketh Isaac in
the beginning of the 400. years, and that mocking in the Scripture is called
persecution: and in the end of 400. years they were afflicted unto the coming
out of Egypt, so that they were not in Egypt 400. years, but they were
afflicted first and last 400. years.

Psalm. 105. Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was a stranger in the land of
Cham; to confirm the covenant that he made with Abraham, and the oath that he
swear unto Isaac which he appointed to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
everlasting Testament, saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the
lot of your inheritance. When as yet there were but a few of them, and they
strangers in the land, what time as they went from one Nation to another, and
from one kingdom to annother people: he suffered no man to do them wrong,
but reproved even Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm. Yet he called for a dearth upon the land, and
destroyed all the provision of bread. But he had sent a man before them, Genesis
45. Even Joseph which was sold, to be a bondseruant, whose feet were hurt in
the stocks, and the iron entered into his soul until the time that his cause
was known. The word of the Lord tried him.

This famine over all the land of Canaan, may appear to be a punishment on
Jacobs family, for selling Joseph into Egypt.
Jacob goes into Egypt, and there tells Pharaoh that he was 130. years old.
Though Pharaoh in his demand meant no more than a heathen man would, to wit,
to know his years and the age of his life: Yet God so disposes Jacobs
answer, that he signifies unto him that his coming into Egypt with seventy
souls, is answerable in a contrary degree to the first scattering of the
seventy families at the building of the tower of Babell. In the 4^ years
there came three discents from Jacob. Whereby it appears, that Judah and
Pharez could not be much elder when they begot children, than Solomon was when
he begot Roboam, which was about twelve years of age. By means of which
speedy increase, there were of these seventy in 215. years, six hundred
thousand fighting men, besides women and children, godly, and of the household
of faith: to show, how God could perform his promise to Abraham, that he
would make his seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the sea
shore. Hereupon Abacuck says, that the counsels of God are eternal: thereby
teaching us to mark diligently the time wherein God performs his promises,
which may be made familiar by examples in this sort. It is said, Genesis 3. The
seed of the woman, shall break the head of the serpent.

This was not performed, till Christ took flesh of the Virgin, and became man,
which was 4000. years wanting but 70. after the promise made to Adam. Satan,
to try this, tempts Christ, and is overthrown. Abraham goes forth of his
country, to embrace the promise, that God would give him a land, 430. years
before his seed should enjoy it. But the true performance was long after, that
is to say, in Christ, as Zacharias speaks. Luke 1. To perform the oath which
he swear to our Father Abraham, that would give us. God speaks as though it
should presently fall out; but seeing one thousand years in his sight, are as
one day, we must mark how his counsels are eternal. It was spoken in King
Achaz days by Esaias 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive a son. He nor his
seed saw the performance thereof: so was Isaac a figure of Christ, and the
Lamb kept it in memory. Daniel in his time prophesies of 70. seuens, or 490.
years before Christ, the King should be killed, to perform every vision and
prophecy.

2315. Jacob died in Egypt etc. Genesis 49.
HE is brought from Egypt to Canaan, to be buried in Hebron with Abraham and
Isaac, as a sign that he looked for the resurrection and enjoying of the
spiritual Canaan. This place Caleb afterward claims for an inheritance when
he comes into the land: for it was the first purchase, and a signification
of our pilgrimage in this life, having here no abiding place.

Now let us compare the iourneys of Abraham, Jacob, Jacobs sons, and Christ
together.
Abraham Jacob Jacobs sons Christ Was borne in Mesopotamia. He goes to
Canaan. He returns to Egypt. He dies in Canaan.
Was borne in Canaan. He goes to Mesopotamia. He returns to Canaan. He
goes into Egypt. He is brought to Canaan again.
Are borne in Mesopotamia. They dwell in Canaan. They multiply in Egypt. They
return to Canaan, and after that are carried into Babell an other Egypt.
Is borne in Canaan. He goes to Egypt. He returns to Canaan, and there he
dies, and brings a new Babell, or Egypt, the Romans on the Jews to destroy
them.


Ramban, an old Hebrew, makes another comparison in the events, thus: Jacob
himself was used well in Egypt, but his posterity was plagued by the Kings
which lived after him in Egypt.

In Babylon those that went into captivity were plagued, as Sidrack, Mishak,
Abednego: but their posterity found relief in Cyrus and Darius, conquering
the Babylonians.

Now it is necessary to speak of the place where Jacob died.

This place was Egypt, Chams country, long ago accursed. Where it is spoken
in the Prophets, that in Egypt men spoke with the tongue of Canaan, the meaning
of it is thus much: That when Christ shall come to preach, his teaching shall
be of such power, that it shall convert in all countries (as well Egypt as
Grecia, Barbaria, and all other the countries of the Gentiles which knew not
God) souls unto God, which being converted, shall speak the tongue of Canaan,
that is, their tongues shall praise God for the redemption by Christ, which is
the tongue of Canaan. This continues yet true: for there is no country nor
nation, where God has not had, or has those which unfeignedly believe the
Gospel. Yet if it be objected, that the tongue of Canaan was Hebrew, how then
shall a simple ploughman understand it? This objection is thus taken away. It
is not necessary for a simple ploughman or trades man to be a skillful
Hebrecian: for he may be saved without the knowledge of the tongue, seeing by
the Bible translated, he may learn the religion of Canaan, and that learning
will teach him the tongue of Canaan. If they reply further, that the Papists
say the translations be corrupted, and therefore it is necessary he should be
cunning in the original: For answer to this reply made from the Papists
argument, if any doubt of the truth of the translations, he may resort to
learned preachers, which can easily resolve him. And for the Papists, if the
controversy be between them and us, the original must determine it.

It is said, that Jacobs sons were of Cham. It is not meant his twelve
sons, for they were borne before he came into Egypt: but that place of
Scripture has special reference to the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasses, who are reckoned to be Jacobs children. For Joseph marring an
Egyptian by whom he had them, they by the mothers side are of Cham, and so
Jacobs children in this sense are of Cham.

Thus much for the place.
Now follows his will. Genesis 49.
Hear ye sons of Jacob, and hearken to Israel your father. Here he
repeateth his own name, Israel, that is, mighty with God. The accomplishment
of this strength was fulfilled when they came from Egypt.

As there is no common wealth but stands of those that be wanton, of men offer
reached with choler, of Judges, of husbandmen, of merchants, of men of trade,
of warriers to defend from foreign invasion: so are Jacobs twelve sons of
all degrees in life.

In placing them here thus, their dignity is regarded, and not their
prerogative of birth: for then Reuben should be first.

Judah. Has the prerogative, that his brethren shall praise him. Yet if we
look into his life, this could not be meant of him: for who looser then he,
who lay with his daughter Thamar? But herein is manifest, the gifts of God to
be of grace, and not of nature For if Judah had bin rare for godliness, then the
prerogative of nature might seem to have caused Christ to have come of him.
Judah his story of praise God, is repeated by Saint Paul. Romans 2. Where he
says, Whose praise is not of men, but of God: So every man that knows the
birth of Christ, and embraces the truth thereof with constancy, not turning
for the love of reward, his praise is of God; though the world hate him.

Joseph. He exceeds in virtue, and thereof has wonderful blessings: for among
the thirteen Judges, six are of his tribe, by which glory his posterity began
to despise the tribe of Judah. For at Roboams time, they say, 1. King. 12. What
have we to do with the house of Iessay? What have we to do with the house of
David? to your tents O Israel, to your tents. But the Lord plagued them with a
plague ever to be kept in memory, as the Prophet Jeremy says, Iere. 7.
Mark what I have done to Siloh: which was a city in the tribe of Ephraim. And
again, Psalm. 78. He for-sooke the tabernacle of Siloh, even the tent he had
pitched among them. He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and choose not the
tribe of Ephraim, but choose the tribe of Judah, even the hill of Sion which he
loved. Concerning the prosperity of Joseph's house. Nazianzenus notes, that he
himself was more afraid of the subtilties of Satan in his prosperity, then in
his adversity,

Nephtali. Of him this only is spoken: Genesis 49. He is a Hind let go, giving
goodly words: which was performed when Barac of Nephtali, and Debora of
Ephraim, sang for the overthrow of Sisera at the waters of Mageddon. Judge. 5.

Now whereas you have Abacuck to bring a mess of pottake to Daniel in the
Lions den; some Jew that made that, never meant so: but from that place of
Abacucke, The just shall live by his faith, Abac. 2. faineth a comparison, that
as pottage preserves this natural life from perishing, so the meditating by
faith on the promises of God in Christ, kept our souls from wavering by
distrust, and by that confidence Daniel was saved from the mouth of the Lions.

Benjamin. A Child very virtuous. Rachel calls him Ben-oni, Son of my
sorrow, but Israel calls him Benjamin, Son of my right hand. Moses in Deuteronomy.
33. in his blessing says, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by
him, and God shall dwell between his shoulders. And so he did: for the Temple
was afterward built in the tribe of Benjamin. His tribe has the first King,
though he be the meanest of the Tribes. Benjamin continues until the evening.
When the other Tribes fell away, he only with Judah at Roboams time; he only
with Judah in Cyrus time, joined for the building of the Temple. Hester of
Benjamin saved all Judah from the practice of Haman. Paul of Benjamin was the
one of the last builders of the spiritual Temple.

Dan. Moses in his blessing in numbering the Tribes, leaves out Simeon. And in
the Revelation, when the Tribes are sealed, Dan is left out. Thereupon the
Grecians think, that Antichrist shall come of the Tribe of Dan. That is not
so: but Moses being of Leui, in blessing the Tribes puts in Leui, and
speaks largely of his spiritual blessings. Joseph's Sons are not to be left
out, because they were adopted: therefore to keep the number of Twelve, he
must leave out some. Simeon was the fittest, seeing he was without repentance.
Leui must be reckoned, seeing his was a spiritual inheritance, and the Lord
promised to be his inheritance: therefore Dan must be omitted. And this may be
the reason; when the Children of Israel came into the Land of Canaan, the Tribe
of Dan causes the first Idolatry, and therefore that Tribe was justly plagued.
And in this Tribe, Idolatry continued until the remoouing of the Arc from
Siloh. But yet this we must understand, that though Dan is not named, yet in
respect his tribe are Jacobs Sons, the Tribe is comprehended in the general
blessing. And Moses concludes, that seeing the eternal God is the refuge;
Israel the Fountain of water, shall dwell in safety.

Isachar. Was content to live under tribute, like to an Ass couching down
between two burdens, rather than to seek glory by leading bands of men.

Reuben. He loses his prerogative, because he went up to his Fathers bed,
therefore he is light as water, he shall not excel. Reuben has one of
David's Captains of his Tribe: but it is presently added therewith, Nine and
Twenty better than he. Reuben shows some compassion to Joseph, and would not
have him killed, but cast him into some pit. Judah thought that might be too
long ere he would be dispatched, and therefore sells him.

Simeon, and Leui. Their wrath was fierce: yet because Leui afterward
repented, and showed tender affection to Joseph, and was zealous in destroying
Idolatrers, therefore he had a blessing in Moses will.

Simeon never showed any tender affection to Joseph, and therefore when his
brethren come into Egypt, and Joseph accuses them for Spies, he keeps Simeon
in prison till they come down again, as a kind of punishment for his former
malice. His sin against the Sichemites was exceeding great: and seeing he
never showed any sign of repentance, he was justly cut off from the hope of a
blessing. By this we may learn to reject the authority of the book of
Judith: First, because she said to be of the Tribe of Simeon. If we mark this
well, we shall see how this book cannot be scripture. For we must note, that
it is no small glory to have the spirit of God pen a book of ones actions.
If there be but a sentence spoken in the commendation of any in the scripture,
it is a great weight of glory. Now if we look to Jacobs will, and see that
he has a curse, and not a blessing, and in the course of Scripture afterward
no mention of any repentance that Simeon and his Tribe showed, nor any zeal of
religion expressed; how can this stand with Jacobs prophecy? nay, it clean
crosses it, and makes it frustrate. For seeing Jacob as a Prophet, tells
all his Sons what should befall them in the last days, to every one and his
tribe; so long as the Kingdom of the Jews, and their policy stood; and in
his will makes no mention of the book of Judith: We must by admitting this
book, accuse the spirit of God of ignorance. Besides, it is a Story: and yet
the time thereof does not fall out within the compass of any time, neither
before the captivity, neither after, and therefore to be despised. And for my
opinion I make as much account of Ouids Metamorphosis, as of Judith: for Plato
says, that in fables there is a truth revealed secretly. Thus we are to think
likewise of the book of Tobie.

Leui, he repented when Amram of the tribe of Leui saved Moses.

Zabulon. Was a Merchant, and delighted in Ships. In Greek Canaan is called
Phenicia, and the men of Canaan Phenices. Aristotle a Thousand years after
Moses, makes mention of a River Tartesus; he meant the Sea Tharsis* and the
Phenices brought gold, and had such plenty, that their anchors were thereof. No
doubt he had heard of Salomons time, wherein gold and silver was no more
esteemed than stone. This traveling of Jacobs Sons into far Countries,
must needs make the heathen have a taste of Religion. And Moses, he willed the
heathen to resort to the Mountain, where the Temple was built.

Aser, Was a Farmer, to provide pleasures for a King. You have in the old
Testament little spoken of him: but because his tribe should not think
themselves excluded the favor of God, you have in the new Testament Anna,
that is, Grace, (a very rare woman for godliness) the daughter of Phanuel
(that is, See God,) of the happy Tribe of Aser, for Aser signifies Happy.

Gad, He shall lead an Host of men. This was performed when Reuben, Gad, and
half Manasses gave a great overthrow to the Hagarims, about the time that
Saul was anointed King.

Thus we may see, that whatsouer is requisite in policy for the maintenance
of a common weal, you shall find expressed in the lives and behauiours of the
Sons of Israel.

2369. Joseph died, Genesis 50. being One hundred and ten years old.
By Faith, Joseph when he died he made mention of the departing of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, and gave commandment of his bones. Heb. 11.

Now because many excellent things are to be said of Joseph before his death
when he was in Egypt, and in the Sinay sight no years laid down; I will here
handle them together.

God prospered him in Egypt in all his actions. And even as God blessed Laban
for Jacobs sake, so he blessed Joseph's Master for Joseph's sake.

Joseph was a goodly person, and a well favored: which commendation in the same
words is bestowed upon David, 1. King. 16. the same of Daniel, and the same of
Christ. Joseph would not be defiled with the fornication of Egypt. Daniel
would not be defiled with the unclean diet of Babell. Joseph expounds
Pharaohs dream. Daniel expounds Nebuchadnetzars dream. Joseph was made
Ruler over Egypt. Daniel was made Ruler over Babell. Joseph being in prison,
found favor with the Master of the prison. Daniel found favor with the Kings
Chamberlain.

Joseph's name was changed by Pharaoh. Daniels name was changed by
Nebuchadnetzer.

Joseph was falsely accused. Christ was falsely accused.

Joseph was Thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh.

Jesus is baptized beginning to be Thirty years old.

Joseph was in prison between two thieves: the one of them was saved, the
other condemned. Christ was crucified between Two thieves: the one of them was
saved, the other condemned. Yet notwithstanding all these blessings of God upon
Joseph (to show that even the best have their infirmities) his virtues were
darkened very much in that he marries an Egyptian woman. Genesis 41. which was
altogether unlawful. For Esau before doing the like, is blamed, and Rebecca
having an especial care over Jacob, least he should commit the like
wickedness, sends him to Laban to choose a wife of his own kindred. Abraham
had the like care for Isaac: and Moses afterwars forbids it by a law, thereby
confirming the unlawfulness thereof. Seven hundred years after, is this sin
punished in Israel: for Jeroboam receives the Religion of Egypt, and makes
two Calves, whereby all Israel became Idolatrers.

Here begins Jobs Story.
Satan compasses all the earth, etc.
BEfore we come to examine Jobs cause^ there may be by the way, a question
discussed concerning succession: that is to say, Whether succession of Bishops,
be a necessary mark of the Church? And we shall, if we mark the Stories of
the Scripture, find that is none: for in Jobs time, where there was a visible
Sacrificer, to continue the Religion of God in outward policy? Satan having
ouerranne the whole earth, tells God, that he could find none just, or that
feared God. So that thereby we may gather, that there were very few, whom
the world by eyesight acknowledged godly.

And to make this more plain; we are to observe, that the question is not,
Whether the godly in their own hearts do know who serve God: but, Whether
there be continually such an appearance thereof, that it may appear to
eyesight. Since Christ we have not the like time to this, wherein Satan can
brag, he ouer-runneth the whole earth. For in Jobs time Jacob is dead: the
Religion which Jobs friends hold, is condemned by God. Elihu is very young,
and Job himself condemned of his friends: therefore we may very well
conclude, That it is no sound Divinity to affirm, that it is no true Church,
except the policy thereof be so visible, as it may be known by eyesight.

In the Reuleation, four Angels stand on the four Corners of the earth,
holding the four Winds of the Earth, that they should not blow neither on
the earth, neither on the Sea, neither on any green Tree. By this likewise we
may gather, that the godly were very few, and scarce known: For the office
of these four Angels was, to stay the graces of Gods Spirit from blowing
upon, and refreshing the souls of those which dwelt on the earth.

We shall see this cleerer, if we observe the particular fallings through the
Scriptures.

In Enosh his time, Religion decayed in the house of God: for the which, the
flood came and drowned the world, After the flood, for their wickedness which
they manifested in building the Tower of Babell, they have their tongues
confounded, and all their families scattered.

In Jobs time, none of the children of Israel forsook the Idols of Egypt.

In the time of the Judges, you shall find a great many of fallings away, and
therefore God gave them into the hands of diverse and sundry oppressors.

In Roboams time, the ten Tribes fell away.

In Antiochus time, Religion was so corrupted, that the Levites would be Kings,
and thereby became Saduces, maintaining an opinion, That after this life the
body was no more, and concerning the soul, it was no more to be esteemed,
than the soul of a beast, or any other creature.

In Christ's time, all the Jews were back-sliders, except some few, perhaps
about seven Thousand which might hold religion sincerely, answerable to Elias
time.

After Christ, in Vrbanus time, all the Christians fell away, and then came up
the power and authority of Antichrist, for whom he made laws. So that if we
consider these things well, we shall find, that the godly have always been so
few, and the outward policy of true Religion so darkened, that it could
hardly be discerned. This question being thus discussed, we are to consider
the time when Job was afflicted. And if we examine things duly, we shall find
this time to be before Moses. There be slothful fellows that say, the time
cannot be proved when Jobs Story fell out, As though, if any one should
write Epistles or Orations, a good Scholar could not easily from the matter
find out the time wherein he should live. In the Three and Twenty Orations
made by Job and his friends, there is mention made of the Creation, of the
Flood, of Babell, and the Seventy Families of Lot, of Sodom and his
destruction, but nothing of the coming from Egypt: which being so famous a
deliverance, they would not have omitted. For the Prophets continually rehearse
it, and do as it were make large Commentaries thereon.

Further, it must be at such a time wherein Satan had the conquest over the
whole world: for so Satan says, he had run over the whole world, and found
none that feared God, and departed from evil: which affirmation cannot be
true, but only when Israel was in Egypt: for then all the world but they,
worshipped strange Gods, and of them Ezechiel says, None of the Children of
Israel forsook their Idols of Egypt. Therefore this must needs be a
maruailous Victory which Satan had gotten. Besides, Job himself says, O that
God would answer, and try me. This had been a foolish speech, if it had
been after Moses: for then his integrity should have been determined by
Moses laws. When the tongues are divided, you have Abraham called, and made a
rare man. So when in Egypt all Religion was corrupted, you have Moses borne,
thereby to show, that when Satan thinks he bears most sway, the Lord in
mercy will raise up one to overthrow his Kingdom.

The temptations of Job must needs be about the birth of Moses, when the law
was made of killing the young Children, Satan possessing the hearts of the
wicked, that all their care and study was bent to the overthrow of the
Church, and when Aaron was borne but three years before, there was peace: for
we do not read that they were feign to hide him.

Thus much for the time.

THe place where he dwelt, was Eastward. The Sabeans on the one side, the
Caldeans on the other, and Canaan on the other, and he as it were in the
midst. This Country is called Huts. God has in his providence dealt so
surely, that the very heathen (if they be marked) will make plain the event
of Gods promises. Nimrod he goes about to overthrow Sems blessing, and builds
him a Tower, but God gives it an overthrow. Afterward Nachors Twelve Sons
ouerrunne the land of Chush. Ismaels Twelve Sons they do the like. Esau has
eleven Dukes, and Eight Kings, and eleven Dukes again, and that before there
was any King in Israel, as Moses speaks, and they conquer Chush, and his
Land. In Egypt, Chush his posterity imagine by the multitude and strength of
their Chariots and Horsemen, to revenge themselves of the Children of Israel:
but the Lord ouer-whelmed them in the red Sea. When the Children of Israel are
in the wilderness, they of Canaan and their borders deal despightfully with
them, and will grant them no passage, thinking thereby to starve them in the
wilderness: But the Lord by Jesus their Captain destroys them all, even to
Canaan the youngest, according to the curse of Noah, And let Canaan be his
servant. When the Jews are carried away captive to Babylon, there Chush his
posterity have a great stroke, and seem to overthrow Sems blessing. But God
raised up Cyrus of Sem, and Darius of Iaphet, to overthrow the Babylonians, and
thereby comfort the Jews, and provides for the building of the Temple.

Thus we see how God is still true in his promises, Cursed be Canaan a servant
of servants shall he be. Job, he goes to Sems house for his possessions,
thereby showing his religion, which would not enjoy earthly possessions
amongst those whom God had cursed. And we may see in this, the law of nature
observed, that every one is to resort to his eldest brothers house.

Thus much concerning the place.

The next circumstance is, of what kindred he is.
HE is of Abraham by Keturah, for it is said, that he was the richest of all
the men of the East. This cannot be meant generally: for no doubt the kings of
the east exceeded him in riches. But if we take it of those of Abraham's house
by Keturah, to whom Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away, it is true.
Besides, he calls his friends which come to comfort him, his brethren: for
he says, My Brethren are like Rivers of water. This were improperly spoken,
if he were not of Abraham; he cannot be of Esau: for how could that then be
true, that Esau I have hated, being likewise cursed for despising the promise,
if so rare a man for godliness and sincerity, and that before Moses, should
be of Esaus kindred? Jeremy speaks in his Lamentations in this wise. Lament.
4. Rejoice thou Edom in the Land of Huts. From hence some conclude, that seeing
Huts is in the Land of Edom, and Job of Huts; therefore he is of Esaus kindred,
and not of Abraham by Keturah. This objection, though it may seem at the first
sight of force; yet it is easily answered by marking the times: for many ages
had passed betwixt Jobs age, and Ieremies prophecy. Esaus posterity might at
this time have brought Huts under his subjection: but in Jobs time we do not
read he had done so. And the scripture makes plain, that Abraham's Sons by
Keturah, went and dwelt Eastward. And considering Jobs Religion, which no
doubt was not embraced in Esaus house, we must needs think, notwithstanding
this objection, that Job was of Abraham's kindred.

Thus much for the circumstance of his kindred.
ELihu, whom God approoueth, is of Aram by Milcah, who has Bethuel, God is
risen, the Father of Rebecca, and the Father of Aram, of whom Elihu. These two
names contain in them great Religion; for the rest of Nachors Sons, they
signify nothing. Here we see Saint Paul's rule true: If the unbelieving man
will dwell with the believing woman, let them not depart: for the unbelieving
man is sanctified by the believing woman. And I rather think that Milcah named
these two, than Nachor: thereby to show her faith in God, having obtained that
prerogative at her husbands hand, for Nachor must needs learn Idolatry from
Terah his Father.

We may likewise observe from Jobs kindred, what a care Abraham had, yea, even
in his old age, to teach his posterity the law of God, seeing he instructed
Keturah and her Sons. And this care God affirms, when he says, Genesis 18.
That he cannot keep secret from Abraham his Counsels, for he will teach it
his posterity. Therefore we shall find that this book of Job is a Commentary
on this sentence.

Now we come to the question and the sum of the Book.
THe question is not concerning Adams fall, or the goodness and pureness of
works: they doubt not of the Resurrection, nor of the Trinity, nor of any
other points of faith: but it is only a Question of Practice. (that is to say)
Whether a man which abounds in wealth, and being brought to poverty, can be
in favor of God? and whether God do so govern the world, that those whom he
loves, he will suffer to see affliction. Job is declared to be merueilous
great, his blessings multiplied in his sons, in his daughters, in Sheep,
Oxen, Asses, and Cammels. He himself could not be old: perhaps at this time
sixty years: for they say they had then living elder then his father, and
after his temptation he lived 140. years, and we must take heed we make him
not to outliue Isaac. Now all his wealth is taken from him: himself in great
misery remembers Jacobs story going with his staff and his scrip over
Jordan, and by the remembrance thereof comfort himself, and confesses,
Chap. 1. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed therefore be his
name. Saint Paul in the 1. Tim. cap. 6. Tells him, that godliness is great
riches, if a man be content with that he has: for we brought nothing into the
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And the children of Israel
every year when they came to offer, after the Priests had taken the basket of
first fruits, and set it before the Altar of the Lord, were wont to say, Deu.
26. A Syrian was my father, to wit, Jacob, who went over Jordan with his
staff, and his bag, and after he returned into Canaan, and being ready to
perish, went down into Egypt, and soiourned there with a small company, and
grew there unto a nation great, mighty, and full of people.

This confession was not miraculous in Job. For the heathen could say thus much
as they confess in their Epigrams; that naked they came out of the earth, and
naked they shall go thither. Satan touched his body, and left him him
nothing free but the flesh of his teeth, and his tongue, that with his tongue
he might by desperation blaspheme God. Suidas thinks his torments endured
seven years, by matters mentioned in his orations which likelihood could not
fall out sooner, as that every one mocked him and fleed from him* Then it was a
great while after that his kins-men heard of his temptation, yet they could
come, being Dukes and great men, and dwelling far. When they come, they tarry
seven days without speaking any word: so great was his grief upon him, that
all this while it drove them into an amazedness. Then they begun to dispute
with him.

Their disputations are true, and void of oaths: they make mention of the
Sabbath, the inueigh against adultery, and other sins of the second table:
they confute justification by works; they pray not to Saints departed, for
Jobs recovery. By their orations we may easily learn to confute these fond
opinions which Popery holds. His friends may seem to stacker concerning his
salvation, by reason of his rauing and speaking so doubtfully of the truth: for
the which God condemns him after, and asks, Job 38. Who is he that
obscureth knowledge with many words?

Eliphas therefore begins thus: Chap. 4. Will thou be grieved if one assay
to commune with thee? but who can hold himself from speaking? Thou thy self
have taught many, and have strengthened the weary hands: Thou have had great
hope, patience, and confidence. And yet I can tell thee, thy case is very ill,
and if thou do not repent, thou will not be saved. For who ever perished
being an innocent? Indeed the roaring of the Lion and the voice of the
Lioness, and the teeth of the Lions whelps, are broken. You may see this
evident by our victories against Chams house, though Nimrod seemed to rule like
a Lion. The Kori we have likewise destroyed. But concerning Sems house, Nachor,
Ismael, Keturah, do not they flourish? What part of them is consumed? So you see
the Lion perish for lack of prey, and the Lions whelps scattered: but where
was the upright ever destroyed? And if you think this new doctrine, I pray you
enquire of the former ages, and prepare thy self to search after their
fathers, for we are but as yesterday, and are ignorant. You shall see that the
floode ouer-tooke the ungodly. And so we are to think of them which lived
wickedlie afterward. But yet God will not cast away an upright man, neitheir
will he take the wicked by the hand. And how can you be in the favor of God?
the Saints do not pitch their tents about you: for then the Sabeans and
Caldeans had not spoiled your goods. The Angels do not wait on you: for then
the wind had not overthrown your house. Here is none that cares for you:
therefore you cannot be upright. But if you will seek God, this is the way:
confess your sins and repent: For a thing was brought unto me secretly, and
in the thoughts of the visions of the night fear came upon me, and there
stood one and I knew not his face, but I heard a voice which said, Shall man
be more just than God? or shall a man be more pure than his Creator? He
found no steadfastness in his Angels: how much more in them which dwell in
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which shall be destroyed
before the mother? And concerning affliction, it is not out of the dust,
neither does it spring out of the earth. But man is borne unto travel, as the
sparks fly upward. To conclude: Blessed is the man whom God corrects,
therefore refuse not thou the chastisement of the Almighty: for he makes the
wound, and binds it up: and if thou will embrace this, this good will come of
it. Thou shall laugh at destruction; the stones of the field shall be in league
with thee; and the beasts of the field, and peace shall be in thy Tabernacle:
and thy seed shall be great, and thy posterity as the grass of the earth: and
thou shall go to thy grave in a good full age, as a Kick of corn comes
into the barn in due season.

Job, He answers, Chap. 6. Oh that my grief were well weighed, and my
miseries laid together! they would be heavier than the sand of the sea:
therefore my words are swallowed up. And for my friends, this I say. He that is
in misery, ought to be comforted of his neighbor: But you, my brethren, have
deceived me as the rivers in the south, which in the winter are blackish with
ice, and when it is hot, dried up. They that go to Tema and Sheba waits for
them, but they were confounded, so ye are like to them. You have seen my
fearful plague and are afraid. Thus have men forgotten the fear of the
Almighty. Ye pretend counsel and comfort, but this is to have me forget God.
For if I be wicked, why labor I thus in vain, yet if I wash my self with
snow water, and purge my hands most clean, mine own clothes shall make me
filthy. I know I have sinned, and have done wickedlie: but yet my faith
assures me, that God cannot be mine enemy, as you affirm: why then should he
afflict me? and for my strength, is it of stones? or my flesh of brass? Now
whereas you say, that God punishes the wicked, and tyrants come to
destruction; who knows not this? For I know as much as you know, neither am I
inferior to you; yet this is not always true that you say: for we see the
wicked established, their houses are peaceable, and the rod of God is not upon
them. They send forth their children like sheep, and their sons dance, they
take the Tabret and Harp, and sodenlie they go down to the grave: for they
are as stubble before the wind, and destruction comes upon them. But yet
this you must also know, that he destroys the perfect and the wicked. Here
perfect is not meant a life void of sin in the sight of God, but for outward
actions void of hypocrisy. Concerning the wisdom of God, that it is
unsearchable, I confess that likewise, as well as you. For the silver has his
vain, and the gold his place, iron is taken out of the dust, and brass out of
the stone: he sets a bond for darkness, and the shadow of death. Out of
the same earth comes Bread, and under it is brimstone found, the stones
thereof Saphir, and the dust gold. There is a path that the foul knows not,
neither the crows eyes has seen, the Lions have not walked in it. But yet
where is wisdom? and where is the place of understanding? For which gold
shall not be given of Ophir, nor the Onix, nor Zaphir. God understands the
way thereof: for he weighs the winds and the water by measure. When he made a
decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunders, then did he
see it, and unto man he said, The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. Therefore we are not to give rules to God seeing
all have like event together. Concerning my life, I was an eye to the blind;
feet to the lame; a father unto the poor; and when I knew not the cause, I
sought it out diligently. I did never eat my morsels alone, the fatherless
have ever eaten with me. I have not seen any perish for want of clothing; the
loins of him have blessed me, because he was warmed with the fleece of my
sheep. I have ever been so careful, that I would not offend the least child:
my countenance has been so sober, that I have made a covenant with mine eyes,
why then should I behold a maid? But yet, Oh that I were as in times past, as
in the days of my youth, when my children were round about me, when unto me
men gave care, and waited and held their tongue at my counsel, when my words
dropped upon them as the latter rain. If I laughed on them, they believed it
not: my countenance has ever been so grave, for my judgment it was not
changeable as the moon, neither did I flatter my self in secret. For my
religion, I ever held this sure, that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand the last man upon the earth. But I pray you mark how the case is
altered; They that are younger than I, mock me, whose fathers I have refused to
set with the dogs of my flock, yet now I am their song, and their talk: my
own servants fly from me, and my wife uses reproach. To conclude, this is the
sum: Oh that man might talk with God, and make answer to his Creator. Philo
a Jew says, that Dina Jacobs daughter was Jobs wife: he never meant so, but it
is their manner in teaching their children, that where there be women mentioned
unmarried, they say they were married to such whose wives the Scripture
mentions not, that so their children might the better remember them. Zophar
and Bildads Orations were the same with Eliphaz, and they condemned Job in the
same manner. And here we must observe in the discourse of civil actions laid
down by Job, that either he lived so, or that men should live so. And Moses
laws afterward for policy are but an expressing of these.

Jobs speech is ended.

Now follow two Repliers, Elihu, and God.
ELihus beginning is modest, zealous and true. For, says he, I am young, and ye
are ancient, therefore I was afraid to show my opinion. For I said, The days
shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom: and yet aged
do not always understand judgment: yet I must confess there is a spirit in
man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. You have
condemned Job, because God has cast him down. I will not justify him; Yet I
will not reprove him after your manner. I will therefore thus reprove him.

You said Job in the 13. chapter, Oh that a man might dispute with God. Behold,
I am unto thee in Gods stead, and am formed of clay: and behold, my terror
shall not fear thee. You have said, I am clean without sin: he has found
occasions against me, and has put my feet in the stocks. But I will tell you,
O Job, strive not against him: for he is greater than man: he speaks once or
twice; as, THE SEED OF THE WOMAN, SHALL BRVSE THE HEAD OF THE SERPENT: and
blessed be the God of Sem: and opens their ears even by corrections. If then
there be a messenger, or an interpreter one of a thousand, to show man that his
righteousness consists only in the favor of God, that he may say, I have
sinned, I have perverted righteousness, I have sucked up folly like water, and
where I know not, teach thou me, O Lord; then shall he have a reconciliation,
and then shall his righteousness be restored unto him.

Then God replieth out of the whirlewind, and asks, Where is he that
obscureth knowledge with many words? For Job should have showed the purpose of
God in destroying the upright and wicked together, and not spoken doubtfully of
it. And God shows him from the story of the Creation, and the excellency of
the Creatures, his unspeakable wisdom.

Then Job answers, I am vild, I will lay my hand upon my mouth; I know thou
can do all things: and I have spoken things I understand not: therefore I
abhor my self, and will repent in dust and ashes.

Then the Lord accepts Jobs faith and repentance. And as high Sacrificer, he
sacrifices for his three friends. And God blesses him more now, than at the
first. Where it is translated that Jobs wife should say, Curse God and die, it
cannot be so: But the meaning is, Bless God and die, flowting him as if she
should say, See to what your pureness and preciseness is come to, even to
bless God and die. Had it not been better for you to have lived, and enjoyed
prosperity, as others? This patience of Jobs, is repeated in the Epistle of
Saint James, chap. 5. In the Epistle to the Romans, Saint Paul proves, that
the Gentiles were cut off, that the Jew might come in; and now the Jews, that
the Gentiles, and concludes out of Job, who gave to God first, that he might
be recompensed? And Aristaeus a heathen writer, making a description of the
story of Job, says, he was tempted as well by the devil, as by his
neighbors.

Thus much for Jobs Story.
2433. Moses borne.
He is the seventh from Abraham, a new Henoch, another resembler of the
Sabbath.

Henoch walked with God, so did Moses.

Henoch was a preacher of righteousness, so was Moses.

Henoch was a Prophet, so was Moses.

At his birth he was hid in an Arc, and thereby saved from the waters. The
Hebrew word is the same, with it whereby Noah's Arc is signified.

Concerning his kindred: he was an Hebrew, of the Tribe of Leui. Philo-Iudeus
calls him a Chaldean, having relation to Abraham who was called out of Vr of
the Chaldeans to Canaan. Diodorus Siculus calls him an Egyptian: for he
regarded the soil wherein he was borne, and not his family.

His name Moses signifies, Draw out, as one drawn out of a poole of water.
In the eighteen Psalm, this word Moses is used of Christ, in these words, My
soul is drawn out of many waters. In the Hebrew there is a lively reference
one to another, which cannot be expressed in the English. The Grecians call
him Mousche, which is to take out of the waters, penning both to one purpose,
the notation common to both names. If the question be demanded, Whether Moses
or Mousches be his name in right: it is certain in the text, it is Moses: but
an expounder is free to use whether he will for explanation.

Pharaoh makes a bloody law to kill all the young children. Whereupon Moses is
cast into the flags: whom Pharaohs daughter commands to be kept. Exodus 2.
Wherein we may see the loving kindness of Leui recompensed with a rare
blessing from God, seeing Moses is of his Tribe. Amram saved him, not fearing
the Kings displeasure, this is confirmed in the Epistle to the Hebrews. By
faith Moses when he was borne, was hid of his Parents three months, because
they saw he was a proper child; neither feared they the Kings commandment.
Exodus 1. Heb. 11.3. This special preservation may show that it is of grace,
and not of nature, that we have a deliverer from Egypt.

Moses mother is Iochebed, Leuies daughter, Aunt to Moses father, sister to his
Grandfather. At his birth she is 100. years old: so we see a new comparison
with the birth of Isaac, which was a child likewise of promise. This being
strange and not usual, will no doubt stir up the people to enquire and
search what the end of him should be, whose birth is so famous.

Iochebal signifies the glory of God. Amram, High.
THe Providence of God so disposes the tongues of the Parents, that the names
of the children express the glory of God to be performed, afterward by
their actions.

The Hebrews commend Jacobs sons for not giving names after the manner of
the Egyptians, while they were in Egypt. The reason of this may be rendered,
Because that in Egypt they were ill used, and therefore hated the Egyptians. In
Babylon they were well used under the Persians, and therefore they have many
Persian names, and there did learn so the tongue of Babel, that they began to
forget their own. The use of this is very great against the Turk, for to
prove from whence he first came, and thereby to persuade him to embrace the
religion of his first Parents.

The hatred toward Chams house, appears in Shesan that married one of Judah.
The story whereof has been mentioned before in the story of Ismael the
Egyptian.

The Jews call themselves Hebrews, to keep the story of Heber in
remembrance.

Concerning Moses education, God so provides, that he is brought up for the
son of Pharaohs daughter. He is instructed in all the learning of the
Egyptians, which was the Mathematics, and other humane arts. The ouerflowing
of Nilus compelled them to be skillful in Astronomy. His Arithmeticke and
Geometry is apparent in the Tabernacle, and things therein appointed: For
though God gave him instructions, yet it could not be that he should perform
them without taking great delight in the proportions themselves, which could
not be without great skill in the art. In the candlestick the Jews reckon
forty two pieces, six seuens, so you have in this proportion the remembrance
of the Creation, and of the Sabbath, and of those holy men who were special
Seuens. Basile in his Treatise upon the Creation affirms, that there was
one, to wit, Moses the seventh from Abraham, upon whom after a sort the Jews
should depend. God gives likewise to the heathen the knowledge of these
things, that thereby looking to the Creation, they may admire his eternal
wisdom, and worship him as Creator. And Moses himself so lays them down,
that a heathen by his skill in these arts may understand the reason of them.
The sum of all is, God saves the world by Christ, and uses all humane
knowledge; as a servant to teach the Redemption by Christ. So Saint Paul
speaks in the acts, that all his doctrine was nothing but Moses, and the
Prophets; and theirs nothing but Christ. In that sense likewise, the Greek
tongue pertains to Christ.

Moses knew that he should be a deliverer, and therefore seeing an Egyptian
misvsing an Israelite, he kills him. Afterward he sees two Hebrews
striving together, and he comes to them, and tells them, they are
brethren, why then should they be at variance? They vpbraide him with the
slaughter of the Egyptian. He thought, they would have known him their
deliverer. But hearing that this was known, he flees into the land of
Madian. Of this Saint Paul speaks in the Epistle to Hebrews cap. 11. By
faith Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose
rather to suffer affliction with his brethren, than to enjoy the pleasures of
sin, which last but for a season. Thus Moses at forty years old shows
himself a true Christian. He marries Zephora: Marie, she despises her,
because she was of Chush: but indeed she was of Abraham by Keturah: for Madian
one of her sons ouerrunneth Chush, and so inioyeth the blessing by being of
Abraham, that Cham should be a servant of servants to Sems posterity.
Therefore Zephora not inferior to Marie, Mary's sin for despising her was
very great, yea though it were of ignorance. But if she knew her generation,
and then through malice contemned her, her sin was so much the greater. But
whether she used her ill of malice, or ignorance, we cannot tell: this we
may be sure of, her sin was heinous in the sight of God, therefore she was a
leaper.

Moses ordained of God to feed Israel, was now a shepherd, and kept the sheep
of his father in law Iethro Duke of Madian, where Christ appeared to him in a
flame of fire in a bush of thorns, who afterward in the days of his flesh
having fulfilled Moses, and conquered Satan, is crowned whith a crown of
thorns, even with the same kind of plant wherein he appeared, when he
called Moses. Cle. Alexandrius. Philo a Jew is very usual in the comparison
between a shepherd and a King. And Homer makes King Agammenon the, shepherd
of the people. For as sheep will follow headlong through the gappe which the
first brake, though it be even to their perishing: so is the rage of the
people strengthened by error and blindness of their nature Thus you see the
plainness and sweetness for pleasure of these forty years.

Moses after this, is sent by God to Pharaoh with an Embassage, which he
confirms by diverse miracles, whereof Pharaohs Enchaunters did some the like.
This is applied of Saint Paul against the Antichristian Heretics: as Iannes
and Iambres resisted Moses; so they resisted the truth, but their madness
shall be made manifest to all men, as theirs was. 2. Tim. 3.

Pharaoh is plagued with Ten several Plagues.
The First plague. The waters are turned into blood for Seven days, that they
might be punished for the death of the children, which Pharaoh caused to be
drowned in the River: that they might know, that wherein one sins, therein
he shall be punished. The Second plague. Frogs are over all the Land of
Egypt. The Antichrists have spirits like Frogs. The Third plague. The dust
brings Lice. This the Magitians of Pharaoh could not do; here their madness
is made known. They cry, that Moses wrought by the finger of God. That Christ
uses against the Egyptia call pharisees. Mat. 12. If I by the finger of God
cast out Devils, etc. The Fourth plague. Sundry Swarms of diverse Vermin
plague the Egiptians. So Ap. 9. the Antichristian Idolatrers are likened to
Scorpions, and are plagued with stinges of Scorpions. The Fifth plague. The
Egiptians Beasts die of the Plague. So Ap. 16. the Roman beast both causes
plague, and is plagued. The Sixth Plague. Byles are upon the Egyptians, men, and
beasts. So Ap. 16. sore and grievous byles are upon those that bear the name
of the beast, and worship his Image. The Seventh Plague. Hayle and fire falls
upon man and beast, and on the grass in the field. So Ap. 18. In the rising of
the Antichrist, is hail and fire mixed with blood, and in Ap. 16. great hail
falls upon man, so that men blaspheme God for the stroke of the hail. The
Eight Plague. Locusts are over all Egypt. So Ap. 9. out of the smoke of
Papistrie went forth Locusts over all the earth. The Ninth plague. The
Egiptians were Three days in darkness. So Ap. 16. the Kingdom of the Beast
is made dark, and they bite their tongues for sorrow, and blaspheme the God of
heaven, but do not repent them of their works. The Tenth plague. The
Fourteenth day of Nisan in every house of the Egiptians some one is slain. So
Ap. 19. a greater slaughter, and more general, so that all the fowls of the
air are called to take the Carcasses.
By Faith they ordained the Passover and the effusion of blood, least he that
destroyed the first borne, should touch them. Heb. 11.

Christ our Passover is offered for us, therefore let us keep the Feast. 1.
Cor. 5.

Now follovveth the deliverance out of Egypt.
Moses brings Israel out of Egypt. 2513.
Exodus 12.
Four hundred and thirty years after the promise given to Abraham, as Exodus
12. 430.
when the four hundred and thirty years were expired, even the selfsame
day departed all the host of the Lord out of the Land of Egypt. 400.
This four hundred has relation to the time that Ismael and Hagar were
expelled. Abraham's house for Ismaels flowting of Isaac. Here is the
performance of Gods promise to Abraham, Genesis 15. Thy seed shall be in a
strange Land four hundred years, but the people whom they shall be in
bondage to, will I judge, says God. Which was made plain in the ten plagues
of Egypt, and in the ouerwhelming of Pharaoh, and his Chariots in the red sea,
as Exodus 14. and Psalm. 78. Maruailous things did the lord in the sight of our
Fathers in the land of Ham, even in the field of Zoan, he divided the Sea, and
let them go through, he made the waters to stand on an heap, and led forth his
people like sheep, and carried them in the wilderness like a flock. And Psalm.
114. When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among the
strange people, Judah was his Sanctuary, and Israel his Dominion. The Sea saw
that, and fled. Jordan was driven back: this was performed at the beginning
of the Law. The Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills like young
sheep, etc. And Psalm. 105. Egypt was glad at their departure, for they were
afraid of them. And Psa. 106. He rebuked the Red Sea, and it was dried up: he
led his people through the deep, as through a wilderness. As for those that
troubled them, the waters ouer-whelmed them, and there was not one of them
left. Then the children of Israel believed his words, and sange praise unto
him. But within a while they forgot his works, and would not abide his
counsel: but lust came upon them in the wilderness, and they tempted God in
the desert. And Psa. 78. They forgot what he had wrought in Egypt, and his
wonders in the field of Zoan: How he led them in the day with a cloud, and all
the night through with a pillar of fire. He claue the hard Rocks in the
wilderness, and gave them drink thereof: he brought waters out of the Stony
Rock, so that it gushed out like the Rivers. But they provoked the most
highest in the wilderness, and tempted God in their hearts, saying, Shall God
prepare a table in the wilderness? He smote the stony Rock indeed, and the
streams flowed withal: but can he give bread also, or provide flesh for his
people? wherewith the Lord was wroth, so he rained down Manna from heaven. So
man did eat Angels food, for he sent them meat enough. At their desire, he
brought quails, and he filled them with the bread of heaven, he rayned flesh
upon them as thick as dust, and feathered fowls as the sands of the sea, he
let it fall among their tents, even round about their habitation: so they did
eat and were filled, for he gave them their own desire, they were not
disappointed of their lust: but while the meat was in their mouths, the heavy
wrath of God came upon them, and slew the wealthiest of them, and smote down
the chosen men that were in Israel. But for all this, they sinned yet more.
Again, psalm. 106. They angered Moses in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the
Lord. So the earth swallowed up Dathan, and covered the congregation of Abiram,
and the fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the ungodly.
They made a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the moulten Image. Thus they turned
the glory of God into the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay. So he said,
he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stand before him in the
gappe, to turn away his wrathful indignation; yea, they thought scorn of
that pleasant Land, and gave no credence to his words, but murmured in their
Tents, they joined themselves with Baal Peor, and eat the offerings of the
dead. Thus still they provoked God unto anger with their inventions, and the
plague was great among them. But Phinees stood up and prayed, and the plague
ceased, and that was counted to him for righteousness throughout all
posterities for ever. They angered him also at the waters of strife, Exodus 17.
Numb. 20.
so that he punished Moses for their sakes, because they provoked his spirit,
so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.

Nevertheless, he thought upon his covenant, and pitied them according to the
multitude of his mercies, as appears, 2. Esdr. 9, Thou came down upon
Sinay, and spakest to them from heaven, and gave them right judgments, true
Laws, good Commandments and Statutes, and declaredst unto them thy holy
Sabbath, and commaundedst them Precepts, Ordinances, and Laws by the hand of
Moses thy servant, and gave them bread from heaven when they were hungry, and
broughtest forth water out of the Rock for them when they were thirsty, and
promisedst them, that they should go in and take and possess the Land: but
they were proud, and became obstinate and heady: but God forgave them, and was
gracious and merciful, patient, and of great goodness, and forsook them not,
although they made a moulten Calfe, and said, These are our Gods that brought
us out of the Land of Egypt, and did speak blasphemously, yet he forsook
them not in the wilderness according to his great mercy. Forty years long
made he provision for them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing,
their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.

In this Forty years of their being in the wilderness, many things are to be
understood. God chose these Forty, that all the world might know of the
Redemption by Christ. It stands of Four Tens.

This time is made more famous by the Story, wherein a special thing is to be
observed: that in all these Forty years you have but three years story and a
half. And thus it is cast: One year is spent in the Tabernacle, half a year
after, the Spies are sent to view the Land. Upon their Story God swears, that
they shall not enter into his rest. From thence you have no Story, till the
two last years of the conquest of Ob, and of Mary's death. This, one would not
think of, if the bare Story did not compel him. For comparison with this
three years and a half, I will speak more hereafter.

You have in the wilderness the Lamb, which represented Christ; and Manna,
which Christ expounds in Ioh. 6. I am the true bread that came from heaven.
Your Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead, he that eats of this bread, shall
live for ever.

The Rock, signified Christ* The lifting up of the Serpent, his death; Balaam
he prophecieth of Christ, There shall come a Star from Jacob, Numb. 24.
and a Scepter shall rise from Israel. Kittim and Assure shall afflict Heber,
but they also shall come to destruction at the last. This prophecy begins in
the sixth year of Ezechias.

THe time was in the Month Abib, which Month contains part of March, and
part of April. The Seventy Interpreters call it Tanda, the Month of green
blades: for about this time of the year corn begins to show it self above
the ground. Their year before this began in September, answerable to the
Creation, which proves the time of Adams creation to be then. For this
Month is the seventh Month, but now commanded to be the first.

The alteration of this old year, by commanding the keeping of a new year as
a remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, teaches plainly the
Redemption by Christ, whereof this deliverance out of Egypt was a figure. And
this teaches us further, that Moses Laws had not their end only in policy,
but that their chief scope was Christ. The passover likewise made this
plain: for they were to choose the Lamb the Tenth day of the first Month; in
which Month they came out of Egypt, and on the Fourteenth day he was to be
slain. The Four days respite betwixt the choosing and the killing,
admonished them, that the matter now to be performed was very weighty, and
therefore they were deeply to consider it: for now was the action and sum of
all salvation in handling.

In the seventh Month, and the first day of the month, they had the feast of
blowing the Trumpets. The tenth day of the seventh Month was the feast of
offering Sacrifices, an holy convocation to humble them to the Lord. The
Fifteenth day the feast of Tabernacles or Cottages, to keep in remembrance
thereby the dwelling of the children of Israel in boothes in the wilderness.
The use of the Passover was, to assure them, that God would be their defense,
seeing, according to the promise made to Abraham, after Four hundred and
thirty years, they were brought out of Egypt, and that Christ their Passover
was to be offered up in fullness of time. When Christ was crucified, this was
perfected and finished: he was crucified at Easter.

The Jews think, that the world shall end at Easter: for then they came out
of Egypt, and then was their year altered. And in the song of songs this is
expressed, Behold, the winter is past, the voice of the Turtle is heard in the
Mountains, the fig tree has brought forth her young figs, Come, my
beloved, arise and come away my Love, my fair one, Cant. 2. From this place
they gather the end of the world. Christ in the Gospel seems to allude to
this in this sort: Behold, says he, the Fig Tree and all trees, when they
now shoore forth, ye seeing them, know of your own selves, that summer is
near; so likewise when ye see these things come to pass, know that the
Kingdom of God is near. Luke 22.

There is nothing in the Bible contrary, or to confute this; And seeing it is
yet to come, it may very well be so. Christ was answerable to these figures:
for he died at Easter: and, though before the Jews would have killed him, yet
they could not lay hands on him, for his hour was not yet come. Hereby we are
now occasioned to return to the Passover.

The Pascall was killed on a Friday. Codomanus says, that name signifies a
passing over, because God that night passing over the Hebrews, did kill the
first borne in Egypt.

This Pascall was a Kidde, or a Lamb, figuring Christ the Lamb of God, which
should take away the sin of the world. John 1.

It ought to be without blemish, because that we are redeemed from our vain
conversation given from our fathers, not with corruptible things, gold or
silver, but with the precious blood of Christ the Lamb unblemished, and
unspotted, appointed from the beginning of the world, showed in the last times.
1. Pet. 1.18. No bone of the Lamb might be broken. Because of Christ no bone
should be broken, and when Christ was crucified, the thieves legs were
broken, but into Christ his side a spear was thrust. Ioh 19.

It was eaten in the evening, at that time the promise was given to Abraham. At
that time came the Jews from Babell: at that time Christ celebrated his last
Supper.

It was eaten of the circumcised only: because Christians should be all
circumcised in heart, for they do eat his flesh, and drink his blood.

The loins of the body should be girded, because the loins of our minds
should be gyrded, not setting our minds upon treasure in Raamsees, where
worms corrupt and rage; but should be as men looking for their Lord, when he
shall return from the marriage.

At that time for Seven days they did eat unleavened bread, as their minds
should take heed of the sower leaven of pharisey call doctrine. Mat. 16. for a
little leaven sowreth the whole lump of dowe. So we must remove away the old
leaven, that we may become a new lump, as we are unleavened. Therefore let
us keep the old feast not with the old leaven of wickedness and
maliciousness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth: for
Christ our paschall is offered for us, 1. Cor. 5.7.

It was to be killed, and his blood sprinkled, and to be eaten all save the
fat, and the kidneys. Thereby to teach us, that the natural man sauoureth not
the things which are of God. This Saint Paul expounds, Heb. 9. The blood of
Christ purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

It was eaten with bitter herbs: to show, that such is the practice of
Religion.

The time of this was when the Moon was at the full, and in the Spring of the
year. This time is the pleasure of the whole year: so is Christ to those, who
have grace to think on him aright.

The agreement of all these, must needs make a Turk, a Christian: for it is
impossible, that either by the wit of man, or by chance, these things could
have so come to pass.

The Jews had in their Passover, the Lamb, Bread, and Wine.


Christ instituting his last Supper, ends the eating of the Lamb, because he
offered up his own body, as a full body of all shadowing Sacrifices, and
kept Bread and Wine to be a remembrance hereof. He was the true Lamb, as he
says, Ioh. 1. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the
world. So he testifies of himself and alters it, because now the full and
whole Sacrifice being offered up, all Sacrifices were to cease according to
Dan. 9. where it is said, Christ the King, the Holy of Holiest shall be killed,
and shall end the Sacrifice and Oblation, and seal every vision and
prophecy. Neither shall the blood of Bulls or Goats any more avail to the
clensing of sin: But the blood of Christ only that Lamb unspotted, whose
blood shall purge our consciences from dead works, to be sanctified by his
righteousness to the serving of the living Lord, who has laid down his life
for his sheep; and being dead, raised himself up again, as one having power
over death, hell, and victory.

NOw for the popes Transubstantiation: besides that it is repugnant to sense,
it cannot be spoken in Hebrew, and in Greek only by fayning and inuenting of
new terms. Real is no word, seeing it comprehends many things, as well as a
body. Yet Christ is truly present to those which embrace him by faith.

It is said, that this commandment of embracing Christ, is the first: for if
this were not, the other were to small purpose.

Now that the Jews should not be amazed at six hundred and thirteen Laws;
seven weeks between their coming out of Egypt, and the giving of the Law,
were allowed them for meditation. And yet as they made nothing of the Lamb; so
Antichrist treads under foot the sufferings of Christ.

This Commandment of thy God, they brought out of Egypt. Clemens Alexandrinus
says, That Egypt is a sign of the wicked world: therefore every man must
look by the Redeemer to be delivered.

And we must remember Moses Law, You shall not do after the manner of the
Nations from whence ye came, nor whither you go.

Concerning the Ceremony of Sitting Standing
at the Passover.

This is the consent of the Jews: they of fit years did sit: Those which were
young did stand, unless they were bidden to sit. At the first instituting of
the Passover the gesture was prescribed, being fit for them, who were
presently with speed to pass away. When it is repeated again when they are in
the Land, this action is left out. Christ sat with his Apostles after the
manner of the wild Irish, on the ground. From this we may gather, that it is
left to the circumstance of time and place, and which fitteth best in
discretion, the manners and comeliness of the Country. Therefore the best is,
that which the common weal allows.

Fifty days after his ascension, Christ sends down his spirit. And thereby
makes the preaching of the Gospel, equal in majesty to the giving of the
Law. Concerning the day, no day is prescribed, therefore the Church thought
good to appoint the first Sabbath after the full moon.

For Easter, mention is made of the Lords day in the 20. Acts. 1. Cor. 16. in
cap. 1.

The next thing to be handled, is the giving of the Law.
GOd calls simple men out of Egypt, and wills them to hear and judge of
his Laws, and tells them, Hear Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, etc.

In this first sentence, you have the Gospel taught in these words, Thy God.
For by this is understood the Redemption by Christ. For though God in respect
that he is Creator, is God both of the wicked and the Godly, yet he never
calls himself, The God of the wicked. Hitherto is all the Law referred. For
all the prophesies in Christ are Yea, and Amen.

This entrance to the Law by the Gospel, is exceeding necessary. For seeing,
if we behold the infinite majesty of God in our weakness, there is no cause
but of trembling and fear; it pleases God in the face of Thy God the
Redeemer, to show himself favorable and reconciled, whereby we may approach
with boldness. Yet this doctrine of the preaching of the Gospel in the Law,
has been very much doubted of, and has been thought erroneous.

But I will ask them. Seeing the Law comprehends all righteousness, and there
is no righteousness but which is there commanded; if to believe in Christ,
which is the Gospel, is not there commanded, to do it must needs be sin.
And Saint Paul for commanding belief in Christ, had been by law lawfully put
to death, if Moses in his law had not commanded it. All our men which write
Catechismes, do apply the Sabbath and the Sacraments together, and so against
their wills they confess that the doctrine of the Sacraments is in the Law.
Saint Paul, if he were demanded this question, would answer to this as Christ
himself does. The Pharisees demand of Christ, Which is the first Commandment?
He answers them, and demands another question, Whose son is the Messiah?
They answer, David's; If he be David's son, how then does he in spirit call
him Lord? For if he be his Lord, how is he then his son? And thereupon
because the Jews understood not this, he pronounces against them a great many
of Woes. This is yet thought doubtful, seeing the Creed has been taken for a
distinct and divided thing from the Law. But if they mark, they shall find
the very same taught in the Creed, which is taught in Hear Israel thy Lord
thy God. For, I believe in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his
only son our Lord, has the very same sentence with the former, Hear Israel
I am the Lord thy God. And surely they little know what they teach, that do
not in such reference apply the Law and the Gospel together.

God delivers the Law in this sort.
Am the Lord thy God, which with a mighty hand and stretched-out arm, showing
my wonders in the land of Egypt, have brought thee out of bondage. It is
therefore reason, that seeing I only have done these things for you, that you
reverence no Gods, but me. And seeing I never showed my self in any bodily
appearance, and the Creatures do but in a sort express my infinite power and
wisdom; it is reason that you should not after the manner of the Nations
which I destroy, make any image to represent my glory. And seeing that he

These Laws are so certain and plain, that the heart of the simplest cannot
but acknowledge them righteous. For they may see likewise how one commandment
depends of another, as lincks of a golden chain. The Cabalists say, that
these laws were given to man for the sin of the serpent: that is to say, not
for us to accomplish, for we cannot attain thereto, but to show unto us how
far the infection of that venom has carried us away from that duty which
God requires of us: which end of the law is greatly enlightened into us by the
coming of the Messiah, in that he teaches us that the Law is not satisfied
with an outward and Pharisaicall obedience by hypocrisy, but by the vncorrupt
obedience of the heart, and by the acknowledgement of our disobedience. And
Moses and the Prophets commanded circumcision of heart, the offering of praise
and obedience, and to abstain from unhallowing the Sabbath day with
unrighteousness: therefore the service which God requires by the Law is
spiritual, as the reward which we ought to look for is spiritual.

You are also to note, that there was seven times seven days after the eating
of the Lamb, before the giving of the Law. Whereby we may know, that God
cares not for civility without the knowledge of Christ: though the contrary
be taught, that it is enough, so we be civil in life, though our minds
never think of the eating of the Lamb. But if we will live godly indeed,
all our care must be to esteem highly of those rules which concern the
teaching of the Redemption By Christ. For it is no commendation to live
ciuilly, though a sin to miss in conversation. And yet this honest behavior
amongst all men, must not be neglected.

Where it is said, Sanctify your selves, for to morrow is the Sabbath: If it
be demanded, how the Jews could understand this, it may thus be answered.

God so spoke, that a child may understand it. For Adam fell in Paradise the
sixth day, and sacrificed the seventh: which is as much as Moses speaks here.
This is the consent of the Hebrews.

There is a Question. Whether Joseph in Egypt, and the Jews in Babylon did
keep the Sabbath? For any thing that I can find, they did it not publicly.
Peradventure Joseph might do it priuatlie in respect of his own conscience,
but not otherwise. And for the keeping of the Sabbathes by the Jews in
Babylon, we have an express example to the contrary.

There was a feast at Shusan, which was on the Sabbath day, which feast the
Jews likewise did solemnize: immediately upon that, there was a decree to
destroy the Jews.

The Chaldee paraphrast expounds it to be for the contempt of the Sabbath. Job
in his book expounds this commandment of honoring Father and Mother, by
showing how contumeliously those did use him, whose Fathers he would not have
set with his dogs. Saint Paul shows, that this is the first commandment,
that has a promise annexed, showing thereby, that we are to be dealt with like
children, by allurements to embrace common civility: such is the perverseness
of our nature. Jeremy tells the Jews, that if they will keep their Sabbaths,
they shall not go into captivity. He thereby means, that by the true
keeping of the Sabbaths, they must learn all religion. For they must remember
Adams fall* and the restoring by Christ, and then the instituting of the
Sabbath. Then must they come to Sem, and Abraham, and the promise, and the
offering up of Isaac, which was a figure of the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, and so through the Stories of the Scripture.

The Law is usually divided into two Tables, the First, Second.


The Four first Commandments, concerning God.

The six last, concerning man.

The end of the Law is Christ, which is excellently set down in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, which Epistle begins in this sort.

At sundry times, and in sundry manners, God spoke in the old time by the
Prophets. As to Adam, The Seed of the woman shall break the head of the
Serpent. To Noah, Blessed be the God of Sem. To Abraham, In thy seed al Nations
in the earth shall be blessed, etc. And now last by his Son, whom he has
made heir of all things, by whom he made the world: ^ who being the
brightness of his glory, and the Character of his substance, sustaineth all
things, by whom the world was made, far above all Angels. For in the
beginning, O Lord, thou establishedst the heavens: they will perish, but thou
do remain: And the Angels, they are but thy mi^istring spirits, for their
sakes which shall be heirs of salvation.

Now if every transgression and disobedience received a just reward, how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? It is easy to make trial hereof.
For the world was made in the beginning to obey man, the Angels received
damnation for despising this, and in respect hereof, David says, What is man
that thou should be mindful of him? thou have made him a little inferior
to the Angels, that thou might crown him with glory, and honor.

And it was necessary that Jesus should take upon him the seed of Abraham,
and so be made inferior to the Angels by suffering death, that so he might
bring many Children to glory, and through death destroy him that had the power
of death, and by this victory over the Devil be crowned with glory and
honor, and have all things put in subjection under his feet. And by these his
sufferings, he was made like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful,
and a faithful high Priest in things concerning God, that he might make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. Moses was a faithful witness
hereof: and they that believed him not, but disobeyed, were plagued in the
Wilderness. Therefore while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, least
he swear, They shall not enter into my rest.

This Doctrine was further made plain by Aaron, the Anointed of the Lord,
whose office was to offer for his own sins, and the sins of his brethren.
But his office ceased. This ceasing was figured before in Melchisedech,
blessing Abraham, when Levy was yet in Abraham's loins, and therefore above
Abraham* for the lesser is blessed of the greater, to whom Abraham gave tithes,
therefore the Jews must go to a higher Religion, than to the Law: and Thy
God contains more than ceremonies.

We shall see this clear by the Tabernacle: in the which we are not to
speak of the particular Ceremonies, but of those cheefely which as referred to
Christ.

In the Tabernacle there were two places the Holy, the Holy of holiest.


The Holy was called the Sanctuary of this world, wherein were the
Candlestickes, Table of shewbread, etc.

The Holy of holiest did represent the state of heaven, in which was the Arc
of the Covenant of God. In which Arc there was reserved as a memory for all
posterities; a pot of Manna, Aarons Rod that always flourished, and the
Tables of the Law.

The Arc was covered, and the covering thereof was called the mercie-seat,
which figured Christ who is our propiciatorie or mercie-seat to cover our
iniquities. Over the mercie-seat, were the form of two Angels, having relation
to the Angels that kept the way to the tree of life: to show, that none were
worthy to come into that Holy of holiest, but Aaron the anointed of the Lord,
who likewise figured Christ both in name and office. For Aaron signifies
Christ, which in English is, Anointed: and in office, by entering once for all
into the Holy of holiest. For it was the office of the high Sacrificer, once
every year to enter into this Holy of holiest with blood. Of this David
speaks, Psalm 40. When he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and
burnt offering thou would not have, but a body have thou ordained. In the
beginning of thy book it is written, that I should do thy will O God. Then
said I, lo I come. Thus you see how the Redemption by Christ was taught by
Moses.

The two resemblances of heaven and earth, are a glass for us to behold Gods
glory in. The heavens, are the heavens of God; and the earth, a being for man.

In which, there be Creatures clean and unclean: the clean, to represent the
godly: the unclean, the wicked of conversation. And this rule was general
from the creation, and figured in Paradise by the tree of Life, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. And as trees, and all other Creatures differ one
from another: so do the manners of men. And God made Beasts, Fish, and Foul,
to express the affections of men's minds, and gave liberty to Beast, Fish,
and Foul, to eat up one another: but to man he gave a justice among
themselves, and taught them a civil life by eating of clean Beasts, and
forbids gross behauiours in forbidding to eat unclean Beasts, as Hogs,
and Dogs, and Conies, and Hare, and Daw, and such like: to show, that we
should not be like Hogs to wallowe in the mire of our unclean conversation;
nor like to the Dog, to return to our former impieties; but be clothed with
repentance, which is newness of life: nor like to Conies, whose nature is to
undermine, but to deal faithfully with our neighbors: that so our
conversation may appear before men, as we may glorify our Father which is in
heaven: nor like the Dawe or Crow, which peereth with his eyes, for we ought
not to be curious in looking to other men's faults, but strive to mend our
own, as our Savior Christ teaches in the Gospel, Matthew. 7. Thou that spiest
a moat in thy brothers eye, first pull out the beam out of thine own; and so
of all the rest of unclean Beasts, Fishes, and Fowls, something in life is
taught to be eschewed, which to handle particularly were too long. For the
lawfulness and unlawfulness of eating them now, there is no doubt: for they
were only appointed by Moses Law, to distinguish the Jew and the Gentile: but
Christ having broken down the wall of separation, we are now freely to use
any; only the equity of the justice of the same law remains still. For the
Law of God is eternal.

The clean were such as chewed the cud, and parted the hoof, as Ox, Sheep,
Goat, and Heart, and such like: to teach us, that we ought always to be
meditating of the wormanship of heaven and earth, and the Redemption by the
son of God: painful in our vocation, as Oxen; meek, as sheep; hardy as
Goats under the cross of Christ; and swift to good, and slow to evil; that
our bodies might be a clean Tabernacle, holy and undefiled, fit for the Holy
of holiest to enter into. So should we be clothed with Aarons white garment of
perfect justice, and in our bosom retain the precious Jewel of Vrim and
Thu^mim, that is, Light of the knowledge of Christ, and perfection of virtue,
to embrace the same.

Thus we see that the Law, and all the ceremonies thereof, the Tabernacle, and
all appurtenances thereof, Aarons office and his attire, are all to be applied
to the Redemption by Christ.

We are further to observe in the story of Moses, that Moses on the mountain
saw the sum of all salvation. The knowledge of this, is of special
consequence in divinity. For if Moses left out any point of Religion, then his
doctrine is a maimed doctrine, and not sufficient to eternal life. There be
some teachers now a days like to the Church of Laodicea; who though she was
poor, yet thought and esteemed her self rich: Even so these men, for
knowledge in expounding of Scriptures, when as they sever the new Testament
from the old, and do not make the one a light unto the other. For this is the
only difference between Moses, and the new Testament, That the new
Testament is an exposition or comment upon Moses. Saint Peter teaches this
plainly. 2. Pet. 1.19. We have the sure word of the Prophets, to the which
give heed as unto Light shining in darkness till the day appears, and that
the morning star shines in your hearts. Christ himself approoueth this
Doctrine, when he gives his hearers a commandment, John 5. That they should
search the Scriptures, to wit, Moses and the Prophets, because they testify of
me, says Christ, and in them you hope to have eternal life.

Saint Paul in the Acts Chap. 26. lays down a rule how to try the truth of
his doctrine. For, says he, I taught nothing but Moses and the Prophets, that
Christ should die, and rising from the dead, should give life unto the world.
The truth of this rule will be manifested by the particulars in this sort. The
Pope forbids meats, where is this in Moses? Indeed the ceremony of Moses
made a distinction between Jew and Gentile, in respect of election: which
distinction was to continue but a time: but now in Christ Jesus, neither is
circumcision nor uncircumcision any thing, and therefore all the Creatures of
God are good, so they be received with thanksgiving. Therefore by this rule
the Pope is a false Prophet, teaching a doctrine not in Moses. This therefore
is a sound rule to try all doctrines. Where are they taught in Moses? So
likewise if any Scisme be bred, or breeds in the Church, we shall by this
rule be able to establish our consciences, if we examine it by Moses doctrine.
Now, seeing the new Testament referres it self to Moses, we shall never be
able truly and sincerely to expound it, but by being skillful and ready in
Moses. We see Matthew makes mention of Abraham, and proves Christ to come of
him. The use of this will be of no force to us, except we search Moses for
Abraham's story, and see there what glorious things are spoken of him. Saint
Paul likewise proouing justification to be by faith without the works of the
Law, brings for an inevitable argument, the manner how Abraham was
justified. This argument will hardly be made plain and certain unto us,
except we search Moses for Abraham's actions. The same Apostle Heb. 11.
commending the excellency and certainty of faith, uses no other proof, then
a rehearsal of the actions and lives of particular men, Who by faith subdued
kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the fury of fire, despised
the glory of this life, and believed in the son of God, etc. By these reasons
it is evident that the new Testament is then made plain, when it is referred
to the old. Now, though the new Testament shows that he is come, and so the
prophecy being fulfilled, there may seem to be small use of the old: yet we
know that it is not enough for us to embrace a truth, but this one thing is
further required, an Ability to prove the truth against all gainesayers, that
so we may be able to render a reason of that hope that is in us. This
therefore is a sure ground, that in Moses is the sum of all salvation. If you
demand by what words in Moses it may be gathered, that he saw the
Revelation: I answer, it is prophesied in Balaams prophecy, Number. 24. That
Kittim shall afflict Heber, but he shall perishin in the end. So there, under
the term of Kittim, the Italians afflicting the Church of God unto the end of
the world, are signified: So by this we see the generality of this rule, that
Moses saw the sum of salvation: for he saw the fall and restoring of Adam,
the destruction of the world by the flood, how the families fell away in
flowting Sem, and their curse by their scattering, and the calling of the
heathen. I will provoke you by a foolish Nation, and by those who are not my
people. This sentence out of Deuteronomy. 13. Saint Paul cyteth Romans 10. to prove
that the Gentiles likewise were elected, and should be called in the time
appointed.

Amongst the Jews, Moses was had in such reverence, that they have cast all
his sentences into numbers; for whereas we use figures, they use the Hebrew
letters: and so exactly, that if any letter or vowell be either added or left
out, they can presently tell. Withal they are so perfect, that they will tell
where their Prophets took from Moses.

By this observation Sanctus Pagninus gives a rule, that the truth of the
Scriptures will never appear in her right cleerenesse, neither by the Latin
translation, nor by the exposition of the Fathers: for the Latin it is not
agreeable with the Hebrew. For the Fathers, because the most of them are very
ignorant in the story, therefore many things they expound by allegories, which
should by story and event be manifested so to have come to pass. As, where
Jacob prophesying of Judah, Genesis 49. describes the pleasantness and
fertility of the soil by these circumstances, He shall wash his garments in
wine, and his mantle in the blood of grapes: The Fathers make an Allegory of
this, and apply it to the passion of Christ, but of what force is this
exposition against the Turk?

Now follows to be handled, the standings in the Wilderness.
THere were two and forty Standings in the Wilderness. We must observe, that
it is not lawful to frame Allegories out of our own brain: for it is enough
for us to embrace those, which the scripture has laid down.

We must further note, that the plain expounding of a story, is no allegory.
And when we shall find things diverse times repeated, we must know that it is
done to this end, that we might the better remember our own estate, and
therefore they are directions unto us. This is proved by Saint Paul in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he calls these Standings in the
Wilderness, a stamp of our own nature. This may serve for an introduction
into the treatise following. The text notes, that where the cloud stood
still, there they pitched their Tents. In the mention of these Standings in
Numbers, there be some places rehearsed which are not repeated in the former
description, to wit, in Exodus. We may not gather from hence any contrariety,
but we must learn that those places which are not repeated again, are some
little Towns or Villages hard by, as well known as the other, and as it were
the very same, and then it is free to use the one or the other.

The Standings are Two and Forty, for comparison with these, you have Two and
Forty bowls, knobs, and flowers in the Candlestick of the Tabernacle.

42 Of Omri Sons slain. 42 Children destroyed by Bears. 42 Generations of
Christ's kindred from Abraham.
Saint Augustine says, that the numbers in the Scripture contain rare and
excellent matters, even the rudest of them. This opinion of Saint Augustine in
this number of Two and Forty will prove true. For this Two and Forty
consists of six Seuens, which number of Six, and of Seven, keeps in
memory the Creation. By this the Nations are compelled to admire the wisdom
of God in the Creation: for they could not think that it came by chance, that
there should be just Two and Forty Standings in the Wilderness, and no more.
Job says of God, O thou that do order all my steps! And if in our life we
meditate on these Two and Forty Standings, we will endeavor to avoid the like
sins which the Israelites committed in the Wilderness, least we be overtaken
with their punishments.

The place was diverse and variable, sometimes pleasant, and sometimes
unpleasant, so is it with us in our life: and in this we see our pilgrimage
resembled.

If we consider the place it self, it was the fittest for to teach all Nations
from this story, the true Religion, seeing they were either borderers, or came
thither. On the one side was Ismael, called also Pharan; on the other side
Esau, named also Iumea. By it Madian, where Moses took his wife. Sinay also,
where the Law was given. Jacobs Sons dwelt thereabout. Arabia was near,
which Saint Paul in the Galathians calls a mixed Nation. Na^ors twelve Kings
thereabouts. Moab and Ammon there. This in general for the place.

Now follow the Standings.
THe first Station was Ramesis, which signifies Worms. This is handled where
we are admonished not to lay up our treasure in this life, where worms and
rust consume, but in heaven where these things annoy us not.

2. Station. Succhoth, Which signifies poor Cottages: so is every ones state
in this life.

3. Etham, Which signifies Hard ground: so was their state. The Lord there
went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way, and in a
pillar of fire in the night, to give them light. Exodus 13.

This favorable dealing of the Lord, Esaias applies universally to the Church,
saying, The Lord will make upon every dwelling house of Mount Sion, that is,
upon all the assemblies of it, A Cloud for the day time; and a smoke, and
brightness, and a flame of fire for the night. Es. 44. Ap. 10. Christ, the
mighty Angel, has his feet in a pillar of fire.

4. Piahiroth, Which signifies Contention. There Egypt strove with Israel, and
they murmured against Moses, whereof the name was afterward given to that
place. They go thorough the red Sea, the seventh day of unleavened bread, as
the Jews hold with one consent.

By faith they passed through the red Sea, as by dry land, which when the
Egiptians assayed, they were drowned. Heb. 11. Our Fathers were all under the
cloud, and all passed through the Red Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in
the Sea. 1. Cor. 10.

5. Marah, Which signifies Bitterness. There they could find no waters to
drink, for the waters were bitter, therefore the place was called Marah, and
they murmured against Moses, as Saint Paul testifies, Let us not murmr, as
some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. 1. Cor. 10.10.

The next is Elim, Grace. Where were Twelve Fountains of waters, and Seventy
Palm trees. Thus we see that none can come to Elim, Grace, but first they must
abide poverty, and go through hard and bitter contentions and afflictions of
this life. And yet then we are not in rest: for the next Station we come to, is
Sin, Thorny. There the people murmr against Moses for meat. In the evening
God fed them with Quails, and they came to the place of Sepulches, and
leanenesse entered into their souls* In the morning they were fed with Manna,
to know that Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God. Deuteronomy. 8. They did all eat of the same spiritual meat.
1. Cor. 10.

This Manna was to be gathered as every man had need of it. If any were
reserved till morning, it brought forth worms. Exodus 16.20. This, Saint Paul
applies to the use of wealth. 2. Cor. 8. Let it be of equality at this time,
that your abundance fulfill their want, that their abundance may reach to
your want, that there may be an equality, as it is written, He that gathered
much, had not overmuch, and he that gathered little, had not ouer-little.

The sum of these standings is this, that the soil being good and bad,
shows us the manners of the men which live on the earth, and with whom we
live, at whose hands we must look for badde dealing more than for good. This
Christ taught in the Gospel, when he willed, that those who would embrace
him, should take up his Cross and follow him. After they come to Rephidim,
where was no water for the people to drink, the people murmr against Moses:
the place is called Tentation, according to that of David. Psalm. 95. Hebr. 3.
To day if you will hear my voice, harden not your hearts, as is the
provocation in the day of Temptation in the wilderness. etc.

Moses strikes the Rock, and the Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.

They drank all of the same spiritual drink, etc.

Jesus fights with Ameleck.

Moses erecteth an Altar, and calls it Jehovah, my Banner. Christ by death
overcame him that had the power of death, and we have an Altar, Jesus Christ
the righteous, Heb. 11.

Then they come to Horeb, which had the soil very dry. But Sina, on the
top a hole where the wind made a fearful noise. But Sion was a pleasant
and fruitful soil, full of springs, to wash away the blood of the beasts that
there were slain. The Land of Chush always in servitude. So we, if we look
only to have our lives savor of civility our souls not lightened with the
knowledge by Christ, we shall be continually in servitude. And as these places
come short of the glory of Jerusalem: so the Jews not thinking on Christ,
have their cogitations wandering, not finding rest in their souls. Saint Paul
handles these two Mountains in this sort, Galat. 4. By the which things,
another thing is meant: says he, for these two hills are two Testaments, the
one Agar of Mount Sinay, which gendreth unto bondage, being a Mountain in
Arabia, and it answers to Jerusalem which now is, and she is in bondage with
her children: but Jerusalem which is above is free, the mother of us all. The
Persians wonder at the stateliness of Jerusalem, being in glory One Thousand
years. Saint Paul calls this time to Christ, the time of a child under a
Tutor. The Son is, Romans 15. Whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning, that we through patience might have hope. Now says Saint Paul,
These things are our examples, to the end we should not lust after evil
things, as some of them lusted, and fell in one day three and twenty Thousand.
1. Cor. 10.

In this place Sinay, where the Law was given, many things are to be
considered.

The Law was given, that sin might be known to abound.

It was given by Angels, Deuteronomy. 33. By a Mediator, Moses.

There is one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus, the Mediator of
the new Testament. Heb. 9.

It was given on the Lords day, in the morning, the Lord arising and shining
from Pharan, with Thousands of his Angels, with thunder, lightnings, and
earthquake.

Moses erecteth an Altar on Twelve pillars, and having made a sacrifice, does
read the Book of the covenant, and taking the blood of Oxen and Bulls, with
water, purple wool, and Isope, does sprinkle the Book, saying, This is the
blood of the Covenant which God has commanded for you. This is handled in the
9. to the Hebrews: If the blood of Oxen and Bulls does sanctify to
cleanenesse of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ cleanse our
conscience from dead works, to serve the living Lord?

Moses goes up to the Mountain, and fasteth Forty days, Exodus 32.

Christ in the Wilderness fasteth Forty days, Luke 4.

The people turn the glory of God into the similitude of a Calfe that eats
hay. Exodus 32.6.

Be not Idolatrers, as some of them were, as it is written, The people sat
down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. 1. Cor. 16.

Moses breaks the two Tables which he received from God, written with the
finger of God.

The Levites kill three thousand of Israel that had committed Idolatry. They
regarded not Father, mother, brethren, or sisters. This Christ applies to all
men. Mat. 10. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of
me.

Moses goes up again to the Mountain with two Tables prepared of himself,
continues Forty days fasting, writes the words of the former tables in
these. This Paul handles, 2. Cor. 3. Ye are the Epistle of Christ ministered
of us, written not with inkes, but with the spirit, not in Tables of stone,
but in the Tables of hearts of flesh.

The second year after their coming from Egypt, the Tabernacle is erected,
out of which the Lord speaks in a more manifest gracious sort, than at any
time before he had done, to show himself in a special sort merciful.

Christ his humane nature is the Tabernacle. The word became flesh, and had his
Tabernacle among us, Ioh. 1. In him all fullness dwelled bodily. Col.4. By
grace all Christians are a Tabernacle. Es. 10. Ap. 21.

A cloud ouer-shadowed the Tabernacle. To the Virgin Marie Gabriel says,
Luke 1. The power of the highest shall ouer-shadow thee.

So Moses could not enter into the tabernacle of testimony, because the cloud
abode thereupon, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. When Christ
is glorified on the Mountain, and a bright cloud ouer-shadowed him, Peter
said, Let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one
for Elias, Mat. 17.

The Temple of the Tabernacle of witness was open, and the temple was full of
the smoke of the glory of God, and no man could enter into the Temple. Ap. 15.

Where the cloud remained, they went forward with the Arc, Christ has a
white cloud under him. Ap. 14.

Nadab, and Abihu are consumed with fire for offering strange fire before the
Lord. To be an example how God is a consuming fire against foolish zeal.


After this the children of Israel come to Kadesbarnes. Then there are Spies
sent out to view the Land: they are Forty days in viewing it. They bring
word, and tell strange things of the goodness and fatness of the Land, but they
discourage the people, and fear them: for they told them of huge and great
Giants the Sons of Anak Joshua he answers them, Let us go up and possess
the Land. For if God shall be merciful unto us, he will give us the Land
flowing with milk and honey. Upon this God swears, that they shall not enter
into his rest. They were for this Forty years in the Wilderness, Forty days in
viewing the Land. S. Paul repeateth this in the Acts 13. God suffered their
manners in the Wilderness; they wandered, to punish the hardness of their
hearts for not believing. They went up and down, that all the world might
wonder at this dealing of God, and thereby learn to fear him: for every
sin fitteth the providence of God, and serves for his glory. By this all the
world might learn divinity. For it is said of them that their sound was heard
to the end of the world. So that a man of England meeting with one that had
been about those parts, might enquire, When do those people leave their
wandering? They were brought out of Egypt strangely: for the sea parted, and
suffered them to go through, and was a wall to them, but drowned the Egyptians
which followed after.

Did you ever hear, that one striking a Rock, water should come forth? Yet
this is not all, for they had meat from heaven, Manna, which in English
signifies, What shall I call it? Besides, for their apparel it never wears,
not so much as their shoes, their apparel grows with their bodies. A Child
has the same apparel being a man, that he had being a Child: and the
neighbors are in such fear of them, as they dare not touch them. Surely their
God is wonderful, and exceeds the Gods of other Nations. Diodorus Siculus,
he speaks of Moses reverently. Strabo mentions these Standings, but
speaks wickedly. So does Iustine. Hereby is their condemnation just, and they
made inexcusable.

2554. Moses died, Deuteronomy. 34. being One hundred and Twenty years old.
Shorter in life than his Father or Grandfather: So that seeing long life a
great blessing, and he so excellent a man, even by the testimony of the
scripture, it might be asked, why his life was no longer? We shall see, that
these his years are more glorious, than if they had been longer. For this
comparison of One hundred and twenty years, with the One hundred and twenty
years of the building of Noah's Arc, is of rare excellency: and even in this
comparison his face must so shine in their hearts, that they could not behold
him without a veil*

By this they must likewise remember the promise made to Abraham to be
performed, for the which he was raised up. And they must ascend higher, to
Melchisedech, who blessed Abraham, and in whom also the heathen received a
blessing. Then they must go further to the taking up of Henoch.

Homer brings in the mother of Achilles, telling her Son, that there was
decreed for him a double destiny. If he would have a long life, it should then
be obscure: If short, famous. This he fayneth, but yet in fables there is a
color of truth.

We are to consider further the words of Saint Jude, upon the death of Moses.
Yet Michael the Archangell, when he strove with the Devil, and disputed about
the body of Moses, durst not give railing speeches, but said, The Lord rebuke
thee. It may be demanded, where Saint Jude has these words, seeing they are
not expressly laid down in Moses. This objection is thus answered: Any
Scholar may from a true ground, frame a disputation: and it is free to use
this kind of amplification, or any other*

The meaning of Saint Jude is, that Jehovah the Eternal buried Moses. In the
Prophet Zacharias, you have the like in a vision: Iehosua the high sacrificer
stands before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan at his right hand to resist
him: and the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord reprove thee, Satan. Here the
second person Christ Jesus is called Michaell, and here is the like kind of
speaking. So that if we will frame a speech, we may think, that at Moses
death God might command Michael to go fetch up the body of Moses. Satan
resisting, he forbad him, and added, The Lord rebuke thee. The meaning of Saint
Jude is thus much: Those which rail on officers, have not marked Christ's
dealing, who like a stately King, in one word rebukes them.

This exposition the Jews in their Talmed agree unto* The end is to this
purpose: that seeing it is not written by Moses, and the holy Ghost cyteth not
the place from whence it is taken, we must diligently look to the matter, and
searching the scripture for the like Stories, we shall easily find out the use
and order which the holy Ghost uses in amplifications.

Moses was a figure of Christ.
MOses was cast into the flagges, Marie the Daughter of Pharaoh saved him; so,
as Marie saved Moses the deliverer; so the Virgin Marie saved Jesus Christ the
Redeemer.

Moses was persecuted of Pharaoh: Christ was persecuted of Herod a new Pharaoh.

Moses delivered the people from the bondage and slavery of Egypt: so Jesus
Christ has delivered us from the spiritual bondage and Tyranny of the
spiritual Pharaoh Satan.

Moses, when he died was buried by Christ. Even so Jesus Christ by his own
death, buried all the Ceremonies of Moses.

2555. Joshua rules Seventeen years. His name was altered by Moses to Jesus,
because he was to be a figure of Jesus Christ. He with Caleb encouraged the
people, when the other ten Tribes misbeleeued when they were sent to spy the
Land.
These Seventeen years are not set down expressly in the Scripture; but are
gathered from the circumstance of the Story in this sort: From the coming out
of Egypt to the building of Salomons Temple, are Four hundred and Eighty
years. 1. King. 6.8. All the particulars of this account, are laid down save
Joshua his government, and they make four hundred, sixty, and three; to which
add Seventeen years, the time that Joshua ruled: you have full Four hundred
and eighty. So you have another Seventeen for Jacob, and Joseph's Seventeen
years.

Thus much for the time.
Now for his name Jesus.
HOseas the Son of Nun, which was to take the government from Moses, has his
name altered, and is called Jesus in the 72. Psalm. You have his name repeated
Ganushemo, (1) He shall increase. The Hebrews in their Cabala say, that this is
the name of Christ, they mean nothing else but to keep in memory every
name, whereby the glory of the Kingdom of the Messiah is expressed.

When the Jews come from Babell, you have Jesus again, the Son of
Iehosadach. In Ierem. 31. the Lord speaks. Behold the day comes that I will
raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign, and prosper. In
his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the
name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness. In the 110.
Psalm, the Lord swear, and will not repent, thou art a King for ever after the
order of Melchisedech, the King of righteousness. In the first Epistle of
Saint John, it is thus expounded: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father. Jesus Christ the righteous. The Seventy Interpreters translating
the place of Jeremy, And this is his name, The Lord our righteousness:
because they knew the Egyptians could never understand the meaning of the Lord
our righteousness, they translate it thus: And he shall be called the Son of
Iehosadach, which is in signification Ichouah Tzedek, The Lord our
righteousness: but thereby the Grecians thought he was the Son of
Iehosadach.

Where Saint Paul speaks, Philip. 2. That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, both in heaven and in earth, We think that the meaning is the
outward bowing of our knees, and of an external worship to be given at the
sound of this word Jesus. That is not so: but this is the meaning, That his
Majesty is so omnipotent, that all the creatures both in heaven and earth must
be subject to him. And this Christ himself proved by his miracles when the
fishes obeyed, when the Devils resisted not, when the water bare him up, and
the wind was calm at his word. Wherefore if we admit the first exposition,
we commit a gross error: for so soon as we hear Jesus pronounced, we
begin to worship by bending our knees, though that name be not meant of Christ.
As in the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is said, If Jesus had settled the people
in rest, etc. Here is meant Jesus the Son of Nun, and yet this Jesus shall
have bowing of knees:

Now compare Jesus with Jesus.
As Jesus the Son of Nun, received the government and law from Moses. before
Jesus, Jordan opened: Jesus caused the Sun to stay in the firmament.


So Jesus Christ fulfilled all the same. before Jesus Christ, when he was
baptized at Jordan, the heavens opened. Jesus Christ caused the sun to be
darkened in the firmament.


If Jesus had settled the people in rest, etc.
Jesus which signifies Savior, with Eleasar, who is surnamed Aaron, which
signifies Christ, Anointed, settled the Israelites in an earthly rest in the
outward Canaan.

Jesus with Eleasar, brought the Jews out of the captivity of Babell, and set
them in their Land again.

Jesus Christ the Anointed Savior, having in half a Seven conquered Hell and
Satan, has settled our minds, and set us in an heavenly rest in the
spiritual Canaan. So the holy Ghost speaks: for if Jesus had settled the
people in rest, then would not David after this have spoken of another rest.

Moses gives instruction to Jesus for the Conquest of the Land, and goes not
thither himself. So Moses unprofitable, except Christ had come and performed
it.

50.
THis Fifty shows, that the reckoning of the year of Iubilee here begins.

7.
The Seven shows, that the people of Israel were six years in conquering the
Land of Canaan, and the Seventh year settled in rest, as the world was six
days in making, and the Seventh day appointed for rest.

45.
The Five and Forty will approve this true in the Fourteenth of Joshua. Caleb
says, Forty years old was I when Moses sent me to spy the Lands. Now the
people of Israel were Two years in the Wilderness before the Spies were sent.
When the Land is fully conquered, he says, I am this day five and Forty
years old since Moses sent me from Cadesbarnes, to view the Land. From which
five and Forty, if you take away Seven, there remains Thirty and Eight, to
which if you add the other two, in which they were in the Wilderness before the
Spies were sent, you have Forty; so long they were in the Wilnernesse, and the
other Seven they were in conquering the Land.

For comparison with this Seven, you have Seven Fifties for the house of
Joseph: so Hoseas the Prophet speaks, while Joseph spoke there was great
terror. Then Seven Seuenties to the Captivity, Ten Seuens the Captivity, and
Seven Seuenties to the death of Christ. The proof of this is laid down in the
25. of Leuit. where they are commanded upon their settling in the Land, to
number unto them six years for tilling and plowing their ground, and the
Seventh to be a Sabbath, that is, holy unto the Lord. And Seven Sabbaths of
years, thou shall likewise number, then thou shall cause to blow the Trumpet
of the Iubilee, and that was the next year after the seventh Seven.
Theodoretus says, Moses prophesied, that Jesus should be Seven years in
conquering the Land, and thereby likewise expresses the Iubilee, and thereby
shows the Fifty years after they should overthrow Chusan. So the first
Iubilee has a wonderful victory.

God had an especial purpose in his providence, that the land should not be
conquered in one day, (which he could have performed) because from observing
the wonderful order of Jesus victories, the nations far and near might be
stirred up to enquire after their God: and if they would not, yet hereby to be
made inexcusable. Suidas notes, that he came into a Country where he found
certain black pillars erected, wherein this was engraven: Jesus the spoyler
drove us out of Canaan.

Cadmus builds Thebes while the Grecians flourished, and there was continual
enmity between the Athenians, and the Thebanes: and if you cast the ages to
David's time, you shall find that Jesus drove him out likewise.

Now follows the dividing of the Land; which is particularly handled in
Joshua. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
NOw the curse is performed. Genesis 10. Cursed be Canaan: a servant of servants
shall he be. For his posterity, the most part of them are driven out of their
Land, being replenished with all good things, and Sem does reign our him.
Seven Nations only were driven out: the rest God would not as yet utterly
root out, but reserved them to be spurs in the sides, and thorns in the
eyes of the Israelites, if they should at any time be stout, and forget God.
This conquest of Sems house upon Canaan God purposed, when he first settled
them in the Land at the scattering of Nations, as Moses testifies, Deuteronomy. 32.
When the most high God divided to the Nations their inheritance, he appointed
the borders of a people, according to the number of the Sons of Israel. Our
translation is faulty in that place, and thereby obscureth the meaning of the
place. For we say, When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance,
he appointed the borders of the people according to the number of the children
of Israel: which any man knows to be infinite, and therefore not proper for
the understanding of the text.

For look what Countries Jacob gave in his will, and described, Jesus and
Eleasar performed in possession to Jacobs Sons. By this we may be persuaded,
that our life depends on the providence of God, and that all our ways are
numbered.

There were in all Three hundred, Twenty, and Four Towns, wherein the
Israelites inhabited, and neither Bethlehem, nor Nazareth in the tribe of Judah
named, and yet they were of special use, for the revealing of the birth of the
Messiah.

The reason may be thus rendered: God would not in plain terms manifest it* to
the end we should be more diligent and careful to know those things which so
much concern our salvation.

Micheas knew by David's birth in Bethleem, a figure of Christ, and by
Beniamins, that Christ should there be borne. And so the Doctors of the Law
answer Herod, cyting the testimony of Micheas the Prophet. Esaias says, he
saw a Nazarite, a sprigge from the root of Iessay.

The Jews, to cross the certainty of Christ to be the Messiah, say there is
no such Town. Yet God took such order, that the heathen should bear witness
againg them: for it is mentioned in Pliny, and other heathen writers.

The Levites had allotted to them Forty and Two Towns, and six for refuge,
one of every Seven: thereby to signify, that we must observe the like
proportion, if we will have Religion to flourish.

The rest of the Tribes had the lot of their inheritance appointed them: so
that every Tribe was distinct by himself, and so observed until the coming
of Christ, that the kindred of Christ might not be obscured, but that he might
be known to be the seed of Abraham; the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; the
blossom of the root of Iessay. Concerning their possessions, Reuben was
beyond Jordan, and Gad, Simeon, and Leut scattered among the Tribes. Judah in
the best soil: for he shall bind his Ass to the Vine, and his Asses foale to
the best Vine. Benjamin next Joseph, next him the Sons of the hand maids.

Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh in his pilgrimage, goes through all
the Tribes, as Jesus the Conqueror, and Eleasar the high sacrificer had divided
them.

He is conceived in the tribe of Zabulon, at Nazareth.

He is borne in Bethleem of Judah.

In Egypt he goes through the tribe of Simeon.

He teaches in the Temple, in the tribe of Benjamin.

He turned water into wine at the marriage of Cana in Galile in the Tribe of
Aser.

At Sichem in the Tribe of Ephraim, he proves himself to be the Messiah.

At Naum in the Tribe of Nephtali, he rayseth Lazarus from the dead.

In going through the ten Cities, he is in the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and
part of Manasses.

2570. Joshua, or Jesus dies, being One hundred and Ten years old: answerable
to Joseph, who died being One hundred and ten years old.
HE was the Seventh from Ephraim, in whom the blessing of Moses concerning
Joseph is sweetly performed, who says, Deuteronomy. 33.
His horn shall be like to the first borne Bullock.

He therefore has a Bullock his scutchion, to show that he is of Joseph by
Ephraim. Some do muze from whence we gather to give them arms; they may be
resolved, if they search the antiquities of Genesis cap. 49.

Thus much for Joshua.
Now follows the Story of the Judges.
THis is first generally to be observed; That where it is said, When Othoniel,
Aod, or any of the rest had overthrown Chusan, Eglon, or Sisera, or any of the
oppressors, that the Land had rest Forty, or Eighty, or Twenty years; that
the Land rested not so long: for the plain Story crosses it: but the meaning
is, from Iosuas death, or from Othoniels death, or from Aods death after so
many years the land had rest, having been oppressed, by such and such: for the
very native translation is, the things repeated in Eglons Story and Aods, are
the actions of fourscore years, if you add to them Othoniels Forty years.

In the Prophecy of Abacucke. Cap. 3. There ye have an abridgement of all the
Stories of the Judges, and so continuing till David's death. He begins at the
17. verse. For Iniquity I saw the Tents of Chusan, and the curtains of the
land of Midian did tremble. Was the Lord angry with the Rivers? or was thy
wrath against the floods? Meaning the overthrow of Sisera, whose host was
discomfited at the River Kyson: and so proceeds in the Chapter.

The meaning of the Prophet is, to comfort the Jews which now were afflicted
by the neighbors about them, and assures them, that they shall be delivered.
For afore-time they had great deliverances from the like oppressors, and
therefore namerh Chusan, not that he was that Chusan that is mentioned in the
Judges, but being one of Chush his house, and is a Chusan of double impiety:
for by this time Abraham's Sons by Keturah were mixed with Cham, and those
afflicters which bordered on the Jews, are here meant, as Ismael, and Nachors
Sons, and Edom, and Cham, etc.

We are likewise to understand, that these Judges did not rule as Kings or
Magistrates Forty years, or Twenty years: but the Land being for their
sins plagued from time to time by these oppressors, the policy did choose
some especial man out of the Tribes to be chief Captain during the time of
their affliction. Amongst whom Joseph's house had the chiefest glory, but Judah
had the first prerogative.

They fell away six times in the time of these Judges before David's time: and
that was the cause, that these ungodly Nations had such a stroke over them.

Thus much for them in general.

2571. Othoniel of the tribe of Judah, is the First, to show that they should
look for their deliverer, which should end all the visions and prophesies, and
perfecteth all righteousness, to be of Judah.
THe Three hundred, thirty and nine, 339.
is the exact number of the whole time of the Judges. The Four hundred and
Fifty shows the whole time of Judges, with the oppressors years. 450.


The Lord stirred up our Savior to the Children of Israel, and he saved them,
even Othoniel the Son of Kenar, Calebs younger brother: and the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war, and the
Lord delivered Chusan Rishathaim King of Aram into his hand, and his hand
prevailed against him: so the Land had rest Forty years, and Othoniel died.
Judge. 3.9.

2603. Chusan oppresses Eight years.
HIs Country was Mesopotamia. The Children of Israel did wickedly, that is,
they dwelt among the unclean Nations, that were left in the Land, and took
their Daughters to be their wives, and gave their Daughters to their Sons, and
served their Gods, contrary to the commandment of Moses the man of God,
Deuteronomy. 7.3. When you shall come into the Land, etc.

Therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold them
into the hand of Chusan, and they served him Eight years.

Booz of Rahab Borne.
By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them which obeyed not, when she
had received the Spies peaceably. Heb. 11.

Rahab was of Chams house, and yet God of his especial grace gave her the
light of his countenance, and was merciful unto her: because she beholding the
impieties of the unclean Cities of Canaan, and their reward, and the Story of
Lots wife, which no doubt was famous, the loathsome life of the Egyptians and
their plagues, embraced the Covenant to Abraham, and the oath that he swear
unto Isaac.

The manners of these Egyptians are expressed by the woman in the Gospel,
which had her daughter possessed with a Devil. Christ tells her, that it is
not lawful to take the Childrens bread, and to cast it to Dogs. As if Christ
should say, Moses in his laws and religion has cut you off like Dogs, to
whom precious things must not be thrown, and therefore I am not in mercy to
regard you. She answers, It is true Lord, that we are cursed, and by Moses
law cut off from salvation; and it is likewise true, that we are not the
Children: yet we see that the little Dogs eat of the crummes which fall from
the Childrens table. And Moses himself has a law, that if any will learn the
Religion of Judah, he shall be admitted: so that yet there is some hope for the
Dogs. Go thy way, says Christ, thy faith has saved thee. And no doubt, as
this poor woman's daughter was possessed with a Devil in body: so the minds
of the Egyptians had many Devils, seeing they were full of superstition,
witchcraft, and coniuring. They worshipped one Ammon a Devil, yet there were
many of Chams house saved. This I infer, because Rahab was of Cham. And this
opinion is confirmed by her Story, who was saved when Jericho was destroyed.
She tells the Spies, I know that the Lord has given you the Land, for we
have heard how the Lord dried up the Red Sea before you: for the Lord your
God he is the God in heaven above, and in the earth beneath; thereby showing,
that she embraced the promise made to Abraham, that in his seed all Nations in
the earth should be blessed. It is testified of both these women, that their
faith did save them.

The Lord likewise in the days of his flesh, went into Jericho the City of
Rahab long ago accursed.

2610. The first Iubilee.
IT has his name from Iobal, a Horn, because in the beginning of the Feast,
trumpets of Rams horns were to be blown, and thereby the year was
proclaimed. It was the Fiftieth year after the settling the people in the Land,
as Leuit. 25. You shall reckon to you seven Seuens of years, and the Fiftieth
shall be a year of Iubilee, etc. And it was to be kept solemnly until the
death of Christ. The cause of keeping it was, to put them in mind of the great
victories which God had given them over their enemies in the Land of Canaan: so
that by this ceremony likewise, the Redemption by the conquest of Christ over
our spiritual enemy, which the year of Iubilee signified, was also
proclaimed. For if they considered the promise made to Abraham concerning this
Land, and their deliverance out of Egypt being in bondage, and how they were
placed in the Land by Jesus their Captain; the death of Christ, which
delivered them from the snares and bondage of the Devil, must needs be made
plain unto them.

Iobal does signify Joyful. In it, all Lands that were bought of any of the
Tribes, was to return to the old Possessor; then all prisoners were set at
liberty. Figuring, that joyful year of the Lord, wherein we should be freed
from the bondage of Satan, whereof Esaias speaks, He shall heal the broken
heart, and bring the gladsome tidings of the Lord: Justice shall be the girdle
of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins: then the Woolfe
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kidde, and the
Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat beast, and a little Chila shall lead them,
the sucking Child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the wayned Child
shall lay his hand upon the Cockatrice hole: then shall none hurt, nor destroy
in the mountain of mine holiness: for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the Sea. Es. 11. The meaning
is, that the profane beasts of the world, which now know not Christ, shall in
this joyful year be lightened with the brightness of his glory, and shall
rejoice and be glad for so great salvation, and shall be members of one head
Christ Jesus, loving one another as Christians, whose joy is expressed very
largely, in the 35. of Esaias. The desert and the Wilderness shall rejoice, and
the wast ground shall flourish as a Rose, it shall flourish abundantly, and
shall greatly rejoice also and joy, the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto
it, the beauty of Charmell, and of Sharon; they shall see the glory of the
Lord, and the excellency of our God, strengthen the weak hands, and comfort
the feeble knees: say unto them that are fearful, Be strong, fear not,
behold your God comes, even God with a recompense will come and save you:
then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be
opened, then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the dumb man's tongue
shall singe: for in the Wilderness shall water break out, and rivers in the
desert, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow, and mourning shall fly away.

To return to the observation of the time of the Iubilee. Moses says, You
shall reckon to you seven Seuens of years, and the Fiftiet^ shall be a
Iubilee. Leuit. 25. Wherein we may behold the wonderful providence of God for
them, so long as they kept his Sabbaths: for the Nine and fortieth year did
yield corn for three years. No doubt, this must needs make the Nations
astonished, to see that the Children of Israel had such a God, as could in one
year give them corn for three years, so that they should neither sow nor
reap, when themselves had scarce corn with great labor for one year.

Amos in his prophecy finds great fault with those which hoard up corn, and
pronounces a woe unto them for so doing.

But we are to understand, that when the Israelites neglected their Sabbaths,
and forgot the great benefits they had received, becoming Idolatrers, and
polluted with the abominations of the land into which they came; their joy was
turned into sadness, and their Jubilees unto their destruction. For in the
seventeenth Iubilee, they having despised the providence of God, they have
Sedechias a most wicked King set over them, and in Iehoiakims time, they are
carried quite away into Babylon, and there are as dead bones for Seventy
years, until the land had paid her own Sabbaths, which they had omitted when
they dwelt upon it. Therefore we are to note, that we shall never keep our
religion easy and plain, but by casting the Jubilees right, which we must
cast to end just with the death of Christ, or else how does Christ according
to Daniel the 9. end the ceremony and oblation? and the wisdom of God has
taken such order, that where the Scripture seems to leave off to reckon,
there the heathen keep a just account, nothing at all crossing Daniels Seuens.

For the Iubilee which the Jews and Romans observe, there is no color of
Religion in it, nor warrant in Moses for them. Therefore we leave them to
obloquie, as not worth the handling, amongst the rest of their gross errors
which they against Scripture foolishly maintain.

2611. Aod Eighty years.
HE was of the Tribe of Benjamin. The Children of Israel committed wickedness
in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord strengthened Eglon King of Moab, against
Israel. But when they cried unto the Lord, he stirred them up a Savior. Aod
the Son of Gera the Son of Benjamin, a man lame of his right hand, and the
Children of Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon King of Moab, and Aod made
a sharp Dagger, and carried it privily, and when he had delivered the Present,
he thrust it into him, and killed him, and they slew the same day ten Thousand
Moabites: so Moab was subdued under the hand of Israel, and the Land had rest
Fourscore years. Judge. 3.

2671. Eglon oppresses Eighteen years. Judge. 3.


2691. Baracke and Deborah Forty years. Baracke was of Nephtali, and Deborah
of Ephraim.
THe Children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the the sight of the
Lord when Aod was dead; and the Lord sold them into the hand of Iabin King of
Canaan, whose chief Captain was called Sisera. Then they cried unto the Lord:
For Sisera had Nine hundred iron Chariots, and Twenty years he had vexed
them. And at that time Deborah a Prophetess the wife of Lapidoth, judged
Israel. And she called unto her Baracke the Son of Abinoam, and she went
with Baracke to Kedesh against Sisera, and the Lord destroyed Sisera, and all
his Chariots at the waters of Maggeddon; in the Revelation, the overthrow of
Antichrist is compared to the overthrow of Sisera at Mageddon.

Then sange Deborah and Barack the same day, saying, Praise ye the Lord for
auenging of Israel, etc. to the last verse of the Chapter. So let thine enemies
perish, O Lord: but they that love him, shall be as the Sun when he rises in
his might; and the Land had rest Forty years.

Here is performed Genesis 49. Where Jacob blessing Nephtali, says, He shall
be a Hind let go, giving goodly words. He was in the pursuit of Sisera, as
swift as a Hind, and gave goodly words with Deborah. Judge. 5.

2711. Sisera oppresses Twenty years. Obed of Ruth.
IN the time that the Judges ruled, there was a dearth in the Land: and a man
of Bethelem in Judah went for to soiourne in the Country of Moab. The name of
the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife was Naomi, and his two Sons
Mahlon and Chilion Ephrathites of Bethlehem: and they came into the Country of
Moab, and continued there, and they took wives of the Moabites: the name of
the one was Ophrath, and the name of the other Ruth: and so read through the
first and second Chapters of the Book of Ruth.

We have the like commendation of Ruth, that is spoken of Abraham, That she
left her Father and Mother, and the Land where she was borne; and came into a
people whom she knew not in times past. And withal she is blessed in these
words, The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the
Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. Ruth. 2.

So Booz took Ruth, and she was his wife, and the Lord gave that she conceived
a Son, and called his name Obed: the same was the Father of Iessay the Father
of David. Ruth. 4.

In that Christ chooses to come of Rahab of Cham, and of Ruth of Moab, he
purposed not to come into the world by the prerogative of nature, or, as the
Jews looked he should come, in most tryumphant sort: but by grace offering
grace to Cham, recompencing the love of Lot to Abraham, and opening the eyes of
all the Gentiles in the world, and causing the dumb Nations that knew not
that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, to speak the
praises of God in their own tongue.

Again, if his Parents had been from time to time of virtuous life unspotted,
as many of them were, the wonderful graces of Christ would have been
attributed unto the generality of his Fathers. But he prevented every
objection that the peevish unbelieving Pharisees might imagine, by coming of
such as the Jews held as unclean before God.

2731. Gedeon Forty years. Gedeon, Baracke, Sampson, Iephte, David, Samuel,
and the Prophets obtained promises, but received not the promise. Heb. 11.
Again the Children of Israel committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord,
and the Lord gave them into the hands of Madian Seven years: so Israel was
exceedingly impouerished by the Madianites. Therefore they cried unto the Lord;
and when they cried, the Lord sent a Prophet unto them, who said unto them,
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I have brought you up from Egypt, and have
brought you out of the house of bondage, and I said unto you, fear not the
Gods of the Amorites in whose land you dwell: but you have not obeyed my voice.
And Gedeon of the Tribe of Ephraim, was threshing of wheat to hide it from the
Madianites. Then the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said, The Lord
is with thee thou valiant man. And the Lord looked upon him, and said unto him,
Go in this thy might, and and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of the
Madianites. Have not I sent thee?

The multitude of the Madianites, and the Amalekites, and all they of the East,
lay in the valley like Grasshoppers, and there Camels were without number, as
the sand by the seashore. But Gedeon with three Hundred destroyed the
Madianites, To show, that victory consists not in strength of men, or
multitude of Camels, but in God who gives the Victory. For at the sounding of
Gedeons Trumpet the enemies ran, and cried, and fled, and the Lord caused
them to kill one another. Thus was Midian brought low before the Children of
Israel, so that they lift up their heads no more, and the Country was in
quietness forty years in the days of Gedeon.

This Gedeon had Seventy Sons begotten of his body, for he had many wives;
and he had a Son by a Concubine, whose name was Abimelech.

So Gedeon died in a good age, and was buried in the Sepulcher of Ioash, his
Father in Ophrath. Read the 6, 7, and 8 Chapters of Judges.

Madian oppresses Seven years.


2771. Abimelech Three years, the Son of Gedeon, of the Tribe of Ephraim.
When Gedeon was dead, the children of Israel turned away, and went a whoring
after Baalim, and made Baal Berith their God, and they remembered not the Lord
their God, which had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on
every side: neither showed they mercy on the house of Ierubbaal, or Gedeon,
according unto all the goodness which he had showed unto Israel.

Then Abimelech went unto his fathers house, and slew his brethren the sons
of Ierubbaal or Gedeon, about seauentie persons upon one stone: so Abimelech
reigned three years over Israel. But God sent an evil spirit between
Abimelech and the men of Sechem: and they brake their promise to him, that the
cruelty toward the seauentie persons and their blood might come and be laid
upon Abimelech their brother. And a certain woman cast a piece of a mil-stone
upon Abimelechs head, and brake his brain pan. And when the men of Israel
saw he was dead, they departed every one unto his own place. Thus God rendered
the wickedness of Abimelech which he did unto his father in slaying his
seauentie brethren. To show that God by untimely and miserable death, takes
vengeance on tyrants, even in this life. Iud. 9.

2774.
After Abimelech, there arose to defend Israel Thola of the tribe of Isachar,
and he judged Israel twenty three years and died, and was buried in Shamir.

2797
And after him arose Iair of the tribe of Manasses, and judged Israel two and
twenty years, and he had thirty sons that rode on Asse-coltes, signifying
they were men of authority. They had thirty Cities which are called Hauoth
Iair unto this day, and are in the land of Gilead. And Iair died, and was
buried in Chamon. And the children of Israel wrought wickedness again in the
sight of the Lord, and served Baalim and Ashtarath, and the Gods of Aram, and
the Gods of Sidon, and the Gods of Moab, and the Gods of the children of Ammon,
and the Gods of the Philistines, and forsook the Lord and served him not. 2801
And in process of time the children of Ammon made war with Israel, 2819
and they said unto Iephte of the tribe of Ephraim, Come and be our Captain:
and the spirit of the Lord came upon Iephte, and he went to the children of
Ammon to fight against them, and the Lord delivered them into his hands.
Whereupon, he according to a foolish vow, being overcome with blind zeal, not
considering whether the vow were lawful or no, offered up his only daughter in
sacrifice, and Iephte judged Israel six years. Iud. 11. and 12. Chap.

Iessai borne.
ALthough he was but an obscure man in respect of worldly glory* yet, no doubt,
he was a very godly man, and taught his sons the religion of God, in that the
holy Ghost does so often repeat his name in the Scripture. In the Revelation
chap. 5. Christ is cal^ed the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and the root of
Iessay. And Esaias chap. 11. prophesying of the graces of Christ, says, There
shall come a rod sorth of the stock of Iessay, and a branch shall grow out of
his roots: and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of God, etc. To show, that as David, who in diverse
respects figured Christ, came out of Iessay, a man without dignity: so Christ
should come of a poor Carpenters house, as out of a dead stock, as Esaias.
53.2. He shall grow up before him as a branch, and as a root out of a dry
ground: he has neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be
no form that we should desire him.

Again, with the very same skorne that the Jews despised Christ, vpbrayding
him by the baseness of his kindred* Is not this the Carpenters son? do the
Israelites object against the house of Judah, when the ten Tribes joined with
Jeroboam, 1. King. 12. saying, What have we to do with Iessay? what have we
to do with the house of David? As if they should say; why Iessay was but an
husbandman, and David was but a shepherd, we will not be subject to so base
kindred, nor suffer such a fool as Roboam of their blood to reign over us,
for we be noble, and unfit to be governed by such a poor stock; but we will
worship Jeroboam of the house of Joseph for he is a noble man, and diverse
valiant and worthy men came of his kindred in the time of the Judges. And so
they indeed utterly forsook the house of Judah, the stock of Iessay, and
walked in the ways of Jeroboam, choosing rather for outward dignity to go to
destruction, than embracing virtue, depend upon the promises of God, to obtain
eternal life. Therefore our Savior Christ says in the Gospel, Whosoever
denies me before men, I will deny him before my Father which is in heaven.
Luke 9.

AFter Iephte. Abesan of Bethleem of the tribe of Judah; judged Israel seven
years. He had Thirty sons, and thirty daughters: He died, 2825.
and was buried at Bethleem. And after him judged Israel, 2833.
Elon of the tribe of Zabulon, and he judged Israel ten years. Tthen he died,
2843.
and after him Abdon of the tribe of Eph^aim, judged Israel eight years, and
he had 40. sons and thirty Nephews that rode on seauentie asse-coltes, and he
died. Iud. 12.

But the Children of Israel continued to commit wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistines Forty
years.

2850.
Then the spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson of the Tribe of Dan, and with
the iawe-bone of an Ass, he slew a Thousand of the Philistines, and he judged
Israel Twenty years. The Philistines in revenge of this, put out both his
eyes, but the Lord strengthened Sampson against them, and he slew at the time
of his death three Thousand more of them.

Here is performed Jacobs Will in Genesis 49. Where he says, Dan shall be a
Serpent by the way, and an Adder by the path, biting the Horse heels, so that
his Rider shall fall backward. And in Judge. 16. He overthrows the house
where the Princes of the Philistines were: so that he slew more at his death
than in all his life: and notwithstanding he died with them, yet he looked for
salvation in Christ, of whom he himself was a figure.

Now compare him with Christ.
Sampson Christ was a Nazarite unto God to the time of his death, and saved
Israel from the hands of the Philistines. was brought before the Princes, and
mocked. at his death overcame more, than in his life.
was a Nazarite unto the time of his death, and delivered us from the spiritual
Philistines Satan, and his Angels. was brought before the Magistrates, and was
mocked. at his death overcomes him that had the power of death.


The Ceremony of the Nazarites is prescribed in Numb. 6. They were such as
vowed themselves to God, and from the vain desires of the world.

2870. Heli of the Tribe of Leui, judged Israel Forty years.
THis Heli had Two Sons, Ophni and Phineas, which were Sacrificers, and they
sinned grievously against God, as appears 1. Sam. 2.12.22. And Eli in stead
of putting them to death, reproved them with tender words. So there came a man
of God unto him, and said: Wherefore have you kicked against my Sacrifice, and
mine offering which I commanded in my Tabernacle, and honor thy children
above me? Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says: Behold, the days come that
I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy Fathers house, that there shall
not be an old man in thy house, shall be a sign unto thee, that thy Sons
die both: for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me
shall be despised. 1. Sam. 2. This our Savior Christ repeateth in the
Gospel: Who so loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.
Mat. 10. and in the 1. Sam. 15. it is said, Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice: and to hearken, is better than the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry.

Afterward the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord was taken from the host of
Israel by the Philistines, and Israel was smitten down, and there was a great
slaughter, for there fell of Israel thirty Thousand footmen, and Hophni and
Phineas died.

And when Heli heard that the Arc was taken, he fell from his seat backward,
and his neck was broken, and he died, for he was an old man and heavy, and
had judged Israel Forty years.

So the Ark of the Lord was in the Country of the Philistines Seven months.
But the Lord plagued them all the time, that they kept it. So they knew not
what to do with it, but put it into a cart, and set a couple of young kine to
to draw it, and the Kine carried it directly to the Israelites, and turned
neither to the right hand, nor to the left till they came at the Isralites.
This shows the wonderful impiety of the Philistines, in that the beasts had
more knowledge then they. Therefore the Prophet David says, they are like unto
horse, and Mule that has no understand. For they worshipped Dagon a moulten
Image. But the hand of the Lord was upon them* and the Lord destroyed them,
with Emorods, which was the cause they sent away the Arc. The use of it is
thus much, that the wicked* when they feel the hand of God, grudge and reject
him, whereas the godly embracing Christ humble themselves, and cry for mercy.

Thus much for the particular stories of the Judges.
Now follows somewhat again in general.
IN these Stories we are to note, that Joseph's Tribe has more Judges than
Judah, or any other Tribe. This may be the reason: We shall see through the
course of the Scriptures, that the Children have diverse times great
prerogatives in regard of their Parents Stories* Ioseps mother was first
contracted: but Iudahs Mother first bare Children: this we shall further
observe in things concerning outward life, and therefore in respect of the
first love of Jacob, and that Rachel was first contracted, it was necessary
that in outward blessings Ioseps house should seem to over match Iudahs. Yet
seeing Leahs zeal was very fervent, the Messiah choseth to come of her.
Othoniel the first Judge was of the Tribe of Judah, to show, that they should
look for their deliverer which should end all the visions and prophesies, and
perfect all righteousness, to be of Judah. The second is Aod of Benjamin, who
is called the beloved of Israel, and of whom Moses prophecieth, that God should
rest upon his shoulders. Joseph gathered poison, where he should have gathered
honey: of him Hoseas speaks while Ephraim spoke, there was great terror. And
thus we see, that none can come to the Son except the Father draw him, as he
himself testifies; for Ioseps glory and blessing was the cause of his
overthrow. This was the cause that in Roboams days the ten Tribes fell away,
and despised the glory of Judah, compelling every one to his Tents, saying,
What have we to do with the Son of Iessai: forgetting Booz, Salmon, Obed,
and Iessai, who in age at the birth of their Sons, resembled and kept in
mind Abraham's age at the birth of Isaacke.

Thus much for the Judges in general.
Now let us return to the Oppressors.
THe first is Chusan of Mesopotamia. The second is Eglon of Moab. The 3. is
Sisera of Canaan, the 4. Madian of Moab; then Ammon of Mesopotamias then the
Philistines in Canaan and so forth in the like sort. We may observe in these
Judges, the gentle and patient punishing of God, who first begins (...) but
if thereby the wicked grow worse and worse, and will not be bettered, he uses
more severe corrections: for Chusan is more mild than Eglon, Eglon more severe
than Chusan. But Sisera with nine Hundred Chariots wonderful vehement in
oppressing. We shall see, that the Moabites were less heavy in afflictions
toward the Children of Israel, than the rest of the oppressors. The reason
hereof may thus be rendered: The Moabites were of affinity with Abraham's seed,
and God promised, that whosoever blessed Abraham, he would likewise bless: and
therefore Lot and his posterity had diverse blessings, and the memory of this
must in some sort assuage their malice. Thus we see an art as it were in Gods
punishments, and the order which he observes, and yet the Stories contain
this doctrine so laid down, as if they fell out at random.

Now for the time of the Judges government.
SSaint Paul in the Act. cap. 7. mentioning their Story, says, That God gave
them Judges after a kind of reckoning Four hundred and Fifty years: if you
count the years of the Judges exactly, they were but three Hundred, thirty,
and nine. Therefore Saint Paul adds, after a kind of reckoning, that is, as
the Jews accounted it, taking in the years of the oppressors, whose tyranny
amounted to one hundred and eleven years: which one Hundred and eleven years,
being added to the three Hundred, thirty, and nine years, make up the just
sum of four Hundred and Fifty years. This kind of reckoning Josephus an
ancient Jew uses: who of some is thought to err, because they mark not his
purpose in the 1. King. 6. where the Text says, From the going out of Egypt to
the building of the Temple, are four Hundred and Eighty years. Josephus, as
if he purposed to cross the text, says, that the time was five Hundred,
ninety, and two years, we have no warrant to think Josephus either of so
great impiety, as to deny the truth of the Scripture; or of such ignorance,
as to be unskillful in so plain a matter, which might be discussed by
eyesight. Therefore if we take in the years of the Oppressors, and the years
wherein the Egiptians were plagued, we have just five Hundred, ninety, and
two years: so Saint Paul in the follows the account of the Jews, though in
right the time of the Oppressors belongs not to the chronicle: this is the use
of al, Christ is Palmoni the secret nu^berer, who weighs, numbreth, and
divides, yea, even the hairs of our head. By these also, the Eight and
twenty Jubilees are made plain and perfect. The certentie of these falling
out so just, may assure our consciences, that God is faithful who has
promised. Dan. 9. Christ the King after seventy Seuens shall be slain, but not
for himself, etc. is the full accomplishment hereof, and to which they are to
to be referred: for so Othoniel the first Judge of the Tribe of Judah
represented him, of all these Judges. Saint Paul speaks, Heb. 11. By faith
all these saw the Promise a far off, and believed, and received it not, God
providing a better thing for us, that without us they should not be made
perfect. To conclude, in the ninth of Esaias, the Lord brings in the conquest
of the Judges, both of Zabulon and Nephtali, and the overthrow of Madian, and
then how the Battle of the Warrior was with great noise, and with tumbling
his garments in blood: but when Christ shall come to subdue all Nations unto
himself, whom these Conquerours signified, his government shall be with peace
and righteousness, and of his Kingdom there shall be none end.

Thus much for the Story of the Judges.
THE NEXT WHICH IS TO be handled, are Samuel, and Saul; and first for Samuel.
The Seventh Iubilee.
HEre you have in the Seventh Iubilee a rare man, Samuel to teach Religion, 490.
where God purposed to establish a Kingdom.

It may be demanded, why Christ did not die in the Fourth Iubilee, seeing it is
a square number, and represents the form of the heavenly Jerusalem? Because
Joseph's house had not then received his full glory. Why then died he not in
the Seventh Iubilee, seeing it is a holy number, and figureth the rest of our
souls?

Because the Scepter which Jacob promised, was not yet come to Judah: and when
he had, it must have a double glory over Ioseps house: but multiply the number
of Seven by the number four, you have Eight and Twenty the very year of
Christ's death.

Thus you see in what a sweet harmony all the actions of God are lincked, if
men will mark, and not be amazed at manifest truths.

Samuel and Saul Forty years.
IN Samuels Story we are to consider three things.

First, the time of the government. Secondly, the place where he ruled.
Thirdly, his person.
The time was in Seventh Iubilee: this is a special note, They were Seven
years in conquering the Land. Theodoretus applies this to this Story that so
in the Seventh Iubilee they should look for some rare event. In the first
Iubilee Othoniel of the Tribe of Judah has a great victory, and is the first
Judge, and recouereth the Kingdom. In the Seventh Iubilee there is a great
conquest: for Samuel recouereth the Kingdom from the Philistines, restores
the Arc to Judah, and erecteth the Kingdom in Israel: This is a wonderful
matter, and these times are to be noted, because Saint Paul in the Acts, says,
That God gave them Judges after a kind of reckoning Four hundred and Fifty
years, unto the time of Samuel the Prophet; which four Hundred and Fifty
years we must find out by casting the particulars. So likewise Daniel
reckoning the death of Christ by seventy Seuens, compels us to remember the
Seventy years of the Captivity, the four Seuens of Jubilees, and the other
Seuens through the scripture. These things hang together like a golden chain,
that even as by breaking one link all is disturbed, so by not marking, or
neglecting one, the other become hard: and by observing this order, the word of
God is made plain, and easy to those which delight in it.

Samuels time may be compared to the new world after the flood: for even as
in Noah's time at the flood, all good men were dead: even so now none alive of
any rare blessing: so that Samuel begins as it were, to revive the world
again.

Now for the place.
HE was borne at Aramathia, which signifies, a hye Bancke. Here is no mystery
in this. But hereby we may remember a like Story: for Joseph of Aramathia
buried Christ, equal with Joseph which buried Jacob.

Now follows the circumstance of his person.
IN his person, first we may consider his name; which signifies I have asked
him of God. Plato brings in a man Theaitetes, which signifies, asked of God.
The heathen took great delight to give names full of signification.

This Samuel was of the Tribe of Leui, answereable for rareness to Moses.
Moses birth was very strange, his Mother being an hundred and thirty years:
so the Hebrews cast her age. This they cannot prove exactly: but yet she must
be very old, because she was sister to Moses Grandfather: so Samuels mother
very old. The strangeness of their birth, must needs cause those which lived
with them, to expect great things of them, and diligently to observe their
actions. Here is yet the difference between Moses and Samuel. Moses had some
notable of his Ancestors, which were not touched with any notable blemish.
Samuel is of Chore, which family is most wicked. And here is a great matter to
be considered. David and Samuels Sons are of one age, and yet from Leui to
Samuel, you have Seventeen generations: and his Sons make one generation,
which makes Eighteen Generations: But in the Tribe of Judah to David, you have
but five Generations, that is to say, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Iessai, and David.
There is mention made in the Psalms of Ten psalms of the Sons of Chore:
they be all psalms of comfort, but the Eighty and Four psalm is a special
one: for there he shows, how God has been favorable unto the Land, because
he brought again the captivity of Jacob, when in mercy he forgave their
sins. And this mercy will he always show to them that fear him, and then
the Lord shall dwell in their Land. For mercy and truth shall meet
righteousness and peace, because truth shall budde out of the earth, and then
righteousness shall look down from heaven. In the 87. Psalm. thus they
speak: The Lord loves the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob:
for in it the Temple was built, I will think upon Rahab and Babell. Behold ye
Philistines, and they of Tire with the Morians, lo there was he borne. The
meaning of this last sentence, is thus much: The Lord will write this man and
that man born in Salem by regeneration; where in the conflict between Moses
and Dathan, Chore and Abiram which were destroyed, Moses writes, that the
Sons of Chore did not perish; We must expound this as a Prophecy, and
refer it to the present time. For he as a Prophet saw, that some of them
should be godly; the perfourmance whereof appears in these days. Hereby we
may learn, that diverse wicked Fathers may have children inheritors of
salvation. And the heathen were not hindered for being called, because of the
ignorance of their Fathers, as Saint Paul proves in the Acts. This is a
Meditation of great comfort, if it be applied to every ones conscience.

Now let us consider the purpose of Samuel in erecting the Kingdom.
THis will appear the plainer, if we look a little back unto Moses actions.
Moses speaks glorious things of Judah: yet he himself gives not the Land to
Judah, but leaves it to him in a Prophecy. Jesus of Ephraim divides the Land,
and gives the pleasant soil to Judah. Samuel gives to Judah by anointing
David king: so we see how his purpose and practice fulfilleth Moses prophecy
concerning the kingdom of Judah. All these things in the Scripture have their
end to the strengthening of Christ's kingdom. If one of Judah had divided the
Land, and taken the best soil to himself, the heathen herein would have
thought it great partiality: therefore one of Joseph divides the Land, and
refuses to plant himself in the best soil, but gives that glory to Judah.

Now we have diverse comparisons between Samuel and Moses.
FIrst in their births, their Mothers being very old.

Moses name signifies, Drawn out of the waters, and so strangely preserved.

Samuels name is, asked of God, and so strangely given.

Moses was brought up in all the learning of the Egiptians.

Samuel brought up in all spiritual learning.

Moses did rule, and left not the kingdom to his posterity, but gave it to
Joseph, that so he might give it to Judah. So Samuel gives it not to his
Sons, but annointeth David of the Tribe of Judah. And so ought Leui to rule,
to teach others how to rule well; but not to leave a kingdom to his children.

They were both Kings: so Moses testifies of himself, when there was no King
in Israel.

They both made wars, and were Conquerours, and both ruled Forty years. The
Jews say, he ruled but thirteen years; but by this they labor to disturb
the plainness of the Scriptures, which will never be easy without the true
understanding of the Chronicle. Samuel brings the Kingdom to Judah by
teaching the religion of god, and makes Schools of Divinity, and instructs
them to search Moses.

This continued in Esdras time, and under the Antiochi; so that as Moses
recorded by writing Iudahs government, and continuance: so Samuel taught it by
expounding Moses, and thereby established it.

Here I am to show a special thing.

When Elias is to be taken up, one tells Elizeus, 2. King. 2. Do not thou
know that thy Master shall be taken up from thee? If it be demanded how he
knew this: it may be thought he knew this from comparison of the ages. For as
Henoch the Seventh was taken up, and Moses the Seventh was buried by God, no
place remaining of his burial: so now in this Seventh age they were to look
for some rare event, which was performed when Elias was taken up.

There be that think, that by this kind of teaching the Ceremonies of Moses
are revived. But they must know that the next way to abolish them, is to know
what they are, and to what use they serve. If we demand the reason why God
gives not the government to Judah; we shall see, that it was because all Israel
followed strange Gods, not regarding the glory of Shiloh. And when as the Oxen
which carried the Arc were released, they went of their own accord lowing to
Judah: and Jeremy says, Mark what I have done unto Silo. Therefore to bring
in the true worship of God, it was necessary to erect the kingdom in Samuel
of Leui: Whose government continued Forty years, thereby to teach us, that
till Religion be well taught, it is not easy to establish a good government,
and this will be long in learning.

Now follows Saul's Story.
SAVL. His name signifies Desired: thereby showing, that he was desired of the
people, casting off the government of God. He was of the Tribe of Benjamin.
The prerogative that Benjamin has the first King of his Tribe, in that he was
the leaft of the Tribes, is (no doubt) an especial favor. If it be demanded,
why he was of Benjamin before any of the rest of the Tribes; this may be the
reason thereof: Reuben had defiled his Fathers bed: therefore it was no reason
that he should bear sway in the common wealth.

Simeon never showed any sign of repentance, but continued in malice*
therefore his cruelty must needs hinder him.

Leui was not to govern, but to confirm others in the government.

He must not be of Judah, because God did not choose him, but the people: for if
God had chosen him, his kingdom must have been established, because the gifts
of God are without repentance.

For Isachar and Zabulon, the younger must not be preferred before the elder.
Then the Sons of the hand-maides, to wit, Dan and Nephtali by Bilha, Gad and
Aser by Zilpa, must not be first preferred.

Joseph's pride cast him off, for that glory which he had in the time of the
Judges, caused him to despise Judah, and therefore God says, Mark what I have
done to Silo: so that of necessity he must be of Benjamin.

Concerning Saul, he was goodly and fair, as any of the Children of Israel.
Thus the world regards only outward respects: but the Lord cares only for
them that fear him, and judges not as man judges. It is said of him, 2. Sam.
1. His spear came never empty home.

We have a comparison betwixt him and Saul the Apostle: for both were of the
Tribe of Benjamin: both persecuted David the beloved, the one for the kingdom,
the other for profession of the religion of Christ the true king of David's
Kingdom: both end the glory of their Tribe.

When Saul is made King, the tribe of Reuben might say unto God, O Lord, how
are we despised? for of all the Tribes we have no glory. Will thou always
remember justice? God therefore to comfort them gives them a conquest over the
Hagarims, by the slaughter of whom they enrich themselves. Aser likewise might
mourn, and reason with God, why he never looked on them in mercy? God
therefore gives them this comfort: Anna, that is, Grace, the Daughter of
Panuel, See God, of the happy Tribe of Aser, prophecieth at the birth of
Christ. And surely if we sincerely embrace Christ Jesus, we shall have the
spirit of grace, to show us the love of God laid up in Christ, that thereby we
may enjoy all happiness: by this you may see the tribe of Aser had a great
blessing.

In the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 4. one Ioses a Leuite of Cyprus sells his
possession, and lays his money at the Apostles feet, and he is called the Son
of Consolation, for the Levites were scattered in the Land, and the Lord the
God of Consolation was their inheritance.

Thus much for those things wherein Saul might seem glorious.
Now for his Faults.
HIs fault was, in that he disobeyed the commandment of God insparing Agag,
and reserving the best of the spoil unto himself. And in that he was envious
against David, and though he speaks good things of him, and knew he should
succeed him in the Kingdom, yet he persecuteth him. This is to run headlong
against the light of Gods truth. So the Devil tempted Christ, though he knew
thereby he increased his damnation. Saul's punishment was very great: for he is
slain at Easter by himself, then undertaking battles when he should have
celebrated the Lords feasts. That it was at Easter, it may be gathered by the
Witch preparing him unleavened bread.

Jonathan the Son of Saul, loved David as his soul; therefore it may be
concluded, he was saved: for he loved David the beloved of the Lord, and
therefore believed in Christ of whom David was a figure. This may be proved
by the new Testament: for in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 11. the
Battles of Gedeon, Baracke, Sampson, and of others are rehearsed, of whom
this is added, that they all by faith subdued Kingdoms, and received the
promise: and in these Jonathan is included. This testimony of the holy spirit
is of no small glory.

Saul goes to a Witch called Ob, which had a Hobgoblin. Herein he sinned
greatly against the government of God laid down in Moses. The hid things for
God, those revealed for you and your children to do them. He fell to this
wickedness, because he killed those which ware the Ephod, and therefore God
answered him not by Vrim and Thummim. God suffers him to take revenge of
himself: for being a King, he was the highest Magistrate, and not to be put
to death by his inferiors. His posterity was likewise plagued, because they
kept not the Covenant with the Gibeonites, which Joshua had made.

Thus much for Saul.
David, borne in Bethlehem,
Which the Prophet Micheas, Cap. 5. calls Little, because it was a little
Village; and little in quantity. The Evangelist Math. 2. calls it not
little, because it was famous in that Christ and David were borne there.

His name signifies, The beloved of God: so is Christ called in Hoseas, and
Ezechiel, by this name, and oftentimes in the song of songs. So that after the
heart of God, and this name David, is all one.

Bethlehem, is as much to say, as the House of Bread, there David the Shepherd
the feeder of Israel, was borne as a figure and token that Christ the great
Shepherd, and true bread of life, should be borne there.

David reigns Forty years; Seven years and a half in Hebron, and Thirty
two years and a half in Jerusalem.
HErein is a comparison with Christ: for as David was King proclaimed at Easter
over Judah: so Christ by his resurrection at Easter, was proved King over the
whole world. David after the death of Saul, asks God whether he shall go?
God answers, To Hebron. This is not without special observation, that God
should command him to go thither. The monuments of places are of great force
to bring Stories into remembrance. For in Hebron Sara was buried, being the
first purchase which Abraham made. Isaacke and Rebecka were buried there: Jacob
and Leah there: there Caleb challenged his inheritance. So that David being
King there, is joined in a kind of purchase with these Fathers, and their
glory herein matched. So the Hebrews apply it. Hebron is called Consociation.
The Seven years King, is a comparison with the Seven years of conquering the
Land: so that look what glory is reaped in the conquest thereof, the same you
may gather in the time of David's government in Hebron. Further it was
requisite there should be proof of the sufficiency of his government by
governing Hebron, before he should rule so stately a kingdom as Jerusalem was.

His Two and thirty years, and six Months, have a comparison with Christ's
living on earth. He began his government there exactly One thousand years
before Christ was baptized, at the very same time that Christ began: so you
see all Gods dealings cast in a fine and sweet proportion.

David comes of Iessai, in this respect Christ is called the root of Iessai.
The ages of David's Ancestors calls in mind Abraham's years at the birth of
Isaacke, and so remembers his Story. About Seven years before he was King,
he fights with Goliath the Philistine, who came of Mitzraijm, which filled Egypt
the cursed Nation of Cham. David is hereunto encouraged by a miracle, being
made Victor over a Lion and a Bear, and thereupon he concludes: This
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. Goliath challenges all
Israel, and defieth them. David trusting in the strength of the Lord, unarmed,
only with stones in his bag, and his sling, slays the Philistine. He was
about this time Three and Twenty years old.

This is the use; Look what this Goliath, and the Philistines were to the state
of Israel: so is the Devil and his Angels to the children of God. And as David
the beloved, by trusting in the beloved Son of God, overcame; so shall we, if
we believe as he did, putting on the armor of God. The sum in regard of the
Jews, is this: that as he, being of Judah, subdued this Philistine; so likewise
in all other battles they should courageously follow him, seeing he of Judah
should come after the flesh, which fought for them from heaven.

Saul gives David his Daughter to wife: it has been a received opinion, that
the Jews might not marry out of their Tribes. This is only to be understood
of the heirs, because inheritance might not go from one Tribe to another: but
if they were not heirs, they might: As we see David of Judah marries one of
Benjamin.

Now for his Victories.
THe 60. and 108. Psalm, speaks shortly of them in this sort, Giliad is
mine; Manasses is mine; Ephraim the strength of my head; Judah is my Lawgiver;
Moab is my Washpot: over Edom will I cast out my shoe: upon the Philistines
will I triumph. The meaning of it is: Christ will come, and subdue all Nations
unto himself, and erect his kingdom for ever. And yet as all these Nations,
Moab, and Ammon, and Edom strive against David; so will the Gentiles against
Christ: And yet, why do the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing? The Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed, and yet all in vain: for he will
bruise them with a rod of iron, for he has given him the ends of the world
for his Dominion: therefore are the heathen fools. In the Revelation you have
the like striving by the Emperors against Christ: but the Mountain is cast
into the fire. In the Acts of the Apostles Pontius Pilate and the rest did that
which the Lord decreed. In these battles of David, Saint Paul's rule takes
place: the sound of them was heard to the ends of the world. For David's
victories being gained not in one; but being forty years allotted to the
accomplishment of them, no doubt were an astonishment unto the nations, and by
them to be greatly observed. Here we have the like comparison of the Forty
years in the Wilderness. David referred all his actions to the building of
the Temple. And if we will truly be beloved, all our actions must have this
end, to advance the glory of God in his Temple. David had many enemies: so
that the 18. Psalm is a thanksgiving to God for his deliverance from them.
God would not have his afflictions easy, because the comfort and consolation
in ouercomming, should be sweeter: and that he being the beloved of God, and
yet afflicted, men might learn to leave to trust to the happiness in this
life, and thirst after the felicity of the world to come. He had enemies
abroad, and enemies at home: As Adonay, Absalom, etc. and in respect of this,
he makes the 86. Psalm.

The consideration of this, is of great use to every godly man in his private
life. Besides these, he himself was his own greatest enemy in seeing Vrias
wife and coveting her, and killing of Vrias. Gods purpose in these great
offenses of the godly, is wonderful: upon this he sung the 51. Psalm, showing
himself to be a spiritual Leapour, more odious and detestable in the sight of
God, than the bodily leaprousie in the sight of men. In the psalm there is a
sentence used, which Saint Paul applies in the new testament: for he says,
then shall I teach thy way unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. And says Saint Paul, God has showed mercy to me a sinner. These
fallings of David, are no warrant for any man to presume to do the like: But
from hence arises a wonderful comfort to the sinner which transgresses by
infirmity, to hope for forgiveness, that so he may be free from
desperation. If David, being so glorious in conquests, and other graces, had
not thus transgressed, he would have been too proud: but he was therefore
humbled, that he might thereby keep the Commandments of the Lord.

Now let us consider him in his learned affairs.
THe whole Book of Psalms are called David's: but there be many which are none
of his, yet they are called David's psalms, because they be in that volume.
All David's Psalms have relation to Moses: and there is great use of them to
expound Moses. For as Moses at his death blesses Judah; the second psalm
expounds that blessing, and applies it to Christ. Moses teaches the Children
of Israel to bless in this sort, Numb. 6. The Lord bless you and keep you,
the Lord make his face to shine upon you, the Lord turn his loving countenance
toward you, and grant you his peace. David in the 67. Psalm expounds this,
and tells wherein this consists. He begins in the like order, that God
would be merciful unto us, and show us the light of his countenance. This
appears in that the earth knows his way, and the Nations his saving health,
When he judges the folk righteously, and gouernes the Nations upon the
earth: and then shall the earth increase, therefore let the people praise thee,
o God, yea let all the people praise thee: by this one you may gather all the
rest. In Moses it is said, that God did arise. The 68. Psalm begins so, Let
God arise, and his enemies shall be scattered. There he says, Thou art gone up
on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men. Saint
Paul expounds this of Christ. Ephesians. 4.

Thus much for his Doctrine generally.
ABenezra an ancient Jew, moves a doubt concerning David's Organes and
Instruments of Music. It may thus be answered* when they came from Egypt,
they had Organes: and having one kind, it was lawful to have other kinds
also. The Prophets which knew the Jews should be trained up in ceremonies,
might use these to the same purpose.

This is no warrant for the use of them now, seeing Ceremonies cease.
Concerning the ecclesiastical discipline amongst the Jews, we shall see, that
David durst not adventure to appoint the Sacrificers, whose turn should be
first, or second; but they cast lots for it, for as he was Prince and ruler
over the people, so they were al Princes of the sanctuary, and therein equal
with him. When the Levites took upon them to be Kings, they became Saduces,
and Malachi calls this time the time of the curse. Rabbi, Leui, Ben, Gerson
shows, that though the Levites had notable victories against the Antiochi,
yet they all died of violent deaths, because they took the glory from Judah,
therefore God would not hold them unpunished.

In the 22. Psalm, David as a prophet tells what the Scribes and pharisees
would do unto Christ: and therein shows likewise the calling of the
Gentiles. He entituleth the Psalm, the Heart of the morning: that look even as
the Heart is the pleasure of the beasts, and the morning the glory of the day:
so is Christ to the souls of those which believe in him. As David a great many
years looks to the death of Christ; so must we following Saint Peter's rule,
look to the end of the world: that from the meditation thereof, we may lift up
our heads, knowing that our salvation is at hand.

David knew of these contumelies against Christ by the spirit of prophecy,
but yet he must prove the truth thereof, and therefore imagines the most
outrageous. And surely we cannot imagine greater, than that Christ should be
as one forsaken of God. Besides, what could be more cruel, than to give
vinegar to drink to those which are sick? David in his psalms goes further,
and compares Melchisedech with Christ, saying, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech: and from thence descends to the calling of
the heathen, He shall smite in sunder the heads over diverse Nations; He
likewise in the 49. Psalm. mentions Adams Story: Adam being in honor
continues not one night, but is as the beast that perishes. The sum of all
is that as Paul taught nothing but Moses and the prophets, so does he. In that
his Sons are wicked, we have to learn, that godliness is no inheritance,
neither does it lineally descend from the Father to the Sons. His afflictions
may teach us, that the best men are not without the greatest calamities, seeing
there is no goodness in them. And if their actions have good success, it is
because God does bless the whole state.

Thus much for David's Story.
Solomon borne.
HIs name signifies Peaceable: so was his Kingdom and government: thereby to
show, that Christ the King, whom he represents, should give peace passing
all understanding.

He was of David by Bershabe. This blemish the holy Ghost notes, to comfort
us in our infirmities, and to keep us from desperation.

Solomon reigns Forty years.
THe Grecians say, that Solomon was King at Twelve years of age. The reason is,
because mention is made of him when Thamar was defloured, and they cast it
thus; two years after the deflouring of Thamar, Ammon is slain, for the which
Absalom flies to Geshur, and there he remains three years, afterward he
is two years banished from the presence of the King: then he rebelleth one
year, and is slain: after this there is a Famine for three years, and the
Twelfth year David dies, and then Solomon succeeds in the Kingdom.

Eupolemus says, that the building of the Temple was reserved to Solomon, who
came to the Crown at the age of Twelve years.

This time has a comparison with Christ.

As Solomon being Twelve years old, decided the controversy between the two
women for the dead Child: Even so Jesus Christ much more to be admired than
Solomon, at Twelve years of age disputes with the Doctors in the Temple.

For this number of Twelve,

You have Twelve Signs. Months in the year. Stones in Jordan. Loaves of
bread in the Tabernacle. Stewards of Salomons house. Fountains in the
Wilderness. Apostles* times 12 thousand Christians sealed in the Revelation.


Christ tells, that the Queen of the South came to hear the wisdom of
Solomon. But says he, behold a greater than Solomon. Besides clean through
the song of songs, you have Christ and Solomon compared together, saving only
in the beginning, where it is said, a Song of Salomons.

We read in Plutarch, that it was a custom among the Kings of old time, to
put questions one to another, to try the ability of their wits, and that a
certain praise was appointed to him that got the victory; and Dius an
Historiographer of the Phoenicians, rehearses the Riddles and Questions that
Solomon sent to King Hiram, saying, that it cost Hiram very much, in that he
could not open them, until at length he found a young man of Tyrus, named
Abdemon, who decyphered unto him the most part of them: we find, that in the
Book of Judges, Sampson promised great rewards to them that could declare his
Riddle. These have a fit relation to the parables uttered by Christ to the
Jews.

Something must be said of the anointing of Kings.
WE shall find that Saul was anointed, because he was the first King: And
David was anointed, because he was chosen by God of another tribe. And Solomon
was anointed, because that Absalom and Adonay gave a push for the Kingdom.
And Ioas was anointed, because Athalia sought to set up other. Every one that
is a Christian, is called the annnointed of the Lord, as it is in the ^. Psalm.
Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm. This is spoken of
Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob, and so consequently of all the faithful.

For anointing of Kings, it is not lawful by imitation to revive it as a
ceremony, seeing this was never done but upon special occasion, the state
requiring it, diverse having at that time title to the Crown. In respect of
policy, it is peradventure lawful, having been authorized by the consent of
Nations: otherwise not.

Temple built four Hundred and Eighty years after the Children of Israel
came out of Egypt. 1. King. 6.
THe foundation of the Temple is laid on Mount Moriah, where Adam was created,
where the Fathers in ancient time sacrificed, where Isaac was offered, where
Jehovah appeared to David staying the plague. 2. Chron. 3.1.

As a City, or an house situate upon an hill cannot be hidden: even so God
would have his people not to behid, but to be an example to all Nations.

The Temple is twice as big as the Tabernacle, because that the Temple and
the Tabernacle had a relation to the number of the people. Seeing therefore now
the people were twice so many as then; the Temple ought to be twice so big.
The efficient cause, is the commandment and warrant of God: the isntrumental
cause is David: he puts it not in practice, because he was a man much
busied in wars. It was begun to be built in the Fourth year of the reign
of Solomon. The Cedars for it were had from Libanon, where Noah's Arc was built.

In the understanding of the Temple, and the particulars thereof, consists
the whole sum of Religion.

It had Six Courts, and every Court of several use, before you came to the
holy of holiest: and every Court were Twelve steps one above another. The
use of which is, that it is no easy study to attain to the depth of the
knowledge of God, neither can a man attain unto it at the first as he will,
but he must ascend by degrees. So were the windows, narrow without, and wide
within: to show, that they which once had obtained the knowledge of Christ,
embracing it with a lively faith, do behold his graces in a full clearer sort,
than those which are without.

For the Courts, they were thus distinguished.

Within the utmost rayles the heathen and profane people might stand, to see
and hear: and as they were like beasts in knowledge, so their place was next
to the beasts of the field.

In the second Court, the women stood.

In the third Court, the Common people.

In the fourth Court, the King did hear the Law read.

In the fifth, were the Sacrifices burnt upon the brazen Altar.

In the sixth, was the golden Altar, and the Table of Shewbread.

In the Seventh, was the holy of holiest, where was the Arc of the Covenant of
Jehovah, and within it the two tables of Testimony* Into it only might enter
the high Sacrificer, and that he might do but once a year: figuring Christ
the high Sacrificer, which once for all should enter into the holy of holiest,
to make intercession for all the world.

Between the holy, and the holy of holiest, there was a veil of blew silk,
purple, crimson, and fine linen, and Cherubines wrought thereon. This veil
represented the body of Christ, and showed that none could come to the Father,
but by the Son; and none come unto the Son, except the Father draw him.
When Christ was crucified, this veil did tear from the top to the bottom,
and showed that by his suffering of death, all men then were Kings and
Sacrificers, and might by their own prayers grounded on knowledge and the
fear of God, obtain forgiveness of their sins.

The doors, pillars, and seeling of the Temple, were covered with gold:
resembling the golden spirit of prophecy.

And when the Temple was built, the stones were so squared before they were
brought, that there was neither hammer, axe, or any tool of iron heard in the
Temple while it was in building: To teach the Israelites, that they ought to
live in peace, love, and unity one with another, without iarring or contention,
if they would have the use of Gods holy Temple. For, says God, My house is a
house of prayer.

The Temple is a resemblance of things in earth, respecting God in heaven.

The sum is, Moses to be compared with Solomon, Solomon with Daniel, Daniel
with Christ, Christ to be compared with all.

In the Eleauenth year of Solomon, he finished the Temple.
AS the Tabernacle was 7. Months in building; so now the Temple was Seven
years in building: thirteen years after, Solomon builds his own house.

There be that think he was twenty years old when he took upon him to
succeed in the Kingdom: and they cast his years to be four and Forty when
he fell to Idolatry. They reckon it thus: He is twenty years old when he is
King: Four years after he builds the Temple: he is Seven years in building:
thirteen years after, he builds his own house.

Upon this his Idolatry there has been a great doubt, whether he was saved,
or not. It is without question, he was saved* but yet it was not without
singular reason, that the holy Ghost left it doubtful: for if it had been
easy for him to be saved, he had been an example of great impiety. It is
promised him, that if he sin, he shall be chastised: but God will never take
his mercy clean from him.

This cannot be meant of succession in the kingdom: for what comfort had it
been to him, to have enjoyed the Kingdom, and afterward to have enjoyed
damnation? therefore it must needs be meant of his estate after this life.
Besides, he is called the Beloved: that may be a reason to prove his
salvation. And in the 13. of Mark; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the
Prophets are said to be in the kingdom of heaven: therefore he being a
prophet, must needs be there. Yet false prophets are excepted, as Balaam and
others, of whom Saint Peter gives a rule, 2. Pet. 2. That they bring upon
themselves swift damnation. Now God knowing his own wisdom speaks things
wonderful short. Where it is said, He worshipped strange Gods; I have
oftentimes muzed what should be the meaning of it. For I could never think,
that he could esteem the Idols of the heathen for Gods, considering he had
such wonderful knowledge. But surely this is the meaning, that allowing his
Concubines to worship them, seeing done by his commandment, it was as his
act: and this will I hold, till I be better instructed. For if he had come to
so open a folly as to worship them as God: this sin must needs have been the
sin against the holy Ghost.

Now concerning his felicity.
THere is no one thing sets it forth more, than the Book of the Preacher:
which Book was made in his age, and after his repentance: yet in that he
speaks coldly of repentance. He begins, Vanity of vanities, all is but
vanities, says the Preacher. This is the sum of the Book. It is amplified
by the general state of all things, then by the particular. The general thus.

The earth stands, yet one Generation passes, and another comes, so there
is nothing constant. If we consider things past, they are the same which shall
be, all things have a time. And the Persians called wise men the searchers of
time. Moses teaches us to pray to God to teach us to number our days, that
we may apply our hearts to wisdom. In all this there is nothing but for a
man to be merry in his labor. Let us behold the Sun, it rises and sets,
and returns again to his place, and there rising, goes toward the South,
and bends toward the North: he never continues in one place, he causes
Winter and Summer, Spring time and Harvest; the Rivers run all into the sea,
and they ouer-flowe again into the sea. Of all these, this is the sum, that
all things under the Sun are vanity, and affliction of spirit: Even so is
the state of man. This likewise the creation shows: for there is nothing new
under the Sun, either for good or badde. Even the finest inventions have been
before: but we count them new, because the generation that knew them, is past,
and so forgotten. So that by this we may see no happpinesse under the Sun,
but all is vanity.

Thus much for the general.

Now follow the particulars.
FIrst as concerning men, and they are in two sorts. The first concerning the
best men: then men of corrupt conversation. I therefore, says the Preacher, I
meant to try pleasure alone, and wisdom alone, and then both together.

Concerning wisdom, I talked with the best Scholars: I knew all the plants,
from the lowest shrubbe, to the tallest Cedar in Libanon, and their use in
cleansing the leaprosie, and how thereby Christ was signified. Yet this
knowledge did not ouer-reach Moses. The nature of the fowls was familiar unto
me. If it be asked how he came by this knowledge, it may be answered; partly
by education, and partly by an immediate inspiration from God: and yet of all,
this is the end, Much reading is a weariness of the flesh, and there is no end
of making many books. So wise men are never quiet, because they see so few
saved: for crooked things shall not be made straight: from this I went says
the Preacher, and tried pleasure.

Go to now, I will prove thee with joy, and with pleasant things, and yet
this is a vanity. Of laughter this I said, that it was madness: and of joy
What is that thou do? We may see he never disputes of these things, but
speaks short: for the heathen by the light of nature knew thus much I went yet
further, says the Preacher, and joined pleasure and wisdom together. For I
made great works: I built houses, set Gardens, planted vineyardes, and trees
of all sorts. I got servants and maids, and had children borne in the house. I
had great possession of Beeues and Sheep: and to conclude, I was great, and
increased above all that were before me in Jerusalem. When I began to look
on all these things, I beheld nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit, and
that there was no profit under the Sun. Besides, when I looked who should
after me possess these, and thought with my self. What? Roboam the fool?
and then I hated all the labor wherein I had travailed under the Sun, seeing
no man knows whether he shall be wise or foolish, which shall be ruler over
my works, and wherein I have showed my self wise: this is also a vanity.
Therefore we see, to all things an appointed time. A time to be borne, and a
time to die; a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of
peace.

Thus God turns the wheel of our life, to the end, that we should not set
our affections on these earthly vanities, but being risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above. Now that all hope of constancy in these
transitory things might be taken away, he reproues it from his own person. For
if he, being a king, and the greatest in Israel, and such a one, as Who is the
man that will come after the King in things which he now has done? and yet
could not find wherein to free his heart from vexation and disquietnesse;
shall any other think to find quietness and security in this life?
therefore of all these experiences, thus he concludes, There is no profit to
a man, seeing all his days are sorrow, and his travail grief, that he eat
and drink, and delight his soul with the profit of his labors, because this
is of the hand of God.

Concerning actions; they are either without a man, or within him. Without, the
most excellent is Justice: and how is that executed? I heard the cries of the
innocent, and no man comforting them, and saw their oppression, and no man
resisting it; therefore I counted those which are dead, better than those which
are alive: and yet happier that never was. I have seen, says he, a wealthy
fool greedy after riches, and yet took no fruit of them, and this is a great
vanity. I saw another in a kingdom, and the hearts of the people alienated
from him. I saw another who has gotten wealth justly, and yet his heir shall
not inherit it, but a stranger shall devour his substance, this is also a
vanity, and a great misery. Now seeing that present punishment falls not
upon the wicked for their sins, therefore without fear they go on forward
without regard of wickedness: for they are sometimes rewarded, as though their
actions had been godly. But this is the sum: No man can know by the outward
things in life, whether he be in the favor and love of God, or in the hatred of
his Creator. The Pope expounds this of doubtfulnesse in faith. This cannot be
the meaning: for Solomon disputes only from the outward actions, what a
stranger may judge: not what he from his own conscience may assure himself.
This is the conclusion, As to the good, so to the sinner it happens; as to the
perjured, so to him that says true; their end is both a like. Yet here is the
difference, that wisdom and foolishness differ as light and darkness. Now
then seeing nothing accords to virtue, fools torment themselves, even as a
dead fly marreth the Apothecaries ointment. We must cast our bread upon the
waters, do good, though the case be desperate: for look in what place the
tree falls, there it lies. The sum is, One generation passes, another
comes: and though one live a Thousand years, and has rejoiced in all the
works of his hands, he must remember the days of darkness, and that all
that is past, is vanity. Therefore o young man, Remember thy Creator in the
time of thy youth, before thy time of afflictions come: and before thy old age
full of sorrow, in which thou shall say, thou have no pleasure, before the
Sun, Moon, and Stars seem to the darkness, and thy hands the keepers of
thy house do tremble, and thy legs thy strong men fail under thee, and thy
teeth being few wax idle, and thy eyes dim, and thou rise at the voice of a
bird, and a Grasshopper through thy weakness, be a burden unto thee. When thy
head flourishes in whiteness like the Almond tree: and thou do go to the
earth from whence it came, and the spirit to God that gave it. This is the
conclusion: The wiser Solomon was, the more he taught the people, and those
things which he had made; and like as a shepherd to the flock, and as a nail
to fasten the joint; so are the words of the wise. This last of teaching the
people knowledge, is all concerning his repentance. Seek no further, for there
is no end of books, and much reading is but a vexation of the flesh; but the
word of God endures for ever: and therefore the sum of all wisdom is, to
fear God, and keep his Commandments.

Now I will briefly show his other Books, as the Proverbs, Song of Songs.


THe Proverbs for the most part of them, were made in his time: some of them
gathered together in Ezechias days.

The sum of them is, that by Allegories taken from the Cedar in Libanon to
the grass, he would show the wisdom of God to be the same in government,
that it was in the creation of the world: And therefore he proves the
particulars hereof by the beasts; for the Jews being a simple people, could
not know this by experience, and therefore from the beasts, with which they
were well acquainted, he proves it. Go to the Ant, behold her ways and
learn to be wise: for she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her
meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest; and thus he runs
through the course of nature, from thence teaching precepts of civil life.

Concerning the Song of Songs.
THe Jews had it in such reverence and account, that before thirty years of
age none of them would study it. It is a wonderful thing, that all the
particulars which the Book contains, being taken from marriage, and handled
so sincerely, no blemish or spot can be found therein. The meaning and sum
thereof, is thus much; That as in marriage we are joined one to the other, and
have separated our selves from all other; so in our spiritual conjunction in
the Church with Christ, we have sworn to detest Idolatry, and to serve and
worship the true and living God. S. Paul to the Ephesians. Cap. 5. expounds this:
Husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it,
that he might make unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle;
so men ought to love their wives, even as the Lord does his church: for we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man
leave father and mother, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great
secret; but I speak of Christ and his Church. Thus you see how S. Paul proves
and makes plain the one by the other; so does Solomon in this Book. The
hardness of this book is in this, that he takes the best things in the course
of nature, and applies them to religion: this could not be done by the wit of
man. All this is done, to express the virtues of Christ to his church. I am
black, but fair, as the daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tabernacles of Kedar,
as the curtains of Solomon. I am black, even like those which keep flocks in
Arabia, through mine own sin: but being lightened by Christ, and having put
on his righteousness, I am fair as the daughters of Jerusalem, and as
beautiful as the curtains of Solomon.

Then she desires: O Lord teach me, O Lord, where thou feedest, where thou
do lie in the noone day, least missing thee to be my teacher and guide, I
wander after the flocks of my companions. Christ makes answer: If thou art
ignorant, oh thou fairest among women, go and enquire of the shepherds: If
they be false go yet a step higher, and this you must learn, that if you be
risen with Christ, then seek those things which are above where Christ sits
at the right hand of God.

Other comparisons there are, as from the wilderness: but by this you may
learn to expound the rest; they are hard, if we apply them to particular
things: but we must know, that these comparisons here used, are not to prove
new points of religion, but to illustrate and amplify those already set
down: for grounds of Religion, whereon our salvation stands, must be proved
by plain story: for the Lord teaches nothing in corners.

Kings of Judah three Hundred and Ninety years before the burning of the
Temple by Nebuchadnetzar.
BEfore I handle the Kings particularly, this must be understood, that now the
Kingdom of Judah was distinguished from Israel. For Jeroboam of Joseph's house,
withdrew the hearts of ten Tribes from under the Scepter of Roboam of Judah, and
caused all Israel to worship strange Gods: and therefore they had two
Kingdoms, one of Judah, the other of Israel. And first I will speak of the
Kings of Judah.

Roboam Seventeen years.
HIs name signifies Sauouring with the people. When Solomon was dead, his Son
Roboam succeeded him in the Kingdom, and his wise men came and counseled him
to serve the people one day, and they would serve him all the days of his
life: but he following the counsel of his young men, said unto them, My
little finger shall be bigger than my Fathers thigh. Thereupon the ten Tribes
fell away, and rebelled against the kingdom of Judah, crying, Home Israel to
your Tents: and they made Jeroboam of the house of Joseph King over them: They
forgot the Temple of Judah, the promise made to David, and the Messiah to come
of his loins, saying, What is Iessai? he was but a yeoman of the house of
Judah. Is the house of Judah better than the house of Joseph who was King over us
in Egypt? but Benjamin and the Levites kept within Judah. And in the Fifth year
of Roboam, ^kisacke King of Egypt, came up and spoiled the Temple, and the
treasures of the kings house. For seeing they had lost the gold of their
Religion, God suffered them to lose the gold of their Temple. And this is to be
observed in the state of the kings of Judah, that in it all common wealths in
the world are figured. For some of them began well, and ended ill: some begun
ill, and ended well: some were wise, some foolish: some very godly, some
extreme wicked: and finally, what condition soever the state of a common
wealth might be of, was expressed in the manners of the kings of Judah.

Abiam Three years.
HE succeeded Roboam his Father. He wrought wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, yet for David's sake, God set him up in Jerusalem he had continual war
with Jeroboam, but always became victor, because he knew that the kingdom
belonged to Judah, and therefore waxed mighty: so that Jeroboam all his days
could recover no strength. He dies.

Asa succeeds him, and reigns One and Forty years.
HE was a godly King: for he makes a law. 2. Chron. 15. That whosoever will
not seek the Lord God of Israel, shall be slain, whether he be small or
great. It is said, that in the Thirty and six year of his reign came Baasa
King of Israel up against Judah. That is meant the Thirty and six year since
the division of the kingdom in Ieroboams time. His fault was, that he put
Hanani the Prophet in prison, because he reproved him for making covenant with
Benadad King of Aram.

3889. Iosaphat Twenty and five years.
HE succeeds his Father Asa. His fault was in joining with Ahab of the house
of Omri. In his days Elias was taken up. He repents him of his sin, by
seeing the king of Israel plagued, and himself in danger. He has victory
over the Moabites, and the Ammonites, because he set his heart to seek the Lord,
and so he had rest on every side. Yet in the end, he joined with Ahasiah King
of Israel, who was given to do evil, and so he died. 1. King. 22.

3110. Ioram Eight years.
HE walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, as the house of Ahab had done,
and wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord. Howbeit, the Lord would not destroy
the house of David, because he had promised to give a light to him, and to his
Sons for ever. In his days Edom rebelled from under the hand of Judah. Now is
performed the saying of Isaacke when he blessed Esau. Genesis 27. But the day
shall come that thou shall loosen the yoke from off thee.

He slew all his brethren, and the Princes of Judah, and made high places in the
Mountains, and caused the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit Idolatry. So
there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet: Because thou have done
these things, behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people; and
thy children, thy wives, and al thy substance, and thou shall be in great
diseases in the disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out day by day.
So the lord stirred up against Ioram, the spirit of the Philistines, and the
Arabians, that were besides the Ethiopians. Because there were other Arabia^s
in Africa southward toward Egypt, I distinguish the^. And they came up to Judah,
and carried away all the substance that was in the Kings house, and his Sons
also, and his wives, so that there was not a Son left him alive save Iehaahaz
the youngest of his Sons: to show, that wherein a man offends, therein he
shall be punished. And after all this, the Lord smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease, and within two years his guts fell out with his disease,
and he died of sore diseases, yet he was buried in the City of David, but not
among the Sepulchers of the Kings. 2. Chron* 21.

So that we may see by Gods Judgments upon him, that we cannot both join with
the wicked, and serve God: neither are Gods promises tied to men longer than
they continue in his fear, keeping his commandments; as it is written, 1.
King. 2.4. If thy Sons take heed to their way, that they walk before me in
truth, that is, without hypocrisy, with all their hearts, and all their
souls, thou shall not, said he, want one of thy posterity to sit upon the
throne of Israel.

3117. Ochosias One year.
HE was two and Forty years old when he began to reign. The meaning is
this, He is the child of the two and Fortieth year, for it is two and Forty
years since the house of Omri came up. Here is repeated the like story of two
and Forty years in the wilderness. He was the Son of Athalia, the Daughter
of Ahab of the house of Omri: he walked also in the way of Ahab King of
Israel; for his mother counseled him to do wickedly: wherefore he did evil
in the sight of the Lord like the house of Achab. For they were his Counselors
after the death of his Father, to his destruction. Which shows, that such as
the rulers be, such are their Counselors, and that there can never be a godly
Kingdom, where wicked Counselors are suffered to bear stroke. And the
destruction of Ochosias came, in that he went to Ioram the Son of Achab King
of Israel, to fight against Hazael King of Aram at Ramoth Gilead, and against
Iehu the Son of Nimshi, whom the Lord had anointed to destroy the house of
Achab. Therefore when Iehu executed judgment upon the house of Ahab, and
found the Princes of Judah and the Sons of the brethren of Ochosias that
waited on Ochosias, he slew them also: and he sought Ochosias, and caught him
where he was hid in Samaria, and brought him to Iehu, and slew him, and buried
him, because they said he is the Son of Iosaphat, which sought the Lord with
all his heart. So the house of Ochosias was not able to retain the Kingdom.
This was the just plague of God, because he joined himself with Gods enemies:
yet God, to declare the worthiness of Iosaphat his Grandfather, moved them to
give him the honor of burial. 2. Chron. 22.

3118. Athalia Six years.
WHen she heard that her Son Ochosias was dead, she puts to death all the
Kings seed of Ochosias house, because she might by that means bring the
Kingdom to Israel, and so have established Idolatry. But Iehoshabeath the
daughter of the King took Ioash the Son of Ochosias, and stole him from
among the Kings Sons that should be slain, and put him and his Nurse in the
Bedchamber. So Iehoshabeath the daughter of King Ioram, the wife of Iehoida
the Sacrificer, (for she was the Sister of Ochosias) hid him from Athalia. So
she slew him not: and he was hid with them in the house of God six years,
whiles Athalia reigned over Judah. But after, this Iehoida caused Athalia to be
slain: to show, that who so sheddeth blood, by man shall their blood be shed.

3124. Ioas Forty years.
THen they brought out the Kings Son, and put on him the crown, and gave him
the testimony, that is his oath, and royal apparel, and made him King, and
Iehoida and his Sons anointed him, and said, God save the king. Then all the
people of the Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet, after they had slain
Athaliah with the sword. For where a tyrant and an Idolatrer reigns, there
Gods religion cannot flourish: but the plagues of God are ever among such
people.

This Ioas, while Iehoida lived, kept religion sincerely: but he being dead,
fell to Idolatry. And because Zacharias the Son of Barachias or Iehoida,
reproved him, he commanded him to be slain between the Altar, and the
Temple, that so all the righteous blood from Abel hitherto might come upon the
Jews and their children. Here we may observe, how hard a thing in a wicked
Kingdom it is, to escape the wrath of God, and to keep our hands from
reaching unto wickedness. And here, look what Kaines age was for impiety, so
was this: for so Christ ioynes them together. Mat. 23. That all the righteous
blood from Abel hitherto might come upon them. Thus Ioas forgot the kindness
which Iehoida the father of Zacharias had done to him. And when the year was
out, the Host of Aram came up against Ioas, and they came against Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people from among the people,
and sent all the spoil of them unto the King of Damascus. Though the Army of
Aram came with a small company of men, yet the Lord delivered a very great
Army into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers.
And they gave sentence against Ioash: and when they were departed from him (for
they left him in great diseases) his own servants conspired against him for
the blood of the children of Iehoiada the Sacrificer, and slew him on his bed.
And he died, and they buried him in the City of David, but they buried him not
in the Sepulchers of the Kings 2. Chron. 24.

Saint Matthew in the Genealogy says, that Ioas was not the natural Son of
Ochosias: for he omits three Kings in the Genealogy.

First let us see, why he omits any, and then why these three. It is certain,
that the Jews wrote the Genealogies, and reduced them to six Seuens, two and
Forty Fathers. Saint Matthew was to take them as he found them, seeing they
spoke true. For it was enough to tell that Christ was of Abraham, and Joseph.
The rest betwixt, are to show the variety of Gods wisdom and providence. The
six Seuens have in them a sweet proportion to the creation, and that they make
up two and Forty, they resemble the standings in the wilderness, being
likewise two and Forty Standings.

Now for the reason why Sant Matthew leaves out three, this it is: They were
very wicked, and for their wickedness were grievously plagued; and therefore
seeing the Jews would not exceed the number of two and Forty, they were the
fittest to be left out. The like example we have in the blessing of Moses:
where Simeon is left out, being wicked, and the number of Twelve must be
observed. And in the Revelation, where the Tribes are sealed Dan is omitted,
for the reason before: even so these three kings being very wicked, had violent
deaths, in token of Gods curse, and therefore the Jews penning Christ's
Ancestors, might justly leave them out. To proceed; when Henocke was taken up,
there was a prophecy for the flood. In Hebers days, Pelegs name prophesied
the co^founding of their tongues. When Elias is taken up, there is presently a
great alteration: for Ochosias is killed, and Athalia does in six years as it
were, vnconquer the Land, and bring all to an vproare. Ioas the remnant of the
Kings seed, preserved by Iehoiada the high Sacrificer from slaughter, comes
up very weakly: thereby to show unto us, that there is no strength in man,
whose breath is in his nostrils.

3161. Amasias, Nine and Twenty years.
HE did uprightly in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart:
meaning, in respect of his predecessors, albeit he had his imperfections. For
when the Kingdom was established unto him, he slew his servants that had slain
the King his Fathers, but he slew not their children, but did as it is written
in the Law, and in the Book of Moses, Deuteronomy.24.16. Where the Lord commanded,
saying, The Fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the Children
die for the Fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin. And Amasias
assembled Judah, and made war against Edom, and smote off the children of
Seir ten Thousand, and other ten Thousand the Children of Judah took alive,
and carried them to the top of a Rock, and cast them down from the top, and
they all burst to pieces. Now after that Amasias was come from the slaughter of
the Edomites, he brought the Gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to
be his Gods, and worshipped them, and burned incense unto them. So that instead
of praise giving to God for his victory, he commits gross Idolatry.

Now after the time that Amasias did turn away from the Lord, they wrought
treason against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, and they sent after
him, and slew him there, and he was brought upon horses and buried with his
Fathers in the City of Judah. 2. Chron. 25.

Here you see a good beginning, but an ill end: and that God plagueth by those
means wherein men most trust: to teach them, that he sits upon a fiery
throne, thereby to cause them have their affections settled only on the mercies
of God, acknowledging his power, and his justice: which they neglecting to
embrace, God to show his judgments hardneth their hearts to follow that which
shall be their own destruction; as Amasias did, who contrary to the counsel
of the Prophet of God, goes up against Ioash king of Israel. After him the
kingdom of Judah was void Eleauen years.

3201. Azarias, two and Fifty years.
HIs name was also called Vzzias. All is one in Hebrew, it signifies Might, or
Strength. In his days Amos the Prophet the Father of Esaias did prophecy: so did
Oseas the prophet. Amos begins to preach two years before the Earthquake
which was in his time.

Azarias did uprightly in the sight of God, according to all that Amasias his
father did, and he sought God in the days of Zechariah, which understood the
visions of God: and when he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper: for he
went forth and fought against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath,
and the wall of Iabneth, and the wall of Ashdod, and built Cities in Ashdod,
and among the Philistines, and many valiant things did he. But when he was
strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he transgressed
against the Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord to burn incense
upon the Altar of incense; usurping the office of the Sacrificers, and is
stricken with leaprosie, and therefore dwelt apart, being cut off from the house
of the Lord, and so continued unto the day of his death. From hence we may
learn what a grievous thing it is in the sight of God, to meddle in the office
of the Sacrificers, which the Lord had forbidden. Number. 18. We may also learn
from hence, not to forget God in our prosperity, least thereby we procure our
own destruction.

In Antiochus time, the Levites who were appointed of God only to sacrifice
and offer incense before him, will usurp into the kings seat and bear rule,
upon the like success in victories. And then God plagueth the^ with a
spiritual leaprosie more foul and filthy than that of the body, being from
Pharisees become Saduces, denying the resurrection, and the life of the soul
departed from the body.

This Azarias king of Judah, saw the days of Eight kings of Israel, wherein the
word of God remains true, The wicked shall not live out half their days.

3253. Iotham, Sixteen years.
HIs Fathers plague causes him to rule indifferently well. His Son Achaz
succeeding, is far worse.

Micheas the Prophet, teaches in the days of Iotham King of Judah.

3268. Achaz, Sixteen years.
HE walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and made moulten Images for
Baalim. Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of Benhinnom, and burnt his
Sons with fire after the abomination of the heathen, whom the Lord had cast
out before the Children of Israel. He sent for help to Tiglah, Pilueeser, and
the rest of the Kings of Ashur, which was not lawful to seek help of
Infidels. Then the Prophet Esaias prophesied: and by him God gives a prophecy:
for when Jerusalem was besieged for the wickedness of Achaz, God sends Esaias
to Achaz, and wills him to ask a sign. Who answers, he will not tempt
God, Esaias. 7. The Prophet replyeth, Is it not a small thing to grieve men, but
you must also grieve my God? therefore the Lord will give you a sign. A Virgin
shall conceive, and bear a Son, and she shall call his name Emanuel, God
with us. Thereby to show Achaz the greatness of his impiety, for seeking to
the Nations for help. For seeing God spares not his own Son, but gives
him to death for us, will not he likewise send strength to Judah? He was buried
in the City of Jerusalem, but not in the Sepulchers of the Kings of Judah.

3281. Ezechias, nine and Twenty years. A new Heber.
HEre we see some recovery of the state. For in the year that Azarias died,
Esaias saw the Lord sitting in the Temple: the Seraphins stood upon it, every
one having six wings, and one cried to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Hosts. And God speaks, Ye shall hear me, but not understand: ye shall see
plainly, and not perceive. Esaias asks, How long Lord? until the Cities be
wasted, the house without a man, and the Land utterly desolate: Thereby meaning
their captivity* wherein there shall be ten forsakings: in Ezecchias time
two, in Manasses one, Josias time one, the fifth in Iehoachaz time the Son of
Josias, the sixth in Iehoiakim, the Seventh when he rebelled after he had served
the King of Babell three years, the Eight in Ieconias time, the two last which
makes the Tenth under Zedechias himself being carried to Babell, his eyes put
out, and his Sons slain, and after the house of the Lord burnt, and all the
City carried captive: so the Lord is in his Temple beholding the actions of
men, and his skirts fill the Temple, the least of Gods mysteries excelling all
the wisdom of man, and the Angels proclaim Holiness to God, this Esaias
confessed: for he saw nothing but woe unto himself, being a man of polluted
lips, that so by faith in the Son of God, his sin might be put away. In
Ezechias time Esaias speaks of nine Nations plagued, which were borderers on
Judea. From this we might gather, that seeing their wickedness was equal,
they should receive the like measure of punishment. He goes further, and
tells what Assure shall speak, and Babell, and prophecieth of Cyrus one
hundred years before he was borne, answerable to the prophecy that was of
Josias in Ieroboams time, concerning the taking up of the bones of the
Prophets. Esaias in Ezechias days prophecieth of Christ, and saw the promise a
far off, and embraced it, and showed the particulars, as if they were now
performed by Pilate. This would not have moved a profane man: but he being a
prophet knew that God was faithful, who had promised. And the men in his time
gathered together Salomons Proverbs. Yet for all this we shall find, that few
were saved, and Christ says, that many Kings desired to see that which you
see, and saw them not. Ezechias was very desirous to have his posterity to
keep the Kingdom in the true Religion. Esaias comes unto him, and wills him
to set his house in a readiness, for he should die, for any thing yet
revealed. He wept, not for fear of death, seeing he had great assurance of
Gods favor, and thereby his salvation made certain: but to remember the
wickedness of the Kings before, and how through their impiety Judah was
humbled, and that now he should sleep with his Fathers, not leaving a godly
one to succeed him. He has a Son, but it had been better, that Manasses his
Son had never been, he was so wicked.

This Ezechias commits a grievous offense, in showing his wealth to the
Ambassadors of the king of Babell. Thereupon says the prophet, because thou
trustedst not in God, but in thy wealth, therefore one of Babell shall come and
carry away captive these excellent things, and thy Sons shall be courtiers
in the court of the king of Babell.

He has Fifteen years longer allowed for the time of his life in this world,
and has this warranted by the course of the Sun going fifteen degrees
backward. He knew the end and period of his life, and thereby (no doubt) had a
wonderful glory. This is certain, that none can tell by outward blessings,
how far he is in the favor or disfauor of God: Ezechias dies, to the end
he should not see the evil days.

3311. Manasses his Son reigns 55. years, being wonderful wicked.
HEre the long patience of God appeared, calling men to repentance, as in the
days of Noah, while the Arc was in preparing.

3366. Amon his Son reigned Two years.
HE committed evil in the sight of the Lord, as did Manasses his Father. For
Ammon sacrificed to all the Images which Manasses his Father had made, and
served them, and he humbled not himself before the Lord, as Manasses his
Father had humbled himself: but this Ammon trespassed more and more, and his
Servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house. And the people
of the Land made Josias King, and he reigned One and Thirty years, and he
did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, 3368.
and walked in the ways of David his Father, and bowed neither to the right
hand, nor to the left. He takes up the Prophets bones, and burns them upon
their Altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem. So he fulfilleth that prophecy:
Read the 3. King. 23.16.

He was very godly at Sixteen years of age, at Eighteen the Book of the Law
is found. It is a great question what Book of the Law it was. It is certain,
that the prophets had the law to study, as Esaias, Amos, and Ezechiel. Therefore
the meaning cannot be, that before this finding they had no copies of Moses:
but the truth is, Now was found the very original which Moses wrote: for
wicked Manasses was the occasion of hiding thereof. Upon this finding and
reading thereof, God says, 2. Chron. 34. Because thy heart did melt, and thou
have humbled thy self before the Lord, therefore thou shall be gathered unto
thy fathers, and shall be put into thy grave with peace. He was slain by
Pharaoh Neco at Megiddo; for the Lord turned not from his fierce wrath,
wherewith he was angry against Judah, because of the prouocations of Manasses:
therefore he determined to put Judah out of his sight. Upon this Jeremy
writes the Lamentations of his death.

In his days Jeremy and Sophony prophesied.

3399. Ioakim, Eleauen years.
HE would not believe the judgments of God against Judah and Jerusalem
pronounced by Jeremy 22. Thus says the Lord against Ioakim, they shall not
lament him saying, Ah my Brother, or ah Sister: neither shall they mourn for
him, saying, ah Lord, or ah this glory: he shall be buried as an Ass is
buried, even drawn and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem. And then
began Nebuchadnetzar to besiege Jerusalem, and Ioakim cuts Ieremies
Lamentations in pieces. Therefore he was buried like an Ass: and here the
succession ended.

Gregory Martin hereupon keeps a stir, as if the Scriptures were not true,
because Saint Matthew says that Ioakim begat Ieconias and his brethren, whereas
in truth Ioakim died childlesse. The Scripture is true: for this word Son, is
taken for any kinsman, and so used in the scripture. He was his Uncle in proper
sense, and Son by succession. Here is now the saying fulfilled. Ierem. 22. O
earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, write Iehoiakim void of
Children.

Nathaniel, he says of Christ, Ioh. 1. Thou art the King of Israel. The
purpose of God in this Kingdom was this, that Christ should be King for ever,
whose government they in some sort shadowed: and yet seeing they could not
perform civil Justice for this life, how shall we, if we trust in our own
righteousness, appear in the sight of God?

The next in order of time to be handled, is Nebuchadnetzar, and the Story of
the Captivity: but because before I could not conveniently handle the Kings of
Israel; before I come to the captivity, I will here handle their Stories in
general terms.
TIll Ieroboams time, Judah ruled over all the Tribes: but when Solomon was
dead, and Roboam succeeds, the Ten tribes fall away from Judah, and then those
Tribes make another Kingdom by their division, and from this time Israel is a
kingdom divided; the ten Tribes bearing the name of Israel, and the other
Tribes, Judah and Benjamin, the Kingdom of Judah.

This division continues unto Ezechias time, and there ends the ten Tribes
being carried captive by Salmanasar.

The Prophet Oseas expresses their state in this sort. Cap. 1.
Go, take unto thee a wife of Fornications: and he took Gomer, which
signifies a whole body or multitude, the Daughter of Diblaim, which
signifies Barrenness, which was a name of one of the standings in the
wilderness. And she conceived and bare a Son, and called him Isreel. So God
calls the whole state of Israel, a whole body, as barren as the wilderness.
She conceived again, and bare a daughter, and called her Loruhamah, not
pitied. She bare again another Son, and called his name Lognamj, that is,
not my people.

The meaning is thus much, Go to the multitude of Israel, whose Fathers
pitched their Tents in the wilderness of Diblaim: and because they fall to
Idolatry, worshipping molten Calves as their fathers did in the wilderness,
not regarding the glory of Shiloh, tell them, that their state shall be as
Israel, that is, like the slaughter of Iehu upon Achab in the valley of Isreel:
and they shall be so unpitied, that they shall be as though they were no
people, until they know I am the Lord.

Of these calamities, Oseas preaches unto them in Ieroboams time, and tells
them under these terms, of three alterations: the one by Iehu, which he
expresses by his first Son Isreel, because, a little while, and I will
visit the blood of Isreel upon the house of Iehu, and will make the
government of the house of Israel to cease: and at that day will I also break
the bow of Israel in the valley of Iesrell.

The Second by his Daughter Loruhamah without mercy: For I will no more have
pity upon the house of Israel, but I will utterly take them away, which was
performed in Tighath Pelesars days without mercy.

The Third, Lognammi, no people: for ye are not my people, therefore will I
not be yours, This was performed when Salmanasar carried them clean away.

It is not expressed of what Tribes the Kings of Israel were, because the Lord
keeps not the wicked in remembrance. If any be mentioned, it is for some
special use in the Story: as Iehu may be supposed to be of Gad, because there
is mention made, that he came from a Town in that Tribe.

Jeroboam is of Joseph, and is a plague to Israel, when he erected the two
Calves in Dan and Bethel.

This punishment Joseph drew upon the Children of Israel by matching with the
Egiptians, and his sin is now plagued.

It is said of Jeroboam, that he made all the Kings of Israel to sin, saving
of Sallum and Hoseas. Hereby we may gather, that Kings being no Prophets,
esteem no more of religion than Calves: and if they make Laws for the
establishing of religion, it is but only for a color to keep the Kingdom
sure, and in peace. The Jews conclude, that all the Kings of Israel went to
destruction to Gehenna. Oh, but some say, we must not judge, least we thereby
become uncharitable. This is certain, that the holy spirit testifies, that
they continued in the sins of Jeroboam: and there is no mention of their
repentance, which is not likely the holy spirit of God would have left
untouched, if there had been any. Therefore seeing there is no salvation but
through belief in Christ, in whom they never trusted, why should we hope
better of them, than the scripture warrants?

The cause of this falling away, was the pride of Joseph's house despising the
glory of Judah. There is one only good of Israel. Abia the Son of Jeroboam:
who being sick, by the counsel of Jeroboam, his mother enquires of Ahijah the
Prophet, whether he should live or die. If she had had faith, she would never
have entered the house, and then the child should have lived the ordinary
course of life.

In Iesabels Story we are to note, that wicked heretics in the Revelation are
called by the name of Iesabel.

Israel became Iesabels, that is, Scattered of God, when they were carried into
captivity, saving a scattered remnant, as corn in the field left standing
after the mower, here and there an Ear.

Iosaphat lost his ships, and Ioram was plagued, because they joined in
affinity with Achab. Micheas tells them, that they made Statutes for Omri,
Mich. 6. This rule is eternal: God plagueth those which join with Infidels.
Here again was repeated Ochosias Story, being the Child of the two and
Forty years. We may further observe, that in the Seventh King of Israel the
Kingdom of Judah almost lost all their state. Iehu he did a very good work in
overthrowing Achab, Rechab of Abraham's house giving him counsel; and therefore
he has a promise, that the kingdom shall continue in his house for four
discents. This was a special glory, the Kings before him not continuing half
so long, though this overthrow was not done by faith. The fourth man of Iehus
house, was Twenty years without the kingdom, and then ruled but six Months.
Now in Hoseas time this prophecy is fulfilled, Iehu shall be afflicted like
Achab; not because his actions were so wicked, but because he himself not
sincerely godly, did them not in faith, and stood in fear of the neighbors
about.

In that the Kings of Israel have so short continuance, we may know that God
caring not for them, they were not to look for any quietness in this life.
Saint Paul handles the state of Israel, as Hoseas did in the case of the
Gentiles, where he says, which sometimes were vnpipitied, and sometimes no
people: For this we may likewise conclude, that they go to destruction which
believe not in Christ.

The Kings of Israel in respect of the kingdom, sometimes unpitied as in
Tiglahpelesar, sometimes no people, as in Salmanasar, in respect of their
souls, always unpitied, always no people.

In Elias Story we have a special observation, 1. King. 19. Elias was Forty
days and Forty nights in mount Horeb, where the Law was given (as was Moses)
and first there comes a wind, but God was not in the wind: and then a fire, and
God was not in the fire: and then a soft voice, and God was in the voice: And
then God and he reasons together: for Israel regarded not Gods wrath, neither
in the wind of Iehu which overthrew Achabs house, nor in the fire of the
Assirians: only seven Thousand which never bowed their knees to Baal, heard
the voice of the Lord, and feared. In the sixth of Ezechiel, the Lord shows
his wonderful tenderness, in that he is so unwilling to plague them, if so be
he could by any means spare them. Now though Jeroboam had a prophecy that he
should be King; yet it stretched not to his Sons, nor further than himself,
and therefore after his death they should have yielded the Kingdom to Judah:
for which, because they did not, they were so notably plagued.

This four Hundred and ninety, shows the time from Samuels government unto
this time, which are Seventy Seuens of years, 3401. 70. 490.
or four Hundred and ninety years.

The Seventy shows the general time of their being in Babylon, which was
prophesied in Ierem. 25. That so it should come to pass, because they would
not keep their Sabbaths, the Land should rest Seventy years, until it had
fulfilled it own Sabbaths.

Upon this number of Seventy, we have exceeding many things to be noted.

First, it is a sweet proportion to the sweetness of man's life.

Joshua sends Twelve to spy and view the goodness of the Land of Canaan:
Ten of those do not believe, and are the discouraging of the people, so that
they likewise perish through unbelief. Upon this, Moses makes the Foure-score
and tenth psalm, and sets down as a decree the wrath of God shortning man's
life, and says, The days of man are Threescore years and Ten, and if one
come to Foure-score, then are his days nothing but sorrow, so soon pass we
away, and are gone.

Another comparison we have with Adam: He lived nine Hundred and thirty
years, one Thousand years wanting but Seventy. The Jews delighting to
descant, say, that Adam as a Prophet saw that David should live but Seventy
years, to make up Adams Thousand. For us, not one of many Thousands come to
David's years: so heavy is the wrath of God upon sinners. Solon being
demanded who were happy, tells a Story of two, who in love and affection to
their Parents, drew their Mothers chariots to the Temple: And the God for
recompense, caused them to die presently.

Cressus going further, asked him, whether he thought him happy? he answered,
There be in a year three Hundred, sixty, and five days, and in every day,
hours and minutes, wherein our life is subject to change and alteration: and
therefore till all this be ended, I cannot tell whom to account blessed.

This number of Seventy, depends of Seven and Ten: thereby we may still
remember the creation, and the Fathers before the flood. Upon this there
depends a prophecy. Leuit. 26. If you will not keep my laws, nor observe my
Statutes, ye shall be in your enemies land, till the land has paid her
Sabbaths, which was fulfilled in ten Sabbaths. The state of the people of the
Jews in Babylon, Ezechiel compares to dead bones. For as it may seem to
every man, that dead bones shall not be reuided; so should they never be
delivered. Yet he comfort them by the vision, wherein God restored these
bones to life; some reason they had thus to esteem of themselves: for they
were carried away captive, the land of Judah desolate for religion, and the
neighbors about them amazed. In Babylon policy they could have none, nor any
exercise of Religion. If they prayed, it must be after the manner of Daniel, in
his Chamber, and so (no doubt) Ezra, and Salathiel, and the rest did So that
their age was even as a dead time in the world. Besides, God says, Esaias 52. My
name is evil spoken of, because of you, among the heathen: so that one of
Babylon might say to his neighbor, You see here a Nation vild, and of no
account; yet they have a hope that they shall be delivered out of captivity
after Seventy years: and here is one Jeremy, which takes a stone, and
casts it into the Sea, and so (says he) headlong shall Babylon be
overthrown: and they have one Daniel, who prophecieth, that the great King
Nebuchadnetzar shall be a beast, that is, shall have the heart of a Beast given
him, because he does not worship their God, but have destroyed their temple.
They despise to march with us, looking still for their deliverance. This (no
doubt) would cause them to be hated, and the name of God ill spoken of. From
this we may gather a deep meditation for our own estate, and to look to our
ways, that they be the Lords ways, and not our own, least through misbeleefe
we fall into the like sorrows. As Ezechiel compares them to dead bones; so
they themselves were as men in graves: for so the 126. Psalm speaks, When
thou leddest captivity captive, then were we like men that dreamed: for we
thought no more that this had come to pass, than the dreams which appear
from the vanity of our thoughts. Now if we make use of these things, by
comparing our state in this life with theirs in Babell, we shall do well: for
may not every one of us say with Jacob, Genes. 47. Our days are few and
evil, and full of sorrow, and we do not attain to the days of our
Fathers? All the Kingdoms of the earth since this time, in respect of their
policy, are called Babell. In the Revelation the godly are admonished to come
out of Babell, seeing they are Gods people; otherwise they shall be partakers
of their plagues: and as long as we live, we shall be in Babell and
confusion, our tongues so confounded as not able to speak the mysteries of God
aright: this is the case of every one of us.

Now the Jews in Babylon, seeing they cannot restore policy, they perform
outward obedience for civil actions, and turning their faces to Jerusalem, the
sight of peace, they praise God in their souls; so we, seeing our case is no
better than theirs in this life, we must meditate on the Son of
righteousness, and settle our affections on high, that after this life, we
may enjoy the heavenly Jerusalem, our conscience having embraced that peace of
God, which passes all understanding, not going about to restore policy, but
in entreating the Lord to teach us to number our days, that yet so we may
apply our selves unto wisdom. To this purpose the 137. Psalm is full of
comfort: for we must consider there is no Land, nor no law, that can hinder us
to be godly. And though there be wicked laws decreed, as when Nebuchadnetzar
erected the Image, and commanded a worshipping of it; yet their end is but to
try the faith of Gods Children, that even as Gold seven times purified, is not
consumed, but made more glorious: so the Furnace seven times more hot, shall
not so much as make our garments to smell thereof, for God is in the midst of
his chosen.

Thus much for the Seventy years in general.
Now a little for the particulars.
IT had three captiuities: The one when Daniel was carried away. The second
Seven years after, when Ieconias was carried away. The third, eleauen years
after, when Sedechias was carried away: so they were wholly but Fifty years in
captivity in Babel, a full Iubilee: this opinion has been crossed: but you
shall see it must needs be so. Then it is said, that captivity begins, when
men are led captive. Besides, seeing God calls the people of the Jews
Daniels people, and the City his City; shall we think that he being in such
favor with God, God made no account of his captivity, seeing by these titles
given unto him, it is apparent God esteemed more of him, than of all the men in
the earth? Further, if you reckon it from Iehoiakims, you then make it Seventy
seven, which is more than the scripture warrants.

Now for the place in Ezechiel, from the time of our captivity, It is
certain, the Prophet there speaks only of the carrying away of the Kings.
Jeremy tells, that the Babylonians shall rule but Seventy years, and they
must be in captivity but to them: and therefore you must begin your
captivity from the time that Daniel was carried away: otherwise you will make
more or less than Seventy. Now if we examine why the Jews would not believe
this, we shall find the reason by a common disease amongst our selves. For we
all know we shall die, but yet there is none so old, but thinks he may live
till to morrow: even so they knew they should be led away captive, but
every one persuaded himself not in his days, and so destruction came
suddenly upon them. Besides, there was a prophecy, Habac. 1. I will work a
work in your days, which you will not believe, though one should tell you.
Saint Paul speaks this to the Gentiles, and applies it to Christ. We may
mark another thing. Israel is carried away captive in Hoseas time, of whom
this is not added, that he continued in the sins of Jeroboam, and by this we
may gather he was the best of the Kings of Israel. Judah is carried captive in
Iehoiakims time, and yet Manasses as wicked a King as he. From hence we see,
that Christ is Palmoni, who numbreth, wayeth, and divides, and the wicked
shall drink up their portion the judgment of God, which neither the goodness,
nor wickedness of any can hinder to cause to come sooner, or later.

Babylon the Lion. 3401. Nebuchadnetzar reigned 45. years.
HIs name signifies, The bewayling of judgment, or the sorrowing of pouerty^
this was true both in himself, and in the Jews whom he captiued. In himself,
in that God being a fiery judge, sitting upon a throne exalting Kings and
putting down Kings, abased the high estate of Nebucadnetzar King of Babel, and
threw him from the house which he had built: whereby he continued not in honor,
but was made like to the beasts that perish, and compelled to bewail his own
misery.

It was true in the Jews, in that they forgetting the law of Moses Leuit. 26.
neglected their Sabbaths, erected Altars, worshipped strange Gods, and forsook
not the abominations of the Nations whose land they possessed, but in groves
and high places profaned the name of the mighty God of Jacob. Whose sin,
says the Prophet Jeremy, c. 17. is written with a pen of iron, and with the
point of a Diamond, and graven upon the table of their hearts, and upon the
horns of their Altars. They shall serve their enemies in the land which they
know not, for they have kindled a fire in the Lords anger, which shall burn for
ever says the Lord. For where the Lord said, Take heed to your souls, and
bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem,
but sanctify the sabbath as I commanded your fathers, they obeyed not, neither
inclined their ears, but said desperately, surely we will walk after our owee
imaginations, and do every man according to the stubbornnes of his wicked
heart. Therefore thus says the Lord, The Virgin of Israel has done very
filthily: will a man forsake the snow of Lebanon, which comes from the
rock? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from an other place, be
forsaken? I shall scatter them with an East wind before the enemy, and I will
show them the back, and not the face in the day of their destruction: their
children shall be delivered up to famine, and they drop away by the force of
the sword: their city shall be desolate, and an hissing, and they shall eat
the flesh of their own children: For the Lord will visit them according to
the fruit of their works, and kindled a fire to devour them round about.

For his kindred, he was of Nimrod of Chams house, and partaker of the ancient
curse: Genesis 10. For we do not read that ever he acknowledged the Redemption
by Christ, which is the sum of al salvation, though he by punishments was
forced to acknowledge the power of God in his judgments. This is the case of
all wicked. His country was called Babel, or Shinear: Babel signifying
Confusion: and Shinear, Shake off.

God gave him a stroke over all the world: but the glory of captiuing Sems house
was the greatest honor, this was a wonderful blessing of God, to make
himself known in Babylon, rather than among other heathen, if he had rightly
embraced it: but we cannot find that ever he came to any hope of grace. But it
was a wonderful judgment upon the Jews: for God thereby showed himself to
be better known in Babylon, (though but barely confessed Creator) than he was
in David's kingdom at home, who neither acknowledged him Redeemer nor Creator.

This conquest of Nebucadnetzar over the Jews was prophesied of long before,
by Jeremy, cap. 25. in these words. From the thirteenth year of Josias the
son of Amon King of Judah, the word of the Lord came unto me, and I have
spoken unto you rising early and speaking, but ye would not hear. Therefore
thus says the Lord of hosts, because ye have not heard my words, I will send
and take to me all the families of the North, and Nebucadnetzar the King of
Babel my servant, that is, (in executing Gods judgments) and will bring them
against this land, and this whole land shall be desolate, and these nations
shall serve the King of Babel seauenty years. This by faith they might have
prevented, as did the Ninevites. For the Lord promised, if they would turn
every one from his evil way, and from the wickedness of their inventions, they
should dwell in the land that the Lord had given them and their fathers for ever
and ever, and that he would not punish them. But in this we see the purpose of
God to be eternal. He suffers his chosen to be tried and chastised with the
afflictions of wicked men, that thereby the condemnation of the ungodly, may be
the swifter against themselves. This victory which God gave unto the
Babylonians over the Jews, was not in that they in any thing deserved the
favor of God, but to the end he might the sharplier be avenged of them, as
Ier. 25 And when these seauentie years are accomplished, I will visit the
King of Babel and that Nation, says the Lord, for their iniquities, even the
land of the Chaldeans, and will make it a perpetual desolation, and will bring
upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it: for many
nations, and great Kings shall even serve themselves of them. Thus will I
recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their
own hands. For lo, I begin to plague the city where my name is called
upon, and should you go free? ye shall not go quite, says the Lord of hosts.

When the Lord has accomplished all his work upon mount Zion and Jerusalem, I
will visit the fruit of the proud King of Ashur, and his glorious and proud
looks, because he said, By the power of mine own hand have I done it, and by
my wisdom, because I am wise. Shall the axe boast it self against him that
heweth with it? or the saw exalt it self against him that moves it? therefore
shall the Lord send among his fat men leanness, and under his glory he shall
kindle a burning like the burning of fire, and shall consume the glory of his
forest, and of his fruitful field* both soul and flesh, and he shall be as
the fainting of a Standard Bearer. For the Lord of hosts shall make the
consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land. Therefore, O
people of Sion, be not afraid of Ashur, he shall smite thee with a rod nor
shall lift up his staff against thee after the manner of Egypt. But yet a very
little time; and the wrath shall be consumed, and the Lord of hosts shall
raise up a scourge for him according to the plague of Midian in the rock Oreb,
and as his staff was upon the sea, so he will lift it up after the manner of
Egypt. For behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel, with wrath and fierce
anger, to lay the land waste, and he shall destroy the sinners out of it. He
will visit the wickedness of the world, and their iniquity upon the wicked,
and will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will cast down the
pride of tyrants. Their children also shall be broken in pieces before their
eyes, their houses spoiled, and their wives ravished. For Babel, the glory of
kingdoms, the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans* shall be as the destruction of
God in Sodom and Gomora. It shall not be inhabited for ever, neither shall it
be dwelt in from generation to generation, neither shall the Arabian pitch his
tents there, neither shall the sheepheards make their fouldes there: But Zijm
shall lodge there, and their houses shall be full of Ohim. Ostriges shall dwell
there, and the Satires shall dance there. And Iim shall cry in their places.
Then shall thou take up this Proverb against the King of Babel, and say, How
has the oppressor ceased, and the gold-thirstie Babel rested! the Lord has
broken the rod of the wicked, and the scepter of the Rulers, which smote the
people with a continual plague, and ruled the nations in wrath. The whole
world does sing for joy, they that see thee shall look upon thee and consider
thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, and that did
shake the kingdoms? he made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the
cities thereof, and opened not the house of his prisoners. All the Kings of the
nations sleep in glory, every one in his own house: but thou art cast out of
thy grave like an abominable branch, and like the raiment of those that are
slain: thou shall not be joined with them in the grave, because thou have
destroyed thine own land, and slain thy people: for the seed of the wicked
shall not be renowned for ever. Prepare a slaughter for his children for the
iniquity of their fathers, let them not rise up and possess the land, nor
fill the face of the world with enemies: for I will rise up against them, says
the Lord of hosts, and will cut off from Babel the name, and the remnant, and
the son, and the nephewe, says the Lord, and I will make it a possession to
the Hedg-hogge, and pooles of water, and I will sweep it with the beesome of
destruction, says the Lord of hosts. For the Lord has sworn, saying, like
as I have purposed, so it shall come to pass, and as I have consulted it shall
stand, That I will break to pieces Ashur in my land, and upon my mountains
will I tread him underfoot, so that his yoke shall depart from my people, and
his burden shall be taken from off their shoulder: for the Lord will have
compassion on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and cause them to rest in
their own land, and the stranger (meaning the Gentiles) shall join himself
unto them, and they shall cleave unto the house of Jacob, and the people shall
receive them, and bring them to their own place, and the house of Israel shall
possess them in the land of the Lord, for servants and hand-maides, and they
shall take them prisoners whose captives they were, and have rule over their
oppressors: and the light of Israel shall be as a fire, and the holy one thereof
as a flame, (meaning that God is a light to comfort his people, and a consuming
fire to destroy his enemies:) and it shall burn, and devour these thorns and
briars in one day. And at that day shall the remnant of Israel, and such as are
escaped of the house of Jacob, stay no more upon him that smote them, but shall
stay upon the Lord the holy one of Israel in truth, the remnant shall return,
even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. For though thy people, O
Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet shall the remnant of them return, the
consumption decreed shall ouerflowe with righteousness: and there shall be a
path to the remnant of his people which are left of Ashur, like as it was unto
Israel, in the day that he came out of the land of Egypt. In that day also
shall the great trumpe be blown, and they shall come which perished in the
land of Ashur, and they that were chased into the land of Egypt, and they shall
worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem, as it was promised, Leuit. 26.
Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and my covenant with Isaac, and
my covenant also with Abraham will I remember, the covenant of old, when I
brought them out of Egypt, in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their
God, I am the Lord. And thou shall say in that day, O Lord, I will praise thee,
though thou wast angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest
me. Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust, and will not fear: for the Lord
God is my strength and song, he also is become my salvation. Therefore with joy
shall ye draw waters out of the wells of salvation, and ye shall say in
that day, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his works among the
people, make mention of them: for his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord, for
he has done excellent things: this is known in all the world. Cry out and
showte, O inhabitant of Sion: for great is the holy one of Israel in the
midst of thee. In that day also shall this song be sung in the land of Judah,
We have a strong city, Salvation shall God set for walls and bulwarks. Open
ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may enter in.
By an assured purpose will thou preserve perfect peace, because they trusted in
thee. Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord God there is strength for
evermore: for he will bring down them that dwell on hie, the high city will
he abase, even to the ground will he cast it down, and bring it to dust. The
way of the just is righteousness: thou will make equal the righteous path of
the just: the wicked, O Lord, will not behold thy high hand, but they shall see
it and b^ confounded. But Lord, unto us thou will ordain peace: for thou have
also wrought all our works for us. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee
have ruled us, but we will remember thee only and thy name. Thus we see, that
God does not utterly forsake his elect, though sometimes he leaves them, for
the trial of their faith, to their own infirmities, but for ever destroys
the wicked and ungodly.

We have the like story of Gods justice in the affliction of Abraham's seed in
Egypt. God told Abraham, that his seed should be evil entreated in a land
that was not theirs four hundred years: but the people, to whom they are in
bondage too, will I judge, says the Lord, Genesis 15.

The afflicters both of Cham.

The afflicted both of Abraham.

It is said in the 25. of Ieremies Prophecy, that the fourth year of
Iehoiakim King of Judah, was the first year of Nebucadnetzar King of Babel. And
in the first of Daniel it is said, In the third year of Iehoiakim King of
Judah, came Nebucadnetzar King of Babel unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. The
question is, how these two places are reconciled the one to the other.

It is certain, that it is in the third year accomplished, and in the
beginning of the fourth: for though Nebucadnetzar began to reign in the third
year of Iehoiakims reign; yet that year in Jeremy is not counted, because
it was almost expired: but in Daniel it is laid down, to make plain the first
year of the seauenty, which they were to be in captivity.

In the second year after this captivity, Nebucadnetzar sees a great Image,
whose head was of fine gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly and his
thighs of brass, his legs of iron, and his feet, part of iron, part of clay:
he beheld also till a stone was cut without hands, which smote the image upon
his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces: then was the
iron, the clay, the brass, the silver and the gold broken all together, that
no place was found for them: and the stone that smote them, became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth. Dan. 2.

Daniel saw some great beasts come up from the sea: the first a Lion, the
second a Bear, the third a Leopard, the fourth unlike the former, with teeth
of iron, and ten horns. Dan. 7. These great beasts which are four, are
four Kings which shall take the kingdom of the Saints of the most high. In
the thirteenth of the Revelation, John saw a beast rise out of the sea, having
seven heads and ten horns, mouthed like a Lion, bodied like a Leopard,
footed like a Bear, and the Dragon gave him his power.

And Daniel beheld till the thrones were set up, and the Ancient of days did
sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure
wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire: a
fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him, the
judgment was set, and the books opened, the beasts were slain, and their
bodies cast into the burning fire: and behold, one like the Son of man came in
the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and he gave him
dominion and honor, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages
should serve him: his kingdom shall never be destroyed, so as Revel. 20. John
saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face flied both
the earth and the heaven, and he saw the dead both great and small stand
before God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened which was
the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books according to their works, and whosoever was not found written in
the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire.

Dan. 3. Nebucadnetzar erecteth an Image, and commands to worship it.
Sidrach, Mishach, and Abednego refused. This shows, that wicked laws cannot
compel godly men to do that which God forbids: for the faithful are
always assured that God will defend them (this is the meaning of this place)
and will not fear him that can throw the body into the fire, but stand in awe
of him that can throw both body and soul into eternal fire: so in Apoc. 1^.
As many as would not worship the image of the beast, were killed.

3409. Ioachin, three months.
HE was eight years old when he began to reign, and he ruled three months
and ten days in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sigh of the Lord. And when the
year was out, King Nebucadnetzar sent and brought him to Babel, with the
precious vessels of the house of the Lord.

He began his reign at eight years, and reigned ten years when his father
was alive, and after his fathers death, which was the eighteenth year of his
age, he reigned alone three months and ten days. So he was brought prisoner
to Babel, and Zedechias his brother (but in truth his Uncle) was made King in
his steed, so he continued in prison all the days of Nebucadnetzar, that is,
seven and thirty years after Nebucadnetzar had carried him captive, unto the
first year of evil Merodach King of Babel, who succeeded Nebuchadnetzar. This
was foretold him by the Prophet Jeremy, cap. 22. Thou that dwell in
Lebanon, and make thy nest in the Cedars, how beautiful shall thou be, when
sorrows come upon thee as the sorrows of a woman in travail? as I live,
says the Lord, though Coniah (that is Ioachin or Ieconias) the son of
Iehoiachim King of Judah were as the signet of my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence, and I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life,
and into the land of them whose face thou fear, even into the hand of
Nebucadnetzar King of Babel, and into the hand of the Chaldeans, and I will
cause them to carry thee away and thy mother that bare thee, into another
country where ye were not borne, and there shall ye die; but to the land
whereunto they desire to return, they shall not return thither. But after the
death of Nebucadnetzar, evil Merodach his son did lift up the head of
Ioachin, or Ieconias King of Judah out of the prison, and spoke kindly to him,
and set his throne above the throne of the Kings that were with him in Babel,
and changed his prison garments, and he did continually eat meat before him
all the days of his life, and his portion was a continual portion given him
by the King, every day a certain all the days of his life.

3410. Zedechias, Eleauen years.
HIs name was first Mattamah: but Nebucadnetzar changed his name to Zedechiah.
He was one and twenty years old when he began to reign. And he did evil
in the sight of the Lord according to all that Iehoiakim had done. Therefore
the wrath of the Lord was against Jerusalem and Judah, until he cast them out
of his sight. And Zedechias rebelled against the King of Babell: and in the
ninth year of Zedechias reign, the tenth month, and which day of the month,
Nebucadnetzar King of Babel came, he, and all his host against Jerusalem, and
pitched against it, and they built forts against it round about. So the city
was besieged unto the eleauenth year of King Zedechias, and the ninth month,
the famine was so great in the city, that there was no bread for the people of
the land. So that the fourth of Ieremies Lamentations was truly performed,
that mothers did eat their own children. So the city was broken up, and the
King Zedechias fled: but the army of the Caldees pursued after him, and
took him in the deserts of Jericho, and all his host was scattered from him.
Then they took the King, and carried him up to the King of Babel to Riblah,
where they gave judgment upon him: and they slew the sons of Zadechias before
his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedechias, and bound him in chains, and
carried him to Babel.

Here is performed the words of Jeremy the Prophet, chap. 24. I will give
Zedechias the King of Judah, and his Princes, and the rest of Jerusalem, for a
terrible plague to all the kingdoms of the earth, and for a reproach, and for a
proverb, for a common talk, and for a curse in all places where I shall cast
them, and I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence among them,
till they be consumed out of the land that I gave to them and their Fathers.
And Ier. 5. For the house of Israel, and the house of Judah have grieuouslie
transgressed against me, says the Lord: they have denied the Lord, and said,
It is not he, neither shall the plague come upon us, neither shall we see
sword, nor famine: and the Prophets shall be as wind, and the word is not in
them. Wherefore thus says the Lord God of hosts, because ye spoke such
words, I will bring a Nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, which is
a mighty Nation, and an ancient Nation, and a Nation whose language thou
know not, neither understand what they say: whose quiver is an open
sepulcher, they are all very strong, and they shall eat thine harvest, and thy
bread, and they shall devour thy sons and thy daughters, they shall eat up
thy sheep and thy bullockes, they shall eat thy vines and thy fig trees, they
shall destroy with the sword thy fenced cities, wherein thou did trust.
Nevertheless, says the Lord, at those days I will not make a full end of
you. And when you shall say: Wherefore does the Lord these things unto us? then
shall thou answer them, Like as you have forsaken me, and served strange Gods
in your land: so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours. Declare
this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah: for among my people are
found wicked persons, that lay wait as he that sets snares, and as a
cagefull of birds, so is their housefull of deceit: they do ouerpasse the
deeds of the wicked, they execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the
fatherless. And shall not visit for these things, says the Lord, or shall
not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? an horrible and filthy thing
is committed in the land: the Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests receive
gifts in their hands, ard my people delight therein.

Here the crown and kingdom is overthrown according to that prophecy, I
will ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne the kingdom, until he come unto whom
the crown and diadem does belong: meaning Christ. And indeed the Jews after
this time had never an established kingdom several to themselves free from
foreign government.

3414. Ezechiel prophecieth.
WHo cap. 1. saw the heavens open, and four beasts (that is Angels) like a
man, a lion, an eagle, and an ox full of eyes, and with four wings, and
above the firmament that was over their head, was the fashion of a throne, like
unto a Saphir stone, and upon the similitude of the throne was by appearance as
the similitude of a man upon it, and the likeness of the bow that is in the
clowd in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the light round about it:
this was the appearance of the similitude of the glory of the Lord. Ezechiel
being in Chaldea, in a vision is carried into Jerusalem, and there sees the
glory of God as before, and saw horrible idolatry. The similitude of creeping
things and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel painted
upon a wall, whence the wrath of Christ kindled against them is thus signified:
one from the throne of Saphir stone clothed with linen, fills his hands with
coals of fire, and scatters them over Jerusalem. So in the fall of the
Church. Ap. 8. The Angel took the censure, and filled it with fire of the
Altar, and cast it into the earth, and there were voices, and thundrings, and
earthquakes.

3419. Temple burnt.
IN the Nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnetzar king of Babel, 390.
came Nebuzaradan chief Steward and servant of the king of Babel to Jerusalem,
and burnt the house of the Lord, and the kings house, and all the houses of
Jerusalem. Also all the pillars of brass, the bases, the brazen sea did the
Chaldees break, and carried the brass of them to Babel. The pots also, and
the besomes, the instruments of music, and the incense ashes, and all the
vessels of brass that they ministered in, took they away.

It is to be noted, that so long as the Temple stood, there was peace in all
the earth: but it being once overthrown, there was after that general wars:
the Persians against the Babylonians, and the Babylonians against all Nations,
and the Grecians against the Persians. For when God once plagued his own
people, his justice was extended over all: and as it was Seven years in
building: so Nebuchadnetzar was Seven years a beast for destroying it, that
is, the heart of a man, not the body of a man was taken from him.

Megastenes an ancient author, writes that Nebuchadnetzar at his return home
was stricken with madness, and died, crying incessantly to the Babilonians, that
a great mischief was nere them, which all the power of their Gods could not
stay: For (quoth he) a Hafeasse of Persia shall come and make us thrals. The
man that he spoke of was Cyrus, who as Alexander Polihistor witnesses, builded
up the temple of Jerusalem again.

Here is performed, Iere. 20. I will make this City desolate, and an hissing,
so that every one that passes by shall be astonished, and hiss, because of
all the plagues thereof: for the people are all rebellious traitors: they are
brass and iron, they all are destroyers. And Ierem. 7. Wherefore thus says
the Lord, Is this house become a den of Thieves, whereupon my name is called
before your eyes? This our Savior Christ in the 21. of Matthew uses to the
money changers* Behold I see it, says the Lord. But go ye now to Silo, where I
set my name at the beginning, and behold what I did to it, for the sins of my
people Israel, even so will I do to this house wherein also ye trust, even to
the place that I gave to you, and to your Fathers, as I have done unto Silo.
And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast all your brethren, even all
the children of Ephraim. For see thou not what they do in the Cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make Cakes to the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto other Gods, that they may
provoke me unto anger. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold my anger, and
my wrath shall be powered upon this place upon man, and upon beast, and upon the
tree of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground, and it shall burn, and
not be quenched. Ezech. 4. And behold, I will break the staff of bread in
Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by wait and with care, and they shall
drink water by measure, and with astonishment. And Ezekiel. 5. the third part of
thee shall die with pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the
midst of thee, and another third part shall fall by the sword, and I will
scatter the last third part into all the winds, and I will draw a sword after
them, says the Lord, so thou shall be a reproach and shame, a chastisement and
astonishment unto the Nations, when I shall execute my judgments. For I will
send upon you a famine, and beasts, and pestilence and blood shall pass
thorough thee. I the Lord have spoken it.

These plagues were foretold should come upon them in the Law of Moses. Leuit.
26. In these words: If you will not be reformed, but walk stubbornly against
me, etc. I will appoint over you fearfulness, a consumption, and the burning
ague to consume the eyes, and to make the heart heavy, and you shall sow your
seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. I will break the pride of
power, and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass. This was
performed when Elias was constrained to pray for rain. Your strength shall be
spent in vain, neither shall the Land give her increase, neither shall the
trees of the Land give their fruit. I will also send wild beasts upon you,
which shall spoil you, and destroy your cattle, and a sword that shall avenge
the quarrel of my covenant, and when ye are gathered in your Cities, I will
send the pestilence upon you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the
enemy, when I shall break the staff of your bread, then ten women shall
bake your bread in one Oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by
weight, and ye shall eat but not be satisfied, and ye shall eat the flesh of
your Sons, and the flesh of your Daughters shall ye devour. I will make
your Cities desolate, and bring your Sanctuary to naught.

Upon this destruction Jeremy lamenteth the state of Ierusalems misery, and
shows therewith the cause of her punishments.

How does the City remain solitary that was full of people? she is as a
widow, she weepeth continually in the night, her tears run down her cheeks:
among all her lovers she has none to comfort her. Judah is carried away
captive because of affliction, and because of great servitude she dwells
among heathen, and finds no rest: all her persecutors took her in the
straights. The ways of Sion lament, because no man comes to the solemn
feasts: all her gates are desolate, her Priests sigh, her Virgins are
discomfited, and she is in heaviness, her Adversaries are the chief, and her
enemies prosper: for the Lord has afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions, and her children are gone into captivity before the enemy.
And from the Daughter of Sion all her beauty is departed, her Princes are
become like Hearts that find no pasture, and they are gone without strength
before the pursuer. Jerusalem remembered the days of her affliction, and of her
rebellion, and all her pleasant things that she had in times past, when her
people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her, the
adversaries saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths. Jerusalem has grievously
sinned, therefore she is in derision: all that honored her despise her,
because they have seen her filthiness: yea, she sigheth, and turns
backward, her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembered not her last end,
therefore she came down wonderfully she had no comforter, she has seen the
heathen enter into her Sanctuary, whom thou did command that they should not
enter into thy Church. Sion stretches out her hands, and there is none to
comfort her. The Lord has appointed the enemies of Jacob round about him.
Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman in the midst of them. The Lord is
righteous: for I have rebelled against his commandment: Hear I pray you all
people, and behold my sorrow; my Virgins and my young men are gone into
captivity. I called for my Lovers, but they deceived me, my priests and mine
Elders perished in the City, while they sought their meat to refresh their
souls: how has the Lord darkened the Daughter of Sion in his wrath, and has
cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not
his footstool in the day of his wrath! The Lord has destroyed all the
habitations of Jacob, and not spared: he has polluted the Kingdom, and the
Princes thereof, he has destroyed his Tabernacle as a Garden, he has
destroyed his congregation: the Lord has caused the feasts and Sabbaths to be
forgotten in Sion: He has forsaken his Altar, he has abhorred his
Sanctuary, he has given into the hand of the enemy the walls of her
Palaces: they made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of
solemnity: her gates are sunk to the ground, he has destroyed and broken her
bars, her King and her Princes are among the Gentiles; the law is no more,
neither can her Prophets receive any vision from the Lord: all that pass by
the way clappe their hands at thee, they hiss and wagge their head upon the
daughter Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of
beauty, and the joy of the whole earth? thy enemies hiss and gnash their
teeth against thee, saying, Let us devour it: surely, this is the day that we
looked for: we have found and seen it. The Lord has done that which he
purposed, he has fulfilled his word that he had determined of old.

3431. Ezechiel sees a Vision of the restoring of the Temple.
THe name of Ezechiels Temple is, The Lord is there. This Temple had more
spiritual ornaments, than the first: for all the Nations of the earth came
thither. Christ himself taught there, a greater than Aaron.

The old Temple had gold, that is, the spirit of prophecy, which the new
Temple had not.

All the laws and ceremonies of the former Temple was delivered unto them
again anew: and Israel and Judah brought all under one head, as in the days
of David and Solomon.

Ezech 40
In the five and Twentieth year of our being in captivity in the beginning of
the year in the Tenth day of the Month in the Fourteenth year after the
City was smitten, the hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought me into the
Land of Israel in a divine vision, and set me upon a very hye Mountain,
whereupon was as the building of a City. And behold, there was a man with a
reed to measure it: So in the Ap. 21. John says, The Angel carried me away in
the spirit to a great and a hye Mountain, and he showed me the great City
holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, and I saw no Temple therein,
for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.

3446. Euilmerodach, two and Twenty years.
OF him no evil is spoken in the Scripture: something is spoken in his praise,
that he entreated favorably Ieconias King of Judah.

Zorobabel. His name signifies, Free from confusion. This was performed in
him, when as he with Jesus the Son of Iehosadach, Ezra. 3.2. led the people
from Babell, which signifies Confusion, and builded the Altar of the Lord to
offer burnt offerings thereon, as it is written, Exodus 23.

This deliverance was prophesied of Zorobabell, by Haggai the prophet. Cap. 2.
I will take thee, O Zorobabel the Son of Selathiel, and make thee as a signet
upon my right hand.

3469. Baltazar, Three years.
HIs name signifies* a searcher of treasu^^^. He was very wicked, as was
Nebuchadnetzar his Grandfather: blasphemed God, and polluted his vessels. For
he made a great banquet, and called thereunto his wives and his Concubines,
his Lords and his Nobles, and was drunk with the wine which he drank out of
the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nebuchadnetzar had brought out from
the Temple of Jerusalem; and the same hour whilst he was boasting of himself
in the pride of his greatness, a piece of hand writes on the wall where he
was banqueting, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin. At the sight whereof his
countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of
his loins were loosened, and his knees smote one against the other, and his
Princes were astonished: Wherefore he sent for all his Astrologians, Caldeans,
and Soothsayers, to tell him the interpretation of the words, but they could
not* then the Queen mother, to wit, Nebuchadnetzars wife, and Grandmother to
Baltazar tells the King, that there was in his Kingdom a man in whom was the
spirit of the holy Gods, and light and understanding and wisdom was found in
him, whom Nebuchadnetzar made chief of the Enchaunters, Astrologians,
Caldeans, and Soothsayers, because a more excellent spirit, and knowledge, and
understanding was found in him: for he did expound dreams, and declare hard
sentences, and dissolved doubts, even Daniel, whom the King named
Belteshazter, according to the name of Nebuchadnetzars God, which he did of
purpose, Daniel being young, to make him forget his own name, and thereby his
Religion, if it could have been; for Daniels name indeed contained singular
assurance of Gods mercy toward him. Daniel, God is my Judge.

Then Daniel was brought before the King, and the King spoke and said unto
Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the Captivity of
Judah, whom my Father the King brought out of Jury? I have heard of thee,
that the spirit of the holy Gods is in thee, and that light and understanding,
and excellent wisdom is found in thee. Now wise men, and Astrologians have been brought before me, that they should read this writing, and show me the
interpretation, but they could not, which if thou can do it, thou shall be
clothed with purple, and shall have a chain of gold, and be the third ruler
in my Kingdom. Then Daniel answered before the King, Keep thy rewards to thy
self, and give thy gifts to another: Yet will I read the writing unto the
King, and show him the interpretation.

By the way, we have here to understand, how godly men cannot live in a
kingdom, but God will make them known to be his servants: which they may know
if they despise unlawful preferments, trusting to the providence of God.
Abraham was of this Religion: he would not be enriched by the King of Sodom.
And Moses had rather suffer affliction with the Children of God, than to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter.

Daniel before he reads the writing, declares to the King his wonderful
and impious ingratitude toward God, considering his wonderful work toward
his Grandfather, and so shows that he does not sin of ignorance, but of
malice, and therefore cannot be forgiven.

Daniels speech is bold, yet reverent.
O King hear thou, The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnetzar thy Father a
Kingdom, and majesty, and honor, and glory, and for the majesty that he
gave him, all people, Nations, and languages trembled, and feared before him.
He put to death whom he would, and whom he would, he smote; he set up whom
he would, and whom he would he put down: but when his heart was puffed up,
and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and
they took his honor from him, and he was driven from the Sons of men, and
his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild Asses,
they fed him with grass like Oxen, and his body was weat with the deaw of
heaven, till he knew that the most high God bare rule over the kingdom of men,
and that he appoints over it whomsoever he pleases. And thou his Son O
Belshatzer, have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all these things.
But have lift up thy self against the Lord of heaven, and they have brought
the vessels of his house before thee, and thou and thy Princes, thy wives, and
thy Concubines have drunk wine in them, and thou have praised the Gods of
silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which neither see, nor
hear, ^or understand, and the God in whose hand thy breath is and all thy
ways, him have thou not glorified.

Now this is the writing that he has written.
This is the interpretation.
Mean, Mean, Mean. God has numbered thy kingdom, and has finished it. Tekel,
Tekel. Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found too light. Vpharsin,
Peers. Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.
The same night was Baltasar the King of the Caldees slain: and Darius of the
Medes took the Kingdom.

Thus the head of gold is punned to dust, and Babylon the Lion is cast into the
fire by Christ the fiery Judge.

And here ends the glory of the Babylonians. Now the Seventy years of
captiuing the Jews is accomplished, and the plague and ruin of Babylon
foretold by the Prophets, is now performed. For Cyrus of Sem, and Darius of
Iaphet join together, to overthrow Baltasar of Chams house: here Iaphet is
persuaded to dwell with Sem, and Canaan is made a servant of servants to them
both according to Genesis 10.

Now follows to be handled the overthrow of Babel, and the prophecies which
concern the same, and by whom the destruction is prophesied.
A Grievous vision was showed unto me. The transgressor against a
transgressor, and the destroyer against a destroyer. Go up Elam, Esaias. 21.
besiege O Madat* By Elam, he means the Persians; and by Madai, the Meedes.
This prophecy was foretold a Hundred years before this time. Esaias. 13.
Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver,
nor be desirous of gold: their children also shall be broken in pieces before
their eyes, their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

Of Cyrus one Hundred years before he was borne the Lord said, Esaias. 44.
Cyrus, thou art my shepherd, and he shall perform all my desire: saying also
to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built: and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be
surely laid. And Esaias. 45. Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose
right hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him. Therefore I will weaken
the loins of Kings, and open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be
shut. This is verified, when Baltazar being drunk at his banquet, the watches
of the City were left open, that Cyrus and Darius came suddenly upon them.

It is said further there, I will go before thee, and make the crooked
straight: I will break the brazen doors, and brust the iron bars, and I will
give thee the treasures of darkness, and the things hid in secret places,
that thou may know that I am the Lord which call thee by thy name, even the
God of Israel. For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I will even
call thee by thy name, and name thee though thou have not known me. I whose
hands have spread out the heavens, I have even commanded all thine army, I
have raised thee up in righteousness, and I will direct all thy ways: thou
shall build my City, and let go my captives, not for price nor reward, says
the Lord of Hosts. The labor of Egypt and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and of
the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come unto thee, and they shall be thine:
they shall follow thee, and make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is
in thee, and there is none other Gods besides. And Esaias 46. For I call a bird
from the East, and the man of my counsel from far: as I have spoken, so will
I bring it to pass: I have purposed, and I will do it. Hear me, ye
stubborn hearted, and that are far from justice, I bring near my justice,
it shall not be far off: and my salvation shall not tarry: for I will give
salvation in Sion, and my glory unto Israel. These people here mentioned, were
tributaries to the Persians.

Cyrus was a figure of Christ; For as Cyrus delivered the Jews from the
bondage of Babel: so Jesus Christ delivered us from the bondage of the
spiritual Babel.

Thus much for the Prophecy of the persons who should destroy Babylon.
Now follows the Prophecies of the destruction thereof.
Esaias 46.
BELL is bowed down, Nebo is fallen: they are bowed down and fallen together:
for they could not rid them of their burden, and their soul is gone into
captivity. And Esaias. 47. Come down and sit in the dust O Virgin daughter
Bahel: sit on the ground: there is no throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans, for
thou shall no more be called tender and delicate. Take the mill stones, and
grind meal, loose thy locks, make bare thy feet, uncover the leg, and pass
through the floods. Thy filthiness shall be discovered, and thy shame shall be
seen. I will take vengeance, and not meet thee as a man: meaning, that he
would use no humanity nor pity toward it. Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts
is his name, the Holy one of Israel* Sit still, and get thee into darkness, O
daughter of the Caldeans: for thou shall no more be called the Lady of
Kingdoms. I was wrath with my people, I polluted mine inheritance, and gave
them into thine hands, and thou did show them no mercy, but thou laidst
the very heavy yoke upon the ancient, and thou said, I shall be a Lady for
ever: so that thou did not set thy heart to these things, neither did thou
remember the latter end thereof. Therefore now hear, thou that art given to
pleasures, and dwell careless: Thou say in thy heart, I am, and none
else: I shall not sit as a widdowe, neither shall know the loss of children:
but these two things shall come to thee in one day, the loss of children, and
widdowhood: for, the multitude of the diuinations, and for the great abundance
of thine enchanters, have caused thee to rebel, and thou have said in thy
heart, I am, and none else. Stand now among thy enchanters, and in the
multitude of thy soothsayers: let now the Astrologers, the star gasers, and
Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things. Behold, they shall
be as stubble, they shall burn like fire, and shall not deliver their own
lives from the power of the flame. For Babell is fallen, it is fallen: and all
the images of her Gods are broken to the ground, this is the time of the Lords
vengeance, he will render unto her a recompense. Babell has been as a golden
cup in the Lords hand, that made all the earth drunken, the Nations have
drunk of her wine, therefore do the Nations rage. Babell is suddenly fallen
and destroyed: howl for her, bring balm for her sore, if she may be healed.
We would have cured Babell, but she could not be healed. Forsake her, and let
every one go into his own country: for her judgment is come up into heaven,
and is lifted up to the clouds. O thou that dwell upon many waters,
abundant in treasures, thy end is come, even the end of thy covetousness!
Behold, I come unto thee, O destroying mountain, which destroyest all the
earth, says the Lord, and I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee
down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain. They shall not
take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations, but thou shall
be destroyed for ever, says the Lord. A Post shall run to meet the Post,
and a Messenger to meet the Messenger, to show the King of Babell how his
city is taken on a side thereof, and that the daughter of Babel is like a
threshing floor, and the time of her threshing is come, says the Lord. The
spoil of me, and that which was left of me, is brought unto Babel shall the
inhabitant of Sion say, and my blood unto the inhabitants of Caldea, shall
Jerusalem say. Therefore Babel shall be as heaps, a dwelling place for
Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an inhabitant. They shall
roar together like Lions, and yelle as the Lions whelps. In their heat I
will make them feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice,
and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the Lord. How is Sheshack
taken! how is the glory of the whole world taken! how is Babell become an
astonishment among the Nations! her cities are desolate: the land is dry and a
wilderness, a land wherein no man dwells, neither does the Son of man
pass thereby. Though Babell should mount up to the heavens, and though she
should defend her strength on high; yet from me shall come her destroyers,
says the Lord. For the Lord God that recompenceth, will surely recompense, and
I will make drunk her Princes and her Wisemen, her Dukes and her Nobles, and
they shall sl^epe a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the King, whose name
is the Lord of hosts. And Jeremy took a great stone, and cast it into
Euphrates, and said, Thus shall Babylon be overthrown. Thus the word of the
Lord remains for ever, as it is written, If any lead into captivity, he
shall go into captivity: and if any kill with a sword, he must be killed with
a sword. Ap. 13.

Now compare the impieties of Rome, or mystical Babylon, with these times, and
you shall find them the very same, and therefore the Holy Ghost lays down
her destruction, as the destruction of Babel.
ANd Ap. 14. I saw an Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel, saying with with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory
to him for the hour of his judgment is come. And there followed an other Angel
saying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City: For she made all
nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. And I saw a
woman sitting upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, which
had seven heads and ten horns, and in her forehead was a name written. A
mystery Great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth.
And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus. And the Angel said unto me, The woman which thou saw,
is the Great City which reigns over the Kings of the earth. Ap. 18.

And after this I saw an other Angel come down from heaven, and he cried with
a loud voice, saying: It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great Ci^ie and
is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of al foul spirits, and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the
wine of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication
with her, and the Merchants of the earth are waxed rich of the abundance of her
pleasures. And I heard an other voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues, for her sins are come up to heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities. Reward her, even as she has rewarded you, and give her double
according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her
the double: in as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so
much give ye to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart, I sit
being a Queen and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. Therefore shall her
plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt
with fire: for strong is the Lord God which will condemn her. O heaven, rejoice
of her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets: for God has given your judgment on
her. Then a mighty Angel took up a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it
into the sea, saying, With such violence, shall the great city Babylon be
cast, and shall be found no more.

And as the Jews do praise God after their deliverance, so is it said that
upon the deliverance from this spiritual bondage, all Christians shall say,
Let us be glad and rejoice, and worship God, saying Amen, Hallelu-iah: for our
Lord God Almighty has reigned.

At this deliverance out of Babell, about the evening offering, the Angel
Gabriel appears to Daniel, and tells him the exact hour of Christ's death,
Dan. 9. in these words. Seauenty seauens, 70. 490.
(or 490) years are exactly decreed for the death of Christ the King, the most
Holy, to finish sin, to bring in justice, to reconcile iniquity, to anoint
the most Holy, and to perform every vision and prophecy. By this key the
Jews might have understood the death of Christ the son of all salvation.

These seauenty seauens are distinguished into seven seauens, and the Temple
shall be built into sixty two seauens, wherein Religion shall seem to be
utterly obscured: and into one seven, in the half of which Christ the King
must be killed, not for himself, but for the people, as Dan. 9. The time of
the sixty two seauens is proved out of the Grecians Story, whom God in his
secret wisdom used though unwittingly to themselves) to be recorders of his
truth. These seauens of weeks I will handle more at large at the death of
Christ, where they are fully accomplished.

Upon the vision of the four Beasts in Dan: which represent four stately
kingdoms, figured before in Nebucadnetzars image which he saw in his dream,
Dan. 2. arises a great question, Whether the fourth Beast contain the
kingdom of the Romans, or not. It is certain it does not, and thus it may be
proved.

Of the first, which is the Lion, to be meant of Babylon; the Bear, to be the
kingdom of the Medes, and Persians; and the Leopard to be Alexanders kingdom,
there is no controversy: but then of the fourth Beast with ten horns, lies
the question.

It is said that a stone shall be cut without hands, and shall become a great
mountain, and shall fill all the earth, and shall fall upon the image, and punne
it to dust. This stone is Christ, upon whose birth this vision ends: for the
stone falling upon the feet of iron and clay, the whole image fell and was
beaten to powder. If then upon the birth of Christ the fourth kingdom must be
punned to dust, and all the beasts be consumed in the fire by the Ancient of
days, as Daniel 7. then the fourth kingdom cannot be the Romans. For until
the coming of Christ they were in no glory, and then were they in their
chiefest glory: for although a little before indeed they had conquered all the
world, yet the world did not consent to pay tribute until Christ's time, and
therefore it could not be said a full conquest. For it is never a full
conquest, until a general consent of tribute be granted. If it be objected,
that it is meant of the second coming of Christ, how is every vision and
prophecy performed in Christ? and with what authority could Daniel speak of
the second coming, before he had mentioned the first? Therefore, to hold this
to be meant of the Romans, proves Christ not to be yet come, nor the
ceremonies of Moses to be abolished.

Again, the fourth Beast, that is, the fourth kingdom has relation to the
fourth part of the image. And by the legs of iron and clay, and thereby, as
the legs of one body being twain, are expressed.

Wherefore, as the legs of contrary natures, that is, of iron and clay, being
twain, proceed out of one body: so the kingdom which by them is signified,
must be a divided Nation ruling one kingdom, which the Romans were not: for
Augustus Caesar was only Emperor: otherwise you darken the Romans glory.

Again, it is said of these legs (that is of this fourth kingdom) that they
shall strive by marriages, because they were two Nations, that is, of Syria and
Egypt, to be as one body. But as iron cleaves not in nature with clay; no more
should they be one. Whose stories if you examine in Iustine and other heathen
Authors, you shall find they were from time to time prevented by untimely
deaths. For the wives killed their husbands, the mothers their sons, the
sons their mothers; so that they could not bring to pass their purpose. This
cannot be applied to the Romans: for they were still one sole government, and
universal Emperors of themselves.

Again, the little horn, that is, the tenth horn of the fourth beast, is
Antiochus the vilde, who is the last part of the fourth beast: whose villainies
indeed are answerable to the impieties of the Romans, and therefore in the
Revelation the whole time of their government is by allusion called days 1260.
a time. 2. times and half a time, or 42. months alluding to the time of
Antiochus government. For as Antiochus polluted the Temple of God, changing the
laws of Moses, forbidding that which God commanded, placing idolatry in his
sanctuary, and persecuting such as would not forsake the Religion of God: so
the Romans have polluted the Temple of God, changing the laws that Moses
teaches, and forbids that which God commands, compelling open idolatry,
and persecuting such as will not forsake the truth of Gods Religion.

Again, these legs, meaning the fourth kingdom, are called in Dan. 11. the
King of the North, and the King of the South, that is, Syria, which is North
from Judea, and Egypt which is South from Judea: therefore not the Romans.

Again, the corporation of the Romans is described in the Revelation to be
one beast with seven heads and ten horns. This fourth beast in Daniel has
but one head and ten horns: therefore it cannot be meant of the Romans.

But in truth the Romans having conquered the whole world, and embracing the
impieties of the Babylonian Lion, the cruelty of the Persian Bear, the
fiercenes of the Grecian Leopard, and the most tyrannical and profane
blasphemies of the fourth beast; The holy Ghost could not by fitter
resemblances describe them, than by these beasts: therefore he names them
under the name of one monstrous beast: having property of all the former, that
is, A beast with seven heads and ten horns, mouthed like the Babylonian Lion,
footed like the Persian Bear, bodyed like the Grecian Leopard, and has ten
horns, and the blasphemous words of the fourth beast, whose inhumane cruelty
was such, that no beast in the earth could be likened unto it.

Thus much for the parts of the image, and for the four beasts in general.

Now follows to be handled the Persians Story particularly. And first for
Cyrus.
HE delivered the people from captivity the same year that he took Babylon,
and gave them great treasures to build up the Temple of Jerusalem, whither he
sent them under the conduct of Zorababel.

2. Chro. 36. In the first year of Cyrus King of Persia, (when the word of the
Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremy was finished) the Lord stirred up the
spirit of Cyrus, and he made a Proclamation throughout all his kingdom,
saying, Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has
the Lord God of heaven given me, and he has commanded me to build him an
house in Jerusalem, that is in Judah. Who is among you of all his people, with
whom the Lord his God is, let him go up, and build the house of the Lord God
of Israel, he is the God which is in Jerusalem.

Then the chief Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the sacrificers and Levites
rose up, with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up to build the
house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem.

Also Cyrus brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord which
Nebucadnetzar had taken out of Jerusalem, and counted them unto Sheshbatzar the
Prince of Judah whom the Caldeans called Zorobabel, and the number of the
vessels of gold and silver were 5400. Sheshbatzar brought up all, with them of
the captivity that came up from Babel to Jerusalem: and the whole congregation
of them together which came from captivity, were 42360. besides their servants
and maids, of whom were 7337. and among them 200. singing men and women. And
certain of the chief Fathers when they came to Jerusalem, gave after their
ability unto the treasure of the work 60000. drammes of gold, and 5000. pieces
of silver, and 100. sacrificers garments; the sum of the money in our account
amounts to 94493. pounds, 6. shillings 8. pence: for the dram is the eight
part of an ounce, and the ounce the eight part of a mark, which according to
our estimation amounts (allowing the French crown for 6. shillings 4. pence
the dram) to 24826. pounds, 13. shillings 4. pence. And the pieces of silver
are called Minaes, and every piece contain 26. shillings 8. pence: so 5000.
Minaes make 550000. frankes, which in our account is 69666. pounds, 13.
shillings 4. pence.

But the Israelites that were beyond the river in Samaria, placed there by the
King of Ashur, envying the prosperous proceeding of the building of the City
and Temple, caused it to be hindered unto the second year of Darius King of
Persia: But Haggai and Zachariah prophesied unto the people, and encouraged
them. So they continued in the work: one hand on the trowell, the other on the
sword, until it was finished. So the foundation is laid in the fourth year of
Cyrus, as the first Temples foundation was laid in the fourth year of Solomon.

This Darius is also called Artaxerxes which in the Persian tongue signifies,
an excellent Warrior. Some think it was Cambyses Darius son: but Cambyses
Cyrus son was never King, but Lieutenant in his fathers absence.

This Darius was also called Assuerus: he was not supreme King, but deputy to
Cyrus. For Cyrus having conquered the kingdom of the Medes against Astyages,
left the said kingdom to his brother Darius, by whose aid he took Babylon,
and transported the kingdom of the Babylonians to the Persians. Two years
after, the said Darius returned into Madai, and Cyrus reigned alone in Babylon.
Then he moved war against the Scythians, and marched toward them, and in
the mean while left Cambyses his son King of the country in his absence,
according to the custom of the Persians, which was, to appoint the nearest of
the Kings blood to be King over the country, when the King went out to fight
against any strange Nation: this is the cause why Cambyses was not set in the
successiue order of the kingdoms. Neither is there mention of two brethren
which were Magitians, which guilefully usurped the kingdom: but their guile
being known, they continued but a few months, and Darius son to Hystaspis
was chosen King.

Xerxes the son of the said Darius succeeded him, but is not here placed in
the number of the Monarchies, for that he left his kingdom to Darius Long-hand
his son, according to the custom of the Persians, when he went to war
against the Grecians. The Greek Historiographers not respecting the custom,
number the said Xerxes and Cambyses among the said Monarchies successively in
order, which is the cause that they count more years in the Persian Monarchy
than were: that is, 226. years, whereas their whole government was not above
120. years, or thereabouts.

Cyrus reigned twelve years. And after Cyrus death, Assuerus Artaxerxes
obtayneth the kingdom of the Persians twelve years; in his third year
began the Story of Hester. After him succeeded Darius Assirius, Esdr. 6.22.
This Darius King of Ashur, encouraged the people in the work of the house of
the Lord. He is here called King of Ashur, because he was King of the Medes,
Persians, and Assirians.

After him succeeded Artaxerxes the godly, the son of Darius Hystaspis. Esdr.
7. Neh. 2.

2519. The Temple built in the end of the seventh seven.
THE time from the first proclamation by Cyrus for the building of this Temple
is seven seauens, that is, Nine and forty years: but being hindered until
the third year, 49.
the exact time is but six and forty years according to John 2. Forty and
six years was this Temple in building. The meaning is, that the Temple and
walls of the Cities were now fully reedified by Nehemiah. This nine and
forty years was the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the godly. Neh. 6.25.

By the way here is to be understood, that presently after the building of the
Temple, all prophesying failed.

2519.
The Prophets that were in these times after the captivity of Babylon, were
Esdras, Nehemias, Haggai, Zacharias, and Malachi: All the other Prophets, as
Esaias, Amos, Micheas, Oseas, Jeremy, Sophonie, Obadias, Jonas, Nahum, Abacuk or
Joel, were before the captivity; and Daniel, and Ezechiel in the captivity.

After him succeeded Xerxes the fifth King of the Persians. The time when he
first warred with Grecia, is not certainly set down.

After him Artaxerxes Longi-manus the sixth King of Persia. Then Ochus
Artaxerxes, Darius Nothus the seventh.

Artaxerxes Memor the eighth, Arses Artaxerxes, and then Darius the last King
of the Persians, conquered by Alexander, according to Dan. 10. Behold, I go
away, and the King of Grecia comes.

Here the Ram is overthrown by the goat bucke. Alexander the horn in the
forhead of the Bucke overcomes him: as Dan: 8. I saw in a vision in the
Palace of Shusan in the Province of Elam, being by the river Vlai, a Ram
with two horns, and the Ram pushed against the West, against the North, and
against the South: so that no beasts might stand before him, nor could deliver
out of his hand, but he did what he listed and became great. And as I
considered, behold, a goat bucke came from the West over the whole earth, and
touched not the ground, and this Goat had a horn that appeared between his
eyes, and he came to the Ram that had the two horns, and ran unto him in his
fierce rage, and he smote the Ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no
power in the Ram to stand against him, but he cast him down to the ground,
and stamped upon him, and there was none that could deliver the Ram out of
his power. Therefore the Goat waxed exceeding strong, and when he was at the
strongest, his great horn was broken, and for it came up four, that appeared
toward the four winds of the heaven.

This Ram is the kingdom of Media and Persia: the two horns are to
distinguish the kingdoms, and do represent the Meeds and Persians: they are
also the Bear the arms and breast of silver.

Here the Bear is cast into the fire by Christ the fiery judge, and the arms
and breast of the image are punned to dust, and the Ram that boasted himself
in his strength, stamped under foot.

And here ends the glory of the Persians.
IT is said, Dan. 11. Behold, there shall stand up three Kings in Persia, and
the Fourth shall be far richer than they all. Now he means that there
shall be but Four Kings in Persia, for the Plain crosses but from Cambyses
who at this time reigned: there should be four Kings that should be enemies
to the Jews, that is, Cambyses, Smerdes, Darius the Son of Hystaspis, and
Artaxerxes or Darius whom Alexander overthrew. This Darius was of wonderful
power, he had in his army Nine hundred thousand men. Yet he was not able to
withstand Alexander the Horn in the forehead of the Bucke. The reason was, he
trusted in his strength, and not in God. And again God had promised Alexander
the victory One hundred years before.

As touching their confused names, ye shall understand, that among the
Persians, Darius signifies he that subdueth, Xerxes a Warrior. Also that this
name Assuerus is drawn from the Hebrews in stead of Artaxerxes. Further, that
Artaxerxes was the common name of all kings of Persia, as Pharaoh was the
common name of the kings of Egypt, and Caesar of the Roman Emperors.
Therefore where ye find many indifferently named Darius, or Artaxerxes, or
both together, you must diligently examine the Story, and the difficulty of
understanding under what king that happened, which is recited in the Books of
Esdras, Nehemias, and Ester, will easily be made plain.

Here the old Testament ends, and Malachi prophecieth of the coming of John
Baptist, under the name of Elias. Mal. 3. Behold, I send you Elias. Christ
himself expounds this of John Baptist. Mat. 11. This is he of whom it is
written, behold, I send mine Angel before thy face, which shall prepare thy
way before thee, for all the Prophets, and the law prophesied unto John, and
if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was to come. He that has ears to
hear, let him hear.

Here ends also the Hebrew tongue. And though Scholars write Hebrew, yet
upon the first sight it is apparent to be the writing of man, so far it
disagreeth from the style of the holy spirit. Now all prophesying cease. And
where the old Testament leaves, there the new begins. The old Testament
begins with describing the earthly habitation for man, and the tree of life.
The new Testament ends with description of the heavenly habitation of the soul
of man, that is, the heavenly Jerusalem, and the tree of life. The old
Testament ends with grace, that is, Iochanan, or John. The new Testament both
begins with grace, and ends with grace, that is to say, with John Baptist, and
John the Evangelist.

Here begins the Kingdom of the Grecians to flourish.
3591. Alexander the great, reigns Twelve years.
HIs name signifies Conqueror. His Country was Macedonia, or Grecia, Iauans
Country, that is, where Iauans Sons were scattered at the confusion of
tongues.

He is of Iaphet by kindred. In his conquest over the whole world, there is the
wonderful love of God to be understood: and that is, that by his means the
Greek tongue, wherein the new Testament was afterward to be written, was
made famous over all the world, that when the holy Ghost should pen the
Book, it might be easy to all. This blessing was to Iaphet, in recompense of
his virtuous action with Sem in covering their Father. For Noah prophesied,
that Sem should first be blessed, and then Iaphet should have a larger glory.
This blessing concerning Iaphets house, began in the success of Darius of
Iaphet, with Cyrus of Sem, against the Babylonians, enlarged now by Alexanders
conquest, and by making the Greek tongue famous: but most of all after Christ,
when John was banished into Iaphets Country, to see the glorious form of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and a Book in the Greek tongue delivered up to all the
world containing the graces of Christ, and the glad tidings of the everlasting
Gospel. The comfort of this is unspeakable, being duly embraced: but
especially to us of Iaphets house, that is, the Islands of the ends of the
earth, seeing by the benefit thereof, we have the true understanding of
eternal life. The use of this compels us to search the Stories of our
antiquities, which we may find in the 10. of Genesis.

About this time Solon the wise flourished, and made a law, that Homer the
Poet, who was long before him, should be read in the public assemblies on holy
days and festival days, as the Epistles and Gospels be read in our
Churches. This Homer in a trifling argument of the war at Troy, lays down
all the excellency of the Greek tongue.

About this time also, the Seven wise men of Greece were famous, and all their
disputations be upon Homer: as Plato, Aristotle, and Zenophon, etc.

The Grecians affirm, that Homer was translated into the Indian tongue, and
other languages, that so he might be known and understood of other nations
also.

Again, Alexander being of great possessions, he must have many
under-officers to belong unto him: then he that would bear any office, or be
in any credit, must be skillful in the greek tongue. Caesar, Seven and Forty
years before Christ, speaks of the Denides learning greek in England.
Tullie pro Archia the poet, reasons thus: Though Archias the poet be not by
nature a Citizen, yet he deserves to be thought so to be, seeing by birth
he is a Grecian, and of Antiochia a populous City, and of great account, from
whence flowed learned men, and liberal studies. And if any man shall think a
lesser fruit of glory to be reaped from greek verses, than from latin, he
erreth in good sadness, because those things which are written in greek, are
read almost into all nations: those which are in latin, are contained with
their own borders, which in good sooth are very narrow. Thus, by Tullies
testimony, the greek tongue stretched over the whole world.

At Augustus Caesar's time the latin began to flourish, and the greek tongue
ceased as if the holy ghost should have advised the Grecians to have written no
more. For Plutarch and Athenaeus do not write any new story, but either
comment on that which was written before; or abridge it. And any one skillful
in the greek tongue, may easily perceive from what notable place of Plato,
Homer, or other greek writers every phrase in the new Testament is derived;
and those which are not there to be found in those authors, are fetched from
the hebrew of the old Testament, from whence all the roots of the greek
tongue are drawn. So that to the exact knowledge and understanding of the new
testament, two things are requisite, cunning in the greek authors, and in the
old Testament.

Let us return to Alexander.
He is the great Horn in the forehead of the Goat Bucke.

He is also the Leopard: but the four heads of the Leopard are four
Captains, to whom after his death, his Kingdom was divided.

He is also the belly and sides of brass.

Alexanders great power is broken; for when he had overcome all the East, he
thought to return to Grecia, to subdue them that there had rebelled, and so
he died by the way, after he had reigned twelve years.

Here the belly and sides of brass are beaten to dust by Christ the Stone.
The Leopard is cast into the fire by Christ the fiery Judge. The great Horn
is broken by Christ truly Palmoni, having secrets numbered, Who numbreth,
wayeth, and divides.

This sentence does extend to the use of all men in the world. For God numbreth
all our ways, and wayeth us in the balance of his justice, but enters not
into judgment with his servants, knowing whereof they be made. He divides his
mercy unto us far beyond the compass of our deserts, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father.

Now after Alexanders death, the whole government was divided unto four of his
Captains, which are the four heads of the Leopard. The body of the Leopard
was himself, and his entier government: the wings, the speedy spoil that
he made of the Persians.

The names of his Captains were Cassander, Seleucus, Antigonus, Ptolomeus,
who had Macedonia. Syria. Asia the less. Egypt.


And in a short space after, the government came into two heads; that is, it
was ruled by Seleucus king of Syria, and Ptolomeus Lagi king of Egypt, the King
of the North and the King of the South: and their government, and the
succession of their government are the beast with ten Horns: and the legs of
iron and clay, they are also called Gog and Magog in Ezechiel. The whole
government or Kingdom is the beast; the ten horns are ten cruel Kings
that shall arise out of that kingdom, namely, Seleucus Nicator, Antiochus
Soter, Antiochus Theos, Seleucus Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus, Antiochus the
great, Seleucus Philopater, Ptolomeus Euergetes, Ptolomeus Philopater, and
Antiochus Epiphanes.

3620. Seleucus Nicator, one of Alexanders Successors.
HE held Asia two and forty years. Here begins the tyrannical government
of the ten Horns, and the hardness of the iron legs: for yet the legs
are iron. He is the first Horn that rusheth against Judea, exacting all
duties, as if he had been their king. From this time to Antiochus Epiphanes is
reckoned, one hundred thirty and seven years. 1, Match. 1.11.

3663. Antiochus Soter, the second Horn.
HE is made king in his fathers life. He falls sick for love of his Fathers
wife, and afterward marieth her, and within few years dies in recompense of
that villainy.

3663. Antiochus Theos, the third Horn.
HE marries Berenice the Daughter of Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of the South
or Egypt, having a former wife Laodice, by whom he is poisoned, and Berenice
with all her Assistants slain. This is handled Dan. 11.6. And in the end of
years, they shall be joined together, for the Kings Daughter of the South
shall come to the king of the North, to make an agreement: but she shall not
retain the power of the arm, neither shall he continue, nor his arm, but she
shall be delivered to death, and they that brought her, and he that begat her,
and he that comforted her, in these times. Thus it appears how the legs of
iron and clay cleave not together.

This Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, being desirous to be famous for
Books, gets a Library of all the books he could hear of. Amongst which,
he heard of a book that the Jews had at Jerusalem, which was the Bible: so
he sent for Seventy Jews to translate the book out of hebrew into greek,
which they did in Seventy days. Now they knowing that it was not of any
devotion of religion that he desired it, but to furnish his Library; they
thrust in likewise into the Bible diverse of their own fables, as the story of
Susanna, of Bell and the Dragon, of Esdras, the books of Tobie and Judith, and
la the books that we call Apocripha, because they knew that God had no purpose
to save them, being Egiptian Dogs; and because they would not throw pearls to
swine, they thrust into the ages before the flood more years by a thousand,
than ever were in.

3680. Seleucus Callinicus, the fourth Horn.
HE slew his Stepmother Berenice, and her young Son. But out of the budde of
her roots, as Dan. 11.7. shall one stand up in his stead, (meaning, that
Ptolomeus Euergetes the fifth Horn, after the death of his Father Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, 3691.
should succeed in the Kingdom, being of the same stock that Berenice was)
and he shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the King
of the North, meaning Seleucus Callinicus to revenge Berenice his sisters
death. Wherefore Seleucus Callinicus Sons, 3704.
that is, Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the Great, Dan. 3706.
11.10. shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a mighty great army;
Seleucus died whiles the wars were preparing: but Antiochus the great
prepared a wonderful great army, he had Six thousand horsemen, and
Threescore thousand footmen, and grew to be very great. But the king of the
North, that is, Ptolomeus Philopater the eight horn, 3710.
when he saw Antiochus the great take away so many of his Dominions in Syria,
and that he was also ready to invade Egypt, he prepares a great army, and
withstandeth Antiochus the king of the North. But it did not prevail: for not
only Antiochus came against him, but also Philip king of Macedon, and they
brought a great power with them, as Dan. 11.14. And at that same time there
shall many stand up against the King of the South. Also the rebellious children
of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision, but they shall
fall. She here means by the rebellious children, certain Jews, which under
the conduct of Onyas retired with him into Egypt, upon the false alleging of
a place out of Esaias 19.19. In that day shall the Altar of the Lord be in the
midst of the Land of Egypt, and a pillar by the border thereof unto the Lord,
etc. And Dan. 11. So the King of the North shall come, and cast up a mount, and
take the strong City, and the arms of the South, that is, The power of the
Egyptians shall not resist, neither his chosen people, neither shall there be
any strength to withstand. But he (that is Antiochus the great) shall come,
and do unto him, (that is, Ptolomeus Epiphanes) what he list, and none shall
stand against him, and he shall stand in the pleasant Land, which by his hand
shall be consumed: meaning, that he shall not only afflict the Egyptians, but
the Jews also the people of the pleasant Land. Again, he shall set his face
to enter with the power of his whole Kingdom, and his confederates with him,
and thus shall he do. And he, (that is, Ptolomeus Epiphanes) shall give him
a Daughter of women, (that is, one Cleopatra the Daughter of Antiochus) to
destroy her: but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.

For he shall turn his face toward the forts of his own Land, that is, for
fear of the Romans he shall fly to his holds. Then shall stand in his place
in the glory of the Kingdom one that shall raise taxes, (that is, 3743.
Seleucus Philopater shall succeed his Father Antiochus) but after few days
he shall be destroyed, neither in wrath nor in battle, (that is, not by
foreign enemies or battle, but by treason) and in his p^ace shall stand up a
vilde person, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes, 3757.
the little Horn of the fourth beast, to whom shall not be given the honor
of the kingdom, but he shall come in peaceably, that is, pretending peace,
and obtain the kingdom by flatteries, according to the S. of Daniel. And out
of them, that is, out of the Horns of the Goat Bucke, there came forth a litte
Horn, which waxed very great toward the south, and toward the east, and
toward the pleasant Land: meaning, Antiochus, who was of a servile and
flattering nature, and by subtlety depriueth three other that were between
him and the Kingdom, and is called the little Horn, because he should
continue but a little while, and in him was found neither princely conditions,
nor any other thing worthy to obtain a kingdom.

He began his reign in the One hundred thirty and seventh year of the
Grecians. 1. Match. 1. and reigns Twelve years.

He makes Battles against Ptolomeus Philometor.

A profane School was erected in Jerusalem, and in the One hundred, forty,
and three year of the Grecians, he spoyleth the Temple of Jerusalem, and
burned all the books of Moses, and put to death all persons with whom they
were found: and after two years he sends Appolonius, and places a garrison
in Jerusalem on the Fifteenth of Cislen, in the One hundred, forty, and five
year of the Grecians, they builded an Altar upon the holy Altar, an
abomination of desolation, and places an Idol of Iouis Olympij in the holy
Temple, as Dan. 11.38. And in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. Saint Paul compares the
Antichrist with this Idol. Also Ap. 20. Saint John compares Gog and Magog
with this history, speaking of the Antichrist, as Saint Paul does.

Antiochus by letters Patents grants the Jews their own religion, after
One thousand, two hundred, and ninety days since the Temple was profaned, in
their One hundred, forty, and eight year, the Fifteenth of their Month
Xanticus, which differs from the Jews account, to whom the Five and twenty
of Cislen or November comes before this time about One hundred eighty, and
five days: and after two and fifty days, in the year One hundred, forty,
and nine, Antiochus dies of a notorious strange sickness, and acknowledges
the hand of God to be upon him, after the Temple was profaned One thousand,
three hundred, forty and five days. Dan. 12.7. It shall tarry for a time,
two times and half a time, and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the
power of the holy people, all these things, that is, all the troubles of the
Jews, shall be finished.

Here it falls out that was spoken, Dan. 8.25. He shall resist the Prince of
Princes, and shall be broken without hands.

3764.
Here Judas Machabeus recouereth the government of Judea from Antiochus. Thus
the legs of iron and clay nothing cleaving together, by marriages are made
weak, not any more treading down the Jews, but rather are beaten to dust by
Christ the Stone. The Fourth beast is cast into the fire by Christ his fiery
judgment, the little Horn is broken: the Saints, that is, the Jews possess
their Kingdom, Gog and Magog are overthrown. The rest of the Kings of Syria,
because they are not expressed in the Sinay sight, and in Daniel nothing spoken
of them, I pass them over.

Wherefore Christ in the days of his flesh, Ioh. 10.22. celebrateth the feast
of this deliverance.

After this time God shaked the kingdom of Syria by Ligranes King of Armenia,
until it came to the hands of the Romans.

On the Five and twenty of Cisleu or November, in the One hundred, forty, and
eighth year of the Grecians, the Altar was restored. 1. Mac. 4.25. And Judas
Machabeus celebrated the restoring of the Altar eight days, and makes a
decree of this to be observed yearly. Christ celebrateth this Ioh. 10.22. The
feast of dedication then was in Jerusalem, and it was winter, and Jesus walked
in the Temple in Salomons porch.

Here is accomplished Dan. 7. 25. of changing the Ceremonies for a time, two
times, and half a time: also of the One thousand and three hundred days
justly complete since a profane School was erected in Jerusalem.

The beast overthrown, is the subversion of the kingdom of Syria.

Kings of Leuj.
PResently after, upon the success of Judas Machabeus victories, after his
death, the Levites took upon them kingly authority, contrary to the law of
Moses, Exodus 28. where their office was only to attend upon the sacrificers of
the Tabernacle and the Temple.

Now to color this to be lawful, they raise up diverse sects of religion. Then
came up the Saduces and Pharisees: these Saduces hold, that the soul of man or
woman dies with the body, as a beast, denying the resurrection. So likewise
after Christ, when the Bishops took upon them imperial authority, and the
supremacy was granted to Bonifacius by Phocas; then, to color the
lawfulness thereof, they frame new sects and heresies in religion.

Of the rest that succeed in that order until Herod, as Aristobulus,
Alexander Ianneus, Alexandra, Hircanus, Aristobulus and Antigonus: because they
are not spoken of in Daniel, have small use in religion, I refer you to the
reading of their Stories in the books of the Machabees.

3883. Julius Caesar, Five years.


3887. Augustus, Six and fifty years.
HE was Emperor of all the world, and appoints Herod an Idumean of the
kindred of Esau, King over the Jews* he was the first Aliant that reigned in
Judea.

Now the Romans kingdom flourished six and forty years before the
Incarnation of our Lord: and here the Greek writers ceased. Now the Latin
tongue grew to be famous over the whole world. Now Daniels four beasts are
quite consumed, and a more monstrous beast having property of all them, that
is, with seven heads and ten horns, arises out of the earth. This beast is
fully handled in the Revelation. In this place he has not his full power
given unto him.

The beast is Rome: the seven heads are seven hills whereupon Rome stands:
namely, Palatinus, Capitolinus, Auentinus, Exquilinus, Coeluis, Viminalis, and
Quirinalis. The ten horns are ten several kinds of governments, under
which the Romans were governed.

Marie, borne.
HEr name signifies Exalted. This she uses in her song. Luke 1. He has put
down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek. She
was the natural daughter of Eli, as Luke 3. She had a sister whose name was
Marie Cleophas, or Marie James; because she was the wife of Cleophas, and
mother of James. She was likewise a very godly woman, and bestowed great labor
upon Gods preachers, as Romans 16.6. There was also Marie Magdalen the sister of
Lazarus and Martha, out of whom Christ cast seven Devils. And she followed
him ministering to him of her substance. She anointed the Lord, and wiped his
feet with her hair. She was the first to whom Christ appeared after his
resurrection.

The Virgin Marie being told by the Angel Gabriel that she should conceive a
son, whom she should call Savior, believes that he was that seed of the
woman, that should break the head of the serpent; therefore is she called
Happy above other women. By this faith the Virgin which God made unto Adam, is
called Euah, that is, Life. By this faith all the righteous that ever were or
shall be, are saved. The Papists attribute this power to the Virgin Marie,
saying, She shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise her heel: and
thereupon they make an Idol of her, offering their prayers unto her,
derogating from Christ his glory; whereas they are commanded, Mat. 6. When you
pray; pray unto your Father which is in heaven.

The Tabernacle did represent the dwelling of God with men: so the Virgin Marie
is compared unto the Tabernacle.

A cloud ouershadowed the Tabernacle: so the power of the highest ouershadwed
her: showing that Jesus Christ should take flesh, and have his Tabernacle
amongst us.

She is betrothed to Joseph: therefore is Joseph called the son of Ely: not
that he was so naturally, for he was the son of Jacob, answerable in
godliness to Joseph the son of Jacob in Genesis: so by supputation, he is
the son of Ely, and by nature the son of Jacob.

She is that Virgin of whom Esaias fore-tolde, Esaias 7. Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive a son, and he shall be called Emanuel, God with us.

She goes to her Cousin Elizabeth the wife of Zacharias, and mother of John
Baptist to Hebro^ the inheritance of Caleb, and saluteth her. And as Elizab:
heard the salutation of Mary, the Babe, that is John Baptist, sprang in her
womb, and Eliz: was filled with the holy Ghost, and she cried with a loud
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, because the fruit of thy womb
is blessed. Upon this place one of the fathers of the church says, that more
blessed was the Virgin Marie for retayning the faith of Christ, than in
conceiving the body of Christ: for to have all happiness and knowledge, and not
to know Christ, is neither to be happy, nor to know any thing. For in the
true knowledge of Christ, that is, knowing him to be God and Man, and one
Christ, and truly to embrace the same, consists the highest point of all
salvation.

Then Marie sings a song of thanksgiving unto God. Luke 1.

In the old Testament you have Marie a Prophetess the sister of Aaron, who
likewise sings a song of thanksgiving for the deliverance of Israel out of
Egypt, and for the overthrow of Pharaoh in the red Sea Exodus 15. Sing ye unto
the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and the rider has he
overthrown in the sea. And to the same effect are the Virgin Mary's words,
Luke 1. He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in
the imaginations of their hearts, etc.

Notwithstanding that Elizabeth was married to one of Leuies tribe, yet she was
of the tribe of Judah, and Mary's Cousin. For the law which forbadde marriage
out of their own tribe, was only, that the tribes should not be mixed and
confounded, which could not be with marriing with the Levites: for they had no
portion assigned to them.

In the old Testament you have Marie and Elizabeth both of one kindred, both
rare for godliness.

Whereas the Papists hold invocation to the Virgin Mary and to Saints, and call
her the Queen of heaven, therefore greater than her son Christ; therein they
commit open blasphemy against the holy Ghost. For, says the prophet Esaias,
Shall the axe boast himself against the hewer? or the saw against him that
uses it? Therefore, whosoever wittingly holds it, there is no hope of
salvation left for them, but a fearful looking for judgment.

Our Savior Christ in the Gospel: Mat. 20.21. When the mother of Zebedeus
worshipping him, desired that her two sons might sit one at his right hand,
and the other on his left in the kingdom of heaven, answered her, To sit on my
right hand or on my left, is not in me to give, but it shall be given unto
them for whom it is prepared of my father.

Again, his Disciples at an other time said unto him, Behold thy mother, thy
brethren and thy sisters: to whom he answered, Who is my mother, my brother
and my sister? even he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.
Whereby it appears, that Christ regarded the Virgin Mary as he was God, no
more than he does any other faithful in the world: for God has no respect of
persons. And again, he says Ioh. 6. None comes unto me except the father
draw him. And Romans 6. Eternal is the gift of God, not the gift of men or women
departed. And David says Psalm. 4. It is thou Lord only that make me dwell in
safety. Again, Christ being become an high Sacrificer of good things to come,
not by the blood of goats, or calves, but by his own blood has entered once
for all unto the Holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. And for
this cause is He the mediator of the new Testament, that through death which
was for the redemption of the transgressions that were in the former Testament,
they which were called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For
Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands, which are
similitudes of the true sanctuary; but is entered into very heaven to appear
now in the sight of God for us, not that he should offer himself often as the
high Sacrificer did once every year: (for then he must have often suffered)
but now in the end of the world has he appeared once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, by the which we are sanctified. Every sacrificer
appears daily ministering, and often times offers one manner offering, which
can never take away sins: but this man, after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God, and from hence forth
tarrieth until he has made his enemies his footestoole: for with one offering
has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Seeing therefore,
brethren, that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy
place, by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the
veil, that is, his flesh: And seeing we have a high sacrificer over the house
of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkled
in our hearts from an evil conscience, and let us keep the profession of our
hope without wavering: for he is faithful that promised. He that despises
Moses law, dies without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer
punishments, suppose ye them worthy which tread underfoot the Son of God, and
counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith we are
sanctified? for we know him that has said, Vengeance is mine, I will
recompense says the Lord: and again, the Lord shall judge the people. Cast
not away therefore your confidence which has great recompense of reward. For
the just shall live by his faith. But without faith it is impossible to please
him. For he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him. Let us therefore by him, (not by the Virgin
Marie or Saints) offer the sacrifice of praise always to God that is the fruit
of the lips which confess his name. For, says the Lord, I, even I am the
Lord, and beside me there is no savior. This being duly marked, and rightly
applied, is a full and large disputation against any Papist.

Elias, John Baptist borne.
HIS name John, signifies The grace of God; Baptist was in respect of his
office: which was, to baptize, and to preach repentance and forgiveness of
sins, and foretold a forerunner of the blessed Messiah in Malach. 3. where
it is written, Behold, I send my Ambassador to make way before him, and by and
by after shall the Lord whom ye seek, enter into his Temple: and in the next
chapter, he is called Elias, by reason of the likeness of their offices: and
this text by the Jews themselves is understood concerning the Messiah: and the
Scribes do say in the Gospel, that Elias must first come; and in another place,
Art thou Christ, or Elias, or one of the Prophets? He was the son of
Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his mother was Elizabeth.

The Angel of the Lord shows unto Zacharias, that he is that Elias of whom
Malachi foretold chap. 3. That he should turn many of the children of Israel
to their Lord God: for he shall go before him in the spirit and power of
Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord. And the Angel gave Zacharias a sign of this to be performed,
that is, he made him dumb until the child was borne. Now Elizabeth's time was
fulfilled that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a son, and on
the eight day her friends came to circumcise the babe and called him Zacharias,
after the name of his Father. But his mother answered, he shall be called John:
and his father being dumb, took writing tables, and wrote, saying, His name is
John. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke
and praised God, and was filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people, and has raised up the horn of salvation for us in the house of his
servant David, etc. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in
the wilderness, till the day came that he should show himself unto Israel.

Here you may see, Zachary and John were the two first of the new Testament. So
in the old Testament, Zachary and Malachi called also Iochanan or John, do end
the old Testament.

You have in the new Testament another John the son of Zebedeus, who with his
brother James were called by Christ, as they were mending their nets, and
became Apostles. This John forbadde one to cast out Devils by the name of
Jesus: but Christ reproved him. He was the beloved Apostle, on whose breast
Christ leaned. Christ reuealeth unto him who should betray him. He was banished
into the Isle of Patmos, and has a revelation of the heavenly Jerusalem and
mystical Babylon.

There was also John called Mark. Act. 15.37.

3928. Jesus is borne.
THis name Jesus signifies A Savior, so named in his mothers womb. A great
Rabbin says, that because the Anointed shall save folks, therefore he shall
be called Jesus: And because he shall be God and Man, therefore he shall be
called Emanuel.

This is he of whom the Prophet Esaias cap. 9. foretold, saying, Unto us a
child is borne, and unto us a son is given, and the government is upon his
shoulder: and he shall call his name, Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: The increase of his government and
peace shall have no end.

He is also called The Son of the Virgin, Emanuel, God with us, Es. 7. Shiloh
the acceptable child, Genesis 49. The bright day star, Luke 3: The Seed of the
woman, Genesis 3: The Physician to the helpless: The proclaymer of the acceptable
year of the Lord: The star and Scepter that should dash all the sons of
Seth, Numb. 24: The stone cut out of the mountain without hands, that now
fills all the earth with his glory: eue^ he that should punne Nebucadnetzars
image to dust. Dan. 2: The sprigge of the root of Iessaj, Esaias 11; The most
holy; The anointed of the Father; That great Prophet; Dan. 9.
The Tabernacle; The Temple: The Altar; The mercy seat, The way that leads
to the heavenly Jerusalem: The truth that directs to eternal happiness: The
life that redeemed Adam from death: The true Israelite in whom there is no
guile: The lawgiver of the Gentiles: The propitiatory for our sins: The
mediator betwixt God and man: The first begotten Son of the Father: The
everlasting, our Righteousness: The great shepherd of his sheep, whom
Angels worshipped, to whom Kings brought sweet odors as to Solomon; to whom
the sheepheards of the ends of the earth came to worship. He is also called
Palmony, the secret Numberer, who weighs, numbreth, and divides. The
Messiah, Dan. 9. The son of David: The Lion of the tribe of Judah: The son
of man: The spiritual Rock: The true bread that came from heaven: The word
that created all things: The beloved of the Lord: The light and life of man:
The true vine: The dwelling of God with men: Michael, who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God: He to whom the Crown and Diadem does belong: The King
of the Jews: Alpha and Omega: The Lamb that was killed from the beginning of
the world.

The place where he was borne, was Bethlehem of Judah, which the Prophet
Micheas calls Little, to be among the thousands of Judah: yet, says the
prophet, out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler of
Israel, whose goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.
The prophet calls it Little, because, according to the custom of the Jews
who divided their country into thousands, and for every thousand a chief
Captain, Bethleem was not able to make a thousand. But S. Matthew Chap. 2. in
respecting the greatness of the Ruler of Israel that was borne there, says, And
thou Bethlehem art not the least of the cities of Judah.

The time of his birth was in the 42. year of Augustus Caesar, who Luc. 2.
gave a commandment, that all the world should be taxed. Therefore went every
man to his own city, and Joseph went from Galile, out of a city called
Nazaret in Judea, unto the city of David which is called Bethleem, because he
was of the house and lineage of David, to be taxed with Mary that was given him
to wife, which was with child. And there she brought forth her first begotten
son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a cribbe, because
there was no room for them in the Inn. And there were in the same country
sheepheards abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night because of their
flocks: and lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon the^, and the glory of the
Lord shone about them, and they were sore afraid. Then the Angel said, Be not
afraid: for behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to al
people; that is, unto you is borne this day in the city of David a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord. And strait way there was with the Angel a multitude
of heavenly soldiers, praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the highest
heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men good will. And these sheepheards
following the star, it vanished away: where: fore they came to Jerusalem, and
asked, saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? The purpose of God
in this was, that the Jews, who by the Prophets might and were bound to have
known this by the diligence of the heathen, might be inexcusable in the day
of wrath. But departing from Herod, the Star which they before had seen
appeared unto them, and went before them till it came and stood over the place
where the Babe was, and they went into the house, and fell down, and worshipped
him, and opened their treasures, and presented unto him gifts, even gold, and
incense, and mirhe. Here is performed, Esaias 60. They of Sheba and Seba shall
bring forth gold and incense upon mine Altar, meaning Christ: And I will
magnify the house of my glory. These were the first fruits of the Gentiles.
And these Gentiles also were of Abraham by Keturah, to whom when he died he
gave gifts, and sent them away to the East. There was Job found, a just and
perfect man, when all the world else had forsaken God.

And the Sheepheards returned glorifying and praising God for all they had
heard and seen.

And after eight days they circumcised the child: his name was then called
Jesus, which was named of the Angel before he was conceived in the womb.

Herod, another Pharaoh, proceeding of Esau the old enemy to Jacob, destroys
the little children; not by water, as the first Pharaoh did, Exodus 2. but by
the sword. Math. 2. Rachel weepeth for her children and would not be comforted,
because they were not; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet. Ier. 31.15.

Joseph takes the Babe and Marie his Mother, and goes into Egypt until the
death of Herod, and then returns again, that it might be fulfilled which
was written. Oseas 11.1. Out of Egypt have I called my son.

There is a great doubt of the time of the year of Christ's birth: which
because it is very necessary to be known, I think it not amiss to lay it
down in the treatise following.

SAint Matthew reckoning the kindred of Christ, brings them down but from
Abraham, to make the number of his generations Forty two, that is, six
seauens, or three fourteenes: and brings him also from Solomon, thereby to
prove him King of the Jews. But in reckoning the Kings to make the number
answerable to a sweet proportion of a former story, that is, of the two and
forty standings in the wilderness, and the two and forty flowers, bowls and
knobbes, of the candlestick in the tabernacle which figured Christ, leaves
out three, Ioas, Amasias, and Azarias. S. Luke reckoning his kindred, brings
the^ from Adam, and from David by Nathan: thereby to prove him to be the Seed
of the woman. The number of the generations are 75 answerable in number to
Abraham's years, when the promise concerning the state of the outward Canaan,
figuring the spiritual holy land, was given unto him.

The key of all Chronicles is taught in Luke 3. Where he compares the age of
Christ with the Roman Empire, whereby the writers of Chronicles are taught to
compare the heathen histories with the Bible, without which place they should
hardly have been compared so certain as now they may.
3942.
AT twelve years of age, Jesus is found in the Temple disputing among the
Doctors: doubtless, of the Messiah, seeing therein all wisdom stands.

12.
This twelve, has comparison with the years of Salomons age when he decided the
controversy for the dead child. But, says S. Matthew, Behold a greater than
Solomon.

3956. Christ baptized.
BEginning to be thirty years old, according to the manner of the high
sacrificer which shadowed Christ, who might not enter into that office before
he was Thirty years old.

His name Christ signifies Anointed: so Aaron in Hebrew signifies Anointed.

Luke 3.
Now in the Fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor
of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galile, and his brother Philip Tetrarch
of Iturea, and of the country of the Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of
Abilene, when Annas and Caiphas were the high Priests, the word of God came
unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness: and he came into all the
coasts of Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins, as it was foretold Esaias 40. The voice of a crier in the w^ldernesse is 5
Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight, every valley shall be
filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and crooked
things shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth, and
all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

The people maruailed at him, thinking him to be Christ: but John answered I
baptize you with water, but one stronger than I comes, whose shoes latchet I
am not worthy to unloose, he will baptize you with the holy ghost, and with
fire. Thus then with many exhortations he preached unto the people.

Now it came to pass, as all the people were baptized, Jesus also is baptized
at Jordan the place of passage, and the heavens did open: as to the passage of
the children of Israel. Of this David 114. Psalm: speaks, Jordan what ayleth
thee that thou art turned back? As touching the peculiar act of baptizing, it
seems that the Levites waited for some special thing upon it, in that they
asked of John, How happens it that thou baptizest, if thou be neither
Christ, nor Elias the Prophet? After this, John Baptist (having been put in
prison for rebuking Herod the Tetrarch, for Herodias his brother Philips wife,
and because of an oath he made to Herodias Daughter) is beheaded. Mat. 14.

And Jesus full of the holy ghost returns from Jordan, and was in the
wilderness forty days and forty nights (as was Moses) and was tempted of
the Devil. Luke 4.

At Nazareth he shows out of Esaias, all the joy of the proclamation of the
joyful or Iubilee year, to be fulfilled in him that day.

At Nazareth also out of Esaias, he shows the nature of his name Christ: for
that God anointed him to show the glad tidings to the poor, to heal the
broken in heart, to preach to the captives liberty, and to the blind
recovery of sight, to proclaim (the shaking away of all burdens) the joyful
year of the Lord, and shows how that day that scripture was fulfilled in
their ears. Now the proclaiming of the Iubilee year was on the Tenth day of
Tisri, even the same day that the high priest entered into the sanctuary. It
seemed therefore that he that day expounded the name and office of the Messiah.

Christ preaches the word of God in every town: all his preachings are of the
forgiveness of sins, and of the Kingdom of heaven. His Disciples were
always importune in asking him, Lord, when will thou set up the Kingdom of
Israel again? in stead of contenting them, he answers concerning the
Kingdom of heaven; One of them would needs have sit on his right hand, and
another on his left: but he answers, Whosoever will be greatest, let him be
least.

He feeds Four thousand with five loaves and two fishes Easter being near,
but he went not to the feast. This Christ by his power and providence does to
the worlds end: which we by experience do know, if we mark the wonderful
increase of the blessings of God.

He teaches of the Manna that gives life unto the world: also of the eating
of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, Easter being near.

On the Five and twenty of Cisleu, Dan. 8. Christ celebrateth the feast that
Judas Machabeus ordained in memory of the Temple renewed from the idolatry of
Antiochus, and there he teaches, that he is Michael (in the form of God)
that stands for his people, saying, My Father and I am one, and none can take
my sheep from me.

He goes into Jericho the City of Rahab, which was accursed by Joshua in old
time, and there saves Zache, a chief publican, from the curse.

He raises Lazarus from death, ( Lazarus is, my God is the help,) Christ is
said to love him, Ioh. 11.3. as he loves all that answer to that name,
whereof in that parable, Luke 16. Lazarus is set down for any godly men. Moses
handles this name. Exodus 2. when he calls Son Eleasar or Lazarus: for
Eleasar is the same in signification with Lazarus.

Upon this occasion for raising to life the dead, for loving of those who hold
God their helper, the high Priests assembled the Sanedrin or high counsel, and
from that day they took counsel how to kill him.

After this, he suppeth in Bethani (the house of affliction) Six days before
the Passover, where Marie with precious Nard annointeth him unto his burial.
This is foretold in the Song of songs, When the King did sit at his repast, my
Spikenard gave the smell thereof.

He comes to Jerusalem, the people took palm treeboughes, and go to meet
him, saying, Hosanna.

It is to be understood, that the feast of Tabernacles, ordained to begin the
Fifteenth of Tisri, was ordained in token of Gods defense of the people in the
cloud in the wilderness, which signified the dwelling of the word of God in
the nature of man. And whereas he was borne the day of preparing the boughs,
and then baptized; and at the feast of Tabernacles proclaimed himself, that
all should come to him that thirsted to have waters of life out of the rock:
this being not understood in the feast of Tabernacles, the people now perform
that which was to be done in bearing the boughs: they cried Hosanna, whereof
those boughs were called Hosanna, so that in Hosanna to the Son of David,
they mean thus much: these boughs we bear in the honor of the Son of
David.

Jesus bewayleth Jerusalem, because it did not see those things that touched
the the peace of it: and shows how it shall no more be Jerusalem, but Iebus,
that is, trodden under foot: for now Melchisedech under whom it was first
called Salem, is to be acknowledged a figure of the Lord. Now Isaacke offered,
not offered, is known, whereof he was a figure which Isaac gave Abraham
occasion to augment that name Salem, with Iire before Salem, where the Lord
will provide for everlasting peace.

3960. Jesus Christ the King, the most holy, is betrayed by Judas Iscarioth,
that is, which falls away for reward.
CHrist is crucified according to Daniel 9. Pontius Pilate being then
Lieutenant of Jury for Tiberius Caesar then Emperor of Rome, after that he
had preached three years and a half.

For comparison with this three years and an half, you have Elias in praying
it might not rain, and it rained not in three years and six months. Our
Savior Christ in the Gospel remembers this Story, when he makes comparison
with his coming to the Jews, with that of Elias. In the days of Elias, says
Christ, many widows were in Israel, when the heavens were shut three years
and six Months, but unto none was Elias sent save unto the widow of Sarepta.

Further, the Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes had the like story of three
years and six months, when the Idol was set in the Temple of God.

Moses laid down a law, that when they came into the Land, what tree they
planted good for meat, they should the three first years hold it unclean, and
those three years they should not eat the fruit thereof. So Christ in the
Gospel handles it thus in a parable: A man had a fig tree planted in his
Vineyard, and finding no fruit thereon, he said to the dresser of this
Vineyard, Behold these three years have I come, and sought fruit, but I find
none: cut it down, why keeps it the ground barren? and he answered, Lord,
let it alone this year, till I dig it round about, and dunge it, and if then
it bear not fruit, you shall cut it down.

We have the like comparison of three years and an half in the Revelation. For
all the persecution under the Roman Emperors being about three hundred years,
is alluded to this time of Christ's preaching being called forty and two
Months, which makes three years and six months. The Papists upon this
dream, that Antichrist when he comes shall reign but three years and a
half, and therefore the Pope cannot be Antichrist, seeing he has reigned many
hundred years. But to what purpose should the holy spirit speak of him so
long before, if his tyranny should be of no longer continuance? Besides,
seeing by the two and forty months which are the same in account with One
thousand, three hundred, and sixty days, the whole time of the tyranny
executed by the profane Emperors is meant. It must needs be, that the Popes
government which comes up in their stead, must be signified by One thousand,
three hundred, and sixty days.

236.
To this Carthusianus and Beda expound this time of One thousand, three hundred,
and sixty days, to comprehend the whole continuance of the preaching of the
Gospel to the end of the world. This their own side use for an exposition: and
seeing it is true, we embrace it. It is further to be demanded of them, how
it can be possible that the Antichrist should be able in three years and a
half to subdue all the world? Before Christ, this time was spoken in proper
terms: but since, in a metaphor, because there ensues the like dealings.

The Two and thirty and a half, are the years of Christ's government upon the
earth, and have comparison with David's two and thirty years, and six months
government in Jerusalem.

70.
This Seventy, is to show that this is the last Seven of the 70 Seuens, or
Four hundred and ninety years expressed, Dan. 9. wherein Christ should end
the sacrifice and oblation. 490.


The Fifty, is to show that it is the last Iubilee of the eight and twenty.

His humility, his life, his death, the cause and manner of his death, was
told before by the Prophets. In Esaias, Jeremy, and Daniel.

In Esaias 53. it is said of him. Who will believe our report? and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? he has neither form nor beauty: when we shall
see him, there shall be no form that we should desire him. He is despised
and rejected of men, he is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of
infirmities. He was despised, and we esteemed him not; Surely he has borne
our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did judge him as plagued, and
smitten of God, and humbled; but he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he
not open his mouth. He is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before his shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. He was taken out of
prison, and from judgment, and who will declare his age? for he was cut out of
the land of the living, for the transgression of my people was he plagued. And
he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he
had done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth. By his knowledge
shall he justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. He was counted
with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and prayed for the
transgressors. And again he says, Esaias 50. I gave my back unto the smiters,
and my cheeks to the nippers: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. And
again Psalm. 22. As for me I am a worm, and no man, a very scorn of men, and
the outcast of the people. All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they
shoot out their lips, and shake their heads, saying, He trusted in God, that
he would deliver him, let him deliver him if he will have him. Many Oxen are
come about me, fat Bulls of Basan enclose me in on every side: they gape
upon me with their mouths, as it were a ramping and roaring Lion. I am powered
out like water, and all my bones are out of joint, my heart also in the midst
of me is even like melting wax. They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell
all my bones, they stand staring and looking upon me. They part my garments
among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. Yea, the very abiects came together
against me unawares, making mowes at me and ceased not. With the flatterers
were busy mockers, which gnashed upon me with their teeth, they gaped on me
with their mouths, and said, Fie on thee, fie on thee, we saw it with our
eyes. They that sit in the gate speak against me, and the drunkards make song;
upon me, they gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty, they gave me
vinegar to drink: they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk
how they may vex him whom thou have wounded. Thou have laid me in the lowest
pit in a place of darkness, and in the deep. This text the Jews have
striuen with great malice to corrupt: for in stead of Caru, that is to say,
they pierced; the Jews will needs read Caari, that is, as a Lion: but the
Massorets who registered the number of the words and letters in the Bible, do
testify, that in all good copies it is written, Caru, they pierce: Also the
Seventy Interpreters have translated into greek (...), etc. They pierced my
hands, etc. Also the Prophet Zachary says, I will power out the spirit of
grace, and mercy upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and they shall look unto me whom they pierced.

Christ suffered at Easter, to end the ceremony of the paschall Lamb. For now
the true Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, is offered up
for us.

As of the paschall Lamb no bone was broken; so of Christ the immaculate Lamb
no bone was broken.

As the red Cow in Moses accompanied with all the people was conuayed out of
the host, and burned with the camp; so also was Jesus led out of the City
accompanied by the people, and crucified without the City.

He went over the brook Kedron, the way that David fled from Absalom.

He went into a garden to pray to recover Adams fall in the garden.

He suffered on friday being the Jews sixth day, the day wherein Adam was
created.

He suffered at noone, the time when Adam disobeyed.

He suffered on the cross, to take the curse upon him.

He opens Paradise to the poor thief, out of which Adam that day was driven.

Two thieves were crucified with him, and he was reckoned among the wicked,
as Esaias forespake, Esaias 53.

General darkness at his death was over all the world from the sixth hour
until the ninth hour. Adams soul was in darkness, hiding himself from the
presence of God from the sixth hour until the ninth hour. At the ninth hour
he called on God, whose voice Adam could not abide.

As Joseph buried his Father Jacob; so now Joseph burieth Christ the true Jacob.

After three days and three nights, he rises again, as Jonas after three
days and three nights was delivered out of the Whales belly.

After his resurrection, he appears twelve times, as Joshua sent twelve to
view the Land of Canaan.

He walked on the earth forty days, as Joshua viewed the Land forty days.

On the Fiftieth day he sends the holy Ghost upon the Apostles: so after
eating the Lamb, on the Fifty day the Law was given.

Now Christ the courageous white horse shines, and his Kingdom is
established, and Satan is bound for a thousand years. For the preaching of
Christ, and his Apostles has opened the eyes of some of all the Gentiles in
the world, whereby the power of Satan is weakened, and the rage of the cruel
Horns of the beast of Rome, that is, the tyranny of the persecuting Emperors
Nero, Domitian, and the rest plagued by the hand of God. Plagues of blood,
famine, and pestilence, resembled by horses, red, black, and lean, the great
beast also having one head cut off, lies dead until the end of the thousand
years, and the gracious Gospel of Christ flourishing in Iaphets borders,
(these be the ends of the earth) Sems house not regarding the peace of
Jerusalem, Iaphets Sons are persuaded to come to his tents to fetch precious
stones from Sion to lay the foundation of the spiritual Salem, to perform
the blessing of Noah, Genesis 10. And God will persuade Iaphet to dwell in the
tents of Sem. The earthly Jerusalem is now destroyed by the Romans, under
whom Christ was crucified, called in Dan. 9. the abomination of desolation;
whose City, in respect of their impieties, is called Ap. 11. a spiritual
Sodom, and Egypt; and therefore unto John figured by one monstrous beast having
seven heads, and ten horns, answearable to the number of the heads and horns
of Daniels four beasts; one of whose heads Constantine the great cutteth off
by remoouing the imperial seat of the Roman Empire to Constantinople, which
he called new Rome, so that the beast lay wounded about three hundred years,
one while being overcome by Vandals, another while by Lumbards, another while
by Germans, one while by one, and another while by another: and withal such
plagues lighted upon the afflicters of the Church of God, that they in effect
desired the mountains to fall upon and cover them. Thus it was of no glory
until the end of the thousand years, then Satan is let loose, and suffered to
go roaring about to deceive the hearts of the people, seeking like a ramping
and a roaring Lion whom he might devour, and he puts life into this dead
beast, having power given him from God, Revel. 13. And he spoke as did the
Dragon, and he did all that the first beast could do in his presence, and he
caused the earth with them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed, and he did great wonders, so that he made fire
to come down from heaven in the sight of men, and deceived them that dwelt on
the earth, by the means of those signs which he had power to do in the
sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should
make an image unto the beast, which had the wound of a sword, and did live. And
he had power to give a spirit unto the image of the beast, and that the image
of the beast should speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship
the image of the beast, should be killed. And he caused all both small and
great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand,
or in their foreheads: or the number of his name. Here is wit, let him that
has wisdom count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and
his number is six hundred, threescore, and six.

When Gregory the seventh forbids marriages, who takes upon him not the
form of the former beast and horns, but the shape of a Lamb with two horns
pretending all holiness, of whom Christ forbad long before to take heed,
saying, Mat. 7. Take heed of such as come in sheeps clothing, and say, here is
Christ, and there is Christ, and to color this Religion to be good, they
strengthen the throne of Satan, they erect houses for devout persons,
patterns (as they say) of chastity, good life, and all virtue, sequestring
themselves from the glory of the world, whom the holy Ghost compares in Ap.
8. to Locusts, that is, monstrous Serpents sprung from the seed of that old
serpent Satan the Devil, and are described to have faces like men, to show
that they should be but private men; hair like women, signifying that they
should remain in cloisters, and secret places, as women; and crowns upon their
heads, declaring their imperiousness: and wings like the wheels of chariots
prepared for war, their speediness to bloodshed, and tails like Scorpions,
out of the which proceeedeth poison to fill the cup of the strumpet which
sits upon the scarlet colored beast, out of the which the Princes of the
earth do drink, and are drunk with the abomination of her fornications.
These are, as we call them, Abbots, Monks, and Friars, and Nuns, which like
Locusts destroy the fruits of the earth, living by the sweat of other men's
labors, who receive wages of the beast and the false prophet, bearing his
mark in their foreheads, whose name is Abad^on, that is, Destruction. He is
also called Antichrist, that is, contrary to Christ's figured before Christ's
birth in Antiochus the vild, the little horn: who profaned the Temple of God,
erecting the Idol of Iouis Olympi in the temple of God, changing the laws
that Moses gave, speaking presumptuous words against the God of gods, and
exalting himself above all that is called God. But he went to Geheana. So
shall the Antichrist and the beast be destroyed, according to Numbers 24, but
he shall perish in the end, because he prophaneth the temple of God, changing
times and seasons, forbidding marriages, sitting in the temple, exalting
himself above all, that is, called God, speaking blasphemously, I am God upon
earth, persuading Gog and Magog the four quarters of the earth to go fight
for the holy Cross at Jerusalem, for which there were nine mischievous voiages
made, to the great bloodshed of many. And as his mischievous prankes were
figured in Antiochus: so the time of his government which shall be to the end
of the world, was in Antiochus likewise figured One thousand, two hundred and
sixty days, two and forty months, a time, two times, and half a time.

Unto this proper time of three years and a half of Antiochus rage, is the
whole time of the rage of the Antiochian Antichrist alluded, as Beda and diverse
godly men do expound the place, the story compelling them so to understand
it. And power was given to him over all kindreds, and people, and tongues, and
nations; and all that dw^lled on the earth worshipped him, whose names are not
written in the book of life, of the Lamb which was killed from the beginning
of the world, which Lamb only was found worthy to open the book and the
Seals. Ap. 5. and 6. Unto whom thousand thousands cried with a loud voice,
saying. Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing: who standing upon
mount Syon, had with him One hundred forty and four thousand, having his name
and his fathers name written in their foreheads: and they sang the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
maruailous are thy works Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou
King of Saints. Who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou
only art holy, and all Gentiles shall come and worship before thee: for thy
judgments are made manifest. Ap. 17. and 18. Chapters. Where the woman, that
makes drunk with her fornications the Kings of the earth, with her beastly
corporation, is said to go into perdition; whose destruction was figured in
the fall of Babylon, and in the destruction of Tyrus; in Iere. 51. and Ezech.
27. For the Gospel of salvation appearing again in the world, men fall away
from the throne and the beast, so that Kings eat his flesh in denying his
power, and refusing to bear his mark; whereat both Heavens, and holy
Apostles, and Prophets rejoice, saying, Halleluiah; Salvation, and glory, and
honor, and power, be ascribed to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are
his judgments: for he has judged the great whore, which did corrupt the
earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants of her
hand. And again they said, Halleluiah, and smoke rose up for evermore. And
the Heavens opened, and behold, A white Horse, and he that sat upon him was
faithful, and true, and in righteousness does he judge and make battle: his
eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he had a
name written, that no man knew but he himself, and he was clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, The Word of God: and he has on
his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
and the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their warriors gathered
together to make battle against him that sat on the Horse, and against his
soldiers, and the beast was taken and with him that false Prophet, that is to
say the Popes or Antichrist, that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them that received the beasts mark, (that is, the Popes Bulls,) and
them that worshipped his image. These both shall be cast into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone. He that testifies these things, says: be it I come
quickly, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

