

Infirmities were multiplied upon them, and after that they made have to come,
ps. 15

They sought thee out, O Lord, in their affliction. Esaias 26.

THE Sanctuary of a troubled Soul. Written by I. H.

Newly reprinted, enlarged and emended; by the author himself.

Before I was troubled I went wrong. Psalm. 119.

LONDON* Printed by I. W. and are to be sold at the Exchange by Cuthbert Burby.
1601.



Provide thee of a medicine before the soar come, and examine thy self
before Judgment: and so shall thou find propitiation in the sight of God,
Eccies. 8. 18.

The I. Devotion.
The sinner touched with his own sins, and terrified with Gods judgment,
flies unto Christ.

O Christ, the Son of the most mighty God, the Savior of most miserable
men; whose blessed body was buffeted with siftes, torn with whips, stretched
upon the cross, pierced with nails and spear* and bathed in the sweet
streams of thine own blood, for the redemption of all mankind: to thee, O
author, O restorer, O preserver of life, to thy majesty, to thy mercy, my
sinful soul, full of fresh bleeding wounds. full of old corrupted soars,
sick to the death with a surfeit of sin, would feign present it self, and
send a few fainte groans unto thy heavenly ears.

but alas, the greatness of my disease has almost taken away the sense
thereof; and so horrible is my corruption, that I fear it will too much offend
thy pure presence? and altogether auert, thy cou^tena^ce from beholding me,
thine ear from hearing me, and thy compassion from relieuing me.

O sin, the very bane and death of my soul, was it not enough for you to
infect a heedeles creature with your poison, but you must make it so ougly and
loathsome, that the eye of mercy should not endure to beehould it? was it not
enough for you to crush it in pieces with your weight, but you must also go
about to stop, both the ear of pity with horror, and the mouth of prayer
with shame? was it not enough for you to draw me to destruction, but you must
also take from me, both the sense of grief, and the sight of danger; and
consequently, the cure of the one, and care of the other?

I was wounded and I felt it not: I was wounded to death, and I perceived it
not: I was bound, I was beaten, and I regarded it not: yea, my wounds were a
delightful tickling unto me, I took pleasure in most base bondage, and (like
Salomons fool) I laughed when I was lashed. For I was beside my self, when I
was without thee, neither discerning and desiring that which was good nor yet
seeing and shunning that which was evil. I beecame not only foolish, but
altogether senseless; for thou art truth, and I was without thee, thou art
life, and I was without thee.

Alas how am I deformed? how am I defiled? O dear Christ, my fainting soul
groaneth and gaspeth for thy grace, but it is abashed at thy glory: I would
feign entreat thy mercy to heal me, but I am loath to offend thy majesty in
beeholding me: I am ashamed to lay open my iniquities, and yet (woe is me) I
cannot appear before thee without them.

Ah these my sins, how do they distres? how do they distract me? they desire
to be seen, that they may be healed; but they shun to be shown, least they
should be detested: they are not healed without confession, and they are not
heard without confusion: If they be covered they cannot be cured, and if they
be opened they must needs be abhorred. In the mean time, their sharpenes
pierces me, their weight presses me, they torment me with grief, they
terrify me with fear, they confound me with shame.

What shall I say, or what shall I do, wretch that I am, whether did I bend
my self, and to what pas am I now come? O Christ, I did not set thee before
my eyes, and now I dare not appear in thy sight: I rejoiced but not in thee,
and now I am troubled, but thou art not with me. Alas, better it were to be
nothing, then to be without thee, without whom al things are nothing; better
it were to be dead, then to be without thee, O our life.

Woe to me wretch, what shall I do in that terrible day, when at the sound of
the trumpet all graves shall open, and yield up their prisoners, which they
have kept fast fettered in the chains of death, from all ages since the world
was made. When the books of every ma^s naked conscience shall be laid forth:
when all my actions, words and thoughts, even those which I most esteemed,
either concealed, or else forgotten, shall be set in so open and plain a veiw,
that all the world shall point at me, and say, Behold the man and what he
has done. When I shall be compelled to answer to many things, whereof I
would have scorned to have been either questioned or told, during the time of
my life. when the heavens shall threate^ me, the earth rise up against me, and
all the creatures which I have abused cry vengeance upon me: when the Diuelles
shall accuse me, my own conscience give evidence against me, and the whole
Jury of Saints pass their verdict upon me.

At that day to go forward it will be intolerable; to go back, impossible; to
turn a side, unavailable: and so great will be the astonishment, between
sorrow, shame and fear, that the guilty sinner shall be desirous to hide him
self, (if it were possible) even in hell.

What way shall I the^ take in these desperate extremities? whether shall I
turn my self? what shift, what friends shall I be able to make? all things
giving cause of terror, and nothing of comfort. Alas, what shall I do, but
even faint for fear, and stand as a most desperate and forlorn wretch,
tre^blinge and quakinge before the presence of the most severe judge, who
neither can be blinded, nor will be corrupted; altogether confounded, at the
intolerable vehemency and weight of his wrath, at the inexcusable number and
enormity of my sins, at the easelesse and endless punishment which I shall
see I have deserved.

Who, where, what thing shall then be my comfort? when I shall behold, above,
an angry Judge condemning me; beeneath, hell open, and the boiling furnace
ready to devour me; on one side, the devils with bitter scoffs and vpbraydings
haling me; on the other side, the saints and my very nearest friends, not
only forsaking me, but rejoicing and praising God for his justice in my
damnation: within, my conscience tearing me; without, the powers of heaven
shaken and dissolved, the elements shiuered in pieces; the whole world
flaming, and all damned souls crying and cursing round about me.

O indignation of of the almighty, fall not upon me; for I have neither power
to resist thee, nor patience to endure thee, nor place to avoid thee. And
doubtless, it is impossible, either to express, or to imagine, what an
inestimable treasure a good conscience will be at that day: and if a sinner
could now conceive the infinite sea of terrors and torments, which then he
shall perceive to rush upon him, he would not endure them one moment, for all
the false pleasures that his sweetest sins can afford.

Alas wretch, what shall I do? if I speak, my sins stand up against me:
and if I hold my peace, I find no man to comfort me. Mourn O my soul, drown
thy self in bitter mourning; howl out and lament because of these heavy
horrors which thine offenses prepare daily to heap upon thee: thou being as
unable to repel the one, as either to repress, or repent the other.

And yet now thou do see these evils, see also if thou can shun them;
let no pains be too great, no petitions either to often, or too earnest to
make provision against that day: trample under foot the vanities of this
life; shake them off, as Paul did the viper into the fire, lest they cause thee
to shake. Run, O run unto thy only refuge Jesus Christ thy redeemer,
become (as it does become thee) an humble suppliant, in the lowest degree both
of sorrow and shame: prostrate thy self before his presence, pour out thy
tears at his feet, make an abject countenance and gesture, unfeigned
messengers of thy distressed mind; let thy words be seasoned with sighs, and
bathed in tears, and so address thy suite unto him. Although it be late, it
is not yet too late to call for his mercy: and wherefore should thou be
consumed in saying nothing? As it is impossible he should forgette the
passions which he endured, so it is not credible that he should not have
compassion on thee for whom he suffered.

O Christ, O son of the euerlyuinge God, in goodness infinite, infinite also
in greatness, in power almighty, in wisdom wonderful, in judgment just, in
promise true, in works holy, in mercy rich, patient toward sinners, and
sparing when they do repent: call to thy remembrance, O sweet Jesus, for whose
sake thou were content to endure all the miseries of mortallitie: hunger,
cold, grief, poverty, contempt, scorn, blasphemies, bands, blows, the
cross, wounds, death, and the grave.

And now, O Lord, where is this love? where are these mercies? is thy goodness
come to an end? and will thine anger never again be appeased? If I be full of
impiety, art thou therefore not full of pity? and if I confess the one, will thou therefore deny the other? if my sins are greater the^ it is meet, ar thy
mercies lesser then they were wont? if thy glorious greatness did make me draw
back, will thou therefore draw back thy gracious goodness?

O Lord my God, although I am a sinner, yet am I thy creature: although I am a
sinner, yet am I redeemed with the blessed price of thy blood. O Lord my life,
It was no goodness in me that compelled thee to make me, but even thy love; it
was no merit in me that did win thee to redeem me, but even thy mercy: why
then sweet Christ and most loving Jesus, let that love which compelled thee to
make me, compel thee also to help me; let that mercy which did win thee to die
for me, win thee also to save my life: for thou art always one, neither is thy
love changed, nor thy mercy diminished.

Hear me O Lord, heal me O Lord, heal my sick soul which pants at thy
feet, and is even at the point to perish: reject not him who deiecteth him
self, let not the abasing of my self make me seem base unto thee: enter not
into judgment with thy servant, but according to thy mercies, to the multitude
of thy mercies put away mine iniquities.

Think not on thy hate against a sinner, but think on thy love toward thy
creature: remember not thy justice where by thou punishest, but remember thy
mercy whereby thou sauest: forget me as I was disobedient, provoking thee to
wrath, and regard me as I am distressed, crying to thee for help. Comfort me
that am weak, heal me that am wounded, raise me that am dead: heal the
infirmity which grieueth me, and thou shall remove the deformity which
offends thee: take away the wretchedness whereof I languish, and thou shall
take away the lothso^nes which thou abhorrest: free me from my danger, and thou
shalt free thy self from thy displeasure.

O sweet Lord and most merciful Jesus Christ, we know wherefore thou came
into the world, even to seek and to save that which was lost: and do not thou
O Lord forget that which we, vile wretches, not only know, but shall acknowledge,
either with trembling, or else with joy. Thou came to save that which was
lost, and will thou see me perish, in the view of thy pitiful eyes, in the
presence of thy bowels of mercy? Thou came to call sinners to repentance, and
will thou not hear them when they do repent? thou came to seek those which
wandered, and to assemble those which were dispersed, and will thou not receive
those which com unto thee, which cry after thee, which call upon thee?

Thou did not stop thine ears when thou were blasphemed; and will thou
stop them now thou art entreated? thou did not turn away thy face from those
that spat upon thee and buffeted thee, and will thou now turn it away from
those that pray unto thee?

O thou hope of my heart, and strength of my soul, whether should I run for
succor, to whom should I resort, but only unto thee, who art the reconciler,
the redeemer, the Savior of mankind? O reconciler, whom will thou reconcile
to thy Father, if thou reiectest a poor sinner, who condemns himself, and
calls upon thee? if death shall devour him who dispaireth in himself, and
trusts in thee? if that soul shall be drowned in hell, which acknowledges
his own wickedness with fear, and thy goodness with love? O redeemer whom
have thou then redeemed? O Savior whom then will thou save?

O Christ hear me, O Christ help me, or else tell me thy unworthy
servant, O merciful God, tell thy servant, to whom shall I cry? to whom
shall I complain? who is more able to help? who more easy to be entreated? to
whom may I fly more safely? to whom more readily? who is more mighty? who
more merciful? where may I be more bold? where more secure?

O thou only refuge and relief of the distressed, to whom no man sueth
without hope of help, forsake me not now I call upon thee, for before I did
call upon thee, thou diddst call me; and to the end that I should seek after
thee, thou did seek out me. Sweet Jesus I praise thee for this
voluntary gift of thy goodness, O let it not be unprofitable unto me: Finish
that which thou have begun, and give me the thing which thou have moved me to
desire.

Hear my prayer, and have mercy upon me a forsaken orphane; look upon the
tears of my misery. Have mercy upon me, O son of David, O fountain of
mercy, have mercy upon me; let my soul be the sea to swallow up those
streams which flow from thee, O fountain of mercy. Heal the diseased, help
the distressed which cries to thee for comfort.

O light, behold the blind; O strength, stretch forth thy hand that the lame
may come unto thee; O life, raise the dead out of the sepulcher of his sins.

O mercrfull lover of mankind, ah show thy self unto me; reveal thy glory,
reveal thy grace, oh let me beehold oh let me hold thee.

Let me find, let me feel, that thou only art the hope of the distressed,
the relief of the afflicted, the comfort, the strength, the joy of all. O
Christ, let me not in vain believe this truth: O Christ let me not in vain
lay hold upon this hope: O Christ, let me not in vain desire this mercy. And
if my faith be so little, my hope so cold, my prayer so weak, that I can
thereby deserve, neither pardon of my punishment, nor participation of thy
glory; supply thou I beseech thee my imperfections, that by thy mercy I may
obtain the one, and by thy merits the other.

O Sweet Jesus, O my God, bring me from all ontward things to my self, and
from my self unto thee: make me as like to thee in will and desire, as I am
in nature: set me wholly on fire with thy love; thy sweet love, thy longinge
love, thy chaste love; with desire of thee, with contentmente, with joy, with
saciety in thee. Let this light of thy love captiuate my senses from all other
both lights and delights, let it clear my soul from the gross vapors of
earthly affections; that I may thereby, if not fully satisfy, yet show my
self industrious to satisfy thy goodness and goodwill; and that as hitherto I
have lived against my self, and without thee, so from henceforth I may lead
my life, for my self, in and by thee, sweet Jesus Amen.

Hom. II. a. (...).

(...).

Tam graui^ ille mihi nigri quam limina ditis,

Ore aliud qui fert, aliud sub pectore celat.

As dale of death, so do I hate that kind,

Whose tongue from th^ught, whose mouth dissent from mind.

Periissem nisi periissem



The II. Devotion.
The touch of sin and the terrors of hell, causes the soul to lay hold
upon Gods mercy.

O Soul, O wicked, O wretched soul, shake off sloth, this sleep, this death
of sin, wherein thou walowest, and wherein thou wanderest: raise up, rowse up
thy self from this dangerous dulnes. Call to thy consideration (unhappy
creature) from whence thou runnest, where thou art, and whereto thou hastnest:
the favor which thou forsakest, the horror wherein thou abidest, and the
terror whereto thou tendest.

Thou were once washed clean with the heavenly fountain in baptism, clothed
with the pure robe of righteousness, endowed with the ioies of heaven, and
espoused to my Savior Christ: but now thou have soiled thy self with sin,
defiled that glorious garment, broken those sacred bands, and by impuritye of
life have made thy loving spouse, both thine earnest enemy, and severe judge.

O Christ, how can I forget thy goodness, and yet how dare I remember thy
greatness? I have denied thee with Peter, beetraied thee with Judas, and run
from thee with thy other disciples: nay, with the most accursed cruel Jews, I
have mocked, blasphemed, buffeted and scourged thee; spitte upon thy glorious
face, and torn open thy tender wounds. Then since I have committed their
cruelty, what hope may I have to avoid their curse; that thy blood be not
upon me, and my posterity?

Alas (miserable wretch) in what path have I walked? in what pollutions have I
wallowed? and in what perplexities am I now plunged? wherein, the consideration
both of good and evil tormenteth me a like: of good, with grief of that which
I have lost: of evil, partly with sense of that which I sustain: and partly
with fear of that which I expect. I have lost glory, I feel shame, I fear
punishment: the loss is by me irrepairable the shame inexcusable, the fear
inconsolable. Oh miserable estate, oh uncomfortable, not only to be deprived
of unspeakable ioies, but to be afflicted with intolerable pains.

O sin, the defiler, the deformer, the destroier of souls, from how high a
pitch of happiness have thou dejected me? into how deep a gulf of miseries
have thou depressed me? with what a world of woes have thou enclosed me?
here woe and there woe, and a very hell of woes is heaped upon me.

Justly (Lord) justly am I thus tormented; for I have been fainte, yea false
in the charge that thou have committed unto me: I have thrown away my
spiritual weapons; I have forsaken the field of christian combat; and not
only cowardly yealded, but traitorously turned to the prince of darkness.

I have cast off my Savior, and cast away my self; I have forsaken the
society of Saints, and joined company with the damned crew; I have aba^doned
the palaces of heaven, and built me a nest in the loathsome den of hell: I
am altogether become an abject from God and a subject to the Devil.

What have thou done, O madd man, O mischievous, O monstrous man, what have
thou done? what a woeful exchange have thou made? what a lamentable loss have
thou incurred? O perverse will, O miracle of madness. How, O God, has
corruption depraved me? how O God shall satisfaction restore me?

Cast thy self (forlorn wretch) into the uncomfortable dungeon of sorrow,
ouerwhelme thy self with mountains of bitter mourning: come grief, come
horror, come anguish, come fear; heap your felues upon me, wrap me in, weigh
me down, I have impudently contemned you, I have desperately provoked you, and
now do miserably call for you.

So, so, it is just, afflict the wicked, torment the guilty, revenge the
injuries, revenge the periuries which I have committed against God: give the
sinner a touch of the infernal tortures which he has deserved: give him a
taste of the banquet which he has prepared. Comfort, peace, security, joy,
keep away, I will none of you, except you bring a pardone with you: disquiet
shallbe my rest, mourning my mirth, sour sorrow my comfort.

Alas, how shall I present my self before the majesty of the most righteous
and upright judge? how shall my fearful face behold him? how terriblie will he
cast his countenance upon me? His eyes far brighter the^ the sun, have
narrowly observed all my actions, he has weighed my words, he has nombred my
thoughts; he has seen, he has sealed up all my sins: he has hitherto
bin silent, hitherto patient; but out alas, he will one day cry out, one day
he will call me to a reckoning for all.

O my heart, O poor heart, O heart full of miseries, yea depressed, yea
oppressed with manyfold miseries; never able to sustain these firebrandes of
conscience. Alas mine eyes are not worthy to look toward heaven: yea, they
are most worthy to be extinguished with tears. If then I be ashamed to be
seen, how shall I be assured to be received? if I have no heart to ask, what
hope can I have that I shall obtain.

Go too then O sinful soul, enter again into the closet of thy conscience,
turn over the books of thy accountes, cast thy reckoninges, set down thy
sums; see what thou have done, and what thou have deserved.

Imprimis, for abusing many creatures, in desieringe, seeking and embrasing
them above the Creator. Item, for blaspheming. Item, for swearing. Item, for
lying. Item, for vile and vain talkinge. Item, for covetousness. Item, for
cruelty. Item, for pride. Item, for ambition. Item, for riot. Item, for
gluttony. Item, for drunkenness. Item, for lightness. Item, for looseness. Item,
for lust. Item, for envy. Item, for hatred Item, for anger. Item for
unquietness. Item, for frowardnes. Item, for obstinacy. Ite^, for rashness.
Item, for violence Item, for idleness. Item, for sloth. Item, for hypocrisy.
Item, for flatterye. Item, for curiosity. Item, for detraction. Item, for
oppression. Item, for sclander, etc.

The total snmme is, the manifest and manifold breach of all thy
commandementes.

The penalty is, eternal banishmente from thy presence, and intolerable and
endless pains in hell fire.

Out upon me wretch, alas what shall become of me? O my Lord, I know not
what to do, I cannot tell what answer to make: and being now in extremity
both of danger and fear, my cogitations trouble me, my conscience tormenteth
me, every thought is athorne unto me.

Nay go on then a little further, look down into hell, before thou leap
into it; observe there who expects thy coming, and what shall be thy
entertainment.

O good God, what do I behold in this infernal lake, nothing but horror,
tumultuous and eternal horror; fiery chains, flaming whippes, scorchinge
darkness, tormenting devils, and burninge souls; howling, roaring and
lamenting, woe and alas; with a mad rage blaspheming God; with a desperate
impatiencie, cursing the^ selves; tearing (in a manner) their own substance,
and enuiting the furious fiends to torment them.

Here every part of the condemned prisoner has both a full and fit charge of
punishment, without either intermission or change: the memory is tormented
with pleasures that are past; the understanding, with ioies that are lost; the
apprehension, with pains that are present; and (above all,) the conscience is
griped with every particular offense that the sinner has committed; which
once were sweet, but the^ like serpents shall cruellye and restlestlye gnaw
upon him. Never ceasing to rub into his remembrance, how base were the causes
of his calamity what warninge was given, what means were offered him to have
avoided it; how easily he might, and many times how nearly he had
apprehended the occasion; and yet how negligently, how foolishly, how madly
he continued in his careless course.

Further, the sight is afflicted with fearful darkness and ugly devils, the
hearing with horrible and hidious cries, the smell with poisonous stink, the
taste with bitterness of gall, the feeling with sharpnes of fire.

A fire, which as nothing does feed it, so it consumes nothing that it does
burn: a fire, which has no light to comfort, but heat to torment: a fire,
whose force shall never be either spent, or extinguished, or yet abated: but
as long as God is God, so long shall it tormente the wicked; and that with
such vehemency of heat, that one drop of water to be applied to the
scorched tongue will be of greater valuation then a thousand worlds.

And besides these common torments, every offender shall have his particulare
pains, according to the difference of his sins, either in quality, or in
kind. Of which pains, not only all, but any one shallbe so grievous, and so
intolerable, as it is impossible for any mortal wit, either to express* or
to imagine. And yet shall no creature be grieved at them; and endured they
must be without any hope, FIRST, of intermission; SECONDLY, of abatement;
THIRDLY of change, (without which things, not only painful, but indifferent,
yea pleasant, become insupportable;) FOURTHLY, of comfort, but to the
contrary, the diuelles shall vpbrayde them, the damned curse them, and the
Saints deride them; LASTLY, of end, but after so many millions of ages as
there are drops of water in the sea, the damned shall be as far from either
end or ease of their torments, as they were the first day of their beeginning.

O intolerable punishment, which no means can moderate, no patience can
endure, no time shall end: Is this (O Lord) the wages of sin? is this the
punishment of wicked doers, of whom I am one, in so deep a degree? and is it
marvel then if my conscience quake? if my soul cleave with sighs? and if my
eyes be drowned in tears.

But where am I, and whether am I carried? whether do you drive me, O my
sins? whether, O God, do thou deliver me? If my sins have made me that I
am thy offender, have they also made me that I am not thy creature? If the
Devil has bereaved me of my purity, has he also beereaued thee of thy
pity? If thy justice may rightly damn me, cannot thy mercies possiblye save
me? and if I have deserved the one, have I thereby also disclaymed the other?

O merciful Lord, do not so look upon me, that thou see not thy self:
regard no so my wickedness that thou beehold not thy own goodness: remember
not so the sins that I have done, that thou forget the substance which thou
have made.

What (O Lord) is the sense of this saying? I will not the death of a sinner,
but I desire that he be converted and live: is this I will not the death of a
sinner, if thou reiectest a sinful soul, if thou drownest it in hell, that
cries unto thee for mercy? is this I desire that he be converted and live?

O gracious God, whose word is a will, and whose will is a power, who do
promise nothing but that which thou do purpose, and who do purpose nothing
but that which thou able to perform, suffer me I pray thee, to speak with thy
mercy; me, I say, earth and ashes, suffer me to speak with thy mercy, for
great are thy mercies toward us.

Lord, if thou will not the death of a sinner, what necessitye is there that I
should be damned? If thou desire that a sinner should be converted and live,
what difficulty is there that I should not be saved? can the power and malice
of the Devil? can the number, can the enormitie of my offenses, either
constrain that which thou would not, or hinder that which thou desire?

No, no, my God, the devils tremble at thy mighty majesty: and if the sins
of the whole world were ballaunced against the least of thy mercies, they
could hold no weighte; much less can the offenses of one wicked wretch sway
thy Almighty and merciful will. For by how much God is greater then man, by so
much is my wickedness inferior to thy goodness.

Have mercy therefore upon me, O almighty God, return, del^uer my soul, save
me for thy mercies sake: for if thou will thou can save me, and in thy will
rests the strength of my hope.

Remember not thy justice, and my deserts, but remember thy mercies, and my
miseries: think not upon thy hate toward offenders, but think upon thy love
toward thy creatures: cast thy severe eye of revenge upon thy son, but
look upon me with thy eye of pity.

O dear God, hell is already full, and what profit is there in my
distructio^? Also many millions of sinners will never come unto thee, will
never call nor care for thy help: so that if thou reiectest the repentant and
sorrowful sinner, who then shall be saved? and whom will thou f^^de
righteous, if (...) iudgest without mercy?

When I was not, O Lord, thy fingers framed me, and thou neither hate nor
contemnest any thing that thou have made. When I was a captive of the devil,
a slave of hell, thou did send thy beloved son to die for my redemption:
and do not now I beseech thee, cast that away, which thou h^^^ purchased at so
^^gh a price. When I walked in my own wicked ways, thou did patiently
endure me, mightily preserve me, and graciously call me; and will thou not now
beestow one louinge look upon me?

Why then (O loving God) look upon thy beloved son: behold what he has
suffered, and of thy goodness call him to thy remembrance, for whom, thy will
and his obedience did cause him to suffer. Behold his bitter agonies wherein
his body was sprinkled with a bloody sweat; beeholde his back torn with
whips, his head pricked with thorns, his face defiled with spitting: behold
his blessed body so strained upon the cross, that all his bones might be
numbered: behold his harmless hands, and his undefiled feet pierced with
sharp nails: behold his naked side struck through with a spear: behold the
abundance of blood which gushed forth of those holy fountains; which blood
still streameth fresh in thy sight, and now pleads for my pardon.

Behold (O gracious God) how his feeling was possessed with pain, his hearing
with reproach, his eyes with scorn, his taste with gall: behold how his neck
bowed, his head hung, his breast beat; how his sight waxed dim, his
countenance pale, his legs and arms stiff, how he groaned; how he gasped
and gave up the ghost. Behold the priest, behold the sacrifice, even the lamb
undefiled, gloriously imbrued with his own blood.

Gracious and merciful God, by this thy son, by this my Savior, I most
humbly beeseech thee to look favorably upon me; incline thine ears toward
me, hide not thy face now my soul is troubled. Graciously receive the lost
sheep which strayinge from thy pastures through sin, and flying from thy
presence through a guilty conscience, he has louinglye sought, and ioyfullye
does bring unto thee upon his own shoulders. Hear me (O God of all power) and
turn toward me; and let thy mercies accept his merits for full satisfaction
of my misdeedes.

O infinite mercy, thou have set us a way, and given us a light; thou have
threaned us the pains of hell, and promised us the ioies of heaven, now pierce
my flesh with thy fear, that I may avoid the one; and inflame my soul with
thy love, that I may attain the other. Grante I pray thee, that as long
traueilers are thereby taught to love their own country, so my former err^urs
may henceforth be a mean to hold me in the right path: that being led by
thee, and walking through thee, I may come unto thee, and rest in thee: for we
(silly worms) are unable to enter into thine eternity, unless thou who have
created us, do guide us in.

Save (O God who desire not the death of a sinner) save my sinful soul,
which flies from thy fearful justice, to thy comfortable mercies; from the
desert of my sin, to the desert of thy Son. This (O God is easy to thy
power, and usual to thy mercy, and agreeable to thy will

Such are the witless wilful, right, as is the heedles fly, Which kills it
self, and hurtes his sight has has her in his eye.

Sperate miseri: Cauete faelices.

The death of Saints is precious. Psalm. 125.



Miserable is the death of Sinners. Psalm 53.

The III. Devotion.
The guiltines of sin, and the consideration of Death, calls the sinner to
call upon God, for his mercy in Jesus Christ.

O Most high, most holy, most mighty, most merciful, most good, most
goodly, most louinge, most fearful and terrible God; the Creator, the renuer,
the maintainer of all things: whom to know, is to be wise; whom to serve,
is to reign; whom to love, is the life and happiness of the soul: behold, I
pore wretch, to thee who art both rich, and liberal; I miserable, to thee who
art both pitiful and plentiful do draw near: behold, a hunger-starued
beggar knocks at thy door; open unto me, O honorable householder, without
whom all abundance is beggerie; open, I say, thy mercies to my miseries: and
although I am not worthy to sit at thy feast with thy sons, yet with the
basest of thy servants, let me be refreshed with some broken pieces that are
taken from thy table.

Thou have commanded us, (O gracious God) to knock, to ask, and to seek:
whereupon thou have promised to open, to give, and to be found: behold now
my sighinge does seek thee, my tears cry unto thee, and the groans of my
payned soul, do knock at the gate of thy mercies: behold, Lord, I am desirous
to do thy will, perform thou, I beseech thee, thy word.

And first (O Lord) I acknowledge against my self, that I was conceived in
iniquity, and borne in misery; but thou of thy free love did cleanse me,
thou did sanctify me, thou did through faith on my part and mercy on
thine betroath thy self unto me.

Yet I, unmindful of so great goodness, have since, with many a foul fact,
distained my self, and dishonored thee; not dreading thy displeasure, whole
wrath makes the deuells to quake. I was borne in necessary, but I plu^ged my
self in voluntary sins, I made no conscience in offending thee, and feared
not to forgett thy law.

Notwithstanding thou, according to thy wonted mercies, did not banish
me from thy protection; but as though I had daily and duly observed thy will,
thou did bountifullye heap thy benifites upon me; so much undeserved of
me, as not desired.

When I sinned against thee, the devil was ready to have made a pray of me,
I was content, I was desirous to have perished with him: but thou (O Lord)
did drive back him, and draw back me; not only without either my request
or knowledge, but very much against my mind.

When I was in danger of death, both by sickness and casualties, and my
soul was so rocked a sleep in sinful security, so burdened with the
weight of wicked actions, that it must needs have suncke down into hell; thy
grace stood by me, thy power did preserve, both my body from death, and my
soul from damnation.

I did offend thee, but thou did defend me. I did deserve death, but thou
did preserve life; I did not regard thee, when thou did safely guard
me: I (like a wretch either senseless of desperate) did forsake thee, and
fly unto mine enemy; I did long, I did labor to have been lost: but thy care
did keep me, whilst I busied in vain things never marked so much; thy love
did seek with very great and gracious favors to win me unto thee.

But as one that is sick of a sleepie disease cannot be awaked but by
pinching; so out of this lethargy of sin, my sleepy soul (neither
unworthy nor unwilling to have perished) could not be called to it self, but
by some sharp and sensible accident.

Hereupon thou begannest to run with me a more rugged race, laying many kind
crosses upon me; not only to bend my unwilling, but to break my wilful
mind, and to make it appliable to thy pleasure. Thou did call me out of
the wilderness of worldly delights, wherein my guiltines would have hid it
self from thy presence; thou did compel me out of ^^e high way to hell;
thou did take me up strayinge in the streets to attend upon thee; thou
did enter covenant with thy servant, thou did stir in me a desire,
and strengthen, an endeavor to follow thee: thou did instruct, thou did
enable, both my understanding, and also my power; that to discern, this in
some degree of duty to do thy will.

Yet I (wretch that I am) since my entrance into thy service; have either
ungraciously forgotten, or vngratfullye remembered all thy benifites, and have
not so esteemed thee for them, as I would have done a mortal friend for a few
curtisies of course. I have forsaken thee again, and followed the right trace
of the unrighteous world; thinking every thing good whose evil I had not
tried. I have provoked thee, I have stirred up thine anger, I have deserved thy
displeasure, I have done evil in thy sight; not ignora^tly but presumptuously;
not weakly but wilfully; not fearfully, but impudently having not only lost
the tender touch of conscience, but beeginning to bear my self (an offense
beeyond the degree of my vile word) in a bravery of evil.

Alas how deeply has corruption tainted my soul? what folly has not had his
feate in my mind, and left his footsteps in my actions? Nay, I have far
exceeded the limits of follye; noe man not banished from his own wits,
would thus have bin entrapped, thus entangled. I should have repented me of my
former sins, but I have in such sort both increased and aggrauated the^;
that I have scarce left, either number for more, or place for worse.

O my God, what answer shall I make? how shall I either excuse, or extenuate
this my relapse? shall I pretend the sly subtelties of the deuell; the
fair-faced shows of the world? the pleasant persuasions of the flesh? the
woman gave it me, the serpente deceined me? Tush, all these are baits for
babes; but I was come to a greater staidness, both age, and in experience; I
was warned, I was weapened; I was instructed, I was encouraged; I should have
used more warines to suspect, more wisdom to discern, more valor, both to
defend my self, and defeat mine enemy.

Noe sure, I will never excuse him whom his own conscience condemns: I had
thy express word and will to stop me; my own knowledge to bridle me; I would
have disalowed those things that I did, if any other had done them but my
self. When a man's memory is the bill of his debt, when his thoughts are
willing witnesses against him, when his fear is his jailer, when his judgment
is his judge, when his own knowledge conuenteth him, there is little doubt
either of denying or deceiving credit, and much less of making escape.

I, I, it is even I that have broken covenant with thee; I have abused my
reason, rather why to do amiss, then how to amend; I have falsified my faith;
I have riotously run after the vain conceits or rather deceits of sin; whose
kindest courtesies are the allurementes of mischeife; which like a be-mired
dog, defiles with fawning; whose kisses are of power to kill.

I have received many fresh wounds, I have renewed all my oulde soars, and
what thou (O Lord) by thy mercies had healed, I by my madness have rubbed
open; in so much as sin used again, has made the pardone once granted to
be of none effect. I may well say with Judas, I have sinned; but either name
or number my sins I cannot.

O bottomless sea of misery and sorrow, wherein I have plunged my self,
allwaies sinckinge, and yet by the infiniteness thereof never at the bottom;
which I am able, neither to abide* having the firebrandes of all furies within
me, nor yet to avoid, being fettered therein with the cruel chains of my
own fear.

Oh my soul, full of wretchedness, full of shame, but fullest of guiltines,
accept no object but of sorrow; draw greedely into thy mind all conceits
that may increase thy grief: be ashamed, nay abhor to think of any
comfort. Loath thy self, torment thy self, and so shall thou do some thing
well; for thou can neither loath nor torment a more cursed creature.

Alas, how is my soul abandoned? how are all the powers thereof laid wast?
comfort is no more ease unto me, then is the handlinge of sore wounds. I am
divided in my self, how can I stand? I am overthrown in my self, how shall I
rise? my desire is payned because it cannot hope, and if it has any spark of
hope, it is rather in change then riddance of grief.

Forlorn wretch that I am, it had bin better for me never to have bin
converted to grace, then thus peruersly to be diuerted from the same; for then
I should have gone on in a sober security, and my punishment should have bin
so much the less, as ignorance is beneath contempt: but now I am not only
unhappy, but unhappy after the fall from some degree of happiness; now the
footestepps of ouertroden virtue lay cruel accusations against me, and make
the hateful comparison of vice more manifest, miserable are they who lose
they wott not what, but more miserable are they who know what they lose.

O foolish reason, how sharp art thou to see thy mischief, and yet how dim,
how blind art thou to foresee it? O poor remnant of pierie; only so much
goodness left, as to make me languish in my own evil.

O sin, the only fall of my judgment and stain of my conscience, now thou
have sacked my soul, now thou have beaten it down under thy tyranny, rest thy
self, forbear a while, tread not upon my ruins, set not fire to thine own
spoils. And yet not so; but do thy worst, cruel and cursed sin, do even the
very worst that thou can: the more terrors thou executest upon me, the
more shall I both loath and lament the service that I have done thee; the
sooner shall I seek to draw my desires out of the mire of thy subjection.

There is yet left, both time to repent, and occasion to amend; yet does
Christ, not only admit but inuit to his feast: I could neither see nor
sorrow for my sins, did not he both enlighten my understanding, and soften
my senses. He has not enlightened my understanding to drown it in darkness;
he has not softened my senses because he could not break them; and why then
has he thus wakened the one, and weakened the other.

It is even so: he that has hitherto in patience expected me, does now in
pity call me. Speak then (Lord) speak unto thy servant; thunder into the
inner ear of my heart; break my deafness that I may hear thy voice. Lord,
thou look for mine amendmente that I may have thy favor; and I look for
thy favor that I may amend.

Woe is me, how long have I stayed? Alas how late do I come? how slowlye do
I hasten? how does my resolution stick between loathnesse and necessity?
woe is me wretch, how cunningly does the deuell seek to delay me? what art
has he used to keep the line from breaking whereat the fish was caught? not
drawing him violently, but letting him play upon the hook which he so
greedely had swallowed.

O my God, the sun of my life has passed his Meridian, and I am now in the
after noone of my age; the night of nature will come fast upon me, when death
(as Gods sergeant) will arrest, my body upon debt to nature her self, my
soul upon trespass committed against God. The one he will bind hand and
foot, and commit close prisoner to the grave: the other he will arraigne in
the high court of heaven, where God shall be both party and judge, to
aunsweare to all objections, as well of error as of contempt.

At this hour of death, when the sinnfull soul begins to be loosed from
the fetters of flesh, O good God, how is it troubled? what terrors are
presented unto it? Then begins it to throw the thoughts freely into every
corner of the conscience; to see the sins which it has done; to perceive the
vengeance that it has deserved; to consider, that the time of repentance is
then at an end, and that it is set upon the immovable point of passage to a
most stricte trial, uncertain how the best actions that it has done shall
be examined.

It is desirous to stay, it is compelled to go: and as it often happens,
that whilst one thinks too much of doing, he leaves to do the effect of
his thinking; so whilst it lamenteth the loss of all the time that is past,
it loses that little which then remains.

Looking back, it esteems the whole race which it has run, as a short
step; looking forward, it behouldeth the infinite space of eternytie wherein
it has to continue; lifting up the mind to heaven, it discovers a most
bright and beautiful glory; again, castinge it down upon the earth, it
sees all things enfoulded in a mistie darkness. Hereupon, a new swarm of
thoughts stingeth the mind; It lamenteth, that it was so chained with the
enchauntmentes of a momentanie estate, as scarce to think upon the condition
which never shall have end; that to satisfy the flesh, which is to be a nest
of worms, it has neglected the spirit, which was to have bin a companion of
Angels; that it has lost, for so short a show, the eternal substance of
pleasure; that it has exchanged, the treasure of immortal glory for the
trash of floating vanity.

O, if it had but a small time more of amendment, how seriously would it
convert? what a sharp and severe course would it set into? but it is like
unto a horse, desirous to run, and miserably spurred, but so short reined
that he cannot stir: or like unto those who in their dreams are taken with
some fearful vision, which sweat with pain, and strive to cry for help,
but cannot find any strength to cry.

In the mean time, the head shoots, the back aketh, the heart pants, the
throat ruttleth, the tongue faultreth, the breath shortneth, the flesh
trembles, the veins beat, the heart stringes crack; the eyes wex dim, the
nose sharp, the brows hard, the cheeks cold and wanne, the lips pale,
the hands numme, the iointes stiff; the whole body is in a cold sweat, the
strength fainting, the life vanished, and death drawing on. Neither will the
children and friends (for whose sake the sick shall often think them selves
damned) for bear in this instant of extremity; but continually like flesh
flies they will offer molestation.

Whilst these summoners of death do execute their office, all the wicked
actions, words and thoughts are brought into presence; they are heaped
together, and aggrauated to the uttermost; they give the conscience many a
cold pull, and lie upon the heart as heavy as lead. Feign would the sinner
turn away his eye, but he shall be compelled to behold them; they will all
cry unto him; we are thy works, we will go with thee.

Then shall the conscience sharplye accuse, the memory give bitter evidence,
reason shall sit as judge, fear shall stand as executioner; and scarce is
there any severe sentence in all the bible against sin, which the deuell will
not bring into mind, urging every point and amplifying it by construction.
Then will resolution be turned to trembling, pride into baseness, confidence
into despair. Then will be a great difference in judgment from that which
men bear commonly in this world, in so much as the sinner shall be forced to
cry and confess; we simple men thought their life to be but madness, whose
end we now esteem most honorable: but we have wearied our selves in craggye
ways, we are worn out in pursuing vanity, and the ways of the Lord we
have not known.

Never did tirant exercise his rage with greatet cruelty, upon any that he
most hated, then the miserable sinner shall then upon him self; in justly
condemninge, in vainly acknowledging, in unprofitably lamenting the errors of
his actions; whilst the pains of parting shall draw the powers of the mind
from true repentance. All vain pleasures are then at an end, and as quite
forgotten as if they had never bin at all. Yea, every wicked delighte shall
give sharp twitches to the soul; especially when it considers, that it is to
endure the smart for many things, whereof it must leave the pleasure to others.

Sometimes the sinner, more able to abide death then the fear of death, wishes
to be discharged, from beeinge guided by so evil a soul; not in full hope
that his torments shall thereby either end or abate; but according to the
nature of grief, the present being most painful, he desires to chang, and
to put in adventure the ensuing. But when he does perceive infinite legions of
deuells prepared to receive him, and the horrors of hell open for his
entertainment, then is he in a maze of amazement; then like one that houldeth
a wolf by the ear, bitten whilst he holds, and slain when he let go.

Well then, (secure and senseless soul) howsoever the deuell would bear
thee in hand, as he did thy first parents, that thou shall not die: yet
assure thy self this heavy hour, this fearful, this dangerous, this
unavoidable passage is not far from thee, even in the fardest and fairest
course of nature; and may be every hour, by many usual accidents, both of
violence and of sickness. Thy continuance is only certain in uncertainty;
and God would have the time unknown, because thou should be always
ready.

Awake therefore, and watch over thy self; look upon the pale horse, and him
that sits thereon, whose name is Death; provide that thou be not suddenly
surprised, and die before thou begin to live. Loose not the offer of
occasion, whilst it may not only be taken, but offers, yea sueth to be
taken; and if it be not now taken, will never hereafter be overtaken.

Christ yet distributeth the treasures of his mercy, the door stands yet
open, to all that will be suitors for the same; his nature is now as apt to
forgive, as his power will be able hereafter to punish. The kings of Israel
were not so famous for heir mercy among the servants of Abinadab, as the God
is among us. When thou did sin, he did spare; when thou did defer, he
did expect; when thou shall return he will e^brace. The bowelles of his mercy
do still ouerflowe, neither want their issues to derive the streams thereof
into thy soul: his back was torn, his hands and feet were pierced, his
side was opened: through these holes thou may see the abundance of his
love, at these holy holes thou may taste the sweetness of his mercy.

Present thy self therefore unto him in all those humble behauiours, which the
consideration of his majesty and thy misery can possibly frame; be penitent
for the time past, and resolve for the time to come; and with as great
confidence as necessity cry unto him and say.

O Christ, O eternal light, O life of all things, to whom nothing is so
great that it can resist, nothing so small that it is contemptible; whom no
man is so good that he does not need, noe man so evil that he may not hope;
I beseech thee; by the nobl^st title that in my greatest affliction I can give
my self, that I am thy creature; and by thy only name of comfort unto
sinners, that thou art merciful; hear my vile voice, help my distressed
soul, and in the time of necessity and trouble be gra^ious unto me.

Behold (O Lord) how my conscience lies queasomed under the multitude of my
offenses; behold how I am borne down with the weight of my own weakness:
and do not thou, whose property is not only to spare, but to help, either
lighten the burden, or lay under thy heavenly hand, my soul must needs
sincke down into hell.

But thou (O Lord) have neither delight nor likinge in the death of sinners;
thou did die to raise us up from the death of sin. O good Jesus, thou did
redeem us when we were thine enemies, and shall we be destroyed now we are
thy suppliantes? thou did call us to mercy when we craved none, and will thou deny us now we are suitors for it? through thy death we were brought
unto life, and shall we die now thou do l^ue? O thou who helpest the weak
which a word, behoulde, I come, I call, I look for thy mercy; hide not thy
face, stop not thine ear, cast me not out of thy regard: let it suffice
that I feel mine own weakness and want, least I should have been too proud in
my self; now let thy power and plentye appear, that thereby I may be
confident in thee.

O Christ, the guide of those that seek thee, the light of those that see
thee, and the life of those that love thee; O sweet Savior, what shall I say?
whether shall I go? where shall I seek thee? or wherefore do I not see thee?
O my God, if thou be absent from me, where shall I seeeke thee? if in all
places thou art present, wherefore do I not see thee?

O infinite goodness, passing all humane both search and sight, thou both
fillest and includest all things; thou art in every place present without
either seat or motion; give me grace for thy love and desires sake I beeseech
thee, to cast off the blind burden of fleshlye affections; subdue my reason,
regenerate my will, and purify my nature; lead my desire that I may seek
thee; lighten my understanding that I may see thee: for I can neither seek
thee without thou direct me, nor see thee except thou reveal thy self.

Gracious God, I have noe goodness in my self, but only to find that I have
no goodness like a scholar, who is come to that degree of knowledge, to know
him self utterly ignorante: but suffer (I beseech thee) some beutifull beam
of thy majesty to shine into my soul, disperse the clouds wherewith my
conscience is ouercast, melt the mistie darkness which covers my
understanding. O thou who saydest let there be light, and light was made;
speak the word and my soul shall be enlightened, that I may plainly see
thee, and perfectly know thee, and ardently both desire and love thee.

O surpassinge light, deliver me from the shadow both of ignorance and error,
and consequently from the darkness of death; swallow me up in the depth of
thy brightness; dazell my eyes, that I may not be able to see any thing but
thee; possess all my bodily senses, that my sinful affections, or rather
defections may find no place, but that I may so feel thee, that I have noe
feelinge of my self.

O Lord of life, allthough I am a sinner, yet I am thy creature, because thou
have made me, yea and made me again; both by redeeming, and by often renewing
me: help me therefore whom of thy goodness thou have fashioned, let me
not perish in my misery whom of thy mercy thou have redeemed, govern me
hereafter whom hitherto thou have preserved; despise not (O Lord) the work of
thine own hands. For wherefore have thou created me? because thou would
damn me? It had bin better for me never to have bin made, then to be
confounded in my own corruption. Listen (O Lord) to the cry of thy poor
Orphane; cast me not off in thy displeasure, and my distress; forsake me
not, for thy sake, I beeseech thee.

And although I have in such sort, both defiled and defaced this thy creature,
that thou may justly refuse to take knowledge of me; yet by thy mercies I
pray thee, wherein thou art more wonderful then in all thy works, remove the
one, and renew the other; rub out with thy blood the stains which stick in
my soul and then thou will know it, to be thy creature.

O Lord my God, at whose presence all powers do shake, at whose beck all
creatures obey, look favorably upon me from thy glorious seat; let thy
majesty shine unto me through thy mercy: be not angrye with us (wormish
weak elinges) although we offend, for thou know what we are, and whereof we
are made. Is not man rottenness? are not his desires vanity? is not his life
misery, and a very shadow of death? will thou show thy strength against a
worm? against a leaf? against a blast? O thou who grantest truce of life,
there are but twoe pleas before thy throne, either of innocence, or else of
mercy: I do clearly debar my selves of the one, oh let my soul run into
the arms of the other.

Have mercy upon me O gracious God, have mercy upon me, a most wretched
creature; deal not with me according to my deserts, but according to the
greatness of thy mercy, which is infinitely more then the sins of the whole
world.

O almighty God, from whose sight there is noe covert, and against whose power
there is, neither resistance nor flight, look not upon me with thy eye of
justice, draw not thy sword of vengence against me; but extend that
compassion, which thou have so graciously, so deerelye purchased for me.

I acknowledge indeed, that among all, and above all sinners, I am wretched;
I acknowledge also that I am unable to satisfy for my sins: but (O son of
God) beehold that in thy self, which may move thee to have compassion upon
me. So often as thou beehouldest the wounds of thy bruised body, so often
let pity pierce thy heart: So often as thou behouldest the blessed streams
of thy blood, whereof one drop had bin sufficient for redemption of the whole
world, so often cover my sins, and recover me.

Forgive my ignorance, forget my presumption, pardone my iniquities, relieve my
necessities; let my sins no longer be a cloud between my prayer and thy
pity, beetweene thy goodness and my distress, most gracious God, who art
merciful toward all, suffer not me to be distitute of thy mercy: for
although I have committed that whereby I may be damned, yet have thou neither
forgone, nor forgotten that whereby thou art wout to save.

O wretch that I am, how coldly do I cry? how weakly do I crave? woe is me
wretch, how is my heart hardened, that mine eyes do not pour forth plenty of
tears? how senseless is my unclean soul, that my flesh tremble not, that my
iointes do not shake until my knees knock together? But wherefore do I
expostulate with a dead carcass? Alas, I am nothing but vanity; a rotten
root, without any life of virtue; a barren ground, bringing forth nothing
but sin, shame and damnation: I am unable, either to give thee any thing but
of thine own goods; or to do any thing for my self, but by thy free guifte.

Wherefore, O sweet savior, by thy tender love, and by all thy mercies I
beeseech thee, give me grace, that with thy goods and by thy guiftes, I may
serve thee, and sorrow for my sins; give me also a floude of tears in
token of thy favor, that I may sweetlye pour them before thy presence, with
great reverence and fear, in bewailinge mine offenses, Mollify my stony
heart, illuminate my mistie mind, subdue my flesh to my soul, my soul unto
reason, my reason to faith; let me joy only in enioyinge thee, in whom,
desire never wants sacietie, and sacietie never breed dislike.

Come thou into me, that I may remain in thee, shake off these shackles, free
me from this weight of fleshly affections that leaving and loathing all
earthlye desires, I may firmelye resolve, speedely begin, and constantlye
continue, in dooinge and sufferinge thy holy will.

Pour upon my heart the sweet stremes of thy grace, that thereby my affections
may be framed, to honor thee as a Creator, to love thee as a redeemer, to
expect thee as a Savior, and to fear as a judge. Let me allwaies be humbled
before thee, and never be high minded, but only in mindinge things on high.

Write thy name with thy own finger within the tables of my breast, never to
be either shadowed or worn out; that I may continually feed my hungry ho^es,
with steadfast remembrance and regard of thee: for firmly to remember, and
reverently to regard thee, is our mortal manner both of holdinge and
beeholding thee.

Let the fiery force of thy love swallow up my soul, that being altogether
possessed therewith, it may neither feel, nor desire, nor once think upon any
erthly thing; but be always and only, not only joined but united to thee:
for as thy goodness toward us is unmeasurable and infinite so we are bound
to love thee without either measure or end.

Lord, my whole desire is before thee, and my thoughts are not secret from
thy sight; turn not thy countenance from my complaint; hear me, O my God,
and grant my petion; grant my petion, that thou may hear me.

Reach me thy helping hand, draw my soul out of the mire of sin wherein it
is fast set, that I perish not in the presence of thy pity. Deliver me from
the snares that the enemy has laid, to take the souls of sinners either
wilful, or secure; cut away occsions of evil before me; guide me unto
thee the streightest course; and so long as I am to continue in this vile vale
of misery, settle me in that state of life wherein I may best please thee and
pleasure others.

Give me grace, O gracious God, that although I have hitherto had noe care to
live well, yet now I may wholly and holyly bend my care to die well; that from
henceforth I may live in thy fear, die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, rise
in thy power, and remain in thy joy. Amen.

Nec pudet viuere, nec piget mori.



Call upon me in the day of tribulation. I will deliver thee, and thou shall
praise me. Psalm. 50.

The IIII. Devotion.
A Thanksgiving, intermixed with confession and prayer,

O Lord Jesus, infinite in pity, infinite in power, infiite allsoe both in
thy rewards, and in thy revenge: I am weakly (thou know) rather willing then
desirous, with my soul to love thee, with my flesh to fear thee, with my
mind to honor thee, with my mouth to praise thee, with my whole substance to
serve thee, to commend my whole substance unto thy protection. But alas, I am
so clogged with corruption, I am so drowned in flesh and blood, that I scarce
either dare or can lif^ up my head, and look unto thee: and yet why should I
be ashamed when thou do inuit me? why should I be faint when thou do
not only encourage, but also enable me, or at the least accept my weak
endeavor?

Strive then, O the very bowels of my soul, strive with all your strength to
raise your thoughts, out of this mire of mortallitie wherein they stick, out
of these waves of fleshly affections wherein they floate, without either firm
footinge or certain drift. Advance thy self toward thy creator, Frame thy
affections, to love him for his goodness, to honor him for greatness, to rejoice
in him for his merits, to pray unto him for his mercies, which daily thou
do need, and by needing do crave, and by craving do obtain; if not
according to thy desires, yet very far above thy deserts.

O Lord, I confess unto thee, that my heart is unclean, and that I am a man
of polluted lips; wallowing in the dunge, and stinkinge in the rottenness of
my own sin: so that I may iustlye tremble to appear before thy glorious
presence, much more to present unto thee thy pure praises out of my defiled
mouth. But who except thou (O Lord) can make me clean, and what is pure
which thou have not purged?

Thee therefore, O Father of life, O Lord of light, thee with all the forces of
my soul, thee most humbly, most earnestly I do beseech; hear O merciful,
help O mighty Lord, help thy servant whom of thy mercy thou have created:
cleanse my filthynes, lighten my darkness, inflame my coldenes, quicken my
dulnes, awake my drowsines, revive my deadnes; repair the ruins of my soul,
enlarge the frame of the understanding thereof, cleanse it from all earthly
corruption, garnish it with thy heavenly graces, that it may be conveniently
both fit and furnished to receive thee; that thou may make thine entry, and
possess that which is thine own, both by creation, and also by redemption;
and that as thou art exalted above all creatures, so above all creatures I may
honor thee, love thee, and praise thee; not with that affection wherewith my
weakness is able, either to do or to desire; but with that perfection
wherewith in duty I should, and wherewith thy Saints and angels indeed do.

O giver of life, O restorer, O preserver, O enlightner of life; O most louinge
and lovely Lord. But what shall I say? where shall I find full praises to
extol thee? my speech faltreth, and my spirit fails; my tongue can apply no
fitting words, neither can my mind supplye sufficient matter: I want words
to express my mind, I want also a mind to apprehende thy merits: I
conceive far above the ability of my utterance, and yet far under the
dignity of thy deserts.

Lord, my soul is desirous to yield praises to thee for thy benefits, but it
is unable to conceive that which is worthy, and unwilling to utter that which
is unworthy; it is ashamed to send forth words, knowinge how weak they are
for so weighty an office. without thy presence it can never attain to any
degree of thy praise: let it therefore have thee (O Lord) that it may in some
measure praise thee.

For what worthy praise can I give unto thee, by whose goodness I was created,
by whole mercy I was redeemed, by whose power I am preserved, and by whose
grace I look to be glorified? when I was not, thou did make me; when I
was lost and forlorn, thou came down, and tookest mortallitie upon thee to
redeem me: thou a King, did humble thy self to exalt me; thou were
sold to redeem me; thou were wounded to heal me; and thou did dye to
save me.

O son of God, how have thou abased thy self? how were thy affections
inflamed? how large were the limits of thy mercy? Lord, thou have loved me
more then thy self, because for my sake thou would endure, not only a
contemptible life, but both a shameful and painful death.

And yet did not thy love in this sort leave me, but thou have continuallye
so followed me with thy favors, as though thou had regarded me alone,
and neglected all thy other creatures.

When I wandered thou did seek me, when I was ignorant thou did
instruct me, when I offended thou did correct me, when I sorrowed thou
did comfort me, when I stumbled thou did stay me, when I fell thou
did raise me, when I stood thou did strengthen me; in my affairs
thou did direct me, in my troubles thou did help me, in my dangers
thou did deliver me; waking thou did inlighten me, sleeping thou
did watch me, sinninge thou did suffer me, and prayinge thou did
hear me. Further, thou have anointed me with thy holy spirit, and given me
a mind to follow thee; thou have called me by thine own name, and thou have
sealed me with thy blood unto eternal life.

These and many other benefits have I received, some in hand, and some in
hope; although through my own sinful demeanor, I have almost both let go my
hold, and lost my hope. But what? if by my own fault I have lost these graces,
shall I be unthankful to him, by whose favor once I had them.

Lord, I can yealde noe reason wherefore I had them but that thou were
merciful; ney* can I say any thing now I have so near lost them, but that
thou art just: and therefore I thank thee because thou did give me them,
I am sorry because I have noe better kept them, and I pray thee that thou
would again fully restore them. For I assure my self, that thy goodness is
as willinge to restore as it was to give; and that my weakensse is as able to
recover as it was to receive.

Therefore, O Lord Jesus, by thy precious tears, by thy blessed blood which
thou did shedd for my redemption, by the abundance of thy mercies I most
humbly beeseech thee, save thy servant, save one of thy members, though poor
and feeble; save, I say, a part of thy self. Be as great in pardoning those
that are submitted unto thee, as in punishing those that are rebellious: pour
upon my heart the sweet streams of thy mercies; conform my life, confirm my
faith, settle me in a right and upright course, and continue me in the same
even unto the end.

The world (O Lord) is wrapped in darkness, whereby it is made subject,
both to the policies and power of our most dangerous and deadly enemy: who
being the prince of darkness, is thereby become also the prince of the
world: but by thy light his malice is discovered, by thy wisdom his deceites
are avoided, and by thy strength his power is repelled. He has many and
very great things (I confess) to lay unto my charge, but for thy names
sake (O Lord) rebuke him, and deliver me. Draw my desires above the pitch of
his darkness, raise my soul out of this myrie lake of misery, which
affoordeth nothing, but either dangers or discontentmentes; that this filthy
lump of flesh only may abide on earth, but my thoughts may continually
attend upon thee.

O sweet Jesus, the way of health, the gate of life, the palace of piety, of
joy, of safety; I do too much depresse thy benefits whilst I labor to
express them: for they have not only filled, but ouerflowed the frame of the
world. But, O thou who vnfealest the silence of the dumb, untie my tongue,
that I may declare thy goodness, and give my voice a power to praise thee for
the same.

By thee (O Lord) the exile is reduced, the captive redeemed, the sinner is
justified, the sick are healed, the dead are raised, and the damned are saved.
By thy goodness we are created, by thy power we are preserved, by thy mercy
we are saved. Thou did create us without any need, thou do govern us
without any labor, thou may destroy us without any loss. Thou have given
all things under heaven for our use, either necessary or convenient; and yet
did thou not think that enough, but thou have allsoe appointed thine
angels to attend upon us, to stand about us, to watch over us, to be
messengers for our service beetweene thee and us.

And not only mankind have thou exceedinglye both honored and enriched with
thy blessings, but the heavens, the stars, the earth, the air, the seas,
the floudes, the day, the night, and whatsoever else thou have ordained, either
for the necessity or delight of man, are by thee renewed, and restored to the
end for which they were created. For all things were made for the service of
man, and man for the service of God: but once they served those who served
idols, and then they were without any dignity, then in a very kind of
death, being diuerted from the right use of their creation. But now they are
exalted, now revived, now they rejoice to serve those, who serve and worship
thee, O Lord.

But why do I confine thy benefits within the compass of the whole world?
They have prepared down into hell; they have also surmounted above the
heavens. Thou have subdued the kingdom of Satan; thou have broken the chains
of darkness and death; thou have loosed the captivity of hell. By thee also
the angels expect a restitution of the breach which was made amongst them, by
revolt of those which fell.

O singular grace, O admirable goodness, whereby mankind is saved; the
elements are renewed hell is vanquished; and heaven is repaired. O beutifull, O
bountiful Jesus, thou have blessed al creatures, and all creatures again do
bless and praise thee: by thy holiness they are blessed, by thy happiness
they rejoice, by thy fulness they flourish.

O holy, O happy, O high Jesus, how is my dull sight dazelled with thy
exceeding brightness? My affections labor to attain unto thee, but whether,
I pray thee, do thou fly the pursuit of my understanding? How exceedest
thou the compass of my conceit? Tarry O Lord, tarry a while for my feeble
feet, which strain to follow thee: hide not thy self from my dim eyes,
which seek to see thee: have pity upon my weak soul, which wearily
pants after the savor of thy salvation. Reach forth thine heavenly hand;
lead me Lord, lighten me Lord, let me put the finger of my faith into thy
wounds; let me look a little how thou have loved me.

Oh wonder of wisdom, O miracle of mercy: God made all things, and God was
made man: God made all-thinges of nothing, and without man all-thinges had
turned to nothing: God made all things of him self, but God would not
restore all things without man. He was beegotten of God by whom all things
were made, he was borne of a woman by whom all things were renewed: he was
beegotten of God with out whom there was nothing, he was borne of a woman
without whom nothing was well.

O Christ, perfect God, and perfect man; O sweet safety, O secure joy; how
wonderful, how worthy a matter, how weighty is it which I do beehoulde? I am
much delighted to see it, and yet I scarce dare utter it. Let my senses be
silent for a time, let the tumultuous cogitations of my mind be quiet; reason
cannot show her self more reasonable, then to leave resoning in matters above
her reach. What was he made? and what has he made us? Shall I speak with
joy, or with modesty houlde my peace? But that which my heart does beelieue
with love, shall not my mouth confess with praise? I w^ll speak therefore,
not with an high, but with an humble spirit; not to glory in my self, but to
glorify God.

The Son of God was made man, to make men the sons of God. If then he has
made us the sons of his father, he has thereby made him self our brother*
therefore, our intercessor is our brother, our judge is our brother, our Savior
is our brother, our God is our brother. With what assurance then may we hope?
what fear shall enforce us either to despair or to doubt? seeing our
salvation depends upon the will of our most loving brother? With what
security may we fly unto him? with what boldness may we embrace him? with
what confidence may we entreat him? Our louinge brother will give unto us the
good which we do desire, and forgive us the evil which we do deserve; he
will ask for us, he will obtain for us, whatsoever is expedient: the son
will entreat the father for his children, and the father will hear the son
for his brethren.

Let the devil then do his worst to dismay me; let my foolish fear murmur
as much as it will; let them both urge their abject objections, and say; who
art thou? how great are thy sins? and where (in Gods name) are thy
demerites? I will answer with assurance, I know what I am my felfe; and I
know who he is unto whom I trust He has given me his gracious word, who
is both in promise true and mighty in performance; he will do what he can
for my safety, and can do whatsoever he will. When I call to my
consideration the inestimable both bent of his love, and treasure of his
mercy, then may I plainly both see and say, as the servant of the prophette
did when his eyes were opened: they are more that stand for us, then they who
are against us. 2. Reg. 6. 15. The multitude of my sins shall never choke
his love; I can want noe merits so long as he does want noe mercies: If
his love be great, my sins are but small; and if great be his mercies,
great likewise shall be my merits.

He has registered me on his back; he has engraven me in his hands, he
has sealed me on his side; the whippes, the nails, the spear have surely
signed his love unto me: they proclaim his mercy to be claimed of all men;
they cry comfortably unto me, that I need not fear.

He has displaied his blessed body abroad upon the cross, his arms
spread to embrace me, his head bowed down to kiss me, his heart laid
open to love me* Into those arms of my Savior will I run, beetweene these
arms will I rest, beetweene these arms will I rejoice. I will sprinckle my
heart with the blood of this lamb, and the destroyer shall have noe power to
hurt.

My sins greater then can be forgiven? Thou lie, Caine; our sins can
stand in noe degree of comparison with the mercies of God; but so far as
God is greater then man, so much does the goodness of the one exceed the
evil of the other. As the nature of God is infinite and unmeasurable, so
cannot his love be limited, so is there noe measure of his mercy; as the
nature, so the goodness of God is known only to him self.

The son of God has taken our substance upon him, he has exalted it above
the heavens, he has seated it in the kingdom and glory of his father: In him
I have a portion of flesh and blood, in him a part of my self even now does
reign, in him a part of my self is already glorified: and as I do nothing
doubt of this his communion with me in nature, so will I not distrust of my
participation, both here of his grace, and hereafter of his glory; for
although I am sinful, yet is not he so unnatural, that either he can
forgette, or will forsake his own members.

He that dispaireth or distrusteth his own safety, he denies Christ's
mercy: and consequently, he denies his love, he denies his truth, he
denies his power; the love of his passion, the truth of his promise, and the
power of his ascension. Therefore, the more willinge he was to suffer, and the
more able he is to save, the less cause have I to fear; for when all things
shall fail, he will most constantly keep his faith.

O wonderful mystery, O exceeding mercy, ever to be admired, ever to be
loved: we were not worthy to be servants, and lo we are made the sons of
God; yea the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Jesus Christ. Who but must
be amassed at such bowelles of mercy? who but will rejoice at such abundance
of love? which when I call to my consideration, the burden of my flesh does
not so press me, the weight of my mortality and miseries are not so grievous
as they were wont.

Gracious Lord, what thanks, what praise shall I tender to thee for this
adoption? where shall I get good words to set forth this thy good will?
Surely, if I had the tongue and knowledge of Angels, yet could I neither
thank thee, nor think of thee as is it meet. For thy exceeding love,
proceeding from thy mere goodness, reaches beyond all bounds, both of
utterance and understanding: thy praise, Oh Lord; is incomprehensible; and
then we do most praise thee, when we know thee to be thine own praise,
and acknowledge our selves unable to praise thee.

But, O sweet Savior, whom none seeks but the admonished, none finds but
the guided, I beeseech thee by thine inestimable goodness, let me not be
unthankfully silent for these thy benefits teach me secretly in my heart, O my
God, teach me thy humble servant, O merciful God, even by thy great mercies,
I beseech thee, teach my heart, with what reverence it should think of thee;
tell my soul, with what delight it should love thee; give my tongue some
power to pour forth praises unto thee: correct my weakness, erect my hope,
direct my desires: finish the work that thou have beegunne, and bring me to
the fulness of thy mercy.

I was dead and buried in sin, I should have rotted in destruction, but thou
did raise me, thou did revive me, by thy love I live: and therefore I
offer my self wholly unto thee, most earnestlye entreating thy gracious
acceptance, that we may love and live together.

O Lord Jesus, I bow the neck of my soul under the feet of thy majesty,
and in the lowest degree of reverence, do give thee most humble and hearty
thanks for these thy benefits: I yield thee praise (O Lord) although base
and bare, and far unanswerable to thy deserts: yet something my weakness is
bound to perform; namelye, to settle my mind to beeholde and love thee, and
to praise thee with words so well as I can.

O amiable, O admirable Jesus, let me love thee allwaies, because thou did
love me first: let me love thee only, for he loves thee too little, that
loves any thing besides thee, except it be for thy sake; allwaies and only
let me love thee, because by thee only I shall always live.

O that my heart did so languish with thy love, that it might melt the
moisture of my body into tears, oh that the bowels of my soul were so
enflamed with thy love, that it might consume all drossie desires, and dry up
the very marrowe of my bones: oh that I were sick for the love of him, who
died for the love of me.

Lord, allthough I be not worthy so to love thee, yet art thou worthy much
more to be loved. Therefore (O loving Jesus) do not so deny me that whereof
I acknowledge my self unworthy, that thy self be deprived of that, whereof
thou art most worthy. Grant (O Lord) grant I beeseech thee, not for my
deserts, but for thy mercies sake, grant to my soul, that it may love thee
as thou have deserved. Grannt (I say) that I may be worthy to give that, which
thou art worthy to receive: so shall I be worthy of that, whereof now I am
unworthy.

It is very much (O Lord) that I do desire, beeinge altogether unworthy to
speak unto thee; but thy bounty has made me bold; I will speak therefore
again unto my Lord, although I be but dust and ashes: I will speak again
unto him, who has not only licensed, but provoked, but commanded us that we
should ask.

O Lord our God, O gracious, O almighty God, is it not better that thou
should freelye give me that which I have not deserved, then that I should
vnthankefullye not yield to thee, that which is thy due? the one would be a
property of thy mercy, the other an effect of my injustice. Give therefore
unto me thy grace, that I may return unto thee thy due; bestow upon me thy
mercies, that I may commit against thee noe injustice; be liberal unto me,
that I may not seem injurious to thee, give (O Lord,) give unto my soul
abundance of thy love, which I do iustlye desire, that I may not be
unthankful unto thee, which thou may iustlye punish.

Dear Christ, I do feel in my heart a weak warmness of thy love, but my
prayer is, that the coals were thoroughly kindled with desire, and blown with
delight into a full flame. O sacred fire, how comfortablye do thou burn? O
heavenly light, how sweetlye do thou shine? how desirous are they more and
more to burn whom thou do inflame? how are they delighted whom thou do
enlightten?

Alas, how late have I loved thee, O beauty most exceedinglye both ancient
and fresh, and yet, alas, how little do I love thee? wherefore I beeseech
thee, O Lord, by thy precious wounds, from which gushed out the streams of
our redemption, wound my sinful soul with the dart of thy love, strike
Lord, strike with the two edged sword which proceeds out of thy mouth,
strike deep into my hard heart, pierce my senseless soul, part all the
inner parts of my spirit, that I may cry out, (but not complain) how I am
wounded with thy love.

O sweet Christ O good Jesus, even for thine intercession sake, and for thy
merits sake I beeseech thee, give me thy holy and chaste love, and then shall I
be fullye furnished with all heavenly ver^ues. Lord, thou did love us
when we were thine enemies, and will thou deny us now to love thee again?
thou have commanded us with our whole heart to love thee; and will thou not
grant us ability to obey.

Hear O my God, hear O light of mine eyes, increase my desire, and grant my
request; stop not thime ears against me, because of my sins. Indue my
soul with thy love, subdue my flesh with thy fear, that I may allwaies think
of thee ioyntlye both with tremblinge and trust. Settle the love of thee in
me, and the care of me in thee: let my prayer come unto thee, and thy mercy
come unto me; let the joy of thy happiness remain with me, and the
compassion of my miseries remain with thee. Let my heart love thee, let my
flesh fear thee, let my whole substance in this world joy whollye in thee,
that it may enjoy thee wholye in the world to come. Amen.

Aut vbique aut nusquam liber

page Lin. error corrected 49 9 my thy 51 13 path paths 73 12 at them for them
112 7 my any 121 4 shall shall 114 16 both age both in age 151 7 the God the
God of Israel 4 heir their 153 7 resolve resolute 1^3 11 goodness goodness;
161 15 sonle soul, 16 it, it 187 14 either either 16 occsions occasions 184 8
wheeein wherein 189 3 lif lift 191 1 for his merits, for his happiness, to
praise him for his merits, 193 4 sonle soul 197 15 thert veat utter that 216
2 the whole world the world 3 prepared pierced 217 11 beutifull beautiful 223
2 resoning reasoning


