AN ADVERTISEMENT To the Subjects of Scotland, Of the fearful Dangers
threatened to Christian States; And namely, TO GREAT BRITANE, by the Ambition of
SPAIN: With a Contemplation, of the truest Means, to oppose it. Also, Diverse
other TREATISES, Touching the present estate of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND; Very
necessary to be known, and considered, in this Time: CALLED, The First Blast
of the Trumpet. WRITTEN by PETER HAY, of NAVGHTON, IN NORTH-BRITANE.

IN ABERDENE, PRINTED BY EDWARD RABAN Cum Privilegio. 1627.

BON. ACCORD

Insignia Vrbis abredonie,



TO THE MOST ROYAL, AND MIGHTY MONARCH, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF
GREAT BRITANE, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith.
MOST Gracious, and most Sacred Sovereign, This Time, and This Subject, do
join and meet so well together, that it is now, if ever; and in this, if in
any thing, that I dare be bold express the desire I have to do service to
Your Majesty, and to my Country. I vvish the occasion had not been so fair
for venting (...) ambition; but rather that it had lain buried in my Breast,
and I my self had been unknown of Your Majesty to my lives end. But GOD,
who puts Marches to Peace and Wars, and periods to Time; and ^vho has
His apt and proper Instruments, for every disposition of Time; HE has
encouraged me, to offer to Your Majesty, this Treatise, as a necessary, and
useful Inter-course of this Time.

I did strive, so much as I could, to make it short; but by reason of so many
Histories, Discourses, and Examples, as were to be pertinentlie and
profitablie brought in, I could not confyne it to a more narrovv Compend.

And yet, when Your Majesty shall consider it, it will be found minus mole,
quam facultate, a great deal lighter in Paper, than in Matter: For why? It
contains the large Extent and Mysteries of the Spanish Ambition, with a
Contemplation of the truest Contrapoyse to be made thereunto by Neighbor
States; Grave and Weighty Theorems indeed, but which fevv of them do
speculate so deeply as need were; the greatest part being wholy carried
to things sensible, present, and of nearest commodity to themselves in
particular, al-be-it it should import a manifest danger to their Common-peace
and Prosperity: without the care, and curious mayntaynance vvhere-of, neither
can any one of Them flovvrish by it self, nor yet the most flovvrishing, long
endure.

Farther, SIR, Here are contained diverse Purposes and Passages, touching The
present estate of this Kingdom of SCOTLAND, most expedient for avvaking Your
Majesty's Subjects, to look to that which the great exigence of this Time
does require at their Hands; together with a variety of delicate Conceits,
very fit to season both the Understanding and Humor of a young PRINCE: and
those not hatched in my Brains, but sought, and sucked by me, from the richest
Hyues of Politic Wits, which have been committed to Registers in any Age
gone.

Here also is contained, A new Reason, brought from the mystical Theology,
for the holiness and perfection of the number 10; and why GOD did choose it
to be the Quotient of the Ecclesiasticke Goods, in the Leviticall Churches.

So that if Your Majesty shall vouchsafe to read it once, I have good hope
that Ye shall do^ it twice, al-be-it I know, that it is not Your Majesty's
Calling, to cast over Books, Tu regere imperio popul. Romans mem. hae tibi erunt
arts: but such Books do belong unto that same Art. Demetrius Phalereus did
counsel King Proleme, to buy all Books written, de regno imperioque eosque
lectitaret, quia (inquit) quae amici non audent Reges monere, ea in ejusmodi
libris descripta esse. Alexander the Great did sleep with Homer's Poesies
under his head. Julius Caesar, amidst the combustion of bloody Wars, did
spend most part of nights, in reading and writing.

Therefore, SIR, let it please Your Majesty, to take pains, remembering how
the same Homer, whom that great Monarch did so affect, and whom the
Philosophs esteemed to be A source of humane Sciences, he has left this
Aphorism for a King, Non decet Principem solidam dormire noctem: A Prince must
not take a whole nights sleep. A thing well proved by that Arch-Prince for
civil vvisdome, Augustus, who vvhyles at a certain time he could not rest
in the night, having his mind laden with anxieties and cares of the State,
he sent for the pillovv of a known Bancq-ruptier, greatly indebted, who
was reported to sleep well.

GOD has called Your Majesty up in-to this Mountain of Paynfull Governament;
not like unto Helias, who vvhyles he went up, too much delyted with the
pleasant vmbrage of the Iunopre Tree, he fell a-sleeping there-by: But like to
Moses, to whom it was said, Ascend in Montem, and esto ibi. Upon which
words, Esto ibi, another does well note, Non dicitur venisse, qui non
steterit. We do not read that Moses sleeped in that Voyage to the Mountain:
It was a significant Hyerogliffe, which the Egyptians had of a King, Oculum
cum Sceptro, One Eye, and one Scepter: Shevving, that Princes are to join
Vigilance with Power; and ought to have Aquiline Eyes, able to penetrate the
hidden things of the Vulgar Valleys belovve them: Even as the Eagle does
espy the Prey under him, before himself can be perceived of Fowls.
Nazianzen, speaking of Governament, he says, it is, Ars artium, to rule a
People: And Seneca, speaking of Man, Nullum morosius animal, nec majori art
tractandum; There is not a more enorme and insolent Creature than Man, nor
which is to be managed with more cunning. And, as Plutarch says, That as
Beasts can not be guided, nor commanded, but by Men; So Men cannot be
governed, but by Him who is more than a Man, and has a great measure of
Deity into Him.

Certaynlie Your Majesty has need of Eyes under Wings, as is said of the
Spanish Cuttuio; that Ye might fly abroad, to explore the manners of Your
Subjects, and malice of Your Enemies: to see that no Backe-doore be left for
those to enter at, nor no Field commodious, where they may cover their
insidious Nets: but that the whole Sea of Your Majesty's Governament be
calm and peaceable: understanding how the Spanyard is skillful to fish in
drumblie Waters. He can practice as well Protestants as Papists, if he find
them loose and vvavering. Which particular Your Majesty will see examplified
in this Treatise: besides Testimonies of French Writers, which might be
suspected of Partiality, and malicious detraction, it is verefied by natural
Spaniards, namely, Antonio Peers, who was a chief Secretary of Estate,
under Philip the second; and whose Relation in some things touching the said
King, and Estate of Portugal, I have trusted, and follovved, for two
respects: First, Because none could have known those better: and secondly,
Because he did handle the like Theme to this, by way of shovving to King
Henry the fourth of France, the necessity of making Wars to Spain.

Your Majesty knovveth, that it was a brave Emblem for Kings, which Cyrus
had, of putting his foot upon the midst of a hard and dry hyde, vvhere-by he
kept it close at earth: for if he had set his foot upon the borders, or
extremities thereof, the whole should have revolted: to note the Golden Rule
of the Midway in Governament, and forbearing of Extremities: and to shovv,
that Kingdoms are never sure to Princes, until they be in the midst of the
Hearts of their People, and guarded round about with their Affections. Your
Majesty sees how the example of David is a perspicuous Mirror for Kings to
look unto; of whom we read, 2. Sam. 7. When the king sat in his house, and
the LORD had given him rest round about from all his enemies, he said unto
Nathan the Prophet, Behold, Idwell in a house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remains within the Curtains. He resolved to provide for building of the
Lord's House: Therefore, can we not deny, Sir, that the Orient of Your
Majesty's Reign, does break up in just and holy Actions, in favors of the
House of GOD, by setting out a Navy against the mighty Enemies of Christian
Peace, and true Religion; and by whom the over-throvv thereof has been so
directly sought in these Your Majesty's Kingdoms, that numbers of us yet live,
who did see their proud Armada, put even to the parts of our Country for
that end.

Your Majesty's Intentions at Home, to restore the Mayntaynance and Splendour of
God's Worship, do argue the like zeal: and who doubts, but God will grant
to Your Majesty the same spirit of wisdom, with David, rightly to choose
your times, for offices of Peace, and offices of wars. The prudence, and
happy successes of Actions, do consist in discret and sure application of
Circumstances. With a little Time and Patience, your M. will get your good
Subjects, not only to contribute after your desires, to the House of the Lord,
to the Commonwealth, and works of Piety; but to do it willingly, as those
Israelits did unto David, 1. Chron. 29. Then the people rejoiced, for that they
offered willingly; because with a perfect heart they offered willingly to the
Lord. And David the king also rejoiced with great joye. And then, Sir, their
Sacrifices shall be savorie unto God, when they come not from Hearts dyed
into Murmuration, Grudge, or Blackness, like unto the Swan, which for the
same cause was anciently forbidden to be sacrificed to the gods.

I do most humbly reco^mend these my Christian Endeavors to your M. patronage
and protection. If they be acceptable to your M. I hope they shall displease
none of your faithful Subjects. If they do not fully correspond the judicious
quickness of your M. great spirit, it is not my fault; my small Vessel could
hold no more. The Lord, who is the giver of all good things, and who has
sown into your M. Heart these Seeds of Royal Piety and Virtue, He may be
pleased to nourish them, with the daily influence of His Grace; until they
grow to that glorious and fruitful Harvest, which they do now
prognosticate and promise in their Spring. That God, who has set your M. over
a great and mighty People, He may bless your M. with the true vvisdome of
Governament, the trustiness of faithful Counselors, the upright love of your
Subjects, and a prosperous and fortunate Reign unto the end.

Your M. most humble, faithful, and affectionate Subject and Serviture, PETER
HAY.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader,
I speak to as many as be upright Subjects of this Kingdom; of which number
I am sure, there is not one, to whom the principal scope of this Discourse
will not be gracious and plausible. If some Passages do perhaps displease, it
is for too narrow compting in your Particulars. And if I have toutched these
points moderately, and have in them also my interesse equal with yours, it
does absolve me from any meaning to wrong you; and shows, that the acting
hereof has not been intended for you, or me, or for another, but for the
Commonwealth.

We have spent our whole Years gone to our Private Studies, Pleasures, or
Emolument, without the meanest distraction by any sort of Tyranny, or
State-Calamitie, Our days have been like unto that jubilant age of the Roman
Empire, under Augustus, of whom says the Po^t, Ille meos errare boves, ut
cernis, and ipsum
Ludere, quae vellem, calamo permisit agresti.
Ille erit, ille mihi semper DEVS.


But now this Time does require us to carry public, and not private Mynds;
which is the reason, why I do find my self in this action, pene them quam
antea. There is (says SOLOMON) a time for Peace, and a time for War: a time
to gather and keep, and a time to cast away: and GOD does these things that
men should fear before Him. The golden time of Peace, and collection, that we
have enjoyed, under our late King of blessed memory, has so besotted our
Minds, with Security, that we are even Ignorants of the ordinary
vicissitude of the World; so far, that the very first threatenings of change,
do confound us; where as by the contrary, they should make us turn to our
GOD, and fear before Him: resolving to accept at His Hands, patiently, and
thankfully, after so long Prosperity, the Corrections, for our sins proper
to us; and in the nature of things common with us, to all People.

I have presented before you, in this Treatise, as upon a Board, a summarie
Portract of the estate of this time, and of the dangers where-of we are so
much affrayde: which if ye shall diligently contemplate, it will help both
your knowledge and your resolution. As for some few particulars, that for the
first face, may be somewhat disagreeable with you, ye shall find here also
conjoined with them, their sovereign remeadies and solaces. If ye will but
ascend a while, with me upon this Stage, to agitate the cause of your Prince,
your Country, your Commonwealth, and Religion, when we shall look back
upon the invincible couerage of our Predecessors, against so many mighty
Nations, for the standing of this Kingdom, before they were Christians; and
that more than humane magnanimity of the Heathen Codrus of Athens, and others
like to him, the Bruti of Rome, deciosque caput fatale voventes, and these
heroicke Decij, how in sacred ecstasies of resolution, they did devote and
sacrifice their lives, for safety of the States where-of they were members;
such speculations shall make us ashamed of some of our discontentments, and
languishing amidst so great exigence, and appearance of public distresses.

I know there is no generose spirit, but will be much delighted with this
subject, nor any wise-hearted man, who will not esteem it a virtuous and
laudable part, to be foreseeing of so capital dangers.

With-in these three, or four Years, the Palatinate did less dread the
Spanyard, than we do now. Tum tua res agitur, paries dum proximus ardet. If
we do fear the LORD, obey our Prince, and be of united Minds, tymouslie to
employe the means that GOD has given us, to with-stand so strong an Enemy;
then there is no doubt, but we shall be bastant to oppose him: but if we be
relenting in these, then I would say, as one of the Parthian Kings said, long
before they were conquered, by the Romans, Timeamus, ^^^eamus, magnum illum
Romanorum Genium, qui tam brevi spacio torrentis instar effusus est per orbem
terrarum. We have great cause to project Fears, and long before to parralele
the flowrishing destinies of the Spanish Empire: which, like unto a Torrent,
has with-in these hundredth Years, over-flowed the fairest and strongest
Countries of Europe.

Certainly, it is no time for us to delay in murmurations, and to object our
poverty, amongst infinite Examples that be in Histories, of the fatal ruin
that has followed to Princes and People, by such doing: the pitiful and
merciless sackage of Constantinople, by Mahomet the second, may only serve,
to terrify us from the like: the Citizens of that Town being full of Riches,
did so misregard their late Emperors, that one of them, Baldwine, after he
had sold his Silver Plate, Jewels, and best Moueables, he was forced to pawn
his Son to the Venetians, for Money to maintain Wars against the Turks.
The last of them, Constantine the eight, being desperately besiedged by the
said Mahomet, was not able to furnish Pay to his Soldiers, by reason of
exorbitant Vsuries, exercised by his Merchands; nor Corn, nor Victuals, by
reason of their Monopolies, although there was great store of both with-in.
Whereupon, after some Weeks of mutual grudges, and exclamation of the
Emperor against his Subjects, and of them against him, that glorious City, so
commodiouslie seated (for dominion over the World) upon the shoulders of Europe
and Asia, so Emperesse-lyke over-looking both, was taken by the Turks, her
miserable Prince and People cruelly murdered, her beautiful Churches turned
in Stables, her hudge Riches possessed by the Enemies, and she made a Port
for that bloody and barbarous Nation, to come in upon the neck of
Christendom. I will no more insist thus in this place, because the Treatise is
full of Practices and Examples, convenient for your present use: I will only
say again, That it is no time for us now to contest with our King, when
question is for preservation of the State: and I exhort you to read this, with
that disposition as I write it: not of private Subjects, but of Statesmen, and
kyndlie Children of this Commonwealth: that we may all in one voice say with
Pericles of Athens, when his City was reduced to great straites, for want of
Money, in time of hot Wars, Ne cernere cogamur cuncta nostra in servitutem
rap^, mensae, cubilis, supellectilis, ac dierae, superflua abscindamus, no^^que
and liberos, servemus, ut quum pinguior fortuna aspiraverit, nobis rursus ea
restituere valeamus, Let us curb our Humors, control the delicacie of our
Diet, make sober our Moueables, and cut off what-so-ever is superfluous in our
Manners, for our own safety; and let us refer the farther fruition of
those, to more propitious and fortunate Times.

Thus much more must I say (tout^cing the myste^ie of the number 10 here
treated) to some of you, who dee disdain to hear from an-other, that whereof
your selves are ignorant: I wish ye be not scandalized, by the mention of
remote, or natural Theology: remembering how Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15, calls
him a Fool, who in the Analogy of GOD'S Works, cannot find a natural
Argument, to corroborate his supernatural Belief, for the Resurrection of his
Body. And the learned Scaliger, in his Exercitations against Cardan,
discoursing of the Angelical nature, he calls that kind of knowledge
fastigium omnis scientiae, the top of humane Wisdom: and does very
confidentlie censure the contemners thereof, saying, Irridebuntur ista a
quibusdam sectis nebulonum qui otio and supinitate marcentes fastigium
scientiae contemnunt titulo curiositatis: noting two sorts of them, who (says
he) do constantly bark against the search of any other thing than the
naked and literal sense in the Scripture: one is of those who be meerlie
naturalists, and nunquam assurgunt ad supremam causam: Another, of some
presumptuous, but shallow-brained Theologues, who covering their Ignorance,
with pretext of Holiness, semper assurgunt ad supremam causam, they are ever
speaking, and talking of the knowledge of GOD, but may not abide one word of
Nature; contemning the high contemplations thereof, which are the very
paeth-way that do lead us unto that Knowledge, Neither of which two (says
he) have tasted this sweet Science of Analogicall harmony, that is betwixt
the intellectual and visible World: whereof says the divine Plato, that,
that is the real substance, and this but the shadow depending there-fra; that
Truth, and true subsistence are there, and here nothing but as a flowing and
transition of Images, Nulla sunt vera nisi quae sunt aeter^^, ista autem quae
vide^us non sunt vera, sed ve^i similia: the things that we see, are but
temporary shadows of things true and eternal: and as the shadow of any
creature does perfectly declinate unto us the shape, the form, the space,
and name thereof, although we do not see the body it self; so (says he)
into this great body of visible Nature (which is the Image of that
intellectual and infinite World) there is the true deliniation and viue Images
of the several creatures which be there, and of the Heavenly Governament,
and blessed harmony that is amongst them. And brief, (says Plato) we have
no knowledge in this World, but that which is symbolicall, having reference to
things invisible, as the shadow has unto the body. The Prophets of the old
Law did receive their revelations from the Angels in symbolicall speeches, and
(says Christ Himself) litera occidit, spiritus vivificat; The letter is
dead, but it is the Spirit that quickens. And of Him says Saint Mark,
That without Parables He spoke nothing to them: and twelve several Parables
of the Kingdom of Heaven He did delyver to them, all which do thus begin,
Simile est regnum coelorum: and the Prophet David says, I shall open my mouth
by Parables.

Certayn^^e, if ever there was an Age of the World, where-in the supernatural
light of Christ's Gospel had need to have annexed unto it the dark light of
Nature, for alluring and intertayning the weakness of our spiritual sight it
is even this which we now live into, where-in the Heresies of doctrine are so
pregnam (...), and the love of the World, pride of Life, and singularity of
Opinion so predominant in the professors of the Truth, that we may say not
only with ^lato, but with Hosea the Prophet, Non est veritas in terra: the
pure Verity has left the Earth. So that I say to you, Ye must not be
disgusted if upon the sudden ye cannot comprehend every symbolicall Verity
that is propounded unto you: which, if it could be, then we should vilipende
the Mysteries of GOD, as things trivial and vulgar. It is said in Eccles that
God has made the world beautiful, and did set it in the heart of man, even
that he may admire it, and vex himself to explore the nature thereof:
Vexatio dat intellectum, says the same Solomon. And I say, that as the
intellectual spirits of our Brain, which are the Scarchers of the Verity,
are most subtle in themselves, and closed up from our Eyes, within diverse
Cabinets of our Head: Even so the Verity it self, which is the thing searched
by them, is much more subtle, and involved from our sight. The first Ages of
the World did emblem the Verity, by a Triton, standing above the Temple of
Saturn, with a Trumpet in his mouth: signifying, that her habitation was most
high, and with the most ancient Gods, and that therefore she must be sought
laboriouslie, and from afar. GOD Himself, who is only Verity, has made
His Mysteries to be vmbragious, and as at wee-light before us, ( whiles He
Himself does inhabit the inaccessible light, as is said, 1. Tim. 6,)
represented to us by the Seraphims, Esa. 6. beholding Him through two wings;
and by the darkness of the Cloud, where-through Moses did enter into the
light of Mount Sinai, to receive the Law; and by that Pillar of Fire, that
conducted Israel, which was in like manner locked up in a Cloud. All these do
figure unto us, that al-be-it the Verity (like to the Branch of Gold, that
did secure the Voyage of Aeneas, unto the Elisean Fields) shall at length open
a Passage for us, to the inaccessible Light. Yet for the present of our mortal
life, there be infinite Mysteries of the Verity, which we cannot see
other-wayes, than through dark and doubtful Clouds: amongst the which, this
of the number 10, has fallen in mine hands; it may be, as a precious Jewel
comes to an unskillful Goldsmiths; who, although he cannot mount it
curiously, yet he sets it so, as it may be carried, viewed, and valued, of
all men. The ancient Persian and Egyptian Theologues, did call the Body of
GOD, Light; and His Soul, Verity: to declare unto us, that the Verity, when
it is found by us, it should by our means shine to others. And, as a Lantern
carried by a Man in the night time, is better seen of those who be about him,
than by himself; Even so, perhaps, this Noble Mystery, once poynted at by
me, shall be now understood better by many of you, than it is by me, who did
mark it unto you: and I pray GOD it may be so.

Your true, and loving Friend, PETER HAY.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To the Subjectes of SCOTLAND, Of the Dangers threatened to
Christian States; And namely, To GREAT BRITANE, by the Ambition of SPAIN.
THere are some Yeares-gone, since partly my Age, (now about 60.) and partly
my retired Life, free from any public Charge, did make me to disgust all
civil Meditations, and exercise of the more humane Letters; where-in I had
given satietie to my Mind in my Youth-head, both by diligent reading of
Histories, and by traveling abroad through the World, to look upon the several
Governaments thereof. And now I had gotten place upon an higher Stage, and was
become familiar with the Muses more sublime and divine, where I did study to
understand the policy of Nature, the Bounty, Beauty, and Order of the
visible Creatures: and that Magical Spirit, which does by a common sympathy
connect and unite in one Commonwealth so many Contrarieties, as are with-in
the enclose of the supreme Heaven, and which does maintain whole, and inteire
this great Body of the Universe, whilst her Members do daily perish, and
pass away before our Eyes. I did consider, whether this hudge frame was
animate, or inanimall, and where was the residence of that mighty Spirit,
where-by it is governed, how Scripture tells me that, Spiritus DEI implet
orbem terrarum, The Spirit of GOD does fill the whole Earth: and how
Philosophy persuades me, that GOD is, into Nature, as the Soul of Man
with-in his Body: that even as our Soul does fill the Body, with Life and
Motion, and furnish to the Organes of our Senses, their faculties of several
operation; and having its seat hidden into the Brains, yet is it not confined
there, but goes out at random, to run over the whole Earth, to penetrate the
Center, to travel through the Spheres, to fly above them, and to discourse
of things imaginable to be without the purprise of the Heavens: That even so,
GOD has His Habitation and Seat into the inaccessable Light, (as the Head and
hidden Brains of Nature) and there-fra does disperse the Spirit of Life, and
motion through all: putting into the Starre^ (as Organes seated into the face of
that great Body) the influences which minister to all her parts, inspiring
into the vast Belly thereof, the blowing Wyndes, which are the breathing
Spirit of Nature: and again placing the Occean, as the livare and fountain
that does ramifie and spread so many Veins through the Earth, (as it were of
blood, through the fleshly body, and trunk of Nature) and lastly, these
rockie Craiges, as the Bones of that Body. Then I did dispute with my self,
how far these visible things did bear the Characters of the invisible
Governament of GOD, into the intellectual or Architypicall World: where only
(as Plato says) there is real and true subsistence, and where-of these caduc
Creatures that we see, are but a shadow, or a mirror, where-in GOD lets us
behold the Image of that Order and governament that is in Heaven: According to
which, says Saint Paul Romans 2. The invisible things of GOD, from the
creation of the World, are clearlie seen, being understood by the things that
are made. Farther, I went on, to ponder that discourse of Plato in his 6. de
Rep. where he makes the Mind of Man to have that relation to GOD, which his
Eye has to the Sun; where-fra, as a visible Light, proceeds to illuminate
the Eye, and makes it to see the Sun it self, that gives it light: So
does a spiritual Light, proceeding from GOD, illustrate our Minds, with that
splendour where-by we do behold GOD Himself: which Light of GOD, he calls
in that place, Foetum, sive prolem DEI, The Birth, or Child of GOD. Whereupon
I was begun to debate with my self, from what good warrant the learned
Marcilius Ficinus, could affirm, that Plato did there-by mean the eternal
Son of GOD, manifested to us in the Scriptures: of whom says Saint John,
in the first of his Evangell, in terms not unlike, Est lux illuminans omnem
hominem venientem in hunc mundum: That He is a Light, which does illuminate
every man that comes in this World.

But now, while as my spirit had ascended to this height of Heavenly
transportation, little thinking of any worldly retract, or encombrance, Alace
for pity! the late deplorable death of our blessed King, of sacred memory,
did intercept my joys, and make me Icarus-lyke, to fall back into the Seas,
once again to sail a-long the Coasts of that wicked Circe, Death of our late
Sovereign.
where nothing is to be seen, but the dead bones of those who are daily
naufraged amidst her enchanted allurements, and once again to set my self
upon the bloody Theater of the World, to partake of the public sorrows,
wherewith so many good souls are afflicted, for the loss of so precious a
Jewel, whose royal worth, his divine virtues, his happy times, and
miraculous fortune (if Fortune may be spoken of, where GOD did so manifestly
rule) as I am not bastant to express them, so it is not my intention to touch
them in this Discourse, because as Plutarch says, Praeclara gesta praeclaris
orationibus indigent ne gloria defraudentur: curable griefs are spended, and
consumed with words of lamentation, or washed away with tears, but deep and
irrecoverable displeasures will have none other style, nor other
Mourning-Cloath, but astonishment and silence: Therefore, I will only say this
for all, to a-wake our Minds, in thankfulness to GOD, who is the giver of all
good things; That if it were true which Plato supposes, that there are
certain habitable Regions in the Air, for an Heroical, and more celestial
kind of Men, who live to many ages, and feed only of the vapors, and
fragrant smells of Fruits, that grow there, for their nowrishment; or if so
be, that Paradise has been, or does yet remain there, which some Christian
writers spare not to affirm, That as Lucifer, after his rebellion, was thrown
from the Heavens, downe-ward in the Air, so Adam, after his fall, was detruded
from an higher habitation, to a lower. If I say, either of the two were extant,
we of this Kingdom, might contend with any of them, for public Prosperity
and Peace, of a whole Age, without interruption. I make the challenge to those
imaginary and Airie People, because I find none upon the known Earth, who
may enter the Lists, with us, in that behalf. The sanctified Reign of our
sweet Sovereign, who does now enjoy his Crown in the eternal Glory, who
lived 60 years a King, and the hundredth and sixth King of one Stock, who
banished Idolatry, planted the Gospel, superadded two Diaedemes to the third,
making a confluence, of a natural and stately Monarchy; and all this, sieve
saenguine, aut sudore; yea, without the putting one Lance to the Field: let
us weigh this well, and then say truly, qui poterunt similiter gloriari nobis.

But as nothing which is vehement, or extraordinary, can endure into this
ordinary vicissitude of Mortality, so were the very Funerals of this great
Prince. followed with the doubting and fears of all his good Subjects; His
late Majesty's death, followed with great fears of his Subjects.
as if with the death of our holy and peaceable King, the period of our
Countreyes-Peace had also expyred. Whether it be that some malignant
constellation, unable to perturbe so rare a Saint of GOD, has lain in wait
till now, to spew upon us some mischievous Influence; or that GOD, for his
sake, has forborne hitherto, to inflict the Punishments due for our Sins: It
is no new thing indeed, but usual for People subject to Kings, to be taken
with some fear of Innovations, or change, at the entry of a young Prince. The
Philosophers say, that the Celestial Orbs, do some-time suffer their motum
trepidationis, a motion (as they call it) of trembling. What marvel then, if
when the Axiltree of a State is changed, the Body which is carried upon it,
do shake a little? But because I have perceived by conversation with diverse
of grave and constant minds, that such Fears begin to be apprehended of them
more deeply, than is agreeable with the loyal affection, that we ought to
carry to, and trust that we should place in our natural and kindly Prince,
of so great expectation: Therefore it is, that I out of that common Sympathy,
which one Member has with an-other of the same Body, and being now upon the
public Stage of the World, (I mean, a deep and serious Contemplation of the
present condition of things) where the matter and nature of Dangers threatened,
do lie open, and discovered to mine Eyes, I have resolved for information, and
solace of many others, whose sight perhaps cannot penetrate so far, to
deduce and examine the Causes of our Fears, for a tymous Advertisement, to all
the upright Subjects of this Kingdom; that every Man may the better
understand the case of the present time, and everse Man may provide to
contribute the best of his Wits, of his Cowrage, and of his Goods, to the
service of our Prince, whom GOD has set over us, to foresee and obviate our
Dangers, The Fears which have possessed our Minds, be of two sorts, either
flowing from Foreign, or from Domesticke occasions: from Foreign, because
that our mighty Enemy of Spain, Causes of our fears, what these be.
is irritated against us, and has already gotten great advantages: Our
intestine Fears, be one of three, either for Aggravations and Pressures,
which the great exigence of this Time seems to put upon us: or secondly, for
the intended Reformation, or Innovation of Session, Counsel, or
State-Officers: because it seems to chop at the Arch-Pillars of our
Governament, who have been placed, and long pratticked by a King most famous
for solid Wisdom: or thirdly, for the large extent of the Revocation made by
his Majesty who now is, which does touch so many of us to the quick, and as
it were rankle us to the very bones. Of all which three, I shall treat a
little with that Modesty and Reverence which becomes a private and faithful
Subject.

And first, because our Foreign Dangers are most manifest, I will speak of
that, The King of Spay^e, and the Pope, troublers of Christian Princes.
(instar montis equum) that monstrous and formidable pride of Spain, the
Common Enemy of Christian Tranquillity. This King, with his Pope, are the two
Furies, who do enrage all Neighbour-Princes, and States; the Nemesis and
Pandora, who disperse Christian Plagues; the two insatiable Daughters of the
Leech, mentioned in the Scripture, who still cry, Give, give, and who suck the
blood, not of Beasts, but of the Saints of GOD. They are the two Stars of
our wretched Constellations: and when-so-ever it falls in their courses, to
be Ascendents of this occidentall Hemispheare, then let not Christian people
expect other than Fire and Sword, and the blood of legions, unless the
Conjunction of other Princes do make an Aspect happily and rightly opposed
to them. This great King, has long time gone, devoured in his mind the
Occydentall Empire: the design of which Ambition, is not so remarked by
Neighbour-States, (which is their great fault) nor so with-stood, as is
necessary for cutting the Thread thereof in time, before it grow to greater
length: and that because it seems in the mean while to advance but sl^wlie,
as the highest Spheres, who have longest periods, do move most insensibly to
us; yet they cease not to make still progress, till they come to their
stations. Will we but cast back our Eyes a short way, even to the beginning
of Charles the fifth, the Grandsire of this present King, Ambition of Spain
different from that of the Romans.
there we shall see the swift march of that Ambition, so far, that if they
had brooked, that which they gripped, since then, they had matched the Romans,
for dilatation of Empire, in the like tract of time. The generous Romans did
not found their Empire upon Oppression and Spoil, nor raise it by Arts of
Tyranny: They were a just and magnanin ious People, concitate by GOD, to
deliver the Oppressed, and purge the World from proud Tyrants; to introduce
Community of Conversation amongst Countries, Common Laws of Justice, Civil
Policy, and Learning: for the which, says one of the Fathers, that GOD did
favor their Empire, and the growing ther^-of: Donec eo tandem deventum esset,
(says he) ut sieret totus terrarum orbis, quasi unum cultissim^m imperiirus:
That it came to pass, that the whole World was as a well manured Husbandry,
or Fame, of that Empire. Where, by the contrary, these late Kings of Spain
have not only interverted the most laudable and virtuous Ambition begun,
Different from that of their Predecessors.
and prosequuted many years, by their Predecessors, for plantation of
Religion and Policy, amongst the Insidels of Afric, of the Levantine Indies,
and diverse Yles of the Main Occean: but they have turned vp-syde down, this
Christian Ambition, as fair Lucifer did change himself into a Devil; and
have converted the Edge thereof, to the confusion of the fairest Countries of
Europe, so sufficiently adorned with Piety, Justice, and Policy, that they
might have been called The Gemmes of the World. And if the Moneys, and
Forces of Arms, which have been spent to the sackage of these, within an
hundredth years gone, had been employed against Barbarians, and Ignorants of
GOD, then the best part of Afric, of the Eastern and Western ^dies, might
have been at this day under the peaceable Domini^ of that King; and he, by
that Conquest, more justly called a Catholic King: as may be easily
understood, by the Stories extant, of the prosperous and happy beginninges of
his Antecessours, against the Infidels of those Nations: which, because it
does most clearlie paint out the ugly and odious Face of his detestable and
execrable Ambition, I think it not amiss, to make a short Relation thereof,
out of their own Histories.

About some more than 800 years bygone, Roderico, a Christian King of the
Goths in Spain, having ravished and deflored the Daughter of the Earl
Iuliano, his own Subject, was casten out from his Kingdom, and slain by
Tariffio, a Barbarian king, The origin and Antiquity of the present house of
Spain.
brought from Afric, by means of the said Iuliano, for just revenge of the
ignominy done to him. Those Barbarians did possess the whole Country (few
Cities excepted) of Spain, with the utter exterminion of the Gothicke Empire,
and were begun to spread themselves over the Perenees, when Pelagius, son
of the Duke of Biscaglia, (of whom is descended this present King of Spain,
by succession not yet interrupted) having a Sister of rare beauty, in like
sort violented and raped, by a Cousin of this Barbarian King: and being a great
spirit, full of Valor and Piety both, he did plot some Stratagems, for the
revenge of this injury: where-in his cowrage and good fortune were so
conspicuous, Notable punishment of Lust, in Princes.
that the Goths (now oppressed by the Barbarian servitude) did comfort him to
public Arms, for restitution of their Christian Liberty: where-in he made
so good progress, that they did elect and erect him to their Kingdom. The
Ravishment of the Daughter of Iuliano, was the introduction of the Moors in
Spain, and the dejection of the Gothicke Dominion. Pelagius.
The Rape of the Sister of Pelagius, did procure the restitution of the same,
and the ejection of that Barbarian King. There is not certainly a Vice, which
has procured greater ruin to mighty Princes, than this of raging and
voluptuous Lust. Tyranny has thrown out many from their Crowns, but more
yet have been cast out by Immunditie. Be-lyke, as being a g^osse, lo^rde, and
sensual Vice, the LORD does more punish it i^ Princes, than private men, who
are set up, above their People, to spread abroad the Rays of their exemplarie
Piety and Virtue. This Pelagius did spend the rest of his days against those
Infidels, whom he swept out of diverse corners of that Country, Pelagius
honored of the World.
although they were so numerous at that time, that there were found of them in
one Battle in Aquitane, 400000, which made the World adore, in a sort, his
Name, because he was the first Prince, who with extraordinary zeal did
enterprise holy and heroicke VVarres, against those impious Barbarians, who
were begun to tread over all Christian People. Virtuous beginnings, if with
length of time they grow to large extent of Prosperity, they are much honored
by aftercomming Ages; and great reason: for why? the Tree, how tall soever it
be in the Field, yet it was once all in the Seed. This is the just Reward
of Virtue past, and the chief Spur of that which is to come. This Pelagius
is most renowned in the Histories. Buchanan, amongst others, in his Iure regni
apud Scotos, does introduce him for the Image of a most virtuous and temperate
Prince.

The second of these Kings, Ferdinandus Magnus.
memorable in Histories, was Ferdinando, called Magno, who no less than
Pelagius, to the glory of GOD, and his immortal fame, did pacify his
Controversies with some Christian Neighbors, to his great disadvantage, to
manage Wars against the Moors; of whom he over-threw, and banished the King
of Toledo, and the King of Siviglia, with all their People. This Prince is so
honored by their Writers, for a wonderful temperament that was in him of
fierceness against the Barbarians, and religious humility of carriage, and
conversation with his Subjects, that they do equal him unto that perfect
Cavalliere, that Virgill descrybeth in the person of Aeneas.

For the third, I will remember Ferdinando, called Santo, who did holilie bend
himself to cleanse the Country of Spain from the remnant of that Vermin,
Ferdinando Santo.
with such zeal and fervor, that he was noted thus to speak of the Ambition
of Princes, that in their Wars they had diverse ends; some Vindication, some
Extention of Dominions, some Glory of the World, and love of Popular Air: and
all these, said he, were vain, as David speaks of them, Periit memoria
illorum cum sonitu: Their m^morie passes away with that same sound, which
does so much inveagle them for the time. Others, said he, have for the scope
of their Wars, Justice, and the Peace of People: and these do not willingly
move Wars, but for succouring of the Oppressed, and extinction of Pride and
Tyranny. And lastly, others for propogation of the Faith, and that (said
he) is the top of all Glory, to be purchased by Wars. Although (he said)
that seldom were Christian Princes happy in that sort, to have their designs
in War simple, and incommixed with Ambition, Pride, or Avar^ce: vvhich^
(said he) was the true reason why Christian Empyres do flowrish so
slowly. This Prince did purge Granada, Valenza, Saint Lucar, and Cartagena;
and planted diverse Bishops seats, ritchlie rented. This Prince was after his
death, not only of Christians, but even of Infidels so honored, that Halamar,
one of their Kings, did yearlie send an hundredth great Torches, with numbers
of his Friends, to assist a commemoratiue Celebration, used to be yearlie of
his Funerals. He was so modest in acceptance of Honors whilst he lived,
that when the Barrons of his Kingdoms had resolved to erect some Statues, to
remain as famous Ensigns of his glorious Victories, he would not suffer it
to be done; saying, it was to ascrybe to Man the honor which is only due
to the LORD of Hoastes.

For the fourth, I will make mention of the Spaniards Predecessoures
maternall. Alphonso the fifth, King of Portugal, under whom were discovered,
possessed, and made open for Christian Traffic, the Coasts of Aethiopia, the
Yles of Capo-verde, Arguim, Medera, Saint Thomas, those of Terzere, upon the
Coast of Afric. He made conquest of Alcazar, and Arzilla, with their
Territories. After these he did Knight five of his Sons, for their great and
hardy Adventures, about these exploits: and before their instalment of
Cavallerie, he did publicly in a Church, oblish them by a Sacramental Oath,
to hard points of pious Magnanimity, for giving their lives, if need were,
for their Faith, their Honor, their Country, their Prince, their Friends, and
all Oppressed. This Prince was often heard to say, that it imports nothing
to the Commonwealth of Christendom, whether this or (...) Province were
under the Dominion of Spain, or France, or of Almaignie, or any others,
provyding all were good Christians.

For the fifth, I will say some-vvhat of Emanuell, King of Portugal. Alphonso
the first, did cleanse whole Portugal from the Moors. Alphonso the fifth, as
I have said, did war against them in Afrik. And this Emanu^ll did persecute
them even to Asia, and manage hot Wars against them, with extraordinary
good fortune, and is counted amongst the most nominate, and glorious Kings that
have been in any Age: who without removing his Person from Portugal, did
place the Trophies of his Victories in Afric, Arabie, Persia, and the Indees,
and fill the Earth with the splendour of his Name. He made himself full
Master of the Barbarian Occean, and of the Indish Traffic: he over-threw
diverse of their Kings, and did overrun the Levant, as the Stories show, even
to the Ports of China: he daunted the Aethiopians, about the Cape of
Bona-speranza: he built the Fortresses there, called Sofala, and Mozambi:
discovered, and made Tributaries, the noble Yles of Saint Lorenzo, Quiloia,
and Socotera: fortified the Isle of Ormus, and made the King Homager, and
Vassal of Portugal. He planted a Colonie in Goa, which at this day is
esteemed one of the most opulent Cities of the Levant. He took in Moluca, and
frequentlie assaulted Calicute, he did brook the things left to him in
Afrike, and super-adjoyned there-to, Safin, and Azamor. He bestowed one of the
hundreths of all his Revenewes, and the tenth part of the Tributes of his
Conquests, for plantation of the Faith amongst them. He sent learned Churchmen
to the King of Congo, (with whom he was in friendship) and procured the
coming of the said King, his Son, Brother, and diverse Noblemen, to
Portugal, where they were taught, and received to the Christian Faith. He
sent Priests into Brasilia. And brief, their Histories presume to equal this
Prince, to Solomon.

Of this Emanuell, Charles the fifth, Charles the fifth, Emperor.
Emperor, did marry a Daughter, of whom is descended the present King of
Spain, Charles, did follow the same Footsteps of the Christian Ambition of
his Predecessors, against the Infidels. He conquered the Kingdom of Peru,
where-fra he brought into the Countries of Europe, (...) infinite Number of
Gold and Silver, which did on the sudd^e, (as ye will find noted
heere-after) alter the Manners, Estates, and Traffiques of Merchandise,
universally of all men. He restored the King of Tunis, and made him Vassal
of the Crown of Spain. He did employ mighty Forces, at sundry times,
against Solomon the great, who did then gape most greedily for to have
devoured Germany. But above all, the memory of him does rest most sacred for
the longsome Toils and Troubles endured by him, and Worlds of Money, which he
spent, for the pacification of Christian Religion, and reformation of the
Church of Rome. If this fatal and wretched Emulation, and Jealousy of
Neighbour-Princes, had not made King Francis the first, to oppose and mar
him: and if that same had not like-wise made the Pope, his Cardinals, and all
the Prelates, and Princes Catholic of Germany, his Enemies fearing both the
greatness, the good natural, and sincerity of this Prince, of whose
fraudelent and unchristian proceedings with him, the History of the Counsel
of Trent, published with-in these few Years, has the full and perfect
Deduction. Always, not-with-standing that he was a rare King, whose fame and
credit is above Envy, full of Royal Magnanimity, religious toward GOD, and
fortunate to Greatness; a-like to whom there has been in these latter Ages,
if some, yet surely not many, Never-the-lesse, I say, even in him began to
be seen the marks of this Inclination, of the Spanish Ambition, to
universality of Empire in Europe: the testimony where-of, was by his own
direction, publicly set up upon the Ports of such famous Cities as he
conquered; as I my self have seen upon those of Naples, and Milan, that too
superbe and glorious Superscription, Carolus 5. Imperator, ad colligenda regna
dispersa, and plantaudam fidem Christianam, a DEO destinatus: Charles the fifth,
Emperor, destinated by GOD, to collect together dispersed Kingdoms, and to
make plantation of the Christian Faith. I confess indeed, that he in his
time went about this design of Universal Dominion, by more laudable and
Christian ways, than his Successors have done since: that is to say, by
seeking to curb the Papal Tyranny, and to reunite the Church of GOD, in one
Faith, one Governament, under one Civil Law, and, I warrant, under one Prince,
if he could: And to give him his due, assuredly, he has had a most brave
and heroicke mind, like to that of Alexander the Great, of whom says
Plutareh, to his immortal fame, Ni DEVS ille qui Alexandri huc animam
demiserat eam praepopere revocasset, haud scio an lex una cunctos homines
regeret, unumque jus veluti commune Lumen, ad omnes pertineret.

O blessed Ambition of those brave Princes before mentionated^ now-a-dayes,
their Successors do exhaust their Treasures, their Wits, their Forces, to
make desolate Christian States, as is said, and to destroy Christian People;
whilst their Predecessors did seek under Heavens unknown, to find out
Deserts unpeopled, or else plenished with Savages, and have reduced them to
fruitful Agriculture, civil Policy, and Christian Discipline. O damnable,
and cursed Jealousy of Christian Kings, and States! which do not permit their
Ambition to extend it self, to the glory of GOD, the increase of their own
Dominions, and their immortal Fame. This Globe of the World lies abroad by
360 degrees in Longitude, and as many in Latitude: The English have made
Navigation to within 77, Contrapoyse of Christian (...), warranded in Nature.
toward the North, and the Portugals and Castilians, to within 56, toward the
South; so there do rest 228 to discover: and what a fairer Field, or richer
Spoils, can be wished for Christian Ambition, or Avarice, than this? Yet what
shall I say of this Emulation of near, and Neighbour-Princes? It seems to
be fatal in effect; and what is fatal, is necessary: for fatal we call,
Quasi fatum, sive dictum a DEO: A thing pronounced by GOD to be. For if we
shall take a view of His whole Works, we shall see nothing but a temperament,
and contrapoysing of natural Extremities, in such equality of Balance, that
none be able to excrease to the overthrow of the other. The Heavens are
placed into that Equilibrie, that every side is jumpe with the other, and may
not over-shoot it. The contrary motions of the Heavens, do not confound, nor
impede one an-other. The coldness of Saturn, and the heat of Mars, do not
eat up one another, because Jupiter comes between, as the Axiltree of their
Contrapoyse, by the serenitie of his temperature. So is it in the Elements, the
Fire and Water are kept from desperate conflicts, by the Balance kept by the
Air, attempered to both. So it is amongst Beasts, where-of those that be of
fierce and savage kinds, least useful unto Man, (as Lions) GOD has made them
more barren. Those again of the weaker sort, which be more necessary, and
serviceable for Man, He has made more broodie and foecund; to the end, the
Stronger should not be able to destroy that which is more infirm; but the
multitude of weak ones, should be sufficient to contrapoyse the paucitie of
the mightier. There is no Beast, which is not afraid of the Lion, and trembles
at his presence; yet something has he to contrapoyse his awfulnesse: for he
may not abide himself the crying of the Cock, but is astonished there-by. So the
Bellicose Elephant, whom all the terrors of Battle cannot make afraid, he may
not endure the cry of a Swyne, but presently flees, and, as is said in
Eccles, Intuere opera omnia Altissimi, and videbis semper unum contra aliud:
Do contemplate all the works of the most High and you shall find aye one
against another. Even amongst the intellectual Creatures, the good Angels,
against the bad, GOD this way showing the Height and Deepnesse of His
unsearchable Wisdom, by lodging, and ruling of so many contrary things,
peaceably within this one House of the Universe.

Shall we not think then, but the LORD, who has so moderated and brydled
every extreme and contrariety, who has placed Mountains, and steep
Shores, to keep in the raging Sea, that she rise not over her Marches, and
ordinary Banks; but he has like-wise, in the governament of the World, by
several great Kingdoms, and Monarchies, appointed and allowed the same
Contrapoyse, that no Prince become so mighty, as to devour his Neighbor; that
no Pride, or Insolency, do excrease without Limitation? certaynlie, I think
it has a Warrant in Nature: and Reason tells us, That as it is lawful, to
with-stand Force, by Force; it is also lawful, to provide, if we can, that no
Case come, that may constrayne us to do so; or, that may put us to the
employing of Force, or Violence: So that it seems lawful to Princes, or
States, to impede, so far as they can, suspected Neighbor Grandour, lest it
become at length to master them. Hieronimus, Hieron. King of Syras.
King of Syracuse, being demanded, (as Polibius writes) why in the
meane-tyme of his being Confederate, and Friend of Rome, he did aid and
supply the Carthagenians against them? He answered, That it was to the end
he might brook the friendship still of the Romans: whom, if he should
suffer to overthrow the Carthagenians, then of his Friends, they should become
his Masters. Or, will a wise King, within his own Dominion, permit a
particular Statesman, to carry away the whole sway of Governament, by too
much of Authority? no, but he will contrapoyse him with a College of a
contrary Disposition, to keep him in order. Hence is it, that the LORD GOD in
all Ages, has suffered one Nation to combat with an-other, one King to beat
an-other, and one man to hold in the Horns of an-other, that nothing should
shoot out above that just proportion which does corresponde to the communion
of Nature: yea, if we should come to consider and weigh the particular
Fabric of every one man's Body, if the like equilibrie of Contra-Ballance
did not attemper our contrary Humors of Complexion, certainly our
Constitution were not able to subsist; but either the Choler shall burn up
the Phlegm, or the Phlegm extinguish the Choler, if the interjection of these
median Humors of Sanguinean and Melancholicke, did not impede that Conflict.
And hence are all the Leagues of Mutual Defenses amongst weaker States
contracted against the more mighty.

Having thus shortly showed how the Ambition of Castile and Portugal was
virtuous, and laudable, Philip the second, King of Spain, his first action,
his Marriage in England.
unto the death of Charles the fifth, I come now to Philip his Son, and
Successor, who did spot the Glory of his noble Predecessors, by turning his
Thoughts to the Conquest of Christian People. He it was, who did complot and
conduct all the Tragedies which thence-foorth have been acted in Christendom.
This King finding himself debouted of his design to the Crown of England,
by the death of Marie* Queen thereof, who was his Wife, returning into Spain,
his first Practice was, Spanish Inquisition, his second action.
for excluding the Light of the Gospel, (which then began to break forth
over all) to strengthen against Christians, that fearful Inquisition, which
his Antecessours had erected against the Infidels, Jews, and Moors: where-of
this far may be affirmed, that if Satan himself had been King of Spain,
he could not have brought from the bottomless Pit, a more horrible Plague,
more cruel, more Barbarous, and beyond all Humanity; the wicked Invention
where-of, no Words can suffice to express, in sort that it does rather
resemble Hell it self, than that we can find any Example ever heard of the
like, upon the face of this Earth: where innocent Men, yea, Good, and holy
Men, after being straightly incarcerate diverse Years, spoiled of their Lands
and Goods, afflicted with Famine, rent with Tortures, and in end, falselie and
vnjustlie condemned, to the number of 800 in one Year under that King were
brought to public Spectacles to be burnt, with Buckels and Bullets in their
Mouths, to stop all Apologeticall speeches, and again, and again casten in
the Fire, and taken out of the Fire. It is hard, that any Christian should
think of it, without Trembling, and Tears: the farther Discourse where-of,
were but unpleasant here, al-be-it most necessary for Demonstration of that
hateful Tyranny: and who so is curious to understand more of it, he may find
a Treatise done at large on that subject, by Reginaldus Consalvus Montanus, De
Artibus Sanctae, Inquisitionis Hispanicae: one who has for many Years
known, and beheld it with his Eyes.

The next thing that King Philip went about, was the joining of Portugal to
the other Kingdoms of Spain already in his Possession, His third action, the
betraying of the King of Portugal his Cousin.
and there-by to make the Body of that Monarchy perfect and entire: and
finding nothing that could serve him for pretext, or color to move open
Wars, the King thereof, Don Sebestian, being his near Cousin, of one
Religion, free from any Controversies with him for Dominion; and knowing the
said Sebestian to have a Kingly and cowragious Mind, with-all hardy and
temerarious, he did corrupt and suborne some of his chiefest Favorites, to
puisse him to the enlarging of his Conquests in Afric, against the Moors,
where-of his Predecessors had already laid so good Foundations: and for his
easier inducement there-to, he did promise him large aid, both of Soldiers,
and of Money; And when Don Sebestian had embarked himself for Afric, and did
expect the arrival of the promised Succors, he found nothing but Letters of
new expectation, while in the mean time Philip did practice, by Claudestine
means, both coffeehouse and Mutiny with-in his own Armies, and Treyes
with the Barbarian Kings, against whom he went. Whereupon ensued the
overthrow and death of the said Prince, (without Children) in that Battle
which he fought against the Kings of Fesse and Moroco: after the which the
Portugals did receive the next lawful Heir to their Crown, Don Antonio, whom
the said Philip did eject by open War; and Violence, and forced the Subjects
to declare himself righteous Successor of that Kingdom, by his Mother.

Then he perceiving that King Henry the third of France, His fourth action,
was to plot the holy Le^gue in France, against Don Antonio.
did send a Sea-Armie to Portugal, in favors of Don Antonio, he resolved to
stir up and kindle a civil War in France, that might constrain them to
forbear the farther assaulting of his new Conquest in Portugal: and by a
public deliberation with his Counsel in the City of Tison, Anno 1577, he
laid the grounds of that Confederacy, called The Holy League, which did
almost reduce in Ashes, that ancient and flowrishing Kingdom of France: And
to that effect, sent thither secret Practices, with 200000 Crowns, to draw and
assure to his Course, the chiefest of the Nobility, and Gentry Catholic:
which did succeed well enough to his Mind, and to the great Dangers and
Disasters of all the Neighbour-States of Europe, as the Stories do at length
record. And then, that those who were enraged by him to Arms, should not want
an Enemy, on who^ they might consume the^-selues, he sent also to negotiate
privatelie, with King Henry the fourth of France, (being then styled King Of
Navarre, Philip did also practice the Protestants of France.
and Head of the Protestant Faction in France) offering to marry the said
King's Sister, whose Children to Philip, should succeed to the Kingdom of
Navarre, with the Yles of Majorque, Minorque, and Sardinia: also, that the
said King of Navarre should have in marriage the Infanta of Spain, eldest
Daughter of Philip, with condition to be established King of Guyene, at the
adventure, and charges of Philip; and with-all, should have the Right and
Possession of the Duchte Milan, with a present advancement of 200000 Crowns,
for the provision of Forces competent against his Enemies of the League. Who
does not see by these, the insatiable thirst of wicked Ambition, after the
Blood of their Neighbors? never an hungry Bear did hunt more fiercely for
to fill his Panches, than he was enraged for the Conquest of France. But the
said King of Navarre, guided by a better Spirit, did refuse all these
Ouvertures, as treacherous, and tending to the dissipation of France, with-in
it self, that it should be more open and obnoxious for the Spanish invasion.
And by his refusal, he laid the first Stone, whereupon there-after he did
build his reconciliation with as many Papists, as were true hearted
Frenchmen, and his Peace with his Predecessor, King Henry the third, to whom
he did impart all these secret practices, Anno 1583, and who permitted him to
assemble the whole Reformed Churches of France. at Montaban, the year
there-after, for trial, and punishment of the Negotiators of the same.

For by this time, the said King Henry the third, was begun with bitter Grief
and Repentance, to acknowledge his Error, in retiring his Forces from
Portugal; which he was forced to do, by the fury and hot persecution of the
Leaguars. And the year 1589, Elizabeth, Queen of England.
he did send Ambassadors to the Queen of England, (who was already engaged
to the protection of Don Antonio) to treat with her, that she would send him
back to Portugal, with a Sea-Armie, promising for himself, to join
thereunto 5000 Men, never-the-lesse that he was then mightily agitated with
the many Forces of the League, and that the hottest Flames thereof did burn
about his Ears, having even then surprysed the lives of the Duke, and
Cardinal of Guyse, at Blois. This was easily obtained of the said Queen,
who perceiving well that there was no other way to free her own Countries,
(the Spanish Army having threatened her Coasts the year before) nor to
liberate her Confederates of France, and the Netherlands, The Voyage of the
English Navy, to Portugal, under Queen Elizabeth.
from the Tyranny and Oppression of Spain, but by making VVarres to him in
Spain; she did set forth with Don Antonio, an Army for Portugal, under two
Generals, the Lord Noris for the Land, and Dark for the Seas, together with
the Earl of Essex.

But nothing of importance was performed by that Army: the Causes where-of are
diverslie agitated, and alleged; the English History affirming, that their
Generals then had no warrant to make War, except that they had seen an
universal Revolt of the Portugals, from the Spaniard, Antonio Pe^es, wrongeth
the English, in in his relation of that Voyage.
to Don Antonio, their King: where-of, say they, there was no appearance. But
Antonio Peers, in his Treatise to the French King, upon that Subject, does
impute the Causes to Mislucke, and Misgovernament, the Lingering and
Longsomnesse of the Voyage, their lying many days at Plimmouth, and many at
the Groine; where-by the Enemy had too much leisure to fortify himself, a
mortality of their People, where-of their best Canoniers, and other
Soldiers, died; the want of Horses, and Wagons, for transportation from the
coast of Lisbone: so that they were forced to quite great part of their Arms,
and in place thereof carry Bottels of Wine, and other things, for their
mayntaynance. The distraction of the Sea-Generall, Drake, from the
Land-Generall, who when he should have entered the Port of Lisbone, finding a
Fleet of Easterlings to pass by him, he set himself to the hazard of that
Prey, neglecting al-together the Enterprise against Lisbone. About the which,
when the Land-Armie did lie in siedge, there was a great confluence (as he
says) of the Portugals, to Don Antonio: but by reason they were addressed, in
base and course Apparel, they were esteemed by the English, to be but
Commons, and none of the Gentry, and therefore contemned. But (says he) if
the Enterprise had been followed, the Town of Lisbone had been taken in most
easily; for that the Cardinal of Austria, who commanded within, and so many
Castilians as were under him, were ready to leave it upon the first arrival
of Drake with-in the Harberie: that he had already hired thirty Galleyes,
for his transportation: and that with such sear and consternation, that he
conduced to give them 300 Duckates a-piece, for three leagues of Sea.

Always, in the diversity of opinions, concerning that Voyage, for my part, I
do more trust the English History, for two (as I think) infallible Reasons:
first, the World knows, that in those days there was not in Christendom, a
more solid, sure, and reverenced Counsel, than was in England: so that it is
not to be doubted, of that which their History bears; That their Generals
of that Army did obey their Warrant: Secondly, I find Antonio Peers
contrary to himself; for first he says, That by the longsomnesse of the
English Navy, the Enemy had leisure to provyde and guard himself:
Secondly, says he, the whole Gentry of Portugal did repare to join with
Don Antonio, and the English Army. But here I do trap, and convict him from
his own mouth: If (as he says) the Spanyard had leisure at his pleasure to
provide for himself, who then is so simple, as to think, but he did in the
mean time remove from Portugal the Nobility, namely, the Favorers of Don
Antonio, with the whole Gentry, without the leaving of any Man sufficient to
allure a Multitude, or to lead them to a revolt? I think he has forgotten
himself a little here, out of an ardor of his spirit, to have removed all
show of impediment to the French King, for putting of Wars in Portugal.

In the meane-tyme, thus far may be said, That as Obedience and Discipine,
military in the Body of an Army, under a trusty and skillful General, is
of that importance in actions of War, as, sine quo nihil, Too strict
limitation of Generals in War, hurtful.
a point where-in lies the chief Surety and Success of all things, except
of Fortune; Yet a strict limitation of Generals, has for the most part marred,
both good Fortunes, and good Successes of War, where the Opportunities,
Advantages, and Ouvertures are meerelie casual, and inpendent from precise
times. To prescribe to their Generals, was not the custom of the Wise,
Valiant, and fortunate Romans, Sed videant ne quid Resp. detrimenti cap^at.
The Patience and Wisdom of Fabius Maximus.
And what should have become of that great State, if their General, Fabius
Maximus, had not so stiffelie followed his private will of cunctation and
protracting of time with Hannibal? contemning the infamous Reproaches and
Exclamations, both of Senate and People against him: namely, of his Magistrum
equitum: Whom if he had not at length rescued in his temerarious Recountre
with Hannibal, he had perished, with all those whom he commanded.

Now, what were the Practices lyke-wise of Philip, even then also in England
and Scotland, by Corruption, and Iesuisticke Arts, to have drawn the
Subjectes of both Kingdoms to unnatural Revolts, from their Sovereign
Princes? It is better known, than that I need here to make mention of it: I
wish the Writers of our Countries History, may over-passe that Interlude, of
those Insidious times, as Lucan did the Cruelties unnatural, committed
mutuallie amongst the Romans at Pharsalia: Quicquid in hac acie gessisti Roma
tacebo (said he.)

By these few Circumstances, The first thing to be observed of the former
Discourse.
shortly related of the progress of the Spanish Empire, we may easily and
vsefullie observe these three things: first, the growing and fearful
greatness thereof, as it stands at this day. Maximilian, Emperor, and Duke
of Austria, did marry Catherine, The first, the greatness of the Spanish
Empire.
only Child and Successor of Charles, Duke of Burgundy; where-by were annexed
the 17 Provinces of the Nether-lands, to Austria. Of this Marriage issued
Philip, who being Duke of Austria, Burgundy, and Flanders, did marry the
Heretrix of Castile, Daughter of Ferdinando, and Isobella, the Mother of
Charles the fifth, and so did conjoyne the Estates fore-saide, unto the Crown
of Castile. Charles the fifth, by his own Virtue, did super-adde unto it, the
Kingdom of Peru, the Duchy of Milan, the peaceable Possession of the
Kingdom of Naples, and the Kingdom of Sicilia, with the Yles of Sardinia,
Majorque, Minorque, and their Possessions, which they yet have into the
Western Indees. His Son again, Philip the second, of whom I speak, besides
that, he had once within his Claws, France and England: (which both he lost
again) he did conjoyne with these, that which made the integrity and
perfection of the Spanish Empire, Portugal; The Importance, and Worth of
Portugal.
the importance where-of may be remarked by these three: first, by their
glorious Conquests before rehearsed, into the Levant, into Afric, and through
the maine Occean: Secondly, by the great multitudes of People, which do
inhabit the Territories thereof. Antonio Peers does affirm, that under
Sebestian, their last King, of whom I have before remembered, there were
thorow-out the Realms of Portugal, under military Discipline, 1200 Companies
of Footmen, where-of there was no Gentleman, other than Commanders; and in
every Company at least 200. Which being allowed, does amount jumpe to 240000
Men. And that Portugal did yearlie send out to their Conquests, 6000 Men,
where-of the third part did never turn home again. Thirdly, by the Riches
thereof, it being affirmed by him, that their Kings did in this one point of
Greatness, surpass all the Princes of Europe; being able in half an hour,
to give unto their Subjects, ten, or fifteen Millions, or more, to be
received by Ticquets, for dispatches of Governourships, Captainships, Receipts,
Offices, Licenses, to make Voyages by Sea, to the Indees, and Yles of the
Occean. But here I judge, that he has been too large, out of a great
fervor, to persuade Christian Princes, to set their Hearts upon so noble a
Prey: at leastwise, to provyde and prevent, that it should not fall into the
hands of their Common Enemy. But certainly, the best part of these, are well
approved to be true, by this that Philip the second of Spain did put
himself at so great expense, for the purchase and prefervation of Portugal,
by kindling and feeding the Fire of Civil Wars, through Christendom,
namely, in France and Flanders: exhausting to that end, the richest Mines
that be under the Heaven, and by making so ignominious and impious Peace with
Insidels; to be the more able to maintain Portugal, and to incroach farther
on Christian Neighbors. Under King Philip the third again, his son, there
was no accession indeed to this Empire: The mightiest Conquerers that ever
have been, in the Nature and Necessity of things, needed their own
Intervals, Cessation, and Repose, for breeding of new Fortitude and Strength:
and any Man may find into the Roman Wars, there has been at diverse
times, longer Intervalles of Peace: and now we see, that this present King of
Spain, after these Refreshments, is begun to rake and extend the Marches of
his Dominions.

The second thing to be observed by the former Discourse, The second to be
marked of the former Discourse, is, the extent of the Spanish Ambition.
is, the proud Design, and large Extent of the Spanish Ambition: when this
King, of whom I treat, ( Philip the second) durst, together, and at once,
adventure to set himself a-worke for the purchase of Portugal, France, the
Netherlands, England, and Scotland, who should doubt, or call it in question,
that by length of Time they intend not to subjugate the whole Estates of
Christendom? We find it written by themselves, that when he was about the
taking in of Portugal, being demanded by one of his greatest Favorites, what
was the reason why he did neglect his things of East India, and suffer
Friezland, and so many good Towns, to be invaded and possessed of
Heretics, his Enemies, and all to maintain the League, and Civil Wars in
France? Whereunto he answered, That those might be forgotten for a time,
because the settling of Portugal did import no less to him, than the security
of his whole Empire: which once done, he would easily make all those his
Neighbors, to become his Homagers and Tributaries: yea, it was the common
Theme of Discourse amongst his Captains, and Soldiers, both in Italy,
Flanders, and France, or where ever they were, That since Portugal was now
theirs, that France and England could not escape them. And more, (which is a
public Testimony) the Writers of the Spanish Story affirm thus far, That
if it had not been, that the said King Philip had resolved before any thing,
to bridle Portugal, he should have before then sufficiently daunted France,
and have put strong Armies in England.

Farther, the Extent of this Ambition of Spain, is clearlie seen by their
Authority, The Spanish Vs^^pation over the Consistory of Rome.
usurped over the Consistory of Rome; where they have made themselves
perpetual Dictators, which is one of the surest Fundaments of the increase of
their Grandour now-a-dayes: that Consistory being, as the Alembicke, where-in
are fined all the Counsels, Projects, and Designs of Christendom, and the
Pope arrogating to him, power at his pleasure, to excommunicate, and
consequently depose Christian Princes, and to transfer the Succession of
their Crowns, where-of only the Riches must belong to that Catholic King, as
of England, and Yreland, to Philip the second, (by Pius Quintus, who did
excommunicate Queen Elizabeth of ^England) and of Navarre, to his
Predecessors, by the same Title of being Heir and Successor, to
excommunicate Princes, keeping still in their own hand, the raygnes of the
Papal Election, and invading of their Patrimonies, as that of Sicilie; and
being in effect Popes themselves, governing at their will the Church Rents
thorow-out their Kingdoms, exacting a very great part universally of all,
for their own use.

The third point of Observation, upon the preceding Discourse, is the
Iusidiation, ^ 3. Observation upon the former Discourse, is, the Insidiation of
the Spanish Ambition.
and Latent Attempts of this Ambition, by godless Perfidies, and Treachery,
where no Faith is kept, nor Conscience, nor Religion, nor Humanity, nor
Vere^unditie, where Neighbour-Princes cannot brook their lives, by reason of
the excessive Rewards, and Honors promitted, to traiterous Executioners of
Claudestine Murders. What shall I say of Enemy Princes? no, I say of
what-so-ever persons, public, or private, suspected Enemies to their proud
Tyranny, sparing neither Papist, nor Protestant; Pope, nor Cardinal; Bishop,
nor Priest, nor nearest Kinsfolks, nor their most faithful Counselors, or
most fortunate Generals, if they but once, upon the lightest Occasion, become
jealous of them: no, not their own Children, when their blood may bring the
smallest accession unto the strength of that diabolicke Ambition, they do
murder, poison, embotch, and bewitch at their pleasure: So that this same
Philip, of whom I speak, he caused to be made away in his time, as Writers
have observed, more than 200 nominablie recorded in diverse Histories, whereof
I will remember but seven, of the most abominable Paricidies (I will call them
all so) ever heard of, and yet best known. King Henry the third of France, a
Christian Prince, of equal quality with himself, to whom he was bound by
that Fraternity, and by the union of one Faith, besides some degrees of Blood;
yet it is well known, that he did contryue the death of this King, as
truly, as he did plot the League against him. Pope Sextus the fifth, whom
he professed to be Head of the Church, and his holy Father, because that
Pope fearing the Spanish Tyranny, if his Conquest of France had proved good,
he did favor the said Henry the third, in his last Distresses; Philip made
him away by Poison: a thing so well understood, that they have it for a common
speech yet at Rome, (which I have heard with mine ears) That if a Pope do
enter without the approbation of Spain, he will go the way of Sextus the
fifth. He did betray, to the Eyes of the World, Don Sebestian, King of
Portugal, his Cousin, Alexander Farnesse, Duke of Parma, his Kins-man, and
General in Flanders, that valiant and renowned Captain, who had done him so
great Services, immediately after the misfortune of his Armada set out for
England, 1588. (which he did impute to the slownesse of the said Duke) he
fell into a lingering Disease, and died by Poison, ministered from Philip: the
World does know it. Don Bartholomew Carenzae, Archbishop of Toledo, who had
been the Preceptor, and Father of his own Youth-head, as Seneca to Nero,
because he would not publicly maintain his Title to the Crown of
Portugal, he also did dispatch him. His Brother, Don John de Austria, (whose
great and ambitious spirit he began to suspect) he was stricken with the
Plague of Pestilence, immediately after the receipt of a Letter from Spain,
whilst there was no Post in the Countries about, and where-of he died. But
above all, that most deplorable and nefarious Paricidie, publicly committed,
avowed by himself, authorized by the Church, the murdering of Prince Charles,
his own eldest Son. He did price the life of Don Antonio, at 100000
Crowns, and of Elizabeth Queen of England, and of the late Prince of Orange,
at as-much a-piece. He was not ashamed to receive certain Towns from the
King of Moroco, upon Bargain, to betray (as he did) Don Sebestian, King of
Portugal, his Cousin, nor to render unto those Infidels, Arzilla, (which his
Predecessors had nobly conquered) upon condition, they should not furnish in
priest to Don Antonio, 200000 Crowns, as they had promised to do at the
Intercession of the said Queen of England. N^melie, Antonio (...).
These are not mine Assertions, but taken and collected from Spanish Writers.

Of all the fore-sayde Perpetrations, the killing of his Son, Prince Charles,
being in it self most fearful, and execrable of the whole; it is also most
clearlie verified, not only by the Histories of Neighbor-countries, as by
the French records of Majerne, of Matthew of Paris, of Thuanus; but so stood
to, by the Church of Rome, that into that deed, they do place the Triumph,
and Glory of the Piety of the said King, advancing his Faith above that of
Abraham, who did only offer to sacrifice his Son, and comparing him to GOD
Himself, witnessed by Hieronimus Catena, writing upon the life of Popius
Quintus, the which Pope, by a public Panegyricke, did celebrate the praises
of the said Philip, for that fact, saying, E cosa multo notabile, and stupenda
ch' el re facesse sacrificio d'ella carne sua, and del suo sangue a DIO,
dicendo, che' non come Abrahamo, ma come DIO stesso, Propter salutem Ecclesiae,
non pepercit vnico filio: That is to say, It is a thing most notable, and
admirable, that this King did sacrifice unto GOD, his own Flesh, and his own
Blood, for naught, like unto Abraham: but like unto GOD Himself, for the
safety of the Church, he would not spare his only begotten Son. Farther,
it is affirmed by the English Writers, namely, Sir Francis Hastings, in his
Watchword to Queen Elizabeth, against the Spanish Insidiation, that the same
Philip, did by his Agents, the Count of Fuentes, then General in the
Low-Countreyes, and Secretary Ibarra, induce Doctor Lopez, a Jewish Physician,
at London, for fifty thousand Crowns, to poison Queen Elizabeth: which he
himself, upon his trial, did confess, and two others, Manoel Lois, and
Stephen Ferraires, did depone, and all three suffered Death for it, as the
process criminal led against them, and yet extant, will verify.

What shall I say upon this fearful kind of Policy? Ah for pity! Quid non
mortalia pectora cogit, reg^andi dira libido? What is that so odious, which the
love of domination will not persuade the ambitious heart to perpetrate? The
public cruelty of the Inquisition on the one part, and the covert Cruelty
of Ambushes practiced by the King, and his Jesuits, Parricid^e practiced in
Spain, as in Turk^e, by a religous Trad^tion.
on the other part, seem to be a chief Mystery of this Ambition, as two
Arch-pillars, which do for the time sustent the great Sphere of their Empire,
and the wicked Source, where-fra have flowed so many Chastels, Clements,
Ravillacks, Babingtons, Fauxes, Garnets, etc. as have been Actors of the
woeful Assassinates, Sorceries; Pests, Powder Treasons, Poisons, etc. that have
surprysed the lives of so many anointed Kings, and others of lawful
Authority, and do still lie in wait for the like Executions, against those
who are present, or to come heere-after. And here is a Case to be lamented
eternally, that those Parricidies, committed now in Spain, after the manner
of the Mahumetane Superstition; not as Crimes to be repented, but as Religious
Traditions, and Deeds of great Merit, when the life of one Man, or a few Men,
if it were of our Brethren, or Children, are taken, and sacrificed, for
preservation of the public Tranquillity both of Church and State, chiefelie
in great and Monarchical Kingdoms, where Religion does shoot out, with a
growing and flowrishing Empire. Alace! is not this the Fire of Moloch, and the
sacrificing of our Children to those bloody and savage Gods? This is a
Fascination and stupiditie of the Mind in the highest Degree: And here it is,
where that powerful Circe of Superstition, has transformed those Kings
reallie into Beasts, that wittinglie, and willingly, they have cast off both
Sense, and as it were Shape of Humanity; that the greatest Ulysses of the
World, is not able by any Oratorie, to reclaim them. In the meane-time, it is
a Case that does admonish Neighbour-Princes, Christian Princes, to be a^ware
of Spanish Treacheries.
to be of constant Piety, and Devotion toward GOD; and their Domesticke
Servants, to be vigilant, and studious, for the avoiding of that kind of
claudestine Dangers. And, O what great cause we have to render thanks to the
MOST HIGH, for that, that our late Sovereign, of blessed memory, did escape
the Insidiation, and bloody Knyfe of such Butchers! he who was the most
conspicuous Mark whereat they did shoot, and of whom their curious casters of
Horos^ops, and malignant Astrologues, did so often prognosticate, that his end
should not be peaceable.

Fourthlie, we are to weigh the Strength and Soliditie, of this great and
growing Empire, to see if we can explore should not furnish in priest to Don
Antonio, 200000 Crowns, as they had promised to do at the Intercession of the
said Queen of England. (...).
These are not mine Assertions, but taken and collected from Spanish Writers.

Of all the fore-sayde Perpetrations, the killing of his Son, Prince Charles,
being in it self most fearful, and execrable of the whole; it is also most
clearlie verified, not only by the Histories of Neighbor-countries, as by
the French records of Majerne, of Matthew of Paris, of Thuanus; but so stood
to, by the Church of Rome, that into that deed, they do place the Triumph,
and Glory of the Piety of the said King, advancing his Faith above that of
Abraham, who did only offer to sacrifice his Son, and comparing him to GOD
Himself, witnessed by Hieronimus Catena, writing upon the life of Popius
Quintus, the which Pope, by a public Panegyricke, did celebrate the praises
of the said Philip, for that fact, saying, E cosa multo notabile, and stupenda
ch' el re facesse sacrificio d'ella carne sua, and del suo sangue a DIO,
dicendo, che' non come Abrahamo, m^ come DIO stesso, Propter salutem Ecclesiae,
non pepercit vnico filio: That is to say, It is a thing most notable, and
admirable, that this King did sacrifice unto GOD, his own Flesh, and his own
Blood, for naught, like unto Abraham: but like unto GOD Himself, for the
safety of the Church, he would not spare his only begotten Son. Farther,
it is affirmed by the English Writers, namely, Sir Francis Hastings, in his
Watchword to Queen Elizabeth, against the Spanish Insidiation, that the same
Philip, did by his Agents, the Count of Fuentes, then General in the
Low-Countreyes, and Secretary Ibarra, induce Doctor Lopez, a Jewish Physician,
at London, for fifty thousand Crowns, to poison Queen Elizabeth: which he
himself, upon his trial, did confess, and two others, Manoel Lois, and
Stephen Ferraires, did depone, and all three suffered Death for it, as the
process criminal led against them, and yet extant, will verify.

What shall I say upon this fearful kind of Policy? Ah for pity! Quid non
mortalia pectora cogit, regnandi dira libido? What is that so odious, which the
love of domination will not persuade the ambitious heart to perpetrate? The
public cruelty of the Inquisition on the one part, and the covert Cruelty
of Ambushes practiced by the King, and his Jesuits, on the other part,
Parricidie practiced in Sp^tne, as in Turkey, by a religous Tradition.
seem to be a chief Mystery of this Ambition, as two Arch-pillars, which
do for the time sustent the great Sphere of their Empire, and the wicked
Source, where-fra have flowed so many Chastels, Clements, Ravillacks,
Babingtons, Fauxes, Garnets, etc. as have been Actors of the woeful
Assassinates, Sorceries* Pests, Powder Treasons, Poisons, etc. that have
surprysed the lives of so many anointed Kings, and others of lawful
Authority, and do still lie in wait for the like Executions, against those
who are present, or to come heere-after. And here is a Case to be lamented
eternally, that those Parricidies, committed now in Spain, after the manner
of the Mahumetane Superstition; not as Crimes to be repented, but as Religious
Traditions, and Deeds of great Merit, when the life of one Man, or a few Men,
if it were of our Brethren, or Children, are taken, and sacrificed, for
preservation of the public Tranquillity both of Church and State, chiefelie
in great and Monarchical Kingdoms, where Religion does shoot out, with a
growing and flowrishing Empire. Alace! is not this the Fire of Moloch, and the
sacrificing of our Children to those bloody and savage Gods? This is a
Fascination and stupiditie of the Mind in the highest Degree: And here it is,
where that powerful Circe of Superstition, has transformed those Kings
reallie into Beasts, that wittinglie, and willingly, they have cast off both
Sense, and as it were Shape of Humanity; that the greatest Ulysses of the
World, is not able by any Oratorie, to reclaim them. In the meane-time, it is
a Case that does admonish Neighbour-Princes, to be of constant Piety,
Christian Princes, to be a^ware of Spanish Treacheries.
and Devotion toward GOD; and their Domesticke Servants, to be vigilant, and
studious, for the avoiding of that kind of claudestine Dangers. And, O what
great cause we have to render thanks to the MOST HIGH, for that, that our
late Sovereign, of blessed memory, did escape the Insidiation, and bloody
Knyfe of such Butchers! he who was the most conspicuous Mark whereat they did
shoot, and of whom their curious casters of Horos^ops, and malignant
Astrologues, did so often prognosticate, that his end should not be peaceable.

Fourthlle, we are to weigh the Strength and Soliditie, of this great and
growing Empire, to see if we can explore, and find out any Weakness,
Breach, or Advantage to be gained, A trial of what Weakness is into this
great Empire.
since they are our Capital, and mighty Enemies; of whom it is not likely,
that long we shall be fred. Al-be-it it be true, that it is not so much
governed by the Sword, as by Grave and Sage Council, which is never a whit
diverted from their Plots, and Purposes, by the death of any King, where-in
stands, no Question, a chief point of the Firmness and Perpetuity thereof.
The State and Counsel of Spay^, not interrupted, or altered, by the death of a
King.
Yet it cannot be denied, that for abundance of Money, for military
Discipline, and for great numbers of good Soldiers, (which three be as the
Nerves, Veins, and gross Body of the Wars) they too far exceed their
Neighbors. Always, for the first, I say, that the light of Reason shows
me, that the greater Fortitude, does aye consist in the greater Union, Vis
vnita fortior. Fortitude of Empire, stands in (...) of (...).
There is no perfect Strength, but in GOD, because there is nothing meerelie
and simply Vnike, but GOD: The Strength of Nature, depends from her
Compaction, Union, and Sympathy of her well-conjoyned Members. This made
Augustus to abandone and neglect the Longinque Provinces, beyond Caucasus and
Taurus, and here in Great Britane: by mayntaynance where-of, they did receive
greater damage, than could be countervalued by any Benefit to be had
there-fra in time of Peace: saying, that as there were two Defaultes, that made
the natural Body imperfect; that which was too small, and under a proportion
natural; and again, that which was above, too big, superstuous, and
vnwealdie, called by the Physicians, Plethera, and Endeiat Even so it was in
the Civil Body of the State, and there-fore did he recommend to his
Successor, Examples of dis-vnited Conquests.
the Limitation of the Empire united and consolidated within the Marches of
Euphrates, Danubius, and the Western Occean: forbearing to have more care of
the most remote and disjoynted Provinces, which did not other, but teach the
Discipline militare, to barbarous Nations, who were ignorant of it: Whereupon
says Tacitus, Longa oblivio Britanniae etiam in pace, consilium id Augustus
vocavit, maxim Tiberius. Henry King of Castile, who died Anno 1217, without
Children, having two Sisters, of whom the elder had been married to Jews the
eight of France, the youngest to Alphonsus, King of Leon in Spain: The
Castilians, by public Parliament, did declare the youngest to the Crown of
Castile; albeit against their Law, yet convenient in the nature of things,
(said they) seeing Castile and Leon, were Cosines, and easily did
incorporate: they had one Language, and Manners nothing different, where-as
France was naturally divided from them by the Mounts Pirenees, of diverse
Languages, and discrepant Manners, things difficill to be united under one
King. Of Examples of this kind, the Histories be full, of Princes and States,
who stryving to possess things far removed, and dis-joyned from them, and
disconvenient in Nature, albeit their Titles to them were just, yet after many
years enjoying of the^ with much War and Trouble, they have been in end
forced to quite them, being things altogether improfitable, a^ the English of
Aquitane and Guyen, the French of Naples, the Venetians of Pisa, and some
Territories of Genua, the Germane Emperor of some Cities in Italy: of all
which they have nothing this day, but the Burials of their Predecessors: in
which respect, (to return to the purpose) I may say of the Spanyard, that it
is not all Gold, that glistereth: The Spanish Provinces, disjoin^ed members.
his great Empire is patched, of things dismembered, discommodious, and
disconvenient in Nature: he has Navarre divided by the Pirenees in part, and
naturally incorporate to the mighty Kingdom of France: he has Milan
divided by the Alps, Naples by both those, and by the Apemmie too, and both
but members of the body of Italy: Flaunders separated by interjection of
France and Switzerland; the Indees, by the great Occean; that if we shall
consider all the mightiest Monarkes, we shall find none so weak and
obnoxious in that behalf: so far, that it is more easy for France, England,
Holland, and Denmark, to put into Spain 50000 Soldiers, than for Spain it
self, to transport thither from their own Provinces 20000.

Again, Kings are set above their People, as the Sun above the Earth, and
Seas, who draws up the Moistures, wherewith he does partly feed his own
Flames, and partly converteth them in Raines* to refresh the Seas, and nowrish
the Earth: The Spanyard draws naught from his Provinces.
yet it is thought, that he beholds his Provinces oftentimes as Clouds
without Rain; he draws nothing from them, but glorious and airie Titles of
Ambition: yea, he must go search the Belly of the Earth, under another
Hemispheare, to suck the Vapors that must entertain them: for if it were not
by his Treasures of the Indees, it is judged, that he were not able to brook
them. The year of their last Pacification with Holland, I did hear into
Brusels, by some of his entire Counselors, that since the first entry of
those VVarres, he had spended of his proper Fiances, above the Rents of
Flaunders, 60 Millions. I did hear about that same time, at Naples and Milan,
by those of good intelligence in his Affairs, that his whole Revenewes there
were morgadged, and that he was greatly indebted above; and that he was
often-tymes so scarced of Moneys, that at Antwerpe, Genu^, and other Banks,
he did pay more than thirty for the hundredth: which Inconveniences do all
result from this, that his Provinces are not contiguous, nor incorporate.

And yet, it being so, we are not to vilipende our Enemies, no, even those
Provinces do bring notable increase to his Grandour; they are as the Heads or
Hearts of the Countries where they lie; The commodities of his Pro^nees.
they are most fertile, flowrishing, and rich for themselves; and upon
extraordinary Necessities, able to advance to him infinite sums of Money:
planted they are, to the full, with industrious People: They are the Seminaries
of his Milice, which do breed unto him good store of witty Counselors,
skillful Commanders, and brave Soldiers. And how-so-ever they yield nothing
to his Coffers, yet the Vice-rayes and Governors sent thither, (who commonly
are of his nearest Parentage) they do load themselves with Riches, by the
Mechanicke Tyrannies that they are permitted to exercise: and at the end of
their three years, which is the period of their Reign, they do return to
Spain, as clogged Bees, with Honey to their Hyves: which I confess to be of
as great importance and profit to him, as if those did come directly to his
own Coffers; for why? a great Monarch has not so good a Treasure, as
trafficable Countries, What is the greatest Treasure of a Prince.
and Subjects virtuous, and full of Wealth: for then do Moneys abound, and
People do serve their Prince in Offi^es of Peace, or War, with contentment
and splendour both. But if an avaritious Prince do study to collect and amasse
Ritch^s to lay in store, by too much pressing of his Subjectes, then they are
discowraged from their Trades, the Fruits where-of they are not suffered to
enjoy, Virtue decays, that should enritch the Country, and the cowrage of
Men fails, when time of War does come: So that the best Politickes that
have been, hold, that the Riches of mighty Kings, are not so much to be
esteemed, by their Ordinary Rents, as by the Extraordinary Means they have
to lift Moneys upon great necessity: of the which Means, that Prince does
rob himself, who makes his Subjects poor, to fill his Coffers. And they
do think, that as rich was Jews the twelft of France, whose yearlie Rent*
did not exceed one Million, and an half, as Francis the first, under whom it
arryved at three; or Henry the second, who doubled that, or yet the third, who
did multiply it to ten Millions. Those Provinces of Flaunders, being
courteou^^e ruled by Charles the fifth, and by his Son Philip, with more
moderation, after the return of the Duke de Alva, they are found in the
Histories to have advanced willingl^e to those two Kings, in the space of nine
Years, twentie-three Millions of Crowns, which made them to be called the
Northern Indees of the said Empire; and which they could not possibly have
done, if he had lifted gross yearlie Rents from them. So that the Prince, who
does thus tender his People, is said to have his Treasures more sure in the
custody of his Subjects, than if they were collected to his Coffers.

For as they write, hardly can Treasures be saved in the hands of Princes,
even in time of Peace, by reason of so many occasions as they embrace to
disperse them, Inconvenientes following upon the being of Treasures in the
hands of Princes.
to the splendour of their Courts, their bounty to their Favorites, public
and popular shows, employment of Ambassadors upon light causes, which perhaps
had not been taken notice of, if the Coffers had been empty, and such like:
or it may be (say they) that abundance of present Moneys does a-wake
Ambition and Pride, more than is expedient for their Prosperity, and quiet of
their People. And it is even a difficill thing of it self, to keep things
that are much desired, and of many, namely, hard to great Kings, upon whose
bounty so many greedy and importune Suitors do depend and hing; Difficilis
magni custodia census. Or if a temperate and prudent Prince, can save them from
all these, and leave them to his Successor, yet seldom do we find in the
Stories, that they have been converted to any happy use. Tiberius the
Emperor, left behind him 67 Millions, Treasures collected by great Kings,
most often unhappily spended.
and his Successor devoured them in one year. Domitian, and Antonius
Caracalla, did consume at their pleasures and riot, the Treasures of Vespasian,
and of Septimius Severus. Cyrus left 50 Millions of golden Crowns: his Enemy
did carry them: Darius left 80 Millions: Alexander the Great, did spend them.
Sardanapalus left 40 to his Enemies. Pope John the 22, did leave 33 Millions to
the avarice of his Successors, Nephews, and Favorites: Stephen, King of
Bosna, had his Skin fleede from his Body, by Mahomet the second, because he
did not employ his Treasures* to the safety of himself. David (as we find,
1. Chron. last Chap.) left behind him 120 Millions, (which was the greatest
Treasure ever heard of) not to the arbitrament or appetites of his Successor,
but by the special appointment of GOD, to the building of the Temple. Farther,
we may draw an Argument from an article of the Law of GOD, Deuteronomy. 17, Where
Kings are forbidden to multiply Silver and Gold to themselves, either for
taking away the occasions of Aggravations and Imposts on Subjects, or of
excessive Prodigality of their Courts, or Pride of moving unjust and unlawful
Wars, or to invite them to employ the superplus of their yearlie Rents, to
present works of Piety, or Charity, or advancement of the Commonwealth, one
way or other. Public Charity of Augustus.
Augustus did furnish great sums of Money to the People, without Interesse,
says Suetonius: Quoties ex damnatorum bonis pecunia superflueret, vsum ejus
gratuitum iis qui cavere in duplum possent indulsit: to those of mean and
sober estate, who were able to set Cautioners for the double of the principal.
And of the Emperor Alexander Severus, says Lampridius, Foenus publicum
trientarium exercuit, and pauperibus plerisque sine usuris pecunias dedit ad
agros emendos, ^eddendas paulatim de fructibus: that is, four for the 100, to
those of middle and reasonable estate, and to the Poor, without Interesse. And
of Antoninus Pius, Julius Capitolinus does affirm the same. So that it has
been thought by many, that Treasures reserved in the hands of Princes, be
but like Cisterns, and reserues of Water, which may be soon exhausted, by
daily taking from them, because they have no Fountain: and again, that the
same being in the hands of the People, exposed to daily Exchange and
Traffic, is like unto a running River, whose source cannot be dried up. As
Corns do not yield increase that are locked in G^rnels; but the seed
dispersed through the ground, is the thing that does multiply; so are the
Moneys dispersed in popular Trades, only fruitful.

Neither do I allege any of these, as if Kings, and specially great ones,
must not have Royal and Magnificke Rents: for it is not possible for us, who
be private Subjects, to know how many necessary occasions do daily occur
to them, Princes have many occasions, not known to Subjectes, of necessa^ie
debursments.
of great and vast Expenses; neither must we be curious for that part. That
Princes are to live with that Pomp and Dignity, which is requisite to
conserve Majesty, that we do know and see: That they must be at hudge
Charges, by sending out, and accepting in of Ambassadors, that we also see:
That they must give Pensions and Fees to Counselors, Statesmen, Noblemen,
Captains, and serviceable Gentlemen, that we see: Lyke-wise, the exorbitant
debursment which is in War. But what secret Bounty must be bestowed
through the World, amongst sure Friends, in the Courts of other Princes, by
which kind of practicing they do oftentimes best assure their Affairs, when
all men think them in greatest peril: that, and many such, we do not know,
neither must we inquire: but when after their death, the Histories of their
lives come to be devulgate, then we find and read, what these policies, of
having latent Friends abroad, have imported to the greatest Kings. Do not we
read of King Francis the first, that to Almanes, Italians, English, Spanish,
Switzers, he paid during all his lifetime, great yearly Pensions, unknown
to the world for the time? And of Jews the eleventh, who was a sort (I may
say) of Sorcerer, or Enchanter, in that kind of subtlety, to make mercinarie
the Counsels of Neighbour-Princes: so far, that there was none of them free
from his corruption: by which doing, he did render himself a Miracle to the
World, for dexterity of wit, to dissolve the strongest Leagues of his Enemies,
without the drawing of a Sword: he did pay by public paction to King Edward
the fourth of England, 50000 Crowns yearly: but with-all, secretly to his
Counselors, and Domestickes, 17000, also yearly; which (says the Writer
of the History) was the truest Means of the two, for the continuance of that
Pacification. In consideration of these necessary and weighty Charges,
Oblations of Money ancientlie made to Princes.
ancientlie Subjects were wont to give freely to their Princes, and
frequentlie a Portion of Money, that they called Oblations. Augustus did leave
behind him in Testament, eleven Millions, to be distributed amongst the
People of Rome: where-into he did subjoyne this Testimony of the mutual
benevolence of the Romans toward him, saying, that with-in few years
preceding his death, he had gotten of voluntary Donatiues, to the avail of
35000 golden Crowns. But now-a-dayes, Subjects have for borne these voluntary
Gratuities in time of public indigence to their Princes, by reason that some
avaricious Kings have preassed to convert, the same to an annual and ordinary
Duty, as Philip le Long of France, having in his ^necessities granted by his
Subjects the first impost upon the Salt, First Impost of the Salt in France, a
gratuitie temporal, but turned to be annual.
of four Denieres on the pound; with this Condition, to stand but until his
Debts were defrayed. Yet Philip de Valois there-after, did incorporate the same
to the perpetual Domaine of the Crown, saying, that there could not be a
more competent thing to come under Tollage, than Salt, where-of all sort of
People, poor and rich, young and old, had the necessary and daily use. Or
as King Philip the second, (of whom I have spoken) having of before annexed to
the Crown Patrimony, the third part of the Ecclesiastical Rents; yet for the
support of the Wars, wherewith he was greatly charged, had granted to him
by the Prelates, a certain sum of Money also of the two-part, which they
called Subsidy, on condition to stand but some few years: he also did
perpetuate the same to the Crown.

But to return to the purpose of Cases of Weakness to be found into the
Empire of Spain, we cannot think, but, to be feared of all, Another
Weakness of Spain, to be feared of all.
and hated of the greatest part, is a Weakness, if it were of the mightiest
that ever have been: Passimus custos diaturnitatis metus, says the great
Statesman Cicero, That Fear can never make diuturnitie of Greatness. And all
men know it to be true, that the Spanyard is feared of all: I prove it
shortly, by the Church of Rome, (the Jesuits excepted) he is feared
universally, to whom he is most nearlie linked of any foreign Amitis:
Ergo, much more by any other Neighbour-Prince, or State, the truth of mine
Antecedent, is showed by two famous and infallible Testimonies; one of the
History of the Counsel of Trent, where a Man shall clearlie see, how this
Fear did make the Sea Apostolic, directly to oppose the Grandour of Charles
the fifth, Cardinal (...), against (...) the second of Spain.
where-of I have already discoursed. For the second, I take me to Cardinal
Baronio, the most learned and most sincere, that has been amongst them in
these late Ages, in his Treatise written against the Spanish usurpation of the
Kingdom of Sicile, where he writes thus of Philip the second, in whose days
he lived, in one place, Sub vocabulo (inquit) Monarchiae, praeter vnum
Monarcham, quod vn^m visibile caput Ecclesiae est cognitum, aliud in Monarchia
Siciliae obortum, pro monstro and ostento caput Ecclesiae: that is to say,
Above one Monarch over Sicilia, who is the only one visible head of the
Church, having right unto it, there is risen an other monstrous head and
Monarch of the same. And in another place there-after, Ista sunt quae manus
audax, ad sacrilegium prompt^, abstulit, a recitato Papae diplomate: Those
things have that bad and bolde-hand, ready to sacrilege rest from the Papal
Title. This Cardinal had an offer of the Papal Diadem, made him from Philip
the second, if he would call in this opinion; but did refuse it, preferring
his Conscience to whatso-ever Palinodie. Next, unto the Pope, the nearest
Neighbor allied to him, is the French King, his Brother in Law, of whose
daily Fears, and Iealousies of the Spanish Ambition, I were idle to treat
here, it being so well remarked of the World.

Since it is so with his most entire Confederates, I need not, neither I hope
to call it in question, whether the other Potentates, and States of
Christendom, do much more fear him. Therefore, leaving those, I come to try
what probably is the disposition of his own People toward him. The Portugals
do hate the Castilians.
Portugal is of all his things in Spain, of greatest importance, betwixt
whom and the Castilians, there has been from all Antiquity, not only
Neighbor Emulation, but inveterate malice, and as it were, a fundamental and
natural Antipathie of minds and manners, as their own Histories do
confess. The heat where-of, no doubt, must be greatly increased by this
Castilian Tyranny, so lately and vnlawfulie thrown upon them. There be yet
many alive there, who did spend their Blood, to have withstood that Castilian
pride. It is an ordinary speech of the Portugals, The origin of the
Portugals, and (...).
to say, That the Castilians be worse th^n the Moors, who did first inhabit
Castile. The Portugals are said to be descended of the Gauls, their language
approaching unto the Latin. The Castilianes again of the Vandales, Jews, and
Moors, their accent annearing to the Morasque; where-of it is said, that the
Castilians being amongst the Turks, are easily induced to deny the Christian
Faith. And in this point appears to be a noteable Weakness of that Empire:
Portugal accoasting to the Sea, so opportune and commodious for great Navies,
the People many, and malicious against their Conquerers, and having their
Sores yet open and quick.

To come to their other Subjects, we hear that the Arragonees have their
Minds in like sort wounded, with the remembrance of the late Conquest made of
them, The whole (...) of Spain, do hate their Prince his greatness, and why
they do so.
and to speak generally, of all the Nobility of Spain; yea, even of those
of Castile it self. It has been ever so, that as Thieues have been studious
to provide Backe-Doores, so great Noblemen under Kings, in all Ages have
wished, that some adjacent Prince might be in Terms of Emulation with their
Master, to whose protection they might have recourse, in Case at any time they
should happen to fall under their Masters wrath, by their Ambitious and
insolent carriage: things familiar eneugh to potent Subjects in every
Country. Now Spain, being as it is at this day, conjoined under one Crown,
in manner of an Yland, where-fra the Princes and Lords thereof, cannot easily
withdraw themselves in such a Case, they are by that means brought under
greater Fear, Slaverie, and Subjection. When there were several Kingdoms in
Navarre, Arrogone, and Portugal, the Castilian Nobles upon any distraction,
It is not so easy for our Noble men to rebel now, as before our Conjunction
with England
or variance with their King, did find easy retract and protection, with some
of these Neighbour-Princes, perhaps with more Honor, and Preferments than at
home, by reason of Neighbor Iealousies and Contention, the examples where-of,
are most frequent in any History: as in our own, we find, that before the
union of Great Britane, it was more easy and secure for Scottish Noblemen, to
offend their Princes, and leap out from their obedience, having so near a
Sanctuary, in the Hospitality and Arms of England, by reason of Neighbor
Distractions, than it is now, when their nearest refuge should be Spain, or
Flanders. And as ancientlie that advantage did often a-wake the Pride of our
great Men, and give way to Rebellion, against their Kings: So the solid
Incorporation that now is, has put a Bridle into the Teeth of that kind of
Ambition, that no stir can be here to trouble a King, unless it were, by
general revolt of the whole Country, or receiving of Foreign Arms with-in
our Bowels, and joining with them. And as the supposed proud and tyrannous
Governament of Spain, is thought to enstrange the Hearts of their Nobility
from their King, and to make them more practizable to rebellions, if they
should see the occasion fair; so there is no doubt, but dure and rigorous
Governament, should even in this Kingdom, or any other else, produce the like
Consequences. Al-wayes, the Nobility of Spain, at this day, does want this
Sanctuary of Refuge, that the skurviest Marshall is able to arrest the
greatest of them: and now with much grief they do resent the effects of
that, which was prognosticated unto them, when King Charles the fifth began to
extend the Wings of his Domination; for the which cause they did show
themselves notably displeased with the conjunction of Portugal, as Don
Francisco de Ivara, a noble man of Castile, being Ambassador at Paris, during
the League, Anno 1579, hearing by a French Gentleman, newly come from
Afric, that the Moors were in fear, having intelligence that King Philip
did put together great Forces, for to conquer them, under pretext to revenge
the slaughter of Don Sebastian, King of Portugal. A clear Testimony thereof.
(for so did Philip make the World believe, when he did conveane his Armies
against Portugal) But the said Francis did answer this Gentleman, saying,
It is well, that the Moors be in fear, but it is better that your Master,
the King of France understand the intention of that Army, to be against
Portugal; which if he do conquer, your Master, and the Pope, and all the
Princes of Europe may lay count, by length of time, to be his Tributaries.
Which speech does well enough demonstrate the averseness of the Spanish
Nobility, from the fearful Greatness of his Empire. The State Ecclesiasticke
indeed does more affect him, yet I have told you, that he does skumme the
Fat of their P^t: but of this Weakness, which we gather, of discontented
humors of their Nobility, there is no advantage to be gained by secret
Practices, because of the terror of the Inquisition. His Jesuits, and
perfidious Ambassadors, get liberty with other Princes, to traffic and to
traitor at their pleasure; whereof we have late experiences to our own
Coasts, but none dare adventure that kind of doing in Spain. Al-wayes, out
of those it may be surely enough presumed of the Nobility, (namely, of
their late Conquests of Spain) that when they should see a puissant Enemy
amongst them, the Fire of their indignation should break forth so much more
violently, by how much it has been long and masterfullie suppressed amongst
the Ashes of their Servitude, says Scip. African. in that Oration to the
Senate, for sending of Forces in Afric, during Hanniballes being in Italy,
Non speraverat Hanniball fore, ut tot populi in Italia ad se deficerent, post
Cannensem dedem, quanto minus quicquam in Africa firmum a^ stabile sit
Carthaginensibus, infidis sotiis, gravibus dominis? Hanniball did not look for
so great revolting of People with-in Italy, from the honest and generous
Romans, after his victory at Cannas: how much less can things be firm and
sure in Afric, to the Carthagenians, a Nation treacherous, and untrusty to
their Associates, and tyrannous to their Subjects? which Saying how properly
it may be applied to the present Purpose, any man does see it.

Next, it is thought, that there be small store of Arms in Spain, A (...)
supposed in Spain, for (...) of Arms, and how it is so.
the numbers of Cities and People considered; partly because they go for the
furnishing of his Wars abroad, and partly because it is not thought
expedient by his Counsel, that Multitudes but lately conquered, whose Minds
are yet suspected, should be armed at their pleasure: remembering well what
had almost befallen KING PHILIP the third, if the Moors, called N^vos
Christianos, (who then had a near Design against him) had not been
suddenly disarmed, and cast forth of the Country.

Moreover, the proud and tyrannous nature of the Spanyard, Their natural
Pride, a great Weakness.
is no small point of Weakness: for why? the LORD GOD does humble the Proud,
and punish the Oppressor* Tolluntur in altum ut lapsum graviora cad^nt. I do
not only speak of that dominant and Monarchical Pride, mayntayned by so
many Cruelties, Perfidies, and Impieties bore-saide; but universally of the
very vulgar pride, chiefelie of the Castilians. Even as the fumes of strong
Wine, do inebtiate, and make gidd^e the Brains of Man, transporting them from
the center of their place; so does Pride blind and confuse the Understanding:
(and as seldom Prudence does accompany Youth-head) Even so is Wisdom
rarely conjoined with too much Prosperity. Neither shall it be out of
purpose to speak a few words of the Spanish Nature in general. They are
extremely melancholious, Vi^e Description of the Spanish H^mour.
which every ^ot of their carriage does verify, their grave Apparel, their
sober Diet, their Dancing, their Music, their hunting of Bulls, their
personal March, their austere Phisnomie, obscure Color, vnpopular
presentation; where-of every thing is disgustfull to M^n of other Nations.
Melancholy is a tenacious and vis^uous humor, where-from proceeds their
slow and lingering Deliberations, the longsomnesse of their Actions, their
constant Prosecution of their Enterpryses, their obstinate adhering to ancient
Customs, abhorring imitation of Foreign Manners, their Superstition in
Religion, their silence from Discourse, and reservednesse from Conversation;
which indeed do make them, being contemplative, more capable of solid
Knowledge. The Spanish Punctualitie approaches to Nullitie.
They go here and there, through Neighbor-countries, but never procure
familiarity of friendship with any Man: yea, there is small interchange of
Kindness or Courtesy amongst themselves, because, attour being thus
concentricke and contracted with-in themselves, they do make profession of
Punctualitie, which is contrary to Friendship, that in its own nature is open
and communicable, liberal of Discourse and Complements, and of steadable
Actions, things opposed to those who stand upon points, measure their Paces,
and number their Words, fearing to peril their Reputation for a Syllabe more
or less; as if they durst not adventure to go without the Confines of their
Melanch^lie: where-as by any experience, one would think, that Punctualitie
is not only Enemy to Friendship, but contrary to great Actions, De^cription
of Punctualiti^.
because what convenience can be betwixt Greatness, and that which is small?
a point (as every Man knows) does very nearlie approach to nothing, and
Punctualitie, to Nullitie. Therefore is it, that he who stands upon points
in Businesses, oftentimes attaineth nothing; which, men say, A quick
observation, for Punctualitie.
was the chief reason of their bad Successes against England, and Algiers,
where the Designs of their Enterpryses were founded upon such Subtilties,
Moments, and points of time, as was not possible for any General to observe,
except him who could control Time, and make the Sun fixed, as to Joshua, or
retrograde, as it was unto Ezechias.

Lastly, The Navar^oies do hate the Spanyard.
to come without the Confines of Spain, to consider what trust they have with
their next Neighbors, if men of experience should enter to dispute, on what
side it were most advantageous for Enemie-Forces to enter upon Spain, one
might ^ay, that even Navarre were not unfit, al-be-it it be unlawfully
possessed by them, yet those are the natural Subjects of the French King, and
there should be found at this day, the Grandchildren of them who did lose
their Lives and Goods in the service of his Predecessors, And the French too.
against the tyranny of Spain, and who themselves would undergo willingly
the like, to have him restored to be their King. Adjacent to Navarre, are the
Countries of France, whose bravest Men do even now carry into their Faces,
the honorable Seat, and Marks of the bloody Wounds which they did
courageously sustain, when the Spanyard did employ all his Forces to
extinguish the glory of that Nation. We need go no farther, for if we
should travel to the Worlds end, we shall never arryue there, where they are
not either feared, or hated, or both.

Now, since so it is, that this Catholic Ambition aims over all, every Man
sees that it does require a strong Opposition, the Means where-of, and
easiest Possibilities, The Pride of Spain, to be opposed by War.
is not an unfit Contemplation for us of this Isle, who for the present seem to
be most threatened by the same. It cannot be opposed, but by Wars: and these
are not to be wished. Al-be-it GOD and Nature have their good ends in Wars,
as GOD to purge the Sins wherewith a Land is defiled, and chiefly of the
Gentry, by Pride, Oppression, and Lust: and Nature again, to cut, as it were,
and crop the over-grouth of the Civil State, when People do multiply above
the proportion of the Countries means* yet we are not to desire Wars, but
rather wish the sending out of Multitudes to Neighbour-Warres; or by
transportation of Colonies, where we can find any possibility to plant
them* which is the most laudable and lawful Means of the two, Colon^es.
for the disburdening of populous Countries; because Wars are never without
too much Cruelty, and effusion of innocent Blood: yea, even where the
Pretenses, and Claymes of Princes and States seem to be most just, the gross
of their Armies are brought to the Shambles, and innocentlie murdered; at
least, they are guiltless of the Ambition which did move the War, al-be-it
it pleased GOD to punish them that way, for other Sins, and to purge the Land
therefrom: But by transportation of Colonies, GOD did people the Earth, as the
sacred History shows: Nature does the same; for are we not all of this
Occidentall World descended of the Trojan, Egyptian, or other Foreign
Colontes? Nature has imprinted this Politic Instinct into Beasts: when the
Eagle has taught her young ones to fly, and catch their Prey, she does no
more admit them to her Nest, but dryveth them away: and if she find any one
laysie, and unwilling to labor for it self, she kills it. The Bees
constrain their brood, when they once can fly abroad, to seek new
Habitationes. All well-governed States have followed the same, there being no
surer Rule in Policy, than the imitation of Nature, which things I need not
here to discourse, being of daily practice in the World, so notorious in
Histories, and lately so well set down, by a virtuous and worthy Gentleman
of our Country, Sir William Al^xander, now Secretary for Scotland, Plantatio^
of Nova Scotia.
in his Treatise for Plantation of Nova Scotia; of which Enterpryze, and of all
such like, I must say thus far, that they are not only virtuous, and noble,
but in a degree heroicke, above ordinary Virtue, and Nobility: and for this
Assertion, I give my reason thus; GOD did frame the World to the end, that by
length of time it might be peopled, and that no corner thereof might be
empty of holy Altars, Priests, and People, to celebrate His Worship: So that
he that puts his Hands to such Works, for plantation of Countries
disinhabited or desarted, he does second the first Intentions of GOD toward
the World, and does puisse the course of Nature, so far as in him lies, to
her destinate perfection: and al-be-it this brave Enterpryze of the fore-saide
Gentleman, be somewhat with-stood, by that unlucky Genius of our Nation,
ever esteemed to be averse from such public Virtues, witnessed by many
particulars in our Days, namely, by the bad success of the late Iron Works,
long gone about by inexhaustable pains of another great spirit amongst us; and
falling in the end, for want of concurrance: Not-the-lesse, let not Virtue
want her due, to be honored of Men, Sat magnum est voluisse magna: and seeing
no Nation has greater cause than we, to try the Fortune of Transplantation,
let us be a little ashamed to be so contrary to this Design of Nova Scotia,
that we do not only refuse to embarke our selves into it, but we seem to
have an heart-sore, that His Majesty should confer the marks of Honor on
such as do join thereunto; while as we cannot deny him to have the more high
and noble Mind, who does it, than he who refuses, by as far as Hope is
more heroicke than Despare. Rome was not builded in one day, and many glorious
works have been founded upon doubtful and difficill beginnings: although
many of us do hold it an idle Project, yet understanding Men have seen and
contemplate the Country, who intend to return and remain there-in,
certain, it is more idle, and more vnreverend with-all, to think, that GOD
has placed a Region under a degree so temperate, which he will not suffer to
be peopled by time. Al-be-it Men have often builded Houses, and never dwelt
into them, much less have plenished them; it is not so with GOD, whose ends
are infallible. For my part, I do hold, that that insearchable Wisdom has
framed no part of this whole Globe, which is not capable of Man, and sufficient
for the mayntaynance of his Life.

But as touching the nature and condition of War, Incommodities, and Evils
following on VVarr^.
such are the Distresses that come by Wars, that even the best Fortunes of
the Victors do seldom contrapoyse them: In pace causas and merita spectari,
ubi bellum ingruat innocents ac impios juxta cadere, says one. What War
was there ever in the World, which was not damnable, for desolation of Cities,
exterminion of noble Houses, spoil of poor People, rape of Women, violation
of Churches, and of Holy Things? And happy is that Warrior, whose Sword has
not been defiled with Christian Blood. Augustus, that mighty Emperor, did
abhor War, and adore Peace: his Successor Tiberius, did arrogate to him,
as the greatest of all his Glories, when he had pacified any Tumult, rather
by practicing, than by War. The Emperor Adrian, did compare Peace to Argent
Content, and his Forces were most strong, and when he could quyer his
bordering Nations with peaceable ways: jactabat palam (says Aurelius
Victor) plus se ocio adeptum quam armis caeteros: he bragged openly, that he
had done more in Peace, and Quietness, then his Neighbors had by Arms.

I know farther, that when GOD has brought a State to a sort of Maturitie, and
Perfection, When a Kingdom is i^perfection, then be aware of Wars.
that it is, as compacted and limited naturally; as presently is this
Monarchy of GREAT BRITANE, consolidate with-in it self, and confyned with-in
the Occean, that then it is good, to fear the instabilitie of things. And
seeing what-so-ever thing is under the Moon, yea, the Moon it self, is
subject to ordinary changes; It must be an heroicke, and more than an humane,
yea, a divine work, the mayntayning of great Kingdoms to great length of
time: and this is not done, Great B^itane already a perfect Monarchy.
but by a prudent wariness and moderation, when States are once come to a
maturitie for reasonable greatness, or for Antiquity, as this Kingdom (I say
again) of Great Britane. It is written of Scipio, that when he had ruinated
Carthage, and destroyed Numantia, Wisdom, and Moderation of Scipio (...).
the two Competitors, and Emulators of Rome, then he did not so much wish the
farther increase, as the continuation of the Roman State: So far, that
being himself Censor a while there-after, and making the Lustrum, at the
pubilcke Sacrifice, the Master of their religious Ceremonies, according to
their form, he prayed for the daily growing of their Empire. Scipio did
correct and change the Style of that Invocation: Satis inquit bonae ac magnae
sunt res Romanae, itaque Deos precor vt eas perpetuo incolumes servent, ac
protinus in publicis tabulis ad hunc modum carmen emendari voluit, says the
History: He would have the Gods to be invocated only for the continuation of
the Empire, because it was already great enough: and he would have that
Phrase of Prayer to remain there-after in the Books public of their
Priests. In which case, I say, it were madness for us of this Isle to cry for
VVarres, out of Pride, Foreign (...) f^uitlesse for our Princes.
or for extention of Empire. The mightiest Kings of England (as I have before
touched) did find their Forraigue, Ambition but troublesome and fruitless,
that after the possession of many Ages, they were contented to quy^e the
things that they and their Predecessors had lawfully, justly, and long
brooked in France.

But now it is one thing to wish War, and another thing to embrace tymouslie
a most necessary and inevitable War. The definition of a just War.
Omne bellum necessarium est justum, said that Captain of the Volsques, in
Livius, when the Romans had determined to conquer his Country. And no Man can
deny it that War which is necessary, is just; because we defyne
necessary, that which can be no other-wyse. The Volsques behooved to quyte
their Countries Liberty, Our War against Spain just, in three maine
respects.
or fight with the Romans. Again, that War which is moved to procure
Peace, and is defensive, it is a just War: GOD and Nature do warrant that.
So, I say, for ought I see, we are to embrace a War most just in all these
three Respects; and I show it by this Argument: To do that which may stop the
coming against our Country, a mighty Enemy, whose design to conquer us is
hereditarie to him; it is both necessary, defensive, and tends to purchase
Peace: But to make War to such an Enemy, within some part of his own
Dominions, is to impeach and stop his coming: Ergo, the mooving of War
against him, is just, defensive, and tends to procure Peace. The Major of
this Syllogism is so clear, that it needs no probation: the light of Reason
does show it. The Minor is verified by the ordinary experience of all Ages
gone, and Histories be full of Examples of the same, where-of I will allege,
for Brevities cause, but three or four, of the most famous, and most
frequentlie cited by every Man, upon this kind of Theme: The noble Yland of
Sicilia, seated betwixt Rome and Carthage, (the two mighty Emulators for the
Empire of the World) was long stryven for, and oftentimes assaulted by them
both, as a thing that would downe-swey the Balance of their Emulation, and
draw after it universality of Dominion. Amongst others, Agathocles, King
thereof, being hardly besiedged with-in his Town of Syracuse, by the
Carthagenians, he did closely convoy himself forth, and went with an Army
into Afric: by means where-of, they were forced to lift the Siedge, and
turn home for defense of their own Country. Which exploit Scipio Afri^. did
object in these Terms to Fabius Maxintus, who went about in the Senate, to
hinder the sending of an Army with Scipio against Carthage, during Hanniball
his being in Italy: Livius dec. 3. lib. 8.
Car ergo Agathoc^e^^ Sy^^. regem (...) Sicilia punico bello vexaretur,
transgressum in hanc eandem Africam avertisse eo bell^^n, vnde venerat, non
rofers. There-after the Romans perceiving that Amilcar, the Father of
Hanniball, was likely to adjoyne Sicile to Carthage: therefore, to prevent
that a conquering People should not spread over their Arms to Italy, they
resolved to make War with them in Sicil^a it self. From the same ground,
the Carthag^nian^, after the fulling of Sicile, into the hands of the Romans,
fearing lyke-wyse their coming into Afric, they did send Hanniball, with
strong Forces into Italy, to keep them at home: where-of says the same
Scipio, in the same place and to the same purpose, Sed quid veteribus
externisque exemplis opus est majus praesentiusque ^llum esse exemplum quant
Hanniball potest. From the same ground, yet the Romans, by sending of Scipio
to make War in Afric, made Hanniball constrainedlie to be called out of
Italy; Quasi eodem telo saepius retorto, (says one) as by a natural,
necessary, and ordinary mean, for keeping of any State peaceable, and free
from Enemie-Invasion, namely, of the weaker, from the more mighty.

For even in like manner, when the great Persian Monarchs did often afflict the
weak and dismembered Estates of Greece, Ag^silaus, ^ poor King went against
the Persian Empire.
gaping at length after the conquest of all, Agesilaus, King of Lacedemon
pitying his Countries Calamit^e, and to divert those mighty Kings from
Greece, he did put himself with a maine Army into the midst of Persia, where
he did so daunt the pride of Xerxes, that it behooved him to practice the same
Policy, for Liberation of his Kingdoms, from Foreign Powers, he sent 10000
great pieces of Gold, bearing the Image of an Archer: on the one side (the
current Stamp then of his Coin) to corrupt (as it did) the Orators of Athens
and Thebes, and concitate the People, to make War to Lacedemon, in absence of
their King, and Countries Forces: whereupon the Ephorie were compelled to
recall Agesilaus, (...)
who in his returning, said, that 10000 Persian Arcbers had chased him out of
Asia.

Again, of the like practice to this of Xerxes, with Athens and Thebes, for
mooving and keeping of Wars in Enemie-Countreyes, that we may remain within
our selves free from their Invasion, we read in the Histories of Scotland,
that the renowned Prince, Charles Magne, having an holy and Christian
Resolution, to prosecure (as he did) Wars against the Barbarians: and
finding the English begun in their prosperity, to cross the Seas, and to
molest the Borders of his Kingdom of France, he sent Ambassadors to Aebains,
King of Scotland, to negotiate with him a perpetual League, in these Terms,
that when-so-ever the English should molest either of their Countries, the
other should move War to England, and so constrain them to call home their
Armies. Which (after great Controversies of Opinions amongst the Scottish
Nobility, and frequent Orations of the French Ambassadors) was finally
concluded, and stood to, by their Successors, in all time following; with
often mutual Advantages against their Common Enemy. For late Examples, I have
already told you, how King Philip made Wars in France, and intended against
England, and that to the end they should retire their Forces from Portugal:
Hanniball did ever affirm, namely to King Antiochus, that it was impossible
to vanquish the Romans, but at home in Italy, as the same Livius does
testify.

Now I think ye will come to the Hypothesis, and put me to prove, How the
Spanyard is proved to be our Enemy.
that the Spanyard is that mighty Enemy, who intends to trouble this
Kingdom. That he is mighty a great deal above that, which we would wish, I
have already showed, and that he is our Enemy, not only by actions
intended, or projected, but diverslie already attempted, these are the
Circumstances, which do qualify it: First he is Enemy to all Christian
States, by the universality of his Ambition: Ergo, also to us; Secondly, his
Grandsire, Philip the second, did once obtain a matrimonial right to the
Crown of England, by his marriage with Queen Marie. Thirdly, and a Papal
right, by excommunication of Queen Elizabeth. Fourthlie, he did set forth a
great Armada, to have reconquered it, as is before rehearsed. Fyftlie, he has
ever since, and as I think, does yet maintain with-in it, a claudestine
Traffic of Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, to alienate the Hearts of
Subjects from their natural King, or to keep them vmbragious, and suspended
in minds, until his better occasion. And I do think, that besides Ambition
puissing him thereunto, there be no Neighbour-States that he so much
fears, by reason of their strong and skillful Navigation, as ye will hear
heere-after more particularly. But this King that now is in Spain, has
proceeded farther: he has reft, and taken away, the whole estate of the
Palatine, who is Brother-in-law to His Majesty, our Sovereign: and by that
deed, has made this War to be defensive to us: Non enim nobis solum nati,
etc. We are not only borne to our selves, but our Prince, our Parents, our
Children, our Friends, Commonwealth; and Religion: every of these have their
own part and interesse in us, and all these together do concur to move us
to so just a War: so far, that if that Prince Palatine were not linked to us
by so near Alliance, and by communion of one Faith; yet, Tum tua res agitur
paries dum proximus ardet, the propulsion of a fearful Enemy approaching
nearer to our Coasts, and seeking to do mineire over all, is sufficient enough
to make all the brave Hearts of Christendom to boil: Besides these, he has
put upon us intolerable Indignities, in a very high degree: he has made us,
by false, and persidious Promises, to be as indifferent beholders of his
conquest of the Pal^tinate: yea, more, to facilitate his engresse there-to, he
has made us to seek Peace, perhaps, to have been accepted upon
disadvantagious Conditions, and has refused the same. And he who refuses
Peace, by necessary consequence, does intend War. The marriage of our
King, has been agitated by him, and illuded: and he who does contain so
near friendship of Neighbors, appearinglie intends to be their Superior.
And so he has left us no hope of Peace, but in Arms: therefore we may
conclude with that Captain of the Volsques, of whom I spoke before, Iustum est
Bellum, quibus est necessarium: and pia Arma, quibus nulla nis^ (...) Armi^
relinquitur spes: Their War is just, whose War is necessary, and their
Arms bolie, to whom there is no hope relinquished but in Arms.

Since then I hold it granted, that of necessity there must be Wars, How
Scotland is furnished of Men for War.
it follows to consider the Forces to be employed there-to, and those must
either be properly our own, or of conjoined Confederates. We are bred into,
and do inhabit, a Northern Region, naturally generatiue of great
Multitudes, of more bellicole kind, and of more robust Bodies, than those of
the Southern Climates: And al-be-it we have for the first face, but small
opinion of our vulgar sort, because an hard condition of living has somewhat
dejected their Hearts, during these late unfruitful Years: yet there be
many strong Persons of Men amongst them, who pressed for the Milice, and once
made acquainted therewith, and being fred from the Poverty and Baseness of
their carriage, they will more gladly follow the Wars, than the Plough. We
have numbers of brave Gentlemen, wanting virtuous Employments, and, for the
most part, necessary Means. We read in our Country Annals, how our
ancient Kings did lose in Battles, yea, and frequent Battles, ten, or twenty,
or thirty thousand Men, when Scotland was not so populous. What should we
then doubt, nor we be able now to make great numbers? and that is alwyse
easily tried, by Rolls of Weapon-showes, if they be diligently noted: and
so what do we lack of War, but Armor, Discipline and Mayntaynance?

And certainly, it is strange, that in this great appearance of Wars,
Neglect of military Discipline.
the two or three years bygone, no order has been given, to bring able men
under Discipline. We hear, and have read, that even in Spain, when the
Countrey-Youthes of vulgar kind are in-rolled for the Milice, and brought to
Cities for Discipline, they do look as most vile and abject Slaves: if one
have Sockes, he wants Shoes; and many do want both: if another have
Breaches, he wants the Doublet: pitiful Bodies, and our of countenance: but
when they be exercised during two Months, and once put into Apparel, then
they are seen of most haughty Carriage, and to walk as Captains in the
Streets. Why then are we not to expect the like of our People, if like pains
were taken? and if in every Shyre (...) Men expert in the Souldierie were set
a-worke to in-roll, and bring under Capt^ines, and Discipline, those who were
most fitting for the Wars, no doubt but our basest Clownes should grow both
to civil conversation and cowrage. There has never been yet any great State
careless of the Military Seminaries, not in times of most solemn and sworn
Peace.

As for Alliance, Leagues, or Confederacio in Wars, Thenature of Leagues and
Consederacies.
they are indeed not only necessary, but as I have said before, even
natural to be, for the safety of smaller States, or Princes, from the
tyranny and violence of the mightier: But with-all, they have been
oftentimes subject to one of two great Inconveniences, either to Pride, for
Preferment, or Prioritie of place during Wars: where-thorow what dangers did
ensue in that famous Confederacy for the Battle of Lepanto, Confe^ for the
Battle of Lapanto.
because of emulation betwixt Don John de Austria, and Vinieri, the Admiral of
Venice, the Story does bear it at length: and al-be-it it pleased GOD in His
mercy, to favor the present action, yet the rememberance of that
Contestation, did debrash all farther prosecution of that glorious and holy
Enterprise, and utterly dissolve that Christian Union. Neither is it a new
thing, al-though I bring this late Example for it: The Romans in their
beginnings, being confederate with the Latins, in a League offensive, and
defensive, the Latins did challange Paritie of Government: Si societas
aequa^io juris est (says Livius) cur non omnia aequantur, cur non alter ab
Latinis Consul datur, vbi pars vivium, ibi and imperij pars? Tum consul Rom*
Confed. of the Romans and (...).
audi Jupiter baec scelera, perigrinos Consules, etc. If society be an
equality of things, Why are not all things made equal to us? and why should
not one of the two Consuls be a Latin? Whereunto the Romans did answer, by
attesting Jupiter, that it was an impious demand, to have a stranger
Consullover them. Or again, Leagues are subject to fraudfull desertion of some
of the Sociation, in time of greatest Danger: Whereof the World is full of
daily experience. Confed. betwixt Car^es the eight of France, and the Duke of
Milan.
I will remember that of Lodowicke Duke of Milan* who upon malice against the
Aragones of Naples, did procure King Charles the eight of France, (pretending
some Title to Naples) to bring a great Army into Italy, and joined with him,
a Confederacy of diverse of his Friends in Italy: But seeing the said King, to
pass through so fortunately, and to behave himself as a Conqueror in many
of their Towns, and to enter peaceably in Naples, without that any Teeth
were showed against him, as the King returned from Naples home-ward, the same
Duke did negoti^te a League of the greatest Pote^tates against him, who did
constrayne him to fight a Battle at Forum Novum, under the Apennine, where he
did hardly escape with his life, although he over-threwe them. I have told
you already, how Philip the second of Spain did desert Don Sebastian of
Portugal, and betray him by a League: but of all Examples for this Purpose,
that is most remarkable, of the Confederacy drawn by Charles of Burgundy,
with the whole Princes of France, against Lewis the eleventh; Confederacy
against Lewis the eleventh of France.
whereunto they were so bended, and willing, that they did call it, Bellum pro
Rep. A War vnder-gone for the Commonwealth. Which Confederacy, that subtle
King did dissolve, as Clouds dispersed with the Wind, before they could grow to
Rain: whereupon, says the Writer of the History, De Comines, That he
holds one party stronger for himself, who does command absolutely over
10000, than are ten Confederates against him, al-be-it every of them does
command over 6000.

To come to our Purpose: Leagues, or Confederacies of Salt.
There are as many Christian Princes, and States, true Enemies to the
Spanyard, as are able to devour him, in two or three Years, if it were
possible to contract amongst them a Confederacy, or League of Salt: that is to
say, which might endure without Corruption, of Fraud, or Emulation.
Deliberation for War, the weightiest matter belonging to a King.
And therefore here must I say, that all the Actions belonging to a King, are
of light importance, compared to this, to maturelie deliberate both of his own
Forces, and of the trustiness of Confederates, before he do enterpryze
VVare. Alwyse, when we take but a single view of our Associates against
Spain, we should think it strange, why they may not stand united, being
al-readie conjoined, by Vi^initie of Neighborhood, by Consanguinitie,
Affinity, communion of one Cause, against a Common Enemy, communion of one
Faith: Confederates against Spain.
connected, I say, every one of them, by diverse of these Bands, our
Sovereign, the King of Great Britane, the French King, his Brother-in-law, the
King of Denmark, his Uncle, the Princes of Germany, all knit to the Prince
Palatine, either in Blood, in Religion, or participation of one Fear of the
House of Austria: the Duke of Savoy, who lies nearest to the Thunders and
Threats of Spain, having a great part of his Territories circumscribed by
them: the Venetians, who behold his Garrisons daily upon their Frontiers,
gaping for some good opportunity of Assault; Holland, and her Estates, who have
been so long protected, and as it were, fostered in the Bosom of the Crown
of England: now, who would not conjecture, that this Tigers VVhelpe might be
surely impailed amidst those mighty Hunters? and that it were easy for them
to bring him to his latter sweat. I scorn here to call in question, what
invincible Armies they might assemble by Sea and Land, sufficient to rob him
of all that he has: for it is thought, that if after the taking in of
Portugal, England, France, Holland, and other Confederates, had then put into
it amongst them all, but 30000 Men, with sufficient Shipping, and Munition,
they had been bastant to recover it, and King Philip had been forced to
forbear from the farther troubling of France or Holland.

And yet to treat this Point of so great Consequence, with Candor and
Sincerity, Whether small, or gross Armies to be sent to Enemy Countries.
I find, that Men of great experience for War, do hold opinion contrary
to this, being of the mind of King Francis the first, who said, that
longsome VVarres, and small Armies, served rather to exercise Men in the Arts
Military, than to daunt the Enemy: and that without gross Armies, and quick
dispatch, it was not possible to compass great Enterpryses: saying with-all,
that the Maintenance of small Armies, and longsome VVarres, was much more
chargeable than the other. They tell us, that the Empire of the Turk begins
to decline for his Pretermission of two things, which his Predecessors did
observe and follow: One, that he goes not in person, to be over his Armies,
as they did: another, that they are not so numerous and gross as they had
them, and that light exploits, and often leading of small Armies to and froe,
does but teach the Milice to his Enemies, and spoil his own Countries,
through which his Soldiers so frequentlie do pass. Where-of they give us
this Example: Amurat the third, The longsome Wars of Amurat the third,
improfitable.
kept under the commandment of his Bussaes, a lingering War, of more than
twelve Years, employing not very great Armies against the Persian, vvhere-by,
al-be-it he conquered great parts of his Countries, yet were his Losses
known to be greater, because he spended the Flower of his Forces, of young
Soldiers, and lusty Horses, 200000 Horses, and more than 500000 Men, from
the beginning to the end, and made desolate the Countries that he took in:
so far, that Osman Bassa alone (besides what was done by others) did cast to
the ground, and burn, 100000 Houses, besides that the Persians, their Enemies,
during that great length of time, did become more skillful Warriors than
themselves. The Spanish Wars against Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, have
wrought the same Effects. Agesilaus, King of Lacedemonia, in his longsome
Wars against the Thebaus, having one day received a dangerous Blow in his
Person, was told by one of his Friends, that he deserved well to have it,
because he had taught his Enemies to be good Soldiers.

I confess indeed, that in this point of teaching the Art Military to
Enemies, we can lose nothing, being rather to learn from them: but whether
the employing of small or grosie Armies against them, shall be most hurtful
to them, before we say to that, ^ prudent Prince will not manage Wars
within, but without his Countries.
we must consider what parts of his Dominions do lie most open for our
Invasion, and most easily and profitablie brooked: for I take it also as
granted, that as there must be Wars, so they must be without our Country,
and into that of the Enemy. Never an active Prince was known to look on,
until the Enemy should be seen with-in his Bowels. There be thousands of
Examples of Ignorants, who by so doing have cast away their Kingdom from
themselves. Antiochus, Persius, Iuba Ptolome the last of Egypt, Darius, some
of the French Kings, as King John, taken vvith-in his own Countries, by
Edward, the Black Prince of England: And for this cause, Philip of France,
called the Conqueror, understanding that the Emperor, Otho the second, and the
King of England, were to assault his Kingdom, he fortified sundry strong
places, and led his Army without the Frontiers, where he did combat, and
defeat them. We read in our Scottish Histories, how frequentlie Armies have
been convoyed beyond our Marches, to find the Enemy, before he should enter
amongst us. So long as a Country is free from open Hostility, as long it
does not feel extreme Calamity; says Scipi^ Afric. for putting of Armies
into Afric, Plus animi est inferenti periculum quam propulsanti, ad hoc major
ignotarum rerum est terror, etc. The Assaulters of any Country must have
greater cowrage than the Defendants, who having mo^ things, and more dear, in
peril their Houses, their Rit^^es, Wives, and Children, are more taken with
fear: besides, being with-in the Enemies Country, ye do discover all his
weaknesses, whylst your strength and possibilities, the more they be unknown
to him, they do the more increase his terror.

But to speak of places in general, most proper for this War, there is
none more honorable than the Palatinate, Palatinate, the most honorable place
of this War.
(al-be-it most difficill to come unto, by reason of remoteness from the Sea:)
without the restitution where-of, there can remain no credit with the parties
and Princes of the League. I heard a Scottish Captain of good experience in
those Countries, lately say to me, that it was impossible to recover the
Palatinate, but by Sea Advantages over the Spanyard, because it was so far
remooved from Friends; and I did ask him, how the late Prince of Parma did
lead 10000 Men to Paris, in the Teeth of a mighty King, amidst his Armies?
he answered me, that those were carried as in Trenches, and the way was
easy, without impediment of Mountains, or Rivers. Again I demanded, how did
the Christian Kings ancientlie of England, Scotland, and France, convoy their
Armies to the holy VVarres of Jerusalem, and most part over Land? or how
Alexander the Great, an Army of with-in 40000, from Macedon, to the Eastern
Occean, and did subjugate all the Nations by the way? or how Julius Caesar, a
smaller by the one half, from the occident of France, to Pharsalia in Greece?
or Hanniball from Carthage, by the way of Spain and France, through so many
alpestiere and precipitious Mountains, even to Naples, and brooked Italy
fifteen Years? Although themselves were excellent, and incomparable
Captains, and of extravagant Fortunes, yet their Soldiers appearinglie have
been but such Men, as do yet live in the World, the difference and ods of
Times excepted: for softness and Delicacie in some, and contemplation, and
love of Letters in others, have so daunted, and as it were emasculate the
cowrage of Men, who now are, that none is able to endure that austeritie and
hardness of living with Hanniball himself, let be his Soldiers.

The next Field fitting for this War, West Flanders, a proper Seat for
Wars against Spain.
is that which were most easy to come unto, and likely to bring the Business
to a short and prosperous End, and this is the Country of West Flanders, if
this fatal Jealousy of Neighbour-Princes, which has been so many times
contrarious to the best Designs and Enterpryses of Christendom, did not here
with-stand: that is to say, if the French King did not call to mind, how that
was the Port where-at ancientlie the English did so often enter to trouble his
Predecessors. It is a wonderful thing, if Kings so nearelie allied, and so
nearelie touched by one Common Danger, cannot be assured from mutual
Iealousies in the mean time, Nulla fides regni sociis. Therefore, leaving that
to the Event which GOD shall grant, Going of the Navy lately to Portugal.
I will speak of putting Armies into Spain by Sea, whereunto, it may be, ye
will object the small Successes; now, of a second Navigation of the English to
Portugal; and that His Majesty had better kept his Navy at home, Careat
successibus opto, quisquis ab eventu facta not and a putet. Counsels not to be
pondered by the events.
I answer to you, that Counsels and Designs, are not to be weighed from the
Event, that was so good a purpose, as in my judgment, will not yet be left.
But ye will say, We have wakened the sleeping Dog, and made spoil of our
best Occasion: I confess, that is more considerable, than any loss; and yet
who doubts, for the Dog, but he was a-wake before? Diabolus non dormit. How
can he sleep, that lies in Ambush, for all the World?

As touching the credit of the Enterprise, it is so far from bringing under
question the Reputation of our Sovereign, that by the contrary, The going of
our King in person to Spain.
both that, and his personal going to Spain, are things where-of we should
rejoice; as being infallible Arguments of his Royal Magnanimity, and
Preambles of much greater things. King Philip of Macedon, being brought for the
first time, to see the noble Horse, Bucephalus, commanded his best Horseman to
ride him: which when he could not do, by reason of his fierceness, the King
did set another to him, and the third, who in like manner did not suffice;
until at length, Alexander his Son, being but a young Stripling, did
adventure himself to it, and did perform it: which when his Father beheld,
shedding Te^res for joy, he apprehended there-by, the greatness of his
Spirit, saying, that Greece was too small for him. Where such Sparkles break
forth, before the Fire of a young Prince his cowrage be well kindled, it is
like enough once to spread many Flames abroad. Yea, I will say farther, that
the success of that Business went better, than if it had been to our Wishes,
for that it is not good, that Fortune should be too indulgent to the
beginninges of a young King, or should lay the Reigns upon his Neck: but
rather that he run his first Cariers with a borne head; to the end, that he
may learn the ways of true Wisdom, and Fore-sightfulnesse in Matters of
greater Consequence. The ancient Theologues* amongst the Gentiles, did never
introduce their Goddess Fortune in the Counsel of the Gods. There is nothing
that does more rectify the judgment to Action, than Experience, where-of one
Trick, in our Youthhead, is more worth to us, than twenty in our Age.

Besides that, we are certainly but ignorant, to think, that great things
can be gone about, or compassed, but by adventuring somethings also of the
like kind: but lest we be any way discowraged, by those two fruitless
Voyages of the English to Portugal, we may read in the Stories, how that
Nation ancientlie has been no less victorious in Spain, than in France,
al-be-it not so often, because they were old, and long Inheriters, and
Inhabiters of diverse parts of France. Edmund, called De Langley, Duke of
York, and John of Gaunt, Duke of Langcaster, both Sons of Edward the third,
King of England, having obtained diverse glorious Victories against the
Castilians, in favors of the Kings of Portugal, sought to be ejected by the
said Castilians: The English auncientlie most victorious in Spain.
not-the-lesse where-of, they did at length marry the two Daughters of Peter,
King of Castile: who dying without other Children, the said John of Gaunt, who
was married to the eldest, did style himself King of Castile, and pass from
Gascoigne, (then being under the English Dominion) into Castile, with 8000
Footmen, and 2000 Horse; where he did quickly make himself Master almost of
the whole Country: but partly, by Famine then in Castile, and secondly,
because of new Troubles betwixt the English and French, then in Gascoigne; and
thirdly, by reason of hot Broils in England, which was likely to cut him
from succourse of his Friends, he did transact with most honorable and
advantageous conditions, even at his own option, that his only Daughter and
Child, should marry the eldest Son of the Castilian King, that himself
should have the present Possession and profits of four chief Towns of
Castile, with sixty hundredth thousand Frankes, in Argent Content, to defray
his Charges, and forty thousand Franks of yearlie Rent. What then? shall we
think, but the English, who are the natural Offspring of those generose
Stocks, have also brave Minds, and abundance of Cowrage, to invade, by way
of just and necessary War, their old and sworn Enemies of Castile, if
they were once set on edge, after this long Intervale of Peace? Have they not
all the while been exclayming against the days of Peace? And was it not much
for a pacificke King, to contain them? Did they not yearne after the Spanyard,
as Hounds long kept up after Hares? And may we not hope, that Armies which be
not very gross, well disciplined, well armed, and well mayntayned, can do
great things in Portugal, being of so easy access and recept? when we
read of Scanderbeg. Scanderbeg, William VVallace.
or of the late Prince of Transylvania, or in our own Annals, of William
VVallace, what Miracles were done by small numbers against worlds of Men? It is
the LORD, who stirs up the Heart, to persecute Pride, and punish Tyrants: it
is He, who does deliver into the Hands of Israel, their mighty Enemies. 2000
Men, that Charles the eight of France gave to his Cousin, Henry, Earl of
Richmond, Henry, Earl of Richmond, against Richard the third, with 2000
French.
were sufficient for him to pass into England, and give Battle to Richard the
third, the Tyrant, and to slay him. The Kingdom of Spain was once already
(as I have related) taken from Roderico, a licentious Prince, by 12000 Moors.

But, to return to the particular: Navarre, or Portugal, shall be the first
Revolters from Spain, Portugal and Navarre, the first revolters from Spain.
when-so-ever the time shall come, where-in GOD has appointed to dissipate
that Empire: there shall the Stone be first moved, which rolling along, shall
bruise and break the Horns thereof. Portugal must be the chief Port of
our Hopes in Spain. The World holds, that His Majesty of Great Britane, and
the Hollanders, his protected Confederates, have more Shipping than will
command the whole Occean, let be to get footing in Portugal, or to stop the
Traffic of the West Indees. And if we would make a likely Conjecture, what
they are able to do in Portugal, let us but call to mind, what great
Conquests were made by the Portugals themselves, with no great numbers of
Ships (as is shown in the former part of this Discourse:) There be many yet
alive, who know, that when those few of England and Holland did last invade,
and took the Town of Cales, King Philip did presently send for his Galleyes
of Naples and Sicilia, and would have borrowed from Genua and Malta: he called
his Forces out of Britanie, and had been compelled to call Home all that he
had any where, if the English had remained longer.

It is greatly to be marveled, why the Riches of the West Indees should not
before now have allured both English and Flemmings, and others, who are
powerful by Sea, those being the Treasures that do fortify and assure the
Spanish Tyranny. The West Indees in the possession of a great Monarch,
aninfallible means to universality of Empire, and the proof there of.
The Romans and Carthagenians, when they began to flowrish, and to have
mutual Iealousies, foreseeing that Sicilia (being a Storehouse of fine
Corns and People) was the thing which would determine their Emulation, as I
have said before, they fought cruel Battles for it. The Carthagenians had it,
and lost it often. At length it did incline to the Romans, and with it, the
Soveraignitie also of Empire. We cannot err, to think, that never a Monarch,
or mighty State, did possess such probable Means, and such inexhaustable
Mines, more commodious for Extension, and universality of Dominion, as are the
West Indees to the Spanyard, if he be suffered to enjoye them peaceably,
together with the other rich Mines of Silver, and great Revenewes that he
has elsewhere. Plinius held Spain the ritchest for Silver Mines in the
World, then in his time: It is wonderful, said he, to see one only Silver
Mine in Spain, broken up by Hanniball, and which yielded to him 300 pound
weight daily, to continue still now under Vespasian. He has diverse of the
most fruitful and questuous Countries of Europe, as Naples, Milane, Sicilie,
Flanders, being all of the Superlatiue Degree, for Riches, and for virtuous
Traffickes, (which are the Fountaynes from whence Riches flow) so it is
indeed: for we read in the Histories, that Charles the fifth of Spain,
Emperor, did draw yearlie more Moneys out of the Duchy of Milan, than King
Francis the first, who lived with him, did from whole France; and more out of
the Low-Countreyes, than the King of England of his whole Kingdoms. (This is
affirmed by French Writers.) It being so, may not I say, with good vvarrand,
that (saving Fatalitie, and the secret providence of GOD) the Kings of Spain
shall be once Masters of the Occidentall World, except that Neighbor Princes
and States take it more in heart, to oppose him, than hither-to they have done?

Bio^, the Philosopher, said, that Money was the Nerve of Action, and of all
the Effayres of Men. And of him says Plutarch, that his speech does most
touch the Actions of War, Money the Nerve of War, and the proof thereof.
where-in there was no doing at all without Money: For why? said he, a
Captain has only two things to go about; either to draw Men together for
Services of War; or being together, to lead them to their Services;
vvhere-of he can do neither without Money. Thucitides says, that the People
of Pelop. did often vex themselves, and over-runne their own Territories, by
short Wars, and small Exployts, because of their Poverty, and want of Money
to attend Wars. The Foundator of that State, Lycurg^s, having by a Law
prohibited the use of Money there, Agesil. their King, were into Egypt, with
great Forces, to be mercenarie, and serve for Money, wherewith he might be
able to keep VVarres against the Theb. who had almost ruinated his Country.
Alexander the Great, before he enterpryzed his VVarres, did alienate
what-so-ever he had for provision of Money, leaving no-thing to himself but
Hope. Pompey the Great, Greatest States and Monarchs, straited for w^nt of
Money.
the time of his VVarres in Spain, against Sertorius, he wrote to the Senate,
that if they did not send him quickly store of Money, his Army would go
from that Province. Hanniball after he had defeated the Romans, by three great
Battles, did write as much to Carthage. So, if Money be the strength of humane
Actions, as Bion said, and principally of War, as Plutarch did subjoyne, I
say, it is a thing no less than fearful, to suffer the Spanyard to brook
peaceably his Traffic of the West Indees, having there-by a greater means
to enlarge his Dominions, than either Rome, or any others have hitherto had;
that of Rome was the greatest of any times past; Plinius calls it, a
Sunne-shyning to the World, but when their Town was taken by the Gauls (who
were irritated by the unjust dealing of the three Fabli) they were forced to
rob their People, of their whole Gold and Silver, and did scarcely find so
much as to pay the Ransom: many years there-after when they were so broken
by Hanniball* they were compelled to do the same, and were in such pain, for
want of Money, that they had no means to redeem 8000 Prisoners, who were
taken by him at the Battle of Cannas.

Now I do not doubt, but some Men will think, that I have said too much, in
affirming, That the West Indees, and Moneys, which the Spanyard has, may by
length and tract of Time, purchase unto him the Western World: therefore I
would preasse to show it this way, By posing the Case, that two things may
concur together, The hudge Moneys gotten by Charles the fifth, into Peru.
which are possible enough to mere, by progress of Time: First, If the
Spanyard should light at once upon the like Treasure as he got at the taking
in of Peru, where there was such plenty of Gold and Silver, that the Bottle
of Wine was sold for 300 Duckates there, a Spanish Cape, at 1000, a Gennet of
Spain, at 6000. And besides the fifth part of all Moneys general in that
Country paid to the King, Charles the fifth, the king thereof, Atabalipa,
paid to him, for his Ransom, ten Millions, three hundredth, twenty, and six
thousand Duckates, in pure Gold, at one time: which was the first thing that
made in these Countries of Europe, the great alteration of all sort of
Merchandise, Vivers, and of the pryces of Land, and, al-most, of the Manners of
Men: even as it fell out in Rome, when Iul. Caes. brought thither the rich
Spoils and Treasures of Egypt, that made upon the sudden the Usury of Money
to be diminished by the one half, and the price of Land to be haughted by the
other half. For the second, I put the Case, that together with this
Casualitie, the Spanyard should find the Humors of France so easy to be
practiced, and such Distemper, and Distraction of Minds amongst them, as his
Grandfather, Philip the second, did find, then when he broached the holy
League in France. If these two should mere, I put it to any Man's
contemplation, if any less could follow there-on, than the conjunction of
France, to the Empire of Spain? which Philip had even then obtained, if his
Conquest of Portugal had not diverted him from it. And may not these supposed
two Cases arrive, and come to pass together? Unless the vigilance, and
diligence of Neighbor Princes, do stop the Ways where-by they must come,
assuredly it is a thing most possible: for why? the French, how-so-ever after
they be beaten with the Miseries and Calamities of War, they can for a while
be content to refresh themselves, The natural humor, and manners, of the
French Nation.
with Peace and Quietness: yet that is but a Digression, or a By-Strype, from
the Current of their natural Humor, which is to be volage, and remoueant,
much delighted with present things, having no long Projectes, given to Change,
both of Apparel, and Mind, joviall; and of open Conversation, of easy
Familiarity, of amiable Countenance, never silent, but still in Complement,
and Discourse, full of Noble, and Courteous Carriage, inclined to all sort of
Gallantri^, which does require great Charges, of moderate Devotion, suden, and
precipitant in their Resolutions, and loving Innovations of State, above all
things: that it is a wonder, to see such Antipathie every way betwixt them,
and the Spanyard, divided but by one Mountain of the Pirenees, and no
other-wise.

Thus have I discoursed on this last Point, to let you see, what great
necessity have Princes, who would make Wars, to be well provided of
Moneys, which, because it does no less touch and concern us, who be
Subjectes of this Kingdom, A (...) of the Re^sor^ which should encowrage us
against the spa^y^rd.
than it does our Sovereign King, it shall be very expedient to treat
somewhat seriously of it, as the weightiest Article we have to speak of.
That we are bound to contribute to just and necessary War, undertaken by
our Prince, Pro aris and focis, not only our Goods, but our Lives, it is a
Position that no Man will contradict: And to know, that we of this Kingdom
are most obliedged of any People in the World, not only to do so, but to
accept the necessity of so doing, with much patience, and thankfulness to
GOD, for the great Peace and Quietness, vouchsafed on us, during a whole Age
bygone, without the smallest interruption, which, what an extraordinary
Blessing it is, Co ^emplat^on of our (...), during our P^ace, this (...)
by^gone.
we cannot understand, never having felt nor known the Afflictions of War.
But if we shall set before our Eyes, (as Portracts of those Calamities) the
fearful Naufrages of our Neighbors, during the time of our Quietness; and
the disastrous, and sorrowful Days, of our own Predecessors, before our
Times, whilst this Isle remained disunited, and under discordant Kings, we
should not then forbear to fall upon our Faces, and to adore that Bounty of
the MOST HIGH, who did reserve so happy Days for us. As for our Neighbors,
we have so often heard the Thunders of their Troubles, sounding in our Ears;
and, as it were, securely standing upon the S^oare, so often beheld the
Spoils of their Tempests, that I need not to particularize any Examples of
things that are so recent. When those of that Noble City of Paris, (the Queen
of all the Towns of the World) were forced by this tyranny of Spain,
Calamity of the City of Paris, and of whole France.
to nowrish themselves with the bodies of Horses, of Dogs, Cats, and Rats, we
were fed, the greater part of us, to Superfluity, and all to Sufficience, When
those of her Country about, were glad to get an hour of sleep in their
Armor, under some Covert in the Fields, the LORD did grant to us, Mollibus
incumbere toris, and pingues exigere somnos.

As for our Predecessors, if we shall cast over the Annals of our Nation, we
shall find it the most cruent and bloody History, where-in, since the
establishment of our Crown, (not-withstanding of the matchless Antiquity,
and lawfulness thereof) we shall not read of an Age, nor half, nor third
part of an Age, Contem^lation of the Troubles of our Predecessors.
free from desperate Wars, now with Peghts, now with Dane^, now with Saxons,
now with Romans, now with English, (tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem:)
where not only Men, but Women, did ordinarily go to Battle: ordinarily, I
say, for many Ages, after many Testimonies of our famous Historiographer,
Hector Bo^ce, where-of I will ci^e to you but one, in his sixth Book, where he
sets down that fearful Battle foughten against them by Maximus, the
Roman General, with the assistance of the Saxones, and perfidious Peghts,
where-in our King, Eugenius, with the whole Nobility, Gentyle, Commons, and
their aged Parents, were nearlie extinguished, without any hope of farther
memory of our Race, Maximus, the Roman General, against the Scottish King,
Euge^^^.
except that it pleased GOD to reserve miraculouslie amidst their Ashes, some
sparkles of Life, which did after some Years reviue, and restore the Progress
of our Nation, Convenere (says he) ad E^genium regem frequontes viri,
foeminae que ad militiam, ex veteri gentis instituto, vrgentibus extremis,
conscriptae, clamantes aut eo die moriendunt sibi omnibus fortiter dimicando,
aut vincendos infensissin os hosts, etc. There did conveane (says he) unto
the King E^gemus, multitudes of Men, and Women, to stand in Battle, according
to the ancient and observed custom of the Country; protesting, that day
either to vanquish, and destroy their deadly Enemy, or other-wise, to lay
down their whole Lives into the Sepulchers of Valor and Dignity. And a
little there-after, speaking of their ardor, and fierceness in that Battle,
Whylst the fury of the Enemy did approach unto the King's Person, the Noble
Men assisting nearest unto him, did persuade him; yea, with akinde of Violence
pressed him, to retire his Person, and save himself to a better Fortune, and
to the Commonwealth: but he casting from him his Kingly Ornaments, did
thrust himself amongst the vulgar Ranks, to the Maine of the Battle; where,
with incredible Cowrage, and contempt of Death, he did sacrifice his Heroicke
Spirit. Few of Men, and of Women, al-most none, did escape this Calamity: and
whylst the Romans did too insolentlie, and fiercely pursue the small numbers
of those, who at the length did flee, they did recounter a new sort of Combat,
never of before known unto them: for why? the remnant of the aged people, Men
and Women, unable for Wars, did follow a-farre, upon the Army, to know what
should be fall thereunto: and finding the event so bad, and unfortunate, they
did run unto the Weapons, and Armor of their dead Children; and forgetting
both Age and Sex, did encowrage those few that yet did rest alive, to make a
new assault upon the Romans: which they did, more like unto savage and enraged
Beasts, than puissed by any humane instigation: where they were all consumed,
and not without great slaughter of their Enemies. These are the very words of
the Writer, by my Translation, from the Latin Text.

Of the like to this, the Historis has many, to show what was the bitter Cup
of our Antecessours, compared with our delicacie; and what they did vnder-lye,
for mainta^nance of that Liberty, where-of we have enjoyed the Sweetness.
Encowragement, from great Reasons.
This and thus was the Foundation, which it pleased GOD to bless, and to build
upon it a stately and united Monarchy, after the which the Spanyard does no
less greedily gape now, than did the Romans then. Here is an Object of
yielding infinite thanks to GOD, and honor to the memory of our generose
Antecessours: They kept constant VVarres, in expectation, and we begin now
to be called to VVarres, for that where-of we have had long Fruition: They
were as the Israelites in the Deserts, under Moses, and we like unto Israel
under Solomon: we are but gently pressed, as yet, (GOD grant it he so long)
to send forth some of our able Youths: and that is an Advantage to us, it
being a Liberation of our Country, from that it may want commodiouslie: and
then to contribute some Tryfles of our Goods, for their entertainment. And we
have better store of Men, and ten times more Moneys, It is proved, that there
is more by a great deal of Money and Men now, than our Predecessors had.
(praised be GOD) than our Antecessours had, who did render willingly both
Lives, and Goods, and Wife, and Children, and all for the service of their
Prince and Country.

And because it may be, this be compted a rash or temerarious Speech, I
think it may be easily prooved in this manner: Al-be-it it be so, that
only GOD can multiply the Earth, yet it is of verity, that we, since the
days of our Predecessors, have multiplied the Fruits of the Earth; so far,
that for every three Plough gate of Land, (as we do call it) manured, which
was in Scotland an hundredth Years bygone, there are four now. And if ye
answer, that the People are multiplied proportionallie to that, so that I
should not esteem it to be increase of Riches, which does bring with it
increase of People to consume them; I will reply to you, that is the point I
intend to prove, for Multitudes of People industrious, are both the Riches
and Strength of a Country; and that we do exceed our Antecessours both for
numbers of People, and of Moneys, ye shall understand it this way: They
wanted first the two Seminaries for breeding of People, which we have: every
one knows, that the Multiplication of Ground-Labourers, and Husbandmen, (as
we call them) have peopled the Land-warts of Scotland, far above that it was
ancientlie; for we see now upon a Maines (that of old was labored by a
Barron himself) twenty or thirty several Families of those Retite
Husbandmen, vvhere-of every one has a good number of Children. Next again,
it is well known to be the Sea Trade, which has peopled our Maritine Towns,
and that also, our Predecessors wanted: so far, that I may say, there be
now twenty Ships of Traffic amongst us, for every one that was in their
days. Then, who does not know, that by the Traffic of the Sea^, our
Country has twenty times more Moneys, than was an hundredth years bygone?
or if ye do doubt of it, ye may soon learn, that our Grandfathers could
have bought as much Land for one thousand Marks, as we can do for twenty
thousands, and far more. Farther, our Predecessors had a means for stopping
the growing of Multitudes, and increase of People, that we want: and it was by
the great numbers of Men and Women, who took themselves to the Caelibate and
Monasticke life, of whom there was no Offspring. And if ye would know of what
great importance that was, do but consider how many Bishoprics, Abbacies,
Pri^ries, Nunueries, with the number of their Convents, Arch-deanries,
Deanries, Personages, and places of cure for secular Priests, was into
Scotland, in time of P^perie: and when ye have taken up their number, do
confer them with the 70 of the house of Jacob, who went into Egypt, and how
in the fourth Age there-after, there came forth 600000, fighting Men, besides
Women and Children, all descended of them. Which when ye have consideratelie
done, I think ye shall be affrayed of the hudge Multitudes, that before now,
should have issued from the professed religious of Scotland, if they had
followed the Matrimonial life. If ye will yet insist, to object the Poverty
of our Country, by reason of the broken Estates of Noblemen, and Gentlemen,
who have our Lands morgadged for great Debts of Money, It is shown that the
broken Estates of particular me^, does not argue the poverty of a Country.
I answer to you, that (by the contrary) it is an Argument of the Riches of
our Country: for if the Noble-mans Grandfather, by Predigalitie, Pride,
wilful pleying in Law, or any other such Misgovernment, had brought himself
to need the like Sums of Money, twenty Lords could not have gotten so much
then, as one can get now. And I will find now a base-borne Man advance to a
Nobleman in pressed, 30, 40, or 50000 Pounds, whose Grandfather, and all his
Parentage, was not valiant of the twenty part thereof: Ergo, the personal
Distresses of Noblemen and Gentlemen, does not argue the Poverty of the
Country in general. We see into Nature, that her several Members, as of
Plants, Beasts, and Men, do daily decay and die; and others do shoot up in
their Rowmes, whilst Nature it self remains in entire and full strength. In
the days of our Predecessors, there were in Scotland but Victual Rents,
where-as now, by the virtuous Trades, which have been since introduced, a
great part of Men do live by Silver Rents.

Things being manifestly so, shall we refuse to furnish out, and maintain,
two or three thousand Soldiers, to so just and necessary Wars? The
d^ngerous consequence of ingratitude in People.
Certaynlie, it cannot be heard abroad, without our great Ignominy, and (which
is worse) adding of Cowrage to our Enemies, when they shall know us to be so
base and degenerose. Well, let us not be ungrate toward GOD. It is true,
indeed, that Nature and Ty^^e do favor the growing of Monarchies, namely,
where they are just and temperate, as being the vi^e Image of GOD, for
Governament of the World; But it is also true, that unthankful People do
procure short Periods of great Kingdoms. The Throne of Israel was established
in the person of David, after many toylsome and laborious years of the
preceding Rulers of that People, and great sheeding of Blood, and so much in
David his own time, that GOD would not suffer his bloody Hand to be put to
the building of the Temple: but the Glory, Peace and Prosperity thereof did
expyre, with the death of Solomon his Son. There-after the LORD did set many
wicked Kings over that wicked People. The greatest Punishment that GOD
threatens to inflict upon a rebellious Nation, A wicked People, do make a
wicked King.
is to give them evil Kings: vvhere-vpon the Divines do note, that it is the
highest Transgression, whereof a People can be guilty before GOD, When by
their Ingratitude they make Princes, of their nature perhaps seren^ and
temperate, to turn to tyrannous Governament, and to lay upon their Necks the
Yoke of perpetual Grudge and Murmuration: and so not only themselves
transgress against GOD, but make their Kings also to do the like, who most of
all Men should obey and fear the LORD: so that often times a wicked People,
makes a wicked King.

But to return: If we do question for small things now, what would we do,
si Hannibal astaret portis? if our Enemies were at the Ports of our Country,
or within the Bowels of it? We would be forced to do even as the Romans did
against Hannibal, to run and offer all our Moneys, and our Jewels, and our
Eare-rings, for safety thereof. We would undoubtedly say, as that famous
Warrior did, the late King of France, who after the recoverie of Cain from
the Spanyard, by transaction, after he had spended a great part of his life in
VVarres, he said, they were not wise, who would not make a Bridge of Gold,
for their Enemies to pass out upon. A Bridge of Gold to be made, for Enemies
to pass out on.
But as we say, It is better to hold out, than to put out: Durius ejicitur quam
non admittitur hostis. Have we not seen our Kings use all possible
Practices, for procuring of Peace all this time bygone, by toyling of
Ambassadors to and froe, by super-spending their Rentes, exhausting their
Coffers, and indebting of themselves? Are we not natural Members, as they
are natural Heads? Are they more bound to do for us, than we for our selves?
Al-be-it the Kings Sphere he higher and greater than ours, Just and true
Encowragements, from solid Causes.
yet every Man does fill his own Sphere, and every Man's estate, is a
Kingdom to himself. Perseus, that mighty King, having beside him infinite
Treasures, and refusing to bestow some of them to Gentius, a Neighbour-prince,
and others, who offered to combat the Romans in Italy, he suffered them to
overthrow himself, in his own Country. Darius committed the like Error
with Alexander, and Stephanus, King of Bosna, the like with Mabomet the second:
as I have remembered before, we may praise GOD, that we have not such
avaricious Kings. What is it, that good and natural Subjects will not do for
the safety of the Sacred Persons of their Kings? Let be of their Kingdoms,
vvhere-in we have our Portion, and common Interesse with them. We may read in
the Histories of France, what damage that Country did sustain, Captivity of
King John of France, and of Francis the first.
for the liberation of their King John, taken by Edward, the Black Prince of
England, at the Battle of Poiteou, and of King Francis the first, taken at the
Battle of Pavie: and in our own Histories, what our Predecessors did, for
the redemption of King David Bruce, led Captive in England, and there detained
eleven years: Great Ransom paid by our Antecessours, for King David Bruce,
if the Author was not a little mistaken.
Liberatus (says the History) undecimo ex qu^ captus est anno, numeratis
quingentis millibus Mercarum Sterlingarum in presenti moneta. He was redeemed
upon payment of five hundredth thousand Marks Sterling, in argent contant. A
thing most admirable, the scarcity of Moneys in those days considered. If a
Physician should command us, in time of a dangerous Sickness, to take a little
Blood, for preservation of the whole Body, we should be glad to obey him:
Philip de Cominit says, five hundredth thousand Crowns.
why not by the like reason, when our King (who cures and cares for the Body
of the Commonwealth) does command us, to bestow some of our Goods, for
safety of our whole Estate, ought we not to obey? if we were versed in the
French Annals, to know what innumerable spoil of Goods was there, before the
Spaniards could be pyked out of the Nests, which they did build upon their
Coasts, and with-in their Bowels, we would be content to spend to our Shirt
(as it is said) before they should plant their Tents amongst us. I have
already told you, how they are of Melancholious, and fixed Minds, not easily
raised, or remooved, where once they are set down: where-of we see the
present experience into the Palatinate. To take, and then to give back again,
is not the way of their Design to universal Empire, over their Neighbors.

If any would object, that the Palatinate is detayned for Reparation of the
Wrongs and Injuries done in Bohemia, he has little skill in the Effaires of
the World: for why? these might have been long since composed, or redressed:
but it is done to facilitate their Conquest in Germany, to enclose the
Nether-Landes from Succourse of their Friends there, The Causes why the
Palatinate, is detained by the Spanyard.
and to open a Gate into England, by length of Time, when they shall find the
Occasion fitting. So that if the Kings of Great Britane, and France, together
with their Confederates of Germany and the Netber-Lands, do not join their
Forces, to banish them tymouslie, from the Palatinate, as the Romans did the
Carthagenians from Sicilia, (which I did note in the beginning here-of)
doubtless they will be upon their own Necks at the length. There was a
great Intervale of Time betwixt the first and second Wars of the Romans,
against the Carthagenians; and yet the last did come to pass, and therewith
the utter overthrow of the Carthagenian State. And here I must recount a
thing, (which I have often called to mind, since His Majesty's coming from
Spain, A remarkable Speech, of Coronell Semple, to the Author of this Treatise.
and that the Treaty of his Marriage did there expyre) how I my self, the
year of their Pacification with Holland, being in the Town of Brussels, in
familiar discourse, touching our late Sovereign his coming to the Crown of
England, with a Scottish Gentleman, of a fine Wit, Experience, and In-sight
in the Spanish Designs, and who had been long time a Coronell, and
Counselor of War amongst them, Coronell Semple; he said to me, That
al-be-it King James was an aged and wise Prince, who had providently
practiced his peaceable Entry to England, that yet he was much beholden to
that Time so fortunate, as it was for him, when Spain, being so broken with
longsome VVarres, had al-most begged their Peace from Holland. And how-soever
(said he) your King may be free of us, during his life, yet if ye shall surviue
him, ye shall see no more Peace betwixt England and Spain: adding vvith-all,
this Speech, Laus non solum hominum est, sed etiam temporum. Whereunto I did
answer, that by these it seemed, that the Spanyard intended to conquer
England. Then he rehearsed to me, the many and notable Injuries done to them,
by the English Nation, by their proud and fascuous ejection of King Philip,
before the death of Marie; by their fostering of their Rebels in Flanders; by
their protection of Don Antonio, King of Portugal, and ayding of him with Sea
Armies; but namely, by their ordinary Sea Rapines, and insolent Navigation,
without the controlling and coercing vvhere-of, Spain could not be in so good
Case, as was hoped for to be, in progress of Time. And in the end, he did
subjoyne thus far, If your Catholic Noblemen of Scotland, with whom my
self (said he) did negotiate from Spain, had been wise, and constant, your
Country might have been, long before now, in a twentie-folde more happy
Condition, under the Dominion of Spain, than ever it can be under the Crown
of England; the Yoke of whose Servitude and Tyranny, shall questionless
become intolerable to you, so soon as that King shall be gone, who does so
well know you: for why? by reason of their Vicinitie, and nearness unto you,
they shall be ever preassing to draw great Rents from you into England, which
cannot fail to impoverish your Country: where-as by the contrary, the
Spanyard should not only spend it amongst your selves, but should also yearlie
send in great sums of Money to you, according as he does here in Flanders,
and in his other Provinces. This Story did I, after my returning to London,
relate to His Majesty, who is now with GOD; and who having heard it, did
answer me, That Semple was an old Traitor, and dangerous company for his
Subjects, which went beyond the Seas.

Thus the Spanyardes know not when the Fish will swim, but they do keep
their Tides diligently, and have their Nets hung in all Men's Waters: so that
if any of us would think, that the present Quarrel against Spain, The
Quarrel of the Palatinate, most ^ib to us, and why.
is more sibbe to the King, our Sovereign, than to us, by reason of the
Palatinate, it were absurd ignorance also: For first granting it were so, yet
there can be no Separation betwixt the Head and the Members: whom GOD and
Nature have knit together, there is none can loose: Next again, it is well
known, that our late King, of blessed memory, could have gotten to marry his
only Daughter, greater, and the greatest of Christian Princes, if it had not
been to prevent the falling of our Crowns Succession, into the person of some
Papisticall Prince, to the dangering of the Liberty Evangelicall, and Unity
of this Kingdom of Great Britane: of both which the LORD has made Himself
the Instrument to establish them. Our latest Histories do record, that
Scotland, England, and Ireland, have already been almost devoured by
Foreign Ambition, by way of Marriages with Papal Kings, as of Queen Marie,
the Grandmother of our present King, with the Dolphin of France; and of Marie,
Queen of England, to Philip the second, King of Spain; vvhere-of what
Blood-sheeding, Cruel Wars, and Persecution of the Professors of the Gospel
did follow, John Knoxe, against the Regiment of Women.
even to public Martyrdom, the Stories do mention at length: which moved
our Proto Reformator, John Knoxe, to publish that Treatise against the Regiment
or Reigns of Women. If so be, that the only Daughter of Great Britane, (and
of that King) capable of the greatest Marriage in Christendom, was couched in
so narrow Bounds, out of the holy Projects of her Father, to assure the Peace
and Liberties of this Kingdom, to us and our Successors, then can any
Quarrel in the World be so dear to us, and more prick our Consciences and
Honor, nor the Restitution of her Estate, although the Spanyard were resolved,
to march his Ambition there, and come no farther?

Having treated thus far concerning War, Of our domesticke discontent, or
Fears.
or the necessity of War with Spain, I come now to speak of things that
may breed into us Distraction of Minds, or Coldness of Affection toward
this Business: And first, (because it is most easily answered unto) I will
remember how it did stick in many Men's Teeth, and could not at the first be
digested, that we did not know, no, not the Lords of our Counsel, what was
the Course of His Majesty's Navy: The going of the Navy to the Seas, and our
public Fast.
that a public Fast and Praying was enjoined for the success of we know
not what; and that this Fast was not limitated, but during the King's will,
contrary the Custom of the Scottish Church, and diverse from any Example to
be found in Scripture. The last of these two being a Question Theological,
and impertinent to this Discourse, I will not touch: But for the first, I say,
and it is approved in all Ages, that nothing does more advance great
Enterpryses, than Secrecy; so far, that Secrecy is the very Soul of the
Actions of Kings: and their Secrets once published, are but like vented Wine,
which can no more be drunken. And most active Princer, have brought to pass
amongst puissant Enemies, Secrecy advances great Enterpryses.
most noteable Exploits, only by means of Secrecy: as we do find
specially in the lives of Julius Caesar, Charles the fifth Emperor, Lewis the
eleventh of France, whose cover Plots, secret Friends, Voyages, Dyets, and
Days of Battle, Secrecy of Julius Caesar, Charles the fifth, (...) the
eleventh, and of the (...) Council.
were kept in their Breasts, unto the time of present Execution: which kind of
doing, was the chiefest thing that made them so redoubted, and feared of all
their Enemies; as the Spanyard, even to this day, delights to hold his
Neighbors in perpetual fear, by this secrecy of Counsels and Courses.
Withal I do confess, that such doing requires a solid wisdom in Princes,
and that other-wise it were very dangerous: in the mean time it is sure,
that we who be private Subjects, are not to crave a Count of their Counsels;
no more than the Members of the Body, do question for that which they are
commanded to do, by the intellectual Reason that lodges in the Head.

The next Point, shall be to consider of our Doubts, and Fears Domesticke, as
I did term them in the beginning: and first, touching the Reformation, The
Reformation, or Innovation of Magistrates.
or Innovation of Counsel and Session, intended by His Majesty; It is
certain, that Princes both may and ought to reform, and if they please,
innovate where there is need; there being no means in this corruptible World,
to keep things in due temper, but after long progress of Time, and growing of
Abuses; to reduce them to their first Institution. Plato holds, that an the
length, GOD shall reform the Work of the whole World, and reduce it to the
first Purity; and that other-wise it is not able to endure and stand, I know
not how that accords with Saint John Apoc. who says, That we shall see
new Heavens, (...).
and a new Earth. And a great Politic said, That if some late reformed
Franciscan Friars, and the late Order of the austere Caputchines, bad not risen
to maintain some credit to the Pope's Church, that it had been before now
disgustfull even to all the World, by reason of his obstinate denial, to
reform his Church, against the nature of things. But to the Purpose^ There is
indeed no small importance in the Auncietie of Senators, long experienced in
the Mysteries of a State, and with the Humors and Conditions of a People^ and
these are only they, who can be called Old Counselors: And diverse of the
wisest Emperors, said it was more dangerous to have an old King, and a young
Counsel, nor a young King, and an old Counsel. Senators are to be of good
Age, and Experience.
Where of we see the good experience in the Spanish Government, where the
death of a King does no more interrupt the Course and prosperity of that
Empire, than it were of any private person. The very Name it self of a
Senator, does signify Agednesse, as a Senectute. The Greeks called the
Senate, (...); to show, that both Greeks and Latins did choose aged Men to
their Counselors: yea, suppose they could have found numbers of young Men,
Wise, Grave, and of good Experience, yet they would not have them to be
Senators, because that were (said they) to turn their Senate into a Iuvenat.
Solon and Lycurgus, did prohibit by a Law, the coming of any upon the
Senate, with-in the age of 40, although they were never so sufficient. But to
leave them, the Scripture tells us, (which is a Warrant infallibl^) that in
the settling of the Jewish Govername^t, GOD commanded to choose 70, not of the
best, nor the most learned, nor of greatest experience; but says the text, Of
the most Aged, Num^. 11.
to whom He gave the Spirit of Wisdom, in abundance.

Yet whilst it is so, Inconvenients that follow the perpetuity of Magistrates.
even good Politickes of the latter Times, and consequently of greater
Experience, will hold the Opinion, that it is expedient for the Commonwealth,
to change and innovate Magistrates: and for it they do bring this Reason, They
tell us, that the end of good Governament is Virtue; and the scope of every
prudent Prince, should be to render his Subjects Virtuous: and therefore the
Rewards of Virtue, (which are public Offices of the State) ought to be
patent to every virtuous Mind, and the Hopes of them set before it, as the
Mark where-at it must aim: which cannot be, if Offices of State be
lyfe-rentallie established in the Persons of a Few, who whilst they, and only
they, do enjoy the public Honors, and Emoluments, it does beget an
Heart-burning, and Envy, into other good Spirits, who find themselves
neglected; and so does breed, and nowrish the Seeds of Civil Sedition.
Farther, (say they) it does procure to those who possess^ chief Offices in
perpetuity, too much Grandour and Authority: it draws away after it, the
Eyes and Dependence of the People; and, as it were, steals a little of that
Splendour, that is due to the Royal Majesty: and being in the Persons of
great Subjectes, prepares the Way to Popularitie, and Ambition. Again,
Inconvenientes by the Innovation of Magistrates, and Counselors.
they who reason against the frequent change of Magistrates, they use that
Argument, which the witty Tyberius used, when his Friends told him, that
he did continue Men in great Offices too long, against the Custom of that
State: he said, it was better for People, to endure those, who were
al-readie satiate, and full of their Blood, (meaning their Goods) than vnder-ly
the Hunger, and Avarice of a new Entrant: Nec enim parcit populis regnum breve.
With-all (they say) that the changeable Magistrate has no Cowrage, nor
Boldness, to administer Justice; but fears the displeasure of Men, being
shortly himself to descend to a private Condition, perhaps inferior to
many, over whom he is Judge for the time: So that betwixt these two
Extremities, one would think the Midway very fitting to be followed by
prudent Princes, where they may neither be perpetual, nor much frequentlie
changed; where they be only to the pleasure of the Prince, and with-all made
Syndicable, and Censurable. For certaynlie, Utility of the Censor amongst the
Romans.
(as all Men know, who understand Policy and Histories) there was never a
Magistracy invented by Men, that did ad more to the Virtue, Increase, and
Stabilitie of a State, than that of the Censor amongst the Romans; when once
a Year, the Consuls, the Senators the Generals, the Knights, the Captains,
the Tribunes, the Pretors, the Questors, and all who had the meanest
Intromission with the State, did compeare, and tremble, in presence of a
Censor; fearing Disgrace, or Deposition from their Offices, or Dignities. The
Spanyardes keep in their Provinces of Italy, The Spanish Syndicator, in place
of the Censor.
an Image of this sort of Magistrate, called by them, Syndicator: and so they
do in the State of Genua. Of this they have some shadow in England, al-be-it
not in the person of one Man, by those who are called Their Court of
Conscience. And of this it seems that our Sovereign King has now erected an
Image amongst us, (if I be not missetaken) in establishing The Iudicatorie of
Grievances.

Of the which Iudicatorie (because Men do dispute diversely, as of a thing
new, Nature of the Comiss. for Grievances.
and unknown amongst us) I will shortly consider two Circumstances, which I
trust shall serve somewhat for our Information, touching the Importance
thereof: First, the Use and End of it: secondly, the Warrant and Authority
where-by it may be established. For the first, The Scope thereof is not only
Politic and Virtuous, but of most Necessary and Profitable Use, for the
Commonwealth: that is, To purge the Land from devowring Cormorants, and those
who suck the Blood of the People: to wit, Corruption of Judges, and Officers
of State, if any be, Extorsion of Seale-Keepers, and Writers to Seals,
exorbitant Usurers, Transporters of Coin, Detracters and Traducers of His
Majesty's Counsels, and Actions: all which (being the Ground and Source of
Public Poverty, and Pillage) are particularly ordained to vnder-ly this
Iudicatorie. And if therewith the Commission had been also granted,
expresselie against Transporters of Oxen, Kyne, and Sheep, whereby our
Country is incredibly damnified; and also against all Prodigal and Profligate
Persons, who by Riot of Lascivious and Distemperate Life, do destroy their
Patrimony, and therewith their Wives and Children, that such might be
punished, according to the Custom amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans:
then, I say, these being committed to the Censures of entire and intelligent
Men, there is no Policy that could more reallie yield many Popular Comforts.
There is indeed a General Clause in this Commission, vvhere-by His Majesty
takes Power to Himself, to refer thereunto what-so-ever shall please Him:
against the which we seem to take this Exception, to say, that this may
import a Controlling and Reduction of the Decreets of our Session, (if His
Majesty would so:) a Practice thought too too extravagant, and extraordinary:
and yet this may be rather Mistaking, than True Judgment of those who think
so; which I do demonstrate in this manner.

We say, there has not been, neither ought there to be, any Appellation
against the Supreme Iudicatorie of our Session, unless it were ordained by a
Parliament; this is our Exception: but leaving the Hypothesis touching our
Session, I will take me in general against the Thesis it self, to say thus
far, That it is not only against Christian Practice and Profession, but
against Humanity, to hold, That there should be no Sovereign Power above
all ordinary Judges, to soften and mittigate the Rigor of Laws, Quia summum
jus summa injuria: the Rigor of the Law, is a Rigorous Oppression: for
Example, A poor Man is found Year and Day at the King's Horn, beside his
knowledge, and perhaps for a naughty matter, of five or six Shillings
Striveling, where-by his Lyfe-Rent of such things as he has, falls into the
Hands of the Lord his Superior, who presently gets before our Session, a
Declarator there-vpon in his Favors. These Judges cannot help this
disstressed Party, because there is a Law standing against him, and they are
sworn to the King, who did place them, to administrate Justice, according to
the Law. So many such, yea, and more pitiful Cases, do daily occur
before Ordinary Judges, vvhere-in Conscience and Justice stand in contrary
Terms, that I need no more to exemplify it. The Judges must give way to
Justice, and have no power to mittigate: yet no Man will deny, that this kind
of Justice; is a grievous Oppression. Here we see a manifest Necessity of
Appellation, to some Sovereign Power, who may dispense with Legal Rigor, in
Favors of weak and distressed Parties. None can dispense with a Law, but a
Lawgiver: No Subject is a Lawgiver; Ergo, No Subject may dispense with a jot
of the Law, except he have Commission from Him who gave the Law.

The power to moderate Legal Extremity, or to absolve from Laws, has ever
been properly annexed to that Sovereign Majesty that gave the Law, A latter
appellat. due to Soveraignitie.
in any State, whether that Soveraignitie was Popular or Princely. Before the
Ejection of King Tarquinus, by the Romans, it was annexed to the Royalty, as
their Histories do clearlie show. After the Expulsion of their Kings, that
Sovereign Majesty of giving Laws, was transferred to the People, as we may
perceive by the words used by the Senate, when they did present any Law to
the People, Quod bonum faustum felixque sit vobis and Reipub. velitis,
jubeatis: that is, Ye will be pleased, to authorize this Law, which the Gods
may grant may be for the happiness of your selves, and of the Commonwealth.
And therefore unto the People also (as then the only Lawgivers) was
transferred the Power, to dispense and absolve from Laws: and to that effect,
a latter Appellation was ordained to be, from the Senate it self, unto the
People, by the Law VALERIA; which is said by Livius, to be the Fundament, and
Main Strength of the Popular Soveraignitie. The Practice here-of, we read in
the Case of Sergius Galba, the Orator, who being convinced of Lese-Majestie, by
Cato the Censor, did appeal unto the People, and had his Absolution from them.
Again, when this Popular State of Rome was reduced in a Principa^tie, by
Caesar the Dictator, the Mittigation of Laws, or Absolution therefrom, did
return, and rest into the person of the Prince: as we read of Cicero,
pleading for Pardon to Ligarius, at the Hands of Caesar: When I plead, says
he, before other Judges, I speak not of Pardon to my Client, but stand to my
Defenses, That the Accusator is calumnious, the Crime forged by Envy, the
Witnesses infamous: but beer, says he, I eraue Grace, Quia poena Legi
Gratia Principi debetur. Again, we read in Contareno, upon the Venetian
Governament, that the first Law that was made, for the establishment of that
Republicke, was, for a last Appellation, from all Judges Ordinarie^ unto their
Great Counsel, into the which the Sovereign Majesty was placed, that State
being Aristocraticke: so that this Power, to absolve, or dispense from Laws,
by a last Appellation, has ever been incorporate in the Soveraignitie geaue
Laws, as naturally belonging there-so, and inseparable from the same.

Thus there being a Necessity, which no man can deny, of Appellation from
Legal Rigor, to some Sovereign Power, who may mittigate the same; and that
being proper to the Supreme Majesty of the State, (as I have showed) those
have led me upon the second Circumstance, touching the Commission of
Grievances; that is, to speak of the Authority, where-by it may be
established, and whether or not His Majesty may do so much by His Prerogative
Royal, without the Approbation of a Parliament added thereunto. And that I
should not seem to corrupt the Verity of so Sovereign a Point, with
Flattery of the Prince, or for fear of Subjects, for the first, I will
confess, that I am not of the Opinion of Melancton, who held, that those hard
and imperious Practices of Kings, objected by Samuel to the Israelites, when
they did demand a King to rule over them, were the true and natural
Privileges of the Sovereign Majesty: But I do think, that they were rather
permitted Acts of GOD His Judgment, against a wicked and rebellious People:
for other-wayes Samuel being then their Supreme Prince, himself would not
have justified the uprightness of his Governament, by saying, Whose Ox, or
whose Ass have I taken? If it had been lawful for him to take them; as he
does there pronounce, that the following Kings should take them: Besides that,
the Text of Samuel, in that place, does not say, that a King shall have
right. To take their Sons, Daughters, and Fields, and to employ them to his
use and service: But only, that it shall be the manner and fashion of doing of
their Kings. Neither does the Hebrew word Mishpat, in that same place signify
a Right to do, but a Custom and Fashion of doing: and therefore the greater
part of the Learned hold it true, which some Hebrews have written of Samuel,
that the Book composed by him, a part of the Privileges and Prerogatives of
the Soveraignitie (mentioned in his Text of the Scripture) was suppressed, and
destroyed by the succeeding Kings, for their greater Liberty, to exercise the
Arts of Tyranny.

But whylst it is so, yet we are to understand, that there is nothing more
sacred, next unto GOD, in this World, than Sovereign Kings: they are the LORD
His Anointed, they carry His Image, they hold the Charter of their
Authority, immediately of Him, they are like unto the highest Spheres,
receiving the first Influence and Emanation from GOD; they are His
Lieuetenents, to command over all Men, holding themselves only of Him: so
respected of GOD, that we are commanded by the Spirit of GOD, to obey Kings
generally, without restriction, whether they be Good, or Bad, because they
are of GOD: if they be good, He has ordained them, for the Quietness, and
Prosperity of good People: if they be Bad, He has ordained them, for the
punishment of Wicked, and rebellious People: so far, that in my judgment,
we can find no lawful Warrant, for Subjects to dethrone the Bad, more than
the Best: in which Respects, it is most necessary, that we should rightly
know the Qualities of their Persons, and Dignity of their high Calling; to the
end, that we may understand what kind of Obedience is due unto them. It is
not idle, nor without great Reason said, that Sovereign Kings are like unto
GOD. There are in GOD many things communicable to His Creatures, His Justice,
Mercy, Verity, Love, Wisdom, Providence, of all which His Creatures do in
some degree participate. Again, there are in GOD things mierlie
incommunicable to Creatures, and which can never be spoken of them, but
privatiuelie, as His Omnipotency, Infinity, Eternity, and these are the
proper Marks of the DEITY that can never fall in any Creature what-so-ever.
Even so, there be in Kings (who represent GOD on Earth) diverse and many
things communicable to) Subjects, besides Honor and Riches, which from
Princes do reflect and shine upon Subjects. A Subject may resemble his Prince
in some Proprieties, both of Body and Mind; but with-all (in that also like
unto GOD) they have some inseparable Marks of Soveraignitie, which cannot be
communicated to Subjects, without the overthrow or Laesion at least of their
Majesty. As for the first, to be Lawgivers, the Disputes and Decreets of
their Counsels, Sonates, and Parliaments, are but a dead Letter, unto the time
that the Royal Word, SCEPTER, Sign, or Seal, do give Life and Authority
thereunto: Senatus decrevi^, Rex jussit. If this Point, to give Laws, were
communicable unto Subjects, then Subjects also might dispense with Laws, and
so participate of the Soveraignitie. Another inseparable Mark of Sovereign
Majesty, is to decree of Peace and War: Counsels and Parliamentes may
agitate, the Prince only may resolve. I grant indeed, that in Christian
Kingdoms, which hold more of Aristocracie, than of Monarchy, the things of
Peace and War do much depend upon the Voice of the Nobles, but the Seal of
Authority is only from the King. A third Mark inseparable of Soveraignitie,
is the Institution, or Deposition of chief Magistrates, which by the fore-sayd
Law Valeria, was annexed to the Popular State, as due to the Sovereign
Majesty then Popular. And certaynlie here-in lies not only a conspicuous
Mark of Soveraignitie, but also a Main Point of the Fortitude and Strength of
the same. A fourth Mark of Sovereign Majesty, and which is of it self most
Sovereign, and incommunicable, is this latter Appellation of Subjectes to
their Sovereigns, in the Cases of Legal Rigor, from what-so-ever Judge:
without the which, the light of Reason does show to any Man, that there can
be no true Soveraignitie: like as we see, that the Consent of the World, the
Practice of all Ages, and these of our own Nation, do give to Kings the
Royal Privilege of granting Grace and Remission, from Laws, even where the
LAW of GOD does ordain Punishment by Death. And the most temperate Christian
Kings, do assume and exercise this Privilege, to pardon Persons Criminal for
Slaughter, at their own pleasure. It being so, how much more ought the Royal
Soveraignitie to have this latter Appellation annexed unto it, from all Judges,
and Causes Civil, where Legal Decreets are found to be hard and tyrannous?
Or if a King cannot bestow this Grace upon a distressed Subject, to repledge
him from the tyranny of Law, how can he be said to carry in His Person, a
Soveraegne Power?

This Privilege, of a last Appellation, in difficult Cases, is not only
proper to Soveraignitie, but likewise a thing ever sought and challenged by
Subjects, as due unto them to be granted by their Kings. Nero and Caligula,
Princes give^ to private Laesciviousnesse, they did (for their own Ease, and
Freedom from Effaires) ordain, that no Appellation should be from the Senate
unto them: but yet the Romans would never quyte that Benefit of a latter
Refuge to their Emperors. And if we shall try things well, we should find,
that the present Practice of almost all Christian Princes, has put
Commissioners, or Lieuetennants in their Place, to exercise that Point of the
Sovereign Majesty, for receiving of latter Appellations, in Causes
Compassionable: as the four Courts of Spain, to which, as to the Royal
Soveraignitie, there are Appeals from all Judges. Their Syndicators in their
Provinces abroad, are instituted to the same end, and that so profitablie, that
there is not in any Christian State, a surer Means for mayntaynance of Peace
and Justice amongst People. The Chamber Imperial in Germany, vvhere-vnto
there are drylie Appellatious from all the Cities, Dutc^ies, Counties,
Baronies, within the whole Empire. In England they have their Court of
Conscience, for the same use and end. So that I do think, for this
Commission for Grievances, here presenting the King His own person, to receive
these latter Appellations due to the Soveraignitie, albeit it seem to be a
new Iudicatorie of late Invention, yet it is not so, because it was ever
incorporate, and inseparably included in the Sovereign Majesty. I trust we
will all think, that nothing is more agreeable with Piety, and Good
Conscience, than the allowing of such Appellations from Legal Rigor and
Extremity: neither any thing more becoming the Soveraignitie that GOD has
placed in Christian Kings, than to receive and hear them; since Judges
Ordinary may not do it in the nature of their Office, being sworn to
administrate Justice in Legal terms, and wanting power to dispense with
Laws: unless that His Majesty would grant to the Lords of our Session, the
same Commission and Power; appoynting some of them for Law, and others for
Conscience, and so consolidate both the Offices in one. Always, if the King
ought or may hear the Grievances of His Subjects, as due unto His
Soveraignitie: and if he may do so much in His own person, then there is no
doubt, but He may do it by Commissioners; and must do so, because of
Remoteness of Pla^e for our Ease, and because of multitude of Effaires for His
own Ease.

I think it not amiss, here to declare, how our Historiographer, Buchanan,
treating of the Original Election of our College of Justice under King James
the fifth, he did esteem it a mere Tyranny, if no Appellation should be
therefrom; Quando Collegiam Iudicum (says he, in his fourteenth Book)
Edinburgi constitutum fuisset, tamen qui sperabatur eventus non est consecutus,
nam cum in Scotianullae pene sint leges praeter conventuum decreta, eaque,
pleraque non in perpetuum, sed in tempus facta, judices^que quod in se est
lationem legum impediant, omnium civium bona quindecem hominum arbitrio sunt
commissa quibus and perpetua est potestas, and imperium plane tyrannicum: that
is to say, When the College of Justice was planted and authorized at
Edinburgh, there did not follow there-on the good Events which were expected;
for there being no other Laws in Scotland, almost, but Acts of Parliament,
and Judges, given, so far as lies in them, to hinder the promulgation of
Laws; the Lands and Goods of all the Subjects were committed to the
arbitriment of fifteen Men, to whom was granted a perpetual power and
Authority, playnlie tyrannous.

Now to proceed touching Ordinary Magistrates: As Laws are not perpetual,
so are not Magistrates everie-where, nor at all times; neither is it
absolutely expedient, or necessary, to be so: albeit we must all confess,
that it is not without great and public detriment, that old and faithful
Magistrates should be often changed, yet the Current of States is so fluxable,
and subject to so many casual Changes, that very good Princes have changed
very good Magistrates, for very good Causes. Marc. Aurol, going abroad,
through his Provinces, to view and consider the Administration and Order of
Justice, he did displace, and hang even of the best and special Magistrates,
because that he would suffer no Man to bear Office in the Country where he
dwelt, namely, a Great Man: as if His Majesty should not permit a Nobleman,
inhabiting the North of Scotland, to be heritable Shyreffe, or Lieuetennant
there, and respected there by that Means, as a Prince. Which kind of doing,
as I understand, is observed through all Spain, where every Judge Ordinary,
is a Stranger there where he judges. And oft-times, Two of one Family, not
to be of one Session, of Judges, approoved in France.
as we may read into their Histories, it has been acted by the Parliaments
of France, that two of one Family should not be of one Session; and most
sufficient Magistrates, to have been remooved for that Respect: and brief,
there is no Question, but Princes not only may change their Magistrates, but
do often find it very good Policy to do so, being always oblished to
place into their Rowmes, Men truly sufficient for Knowledge and Sincerity.
Plutarch, a rare Man, both for Moral and Stately VVisdome, said against
those who would establish perpetual Magistrates, Videmini aut non multi facere
Magistratum, aut non multos Magistratu dignos habere.

But I come to speak (which appearinglie is not yet in Head) of another Point
of Reformation, into our Seat of Justice, than the which there is nothing that
would breed greater Solace to the whole Body of this Kingdom: ^efo^mation of
the Bar, and Advo^ats, Low necessary.
and would to GOD His Majesty should take it to Heart, and be truly
informed of the Importance thereof. And this is of the great numbers of
Advocates, who for their Commodity Particular, do breed the longsomnesse of
Processes, that spoileth so many good People, and which many good and great
Kings have endeavored to correct. By this Abuse, the Seat of Justice is turned
to be a Sink, that draws into it the greatest part of the Riches of the
Land: and this, above all things, does make so many unable to serve their
Prince and Country. These are the Men (whom Cuiacius who knew them well) did
call, Foecem and vomitorium juris, forensia pecora, vulturesque togates, the
Dreg and Extrement of Laws, Confounders of Laws, Men who spue out their
Brains, in subtle Inventions, to mask Laws, and make them of endless
Dispute: which is the reason, why so many of them, do possess the Palaces
and Castles of their Clients. This is an Abuse, that the greatest of States
have been by times forced to resent, and go about to reform it. Imposts
m^^ent^e laid upon Processes.
The Ancients, who were so contrarious to have any new sort of Imposts upon
their People, they did (for repressing of the noisome multitude of Advocates,
and the wrackfull iniquity of lingering Processes) invent an Impost upon
every Process of Law, even to the tenth part of the whole that Parties did
plead for, as we read in Festus Pompeius, and Varro, in his Books De Lingua
Latina. Diverse of the French Kings, namely, Lewis, called Le Saint, (...)
Saint, Enemy to Me^cena^ie Advotation.
who went into Afric, against the Saracens, he did almost utterly
extinguish this Trade of Advocation, and did appoint as well Disputers as
Hearers, and Judges of Processes, who were not Mercenarie: And he himself
gave ordinary Audience to Causes, in Palaces, and Gardens, at certain
affixed Hours to that use: so did he hate the Cavalli^ (as he did
contemptuously call them) of Advocates. It was for many Ages in France, acted
and observed, (for stopping of this Stream of Iniquity, and Spoil that
comes under Pretext and Name of Law) that who did lose the Process, should
pay the whole Charges and Expenses made by the Party Gainer, during the Pley.
This indeed seems to be hard and rigorous, and yet (say these who stand for
it) that being compared with the other Extreme, (that is to say, with this
Insolence and Liberty of Advocates, to make Laws and Processes to be
endless) it is the most easy and tolerable of the two, and ten times more
tolerable: for why? it should but restrain this foolish Frequencie of the
Laws, and constrain Parties to more Friendly Appointments of their
Controversies at Home. For Example, if His Majesty should make a Law by advice
of His Parliament, that all Processes under the avail of 10000 Marks, should
be referred to so many Noblemen, or Barrons, with so many Churchmen,
dwelling nearest unto the Parties, and that none should be heard to speak, but
the Party himself, or his best informed Friends, it were a great Reformation
of this evil of Laws. And who doubts, but the Body of the People would
gladly embrace it; for is there any thing more ordinary now, than to see Men
in the suit of a thousand Pounds, spend as much perhaps, before he can have
it? Again, we read of another Practice assayed in France, for avoiding of
this Inconvenient: they had a kind of Impost on their Subjects, called
Capitation (Census) where-by every Man paid so much, as for having liberty
of a natural Subject: this they did abrogate, as an Ignominious Exaction, and
in place thereof, did erect an Impost upon Lawyers, Writers, and Superfluous
Prodigalities, as Parthian Furs, Perfumes, Fairding, Cloth of Gold, Indigo,
and such as these, thinking that the most honorable and innocent Impost, that
could be laid upon a People.

We read again, Emanuel^, King of Portugal, Enemy to Mercenarie Advocation.
into the life of that famous Emanuel of Portugal, of whom I spoke before,
that he was vvonderfullie given to this kind of Reformation, of the Evils and
Abuses of Advocation. He sent yearlie Visiters to all the Seats of Justice,
with power, to punish, some with remove all from their Places, some with
Mults of their Goods, yea, and with Death, if the weightinesse of the matter of
their Transgressions did merit so much. He went about himself, to give
Personal Audiences. We read again, that in Rome, under Pope Gregory the
tenth, and John the twenty one, and Nicolaus the third, it was intended, and
urged by those Popes, to eradicate and cast out, that multitude of Advocates
and Notars, who as a noisome Vermin, did gnaw the Bowels of their People: but
by reason of the brevitie of their lives, (which as every one knows does
intercept many good intended Policies, In what Christi^n Countr^yes, no
Advocation.
there) it took no Effect. Again, in Switzerland, Almanie, and other
Northern Regions, all Processes are decerned by deduction of Causes, only by
the Parties themselves, without any Advocate at all. In Venice Advocates have
two Audiences, and no more.
In Venice their Supreme Seat of Civil Justice, called Quarantia, consisting
of 40, of the Nobility of Venice, they do send out, at ordinary times of
the Year, a sort of Syndicators, who go to all the Justice Seats through-out
their Territories, to censure their Proceedings: and where they find them to
have exceeded the short Diet of Time appointed for decyding of Causes, they do
remove them: and where they find matter vvorthie of Appellation, they bring it
before the Quarartia, where the Advocates get two several Audiences, every of
them to an Houre-Glasse, and there is all. Where-as here, our Advocates must
have, not Hours, nor Days, nor Months, nor Years, but whole Ages, if they
please: neither is there any possibility of correcting this, but by a
Sovereign and Absolute Misericord of His Majesty: absolute, I say, even to
take upon himselfe^ by his Regal Authority, to break down that devowring
Monster, which they call the Order of their House; consisting of so many
Steps, and Degrees of Process, that it were better for a Mean Man, to go
through the Fire of Purgatory, than through these. If His Majesty would weed
forth the most subtle Advocates, and make them Judges, banish the most
ignorant, and employ to the Office of Advocation, those of midranke; assigning
unto them so many Days of Pleading, without more. As for Multiplication of
Judges, it is rather profitable than perilous, Quia multum aquae difficilius,
quam tantillum corrumpitur: Et melius omnibus, quam singulis creditur: Et nemo
omnes neminem unquam omnes fefellerunt. Certaynlie, Multitude of Judges,
profitable.
without some Reformation of the Bar, the Reformation of our Session, for the
use of the Subjectes, will be without much perceiueable good. If Reformation
of things should be by reducing of them to their first Institution, doubtless
the Foundation of our Session has been free from these multitudes of
Advocates; and as yet many People do live virtuously, and happily, where
there be none permitted at all. It were a notable Reformation, if what
Subjects in Scotland do employ this way, to the mutual over-throwe one of
another, it were saved, and exacted for the service of the Commonwealth.

Always, Heritable Magistrates.
to proceed for Reformation: We read in the French Histories, that Lewis the
eleventh finding many Bayliries and Shyreffships heritable, annexed to the
Houses and Successions of Great Men, he did revoke, Bod. in Repub.
and annull them; making them not only changeable, but Syndicable. Of such we
have great numbers in Scotland, with very great necessity also of Reformation
at least, as is well known, there being nothing more aliene, and averse from
Justice, than the very Name and Nature of an Heritable Magistrate: nor any
thing more absurd in Policy, than the Administration of Justice to be
perpetuate, and tied to one House, or Clan, where-in Women, Children, or
Fools, may come, by time, to succeed; all which three are incapable of that
kind of Charge. And if the best of them, who have the Right Heritable of a
Magistate, do put in the Place some of their ignorant Kins-men, to exercise
the same, who can do naught, but practice Tricks of lewd and base Oppression,
these must be comported by the Body of the common People, and often times by
the better sort: and why? because my Lord is Heritable Shyreffe, and the King
cannot remove him. Is not this to suffer some Subject^s, to play the Prince
over their Neighbors? Or can any thing be more derogatiue to the Royal
Soveraignitie? For why? it takes away one of the proper Marks-there-of, which
is inseparably annexed unto it: that is, of placing chief Magistrates; a
thing only due to the Prince. Statesmen and Counselors, may nominate, but
the free Election belongs to the King. And in times, when Factions are
pregnant, Princes are even to be jealous of the trustiness of Prime
Statesmen in that Point: For Ambition is often times more curious to fortify
it self, than the Commonwealth. Always, if Heritable Offices have been
ancientlie granted, for great and special Services done to the King, or
Commonwealth, by particular Men, from whom such Rights have descended to their
Posterity; then Conscience, Aequ^tie, and Royal Magnanimity, do require
that such Persons be condignlie satisfied for their Dimissions, according as
His Majesty has already condescended. As on the other part, if such a
Subject should be difficill, or intractable with his Prince, in a Point of that
Quality, it should be thought contrary to the modesty of Mind and Carriage,
which in duty he ought to his King, and should argue in him, too much Love of
Soveraignitie.

The like may certaynlie be said of the la^e Lords of Church Lands: Erected
Church Lands.
no, we rather call them Petite Princes, so much Power do they arrogate to
them selves, over those who be within their Lordship, preassing to exercise
the same Bastard Domination over their Tennantes, by the tyranny of their
Heritable Courts, which ancientlie the Pope, and his Abbots, did practice, who
did mierlie appropriate to them selves, the Vassallage and Homage of so many
of the King's Subjects, as were within the Purpryze of their Lands: They did so
before, and now the New-Erected-Lord does the same, and much worse: Nec
Dominium vitavimus, sed Dominum: We have changed the Dominator, but are not
fred from that Bastard Dominion. The old Abbot, and his Convent, ancientlie
following the Monasticke Life, exempted from public Offices, or traveling to
Court or Session, or any elsewhere abroad they were content with the Payment
of their Rentall in easiest manner, and often times with less, and did bestow
great part thereof in Hospitality to the Payers: and albeit their poor
Tennants were oblished to them, for Service of Harriage and Carriage, yet they
did impeach them no more, but once a Year to lead in to their Clost^r, upon
the Cl^strall Ch^rges, some Fleshes, Fishes, and Fuel: this was all. But
now, with the change of the Lord, the Tennant has changed the Happiness of
his poor Condition. For why? to speak sincerely, the tyranny of the Papal
Abbots was exercised most in that Case, against their King, by spoiling from
Him the Vassallage of His natural Subjects: otherwise, they were most
bountiful, and indulgent to their poor Tennantes, who now by this Change,
are brought to as pitiful Slaverie, as the Israelites were under Pharaoh.
Their Lord, he is not a Churchman, nor of the Clostrall Profession: he has
continual a-doe with Court and Session: he has daily occasion of sending
Carriages, and bringing from abroad: the basest of his Servants must not go a
foot, he must be carried, if it were upon the Neck of his poor Tennant: he
must labor his Lord's Vine-yards, and make his Brick, with much Hunger in
his Belly the mean while. The King cannot help him, because his Lord has
the Authority of an Heritable Court, and is absolute over him: he will not
lead his Tithes, but still he must have more than the worth in Bolles: and when
it is so, greater Pryces than be ordinary: if he have to send through the
Country his Cooks, the poor Man must bring his Horse from the Harrowes,
al-be-it the Season were never so fair: and a number of like things, which if
they be not presently done, he takes Decreets to himself, in his own
Courts, (which no Christian King does) and sends his Officers, to poynd the
poor Creature; with such Rigor, that if there were no more in his House,
but the Pot, vvhere-in his silly Portion of Meat is preparing, it must be
taken from him: that very sure it is, that Christian People be not so
oppressed under the Turk. I vvish that His Majesty would deliver His
Subjects, from the Yoke of their grievous Servitude, and Oppression, and
extinguish the Tyranny of Heritable Courts: to the end, that Gentlemen, and
others, have but one Master to look unto, and one Sun, to draw their light
from: and this is most necessary to be, although His Majesty should suffer
them to brook the Lands.

For whether the Domaine of the Crown (vvhere-from those Lands were given)
be alienable, If the Patrimony of the Crown be alienable.
or whether being devoted to the Church, they may return to the Regal
Patrimony, al-be-it I will not take on me to define, yet according to my
knowledge, I shall deliver mine Opinion, with Reverence, and Correction. That
the Domaine of Republics is not alienable, it is certain, and has been so
maintained, by the chiefest of them, to wit, Athens and Rome, where two
Pryme-men, Themistocles, and Cato the Censor, did take back, as we read in
Plutarch, brevi manu, what-so-ever had been alienate of the Public Domaine,
Domaine of Republickes not alienable.
although many years before, holding that the Prescription of an hundredth
years: which does qualify and assure all Possessions, cannot take away the
Public Patrimony, (because there is no Prescription, said they, of Men
against GOD, nor of Particulars against the Commonwealth) but whether the
Royal Soveraignitie going above them in many absolute Points, does also go
above their in that kind of Privilege, one would think it somewhat
incertaine, because of the diverse Practices of Princes in that behalf,
according to their Humors, to the Condition of the Time, and to the
weightinesse of Services done by those, to whom they have been bountiful.
Some Princes have esteemed the Domaine Public so sacred, and inviolable, that
we read of that Roman Emperor, Pertinax, how he caused to be defaced,
and put away his Name and Image, that was engraven upon the public Palaces,
saying, that the Houses belonging to the Commonwealth, ought not to bear any
Marks of Impropriation to him. And of Antonini, called the Pious, that he did
not for the same respect, dwell but upon his peculiar Heritages, and spend the
Rents belonging to him, How Christian Princes do accept their Crowns.
other-wise, than by the public. But the case is so far altered, that at
this Time, and in these latter Days, Princes more by an Inspiration of private
Favor, or for to exercise the Liberty and use of their Royal Prerogatives,
than for any known worth, or Merit of Men, have even made them great, as it
were, in imitation of the goodness of GOD, who made Man of nothing: Omne bonum
sui diffusivum: It is the nature of Goodness, to diffuse and communicate it
self, even as GOD does, other-wyse it cannot be called Goodness. The glory
of the Occean, is more for the bountiful spreading of his Branches upon the
Face of the Earth, than for his Greatness. The stateliest Tree, makes the
most stately vmbrage: Noblemen are the Shadows of Kings: as it is glorious
for the Son, to be accompanied and followed with so many bright Stars,
and Planets, whose Bodies do receive the Beams of his Light, and therewith
do beautify the Heaven about him; so are waiting Noblemen to Kings, as
Diamonds and Rubies planted about their Throne, to receive and reflect the
Splendour of the Royal Majesty.

And yet whiles it is so, we see that Christian Kings, at the Acceptance of
their Crowns, Princes like unto GOD, do creat Men of nothing.
do give their Oaths, for Defense of Religion, of Justice, and the
Commonwealth, and Preservation of that Public Dowayne, which the
Commonwealth does present unto Her Prince, as a Dote, or Tocher-Good, to be
saved for Her Mayntaynance; and vvhere-of he has the only Vsu-Fruit, and
cannot alienate it, but with her own Consent, and for some Extraordinary
service done to her, or to the Prince, who is her Head: Extraordinary, I say,
because Services Ordinary in the State, have annexed unto them, their
Ordinary Fees, and Pensions. Extraordinary I call some Act of singular Valor
for the Country, against a Common Enemy; or some Hazard vnder-gone, for
safety of the Prince his Life. Although the Patrimony of the Crown be
sacred, yet such Services are to be esteemed more sacred: and Donations, or
Rewards for these, are to stand inviolable: for here are the Ods betwixt a
Republicke, and State Royal, That the (...) has no Head Particular, who
should challenge the Privilege of such Bountifulness, or for whose sake it
should be granted: for seldom^^ does the Death of any one Man what-so-ever
breed any Commotion, Cross, or Alteration to a Republicke, Quia non moritur
Respublica: vvhere-as by the contrary, the Death of a good Prince, and often
times of an evil, does shake the very Foundations of a Kingdom: which made
Caesar to say, Non tam (...) interest quam Reipub. quam diutissime vivam. This
makes their Lives to be so precious and Sacro-sanct, they being the very
Heart, and Head of the Body of the Commonwealth. So that to hold absolutely,
that no kind of Services are remunerable, with any thing belonging to the
Crown, it is not only to cast loose the Estates of the Nobility, and
Gentri^, (whose Houses every where through Christendom, have been made up,
and erected by the Bounty of Kings for nominate and famous Services done to
them, or to their Countries) but it were also to peril the Personal
Security of Princes the^-selues; when Men should see that a King could give
noght to one, who should hazard or loose his Life for his Safety, but that
which his Successor may recall, it is to ^urbe the Royal Soveraignitie too
far. And albeit the Extens of His Majesty's late Rev^cation, did seem so
fearful to us at the first, as if it had comprehended so much; yet we are
still to remember, under what a gracious and just Prince we do live, and to
take it rather for a Warning and Awaking of our Gratitude in his first Entry:
and therefore I must here crave Pardon of all, to call to mind, how often since
I have heard from Wise and Sincere Men, that a little more of Readiness to do
him Service in the last Co^vention of our Estates, had been sufficient to
disperse the chiefest Clouds of that Tempest.

I do acknowledge, that it is not licentiate to me, nor tolerable in any
Private Subject, to censure the Reverend and long approved Magistrates of this
Kingdom, neither will I presume to do so, The last Convention of the (...) of
Scotland.
but only to expostulate, and regrate, with many Good Men, the unfortunate
Proceedour of that Counsel, whereby neither Prince nor People did receive
Contentment. Whether we should lay it upon Mistakings possible to have been
amongst the Lords of those Commissions; or, upon the Iealousies and
Competences ordinary to be betwixt New and Old Statesmen, at the Entry of
a King; Or, upon the Baseness of some Countrey-Commissioners, whose Avaryce
would not suffer the^ to resent the Common Danger of this Isle, as appertayned;
Or, upon a Popular Disgust, and General Fear, conceived for Religion, by
reason of some Noblemen of contrary Mind, employed from the Court about that
Business; Or, lastly, whether upon the Backwardness of this Time, so
disposed as it is, to breed Distraction, and Disturbance of the State.
Whatsoever was the Cause moving, certaynlie the Debacts of that Convention
were, as appears, Principia malorum, speaking of Effects: For was it then a
right Time, to answer His Majesty's Demaundes thus, That a Convention could
not go higher in taxing the Country, than a Parliament had done before? At
the last Parliament, King JAMES had a Necessity to send Ambassadors abroad,
to negotiate Peace: which I confess, was a Grave and Great Cause for
Subsidies: but at this Convention, Peace was given up, Wars begun, and it
stood upon the Loss of Germany, and Invasion of Great Britane: whereupon
might have ensued hastily greater Damnage, than of many Taxations. Or, was it
then Time, to refuse the Mayntaynance, during Wars, of 2000 Men, to keep the
Seas free, and open for our Traffic? When we shall reckon our Losses
sustained since by Sea-Traders, and by so many Mariners wanting Employment at
Home, and by losing so fair a Commodity, as was this last Year, for
transporting our Corne^ to profitable Markets, in Neighbor Countries, then
we shall decerne the Error of that Convention. We will say, we have not
been accustomed to bear so great Charges: a weak Argument. Since it has
pleased GOD, to change the Custom of our Fortune, will we contemn His
Visitations, and as senseless Men, be careless of our Country? We will
say, that our Country has suffered many Distresset, by these late bad
Years, and by Sea-Misfortunes; and I know it to be so: but must we not for
all that defend our Country? And what if we must not only maintain two
thousand Men, but also fight our selves? a thing which we have great reason
daily to expect. And I will come to the most pricking Poi^t of all: His
Majesty's Revocation has discowraged us. Whereunto I answer, by asking,
what more has His Majesty done, than any Earl or Lord in Scotland does,
who after the death of his Father, charge his Vassals and Tennants, and
preasseth them by Laws, that he may know their Holdinges? yea, and sometimes
by Manages and Threats, force them to quite their lawful Riches, although
they were their near Kins-men. Always, what wise Vassal, or Tennant, will
not strive to overcome his Lord, with reverent and humble Carriage, and
there-by to move him to accept the tenth part perhaps of that which he did
demand for Entry? and shall it not be borne with in a great King, that which
is ordinarily done by his Subjects? Bis duo dena pet as, his duo sena feres.
What if a young Prince have gotten too large Information touching these? or if
his Infor^ators be mistaken in their judgment there-anent? shall there not be
Patience granted, and time to digest and condescend? And shall not our
Behaviors be in the meane-whyle, correspondent to that Loyalty, Love, and
Obedience, that Subjectes ought unto their natural Prince, and that should
procure His Compassion and Kyndnesse toward all the Members of this Kingdom?
With GOD'S Blessing let us be doing so, and let us expect nothing, but
Christian and Upright Dealing, from a King, in whom there is so great
Appearance of Good and Just Meaning: and let us have still in our Mouths, that
Word, which now (praise to GOD for it) our Noblemen begin liberally to
profess, That let him be holden accursed, who will not contribute to his
very Shirt, for the safety of His Majesty, and of the Country.

Always, for the Point of Revocation, who doubts, but three things may
justly fall under the Consideration of young Princes? First, whether this kind
of Gracious and Divine Bounty, exercised by their Predecessors, giving
Extraordinary Things, for Ordinary Services, or for Private Affection, have
been too Exorbitant. Secondly, what may be the Merit, or Worth, so such as
have pocked them. Lastly, what is the Exigence of the Time, and how these
things may be wanting unto Princes. But otherwise, we find in all Christian
Histories, that Crowne-Lands have been alienated, and given away by Kings, for
one of three Causes, which to this Day have remained vnquarrelled by their
Successors: One is for Reward of those, who have exposed their Lives, to
manifest Danger, for the Safety of Their Persons: As for Example, The Lands
given by His Majesty, our late Sovereign, for Services done against the
Traitors of Gourie, or for Practices of Discovery, and Prevention of the
Powder Treason at London: another for Valiant and Personal Services, done for
Preservation of the Country, against Invasion of Foreign Enemies, or of the
State, from Intestine: as we read of our brave King Malcolme the second, who
seeing the Magnanimity of the Scottish Gentry, against the fierce and enraged
Danes, by five or six Bloody and Desperate Battles, in diverse parts of the
Country, where he him self did assist in Person: therefore in a Public
Parliament, he did divide almost the whole Crown Lands in Baronies, and dispone
them to the Gentry, In publico ordinum convent^ (says my Text) cunctas ^pes,
agrosque regios, pene omnes meritoru^ habita rations distribuit, regno in
parts quas Baronias voca^t divisio. In regard whereof, those Barons, as by
Compaction, did at that same time, annex to the Crown, the Wards and Reliefes
of their Lands: which together with the other Casualities, and Dues belonging
to the Crown, was esteemed and accepted as a sufficient Mayntaynance then of
the Royal Dignity. If either of those two should be revocable, Kings,
Countries, and Commonwealths, should not be compted so Sacred, as they ought
to be. Thirdly, Princes have mortified their Crown Patrimony, to Piety and
Devotion; as King David the first of Scotland, for Plantation of fifteen
Abbayes, and four Bishoprics, ri^chly Rented: Such are recalled in this
latter Age, because of the Nefa^tious and Damnable Abuses, wherewith the
Possessours of them were commonly polluted.

And, O how greatly it were to be wished! That neither King David, To be
wished, that the Church-La^ds had ever remained with the Crown.
nor other Christian Kings, had been so prodigal of their Crown
Patrimonies, in Favors of Churchmen: for the World knows it now, that by
so doing, they did ^urne Religious Priests, into Temporal Princes, and did put
into their Hand, that Sword, wherewith to this Day, they not only do cut the
Throats of Kings, and their Authority, but have spoiled the Purity and
Piety of the Church of GOD: and in Place thereof, have introduced this
Pollution, Pride, Avarice, and Superstition, which shall never have an end, so
long as they remain so rich as they are: Devotio peperit divitias, and filia
devoravit matrem: Riches have spoiled the Piety of the Church.
Devotion (says Gerson) bred Riches, and the Daughter devoured the Mother.
Next, it were to be wished, that when those Lands of the Church, anciently
belonging to the Crown, were again dissolved from the Church, and annexed to
the Crown, by our late Sovereign, of blessed Memory, that they had been
suffered to remain therewith, for the avoiding of so great Coffeehouse and
Confusion, as is like to grow thereof, if they should now be taken in to the
Crown, without Restitution to so many Gentlemen, and others, as have
employed the best part of their Means, for buying of those things from the
Newlie-Erected-Lords, without any Warrandize at all for their Money. Which,
albeit it do greatly perplexe the Mynds of many good Subjects, yet we are
undoubtedly to hope for Reparation, some way of these, since we live under a
Christian Prince, who is already honored of the World, for the Equity of his
Mynd^; and who has already declared his Just Intentions there-anent.

There is, beside another Cause, that makes our Noblemen and Gentry, to
think themselves the sibber to the Church-rents: and this is it; Because their
Predecessors did also enjoye them in effect, albeit not Titularlie, as well
then, as they do now. Their Sons were presented by the Kings, The Laici^ did
spend the Church-rents in, even in time of Pope^^ie.
to the Benefices of the Church. Themselves did often times feed at their
Tables, and gather up the Super-plus of the Rent. The Sons of Mean
Gentlemen, went to the Monasticke Life every where: If they had many
Daughters, they did send some of them to the Religious Convents of Women:
which was a singular Disburden and Relief, both of Greater and Smaller
Houses, (speaking civillie, and in Civil Respects:) And this is yet the
chiefest Cause, why the Riches of the Papal Church, are so tolerable by
Princes, and People of that Profession: so that whiles numbers of Men and
Women, of all sorts, were nowrished anciently by the Church Revenewes in
Scotland, it would be thought strange, to bestow them upon so few Churchmen
as now be, who, I confess, are worthy of Augmentation. But that they should
be made so Rich, or Great, we see what a pestilent Gangren^ that has been
already.: And it is sure enough, that the same Causes, will ever produce the
same Effects. The World is aye like to it self, and Men are still Men: Et
omnia vertuntur in Circulum.

There is not, of Humane Things, a more Extravagant, and Rare Contemplation,
than to consider, how Princes, States, and People of Christendom, The
stupiditie of Princes and People, not observing the Evils following upon the
Riches of the Church.
have been so Blinde-folded, or Hood-winked, that they could not perceive the
Fearful Increase of the Church Rents, and Riches, with the Pernicious Evils,
bred, and brought in with them; unto the time, that things were past remedy
almost, and that the Church had nearlie devoured the State in every part. We
read in the Histories, that before the Separation of the Church of Rome, made
by LUTHER, trial being taken, and Explorations by Kings, and States, who began
to be jealous of the Church Riches, it was found, that through all the
Christian Countries of Europe, the hundredth part of the People, did possess
the tenth part of the Revenewes of all, at least, above the Fisque of
Testaments, of Lands, and Mooueables, largely legaced to them. We find
again, in the French Writers, that the Year 1513, the like Search being
curiously made in France, it was proved, that the whole Rents, and Emoluments
of that Country, being set to twelve parts, the Ecclesiastical Persons did
possess seven thereof: there being found, by this Disquisition, with-in the
Provinces of France, 12 Archbishoprickes, The number of the Ecclesiastical
Estates in (...)
104 Bishoprics, ^40 Abbayes, 27400 Curies^ and danger to have been hudge
many more Curies, if Pope John the twenty two, had not abolished the Decree
of Pope Nicolaus, who permitted, that all Mendicant Religious, should enjoy the
Fruits of Lands left to them by Laicke Persons, the property of the Land being
said to belong to the Popes themselves. An impudent Subtlety, to cover the
Violation of the Mendicant his oath of Poverty: seeing as the Law says, How
Princes do remember these Evils.
The Propriety is unprofitable to one, where the Vsu-fruit is perpetual to
another. So that Kings and States perceiving, that if this kind of Claudestine
Purchase of the Church, and the daily growing of her Riches, were not
interrupted, their People and Territories would by time be stolen away. They
began everie-where almost to intercept it. King Edward the first of England,
prohibited by a Law, that any Churchman should conquish Lands, or succeed to
Legacies. King Henry the eight, took from the Church. King Charles, the fifth
of Spain, made the like Prohibition to the former, in the Low-Countreyes,
against Church-Conquishes, and Legacies. And at this day, the Venetians
(besides the Exterminion of the Jesuits) have done the same; and so have
Florence, and other Princes of Itali^ done the like: Otherwise, it had come to
pass, with-in few Years, that whole Italy had been as one Closter. But we
are not to be jealous of this point here: our Church is plagued with the
contrary Extreme.

Coming now (according to the Order proposed in the beginning of this
Treatise) to speak of our Conceived Fears, The nature of Tithes.
for the Reformation intended of Tithes: first, it is a Question of Theology,
and I am no Doctor there: next, it belongs but per accidens to this Purpose:
lastly, it is a Subject vnplausable to treat of in this Time, by any, who
would speak vprightlie. But as Saint John says, The Truth shall make thee
Free, I shall need no other Apology, but to follow the Verity, in that I
mean to write, where-of I shall make no long Discourse, (which were both
impertinent, and unnecessary, in a thing so current, and well understood
already, and so largely and learnedlie written of, by many, both Scottish
and English) but restraining my self, to two or three Circumstances, where-of
some have not been remarked by any that I have yet read upon this Argument.

The Original Mention of Tithes in the Scripture, Of Tenthes.
by the Practice of Abraham in Genesis^ The devoting of the^ by GOD'S own Mouth
to Moses, in Leviticus: the End and Use of the^ in Deuternomie: And the
Execratio^ and Cursing of things once devoted and made sacred, by GOD Himself,
in Numbers, and in Joshua, are Texts so clear and indisputable, that at least,
for the time of the Law, no Man does question. All that we go about, who be
Opponents to Evangelicall Decimation, The Arguments used against Evangelicall
Tenthes.
is, to enforce, that Tenthes were ceremonial in the Mosaicke, ending with
Consummatum est, and have no warrant in the Gospel, where CHRIST in two places
only does speak of Tithes of the Mint and Annise: These ought ye to have done,
and not omit the other. And again, in Luke, comparing betwixt the Publicane
and Pharisee, who vaunted of the just Payment of his Tenthes, CHRIST did blame
only his Ostentation, and not his Payment of the Tenthes, To both which
Places, we make this Answer, That at that time the Ceremonial Law was in
full strength, and aye until Consummatu^^est. And for that respect, CHRIST did
suffer the Payment of Te^^es: And we say, Seeing CHRIST has changed both the
Priesthood, and the Law, and supplied their Rowmes, and has given no Order for
the Church Revenewes of Tenthes, therefore he has abolished the same. Again,
CHRIST about the sending forth of His Apostles, and speaking of their
Mayntaynance, Matthew. 10. Provide neither Silver nor Gold in your Purses, for
the Worke-man is worthy of his Meat. Here he makes no Mention at all of
Tenthes, as the Place did require, in Case the Tenthes had been due to the
Church.

Thus we cast it over to the Apostles, and there we do also pretend the same
Argument. That where Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 9. does plead at large for
Mayntaynance, he keeps himself upon General Terms, without any Mention
of Tenthes: who feeds a Flock, and does not eat of the Milk thereof? If
we have sown Spiritual things to you, is it a great thing, if we reap your
carnal things? Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox, that treads out
the Corn. And so we say, albeit CHRIST and His Apostles, have allowed Livinges
for Preachers, yea, let the^ be never so ample, yet they have not tied us to a
number, whereunto the Answers are made, that Saint Paul in the same Chapter,
has included the Tenthes, by the General, in these words, He that
ministers about holy things, must live of the Temple; and the Wayters on the
Altar, on the things thereof. That by the things of the Temple, and the Altar,
are signified the Tenthes, albeit he did not express it, in regard they
were then in the Hands of the Pharisees, and could not be challenged, nor
gotten by Law, by Private and Poor Men, as the Apostles were; but contrary
should have increased the Malice of the Jews against them, in Case they had
been sought.

Farther, we study to prove, that Tithes were Ceremonial: First, by reason of
an Absolute and Only Place, whereunto they were brought, to Jerusalem. Why they
ar^ thought Ceremonial.
Secondly, because of the Number, whereby specially we contend, to exclude the
Morality of Tenths, and astrict them to a Ceremony, seeing Natural Reason
would as well allow the Eleventh, as the Tenth Portion, or the Twelft rather,
because the Levites were one of the xij Tribes. And lastly, for their
Employment at Jerusalem* as we have it, Deuteronomy. 14. If the way be long, that
thou art not able to carry thy Tenthes, where the Lord has chosen to set His
Name, then thou shall turn them into Money, and go to the place, and thou
shall bestow the Money for whatsoever thy soul lusts after, Ox, Sheep,
wine, or strong Drink^^ and thou shall eat, and rejoice before the Lord, thou,
and thy Family: thou shall not forsake the Levite within thy gates, nor the
Stranger, nor the Widow, nor the Fatherless. Al which things do smell a
Ceremonial Institution, as we allege, and whereupon there be great and
learned Disputes agitate by diverse of our Contrymen: amongst all which, and
all that can be said for Tenths, it seems to me, that the truest Light is to
be drawn from the Practice of Abraham; by which it appears, they were
Evangelicall, before they were Mosaicall. If long before the Ceremonial or
Written Law, Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec, The Priests of Melchisedek.
how can we hold Tenths to be Ceremonial? albeit we had not that clear
Explication thereof, by S. Paul, Heb. 7, where in the person of Melchisedec, he
proves the Excellency of Christ's Priesthood, above that of Aaron: He proves
Melchis. to be a Priest from two things: from the Discharge of his Office, He
blessed Abraham: and from that which was annexed to his Office, He tythed
Abrahum. If any would object, that Abraham did offer to him those Tenthes, not
of bound duty, but out of his private Charity, or from a Custom that was
used before him, or from the Light of Nature only, (whereof I shall speak
somewhat herafter) that were to annull the Proof of Melchis* his Priesthood,
set down by the Apostle, yea, it were to change the Text, because the Active
word, is in the person of Melchis. and not of Abrah. For it is not said, that
Abr. tythed himself, but that Melchis. ty^hed Abrah. Melchis. decimavit Abrah.
And the Greek word, Verse. 6. of that Chap. (...) does import no less,
how-so-ever the English Translation is received.

Next again, that by Melchis. the Apostle understands Christ, it is evident,
when he says of Him, Verse. 8. Here men die, that do receive Tithes, (meaning
the Levi^s) but there He receives them, of whom it is written, that He lives:
which is undoubtedly spoken of Christ; for so are the words, Verse* 13. and 14.
He of whom these things are written, pertayneth to another Tribe, whereof no
man serves at the Altar, for it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah.
Farther, it is plain, that the Priesthood there spoken of, is an eternal
Priesthood, Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the Order of Melchis.
Whereupon it must follow, that Tithes being the Due of an Eternal Priesthood,
must also themselves be eternal* Abraham saw my day, and did rejoice, says
CHRIST.

And I put the Case, this Point were not so clear as it is, we might find
another Ground, whereby we should see our selves tied to this Burden of Tithes
Evangelicallie: and that is by the Devoting of them, done by Christian Princes,
People, and States, who we may think, before the Church (I suppose) could
challenge them by any Warrant, have been moved to give unto her a Warrant, by
that same Spirit, Tithes devoted by positive Laws.
that moved Abraham, many Years before the Law was given out for Tenthes.
Constantine the Great, and Charlemayne, did begin this Plantation of the Church
Rents, Authority, and Privileges, and others everie-where did follow them.
Then we know, what is the Nature of things once devoted to GOD, Levit. 27.
Verse. 28. No devoted thing, that a Man shall devote to the LORD, both of Man
and Beast, and of the Possession of his Field, shall be redeemed: Every
devoted thing, is holy unto the LORD. And Levit. 5. Verse. 15. If a Soul do
sin, through Ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD, he shall make a
mendes in the holy thing, and shall add a fifth part thereunto.

The Popes them selves, have acknowledged their Possession of Tithes, to be
aliene from the Practice or Pleading of the Primitive Church, and that their
Titles thereunto have flowed from the only Devotion and Donation of Christian
Kings, as may be seen in Can. futuram Ecclesiam, and cap. videntes, 12. Q. 1.
which Bellarmine does stand to, Tom. 1. contra 5. lib. 1. cap. 25. And we may
try it to be so, by the Entry of the Christian Faith in Scotland, Anno 203.
King Donald the first did procure, by his Ambassador sent to Pope Victor, the
coming of some Priests into this Kingdom, for receiving of him, his Family,
and Nobility, to the Church, by Baptism: where there is no Mention of any
Title pretended, or any Suit made by the said Pope for Tithes. When Dedication
in Scotland.
But whole four Ages thereafter, to wit, Anno 578, our King Convallus,
without Challenge or Requisition from the Pope, he of him self did authorize
the Terror and Force of Excommunication, and established to the Church, the
Tenthes of Scotland, Edixit ut decimas omnium terrae nascentium cuncti in
Sacerdotu^ horrea deferrent: by which it appears, that every Man then had
his own Tithes. Farther, he gave to the Priests, Mansions and Dwelling
places, near to the Churches: Praedium in Templi vicinia ubi secretus a vnlgo
habitaret. Withal two things are to be understood: First, that a great part
of those Rentes were employed to the rich deco^ing of Church Fabrickes,
Christi Templa valde ornari voluit. Secondly, that before then, there were
multitudes of Religious people in Scotland, (that Age of the Occidentall World
being, as it were, an Influence, or Inundation of Piety, and Zeal to GODS
Glory) for the History tells, that he sent to Yreland, for that renowned
Abbot, Sanctus Columba; by whose Advyce, Contraxit Monachos spars^s ad id
tempus, and soliv^g^s; inunum, indeque per Caeno^ia quae Convalli pietas
struxer at, distribut^s (...) and vitanon vulgatae observationis instituit.
Where the Author (to let us see, how the Devoting of Tithes, The Benedi^^ne
order frequent, and ^amous in Scotland.
and Foundation of Monasticke places, went always together) he makes
Mention of the Benedictine Order their Frequencie in Scotland before then, and
many Abbayes erected for them: where it is most worthy Observation, his
Judgment of the Revenewes and Riches of the Church, Plurima inter nostrates
celeberrima su^t hujus ordinis Caenobla, hactenus viris pietate clarissimis
habitata, virtute fortassis insigniori, majorique veneratione apud posteros
perseveratura, si ad otium and luxum Regum munificentia, tanta sagina ea non
oner asset: that is to say, There were then in Scotland, many famous Abbayes,
of the Benedictine Order, hitherto inhabited by Men of singular Piety, and
wherein the Sincerity of Religious Virtue might have (...) flowrishing, and
recommendable to all Posterity, if the too great Bounty of Princes did not
over-barde^ them with the Fatness of Ydle-seat and Ri^^hes.

By this doing of Conva^^, I say, it seems, that the Church has gotten a
sufficient Warrant to our Tithes, by Positiu^ Christian Laws, albeit we
should repyne at the Warrand^s brought out of the Gospel. And even the most
Learned of the Protestant side, do hold it the surest Title of the two. The
greatest part of the Reformed Churches of France, do hold it after the Mind
of the learned Calvine, who has left behind him the same Opinion to the
World, in his Treatise upon Job, and upon the 18 of Nu^s Verse. 20, Calvin^, and
Perkins, deny Tithes Evangelicall.
Sed eas a Lai^is occupari quo passus fuisset Papa, si jure divino (ut in^^lse
garriunt) sacra fuisseut Cleri hereditas. Which Opinion is thought to have
begun from the old Valdenses, who did inhabit there about: who seeing the
great Abuse of Tithes under the Church of Rome, did hold, that Tithes
vveremeere Almes^ and no way belonging to the Church. This also was the Mind
of John Hu^. And that great Divine Perkins, on Gal. 3. and 25. The Allowance of
Tithes, says he, stands not in Force, in this and other Commonwealths, by
the Judicial Law of GOD to the Jews, but by Positive Laws of Countries.
These Men think it no fault to give Tithes to the Church, but hold it not
necessary from any Warrant of the Gospell^ they do allow of a sufficient
Church Mayntaynance, but not the same Quetum. And when it is objected to them,
Why should these Beggarlie Jewish Rudiments, and that perishing Priesthood of
the Law, have so rich a Patrimony, and the Glorious Revelation of the
Gospel, a poor and necessitous Ministry? They do answer, Because their
Riches and Forms are diverse, and perhaps contrary; that consisting in Show,
and this in Substance; that being altogether Earthly, and this altogether
Spiritual: and being in this Point too much possessed by Puritan Humors,
Puritanes opposed to the Pops Church, even in good things.
they do not admit that Splendour and Decorement of Churches, nor that
external Pomp and Majesty, of Public Worship, which in my Mind is not
discommendable in the Popes Church. Whereunto they are in all things opposed,
as well in the best Points of Government, and Indifferent Ceremonies, as in the
Maine Grounds of Faith. And farther, it is not to be doubted of, but that so
Profound a Divyne as Cal^^ne, understanding so well as he did, the Arts of the
Papal Pride, he thought it a good Way, for destroying of Superstition, and
Tyranny in the Church, to deny her any Right of Tithes, other than by
Donation, and Charity of Christian Princes, so long as she should remain free
from Heresy, and wicked Abuses, and otherwise might be taken from her.

Now I come to the Circumstance of the Quotum, to consider if there might have
been any matter of Sanctity, Ceremony, or Type in the number of 10, why GOD
choosed the Tenth Portion, to be sacred unto Himself, rather than the ninth,
eleventh, or twelft; and whether Abraham did light upon that number, by any
instinct of Nature common to other People. And first, I will tell you, that
there was never hitherto any Nation heard of, so Barbarous, in whose Hearts
Nature did not ingraue this Law, to adore the DEITY by external Ceremonies of
Worship, consisting in stately Temples, costly Altars, and Images, daily
Oblations of sumptuous Sacrifices, and Mayntaynance of multitudes of
Sacrificators; Tithes understood by natural Light of the Gentiles.
that it is admirable to behold, how Gentiles in external Zeal, have gone
beyond even true Worshippers, so far, that many of them, did allot and
dedicate to Religious Service, much more than Tithes. We read in Dionys.
Halicarn. that Romulus, the first Found^^r of Rome, divided the whole
Territories there of in three parts; one for the Priests, and Public Worship;
another for the Domaine of the Commonwealth; the third for the People; there
being of People for that time 3000, and 18000 Iugera of Land, where-of were
reserved 6000, for the Sacrifices, and Sacrificators. And that this Division of
Romulus, according to Diadorus, was an Imitation of the Egyptians, who in like
manner, did originallie make a Tripartion of the Revenewes of the Land,
where-of the first was for the Priests, and Sacrifices, the second for the
King, and Public Charges of the State, the third for the Calasyres, who were
Soldiers, and Men of Arms. And from the most esteemed Histories of
Antiquity, we have numbers of Testimonies, that the Gentiles knew by the
Light of Nature, that Tithes were Sacred unto GOD, namely, of their Spoils,
and Victories; and therefore did offer and sacrifice them under the Name of
Victimae, quasi vi ictae. Herpocration, Dydymus, and Pausamas, do witness,
that the Greeks gave the Tenth of their Spoils in War, unto their Gods.
Cyrus the Less, gave the Tenth of his Money taken from Captives, to Apollo,
and Diana, at Ephesus. Agis gave his at Delphos: Agesilaus in two years, above
100 Talents of Tithes, to the same place. Pliny relates, that the Sabeans
might not sell their Frankincense, under the pain of Death, until the Priests
had their Tithes: The Aethiopians divided with a Staff, the Bundels of Caunell
and Casia, and first gave GOD His part. Plutarch is Author, that Hercules did
sacrifice every Tenth Bullock, that he took from Geiron by force. The
Tenthes of the Spoils of the Platean VVarres, were dedicate to the Gods*
Socrates has in his Ecclesiastical Kalendars, that Alcibiades gave
commandment for Tenthes to the Gods, from all those that sailed from Pontuu:
When the Veii were taken Prisoners, and the Romans made Peace with the
V^lfians, Camillus made the Romans to pay to Apollo, the Tithes of their
Spoils, and it was allowed of the Senate. Plutarch writes of Lucullus, that
he became incomparably Rich, because he observed the paying of Tonthes to
Hercules. Xenophon witnesses, that others paid in the Countries about, their
Tithes to Apollo. Festus says, Decima quaeque veteres Diis suis offerebant.
Which so universal a Practice does show some Evidence to have proceeded from
the True Light of Nature, before the Written Law, and from the days of Noa, to
have been de^yved to all Nations; otherwise, how was it possible, that such a
Religious Due, so a-nearing unto the Truth of GOD'S Worship, could have been
so generally followed of the Gentiles?

It being so, we are not to doubt, but that Abraham, with this Duke Light of
Nature, common to the Gentiles, where through he did see, as with the Left Eye,
his Religious Duty, concerning Tithes: he had also the Divyne Light; which
as a Right Eye, did demonstrate unto him the Secret of that Mystery; wherefore
the LORD GOD did choose His own Portion under the Number of 10, as most Holy,
and most Perfect in it self.

And here I will borrow (for more clearing of the Nature of Tenthes a little
of your Patience, Mystorie of the number ^0.
for a pleasant Intercourse, to set down, as I have found it in the Remote and
Mysticke Theology, the Reason of the Number 10, and of the Holy Respect, and
Perfection that is into it, and which has been naturally engraven into the
Hearts of Men, even amidst the greatest Darkness of Gentilisme. Created, or
Isntrumental Wisdom.
We read in the Scripture, that God in the Creation of the World, did employ
an isntrumental Wisdom, Omnia fecisti Domine, in numero, pondero, and
mensura, which is called, The created Wisdom of GOD, Wisd. Salom. 7.
Where-of it is said, The LORD created her through the holy Ghost, he has
seen her, numbered her, measured her, and powered her out upon his Creatures,
Eccles. 1.
reme^bered by Esa^, Who measured the Waters* in the hollow of his Hand, Esai
40. Chapter
who met the Heavens with the Span, and weighed the Mountains in a Balance.
The LORD JESUS CHRIST being the increated, and eternal VVisdome, (...) Se^
Sermo Patris, that Word, whereby all things were created, and whereof says
the Gospel, In Him, for Him, and by Him. The nature of Number in general.
Of these three Instruments, whereby GOD framed Nature, Number has the
Prioritie and Precedence, as having nearest Alliance unto GOD, by reason of
Infinity: GOD is infinite, and so is Number, Non datur numerus quo non possit
dari major. No Number is so great, whereunto Addition may not he made. Nature
of Angels.
Again, the Angels, who be nearest and lykest unto GOD, they are only
capable of Number: they do not receive either Dimention or Weight, because
they are pure Spirits, occupying no Place circu^script^uelie, but
definitiuelie, Habent suum^^bi, as I may say, definitiuelie, my Mind is at
London, Paris, or Rome, although it occupy there no Place. The Celestial
Orbs under the Angels, are capable both of Numbers and Dimension: the Extent
and Limits of their Place we do see, but they admit no Weight: and being
Mediant Creatures, betwixt the Angels, and Element arie Corporal things, that
do receive all three, Numerum, Mensuram, and Pondus. The Orbs have into them,
no Ponderous Matter, Quia omnis materia est capax and appetens novarum
formarum: All ponderous matter, is subject to daily mutation of form, whereas
the form of the Celestial Spheres is perpetually one, and the same.

To return to the first of these three, GOD is Unity, Verity, and Bonitie.
( Number) the ancient Theologues, did use three Words, for expressing of the
Nature and Essence of GOD, so nearlie as they could, Deus est Vnitas, Veritas,
Bonitas, and haec tria unum sunt: noting by Bonitie, His Goodness; by Verity,
His VVisdome; there is VVisdome, but in Verity; and by Unity, His Power: In
Union Potestas, as we say, The greater Strength, does consist in the greater
Union: Vis unita fortior. Therefore says Plato, Anima est multitudo mobilis,
Angelus multitudo immobilis, Definition of Unity.
Deus immobilis Vnitas. Now (say the Arithmeticians) of Unity, that it is
Matter Numerorum. The Mother of Number: and of Number, Numerus est multipli^atio
vnitatis: that is, the Multiplication of Unity, even as the goodness of GOD,
is the Mother and Fountain where-from did flow, all those good Creatures; and
they again are the Number of the Species and Particulars of GOD'S goodness,
diffused through the World: so that GOD being Unity Himself, He did by
diffusion of His Goodness, in diverse ways multiply this Unity, both in
Number, and things to be numbered. Unity in Number, is like the Center of the
Circle: GOD is the Center of all Things.
if ye take a Circle (for Example, a Compass of two Arms that Artisanes use)
and do close the Arms thereof in one, it is no more a Circle, but a Center:
do extend and spread it forth again, and it is a Circle. The Sea of the
glorious Godhead, did rest before the Creation, into the Center of it selfs
Contemplation, and thereinto was whole Nature latent, as the Tree into the
Seed: there-after by virtue of that Eternal Word, was blown up, and expanded
this Circamference of the Universe, as so many Lines from the Center, and so
many Numbers from the Unity. The Jewish Caballe, does celebrate a kind of
Omnipotency of this Unity, because it makes all Numbers, being without
Beginning or End it self. Before there were variety of things created,
Unity was: neither can we suppo^e so great a Number of things, whereunto
we may not add one more. So that, like unto GOD, it has neither Beginning
nor ^nde.

Now, if we will hold, that GOD does comprize several things, GOD has
particular respects, for particular Numbers.
under several Numbers, by guess, or casuallie, as that He placed six
Planets in the Heavens, and the seventh to fill them with Light, and but two
Eyes in a Man's Head, to receive that Light. He did reveal His Will toward
His CHVRCH, by His Word in the Apocalipses, under Seven times seven, and
planted but two Ears in our Head, to hear that Word. He made six
Laborious Days in the Week, and the seventh of Rest, and the World as a
Week of 6000. Toylsome and Traveling Years, and the Seventh Thousand as a
Sabbath of Quietitude and Rest: noting that way once the Creation and
Enduration of the World, and then the visible Light of the World, Great use
of the Number. 7.
and the Spiritual Light, under this Number of 7: yea, in diverse places
shadowing under the same Number, the Work of our Redemption. The Candlestickes
of the Church, were Seven. GOD told to the Prophet, that He had yet 7000, who
had not bowed their Knee to Baall. Naman was commanded, to be washed Seven
times in Jordan. The Fever left the Son of the Centurion the Seave^th hour.
David praised GOD Seven times a day. Eliseus, by Seven times breathing, did
restore the Son of the Sunamitish; which interpreted Captive, and by the
Mystical Theology, is said to figure the Sons of Adam, then lying dead
under the Law, which was no more able to restore them, than that Rod in the
Hand of Giesi, Eliseus Servant, did restore that Child, but Eliseus did it
himself, by Seven Breathings, Oscitavit septies. To hold, I say, that GOD
does not see in every Number, and every nu^bred thing, a Reason of
Convenience Natural in His Insearchable Wisdom, it were both Ignorance and
Impiety: We cannot deny it, when-so-ever we remember, how we would think
that Architector unworthy his Wages, who could not contryue our House with a
competent Number of Lights, according to the Proportion of R^wmes, and
commodity of the Sun Beams.

As I have said of Unity, that it is so much esteemed, not only resembling
GOD, by the Possibility of Infinite Multiplication, but implying good things
in its own Nature, Simplicity, Verity, Strength, which made Aristotle, in
one of his Metaphysickes, to say, that the Ancients did so honor this Unity
in Number, Quod ex ejus materia generarent ipsum ens, that they said, Attour
the Universe, the Eternal Being it self, did consist thereof.

So to come to Dualitie, we shall find a Natural Reason, why a Weakness
and Evil do frequentlie follow upon that Number, Nature of the Dualitie.
as if it were cursed; because it is the first Number that breaks the
Blessed Unity, and makes Division, which in it self is evil, Omne regnum
in se divisum, desolabitur. Exemples heere-of, The first Mention that we
find of this Dualitie, in the first of Genesis, GOD created Heaven and Earth:
and the Earth was barren and empty. Two Lights in the Heaven, and one of them
is monethlie defective. Lucifer parted the Court of Heaven in two. CHRIST is
One, Satan Two; HEAVEN. One, Hell Two; MERCY One, Justice Two. GOD did
separate the Light from the Darkness: that was One, and this Two. So did GOD
in the Creation in a sort execrate this Number, as the Enemy of Unity, and a
proper Number of Evil, or of things defective: for so it is frequentlie found
in the Scripture, Two Testimonies against Christ, Two Debtors unable, Two blind
Beggars, Two traiterous Eunuchs, Two Larrouns hanged with CHRIST, Two
insatiable Leeches, Two doubting Disciples, going to Emmaus: And, as says
Eccles. Look through all the Works of the MOST HIGH, and ye shall ever find,
Vnum contra duo, One against two. A Man has two Feet, two Hands, two Eyes,
but one of them is backward. Man and Woman are a joined Dualitie, but one of
them is impotent: there be two Testamentes in the Book of GOD, but one of
them is full of Terror and Damnation. The Scripture says, Cor duas vias
ingrediens non inveniet requiem: An heart that uses double ways, shall find
no rest. And by a common word, we do call a Man, Double, who is known to
be false, and deceitful.

Of the other several Proprieties given by GOD to several Numbers, I could
indeed dilate a long Discourse, but impertinent here, and tedious: I make
haste to that I have to do with at this time, the Number Ten. As the Unity is
like unto GOD, So is the Novemarie, or Nine, Nature of the Novenarie, or Number
9.
like unto his Works in this Fabric of the Universe: as the World
comprehends all things in it, and cannot be comprehended it self, but of
GOD, without whom it should remain imperfect, wanting Head and Life; so does
the Number 9 contain into it all the Numbers, and parts of Number, vvhyles it
self cannot be closed, nor made Perfect, but by One, which is not a Number,
but the Mother of Number: without the Addition whereof, to make up Ten, which
is the Fullness and Perfection of Number, this 9 seems Unhappy, VVeake,
Necessitous, and Indigent, albeit it contain all the Species of Number: For of
Paritie, it has Two, and Four; and of Imparitie, Three and Five. The
Perfection of 10 is seen by Sensible Truth; for when we once arrive at 10,
there is no more Numbering, but by Iteration of 10, or the parts thereof; as
every Man knows, it is the Fullness of Number: For the Cabbalists, to show
the Want and Indigence of 9, for lack of this Unity, they put up on a Board,
999, saying the nakedness thereof is publicly seen by any Eye that looks
upon it. See Plato, 234.

Next again, it is to be understood of 10, as it is a full and perfect
Number, so it is the Quotient and Continent of Nature, comprehending the whole
several Species of GOD'S Creatures: first, will we consider those that are
Intellectual, Ten, is the Quotient, or fullness of Nature.
and Invisible, all the Divynes agree, that there be nine Hierarchies of
Angels, that CHRIST Himself is the tenth: He is that great Angel, of the
Testament promised to come to the Church, Statim veniet ad Templum Angelus
Testamenti quem vos expectatis. He is that Angel, sent before Moses, of whom
GOD said unto him, Be aware of Him, and offend Him not, because My Name is
into Him. The full Name of GOD can be into none, but in CHRIST, of whom says
the GOSPEL, In quo habitat omnis plenitudo Deitatis. Will we again consider
the visible Works, we shall find them for Species, comprysed within the
Quotient of Ten. The Spheres, the Intelligences, or Spirits that move them,
the Lights into them, the three Elements, the Mineral Creatures, the
Vegitable, the Sensible, and Man, who was made to the perfect Image of GOD,
super-added for the Tenth, without the which Tenth, the other Nine (as any Man
may see) were so naked and indigent, that in a sort they did serve to no use:
but the whole World, before the Creation of Man, did look as a Glorious
Palace, of Magnificke Artifice and Furniture, in all things, inhabited with
Myse and Rats, who could make no use thereof, nor yet honor or admire the
Builder. Only this accomplished Tenth Creature, Man, Man, was the first Tithe.
did serve to rule those others; to explore and contemplate their Nature, to
make use of them, and there-vpon to found and sound the Praises and Worship of
their Maker: yea, (as the Platonicks say, and which I think cannot be
disproved) after the Change of Nature, and Consummation of Time, the Specificke
kinds of all those 9, are conserved eternally, by the Eternity of Man, whose
Constitution does participate, and is contryved of all their kynds, as we
know: for with the Minerals, He has Being; with the Plants, He is ^egitable;
with Beasts, Sensible; with the Heavens, moveable; and with the Angels,
Intellectual.

And when Adam by his Fall having tossed this Tenth Perfection and Dignity,
was casten from Paradise, and whole Nature accursed, and made defective for
his Cause; CHRIST was the second Tithe.
Then the LORD GOD did send His Eternal Son, in the fullness of Time, to
undertake the Person of Man, for Restitution of that Pitiful Decadence of
Nature, and to be that Sacred Tenth, which should again renew and accomplish
her Fullness and Glory in that Perfect Number, figured in this Mystical
Theology, by that New Song of David. DEVS cantabo Tibi Canticum novum, in
Psalterio decacordo Psallam Tibi: My GOD, Psalm. 144.
I shall sing unto Thee a new Song, and shall play before Thee upon a Psalterie
of ten Cords. The Works of Nature are said to be a Music and Harmony, and
thereof Theologues ancientlie have written whole Books. Next again, we know,
that in Scripture Sin is signified by the Old Man, or the Old Garment, and
we are bidden put on the New Man, JESUS, the New Adam, the New Tithe,
typicallie expressed by this Prophetical New Song of David, upon these Ten
Cords of Nature foresaid, by His Incarnation then refreshed, and made new.
Again, they hold this Mystery of Ten, to be figured by that Sign which was
given by GOD, of the Restitution of Ezechias, when the Sun came back Ten
Degrees, or Lines, upon the Horologe of Achaz, Reverti faciam umbram linearum,
per quas descenderat in horologio Achaz in Sole, retrorsum december lineis. CHRIST
is the Sun of the World, called by the Prophet Es. Sol Oriens ex alto, and
by the Gospel, Lux illuminans omnem hominem. There is no true Restitution of
Life, nor Salvation, but in Him: He descended by these Ten Orders or Species
of GOD'S Creatures, rehearsed by me, even to the Helles, and returned by the
same, Reversus est Sol per gmdus per quos descenderat. Farther, that the same
is figured by that Tenth piece of Silver in the Gospel, for the which when it
was lost, by that Woman in Luke, she neglected the Nine, to go and seek it:
and by the 99 Sheep, which also were neglected, until that One was found,
that made even Ten times ten.

With this kind of Theology, they conjoyne a natural Reason, thus, The
Figure of the World is Rotund and Circular: more, it is Limited, and not
Infinite, both which are manifest. Next, CHRIST began, and clozed the Circle of
Nature.
say they, a Circle is never perfectly ended, unto the time that the Line of
the Circumference go about to cloze at the Point where-at it did begin: this
also is sensible true. The beginning of Things, was the Incarnate Word, as
says Saint John, In principi^ erat verbum: not the beginning Mosaicke (which
was but Principium principiatum, the beginning of Time) but Principium
principiaus, the beginnining that did begin all things, Ex quo, iu quo, and per
quam omnia. So CHRIST being the Beginning, and as we know, Man the last created
of all things, and hindmost made of GOD, the Circular Line of Nature could
never be concluded, until the First Point was joined with the Last, that the
Beginning should be the End, and the End the Beginning, one Point, both Alpha
and Omega: the Son of GOD, who was the First, conjoined with Man, who was the
Last: GOD becoming Man, and Man becoming GOD, did in the fullness of Time
cloze this Circle, in being the Holy and Perfect second Tenth, of all the
Creatures now renewed, and by descending and returning through these Ten
Degrees, which made Rabb. Mos. Hardasan, in mysterious Words to say of CHRIST,
A Speech of Robo^ Mes. Hardas. worthy observation.
whilst he writes upon Genesis, and cites this Text of David, Psalm. 50,
Ostendam tibi salutare DEI. This is a Scripture (says he) of great weight
and importance, that the Salvation of Israel, is the Salvation of GOD: that is
to say, The preservation and perfection of His Works, for GOD Himself shall
be the price and payment of His own Redemption. Vt qui non nihil frumenti ex
se^onda decima reliquum habet, and id redemit: as he who had resting some
Corn of his second Tithe, he did redeem it. This First and Second Tithe, are
even as that beginning Mosaicke, and that of Saint John, Principians and
principiatum. CHRIST being the First Tithe predestinate in the Eternal
Counsel of GOD, and Man the second, began with the beginning of Time, where-of
(CHRIST issuing of Man, according to His Humanity) is said by him, to be
that Rest of that Second Tithe, reserved by GOD, for the Perfection and
Glorification of whole Nature, by the Price of his Precious Blood. By those it
seems that GOD, who as the Scripture says, Omnia suaviter disponit: He
disposes all things sweethe. And as another says, Et mirabilite^ disponit
adeo ut aliquid semper nisit humano captu majus: He also disposes them
miraculouslie, that still there is somewhat beyond the Horiz^n of humane
sight. It seems, I say, that GOD has chozen that Portion of ou^ Goods due to
His Worship and Service, to be of that Perfect Number, of the Perfect and
Consummated Sacrifice of CHRIST, into the full Quotient and Continent of
Nature; and that withal He has respected the Number of People, who were to
live upon the Tenthes, as Bellarmine does reason, to prove Tithes not
Ceremonial, but Judicial, De Clericis, Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Nam non ordinantur
immediate ad colendum DEVM, sed ad aequitatem inter homines: He says, That
Tithes were commanded to be paid to Levy, because he was about the tenth
part of the People, that there might be a Proportion between his Estate and
the rest.

Thus have I brought in a ^iversitie of Opinions, concerning Tithes; some
holding the^ only Judicial, to the Jews; others, that they belong to GOD, by
way of Alms, but not to the Church; Others, that they appertain to the Church,
but by Positive Laws of Princes; others, that they are so by the Law of
Nature; and finally, (some inclined to follow this Remote and Natural
Theology) affirm, that by all these Titles, they are to the Church, as
Franciscus Iunius, The Opinion of Iunius, concerning Tithes.
(...) omni jure post omnem hominum memoriam DEO fuerunt sacrae. For what less
can omni jure, import, than a Law, as well stamped naturally in the
Consciences of Men, as approoved by Positive Laws of Princes, and warranded by
the Written Word of GOD: But hitherto can I find none to say, that Tithes are
Temporal, or Civil Goods; scarcely we who do possess them: for why? we
hold, that whatsoever we bestow to Mendicant poor People, to necessitous
Friends, or Neighbors, for Mayutaynance of the Ministry, or Schools of
Learning, all that has allowance for Tithes in the sight of GOD: neither are
we oblished, nor can be, to sustain the Poor, by any Law, other than by
that of Tenthes: this I do hold, albeit Ambitious Men, to abuse the World with
fair Colors, will perhaps hold the contrary. But I do not doubt, but this
New Reason, which I do put in from the Mystery of the Number, will be
thought of many a ^aprit^h, or Raveri^ of a Phantasticke Brain. In the mean
time, if we would possess them still, we have need of some New Doctrine
unheard of, for to qualify our Possession, and purge it from the Sacrilege;
seeing our own Teachers, whose other Opinions in every thing, numbers of us
do superstitiouslie follow and adore, they do affirm us to be Sacrilegious
in this Point: I mean, Puritan Preachers, and their Sectators.

It is of notable Observation, to consider, how throughout this whole Isle, Two
sorts of Puritan opponents, to Episcopal Govername^t, and Rentes, discordant
amongst themselves.
there have ever been Opponents to Episcopal Governament and Rents: two
sorts, I may say, of Factious Men; The Clergy factious, and the Laicie
factious: The Clergy Factious have striven for it, That all the Church
Patrimony appertains unto them, their Presbyteries, and Disposition. And
this Ground they have so hardly mayntayned, that in a Supplication given in,
to a Parliament in England, in Name of the Commonnalitie, Anno 1585, they set
it down, for an Article of Doctrine, That all Abbay Lands, once dedicated for
sacred uses, should by the Word of GOD remain in that Condition for ever, and
may not be taken back. Their Disciples again, the Laycie Factious, say, That
their Preachers ought to conform themselves to the Mayntaynance of the
Apostles, who had no Silver, nor Gold^, nor Possessions, nor Tithes, nor Rents.
Whereunto their Teachers do answer, That that is as much, as who would say
to the base popular, That Noblemen have more than their part in the World,
which they spend upon Horses, Halks, Dogs, Riot of Life, whiles their T^nnands
do sterue for Famine. That in the Apostles times, Men had all things in
common, Moneys and Means were laid at their Feet, and equally distributed
by them; and that such Insolence, and Wealth of Noblemen, will but spoil
Piety and Zeal, if they be not reformed according to the Apostolic times,
no Man can deny: But this Proposition is as reasonable as the other, albeit both
should be but an Anabaptisticall Practice. Always, out of a Treatise written
by English Arch-Puritanes, of Discipline Ecclesiasticke, these have I
extracted, ad verbum, Whiles they (meaning their own Disciples) bear us
speak against Bishops, and Cathedral Churches, it tickleth their Ears;
looking for the like Prey, as they had before of Monasteries: yea, they have
already devoured the Church Inheritance: they care not for Religion: they
would crucify CHRIST, to have His Garments: they are Cormorants, and wicked
Dionysians: they do yearne after the Prey, and would there-by, to their utter
confusion, purchase a Field of Blood: they consume their Goods, with
Sacrilegious Impudence, and Boldness, in Courtly Braverie. Herein any Man may
see, how the one sort of them do urge us with the Church Policy, which (say
they) was under the Apostles, Presbyterian; but they would have the Livings of
our latter times. The other sort concur with them in Policy, but upon
Condition, That for Mayntaynance, they will embrace the Apostolic Poverty,
to the end, that they may enjoye the Church Patrimony themselves. Therefore,
may it not be justly said, to the Laycie Factious, That they oght either to
denude themselves of Ecclesiasticke Goods, or provide themselves of other
Teachers, than such as daily condemn the^ to their Fact? and that they should
not be so shameless, as to utter one word, against the present Governament of
the Church, or the Repetitio^ of Tithes to the Church, until they have done
either the one, or the other; lest otherwise they be despised, as Men who
make some little show of Religion, but have none at all.

Now, if any Man do hold sincerely, that Tithes are not due to GOD, I am
sure, that he will yet grant, that a Competent Portion under some other Number,
must be for the Worship of GOD, and Works of Piety. And if the Retention of
Tithes be Sacrilege, there is a fearful Curse pronounced against it, Malach.
3. A Curse of the Devourer; Because ( says the LORD) ye have robbed my
Tithes; and left no Meat in my Storehouse. And is this the only Meat of
Priests, that is robbed here? No, but this is also the Storehouse of the
People, Non ex solo pane vivit homo, says the Spirit of GOD, Man does not
only live upon Bread, but on every Word that does proceed from the Mouth of
GOD. There must be into the House of GOD, store of the Bread of Life, of that
Heavenly Manna, which feeds our Souls: and this cannot be, without
sufficient Provision of Temporal Bread, to the Preachers of the Word, Labia
Sacerdotis custod^^n^ legam DEI, and in pectore ejus conduntur or acula divina.
Certaynlie, the Pover^ie of the Church, does make a scarce and unlearned
Ministry. Amongst the Persecutions of the Christian Religion; recorded in
Histories, there are two most remarkable; one under Dio^lesian, Persecution of
Julian, worse than of Dioclesian.
another under Julian, called the Apostate. The first of them did slay the
Priests: not the less whereof, the Christian Faith did so greatly flowrish, as
it was thence forth said; Sanguis Marty^^, (...) Ecclesiae: The Blood of the
Martyrs, was the Semmarie of the Church. But the second did supplant Religion,
in a more pitthie and pernicious sort, albeit it was not bloody: he robbed the
Church Revenewes, where-thorow both Preaching, and Christian Schools, did
decay, Occidere Presbyteros parum erat: To slay the Priests, it was a small
thing, ( which Dioclesian did) compared with the insidious Opposition of
Julian, Ipse enim occidit Presbyterium, He cutted the Throat of the
Presbyt^riall Possession. Wherethorow great Ignorance did shortly after ensue:
for, as Theodore^ writes, Who would go to spend their Youth, in the Study of
Theology, to have no Mayntaynance in their Age?

And here upon this fair Occasion, I must remember the Neglect of that most
Royal and Necessary Policy, of Plantation of a Sufficient Ministry,
Schools of Learning, and Burgall Societies, in our Northern Yles, Plantation
of the North Yl^s of Scotland, of what Importance.
and Hie-Landes of Scotland, for Exterminion of Berbaritie, and Incorporation
of that People, to the Body of this Kingdom, who for the present have no
Marks to be Native Members thereof, neither by their Manners, their Habit,
nor their Language, the three special Evidences of Natural Union: For, as for
RELIGION, that does most unite of any thing, I think they know none. The
Necessity, and Main Importance of this Policy, is very soon seen: For in
the Assuredness and Strength of Borders, does chiefelie consist the Surety
of a great State. Again, every one knows, how there is not a better
Means, to reduce a People, naturally fierce and rebellions, to Obedience,
than by infusing into the Hearts of them, the Love of Knowledge, and of Civil
Carriage: vvhere-of we have a most proper Example, and most pertinent here,
of the Romans, who by that kind of Arts, did go about to break and
addouce the Bellicose Cowrage of our own Predecessors in BRITANE, as we
read of AGRICOLA, who was General here of the Roman Legions, under the
Emperor DOMITIAN, says Taci^us, I am vero Principum filios liberalibus
artibus erudire, and ingenia BRITANNORUM studiis GALLORUM anteferre, ut qui
modo lingaam Roman. abnuebaent eloquentiam concupiscerent, ^ude etiam h^bitus
nostri honor and frequens tog^, pa^latimque discessum, ad delinimenta ^
vitiorum, porticus, balnea, and conviviorum elegantiam, idqu^ apud imperit^s
huma^itas vocabatur, cum pars servitutis esset. The luchantment, in some, of
the Roman Schools, then made the Britans (...) despise, piece and piece,
their own Manners, and roughness of their own Language, and brought them to
Admiration of the Roman Tongue, and love of their Apparel, and, at length,
to Softness and Delicacie of Life; by which things, they did for the time,
greatly effeminate their Minds.

That our Yles, and Hie-Landes, have now great need to be tamed, by the like
Arts, being a Dangerous, Rebellious, and Uncivil People, it is very easily
proved; for our Scottish History is full of it, That those Yles, and Northern
parts, have not only been Ports, and Receptacles of Foreign Armies,
invading our Country, and a Sanctuary for Domesticke Rebels: but the Lords
of the Yles, have many times threatened the Crown of SCOTLAND, and have
foughten Bloody and Desperate Battles for it. We read in our History, that
our King, Findocus, after he had been afflicted with the mighty Rebellions of
Donaldus, who styled himself, King of the Yles, he was in end murdered by
his Insidi^tion: and the King succeeding to him, (called also Donaldus,) was
slain by the same Man, in open Battle: after the which, he did usurp the
Crown of SCOTLAND, and exercised most bloody Tyrannies, for the Extinction of
the greatest part of the Nobility. Again, under King Eth^inus, another
Donaldus of the Yles, did so boldly revolt, that he came with displayed.
Banners to the Country of GALLOWAY, and all-to-gether spoiled it. The third
Donaldus of the Yles, in the time of KING JAMES the first his being in
ENGLAND, he did oppress and subdue our whole Northern parts, yea, even to
the Honorable City of ABERDENE, which he intended to destroy, if he had not
been diverted, and drawn to that famous Battle of HAR^-LAW, Battle of
Hare-Law.
where so many Barons, Knights, Honorable Gentlemen, and Burgesses of best
sort did lose their Lives.

These serve for sufficient Documents, to after-comming Princes: for there is
naught that has been, which may not come to pass again, Time it self
being but a Circulation of the same things. These Examples did move the
valiant and wise King, Robert Bruce, in his Testamentall Counsels, to his
private Friends, it being the Minority of his Son, to leave this Direction,
Tanquam arranum imperii, vel domus Augusti: That there should never be a Lord,
nor great Man in the Yles, but they should remain perpetually impropriate to
the Crown: Ea-enim oportunitate (says the Writer) sitae sunt, eaque incolaru^
mobilitas ut levissimam (...) causam ad rebellionem impelluntur, nec
deficientes facile reducantur.

As much I say of our Hie-Landes, That in all Ages bygone have been the
Strong Refuge of Bloody Traitors, and those who have violated the Sacred
Ly^es of our Kings; for the which Cause we read very near to the beginnings
of this Kingdom, that Evenus the second, who was but the fourteenth King from
the first, having with much Business, repressed the Tyranny of Gillus, who
pretended to be King: and trusted himself to the Rebellious Hie-lands and
Yles. Thereafter, for the better assuring of that Barbarous People, and
reducing of them to Civil Knowledge and Carriage, he builded two Cities, in
two several Countries, Ennernesse, which is to this day a flowrishing Town,
in the Northern parts, and Ennerlochtie, upon Loch-Tay. And in our own times
we have seen amongst them, such Proud and Incorrigible Oppressions of
Neighbor People, such Cruelties, and Nefarious Perpetrations, as if they did
not fear either GOD, or the Devil. Whiles the Romans were so politic in
Britane, is it not much more easy for His Majesty, who now governs here, to
reform that (...), by frequent Plantation of GOD'S Word, which of all things
is the greatest Dau^ter of the Mind? Certaynlie, it is more easy, and by
twenty to one more necessary for His Majesty to perform, than it was for
the Romans then. The Perfect Plantation chiefly of these Yles, with Burgall
Cities, Civil People, and Christian Clergy, were a most Glorious and
Imperial Work: For besides the clozing of that Backe-Doore, to the Surety
of the Crown, and Quietitude of the Kingdom, it should be the Means, to
erect the Fishing of our Scottish Seas, a Rich Trade, esteemed sufficient for
the Employment of 50000 Persons, a thing of great Consequence for our Country,
wherein there be even Swarms of Indigent and Necessitous People, and a thing
of greater Importance to the yearlie Finances of the Crown, than any that
has been excogitate in times bygone.

The Discourse of the Nature of Tithes, has carried me too far, Abuses, and
Oppressions, by way of Tithes.
from the Point thereof which is most proper for this Treatise: that is, Of
what Coffeehouse may justly arise to us, by reason of the Reformation
intended by His Majesty, of Tythe-Abuses, or Oppressions done by
Tythe-Masters, vvhere-in I need not to insist much to debate it: for if
Oppression be a Crying Sin, it will speak for it self. I have only two
Words, If the Nobleman can put a Bridle in a Gentleman's Month, by any Right to
his Tenthes, although he were his Nearest Kinsman, he can (as every Man
sees) command him, as his Horse. He causes the Poor Laborers of the
Ground, to lead his Tithes to a Milne, perhaps to his Barne-Yard too: and
whereas they were illuded, in the beginning of Reformation of Religion in
Scotland, and made to believe, that they should pay but the Fifteenth Sheaffe,
now it is so rigorously exacted, that if there be a Stuck ruffled with the
Weather, or with the Beasts, that the Tenth-master will not have: he must have
the best. And in place to shave the Poor Man's Hair gently, by a Violent
Pull, he brings with him a Portion of his Hyde. If Reformation of these be
intended, it is no Matter of Coffeehouse, but of Common Joy: yea, even to
Noblemen, it should be so, that the Ways of Oppression be stopped, for
stopping the Current of GOD'S Wrath against them, or their Posterity. I do
reverence the Judgments of GOD, and will not take on me definitiuelie to
pronounce, wherefore He does inflict them: a Case oftentimes hidden from the
Eyes of Men: But surely, it is great Pity to see the Desolation of so many
Honorable Houses, as have been overthrown in this Land, since the first
casting down of Churches, and Religious Houses, and turning of Tithes into
Temporal Goods.

And if Noblemen were to brook them still, they shall do well to agree to
the Reformation of Abuses, or (which were better, in my Opinion, for them, and
all others) to submit our selves to GOD, and to the goodness of our Prince,
who has already by public Declaration, manifested the Benignity of his
Meaning toward these things: that all Rights of his Subjects lawfully
purchased, shall be confirmed, every Man shall have his Tithes upon easy
Conditions, (which seems agreeable to their first Institution by GOD, where
the Payer and his Family, were admitted to the Participation of Tithes) and
that all Men shall be fred from Servitude, and forced Dependances. And since
Tithes are Bona Eceles. Bona Pauperum, Bona Reip. there is no doubt, but a
Christian King, who is Father of the Church, of the Poor, and of the
Commonwealth, may dispense and dispose of them, and of Ecclesiasticke Effayrs,
as David did, and Solomon, and the Christian Emperors, in the Primitive
Church; which is the Reason, why in their Coronation they were anointed with
the Oil of the Priesthood, and why the Kings of England were at their
Inauguration clothed Stola sacerdo tall, to testify their Ecclesiasticke
Power. The CHURCH is sacred, and so is the Commonwealth; the CHURCH being
served, and the Poor, who be Members of the CHURCH, and Schools provided for,
the Prince may employ the Superplus, as they shall please, for the
Commonwealth.

But now, because the special Scope of this Treatise, is to show as well the
Necessity of making War, as the Means to do the same, Discourse of the
Nature, and Courie, of Moneys.
therefore I must speak of one thing, which appears to bring a notable
Inconvenient and Di^tresse to this Time, if it be not prevented: and that is
the great Scarcity that shall be of ready Money in this Country, before it
be long; by reason, that the greatest part of our best Coin is either
exported by Merchands, or looked up in their Hands; and by reason of the
exorbitant Sums that His Majesty must of necessity daily send beyond
Seas, for mayntaynance of the Wars: where-anent, before I set down my
Opinion touching the Stabilitie, or Iustabilitie, of Money-Pryces in Scotland,
I will say somewhat of the Nature thereof in general; for Disquisition
whereof, I will go no farther back in Antiquity, than to the Romans, who
before their first Punicke Wars, to wit, Anno 490, of their State, had no
other Coin, but of the Ass in Brass, because the Septentrion Regions wherein
there be Mines of Silver, but not of Gold; and the Indees, where there be
both of Silver and Gold, were unknown to them at that time: some years
before they had Gold, but neither in Coin, nor in Quantity. Camillus, being
Dictator, when Rome was taken by the Gauls, Anno 364, could not find amongst
them all, above 1000 pound weight of Gold, to make Redemption of the Town,
there being in the mean time (as their Subsidy Books did verify) 152580 free
Citizens in Rome: an Argument, that Gold was then very rare. But as their
Empire did extend it self to Afric, and Asia, not only Gold and Silver
were brought to them, in great Plenty, but therewith also the perfect Science
of those Metals.

Plinius, and all the Naturalists, hold, that no Gold is found without a
Mixture of Silver; Gold cannot be employed, without a ^ixtion of ^ilver.
nor Silver, without commixtion of worse than it self: and certain it is,
that Gold cannot be employed to any Work, nor reduced in Coin, without a
Mixture of Silver, to the 35 part at least, which we do now call of 35 Carret
fine: and this is the best and most upright Gold, Obrizum, of fyrie reddish
Color. Again, the most base is of pale and whyish Color, having a fifth part
of Silver in it, called Electrum. Upon he Degrees betwixt these two of fifth
part, and 35, does run the fynnesse of Gold through the World; and of Silver,
betwixt 13 Penny, and 9 Penuie fine, as we call it: that is to say, having
into it so much of Copper, every Nation following their own Pleasure
there-anent, and many striving to have more base Coin than their Neighbors,
and heighting Foreign Money, which is better than their own, that they may
brook it within their Country; and if they please, mix it with their own,
suffering Merchands, by Subtilties of their Traffic, to wait the Commodities
of Exportation, or Importation: that sometimes does benefit the State in
common, some other times only the Merchand himself: Fraud of Goldsmiths, and
of Coyners.
the ground of all which Abuses, is the fraudulent Commixtion of Gold,
Silver, and Copper, by Coyners, and Goldsmiths, under and below that Fynnesse
which is authorized by Princes and States. We read, that in the days of
Francis the first, the said Artizans being ordained by Law, to work the
Gold of 24 Carret; Trial being taken, all was found to be but of 19: so
that in every 24 Marks of Gold, there were 5 Marks of Silver, which did
vvonderfullie damnifie the Subjects, and was punished by Death and
Confiscation. And albeit amongst the Romans, when they began to have store of
Coin, it had Course of 32 Carret Fynnesse, whereof there are diverse Pieces
extant to this day, under the Stamp of Vespasian, yet the best Fynnesse, now
current in Europe, is about 23, and of Silver, betwixt 11, and 12 Penny: the
most base again, in diverse places; is little better Gold, than the Electrum
of 7, or 8 Carrets, and Silver of 8, or 9 Penny. So that it is the great
Negligence, and Oversight of State-Masters, in many Nations, who do not
duly collation the Worth of Country Coin, with that, which is Foreign,
thereby to know with whom the advantage does rest.

And as it were a good Mean, for Mayntaynance of Humane Society, that all
People should profess one Faith, What the heighting of Money does impo^t.
for our Union in Religion, which is the surest Band of Love, and that all
should acknowledge the same Civil Laws, for Concordance of our Actions, in
the Rules of Justice; so it were the only Way, to conserve Uprightness, and
Equity in commerce of Merchandise amongst diverse Nations, that there should
be a stable Price, and stable Fynnesse of Coin common over all. But that as
the other two are rather wished, than expected, amidst the great Diversity of
the Minds and Manners of Men; whereupon the often Alteration (...) of Money,
specially by heighting of Price, and basing of Fynenesse, have been
frequentlie practiced. And, albeit it seem to be unjust in it self, and to
import manifest Wrong, to particular Members of the Commonwealth; as when he
who advances Money in pressed to his Neighbor, must by those Means receive in
Payment less than the same Weight and Fynnesse which he gave unto him: Or,
when he who has no State, but of Silver Rents, and the poor Artizans, who
get noght for their Work, but Money, are constrained, by the heighting
thereof, to buy every thing at a double Rate perhaps than of before, because
it is true, that the Pryces of all things do follow the Price of Money: Yet
not the less of these, I will reason thus, with such as do stand for the
Stabilitie of Money at this time amongst us: First, I say, there are no things
of Men, which are not subject to Vicissitude: we see no Stabilitie of
Governaments, either in Church or State. Is there any thing more ordinary,
yea, more necessary, than the Change of Positive Laws, according to the
Occurrent Behooffulnesse of the Time? Second^ie, I say, the Alterations of
Money-pryces, are naturally and reasonably as incident as of other things. If
abundance of Lands, put to open selling, great store of Bestiall, hudge
increase of Corns do make the Price of those more low and easy: If Scarcity
again, of the same do raise their Price, why not in like manner, the greater
Plenty of Money, the lower Price, and the greater Penuritie thereof, the
higher Price? So that I say, when Corns are scant, ye cannot choose, but
there must be Dearth: Likewise, when Money is much scarce, ye are not able
to keep it at the old Price, unless ye will mar all, or else that we had
naught to do with Money. Thirdly, I say, it is not a good Argument, Because a
thing does prejudge this or that particular Man: Ergo, it is no Common Good:
Omnis magna lex habet aliquid iniquit at is: what Law has ever been made,
which is not of that kind, and hurtful to some in particular? Nature it self
is contented to be violated in a Member, for the Preservation and Prosperity
of a Whole. We Will snead and cut the Branches, that the Body of the Tree
^ay shoot up more strongly. Albeit the Spirit of our Life be unto our Blood,
yet we will take some Ounces thereof, to prevent (...) remove Mortal
Diseases. Fourthlie, I say, that ^he Body of our people, yea, all of the^
(except some Idle Men, who live only on Silver Rents) are in best Condition,
when our Corns are at reasonable gross Pryces: provyding there be no
Scarcity, every Mank noweth it to be so. But this cannot be, except the
Pryces of Money be haughted, or that ye find other Means to put abundance
thereof in the Country. Ye will say to me, Ye shall provyde how the
Merchandes with time may import store of Silver and Gold, as they did the
year bygone. And I answer to you, That is not at all times in the Option of
the Merchand, but then when he does foresee his own Advantage, and all was
Foreign Money that he brought, but none of our own Coin which goes abroad
at an higher Rate than here: so that I know not a better Way, than by
haughting the Price thereof, to let them see a second Gain, by Importation of
the same.

Will ye ask me, what shall be the benefit of the Commonwealth? or what
Well-governed State has practiced such things? I answer to you, That it is
never done, but upon Necessity, and in that Case, has been done by the
Strongest and most Politic. A great heighting of Moneys amongst the Romans,
in their Punicke Wars.
The Romans, ten years before their first Wars against Carthage, were
begun to have Silver Coin, called Denarius, and the parts thereof Quinarius,
and Sestertius; the Deniere being worth ten Asses, and the Ass being a Pound
of Brass, in Coin, at 12 Ounces the Pownd. But the City being exhausted, and
endebted by that War, unable to defray the Charges, they raised the worth of
the Brazen Money, by diminishing the Weight; ordayning the Ass, to be only
two Ounces: where-by the Exchecquer of the State, did gain five parts of
six, and so was soon made free from Debt. Here was indeed an Exorbitant
Heighting: the Necessity was great, the Commonwealth in danger, and the
Practice upon Brass. Ye will say to me, that Heighting of our Money, will more
prejudge, than profit the King, for Mayntaynance of Wars. For Example, If
every twenty Marks of Money, were by Authority called in, to the
Coyning-house and put forth under the same Weight and Fynnesse, for twenty
one Marks; by this Means His Majesty should presently get the 21 part of
all the Coin in Scotland: but there-after, in yearlie Payment made of His
Rentes, Impostes, and Casualities pertaining to His Treasury, and Taxation of
every 21 Marks, he should want one, that now is made, according to the
present Price: and it cannot be denied. But for Help of that, and Safety of
the Subjects, from Inconvenientes, and Wrongs of that kind, our Money may be
heighted, upon that Reasonable Condition, as we find it to have been done under
King James the third: to wit, That all Bands, Contracts, Obligations,
Infeftments for Annual Rents, Few-Mails, Sums of Money, Tackes of Lands, or of
Impostes for Money, made of before that Heighting, should be paid of the same
Price and Eynnesse, which was current, when the Sureties were made, and that
the Newlie-Heighted-Pryce should only stryke upon Future Traffic and
Commerce: which seems to have been a very reasonable Middle, for
Multiplication of Money, and Raising of Victual, unto Discret and Competent
Pryces, for the Common Good of the greatest part of People.

I confess, that such things are to be done seldom, and then
fore-sightf^llie. Philip Le Bell of France, did once base his Coin, so far,
by Mixtion of Copper, and Brass, that the Italian Poet, Dantes, did call him,
Falsificatore di moneta: which he did excuse, from the Necessity of the
Time, and did there-after repent it much, because it was followed with great
Harm, and Mutiny of his Subjects. Alwyse, I trust none will deny, that it is
more profitablie done, to height Money, than to base i^: and it is well known,
what notable Loss did ensue to this Country, by the last crying down of our
Coin.

But seeing that Land (which is Bonum immobile) is subject to daily change of
Prices, to hold that Gold (being in the Account of Bona mobilia) is not in
the same Condition, Sovereign Virtues of the Gold.
as a thing more Sacred in it self, it is a Scorn, unless we would draw our
Arguments from the great Virtues and Excellencies, which no doubt are latent
there^nto, albeit mystious, and unknown to us, and whereof we make no Use of
that Aurum potabile, so sovereign for removing of Diseases, and Corroboration
of Man's Health; whereof the Aleamistes make Moses to be the first Inventer,
by reducing of the Golden Calfe, into Powder potable. And that the Specificke
Spirit of the Gold, does (as they say) transform other Mettalls into Gold,
and is sufficient to maintain Perpetuity of Youthhead: Affirming their Elixer
to be that same, whereunto Saint John, Apocal. 21, did compare the Holy
City, It was of pure Gold, like Glass: saying, that the Spirit of GOD does
not use to comparison, but things which are indeed In rerum natura: and
citing for this their chief Patron, Paracels. in the 9 of his Metaph. Nostra
tinctura rubea est in se astra auri continens, translucida instar Crystalli,
fragilis ut vitrum. And in diverse Places of his Mineral Treatises, giving the
Cause, in most admirable Terms, why GOD* shall conceal from the World, Elias
Artista.
that Secret unto the coming of Elias Artista, within the seventh thousand
years, which is presumed by the remote Theology, to be the Final Jubilee of
the World, and the Triumph, both of Natural, and Metaphysicall Operations. And
albeit that Suidas does allege, that this Science of the Multiplication of
the Gold, did rest amongst the Egyptians, even to the Reign of Dioclesian;
who (as Augurellus writes) did much fear them, by reason of their Chymicall
Skill; Not the less, I say, we know how these Disquisitions have hitherto,
but exhausted the Brains, and Treasures of many great Princes, who have gone
about them, so that we are not to make Estimation of Gold, for such subtle
Theorems, but even as of other temporary things.

Next, I know ye will pretend, Of Moneys kept up by Merchands.
that there is no Penuritie of Money in Scotland, but that, that is kept up in
the Hands of Rich Merchands, and that ye will find in some Burgh, more
Silver and Gold, with two or three, than is in the whole Town beside, and the
whole Shyreffdome about; but that they refuse to vent it, and if that Case were
cured, we should have great Plenty of Coin: so, for the more clear
Discussion of this Business, I will here suppose my self, having Commission
to dispute this Question with the Merchand who does thus.

Commissioner. I come to show you Merchand, that His Majesty and Counsel, are
highly commoved against you, because in this time of so great Scarcity of
Silver, and of so maine a Necessity, to have it current through the Country,
ye do lock it up in your Coffers, not only to the Common Prejudice and
Peril of the who^e State, but also to your own hurt in particular: for your
Father was accustomed to say, That a laying Hen, was better, than a lying
Crown. Merchand. I do praise GOD, for that I have already gained
sufficiently by the Merchand Trade: the World is evil, both at Home, and
Abroad, and my Money is sure in mine own Possession, Commissionar. Do ye not
consider the great Wrongs in the mean time, by the Detention thereof?
Merchand. What are those Wrongs? for why? I do retain no Man's Goods, but
mine own. Decay of Ships, and the (...) why.
Commissionar. First, ye are unthankful to GOD, and to your Country, who
having acquired so great Abundance, do deny the Profitable and Necessary use
of your things, without your own Hurt, to your Prince, and Commonwealth, who
both are in Pain, for want of Money: farther, ye do what ye can, to
overthrow the City, where-in ye dwell, and vvhere-of ye, are a Member
incorporate: In the which City, a great number, and of the ablest Men, have no
other Means of their Life, but by Maritine Trade, whilst ye, and such as ye,
have weakened and deboshed the Shipping of that Town, so far, that there is
not amongst them all, so many Ordinance, or Sea-Munition of Gunnes, as I have
seen in my time, to be in one of your Ships: by the which doing, the poor
Ma^iners are now in this Dangerous Time, brought to this Desperate Case, that
they dare not adventure to Sea; partly for want of Employment, and partly for
want of Munition and Equipage. Merch. I did follow the Traffic so long as I
could gain any thing for my Pains; now there is naught to be had: for why?
His Majesty's Imposts are so great, that by three Voyages to Bourdeaux, I have
found, that in name of Impost, His Majesty has gotten all my whole Stock.
Commiss. That is an Ambiguous Speech; for I think ye would say, that His
Majesty has gotten as much as your Stock, so that your Gain is not so great
as it was wont to be, when at one Voyage, ye did double, or triple your
Stock. And I ask you, If that be not a most Laudable Virtue, when sitting in
your House at Home, ye ca^ by employing of 3 Voyages, Avance to His Majesty's
Coffers, the Aequivalent of your Stock, when ye can maintain the Means of
their Living to numbers, who serve in your Ships, and keep your Stock with
reasonable Gain, although it were but small, rather than to roust your Moneys
in your Cabinet? How would ye live in Holland, where there is not a Loaf of
Bread, nor a Pot of Biere, which does not pay more of Impost, than it is
vvorth, before it come to any Man's Table? and yet none does complain, or
find Harm by it: But contrary, that Common Intercourse of Money, with the
Dexterity vvhere-by they rule it, has been the only thing to sustain their
Longsome Wars: And is not Money appointed for such Uses? Merch. Our Condition
is not alyke to theirs: their Traffic is great, and questuous: they do
command the Seas, we have no such doing here.

Commiss. What if His Majesty, and His Counsel, Means to restore Shipping,
in Maritine Town^.
should make a Law, (not so much respecting the Importance of His Impostes, as
for the Commonwealth, and Standing of Maritine Towns) that every rich
Burgess inhabiting the same, should employ at least the two part of his State
to the Sea Trade; do ye not think, it were a Princely Policy, for the
Conservation of them, and Good of the whole Country? Merch. But who the^
should buy the Gentle-man's Land, when he is not able to brook his Estate?
Commiss. His Creditors behoved to accept them, in Payment; and it should teach
us to live more frugallie, in times coming, when we should see such
Difficulty, to turn Lands into Money. Always, because we must have your
Silver to come forth, to serve this Time, I will insist farther with you, to
ask, why ye do not bestow it upon Lands, and Annual Rents, since ye have
with-drawne it from the Sea Trade, that the Country may have the Necessary
Use thereof. Merch. Lands are not so ready at hand, as they have been some
years bygone: almost all who needed, have sold: that Market is nearlie past:
besides that, the Time is dangerous, and great appearance of Wars, and of a
Broken State. Commiss. Then it were rather to vent your Money for eight or
seven of the hundredth, to trusty Debtors, who could assure you against all
your Fears. Merc. Before we do that, we will keep it in our Coffers: a Man
may use his own proper Goods, after his own Mind, if it were to consume
them, by Riot and Drunkenness. Commiss. That is a bad and Intolerable Speech:
as if we Country Gentlemen should say, It is lawful for us, to use our
Lands as we please, Prodigal Persons interdy^^d by ^aw.
and to cast barren and unlabored the best part, that we may plague you
Burgall People, with Scarsitie and Famine. Howsoever it is neglected here, yet
in the most Politic States, which have been, that Liberty was not permitted
to Men to do as they would, even with their own Goods or Lands. We read in
the Laws of the 12 Tables, amongst the Romans this Caveat, That he who was a
Prodigal Debosher, should be intradicted as a Fool, Situ ^ona patria,
avita^que vel tua, nimia nequitia disperdere liberos^que tuos ad egestatem
perducere volueris, tunc hoc commercio tibi interdicendum est. And by the Laws
of Solon, and of the Areopagits, such Persons, (called Patrimoniorum de
Coctores) Devourers of their Patrimonies, were with Infamy, debarred from
Honorable Assemblies, accused as Criminal Persons, cast into Prison, and
derobbed of farther Commerce amongst Men. And here I must tell you, it had
been happy, that such Laws had been amongst us in this Country these
thirty years bygone, where-in many virtuous Men undergoing Cautionrie^s,
for their Profused and Prodigal Friends, have been naufraged by you
Merchands, who will not pursue the Principal Debtor, nor comprize his Lands,
but do still attake you to the Cautioner. Now to the Purpose: if the
Commonwealth should be dearer to us, than our Children, because she does
nowrish us both; then if Laws may interdict us, for the sake of our Children,
much more it must be so for the sake of our Mother, the Commonwealth: from
the Safety where-of, does depend the Universal Good of all her Members. So
that when Question is of the Weal of the State, neither must ye be so
absolute Master of your Moneys, nor I of my Lands, as ye do imagine. Always,
I suppose, that I know certain Means, No private Man is absolute Lord of his
Lands, or Goods.
where-by your Silver may be exposed to Public Traffic, without your
Loss, or Coffeehouse: but because it touches a secret of Policy, I will
forbear any Mention of it here, and take me to propone another thing, for
Increase of Money, where-of (it being common to others, as well as to you) I
will speak in Common, and make an end of my Conference with you Merchands in
particular.

Amongst other things that have made so great Scarcity of Coin amongst us,
Against the Prodigality of (...) Plate, and guilding with Gold.
there is one, which with great Reason ought, and with great Advantage may be
reformed: and this is the Abundance of Silver Plate, Chains, Girdles,
Bracelets, and such as have crept into Scotland, since our Union with England.
It is acknowledged in Histories, that the pride of Emperors, in guilding with
Gold, spacious Palaces, Temples, and Towne-Houses, was the first thing that
did scarce the Gold, and haught the Price thereof; as that large Fabric
builded in Rome, by Nero, all beguilded, where-in there were diverse Galleries
of 1000 spaces: and as the Capitol, to the beguilding where-of Vespasian did
employ seven Millions, and two hundredth thousand Crowns, of finest Gold: And
the Temple Pant^eon, (which we see yet extant) beguilded by Agrippa, for
saving the Copper and Brass from Roust. There-after they became so Prodigal,
to beguilde also the Iron and Silver, that it should not be subject to Roust.
We read in the French Histories, that so great has been the Prodigality of
that Nation, for the use of Clinkarts, Lace, and Cloth of Gold and Silver,
that Laws have been set down, to bring those things from Merchands, to the
Coyning-house, with strict Penal Statutes, against any more of that kind for
Apparel. Which things when I consider, they give me Boldness to say, That
His Majesty, our Sovereign, should do well, to ordain all the uncoined
Gold and Silver in Scotland, to be brought in, and stamped in Current Money.
It is in the Hands of Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses, who can lose nothing by
it, but by the Contrary, gain: for even they themselves in the mean time,
do more delight to be served in Glass, which of it self is as Civil, and
more Pure, for that Use.

And lest our Noblemen should think it Dishonorable to be emptied of Rich
Cup-boards, Riches of Scip. Asri^.
I will show how this sort of Thirst has been followed by great Personages,
without Indignity. Scipio Afric. when he died, did leave no more Silver
Plate, and Coin both, to his Heir, than amounted to 32 pound weight: and yet
when he road in Triumph, for the Subjugation of Carthage, he did ostent
publicly, and placed in the Exchecquer of the State, an incredible Sum,
that he obtained of the Conquered, Quater millies, quadringena, septuagena
millia pondo, says Plinius, four thousand, four hundredth, and seaventie
pound weight, a thousand times counted. About the same time (as the same Author
writes) their best and most ancient Captains were degraded, for having fine
pound weight of Silver Plate to serve them at Table. King Ferdinandus of
Spain, Ferdinandus Magn. did sell his Silver Plate, and Jewels.
called Magno, having wholly exhausted both his Treasures, and his Credit, in
making lo^gsome Wars against the Infidels in Valenza and Toledo, and for want
of ready Means, in danger to be oppressed by those Barbarians, his Wife (a
Lady of an excellent Spirit) did put to Port Sale, not only al her Gold and
Silver Plate, and precious Jewels, but also all her best Furniture of her
Palaces, yea, and the richest Pieces of her bodily Apparel: whereby she did
furnish her Husband in such sort, that he prevayled mightily over his Enemies,
and conquered their Cities, with large Treasures and Commodities therein.
Charles the ninth of France, did coin his Silver Plate.
The French Story shows, that King Charles the ninth, did reduce, upon
urgent Necessity, his whole Gold and Silver Plate into Coin. I need not here
object against our selves, the Simplicity of Manners of our Antecessours, and
their Ignorance of such Prodigalities: but lest we should think it base and
ignominious to follow them, I will tell you how Plinius in his time did write
thus; Before our Grandfathers, no Senator did wear Gold Rings; Lib. 33.
and in the remembrance of our Grandfathers, those who had the Office of the
Pretorship, in their old age did wear Rings of Iron. Of his own time again,
(said he) all things that the World by, Land or Sea could produce, were
become so familiar, and sought for at Rome, that every year it did cost the
State, to furnish a Voyag^ into India, fifty Millions of Sesterses: for which
the Indians did send back their Merchandise, which were sold at Rome, for an
hundredth times as much as they were bought for. So bent are People, to
precipitate swiftly, and in short time, to Corruption and Insolence, where
they once find themselves in the Way that leads into it.

Now, supposing there were abundance of Money in the Country, Prescription
for Diet, and Apparel.
there can be nothing more pertinent to a Treatise of this kind, than (for
saving thereof to Public, Necessary, and Virtuous Uses) to propound a thing,
whereof we have great need, and which has been frequentlie practiced by the
best and greatest Commonwealths, in the time of Exige^ice and Distress for
want of Coin, to preserybe Moderation, both of Diet and Apparel, often times
done by the Romans, and frequentlie since by the French and Venetians, and by
times everie-where. It is well known, how far we have deboarded in this
sort, since our Conjunction with England: and I find in our History, that the
like Abuses did creep in amongst our Predecessors, from the same Country, to
the manifest Danger of the Commonwealth then, and that it was at two several
times grievouslie and p^^hilie resented by the Counsel of Scotland, to their
Princes, and Reformation urged, first under K. Malcolme the third, Hector
Bo^^^, Lib. 12.
whose Queen, Margaret, being English, was attended with numbers of their
Gentry, and much Introduction of Foreign Manners: Secondly, at the coming
home of King James the first, after many years being in England, by a notable
Oration publicly delivered to that end, by the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews for the time: to which two Places, I do refer them, who are curious
to know, how many Ways, and how soon, Prodigality and Riot do lead a
State unto Ruin. And if we would esteem such Reformations to be
disagreeable with Noble and Generose Mynds, it were to show the Poverty and
Ignorance of our own Mind; because in the Simplicity of Manners, and
Moderation of Life, does consist all the Active Virtue of the Mightiest
States; there-vpon were Republics founded, Cities builded, Laws established,
Empyres extended, the World conquered: says the same Author, Plinius, there
was not a Baker known at Rome, 580 years after her Plantation, nor no Bread,
other than that which was driven out by Women's Hands, like vnot the Cakes which
are usual amongst our Commoners: where-as in the end, that most puissant and
invincible Empire, whom all the Nations of the Earth could not daunt, was
overthrown by excessive Prodigality of Life, as the Poet says, Nunc patimur
longae pacis mala, sevior armis
Luxuria incubuit victum^que ulc^scitur orbem.


Finally, I will turn my Speech to You, Speech to the King's Majesty.
O Mighty King! Orient Monarch of the Northern World! Successor of that Wise
Solomon of Great Britane, whose Heart so empty of Ambition and Avarice, The
LORD His GOD did fill with the True Wisdom of Governament, and did exalt Him
as a new Pole-starre, or Lantern of Light, to be beheld a-farre, and sought
to, by those who sail into the Naufragious Seas of Southern Darkness. The
LORD indeed did employ Him as a Salomo^, to the like Function of Building His
Temple: for under Him was Popery, and the Altars of Idolatry casten down, The
Gospel planted in this Kingdom, and the Church restored to the ancient
Primitive Governament; That like unto that solid Conjunction of the Tribes of
Israel, under Salomo^, the Body of this whole Isle stands firm and united:
and therefore would not GOD suffer Him to be a Man of War, nor those Hands
to touch the Sword of Blood, which he had concluded to use to the Sacred work
of His Temple. But, Sir, Your Majesty, He has chosen, to be that David, who
should overcome and break the mighty Enemies of his People: I should be
sorry to trouble Your Royal Ears, with tedious Discourse, (yea, if my shallow
Wits could choose) with one idle Word: I will but briefly bring before Your
Majesty, some few of the Practices of Augustus Caesar, whom all the Politic
Writers, and Histories, since his Days, have set up for a Perfect Examplar of
Imitation, to all the Active Princes of following Ages.

The first whereof, and first in the Actions of his Life, was his incredible
Diligence, Diligence of Augastus, against his Enemies.
in the Oppressing and Extinction of Intestine Enemies: For finding that the
Clemency of his Predecessor, Iul. Caes. in pardoning his Capital Foes, in
Dismission of his Personal Guards, his Careless Carriage, and Contempt of
diverse Advertisements, given him from his Friends, of Treasons complotted
against his Life, having nothing more frequent in Mouth, than this, Non tam mea
interest, quam Rep. ut quam diuttssime vivam: I say, that Augustus finding that
by these Errors, his Predecessor had prepared an easy Way of his own
Destruction, he did with all Expedition, make away the whole Enemies of Caesar,
without Mercy: not so much out of Spleen and Vindication, as for Establishment
of the State, and Safety of his own Life. He kept 40 Legions, upon his
B^^de^ing Provinces, under the Commandment of his most trusty Friends, and
strong Guards about himself.

I know the Ods are great betwixt Your Majesty and him, because that was a New
Conquest, and a Change of a Repub. into a Monarchy, where the Doer could not
be secure without Violence, and Severitie of Governament. But withal, every
one does remember of the dangerous Stratagems, and pernicious Attempts,
against the Sacred Person of Your Majesty's Father, often times intercepted.
We know, that there be within the Bowels of Your Majesty's Dominions, Enemies
to Your Governament: even of Men, who I think do tender Your Life as their
own: I mean, of Papists and Puritanes, whereof the first is avowedlie opposed
to Your Majesty's Laws: and that the second is a perilous Enemy to
Monarchall Governament; yea, most perilous it is known to all the World, by
the Records of the Geneva Discipline, vented over all, Who be Enemies to the
present Governament of this Kingdom.
many years ago; and by our own Histories of the Church of SCOTLAND,
written by our Proto-Reformtors, and by our Iure Regni apud Scotos, of Master
George Buchanan: and most clearlie of all, by a certain Treatise, printed in
LONDON, Anno 1593, entitled, Dangerous Positions, published and practiced
within the Isle of BRITANE, under Pretense of Reformation, and for Presbyteriall
Discipline: Which I am persuaded, if Your Majesty should take leisure to cast
over, ye would think it expedient, to have it current and public, to the
View of all Your Good Subjectes, for the better Information of many, who be
ignorantly affected thereunto. Neither do I here suggest any thing, that
may irritate your Majesty to Rigor against such. And if it were asked me,
What then do I mean? This is it, Sir; We understand, that your Majesty has
many and mortal Enemies, even of your Life and Crown: and those of the
greatest Potentates abroad, and their insidious Instruments, who lie in
wait, to slide into your Majesty's Kingdoms vnperceiveablie, when they
shall find the Waters troubled. In which Case, the Unanimity of Subjects,
especially in Matters of Religion, and Ecclesiasticke Governament, is the
only Ba^d of our Security: For even where Subjects are naturally loyal to
their Princes, destracted Minds in such Points are most perilous. And as
when a great Disease, or Evil, does enter upon the Body, it invadeth first
that part or Member, which had any Weakness, or Contusion of before: Even
so, when Foreign Treacheries, or Intestine Seditions, come to be practiced
in a State, they do first assault those of unstayed and divyded Minds: and
namely, from the Pride of Puritanisme, have sprung the Seeds of the most
badde and bold things that have been committed against our Princes in these
last Ages. And I must say it, out of the Sincerity and Simplicity of a most
humble Affection, to the Stabilitie of your Maiestie's Reign, there is not a
more malignant Gangrena latent within your Bowels, than that, nor more able to
quarrel the Credit of Royal Authority, if things were never so little
turned loose.

Your Majesty has need again, to set over the Ports of your Kingdom, the
Eyes of Argos, to see that no Enemy do enter. The Jesuit is a Proteus, who
can transform himself in any Shape. He can pass by your Majesty, under
Covert and Silence. He is like to the Skeilling Goose, who when she flies
along the Mount Taurus, carries a Stone in her Bill, to stop her Cry,
that she should not be heard of the Eagles, which continually do keep the
Top thereof. Chiefelie, your Majesty has need to be ^urious of your own
Court: For as never Heresy did come into the Church, which began not amongst
the Clergy; Even so, seldom are Treasons contryved against Princes,
whereunto some of their Court are not conscious. When Augustus had caused
great numbers to die, and thought himself free from Domesticke Fears, he found
Cinna, a lurking Serpent in his Bosom: therefore we say, that Kings should be
vigilant, like to the Lion, who is King of Beasts, and said to be of such
Solicitude, that he sleeps with open Eyes. And if Your Majesty should at
any time discover Disloyal Practices, then indeed the Example of Augustus
were well to be followed, to punish such Persons, without any Mercy at all.
As for Puritanes, this I hold, that Your Majesty's do admit none to
Episcopal Governament, who hunteth after it, for love of Riches or
Preferment, and then does nothing differ from the Puritan in all his Carriage
thereafter: Vigilance over the Admission of Bishops, and Ministers.
and that no Bishop be bold, to ordain a Preacher, who does not in his own
person obey, and make his Flock obey the present Discipline, and authorized
Ordinances of the Church. Your Majesty of Clemency may suffer to expyre in
peace, such old Puritanes, as had Tollerance and Conni^ence under Your Father,
provided they be modest and reserved: but that either Popery should be
endured, or in any Corner of the Country an Arch-Puritane to bring forth
Seminaries of his Sect, for the Ministry; certaynlie, that were to keep a
Backe-Doore open, for Anarchie and Confusion, sometime to re-enter both into
Church and State. For the present, Your Majesty has Watchmen over our Church
approved enough, by Your Blessed Father, who did prefer them.

The second, SIR, notably remarked in the Gubernatiue Wisdom of Augustus,
Honor done by Augustus, to the Senators.
was the great Honor done by him to the Senators of his Counsel, and his
Confidence in them. The principal thing that did comfort those Conspirators
against the Life of his Predecessor, being his Misregards to the Senate, that
he would not deigne himself to rise from his Chair, when they came in, and
that by the Persuasion and Flattery of Cornelius Balbus, puissing him too much,
to undertake Emperial Dignity: Augustus by the contrary, did dispatch no
matter of Importance, but by the Advyce of the Senators, whom he did so
greattie respect, that after a perfect Settling of all his Difficulties, he did
bear in his own person, the Office of a Consul, another time of the Censor,
which both he did discharge faythfullie, and paynfullie, beyond any that had
exercised those Functions before him. Your Majesty knows how there have not
been better Princes, than Titus, and Trajan, whom the Histories do call the
S^aviters and Delights of Men, and none so much as they did honor the Senate:
none again more badde than Nero and Domisian, who most of any did vilipend
the same. We read how greatly it was to the praise of the French King,
Charles the fifth, called Le Sage, who having received some Appellations and
Complayntes from those of Guyen, The Modellie of ^^aries the fifth of France.
being for the time Subjects to the King of England: which when he remembered
to be done against the Articles of Peace betwixt him and the said King, he
conveaned his Parliament, to be judged of them, for that which had escaped
him. And again, for the Danger that is in the mere Absoluteness of Princes,
Your Majesty has that Famous Testimony, given by Lewis the eleventh of
Fran^e, a most subtle King, most jealous of Sovereign Points, and in his
Counsels most absolute of any: who acknowledging, that by such kind of doing,
he had almost ruinated himself: therefore he would not suffer, that his
Son, Charles the eight, should be taught more than three words of Latin:
Lewis the eleventh of France, would not suffer his Son to learn the Latin
Tongue.
to the end, that want of Learning (which is commonly accompanied with
Presumption of Wi^, a perilous Point in Princes) should constrayne him the more
to govern his things, by Advyce of his Counsel. Some join hereunto, that he
thought, (as all Politickes do) too much, Curiosity of Learning, not fitting
for Kings: the Opinion being generally held, that Delight of Letters does
(as I have said before) in a sort emasculate the Cowrage to Action, in all Men,
and draws them away to Contemplation, Kings being appointed for the active
Life, Tu regere Imperio populos Roman memento
Hae tibi erunt arts pacique imponere morem
Parcere Subjectis and debellare superbes.


Always, SIR, to return to Augustius: he did not only honor the Senate, but
did also foresee, that none were of that Order, but Men most worthy of
Honor: When a Place did vake, he would have the Entrant, old in years, and
old in Experience, of known Virtue, and unspotted Fame, The Condi^^on of
Senators chosen by Augustus.
able to vnder-lye the Sentence of a Censor; and then, of honorable Means,
valiant at least of 40000 Crowns, whereof what was wanting, he did himself
supply: neither durst any Man bring in Question the Name and Credit of a
Senator, other than the Censor, who was indeed a fearful and penetrant
Explorator of their Manners: where-of our Judges for Grievances, newly
erected, seem to be an Image. That Liberty for any to accuse Counselors,
did creep in under the Insidious Reign of Tyberius; and those were called,
Delatores and Instrumenta Imperij: and such doings have ever since been said
to be Arts Tyberianae.

O, SIR! how much it were to be wished, that Youthhead could know the Wisdom
of Age! or that young Princes might understand the Precious Worth of Aged
Counselors, who be faithful! Darius, who was the Father of Xerxes, and an
excellent King, having by many Experiences proved the Loyalty, Love, and
Active Services done to him by Zopyrus, and having at length also taken in the
Town of Babylon, Great Affection of King Darius, to Zopyrus.
by the Wit and Industry of the same Zopyrus, who whylst he went about that
Business, did sustain deadly Wounds, and Mutilation of his Person. And when
his Master did possess the Town peaccablie, he said, that he rather did
wish to have Zopyrus restored to the integrity of his Body, than to have an
hundredth Babylons. SIR, I do most humbly crave Your Majesty's Pardon, to say
thus much; That if Your Majesty should be pleased to cast over the Stories of
Scotland and England, and to consider there, what bad Carriage has been in
both, betwixt Princes and their People, what Tyranny, what Revolts, what
Intestine Blood, and Cruelty unnatural, what fearful Perpetrations, Your
Majesty should find Reason to think, that it were good at all times, to
multiply your Senators, with the most Choice and Privy Men, for Goodness
and Sufficiency, that be in either Kingdom. As for Examples of the Perilous
Evils which do infalliblie ensue, when young Princes do attake themselves
to young Counselors, that one of Rheboboam may serve for a thousand: from the
like to which, I doubt not, but GOD (who has chosen your Majesty to great
Actions) will deliver you. I do confess vvithall, that the best Counselors,
are no vvo^se to be super-intended, and looked to, seeing Men are but Men, and
there is none who cannot err, Unless it be the Pope: in the which Case,
your Majesty may use, in your own Person, the Office of the Censor, as
Augustus did, and at your own pleasure, examine their Carriage.

The third thing, SIR, which is greatly commended to Princes, in the Policy
of Augustus, Diligence Mechanicke of Augustus, to know the Revenewes, and
Debursments ordinary of the Empire.
was his particular Painfulnesse in all the Effaires of that great State,
whose Example has been well followed by the Bravest of Emperors, and Kings
that have been since, Tyberius, Vespasian, Trajan, Adrian, and the Antonines,
who lived all to great Age, and were Masters of Civil Governament. After
Augustus had attained 74 years, whereof he reigned above 50 (counting from
the Death of Julius Caesar) he left behind him three Books, written with
his own Hand, one contained The several Actions of his public Governament:
The second, The order of his Testament: The third, (which is the Point I do
recommend to your Majesty) did bear A Register, of the whole Estate of that
vast Empire, the Finances and Rents over all, the number of the Provinces, the
Legions mayntayned there-into, the Arms, the Munitions, the Fortresses, the
Shipping, the Colonies, the Allies and Confederates, with special Records of
the Debursments, Dues, and Charges, necessary for every of them, Donatiues
ordinary to Friends, Expenses of Public and Theatriall Shows for the
People, Pensions to Captains, Nobles, and other Serviceable Men, and that
monethlie he knew what Proportion was betwixt those Debursments and their
present Moneys. Such indefatigable Pains of this kind did he undergo; that
being moved, at the Request of the Senate, after his Victory over Antoni^us
to accept in his Person, the Office of the Censor, and made Prefe^us morum, he
did three several times make Numeration of the whole Romans, as well resident
at Rome, as dispersed abroad, and of the Subjectes of the whole Provinces, with
several Estimation and Reckonings of every Man's Goods in particular. The
Persian Empire, Vigilance of the Persian Kings, over their Finances.
was yet greater than that of Augustus, having under it 27 Provinces: and the
Stories do tell us, that their Kings have ordinarlie lying on a Table before
them, a Register like unto this of Augustus. Your Majesty may read in the
Sacred History of Hester, that when Artaxerxes had escaped the Treason of the
Eunuchs, by the Means of Mordechay, there-after he did himself enroll
Mordechay to the Condition of his Reward. And tho Histories make Mention, that
this same was the Practice of the late Kings of Spain; whether it be so for
the present, your Majesty does better know. This, SIR, is a Diligence worthy
the greatest Monarchs, this does let them see, the right Addresses of their
Effaires, this does import a necessary Over-watching of their Treasures, and
Receivers, which makes them Frugallie and Thriftilie to confer their
Necessary Debursements, with their Present Means, and to make Tymous Provision
for what is wanting: it teaches them, wherefore Pensions and Donatiues are
bestowed, and to measure them according to the Proportion of Men's Services;
that some have not too much, whylst others get nothing. Your Majesty may read
of Philip of Valoys, that he did revoke all Pensions, which did not bear
Special Mention of the Service done for them, to him, or his Predecessors. And
of Charles the eight, who did annull all Pensions, exceeding a very small sum,
whereof I do not in particular remember. This kind of Diligence will teach your
Majesty to avoyde Great and Greedy Numbers of the Receivers of your Rents,
who do devour so much of them, before they can come to your Majesty's Coffers,
even as burnt and sandy Grounds drink in the Waters that pass through them.
To Charles the fifth of France, were presented Complaints in Public Parliament,
by the whole Estates, because he had five Treasurers, whereas before there were
but two; and a World of Receivers, whereas before there was but one resident in
Paris. And by Francis the first, it was ordained, that there should be four
Keys of the Treasure House; whereof the King should have one himself, without
the which, no other should enter, nor no Sums given forth, but in his
Personal Presence.

The fourth and last thing, Sir, which I find most specially observed in the
Politic Wisdom of Augustus, was his Indulgence toward that People,
Diligence of Augustus, to ease the People, immatters of Law Processes.
and his Fatherly Care of them, in procuring Dispatch of their Actions,
without Longsome Processes of Law; the Censurall Inquisition over the
Magistrates, his Personal Audidnce of their Causes, and Frequent Going Abroad
for that Effects; the Exemplar Practice of his Personal Equity, wherinto he
did so much delight, that having once, by sound of Trumpet, made Offer of 25000
Crowns, to any who would bring to him Crocatas, a Captain of certain Voleurs
in Spain, who did greatly molest that Country: whereof Crocatas being
advertized, he came willingly, and presented himself before the Emperor,
demanding Payment of the Crowns, which he caused to be given him, in Argeht
Content, together with his Pardon, lest he should be thought to take his
Life, for the sake of the Money. These, Sir, made him to be loved as a Father,
and feared as a Prince, whilst he lived, and adored as a God, after he died.

In end of all, Sir, I will conclude with a most Humble Supplication to your
Majesty, in Favors of us, Supplication, in Favou^s of the S. (...) of
Scotland.
who be your Subjects of Scotland; whereunto I am the more encowraged,
because this Paraneticall Discourse, has been intended by me, for no other
use, but to comfort them, to your M. Service and Obedience in every thing:
which I have preassed to do, by the pitthiest Persuasions, that I could bring
from the best Wits of the best Writers. We read, Sir, of Alexander the Great,
that when he was ready to lift his Army from Macedone, to go into the
Levant, his Master, Aristotle, did counsel him, Plutare. de Fortuna aut
virtute, Alexandri.
to rule over the Greeks, as a Father, but over the Nations whom he should
happen to conquer, as a Lord, and Emperoar. Whereunto he answered, That not
so, but that he would be over all People, who should be his, in common as a
Father, because it was his Purpose, to reduce the whole World, unto the Unity
of one City, as Plutarch does report his Speech, Vnaut sit vita, perinde ut
mundus unus, veluti unius Armenti, compascuo in agro, compascentis. Sir, we are
not only no new Conquest of your Ms, but we are your First and most Native
Subjects. There is no thing which is Unnatural or Extravagant in Nature, that
does long endure; and therefore, amongst States and Kingdoms, that which is
most Ancient, must be most Natural: that is the Reason, why we are your Ms
most Natural People. Here are to be seen upon the Ports of your Ms Towns, and
upon the Frontespieces of your Palaces, that Scepter and Crown, where-of your
Blessed Father said, Nobis haec invicta miserunt centum sex Proavi. The like to
which, no King that we know under Heaven, may brag of. Here stands that Noble
Order of the Thistle, whose Honor has hitherto remained Vnviolable, and
Unstained with Disgrace, witnessed by that Cowragious Superscription, Nemo me
impune lacess^i. Here stands that Generous red Lion, who^ the Mighty and
Bellicose Romans were never sufficient to daunt. Here were founded the Sober
Beginninges of that Crown, which has by Progress of so many Ages, risen into
this Height of a Monarchical Diadem. Here is the Ground, wherein was sown that
small Seed, that has shot up to this Strong and Staselie Tree, whose Boughs
do over-shadowthis whole Isle; whose Branches extend themselves beyond Seas,
and whereunto Foreign Nations have Recourse, in time of Tempests, to be
refreshed under the Vmbrage thereof. Here, Sir, is the Ground, which your
Majesty should have in a Sacred Account, that does conserve the Royall-Bodies
of so many of your Predecessors, and keeps about them, the Ashes of so many
thousands of Noble Gentlemen, as have from the beginning of your M. Race, so
valorously laid down their Lives, in fierce Battles, and presence of their
Kings, for Propagation of the same. And here, Sir, is your Mother Ground, which
gave to your M. the first Light, and did nowrish your tender Infancy. The
Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Seas, by a Natural Instinct, do affect
the Places wherein they were hatched; so far, that some of them will come from
the most Longinque Regions, to make yearlie Visits of their Native Soil.

Therefore, Sir, although we be most remote from the Seat of your M. Court, yet
let it please your M. that we enjoy our Privileges, to be your M. most
natural Subjects, and to have your M. our King, not by Conquest, but by
Nature, Remember, Sir, how well it was said, by him who spoke so, that The
Kingdom was happy, where the Subjects did obey the Law of the Prince, and the
Prince obey the Law of Nature. If your M. will look upon the History of your
Predecessors, ye will find, that it is Natural to us, most of any Nation, to
sacrifice our Lives and Goods, for the Preservation of our Prince and Country,
when there is Necessity to do so. Consider, Sir, a little, our Decays, since
the Transportation of the Royal Court, to London: partly by Introduction of
Prodigality, and Foreign Manners, which commonly does accompany the
Dilation of Empire: partly by too much reparing of our Contrymen, of best
sort, there, and spending of Moneys in England, which were wont to entertain
our Merchand Traffic at Home, (now, by that Means, so far decayed) and
partly by the great Malheure of these last bad and unfruitful Years. And when
your M. has pondered these, then do lay upon us, Sir, such Burdens as your M.
finds us able to bear: And that your M. be pleased, not to discover our
Nakedness too much, nor make us to answer, as the Adrians did to
Themistocles, when he came to charge them with an Impost, far above that
which they were able to perform, he told them, that he had brought two Puissant
Gods, to assist him in that Business, to wit, Love and Force. They answered,
that they were to oppose him, by two more puissant, Poverty, and
Impossibility. I confess indeed, that your M. has to do with great sums
of Money, and must have it: but yet, Sir, do not suffer that to derogate a jot
to your M. Royal Bounty and Magnanimity. And here I cannot forbear, to
bring before your M. that Glorious, and Superlatiue Praise, given by Plutarch,
to Alexander the Great; who although in his Youthhead, immediately after his
Father's death, he did perceive the Towns of Greece, conquered by him,
inclyning to Rebellion, Vniversa Grecia-post Philippica demum bella veluti ab
animi deliquio palpit abunda subsaltabat, The notable Magnanimity of
Alexander, whilst he wanted Money.
ad haec exhaustis Philippi Thesauris foenusetiam accesserat ducentorum
talentorum, in tanta ille rerum inopia, tam turbulentis temporibus Adolescens,
vixdum adeo puerili aetate exacta, Babylonem ausus est Susaque illa sperare,
Babylonem Susaque dico, immo vero gentium omnium imperium spondere ipse
sibitriginta peditum millium quatuor equitum numero fretus.

Although, SIR, that Your Majesty do not at once, and together, compass all
Your Desires, that is to teach Your Majesty, that great things are not
performed, GOD makes althings in Nature, with Time and Patience.
but with great Patience, and great length of Time: wherein, Sir, ye are to
imitate the Working of that GREAT GOD into Nature: whereof, albeit He
brings forth no Creature, but slowly, and insensibly, yet He dryveth them
on, unto their Perfection. The ^ll, and robust Oak of the Forest, springs
from a very small Grain, and yet it grows vnperceivablie with time, to that
Strongnesse, that greatest Tempests cannot over-throwe it: Even so, If Your
Majesty can conjoyne this Patience with Time, there is no doubt, but ye may
make of us what your Majesty will.

Do consider, SIR, that it is the fair Aurora, which gives us hope of the
whole Days Serenitie; and that the Orient of the Pleasant Morning, is far
more sweet and delectable in our Eyes, than even the very Meridian of the
brightest Days. And, as the persons of Men are more amiable to be looked
upon, in their Youthhead, The Youthhead of every thing in Nature, most observed
and looked to.
than any time there-after, though they were never so comely: Even so, when
the first Actions of Youth, are Douce and Temperate, they do purchase more
tender Love and Admiration, than their Greatest Things can do thereafter: and on
them we do found the Prognostickes of Happy and Virtuous Progresses: So if
your M. do gently lead us, to our first Yokes of your Obedience, it will
make us to remove our Fears and Doubts, and to fill our Hearts with
Ioyfulnesse, and Expectation of your M. Goodness. Your M. is already most
Famous over all, for the Opinion that the World has conceived of the Equity
and Justice of your Mind.

And therefore, Sir, let your Maiestie's Royal Cares be extended, to repare
the Decadence of our Country: deliver us from longsome Laws, and from
Prodigality of Manners: stop the Resort to your Maiestie's Court, of such as
do naught, but molest your Majesty, and spoil their private Estates: Erect
amongst us such Public Industries, and Liberty of Sea Traffic, as do
enritch our Neighbor Countries. Philip de Valoys of France, The Monopole
(...) the Salt, in France.
was not ashamed, to settle in his own Person, a Monopoly of the Salt, which
does import to his Coffers the Annuitie of great Moneys. If your Majesty
would erect the Trade of Fishing in your Northern Seas, so questuous to
Strangers, and so greatly to our Ignominy and Loss; And if your Majesty
would bring us under Military Discipline, provyde for store of Arms,
Munition, and Shipping, employ numbers of People, to fortify your Coasts:
These, Sir, are the true Means, to make of us a Mighty Nation, and formidable
to our Enemies. The Strength of a Country does maintain Virtue within it,
and makes it Traffickable without. Virtue and Traffic do breed Riches:
and these two the sure Grounds of Yearlie Increase to you^ Maiestie's
Finances: and all three together shall make your Majesty able for the
Prosecution of the great Actions, which GOD has appointed you for. THAT GOD,
who said unto Joshua. Be thou strong, and cowragious; neither do fear thine
Enemies, who shall not stand before thee, because I will be with thee, and
shall not fail thee, as I was with Moses: THAT GOD, Who was with your Blessed
Father, in the building of the Temple, be still with your Majesty, to grant
you Victory over all your Enemies: that having established the Peace and
Tranquillity of your Kingdoms, your Majesty may have Leisure and Delight, to
attend those Cares which are necessary for this COMMONWEALTH: A MEN.

FINIS.
AN HEROICKE SONG, In Praises of the Light, most fitting for the Nights
Meditation. BY THE SAME AVTHOR.
NOw down is gone the stately Globe of Light,
Which Thou, great GOD, create^st for the Day:
And we are wrapped into the Glowds of Night,
When Sprites of Darkness come abroad, to prey.
Our Body's from its Functions releast,
Our Senses are surpryzed unto Sleep:
To guard our Souls, Lord Jesus Christ, make haste,
Desarted thus, into a fearful Deep.
Keep Light into the Lantern of our Mind,
For to direct our Watching Sprite aright:
That though our Foes were all in one combynde,
They may not yet attrap us by their Slight.
Light was the Firstborn Daughter of the LORD,
Who with her Beams did buske and beautify
That Vaste Chaos, before of GOD abhord,
And made her Members lonelie, as we see.
Yet is this Light naught but a Shallow Stream,
Of that Above, in Glory Infinite:
And so hut of HIS Shadow has the Name,
Who did into that Narrow Globe confyne it.
The Body of the Sun if we compare,
Unto the Sphere, that rolleth Him about;
That shall His Smallness unto us declare,
Beside that Light which Rounds the Heaven without.
The Ambient Circle of the Divine Fire,
The Eternal Dwelling of the DEITY;
Which to Descrybe, is none that dare aspyre,
Who has not tasted Immortality:
For if the Spears were of Transparent Kind,
Then suddenly that Glory should Confound
Those Caducke Things within the Poles confynde,
And all this Frame, that Nature has Compound.
The prowdest Sprites durst never yet presume,
To think where-of these Orbs contryved be:
It is above the Low Flight of our Plume,
Always they close that Glory from our Eye.
That Infinite Circumference of Light,
For Center, has this Universe of Things:
There GOD is seen by single Angelicke Sight,
And here this Ball, but as a Mirror hings:
Where-in but Shows of Real Things we see,
And Vmbers, which are from that Light let fall:
Where they do live, unto Eternity;
Here are no True Things, nor True Light at all.
As Princely Portracts close in Cabines placed,
Where Phoebus finds no Hole to enter at:
By Torch or Candles are set out and graced,
This clozed House of Nature's like to that.
With-in her Walls are many Pictures bright,
Yet may no Eyes of Mortal Man sustain,
To view them through the Beams of Divine Light
As by a Torch, they by the Sun are seen.
Not as a Torch, but as a silly- Spark,
Conferred with Light of Infinite Extension;
To shadow which, whole Nature is too dark,
To think of which, does spoil th'Apprehension.
Things unto hourlie Changes made subject,
And daily Death do not truly subsist:
So that our Bodies fatal to defect
But for a space, as Vmbers do exist.
Light, Life, and Truth, these three things are but one,
Whose Time and Place, and Power do exceed,
The Search of Thought, and Number, two alone,
Esteemed to match Infinity indeed.
O Sacred Light! whose subtle Rays do pier^e
The Center, as the Sunnie Beams do show:
Which Grace the Gold, and Gemmes, that are so scarce,
Of the (pure Light) unclean Sprites stand in awe.
Light that appeared to Moses in the Field,
And on his Front, the Horns of Splendour planted:
Unto that Light, let all things Honor yield,
The Power of Darkness by the same is daunted.
The Orient Sun of our Salvation,
Who from the Fountain of this Light came out,
Approach unto this Habitation,
With saving Light to compass me about.
Who of that Light, so pompous Pauelons made,
For those Prophets, into Mount Tabors Glore:
Now whilst my Sense lies in my Body dead,
Grant that my Sprite may to that Mountain so are.
That Light that shyn'd into Saint Peter's Prison,
O Sacred Flame! vouchsafe t'illuminate,
This dark House, with some Sparks of Divine Reason,
Where-in my Soul so long is carcerate.
The Light that did the Apostle Paul convert,
And Persecuter in a Preacher turn,
If it but once do glaunce upon nine Heart,
No Darkness then shall make me for to mourn.
That Light it did it self to Steven reveal,
Amidst the Tortures of his Martyredome;
Transporting him, that he no Pains did feel,
And from the Earth, show CHRIST in His Kingdom.
That to the Prophet's Servant did point out,
The fyrie Charrets, and Forces of the LORD,
When he was sore confused, and in doubt,
And fear of Death almost had him devourd.
That Light where-by the Divyne Angel, John,
Was wrapped, and to the Holy City brought:
So far above the Flight of Phaeton,
Of all those sacred Lights what shall be thought?
And of that Majesty of Light displayde,
Betwixt the Cherubs, there to be adored:
Have they not of the Godhead this bewrayde,
That with the Light it is clothed and decor'd?
That Light is GOD, and GOD alone is Light;
His Creatures, a Reflexe of His Beams:
This World, a Mirror, or a Table tight,
Where Light's but shadowed under diverse Names.
Upon that Light, great Moses durst not look:
The Sight of GOD no sinful Eye may bide;
The Eternal Flames, no Mortal thing may brook,
Therefore the Hand of GOD his Face did hyde.
Into the Bosom of that Light was hatched,
The Truth and Substance of all things that be:
Till perfectly, the Ideas were dispatched,
Of Creatures, whose Shadows we but see.
There, in that Light the Exemplars still exist,
But here the Image quickly does decay:
Of silly Points of Time we do consist,
But what is There, it does endure for aye.
The Verity is firm, and permanent,
And Falsehoods are subject to Nullitie:
Whylst Shadows be but Cases remeante,
Therefore they perish daily, as we see.
As Vmbers are, and then they disappeare,
So Persons are, and then they turn in Dust:
That if we will this Mystery Disquire,
Our Parallele shall be with Shadows just.
Yet when a Man is dead, w^e do retain,
His Shape and Feature, sealed in our Mind:
And every thing that in him we have seen,
As if those were not unto Death confined.
If our weak Sight, thus paint our Memory,
The Light of that Eternal Intellect,
Can it not keep unto Eternity,
Those Ideas which HE did HIMSELF perfect?
Or if we hold Ideas to be vain,
We must deny Things Intellectual;
And unto Shadows take our selves again,
Scorning that Light, which is Angelical.
Light, as it is a thing Incorporall,
Our Sight also, that does the same behold,
And als, the Objectes are Spiritual,
As we may prove, by Reasons manifold.
Else, could the Shape of all this Hemispheare,
Enter the narrow Port of Humane Eyes?
And leave his Portract full imprinted there?
Hence follows then, that Men but Spirits sees;
Or things abstract, and Mathematical,
As Numbers, Figures, and Dimensions;
And Colors, which under the Light do fall,
Although they have most ample their Extensions.
For surely Man is nothing but a Sprite,
His fluide Body, a Vapor of the Grass;
Or Picture, that is presented in the Street,
With Sprites, we find, his Senses do converse.
The Sprite of Light, is object to the Eye,
The Truth of Light, does enter by the Ear,
T'informe the Soul, these two ordained be,
We have, we hear, we see Light, and no more.
The Eye, it is the Globe of all our Glore,
The Port whereat the Soul goes in and out;
By it we see HIS Works, Whom we adore,
And get knowledge of Things dispersed about.
The Ear, the Subtle Nerve, that does admit
His Word, to be the Lantern of our Life:
Our Hopes of Heaven, and Faith come in by it,
To serve the Body, other Senses strive.
Our Gust, we know, and Smelling, are but gross;
They smell no Light, nor taste of Verity:
Compared with those, their Function's in Dross,
And most part do suggest to Luxury.
As for the Things subjected to our Touch,
They Are pieces of the Old Deformed Mass:
Their Light once spent, returning to be such,
Into that Chaos daily they do pass.
And finally, when Time shall take an End,
And when the World Her Glasses have run out:
When Air no longer shall it self extend,
Nor shall the Seas embrace the Earth about:
Nor yet the Spheres distinguish Day from Night,
When Fire shall fill the Universal Globe:
The Efficacy, Almighty of this Light,
Shall force Great Nature for to change Her Robe.
Her Mortal parts, those Flames shall purify,
No Bodies, but Transparent, shall subsist:
Renewed Heavens, like Glassie Gold shall be,
And all Gross Earth from Being shall desist.
That Mighty Flame, shall ear the Ocean;
The Earth to her Virginity shall bring:
The Air from Vapors shall be cleansed then:
In sum, It shall make Light of every thing.
The Saints of GOD shall wasted be with Light,
And Ponderous Bodies they shall feel no more:
Their Walks shall swifter be than any Flight,
For with their LORD they shall be changed in Glore.
Looke-what is then Incompatible with Light,
(As Excrementes into a Sink let fall)
It will the way unto the Center right,
A Den of Darkness, without Light at all.
Before that Change, no true Light can be here,
And then no more of Changes shall we see:
The Light in every Corner shall appear,
No place for Shadows thence-foorth shall there be.
GOD shall triumph, at that Great Jubilee
Of Nature, in her full Perfection:
Where He His Works shall wholly Glorify,
And Darkness throw into Confusion.
Since true Light, and true Things are so remote,
And clozed inaccessiblie with GOD,
Take heed (my Soul) no Paintrie thee besot,
Which thou beholdest, on this Worldly Brod.
But contrary, delight thee in the Night,
There are no Pictures, to distract thee then:
Fly to the City of the Divyne Light,
That is above the Sight of Mortal Men.
Expatiate into the Sacred Fields,
Of the expanded fair Infinity:
Which Millions more, than Earthly Beauty yeeldes,
The Palace of the Blessed Trinity.
Though narrow be our Minds to comprehend
One Point of GOD, where each is Infinite;
Yet to that Search, our Spirits may ascend,
By Visions, which are to our Weakness fit.
There thou shall see, how GOD He is a Light,
With-in the which all Things subsisting be:
Whole Nature's Birth, thou shall see at one Sight,
The Pleasant Object of the DEITY.
He much delights in that Architype,
The Glass, where-in He on His Goodness (...):
The Box that d^eth the Seeds of Nature keep,
And all His Works recorded, as in Books.
As Cunning Paynters gaze upon that Face,
Which they pretend by Portract to present;
And Iakob's Sheep looked in that Watrie Glass,
That He did for their Fruitfulness invent:
So does the Sprite of Nature things beget,
By looking in that Architype of All:
And therefrom does these Images canceit,
That we see set and spread through Natures Hall.
And there thou shall comparatiuelie think,
Our Clearest Days, to be no thing but Night:
And that of Heaven, this World is the Sink,
Repleat with Sorrow, Sinful Care, and Plight.
Or like a Cave, polluted with the Smoke,
Of Chymicke Forges, and Deadly Mercury:
Where Worke-men as Anatomies do look,
Who have consumed Themselves in Sophistry.
O that thou might not Here again return,
But still should live into that Lights Fruition!
For on this Earth thou can do naught but Mourn,
Where Toils, Tears, and Fears, must be thy Portion.
There thou shall see CHRIST settled in HIS Throne,
As Golden Phoebus, in His Silver Sphaero,
Amongst nine Chores of Angels, LORD alone;
Like Planets placed about HIS Royal Chair.
Where Troops of Saints, like Stars do move astray,
As Skalie Squadrons sport into the Deep:
So in that Lightsome Ocean they play,
And still an Heavenly Harmony do keep,
Of Music, that can never be expressed:
Yet by a Sensible Similitude,
We may imagine, that it is addressed,
By four Chief Parts of Men, so understood.
And th^^ by several Alternatiues,
A Mutual and Mighty Melody,
One Theater t'another aye deryues,
Sounding the Glore of that GREAT MAJESTY.
The Alto Angels sing, as I suppose,
Of stablisht Rank, the Foremost Stage They fill:
To Celebrate HIS Providence, They choose,
And Divine Names, belonging there-vntill.
The Tenor by the Voice of Saints, resounds
The Praises, of HIS Sanctity they sing:
And this Echo from Stage to Stage rebounds,
HOLY, HOLY, Is Our Almighty KING.
The Basse is tuned by Harmon of the Sphaeres,
The Sweet Consent, that we see them among,
The True Characters of HIS Wisdom bears,
And Learned hold them vocal in their Song.
The Hallelu of the Church Militant,
Mounts up, to make the Counter-basse perfyte:
With Lofty Straynes of Music resonant,
HIS Goodness, and HIS Mercy, they endyte.
The Subtle Alchymist can separate
The Quintessence, and make it to ascend:
So^are the Church Prayers Alembicate,
By that Great SPRITE, who does Her still defend.
My Soul, be ravished with these Visions,
And They shall make thy Nights more Splendescent,
By True Light, and not by Illusions,
Than are Estivall Days most Relucent.
High ESSENCE of the Inaccessible Light,
Whose Sacred WORD the Darkness did command:
To cloathe Her self into this Beauty bright,
So dayntilie Portrayde by Natures Band.
Say, LORD, unto the Dungeon of mine Heart,
Let there be Light, and straight it shall be so:
Blind Ignorance and Pride shall then depart,
And in the Light securely shall I go.
Possess (Sweet Light) the Temple of my Breast,
Thy Lamps may feed of Multiplied Oil,
Which (since, my GOD, Thou have made me a Priest)
Still on the Altar of mine Heart may boil.
Those Starrie Vaults, that Round our Night about,
As Curtayns full of Flaming Eyes, where-by
Thine Holy Angels constantly look out,
And all our Dangers surely do espy.
Grant me, O LORD, to trust to Thy Relief,
That whylst the Organes of my Soul do sleep,
It may be fred from the N^ctur^all Thief,
That no Uncleanness in my Bosom creep.
Enjoy, my Soul, the Beauty of True Light,
Count not of Painted Shadows that are here:
Those are the Clouds that keep thee from that Sight,
Which vanish then, when we hold Them most Dear.
So when thy Stage is finally concluded,
As Floods return unto their Ocean,
Thou of this Body fullilie denuded,
Shall be reduced to thy Light again.
Though for a Wish, possess a World thou might,
Yet to the End do wish nothing but LIGHT.
FINIS.
Index of the chief Things contained in this Treatise.
THE Preamble, meerelit Metaphysicall page 1. 2. The death of the late King of
blessed memory 3. The occasion and order of the Treatise. 4. The Pope and King
of Spain, troublers of Christian States 5. The Ambition of the ancient Kings
of Spain and Portugal, virtuous, and heroicke: with particular narration of
the most nominate and famous amongst them 6. Charles the fifth, Emperor, the
first projecter and founder of the Spanish Ambition ov^^ Europe 10. Contrapoyse
and jealousy of Christian Princes, war^anded by Nature 12. The Spanish
Inquisition, and practices of Philip^ the second, against neighbor States 14.
He did negotiate intelligence with the Protestants of France, being of head of
their enemies, the holy league 16. The Voyage of the English Navy under Queen
Elizabeth to Portugal, in favors of Dan Antonio 17. Antonio Peers does wrong
the English, in his narration of that Voyage ibid. Strict limitation of
Generals in War 19. The greatness and swift progress of the Spanish Empire
ibid. The large extent of the Spanish Ambition 21. The insidiation of Spain,
by claudestine, and fearful arts of murdering 22. Patricidie practisedin
Spain, as amongst the Turks; by a religious tradition 25. The stabilitie of
the Spanish Counsel never intercepted, by the death of a King, does assure the
stabilitie of their Empire 26. What weakness in the Spanish Empire, by reason
of dis-joyned Provinces 27 Dis-vnited conquestes unprofitable, and examples
thereof. ibid. Traffickable Countries, and Ve^tuous people, the only true
treasure of Princes. The evils resulting of the being of great Treasures, in
the hands of Princes 28. Kings have many necessary occasions of profitable
debursments, nor known, nor to be enquired, of Subjects 31. It is a Weakness
of the Spanish Empire, to be feared of all, and hated of the greatest part 32.
The Pope and Catholic States of Germany, against Charles the fifth 33.
Cardinal Baronio, against Philip the second ibidem. Why the Nobility of
Spain do hate their King 34. A Weakness supposed in Spain, for want of
Arms, and why it is so. 36. Their natural Pride, a Weakness ibid.
Description of the Spanish nature 37. Spain to be opposed by making War
with-in their own Dominions 38. Plantation of Nova Scotia 39. When a Kingdom
is perfect, and naturally compacted in it self, then to be slow to Wars
41. The definition of a just War, and our Wars against Spain, proved to
be just 42. Emulation of the Romans, and Carthagenians, for universal
Empire. 43. Agesilaus being but a poor King, did invade the Persian Empire
ibidem. First confederacy of the Scots with the French sought by Charles
Main. 44. How the Spaniard is proved to be our enemy ibid. How Scotland is
furnished of Men for War 46. Nature of leagues, with examples ancient and
modern 47. Confederates against Spain 48. Whether small or gross Armies to
be sent to Enemie-Countreyes, showed by contemplation of the Turkish Wars
49. The Palati^^te the most honorable seat for Wars against Spain. 51. King
Alexander, Hannibell, and Julius Caesar, did lead their Armies to more remote
Countries ibid. Going of His Majesty in person to Spain 52. The English
auncientlie victorious in Spai^e 53. The West Indees in the possession of a
great Monarch, proved to be an infallible means of universal Empire, by
length of time 55. Money the Nerve of War, and greatest Monarchs, and
States, much distressed for want thereof 56. The hudge Moneys gotten by
Charles the fifth, in Peru 57. The natural humors of the French Nation ibid.
Speculation of Neighbor Calamities, during our Peace, in this Age going, and
of our Predecessors troubles many Ages bygone 58. More of Money, and of Men,
in Scotland now, than in the days of our Antecessours, and the proof thereof.
61. A wicked People, do make a wicked King 63. A Bridge of Gold to be made,
for Enemies to pass out upon ibid. Great Ransom paid by our Predecessors,
for King David Bruce 64. The Palatinate, detained to make a Way, for the
conquest of Germany, and England 65. A remarkable Conference of Coronell
Semple with the Author of this Treatise ibid. John Knoxe against the Regiment
of Women 67, The going of His Majesty's Navy, to Portugal, and what a great
point is Secrecy in great Enterpryses, and the Examples thereof ibid. The
Reformation, or Innovation of Magistrates, and the Commodities, or
Inconvenients following thereon. 68. Plato holds, That after the current of
that great Year, GOD shall reform the whole work of Nature, and reduce it to
the first purity ibid. Utility of the Censor amongst the Romans 70.
Commission for Grievances ibid. Great Men not to bear Offices where they dwell
76. Two of one Family, not to be of one Session of Judges 77. Reformation of
Advocates, most necessary of any thing, with the Examples of Kings, and
States, Enemies to the Trade of Advocation. 78. Lewis the eleventh of France,
did revo^ke and annull Heritable Shyre^^ships 81. Abuses of late erected
Lordships of Church Land^s, necessary to be reformed 82. If the Domaine of
Regal Crowns, or of Republickes be allienable 83. Noble Men, are the
Shadows, and Reflects of Kings 84. Why the Lives of Kings are so precious 85.
The last Convention of the Estates of Scotland, and His Majesty's Revocation
86. The first Donation of the Crown Lands, and division of them in Baronies
ibid. Riches did spoil the Piety of the Church 89. Before the separation of
the Church of Rome, made by Luther, the hundredth part of Christian People, did
possess more than the tenth part of the Revenewes 90. The number of
Ecclesiastical Prelasies, Benefices, Churches, Curies of France ibid. The
nature of. Tenthes 91. The first Dedication of Tenthes in Scotland 94.
Puritanes, foolishlie opposed to the Pope's Church, in good things 96. Mystery
of Number. 98. The Unity does represent GOD 99. The Number. 7, is proper to
the Creation, Induration, and final Glorification of the World 100. The
Novenarie does comprehend the whole Species of Nature, Man excepted 101. Ten,
is the Quotient, or fullness of Nature 102. Man was the first Tenth. ibid.
CHRIST was the second, and perfect Tenth 103 Two sort of Puritanes, opponents
to Episcopal Rents, and Governament, discordant amongst themselves 106.
Persecution of Julian, worse than of Dio^l^sian 107. Plantation of our
Northern Yles, and Hielards, a most Royal, and most necessary Policy. 108.
Battle of Hare-law. 109. Abuses, and Oppressions by way of Tenthes to be
reformed 110. Discourse, of the Nature and Course of Moneys 112. What
Benefit, or Inconvenient, upon the heighting of Money 113. What Order to be
taken with Moneys, kept up in the Hands of Merchands 117. Decay of our
Shipping, how to be restored 118. Prodigal Persons, ancientlie interdicted,
and punished by Laws 119. Against the use of Silver Plate, and guilding 120.
Ferdinandus Magn^s of Spain, Charles the ninth of France, and many great
Princes, did sell their Silver Plate, or reduce it in Coin 121. Prescription,
for Diet, and Apparel, practiced by great States, in time of public
Distresses 122. Speech to the King's Majesty 123. Wisdom of Augustus, in
making away of his Enemies 124. Who are Enemies to His Majesty's Person, or to
his Governament ibid. Vigilance, necessary over the admission of Bishops, and
Ministers, in the Church 126. Honor done by Augustus, to the Roman Senate
ibid. Condition of Senaters, chosen by Augustus 127. Great Affection of King
Darius, to an old faithful Counselor 128. Mechanicke Virtues, and Diligence
of Augustus 129. Watchfulness of the Parsian Monarchs, over their Finances
ibid. Supplication, in Favors of the Subjects of Scotland 132. The admirable
Magnanimity of Alexander the Great, whilst he wanted Moneys 133.
Finis Tabulae.

