Laus Pediculi: OR AN APOLOGETICALL SPEECH, Directed to the Worshipful
Masters and Wardens of Beggars HALL.

Written in Latin by the learned DANIEL HEINSIUS.

And from thence translated into English by JAMES GVITARD, Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER. 1634.

TO THE HONORABLE HENRY, Lord CARRY, Baron of Leppington, etc.
My Lord,
IT IS confessed, that Authors should be as proper in their Dedication, as
apposite in their expression. Nor know J which is the greater felicity. For the
latter, let but the Censurer become a Reader, and J think the Work will
vindicate it self; though the name of the famous Composer may be enough. The
former J must defend: whether the Present be according to the Presentee,
honorable; the Author would make a man believe it so: and if it be not, yet let
the plea be heard before condemnatory sentence. Howsoever, let me not be
mistook; my dedication is in the abstract, the strein of wit. Let Poets (for J
count this Pamphlet but poetical prose) be in the same degree of privilege
with Painters. It undervalueth not the Pencill of the herein admirable, Adrian
Brower, that his drawghts be but revelling Beggars and drunken Bores:
Stultitiam simulare loco sapientia summaest. So the lively expression of
natural rudeness, to the eye of apprehensive curiosity, may seem the height
of artificial featnesse. My Lord, you have a transcendency above others from
Nature and Fortune. Nor can such a qualified Spirit affect but transcendent
objects: among which I suppose this to be such Chemistry of conceit, as can
extract a specious discourse, not from a barren but a contrary subject. This
does the Translator present together with himself,

To your Lordship in all devotion of service, I. G.

Laus Pediculi: Directed to the Worshipful Masters and Wardens of Beggars
HALL.
Aldermen Canters,
THE Ancient VVriters have delivered, that Opinion is Sacer morbus, which is of
that power, that on whomsoever it lightly breaths, it does (as it were)
fetter him with chains, and does not suffer his eyes never so little to peep
toward the dawning truth. But this is chiefly to be deplored, that having once
taken possession of the judgment, whereon the welfare of mankind does depend,
it commands the suffrages and voices, and swayeth on that which is
forestalled with fancy. Nay, in troth, she her self does execute the place of
judicature. Who is so forlorn of sense, as not to confess that this is
apparent in our defendants cause? This same Louce, a creature of fame, and
common note, man's familiar guest, and retainer, born and bred of him, his
home-batled nursling, and cherished with the warmth of the same harth, borne to
the communion of Fortune, and tutelar dependency, and allied in the sacred tie
of any other domestic relation: yea, your ever trusty companion suffers under
the tyrannical oppression of men, and is made by them as contemptibly infamous
as they can: and is not only banished from sea and land, but also is most
barbarously expelled and ejected from the body of man, which is his only seat
of life and maintenance. The cause whereof being demanded, it will be found no
other but merely Opinion. The which to have fully driven out of the mind, I
think it much avayling to the safety of this defendant, whom the more
earnestly to commend unto you, I think it sufficient to notify unto you his
commendable properties. First of all, they say the very name is infamous,
heaven help us! which is derived from the most fashionable part of the body (as
they themselves dare not deny:) first men did call him pedem or foot;
afterward by a loving and flattering appellation they called him pediculum,
with as honest a name as either Oedipus or Polypus, which have the same
Etimology. See therefore, and thoroughly view the force of Opinion; no man
thinks it ugly to say pediculorum montem, populos pediculos, pediculorum agrum,
sive flumen, a hill of Lice, a nation of Lice, a field and river of Lice, that
I meddle not with the Lice of leaves and fruits. Although the Romans would not
see them want illustrious and magnificent names, as when they called them
Serpents, or creepers, and Sexupedes or sixfooted creatures; Yet the Grecians
much less would; which amongst other names have given him one from the very
shop of reason, (...) the brain of man. The Hebrews have named him also from
a powerful word canan, which signifies with them to lay a foundation, (from
whence can, a pedestall, foot, or foundation;) either because they are the
foundation, of greater animals, or else because they are supported of many
feet, as upon a basis. Therefore they are called cinnim, by that most ancient
nation. The Greek Septuagint called them (...), not as being other cattle
(which we ever deemed) but from their compass, because (...) is as much to
say, as little or small. Whence the Chaldeans also from their pinched and
concised body called them cimlin, and the Arabians camla: meaning this self
same creature. Nor need any one be ashamed hereof, seeing valor either
excuses or commends the thinness and contractedness of their body, which
also every one admires in Pismires, unto whom the Ancients do ascribe mighty
wisdom. Nor do our clients also when they fall upon man's flesh, behave
themselves less valiantly, as that every one deserve the same commendation
which the Prince of Poets gives to that great Hero.

Tydeus was but of stature small,
Yet of his warlicke hands was tall.
Although our defendant thinks it does not concern him at all, by what names
he is styled: Which excellent humor of indifferency, doubtless he took from
the Stoics, when he lived heretofore grazing in their beards and brows.
Furthermore, whereas both Orators and Philosophers do fetch the root and
original of praise from ones native soil; (which Plato approoves of also in
his Menexenus, our Spark was borne neither at Athens, nor Rome; which Cities
have been praised and celebrated by great Orators, even until the hearers
ears were cloyed. The native soil of the Louce is Man; whose worth and
prerogative to blazen, were but a silly and idle enterprise: who as he is
only endued with Reason, so has also Reason impallaced in his loftiest and
most topping part, to wit, the head. And this has our Client made choice of
deservedly, as a castle and fort of great importance. Here he is bred, here
he is brought up, here his estate and mayntenance subsisteth; of this is he
the native inhabitant and free denison, scorning the lower regions, and as
ancient Poets said prettily, There is no greater good
Then a good neighborhood.


He has the mind, he has the understanding, he has prudence and wisdom
for his neighbors, and almost familiars, so that the ass, which has the
least portion of these, a dull and lumpish creature, only knows not what it is
to have a Louce, as it is commonly believed. On the contrary, these most
prudent mortal creatures do besides man, the divine and truly chiefest
creature, pursue also most eagerly the dog and the nightingale, whom they
perceive to be of most excellent wit, that it might be verified what first
Homer, and then Aristotle have said, Like will to like.

It was a happiness of wit that made the Ancients to surname Plato divine,
whose Lice are become a Proverb. To omit Pherycides, and Alcman, whose
tickling adherents these were to the last gasp. The chief gentry of them are
imparked in the head.

The meaner yeamondry
Do billet scatteringly.
For they do almost every where send their colonies and make plantations in
the apparel, in the eyebrowes, in the beard; though not all of the same kind,
and form. If you look after the antiquity of their pedigree, you must continue
it beyond Erichteus and Cecrops, even unto the times of Deucalion. For as soon
as the stones wax warm with humane breath, our Client succeeded that warmth;
who ever since has judged to be best for him, to keep himself out of the
cold as much as he can. Man therefore is borne of stone, but the Lice are borne
of Man. So much the nobler in his original, as a man is nobler then a stone.
Aristotle would have them bred of the flesh, but Theophrastus of the blood,
both the most noble and prime parts of the body, (as every one knows.) And
they say they are born by corruption. Cruel Authors! thinking to batter down
innocence by this engine. Suffer not (my Canting Lords) that before your Bar,
ignorance should prejudice and distress the cause of this defendant, against
the truth. For if they go on so, it will be the same case with man, the same
case with all other living creatures. For as from the corruption of blood is
sperme, so from the corruption of sperme both man and all other living are
bred. What more beautiful then a Peacocke? it is borne from an egg corrupted.
What is more prudent then the Be? what more cleanly? what more needful in the
world? yet is borne from the corruption of an Ox For Nature does beget nothing
of another, but so, as that something is corrupted; and by this way does
preserve all things. Whereupon Pythagoras excellently said that nothing dies,
but all things in this world are only changed. Yea, on the contrary (so
heavens prosper me) you will say, it is wonderfully come to pass, that after
the one and the same manner, two famousest creatures are created, the Louce and
the Phoenix; one from his parents ashes; the other of a Nit; as not without
cause the most eminent Authors do conjoyne and compare the original of both.
If you believe Aristotle that there proceeds nothing from a Nit, then you
will make the first author of a Louce, the deputy of Deity, I mean, The
Universal heat; which the Arabes, not without cause, have called, The Creator;
unto which, when this creature is to be procreated, the natural heat is
adjoined. Now if you search into his education; as soon as the Louce enters
into the Lease of his life, he is instituted in those arts and disciplines,
which he thinks are most conducing and importing for his course of life: he
learneth not Swimming, because he lives upon the continent; nor learning and
sciences, in that he sees these do no ways avayle their teachers, for the
most part, unto the attayning of virtue. Therefore being most an end busied in
husbandry and domestique affairs, all the spare time remaining from the
exercise and care of feeding, it bestows on contemplation, and rest: and
herein lives most of all like the Gods; whom Homer gives this Epithete of
Easy Livers: for he does not seek his forage, but has his victuals in a
cubbord, ready for his mouth; wheresoever he turns himself he falls to what
is before him, without any servicing. To omit another thing which is common to
them with Homers Deities, On bread they do not feed,
Nor drink what Grapes do bleed.


They do not manure or till the ground, but gently twich and prick man's flesh.
If you demand the constitution of their body, it does almost escape the
eyesight. Curious Nature has woven together their members with such exceeding
finenesse, as that they fall under the intellect, and are almost invisible;
wherein they are of affinity with incorporeall things, who by their excellency,
are above the senses, being to be apprehended only by reason. And also with
the atoms wherewith Leucippus in his contemplative architecture, Democritus,
and Epicure Carpenter-like, made the world off, which therefore a Roman Poet of
the Retinue of Epicures did call The material bodies, The first bodies, The
principles, The seeds of things, and The matter. But especially Acarus or the
Hand-worme, known unto Aristotle, has this affinity with atoms, which has
almost got the same name; howsoever of the same signification: for it can
neither be divided, nor cleft, nor scarce seen: which if it should offer it
self to the eye, and every particular member to be viewed: I would make you
presently see first the Lice, and also the concurrence of hooked, rough, and
smooth Atoms. Now it has made choice of a quiet and and retired course of
life, not fluttering as birds do, nor skip-hopping as a flea, but according to
the dignity of his life, stable, and still: he walks with a slow, and
gravely composed gate: nor does he seem to embrace any point of Philosophy more
than the Pythagorean silence; for nothing disturbeth more the intentivenesse of
the mind, than a hurry, and a bustling noise: which intentivenesse being
continual, it surmounts the bliss of man. Neither is he altogether idle, and
abstayning from action, for he is always feasting and cramming. Aristotle
said well, that Man is a sociable creature, and therefore the foundation, and
ground of a Commonwealth. The which no man (unless he never saw him) but
knows may as pertinently be said of this our client: for they live in
familiar society one with another, and with man also: it is not so easily
judged what kind of form they commonly use; only it is not much different
from a popular State, for they are esteemed by the number; and are not
transcended in judgment and worth by the plebeans; and they march to war not
in long rancks, and wedgewise-squadrons: but in clustred and round troops; nor
have they mutinously any civil conflicts among themselves, which in mankind
is both mad and horrid, but they encounter and bicker with man himself, whom
oftentimes they conquer triumphantly: nor are they less constant in their
leagve of of friendship with man, nay they surpass him in fidelity, for When
the merry store is spent,
Friends then shrink, and do absent,
For all fortunes share not bent:
But a Louce is a constant stickler to a man: and neither comes nor goes with
fortune; but is chiefly delighted with adverse (that is yours) fortune; so
generous and nobly minded he is, for he is a true companion and attendant to
poverty: It shuns the Court and stately Gates
Of the wealthy Potentates.


Wherefore as Scipio anciently said, that he was never less at leisure, then
when he was at leisure: so I also do think that you (Mendicant Senators) are
never less alone, then when you are alone in prison and chains: for you have
about you perpetual and trusty companions, that do accompany you to the very
Gallows, but especially the Crab-lice, which do take up their station in your
Codpiece, Arme-pits, Beards, and Eyebrows: for what place soever they do
gripingly seize on, they keep their hold until the last gasp. Concerning the
rest, it is exceeding wonderful, and almost incredible, what I shall tell you;
for as famous Authors do relate, that the great and tutelar gods of the
Trojans did abandon the city, upon the Grecians sacking of it: so these also
do when they perceive any body marked for death, they pack away by troops,
and this observation never failed the wisest Physicians and Philosophers.
Whereupon some have thought that these have a prophetical faculty in divining.
Beholding the measure and compass of their body, you will think they are able
to atchieue either little, or nothing, but Read the renown and douted deeds
of them,
And learn the worth of their heroicke stem,


You will presently change your opinion, for whether it be through an
ingenious modesty, or else took up with other affairs, they do contemn
Chronicles, they do conceal their praises and valiant acts, men being never
the sorryer for it. Scylla the chief man of the world, and Commander of the
Romans, who vanquished Marius twice, and twice Mithridates, who dismantled and
sacked Athens, who besmeared all Italy with slaughters: This man, I say, they
did invade with troops; to say nothing of Arnulphus, Antiochus, Herod,
Maximinian, Pheretimus, Honorius, Cassander: all Kings and Princes: not
descending to relate of private personages, over whom they got most illustrious
victories, incountring them weaponlesse and souldierlesse: as that if I have
any judgment, my Client may deservedly challenge, and assume to himself this
encomiasticke title out of the Greek, I thus a Louce, do men and Tyrants tame,
And of dread Themis I a Sergeant am.


I would have given you the Latin, but that Pediculus, runs from a Roman verse;
more friendly complying with the Greeks, as he has reason; though he is
courteous and sociable enough with others, that he has begun the least
familiarity with: for he does not gash, nor hurt any one, but only tickles
them, unless whom he invades in a troop, wherein (as Socrates says in
Plautus Phoedon) it is a question whether it be a greater pain, or pleasure:
but that if there be any pain, it is the progenitor of pleasure; which dainty
kind of tickling, (my Lords) I think you are so taken with, as that I
imagine, it is your chiefest and most lushious relishment of your poor and
miserable condition. Often have I seen with what expressive delight, you use
to rub and scratch, sometimes your back, sometimes your head, sometimes your
sides, sometimes another part, to which this your guest does give the gentle
itching twitch: for if Pleasure be as Plato says, but a mere repletion, and
that rising from indigencie: I wonder if you can bring any other cause of that
your so mighty fricative pleasure, but this your accused defendant, whom (I
will tell you a pretty jest) by all your scratching of your head, and scrubbing
of your body, you destroy never a whit the more, but multiply him. The
Philosophers can tell you the cause hereof. What will you say and they prove
Chirurgians, for the best approved Physicians do confess, that it is good to
have lice in the head. As for their death, with what wonderful courage, how
undauntedly do they suffer. For many times (being now at deaths door, shaking
hands with all the world, and scaffoled upon the very comb, the usual place of
execution, he walks about securely, without being moved in mind at all; that
he might do naught contrary to the dignity of his forepassed life, or
scandalize his credit, whereof noble and brave spirits are ever especially
cheary. Augustus Caesar is said to have wished for an easy departure, and
quick riddance in his death, which this creature (I think) only has, for he
is not martyrd with lingering and chronicall, for with smart and acute pangs:
he feels not the Pleuresie, Stone, or winde-collick, I guess, because at his
birth, Venus stood in the eight place from the horoscope, which as the
Mathematicians do well declare, does prognosticate a most easy and unpaining
death to mortals; among whom, our Client is not the lowest in degree. Thus he
is gone, but with the turning of a thumb; herein only to be lamented, because
he suffers undeservingly, though not therefore the more miserable, for no man
in his rectified judgment, can call calamitous innocence, infelicity: which
they say Socrates said also before his death, when some of his friends did
therefore grieve, that so good a man as he should suffer so undeservingly. Now
the most part are extinguished with untimely death, and therefore without Pomp,
Shows, and a Herald, with a private, not a solemn funeral: they are
exposed, rather then reposed in their tombs, perhaps because they dye in their
minority, and before they come to age: wherefore commonly they decease
intestate. These are but a few commendations, culled and flosculated out of
many: for who dares hope to be able for to display them all. Since the top of
all knowledge, and oracle of wisdom, Homer, (if the Greeks may be believed)
could not unfold the nature of this his perpetual companion in a riddle: What
we took, we left, and what
We could not take, we do bring that.


And overcome with fretting at so high a mystery, fairly made a dye on it.
Perhaps it was in just judgment too, for some do think, that some where in
his verses, he spoke contemptuously and unreverently of his Worship: especially
the Grammatians thinks so, which have never stood ill affected to this our
Client, being his hereditary friends and familiars.

Now you Fathers and Peers of the beging regiment) take all heed hereafter
what you do: for if you please to inflict a penalty on them, you may with a
trice confine and banish them; for they may be either gently set down to the
ground, or else in your courtesy they may be merrily and iudiciously bestowed
upon another; where they may live as they did before, and change nothing but the
place; you have example for it, and reformation in a matter of consequence is
never too late. You cannot choose but know that the Indians, ever since the
Gymnosophists, have been held the wisest of men, and almost the only sages. It
is reported that that there is among them a Bancan nation, so named in that
part, which now they call Guzzarat, who almost only conceiving of the
excellency and endowments of this admirable creature, do cherish, harbor, and
welcome it, as much as they can. Now as he is wonderfully multiplying and
increasing, after that his numerous offspring is begun to be diffusedly
propogated, Where childrens children thronged be,
And their nephewed progeny.
That nation calls for a Priest out of a desert, who receiving them with his
hallowed hands, puts them in his head, for their honest education. Some when
they catch them, lay, and hide them in chincks of walls; and if any one in their
presence do go about to kill them, they make intercession with their tears,
and prayers, to forbear such a sin in in their sight: and if all be in
vain, they give a golden ransom for their lives, and pay it down on the
nail. With these the wisest nation, the Jews do agree, who in their Talmud or
Canon Law, do censure the murderer of a Louce on the Sabbath day, and hold it
unlawful to look for Lice by their Sabbath candels If you never heard of
this, now at last be moved, and let your conscience feel some compunction: Be
merciful to them, J adjure you by the ghosts of their martyred predecessors.
Spare your miserable suppliant conquered, cosens and kindred, that are borne of
you, that are bred by you, which tend on you, follow you, and adhere to you;
which are ready to undergo either fortune with you. Beware, lest you apostatize
from truth, by idolatrizing upon only fancy, or maintaining stiffly a conceit
aggravated with felony.

Vivat Pediculus.
FINIS.

