The Cathechisme, or manner to teach Children and others the Christian faith:

Used in all the lands and dominions that are under the mighty Prince
Frederike, the Palsgraue of ye Rhene, Elector of the Empire. etc.

Translated out of Latin into Englysh, by William Turner Doctor of Physic,

Easily to be understood and read, as well of the people of the North cuntry,
as others.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes, dwelling in the upper end of
Fleetlane. 1572.

A Cathechisme for Children.
QVESTION.

WHich is the only comfort, ^oth in life and in death?

ANS. That both concerning my soul and my body, whether I live or I dye, I am
not mine own, but belong only unto my most faithful Lord and sauer Jesus
Christ, who with his precious blud, most fully making amends for all my
sins, has delivered me from the power of the Devil, and keeps me so:
that without the will of my heavenly Father, there can not so much as an h^ire
fall from my head. Yea, and further that all things must serve for my
salvation, wherefore he has made me sure of everlasting life, by his holy
spirit, and makes me prompt and ready from henceforth to live according to
his will.

QVE. How many things are needful for thee to know, that thou may come by,
and enjoy this cumforte, that thou may both live and dye blessedly?

AN. Three: first, how great my sin and wretchedness is: The second, by what
means I may be delivered from my sin: The third is, what thanks I owe unto my
Lord God for my deliverance.

The first part of man's wretchedness or miserable state.
QVESTION.

BY what means shall thou com by the knowledge of thy wretchedness?

AN. BY the law of God.

QV. * What does the law of God require of us.

AN. That does Christ in a short sum teach us. Matthew.xxij. and Luke.x. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
thought and with all thy strength. This is the first, and greatest commandment.
And ye second is like unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thine own
self

And the whole law and prophets hang upon these two commandments.

QV. Can you keep al these things perfitly?

AN. No for I am ready and disposed of nature, to hate God and my neighbor.

QV. Did God then make man so untoward, crooked, and so froward?

AN. * No, for he made him good, and unto the likeness of his own self that
is: endewed with true rightuusnes and holiness, that he should rightly know god
his maker and heartily love him, and live for ever with him, to that end that he
might love and praise him.

QVE. * Then, from whence sprang up this crooked frowardness of man's nature?

ANS. Of the fall and disobedience of our first Father and Mother, Adam and
Eve, by who^ our nature is so made crooked and naughty, yt we al be concepued
and borne in sin.

QV. * Are we then all so wounded, that we be utterly insufficient to do any
good thing, and disposed and ready to all vice and wickedness?

AN. Yea surely except that we be borne again by the Holy ghost.

QV. * Does not God then do wrong to man, whiles he requires of him by ye
law to do those things which he is not able to do, perform, and fulfill?

AN. No, for God made Adam so, that he might fulfill those things, but he at
the entisment of the Devil, and by his own stubbornness, both spoiled
himself and his after comers, of those godly gifts.

QVE. Does God let go unpunished such stubburnes, and departing from him.

ANS. * Nay, he is by horible means angry, both with our sins that are
grafted in us by nature, and also with them that we afterward work and do,
and the same he punishes by his most rightuus judgment, with present and
everlasting punishments as he does pronounce.

Cursed is every man that abides not in all things that are written in the
Book of the Law, that thou should keep them.

QVE. Then is not God also merciful?

AN. He is in deed merciful, but so that he is also rightuus, wherefore his
rightuusnes requires, that it ye is done against the most high majesty of
God, should be punished with the greatest punishments both of soul and body.

The second part, of the deliverance of man.
QVESTION.

THen, when as by the right judgment of God, we are in danger both of
everlasting pains, and of such that lasts here but for a time: is there yet
any way or means whereby we may be delivered from these pains, and may be
brought in favor again with God?

AN. God will yt we shall make amends or satisfaction unto his rightuusnes,
wherefore we must needs either by our selves, or by some other, content him.

QVE. Can we by our selves, make amends or satisfaction unto him?

ANS. By no means at all, but rather from day to day, do increase our det.

QV. Can any creature in heaven or in earth, which is only a creature, make
satisfaction, recompense, or amends for us and our sins?

AN. None at all: For to begin withal, God will not punish yt in any other
creture which is due to be paid by man: and moreover it can not (because it is
nothing but a creature) abide the wrath of God against sin, and deliver other
from the same.

QVESTION.

What manner of man is to be soughtout, to be our mediator and deliverer?

AN. He which is in deed, a very right man, and perfitly rightuus, and yet
more mighty the^ al creatures, that is, he which also is even very true God.

QV. Why is it needful that he should be a very man, and perfitly rightuus?

ANS. Because the rightuusnes of God requires, that ye same nature which has
sinned: should pay and make amends for sin. But he yt is a sinner can not pay
and make amends for other sinners.

QVE. Why must he also be very God withal?

AN. That by his godly power, he may abide the burden of Gods wrath in his
flesh, and may get again, and restore unto us, the rightuusnes and life
which we have lost.

QVE. Who is that mediator which is both very God and very man, and perfitly
rightuus withal.

AN. * Our Lord Jesus Christ, which is made unto us, the wisdom of God,
rightuusnes, hallower and deliverer.

QVE. * How know thou this?

AN. By the Gospel, which God did open in Paradise, and afterward has farther
set it abroad by the Patriarchs and prophets and did darkly declare as it were
in a shadow, by the Sacrifices and other ceremonies of the law, and last of
al fulfilled, by his only begotten son.

QV. Then, is salvation given by Christ to all men that perished in Adam?

AN. Not to all: but only to them yt by a true faith are graffted in him, and
receive or be pertakers of his benefits or good deeds.

QV. * What is faith?

AN. It is not only a knowledge, whereby I do surely assent to all things
which God has opened to us in his word: but also a sure trust kindled in my
heart by the Holy ghost through the Gospel, whereby I am at peace with God,
surely rekenyng with my self and iudgeyng that forgeuenes of sins,
everlasting life and rightuusnes was given not only to other but also to me,
that freely by ye mercy of God, for the deserving of Christ alone.

QV. * What are those things that a Christ^n man must needs believe.

AN. * All things yt are promised in the Gospel, ye sum whereof is contained
in the Creed, or articles of our faith, wherein is shortly contained as in a
certain short sum, the chief points of the catholic and undoubted faith of
all Christians.

QVESTION.

What is the Creed ye speak of?
ANSWER.

I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only begotten son our Lord. Which was conceived by ye holy ghost,
borne of ye virgin Mary. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and
buried, went down into Hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. And
went up into heaven, and sits there at the right hand of god ye Father
almighty. From thence shall he come to judge ye quick and ye dead. I believe in
the holy ghost. That there is a catholic church. A communion of Saints.
Forgeuenes of sins. The rising again of the flesh. And the life everlasting.
Amen.

QVE. Into how many parts, is this Creed divided?

AN. Into three parts, the first is of the everlasting father, and of our
creation. The second is of the son, and our redemption or deliverance. The
third is of the Holy ghost and making of us holy, and saving us from sin.

QV. When as there is but one only substance of God: why namest: thou three:
the father, the son, and the Holy ghost?

AN. Because God has so opened him self in his word, yt these three sundry
persons are that one true and everlasting God.

Of the Father.
QVESTION.

WHat do thou believe, when you say, I believe in God the father almighty,
maker of heaven and earth?

AN. I do believe that the everlasting Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
has made of nothing heaven and earth, and althinges that are therein: and with
his everlasting counsel and provision, vpholdeth and governs all the same for
Christ's sake is my God and my father, and therefore so trust and rest in him,
that I do not doubt but he will provide for me al things nedful both for my
soul and body, and that he will also turn unto my Salvation, all the euyls
and troubles yt he lays upon me in this troublesome life, both because he can
do it, as an almighty God and will do it as a gentil Father.

QV. What is the provision, or providence of God?

AN. The almighti power of god present in every place, whereby it holds up,
as it were with his hand, and governs heaven and earth and all creatures, in
so much yt those things that grow upon the earth, and rain, also fair wether,
and drines, plentuusnes in bearing and barrennes, meat and drink, health and
sickness, riches and pouerti and to conclude: all things fall and come unto us,
not without advice or by chance, but by his fatherly advised counsel, will and
purpose

QVE. What profit have we by this knowledge of ye creation, and providence of
god? ANS. That in adversity we may be pacient and in prosperytie thankful,
and in time to come, we may have a very good hope in God our most faithful
Father, knowing yt there is nothing yt can draw us away from his love, for
all creatures are so in his Power, that without his will they can not only
do nothing, but even not so much as to stere or move.

Of the Son.
QVESTION.

WWhy is the Son of God called Jesus, that is the Sauer.

AN. * Because he saves us from al our sins, and as no salvation ought to be
craved of any other, so can there none be found in other, but in him alone.

QV. * Then whether do they believe in the only sauer Jesus, which seek
happynes and salvation of saints, or of themselves, or of any other thing?

AN. * No, For although they boast themselves, and rejoice in him as their
Sauer in their words, yet for all that, in very ded^ they deny the only Sauer
Jesus, for either must Jesus not be a perfect Sauer, or else al they that receive
him with a true faith for a Sauer, have in their possessyon in him, all things
necessary unto salvation.

QV. * Why is he called Christus, that is anointed?

AN. * Because he was ordained of the Father, and was anointed of the Holy
ghost, the highest prophet and doctor, which has opened unto us the secret
counsel, and all ye will of his father concerning our redemption and
deliverance. And ye hye Priest, who with one sacrifice or offering of his body and
no mo, has bought us again, and continually makes intercession to his Father
for us. And a King which governs us with his word and his spirit, and
defe^deth and keeps the Salvation which we have gotten by him.

QV. But why art you called a christian?

AN. Because through faith I am a member of jesus Christ, and am pertaker of his
anointing* so that I confess his name, and give my self up unto him, to be a
living offering of thankfulness, in this life to fight against sin and Satan
with a fre and good conscience and afterward may hold and enjoy the
everlasting kyngdo^e with Christ over al cretures.

QV. For what cause is Christ called the only begotten son of god, when we are
also the sons of God?

AN. * Because Christ is only the everlasting and natural son of the father
everlasting and we are but sons chosen and taken up of the Father of favor,
for Christ's sake.

QV. * Why call thou him our Lord?

ANS. Because he byinge again our bodies and souls from sin, not with Gold
nor Silver, but with his precious blood and delivering them from all power of
ye devil: has claymed us for his own proper servants belongi^g unto none
other Lord or master

QV. What beleuest thou, when thou say: he was conceived by the holy ghost,
and borne of the virgin Mary?

AN. That the son of God, which, is, and abides true and everlasting god,
has taken the very true nature of man, of the flesh and blood of the virgin
Marye, by the workyng of the Holy ghost, that he might be also with all ye true
seed of David, like unto his Brethern in all things, saving only in sin.

QV. What profit take thou of the holy conception and birth of Christ?

AN. That he is our mean or mediator, and with his innocentnes and perfect
holiness covers my sins in the which I am conceived, to com into the sight
of God.

QV. What beleuest thou, when thou say he suffered?

AN. That he, all the time of his lyf^ while he was here upon earth, but
special^ at his last time, did suffer the wrath of go^ against the sin of all
mankind, that with his passion as one Sacrifice once for all, should purchase
mercy, and should deliue^ both our bodies and our souls from everlasting
damnation, and get us the grace o^ God, and rightuusnes, and everlasting life.

QVE. For what cause did he suffer under judge Pilate?

ANS, That he being innocent, and yet condemned before a ciuyll judge, might
deliver us from the straight judgment of God which we had deserved, and should
have suffered if Christ had not suffered this sharp judgment for us.

QV. Is there any other cause beside, way that he should rather suffer on ye
cross, then dye any other death.

AN. Yes, there is one in deed: for by this thing I am assured that he took
upon himself the curse which was dew unto me. For the death of the Cross was
cursed of God.

QV. * Why must Christ humble himself even unto the death?

AN. * Because that the justice and truth of God, could not be contented and
swaged for our sins by any other means, but by the death of the son of God.

QV. Why was he also berried?

AN. That thereby he should have sure witness that he was truly dead, and not
feynedly.

QVE. But when as Christ dyed for us, why must we also dye?

ANS. Our death is not a making of amends for our sins: but dyinge from
Sin, and a going into everlasting life.

QV. What profit do we further receive by the sacrifice and death of Christ?

AN. * That by ye virtue of his death our old man is crucified, killed and
berried with him, that the evil desires and lusts of the flesh should not
afterward rain in us, but that we should offer our selves unto him an offering
of thanksgeueing.

QV. * Why is it further said: he went down into Hell?

AN. * That in my grievous temptations and assaltes. I might stay^ and make sur^
my self by this comfort, that my Lord Jesus Christ by unspeakable veracious
and griefs, painful troubles and fears of mind, into the which both before
and most of all when he hanged on the cross, he was cas^ into: has delivered
me from the sorrowful grief and pains of Hell.

QV. What profit have we by the rysyng again of Christ?

AN. * First that by his rysinge again he overcame death, that he might make
us partakers of his rightuusnes, which he had purchased unto us by his death.
Moreover, we are also styrred up by his power unto a new life. And the third
profit is, that the resurrection of our head Christ, is a Pleadge and a
perfect assurance unto us that we shall rise again in glory.

QVE. How vnderstaundest thou this: that he is gone up into heaven?

AN. That Christ (the Apostles lookyng on) was taken up from the earth into
heaven, and yet still is there for our sakes, and will be until he shall com
again to judge the quick and the dead.

QV. Shall Christ not then be with us until the end of the world as he has
promised?

AN. * Christ is true God and true man and so according unto his man's nature,
he is not now upon the Earth: but after his Godly nature, majesty, grace and
Spirit, he is never away from us.

QV. But whether by this means ar the.ij. natures of Christ pulled in sunder
or no, if Christ's man head be not where soever his Godhed is?

AN. Nay, for when as the Godhead of Christ cannot be enclosed nor holden
within any certain compass, and is present in every place: it must needs be
a good argument that his Godhead is without the nature of his manhead which he
has taken upon him, and reaches farther and yet for all that it is fast in
the same, and abides personally joined thereunto.

QV. What fruit have we by ye going up of Christ into Heaven?

AN. First, that he makes intercession for us in heaven, unto the father. Then
yt we have our flesh in heaven, yt thereby we may be surely assured, as by a
sure pledge, that hereafter he will take us yt are his members, unto him which
is our head. Thirdly, yt he se^deth unto us his spirit i^ ye stead of a pledge
between him and us, by whose strong workyng, we seek not earthly things that
are above where he is sitting at the right hand of God.

QV. Why is it further said, that he is sitting at the right hand of God?

AN. * Because Christ therefore is gone up in to heaven, to show that he is ye
head of the church by whom the father governs all things.

QV. What profit is this glory of our head Christ unto us?

AN. * First that through his holy spirit, he powers into us (his members)
heavenly gifts, the next is, that he shildeth and defends us by his might,
against all our enemies.

QV. What comfort have thou by the coming again of Christ, to judge the
quick and the dead?

AN. * That in all my persecutions and troubles I do look up to heaven
holding my head cherefully up for ye self same judge, which purposedly before,
did deliver himself to the judgment of God for me, and has taken away all
curse from me, which shall cast all his and my ennemies into everlasting pain,
and shall bring me with all other chosen persons, into the heavenly ioys and
everlasting glory.

Of the Holy ghost.
QVESTION.

WHat do thou believe of the holy ghost?

AN * First, that he is true and everlasting God, with the everlasting father
and the son. Secondly that he is given unto me, that by true faith he makes
me partaker of Christ, and all his good deeds. And thirdly, comfort me,
and abides with me for ever.

QV. What is thy belief concerning the holy and catholyke Church of Christ?

AN. * I believe that the son of God does gather (from the beginnynge of the
world unto the end) out of hole mankind, a chose^ company by the spirit and the
word, agreeing together in a true faith and* that h^ defends and saves the
same, and that I am one lively member of that company, and shall so abide for
ever.

QV. What meanest thou by the communion, and fellowship of saints?

AN. * First, that all and every one that believes, ar in common, partakers of
Christ and of all his good deeds, as his members and parts of his body, and
then yt every one man ought willyngly, redely, and chearefully, to bestow the
gifts which he has received, to the common profit and health of all men.

QV. What beleuest thou, of the forgeuenes of sins?

AN. * That God for the satisfaction or mendes that Christ has made, he has
put out the remembrance that my sins, and also of yt my crooked wickedness
wherwt I must fight al my life time, and that he will freely give unto me the
rightuusnes of Christ so that I shall not come at any time to judgment, to be
condemned.

QV. What comfort have thou by the ry^sing again of the flesh?

AN. * That not only my soul (after yt it shall depart from the body) shall
straight way be taken up unto Christ her head, but also that this my flesh
(raised up by this power of Christ) shall be joined again unto my soul, and
shall be made like unto ye glorius body of Christ.

QV. What comfort take thou, of ye article of everlasting life?

AN, That for as much as I feel al ready, the beginning of everlasting life in
my heart: it shall afterward come to pass that after this life, I shall come
to full and perfect blessedness, wherein I may praise god forever, which
blessedness neither eye has seen nor ear has hard, neither ye thought of man
is able to reach unto.

QV. But when thou beleuest all these things. what profit have thou thereby?

AN. That I am rightuus in Christ before God, and an heir of everlasting life.

QV. How art thou rightuus before god?

AN. * Only by faith or belief in Jesus Christ, in so much yt although my
conscience did accuse me, that I have sinned grievously against all the
commandments of God, and have kept perfitly never one of them, and am also
ready and disposed yet still to al evil: yet for all that (so that I can receive
all these good deeds of Christ by a true faith of my mind) the perfect
satisfaction or ame^ds making, the rightuusnesse and holiness of Christ, is
coumpted and given unto me by the only mercy of God, even as though I had
never done any sin, neither any spot should cleave unto me: and furthermore, as
though I had fulfilled in mine own person, the obedience which Christ has
fulfilled and performed for me.

QV. Why do thou hold yt thou art made rightuus by faith alone?

AN. * Not because I do please God with the worthynesse of my faith, but
because ye amends making or satisfaction, rightuusnes and holiness of Christ,
are my rightuusnes before God, and I can not take hold thereof, and apply the
same unto me by any other means, then by faith alone.

QV. Why can not our good works be rightuusnes: or at the least some part of
rightuusnes before God?

AN. * Because that rightuusnes yt must stand fast before the judgment of
God, must be in all points perfect and agreeing with the word of God, and al
our good works (even the most holy and perfectest works that we do in this
life) are imperfect and defiled with sin.

QV. How do our good works deserve nothing, when as God does promise that be
will give a reward for them, both in this life, and in the life to come?

AN. * That reward is given not of deserving but of favor.

QV. Does not this learning make me^ to be careless, Godless, and of loose
living?

AN. * No, for it is not possible but that they that are grafted into Christ
throught fay^h, shall bring forth good and thankful fruits.

Of the Sacraments.
QVESTION.

THen, seeing that only faith makes us pertakers of Christ and of good deeds,
from whence comes this faith?

AN. * From the Holy ghost, who kindles it in our hearts through the preaching
of the Gospel, and strengthens the same by the using of the Sacraments.

QV. What are the Sacraments?

AN. * They are holy signs and seals set before our eyes, ordained of god for
that cause, that by them he might open unto us and settle or confirm more
largely the promise of the Gospel, that is to wit: he gives freely forgeuenes
of si^nes, and life everlasting, not only to the number of beleuers, but to
every one that believes for that only sacrifice of christ, which he made
perfect upon the cross.

QV. Then, whether do both the word and Sacraments look to that end, yt they
may lead our faith unto ye sacrifice of christ fully ended on the cross, as
unto ye gr^und of our salvation?

AN. * It is so indeed, for the holy Ghost teaches by the Gospel (and
assures us by ye Sacraments, yt al our salvation stands in ye only sacrifice
of christ, offered for us upon ye cross.

QV. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the new testament?

AN. Two. Baptism, and ye holy Supper.

Of Baptism.
QVESTION.

HOw art thou warned and assured in Baptism that thou art partaker of that
only Sacrifice?

AN. * Because Christ commanded the outward washing putting to this promise:
that I am assurely washed (by his blood and the holy ghost) from al my uncleanness
of my soul, that is from all my sins, as I am outwardly washed with water
whereby all the filthynes of the body is scowred away.

QV. What is it, to be washed with ye blood and spirit of Christ?

AN. It is to receive of God, forgeuenes of our sins freely for christ's
bloods sake, which he shed for us in his sacrifice upon ye cross, and also to
be made new men by the Holy ghost, and by his making of us holy: to be made
members of Christ, that thereby we may dye from sin more and more, and may
live holily and vnblamedly.

QV. Where promised Christ that he would so surely wash us with his blood and
spirit, as we are washed outewardly with the outward water of Baptism?

ANS. In the.xvi. of Saint. Mark, where as he first ordained Baptism, whose
words are these. Go and teach all nations, and baptize them in ye name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. And he that will believe and be
baptized, shall be saved, but he that will not believe shall be damned. And this
promise is rehearsed again, where as the Scripture names Bapisme the bath of
the new birth, and washing away of sins.

QVESTION.

Is not the outward baptising with water, the washing away of our sins?

AN. * It is not: for only the blood of Christ makes us clean from al sin.

QV. Then why does the holy Ghost call baptism the bath of the new birth, and
washing away of sin?

AN. * God, not without a great cause speaks so: to wit, not only to teach us,
yt as the filthiness of our bodies is scoured away with water, so likewise are our
sins washed and scowred away with the blood and Spirit of Christ: but also much
more, yt he might sicker and assure us by this godly token and pledge, that we
are as surely washed from our sins inwardely by the inward washing, as we are
outwardly washed with the outward and seable water.

QV. Ought all young spechlesse children to be baptized

AN. * Yea in any case, for when as they belong as well unto the covenant or
promise, and to the church of god, as they do yt are fully grown and are
perfect men and women: and when as forgeuenes of sins and the Holy ghost yt
worker of faith, is as well promised to them through ye blood of christ, as to
them that are full grown men and women: they are to be grafted into ye church
by baptism, and are to be known from ye children of unbelievers or infidels,
as in the old testament, the children of them that believed were known from
them yt believed not, by circumcision. In whose place and sted (now being taken
away) Baptism was appointed.

Of the Supper of the Lord.
QVESTION.

HOw art thou in the Supper of the Lord warned, assured, and sickered, that
thou art partaker of that only one sacrifice of Christ offered upon ye cross,
and of all his good deeds?

AN. * Because Christ has commanded me and al faithful men, to eat of this
bred that is broken, and to drink of this cup yt is reached unto me in ye
remembrance of him with promise put there to, y^ first his body was assurely
broken on the Cross and offered for me, and his blood as surely shed for me: as
I se the bread of ye Lord broken unto me and the cup of the Lord reched unto
me. More over that my soul is as well fed unto everlasting life with his body
which was crucified for us, and with his blood which was shed for us, as I
receive with ye mouth of my body the bread and the wine (which are tokens of ye
body and blood of our Lord) at ye hands of my sheppard or elder of ye church.

QV. What is it to eat the body yt was crucified, and to drink ye blood yt
was shed?

AN, * It is not only to embrace and receive the hole Passion and death of
christ with a sure trust of mind, and to get by it forgeuenes of sins and
life everlasting: but also to be so joined unto his holy body more and more
through the Holy ghost which dwells in christ and in us, that although he be
in heaven and we in earth, yet for all yt, we are flesh of his flesh, and bones
of his bones, and as all the members or limbs of a manes body ar quickened or
have life of one soul, so are we quickened and governed and have life with one
spirit.

QV. In what place promised Christ that he would as surely give his body and
blood to be eaten and dronken to the^ yt believe as they do eat the bread that
is broken an^ drink the wine out of the cup?

AN. * In the place where he did first o^dayne his supper in these words. Our
Lord Jesus Christ in that night that he was betrayed took the bread, and after
he had given thanks he brake it, and said: take eat, th^^ is my body which is
broken for you, do th^^ in the remembrance of me. And so lykewis^ after supper
he took the cup, saying: thi^ cup is the new testament in my blood, do^^ this
as often as ye shall drink, in my remembrance. For as often as ye shall eat this
brea^ and drink of this cup, ye shall show ye death of the Lord till he come.j,
Cor. xj. This promise is rehearsed again by S. Paul.j. Cor x. where he says:
The cup of tha^ksgeui^g wherewith we give thanks, is it not the pe^taking of
Christ's blood? is not ye bread yt w^ break, ye partaking of ye body of Christ?
Because we being many are one bread and o^^ body, for we are al partakers of
one bread

QV. Are then bread and wine made very body and blood of Christ?

AN. * No, but as the water of baptism^ is not turned into the blood of Christ,
neither is the washinge away of sin: bu^ only a token and pleadge of those
thinge^ that are sealed into us in Baptism, even so is not the Bread of the
Lords Supper the very body of Christ. Notwithstanding, after the manner of
speakinge of Sacraments, and the accusstumed fashion of speaking of the Holy
ghost of these things: bread is called the body of Christ.

QV. Why then does christ call bread his and the cup his blood, or the new
testament through his blood. And Paul calls the bread and wine, the
communion or partaking of his body and blood?

ANSWER.

Christ speaks so, not without great consideration to wite, that he may not
only teach us, that even as bread and wine hold up and keep in the life of
the body so his crucified body and his blood that were shed, are the very true
meat and drink of our soul, whereby it is nourished in to everlasting life:
but also much more he speaks so, to assure and sicker us with this see able
token and pleadge, that we are as truly pertakers of his body and blood by the
workyng of the Holy ghost, as we have receued these holy Tokens in the
remembrance of him, with the mouth of our body, and also that his passion or
suffering, and his obedience or keepynge of the whole law, are as surely
owers, as though we had suffered our own selves for our sins, and had made
ame^ds to god for them.

QV. What diffrence is there between the supper of the Lord and ye popysh Mes^

AN. * The supper of the Lord witnesses that al our sins ar forgeuen us
throg^ that only one sacrifice that he once mad^ on the cross, and that we
are also through the holy ghost grafted into christ, who afte^ his man's nature
is only in heaven at the right hand of the Father, and will be worshipped there
of us. But in the Mess it i^ denied that the quick and dead have forgiveness
of sins through the passion o^ Christ alone, except Christ be offered euer^
day for them, by the sacrificyng mess prees^ Moreover it is taught in the
Mess, tha^ Christ is bodily present under ye likeness^ of bread and wine, and
is therefore to be worshypped in them. And so the foundation o^ the Mess is
nothing else, but a denial of (...) one only sacrifice and passion of Jesus
christ and cursed Iolatrie, maumetry, and worshippyng of by gods beside the
lyui^g God.

QV. Who ought to come to the supper of the Lord?

AN. * Only they that repent, and are very sorry that they have angered God with
their sins, and yet trust that they are forgeuen them for Christ's sake, and
that the rest of their weakness and vnperfitnes is covered whith his death and
passion, who also desire to go forward, and grow more and more in honest life
and conversation. But hypocrites, false feigners of holiness, and they yt repent
not, and will not amend their lives, eat and drink their own damnation.

QV. Ought we also to allow them to this supper which show them selves to be
faithless and ungodly, both in their own confession and noughty life?

AN. * No, for so is the covenant of god unhallowed, and the wrath of God is
styrred against the hole church. Wherefore, the church of God (according to the
appointment of Christ and his Apostles) using the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, ought to hold back such from the Lords supper, until they repent and
amend their manners.

QV. What are the keys of ye kingdom of heaven?

AN. * The preaching of the Gospel, and correction or discipline of the
church, whereby the kingdom of Heaven is opened to them that believe, and is
shut up against them that believe not.

QV. How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut, by ye preaching of ye
Gospel?

ANS. * Where at the commandment of Christ we openly declare and show, all
and every Man's Sins are forgeuen them by God, for the only deserving of
Christ, as often i^ they receive with a true faith and belief, the promise of
the Gospel. Of the contrary part, it shows unto all them that beleu^ not,
and to all hypocrites, feigners of holiness and are wicked within, that ye wrat^
of God, and everlasting damnation hangs over their heads, according to which
witness of the Gospel, God will judge a^ well in this life, as in the life to
come.

QV. How is the kingdom of heaven shut too, or opened, by the correction or
discipline of the Church?

AN. * When as according unto the commandment of Christ, they that are christ
men in name, but show them selves both i^ in learning and life fare from
Christ, aft^^ that they have been certain times brothe^ly warned to forsake
their errors, and lea^ their evil deeds, and are presented or showed t^ the
church, or to them that are appointed (...) the church unto that office, and
will not ^bey their warning: they are shut out by (...) same, from the use of
ye Sacraments, and from coming to the fellowship of Christ's church from God
himself, and the kingdom (...) Christ. But again if they promise to amend
their lives and do so in deed, they a^ received in to the Church again as
members of Christ and of the Church.

The third part is of thankfulness.
QVESTION.

WHen as we are delivered from al our sins and wretchedness without any
deserving of us, by the only mercy of God for Christ's sake: why should we
then do good works?

AN. * Because that after Christ has bought us again with his blood, and
makes us new me^ by his holy spirit, like unto the image of himself, that we
having receued so many good turns, should show our selves all our life time
thankful to God, and that he may be honored, and afterward we every man, may
be assured of his faith by his fruits, last of all: that we may wyn unto
Christ other, by our honest and sober life or good example of living.

QV. Can they then not be saved being unthankful, and abide still careless in
sin, and are not turned to god from their wickedness?

AN. * In no case, for the scripture bears witness yt no unchaste person,
neither worshipper of straing gods, neither hoar master or aduouterers, neither
couetus men, neither Thieves, nor Drunkardes, neither scoldyng raylers, neither
robbers, shall enter into the kingdom of God.

QVE. In what parts stands the turning of a man to God?

AN. * By the kylling or puttyng down of the old man, and the quickening and
raising up of the new man.

QV. What is the kylling of ye old man

AN. * It is truly and with all thy heart to be sorry that thou have angered God
with thy sins, and every day more and more to hate them, and to fly from
them.

QV. What is the quikninge and raising up of the new man.

AN. True gladness in god through christ, and an ernest and ready desire of a man
to order his life according to the will of god, of doing of all manner of good
works.

QV. Which are good works?

AN. * Only they that are done in faith according to the law of God, and ar
wrought for that end yt God may be honored thereby, and not they that are
devised by us, and in our opinion (without the word of God) seem to be good.

QV. Which is the law of Good?

AN. * God has spoken al these words,

The first commandment.

I Am the Lord God which has brought thee out of Egipte, out of the house
of bondage. Thou shall have no other gods in my sight

The.II. commandment.

Thou shall make unto thee no graven image, nor the lykenes of any thing that
is in Heaven above, or in the earth beneth, nor in the water under the earth.

Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am
a gelouse God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in the^ that love me, and keep my commandementes.

The.III. commandment.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain. For the Lord will
not hold him gyltles that takes his name in vayn^.

The.IIII. Remember thou keep holy the Saboth d^y. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that you have to do, but ye seventh day is the Saboth of the Lord
thy God, in it shall thou do no manner of work, you and thy Son and thy
daughter, thy man servant and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the strainger
that is within thy gate. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and earth the
Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

The.V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in ye land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

The.VI. Thou shall do no murder.

The VII. Thou shall not do aduoutry.

The.VIII. Thou shall not steal.

The.IX. Thou shall not bear falls witness against thy neighbor.

The.X. * Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his
servant, nor his maid, nor his ox nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.

QV. How ar these commandments denided?

AN. * Into two tables, of the which the former teaches in it, four
co^ma^dements how yt we shall behave our selves toward God. The second table
teaches in six commandments, what dewty, good deeds, and gentylnes, we owe
unto our nei^^bor.

QV. What requires God of us, in the first table?

AN. * That even so dearly as I love the salvation of my soul, so earnestly
should I shun and fly Idolatrye, Maumetrye, or worshipping of false Gods,
Witchcraft, Sorcerye, Enchauntmentes, supersticion, or worshippinge of God by
other means then he has taught in his word, calling for help of saints or
any other creatures. But that I should rightly confess and acknowledge the
only and true God, and only trust in him, and should with great lowliness
submit my self unto him, and look for all good things of him alone, and that
with all my heart and with all the desires of the same: love him, and with
reverence worship and honor him so much, that I had leauer forsake all
Creatures, then to do any thing contrary to his will.

QVESTION.

What is Idolatry?

ANS. * It is, in the stead of one God, or beside him that is the true God, who
has opened and showed himself plainly and clearly in his word, to feygne,
ma^e or have any thing wherein thou beleuest or put test thy hope in.

QVE. What requires the Second commandment?

AN. * That we should not show, set out, or express God, by any Image or
figure, neither should we worship him any other way then he has commanded in
his word himself to be worshipped.

QV. Whether the^ ought any Images or lyknesses of things to be made?

AN. * God neither ought, neither can by any means be cou^terfeited, showed or
declard, by any caster, fou^der, keruer or paynter, and although they be
suffered to express creatures, as herbs, trees, fishes, and birds, and such
like: yet God forbids their images to be made or had, yt through them we
should worship or honor God, or give to the^ any worship, or outward reverence.

QV. Whether ought images to be suffered to stand in churches to be lay men's
books or no?

AN. * No no. For it is not seemly that we should be wiser then God who
wills that his church should be taught with the lively preaching of his word,
and not with dumme images.

QV. What does God ordain in the third commandment?

AN. * That we should not only, not use his name spightfully and irreverently
in bannyng, cursing, forsweareing, and rashly without a just cause in any manner
of sweareing at all, neither should we be pertakers of these horible and wicked
sins, either by holdyng of our peace, or in winkyng at them, but that we
should use that holy name of God no otherwise but with devotion, reverence, and
worship, that he may be worshipped and honored in all our words and deeds with a
true and steadfast confession, and invocation or calli^g upon his name.

QV. Is it the^ so greuus a sin, to dishonor the name of God in swereyng and in
cursing, that God is also angry with the^ that will not (as much as lies in
them) hinder forbid and let it?

AN. * Surely it is the most greuus sin, neither is there any that angreth and
displeases him more, then the spightful misusing of his name. Wherefore it was
his will that it should be punished with death.

QV. May not a man sometime godly and lawfully, swear by the name of God?

AN * He may. Either when ye maiestrate Gods officer requires or commands a
man to swear, or other wise when need requires, that by this mean a man may
get credit, and ye truth may be proved and stablished therewith that thereby God
may be glorified and praised, and men may be helped thereby. For such a lawful
oath is aproued as holy by the word of God, and therefore it was well used of the
fathers both in the old and new Testament.

QV. Is it lawful for a man to swear by saints or other creatures?

AN. No, For a lawful oath is the calli^g upon, or inuocatio of God, yt he (as
only the knower of ye secrets of ye heart) may give witness unto ye truth,
and punish the swerer (if wittingli he swear falsely) but this honor is to
begeuen unto no creature.

QV. What has God commanded i^ the fourth commandment?

AN. * First, that the serving in the offic^ of preching and ministering of ye
sacraments, and that the scooles should be kept, mainteyned and provided for,
that I on ye hallyday and at other times when the church (...) (for some
necessary cause) gathred togethe^ should join my self unto that holy
fellowship, to hear the word of God diligentl^ and heedefully, and to use the
sacraments, and join my prayers with the common prayers, and give somthyng
according to my riche^ unto the poor, and afterward for all m^ life time,
keep halliday and forbear from all ill deeds, geueyng place, and granting unto
God that through his holy spirit, he may work his works in me: and so may
begin ye everlasting saboth or hallyday in this life.

QV. What inioyneth God us to do it the fifth commandment?

AN. * That we should give dew hono^ and show faithfulness to our Fathers an^
Mothers, and to all that ar governors ou^ us, and should submite our selves with
al^ convenient obedience, unto their faithful commandments and chastnings and
yt we should suffer and bear with their vices and manners, ever thinking this in
our mind, ye god will govern and guide us by their hand.

QV. What does God require in the sixth commandment?

ANS. * That I should do no injury wrong or reproach to my neighbor neither
with my words, gesture or outward behauur, either by my self, or by any
other man, hate him, hurt him, or kill him: but to leave and give over all the
desire of revenging unto God, nether that I should hurt my self, nor cast my
self wittingly into any ieoperdy. Wherefore God has armed the Maiestrate his
officer with the sword, that there should no murder be done.

QV. Does this commandment only forbid manslaughter?

AN. * Almighty God by forbiddyng of murder, teaches that he hates the root
and beginning of murder: anger, envy, hatred, and desire of wreaking or
reuengyng, and that he takes al these things for murder.

QV. Is it enough for us, to kyl no man, by those means that are before
rehearsed?

AN. * It is not enough. For when as God forbids anger, envy, and hatred: he
requires that we should love our neighborres as our selves, should use toward
the^ gentylnes, myldnes, mekenes, patience and mercy, and to turn away or stop
(as much as lies in us) such things as may be hurtful unto the^. And finally
yt we should so be minded toward them, that we should goo even unto our enemies.

QV. What is the meaning of the seven commandment?

AN. * That God defieth al filthiness, a^^ therefore we ought also to hate it,
and utter to defy it, and that we should live contrar^ unto all uncleanness,
temperatly, soberly chastely, both in holy wedlock and also ^ single life.

QV. Does God forbid no more in the commandment, but aduoutri, fornication and
such kinds of filthynes?

AN. * When as our bodies and souls at the chyrches or Temples of the holy Go^
the will of God is, that we should ke^ them both clean, as hallowed unto him
and therefore utterly forbyddeth all deeds signs, tokens, gestures and words,
filth desires, and what so ever intiseth a man thereto.

QV. What does God forbyde in t^ eight commandment?

AN. Not only such thefts and robber it as the common officers do punish: but
(...) understands under the name of theft, a crafty fetchs, drifts, subtyl
means and ways whereby we hawke and lie in wait, to tak^ other men's goods from
the^, or labor to co^uay the^ unto us, either by might or viole^^ or by any
false pretense of right, as though we had a just title to them, and yet have
none at all, Such means ar false weights false yeardes, else, and false
measures, counterfeit and unlawful ware, counterfeit and unlawful money,
vsurye, and al unlawful means and ways that God has forbidden to get a man's
living withal. Here unto may be put and joined all couetusnes and unthrifty and
prodigal powryng out, and spendyng and wastyng of Gods gifts, and evil using
of the same,

QV. What are those things, which God commands here?

AN. That as much as is posible, I should help and increase the goods and
profit of my neighbor. And that I should do so unto him, as I would he should
do unto me, and that I should do my work earnestly, truly and faithfully,
that I may thereby be able to releue and help, them that have need.

QV. What requires the nynth commandment?

AN. * That I shall not bear false witness against any man, neither falsely
turn the meaning of any man's words, nether shall backbyghte any man, or
spightfully rail against any man, neither shall rashly without the showing
of a lawful cause, condemn any man.

But with all the means that I can, I sha^ slye and eschew al kind of lies and
deceipts as the proper works of the devil, except ^ be disposed to stere up
against me, the gr^uous wrath of God. In judgments and other matters I shall
follow it that is true, an^ steadfastly and freely, tell and confess the matte^
as it is indeed, and morouer I shall (as much as I can) defend and increase,
the go^^ name, fame, and credit of my neighbors.

QV. What forbids the.x. commandment?

AN. That our hearts should not be moved or stirrid up, with so much as with
the least thought or desire, against any of god commandementes, but that we
shall ha^ and defy at all times, al kind of sin, an^ shall delight our selves
in all rightuusnes.

QV. Can they that are turned to Go^ keep perfitly, and fully, these
commandments

AN. No, For even the holiest among all men (as long as they live here) ha^
but small beginings of this obedience. B^ yet go so far, that they earnestly
(with ^ feigned desire) begin to live, not only a^cordyng unto some of these
commandem^tes, but according to all the commandeme^tes of God.

QV. Why will God then that hi^ law should be so ernestly and sharply preched
when there is no man in this life, that is ^ble to keep it?

AN. * First, that all the time of our life we shall confess and acknowleadge
how ^reatly we are disposed of nature to sin, and ^o thereby that we more
greedely, and with ^ greatter desire, call for the forgeuenes of ^ur sins, and
yt we should always be occupied ^n this, that we always be thinking and
^ecording with our selves of godliness, and ^al upon the Father for ye grace of
the holy ^oste, that we may be renewed and fashioned ^o the likeness of god
every day more and more, until at the length, after that we be departed out of
this life, we may with joy and gladness get the full perfitnes, that is
purposed, set forth, and required of us.

Of Prayer.
QVESTION.

WHy is prayer necessary for a Christen man?

ANS. * Because it is the chief part of that thankfulness that God requires
of us, and also because God only gives them his grace and holy spirit, who ar
things necessary of him, with true unfeigned gronynges, and geueyng thanks
for such benefytes as they have received.

QV. What things ar required in the prayer which shall please God, and be he^ of
him?

AN. * That we should ask of the onel^ true God which has opened him self
(...) his word (al those things which he hat^ commanded to be axed, with a
true desi^^ of the heart, and an inward felyng of o^ beggarly need and
wretchedness, and cast o^ selves down humbly and lowly in ye sig^^ of Gods
majesty, lean to this sure foundation, that although we be unworthy, y^ we
shall surely be hard for Christ's sake ^ he has promised us in his word.

QV. What are those things that (...) commands to be axed axed of him?

AN. * Al things that are necessary b^ for body and soul, which our Lord
Ies^^ Christ contains in his prayer that (...) has taught us.

QV. Which is that prayer?

ANSWER.

Our father which art in he^uen, hallowed be thy nam^ Thy kingdom come. T^
will be done in earth as it in heaven. Give us this d^ our daily bread. And
forge^^ us our dettes, as we forgive our dette^ And lead us not into
temptation. B^^ deliver us from evil. For thine is the king^ome, the power and
the glory, for ever and ^uer. Amen.

QV. Why does Christ command that we should call God our father?

AN. That he might stir up in us even ^n the very beginning of our prayer,
such ^euerence as is meet for the sons of God and a bold trust toward God
which is to ^e the ground of our prayer, to wit, that God through Christ is made
our father, and will much less deny unto us those things that we axe of him
with a true faith: then ^ur earthly father will deny unto us, erthly things. QV.
Why is it said further, which art in heaven?

AN. * That we should not think to ^ylely, bacely, or earthly, of his
heavenly majesty, and that we should look for, and wait of his
almightynesse, for all things whatsoever ar necessary for our souls and
bodies. QVESTION.

Which is the first pitition or axyng?

AN. * Hallowed be thy name, that is to say: at the beginning, grant us that
we may rightly know thee, and worship praise and honor thy almightines, thy
wisdom, thy rightuusnes and gentylnes, thy mercy and thy truth and afterward,
purpose and drive al our life, our thoghts words and deeds unto this end, thy
most holy name be n^ blasphemed, or evil spoken of for us, b^ rather be hyghly
honored and praised.

QV. Which is the second peticion?

AN. * Thy kingdom come. That is g^uerne us so with thy word and spirit, th^^
we may humble and submite our selue^ more and more unto thee, keep and
incre^^ thy church, destroy the works of the deuy^ and all power that lifts
it self agayns^ thy Majesty, disapoynt and make void an^ of none effect, al he
counselles that are taken against thy word, until thou may^ (at the length)
reign and rule full and perfit^ when as thou shall be all in all.

QV. Which is the third peticion?

AN. * Thy will be done in earth as it (...) in heaven. That is grant that we
and a^ men (renounsing and forsakyng our ow^ wylls) may be obedye^t, redyly
bent, and (...) out any grudge unto the keeping of thy w^ which is only holy,
and that so every o^ of us, may fulfill and do the office that (...) appointed
unto us, faithfully and cherefull^ as the Angels do in Heaven.

QV. Which is the fourth peticion?

AN Give us this day our daily bread. That is, give unto us al things which
needful and necessary for this life, ye throu^ them we may knowledge and
confess yt the art only the well, out of the which al goodness does spryng,
and that all our care and labor, and also thy own gyfts, are unlucky and
noisome unto us, except thou do bless them, and give them increase. Wherefore
grant us to turn away our trust from all creatures, and to put it only in
thee.

QV. Which is the fifte peticion?

AN. * Forgive us our dettes, as we forgive our detters. That is, for Christ's
blud sake, lay not to our charge that are wretched sinners, all our sins: and
that crooked frowardnes which cleueth in us still, even as we do feel this
witness of thy grace in our hearts, that we intend and purpose steadfastly to
forgive unfeignedly with our mind, all them that have hurt or grieved us, or
have done us any wrong.

QV. Which is the sixth peticion?

AN. * Led us not into temptacion. But deliver us from evil. That is, because
we are so feeble and weak of nature, yt we cannot, one minute of an hour
without help, stand steadfastly and not be over thrown, and our most grievous
enemies, the devil, the world, and our own flesh, vnsessably do fight against
us. Thou O our almighty father, hold up and stay us, and strengthen us by thy
might of thy Holy ghost, that we fall not down and be ouercommed in this
spiritual fight, but so long we may stoutly withstand them, until yt we may
get at length, the whole victory.

QVE. How makes he an end of this prayer?

AN. * For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
That is to say, we are all these things of thee, because thou art both our
king, and art almightye, and both will, and can give al these things unto us,
and these things do^ we therefore crave of thee, that by them, al ^onor,
glory, and worship, should come unto thy holy name and not to us.

QVE. What means this word, Amen.

AN. * That the matter is sure and ou^ of all doubt, and that my prayer is much
more surely hand of God, then I do feel i^ my heart that I desire it to be
granted.

FINIS.
A Prayer of the repentant person taken out of the works of Erasmus.
O Most high creator and (...) of all things, when as I call to remembrance how
greatly I have stirred unto anger thy majesty with my sins: I do defye mine
own foolishnes. When and wey with my self how gentle and liberal a father I
have forsaken, I loath and cry out against mine unkindness. When I mark, in how
wretched a bondage I have cast my self, flyinge from such liberty and freedom
of the spirit that I had, I do condem my madness, and in alpoints mislyke my
self. Neither is there any other thing that appears before mine eyes, but
Hell fire, and desperation, while thy unavoidable rightuusnes in punishi^g of
sin does so make my conscience affrayde. But of the contrary part, when I
consider thy unmeasurable and infinite mercy, which according to the witness of
ye Prophet) passes al thy works and whereby thou (after a certain manner) art
greater then thy self, and when as thou art gretest of al other, by and by, a
certain pleasant breath of hope, does refreshe my mind again. For why should
I despair to get forgeuenes of sins of him which so often in ye books of the
Prophets does freely of him self, call sinners to repentance: crying that he will
not have the death of a sinner, but that he should live: and furthermore,
because forgeuenes is always in a redines to be granted of thee, to them that
are penitent and sorry for their sins, as thy only begotten son has declared
often times by diverse lykenesses: as by it of the lost piece of money, that was
lost and found again. And of ye Shep yt was brought hom^ again, on ye man's
shoulder. But more evidently, by ye similitude of ye prodigal son, whose image I
do acknowledge perfitly to be in me For most wickedly I have left my most loving
Father, and have wickedly wasted away his substance. And while I follow the
lusts of my flesh, and forget thy co^mandementes: I have wrapped my self into
the most filthy bondage of si^, and am brought unto extreme beggerlynes,
neither can I tell to whom I should fly for succor, but unto him from whom I
ran away. Let thy mercy receive him, making supplication unto thee: whom you
have hither to gentylly suffered, going astraye. I am unworthy to lift up mine
eyes to thee beeinge in heaven, or to call thee by the name of a father, but I
beseech thee vouchsaue to turn thy eyes unto me, for thy countinaunce makes a
dead sinner to live again, and him that is lost to come home again too
repentance, for I ought to thank thy loueyng countinance, even for that that I
mislyke my self. Thou have vouchsafed to look upon me while I went a stray
from thee. For thou have given me eyes to see in what miserable state I was,
and thou came forth and met me, and did breath into me, the memory and desire
of innocence. I being a bondsman, worthy all kind of punishment desire not to
be embraced and kyssed of thee. I desire not a long gown and a ring, the
badges and tokens of my old dignity which I have cast away. I make not
supplicacion that thou should receive me unto the honor of thy Sons, but it
shall be innough for me, if that thou receive me among the number of the most
vile runnegate bondmen, having their backs al full of scars, by justly deserved
often beating: but at the least, I may cleave unto thee with some part of thy
servants, as in thy house are many dwelling places. It shall not grieve me to
be numbered in this life among the vilest, to be tormented by repentance, to
be made foul with weepyng: so that I be not departed from thee for ever. I
beseech thee father, and desire thee through the death of thy only well-beloved
son, let me have the spirit which may cleanse my heart, an^ strengthen me
with his grace, that ^ never fall back again by foolish vnheede^ fullnes,
thither from whence I am called back again by thy gentilnes. So be it.

A TABLE OF THE contents of this book.
OF the only comfort, both in this life and at our departure. 2. Of the
wretchedness of man. ibidem. That we have no free will or choice of our selves.
ibidem. Of the wrath of God for our sins 3. Of the mercy of God. ibidem. Of
the rightuusnes, or straight pun^shme^t of God. ibidem. Of the deliverance of
man. ibidem. Of satisfaction or making amends for sin. ibidem. Who is our mean
or mediator. 4. What faith is. ibidem. What things ar necessary to believe. 5.
Of ye creed, or articles of our faith. ibide^. Of the providence of God. 6. Of
ye going down of christ to hell. 8. That only faith justifies. 11. Of the
Sacraments. 12. Of Baptism. ibidem. Of the Lords supper. 13. That Christ is
not really, bodily, or fleshly, in the supper. 15. Of ye keys of ye kingdom
of heaven 16. Wherefore we must do good works. 17. Of mortification or kyllyng
or ye old man and of our fleshly lusts and desires. ibid The.x. commandments.
ibide^ What is Idolatry. Of inuocatian, or calling upon saints for help.
ibide^ Against the use of Images. That the commandments can not be kept fully
or perfytly Of prayer, The exposition of the Lords prayer. or Pater noster. 2^
A prayer taken out of the works of Erasmus Rot.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, in ye vp^ end of Fleetlane: by Richard Iohne^ and ar to
be sold at his Shop ioynyng to the Southwest Door of S. Paul's Church.

R. I.
printer's device of Richard John's


