PAPTHENOS

By John Cousturier M.D.C.XXX.III.

P. van Langeren fecit.



PARTHENEIA SACRA. OR THE MYSTERIOVS AND DELICIOVS GARDEN OF THE SACRED
PARTHENES; Symbolically set forth and enriched With PIOUS DEVISES AND EMBLEMES
for the entertainment of DEVOVT SOVLES; Contrived AL TO THE HONOR of the
Incomparable Virgin MARIE Mother of GOD; For the pleasure and devotion
especially of the PARTHENIAN SODALITIE of her Immaculate CONCEPTION.

By H. A.

Printed by JOHN COVSTVRIER. M.DC.XXXIII.

THE ORDER OF THE SYMBOLS contained in this GARDEN.
1. THE GARDEN. 2. THE ROSE. 3. THE LILLY. 4. THE VIOLET. 5. THE HELIOTROPION.
6. THE DEAW. 7. THE BE. 8. THE HEAVENS. 9. THE IRIS. 10. THE MOON. 11. THE
STAR. 12. THE OLIVE. 13. THE NIGHTINGAL. 14. THE PALM. 15. THE HOUSE. 16.
THE HEN. 17. THE PEARL. 18. THE DOVE. 19. THE FOVNTAIN. 20. THE MOUNT. 21. THE
SEA. 22. THE SHIP.
Whereunto are annexed the PHOENIX, and the SWAN without the Garden.

THE EPISTLE TO THE PARTHENIAN SODALITIE.
MY dear PARTHENIANS, When the Savior of the world had passed the Torrent of
Cedron, into the Garden of Gethsemani, there to commence the Tragedy, whose
sad Catastrophe he was to finish on Mount Caluarie, he gave to understand, how
much (no doubt) he was pleased with Gardens. But then especially, after the
Tragic Scene was ended, and that doleful curten or veyle was rent asunder (a
token of the period of the Jewish Theater) when al was voyded, and he
vouchsafed to appear familiarly again to his dearest friends, in the form
and habit of a Gardener, he evidently declared his good affection, toward the
Garden of their Souls, which then he came to cheer-vp and refresh with his
Divine presence, and to banish the clouds of heaviness, which so sad a
spectacle had cast upon the Garden of their hearts, when as no flowers or
functions of their souls could cheerfully yeald their luster, or send forth
any special odor of sa^ctitie, so drowned in tears. May it not therefore
seem strange unto you, if I, knowing the sympathy of hearts, between the
Mother and the Son, the Blessed JESUS, flower of Nazareth, and his sacred
Stem, presume here to personate, and make her appear to your viewes, not in
the habit of fashion of a Gardener, which office she rather yealds (as proper)
to her Son, but of a Garden, under the veyle of Symbols, to deliciate a while
with her Deuotes, You, dearest Parthenians, yet grieved and groaning with the
burden of your pressures, for his sake, who is the cu^ious Gardener indeed,
that from the beginning planted the same for himself, from al Eternity. Now
then the winter past of melancholy thoughts, the showers blowne-ouer and quite
vanished, of tears of persecution; I say, laying the memory of them al aside,
as storms already past, in conceit at least, you here behold our SACRED
PARTHENES, who presents her self for your delights in Garden-attire and
cheerfully receive her, with serene brows, in this coorse and rural array, of
herbs and flowers, as if she were clothed with the Sun, crowned with the
Stars, and trampling the Moon, as once she was seen by her holy Guardian,
the dear Disciple, whom JESUS loved. Nor would I wish you perfunctoriously to
view her only, and pass her over with a slender glance of the eye, but to
enter into her Garden, which she is herself, and survey it well. Where, to the
end you may not err, mistake, or go astray, in ways so new, and strange, and
(for ought I know) as yet vntraced or trod of any, take here, I pray, for
Guide, my proper Genius, well acquainted with all passages of them. And you (O
SACRED PARTHENES) I beseech especially, to guide me also, while in your service
I take thus upon me to guide the rest.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
COnsidering, Gentle Reader, how much thou art taken and delighted (as men are
wont) with change and variety in all things: I (...) here endeavored to serve
thee in this Work, according to thine appetite. Which being not my sole end,
but for thy devotion rather, I made Variety the hand maid to Piety, directing
al, as you see, thereunto. And though I am a most unworthy Client and Deuote to
the Immaculate Virgin Mother of God, I have presumed (as you see) to direct
both the one and other, to the honor of that Incomparable Queen of Heaven.
Wherein though the instruments I use, may seem profane, so profanely used now
adays, as Devises consisting of Impreses, and Mottoes, Characters, Essays,
Emblemes, and Poesies; yet they may be like that Panthaeon, once sacred to the
feigned Deities, and piously since sanctified, converted, and consecrated to
the honor of the glorious Queen, and all the blessed Saints of Heaven. And
following the example of the Israelits, warranted by GOD himself, I have
borrowed but the silver and golden vessels, of those profane Egyptians, and
not the poisonous liquours they caroused in them; to convert them (I say) to a
better use, in service of my Lady and Mistress, and for the pleasure and
devotion of her especial Family; yea, Gentle Reader, for thy solace too, if
thou art pleased to accept of my poor endeauours.

THE PROEME TO HIS GENIUS ON THE SACRED PARTHENES herself.
MY GENIUS; If thou needs must praise, extol, and magnify Beauty, Virtue,
Honor; and not in the air only of Ideas, or abstract from sense, but in a
subject really, subsisting: I say, if thou needs must dignify and eternize a
pure creature above the skies, praise then such an one, whose superlatiue
praises, when thou have said the most, can hardly so exceed, but that her due
Elogies, Encomiums, and Panegyricks, still shall far transcend the faculty of
thy tongue, and thou be acquit of the least imputation of flatteries. And if my
Genius carry thee (my pen) into daliances, as it were, to deliciat with thy
self, upon thy plumes, in contemplation of that noble Sex, corriual with the
Masculin; do not, I prithee, with Isocrates, seek a Helena, that fatal and
most deplorable firebrand of the Troyan City, on whom that elegant and terse
Sophister powered forth the musks and ciuets of his venal tongue, the riches of
of a wanton and luxuriating wit. Behold SHE is even now at hand, whom worthily
thou may, and whom thou can not praise enough, so far from praising her
too much; who besides is able well to guerdon and recompense thy praises given
her, with heaped and redoubled interest. Behold then our SACRED PARTHENES,
Virgin of Virgins, for excellency, is SHE, whom safely thou may praise, whom
the impatient World for so many Ages, groaning under their pressing burden of
their crimes, with vows and prayers had most incessantly begged and
importuned. A boon of wel-nigh fifty Ages suit, obtained at last with much
ado. So great a work it was for Nature, albeit helped by Grace, to bring forth
to Mortals a creature, worthy to be the Mother of God, Lady of the World, and
the true Reparatresse of life. Nor do thou frame to thyself here the Mercuries
of a counterfeit and Sophisticat candor, colored cheeks, curled hair, and
wreathed knots with inexplicable Meanders. Seek not Vermilion or Ceruse in the
face, bracelets of Oriental-pearles on her wrist, Rubie-carknets on the neck,
rich pendants in the ears, and a delicious fan of most exquisit feathers in
her hand, nor all that magasin of Feminin riches, or richest ornaments of
Beauty, enough to belie beauties rather, and destroy them quite, then to
afford them, where they are not found; they being nothing else then a precious
Scene of fopperies, which they only seek with a curious wastfulnes, who will
needs be wholly mad with the greatest sumptuousnes and cost; whereas surely true
Beauty is but one, which even integrity of the mind makes, being the lively
color of God; and was no doubt that, which so much graced our PARTHENES, and
set her forth, whom the entire and intemerate comlines of Virtues has crowned
with such a gloriet on her head, and such splendor and glory in heaven, as in
a pure creature nothing may be imagined more magnificent in riches, nor in
suauities sweeter. And surely when I think more atte^tiuely of her, it seems
to me, the highest Architect of All and great GOD, the sole Moderatour of all,
in creating this one Soul, has so admirably expressed himself in her, and with
his most exquisit fingars, has bestowed so much art and industry in her
delineation, and so pleased himself with the delicat draughts he has showed in
this one image of himself, as if in the shop of human things he would expose
her to all, to be imitated. Wherefore when as that Soul, far purer then the
Stars, and flowing with so many exquisit ornaments, glided into the
Tabernacle of her body, that impure Firebrand was not cast into her, which
first was kindled in the Authors of our kind, and flamed forth afterward
far and wide, to the waste and utter ruin of the whole world, but as a
Saphyr or purer Adamant, appears and grows up in pure and burnisht gold: so a
most chaste Soul, by the hands of God disposing so thereof, was put into her
inviolable and sanctified body, that no least stayne of her stock and progeny
might light upon her. Then, after. SHE (that golden issue of her Mother) was
borne and brought forth to light, I easily believe, that Nature recreated and
refreshed from the daily misery it lay in, even laughed to behold her,
supposing the light was newly risen to her, when first she fixed her eyes on
her, from whose precious and Virginal womb, was the Fountain of light itself to
spring. The Virgin-infant heervpon was nursed-vp and trained between chaste
walls, in a most holy discipline of Patrial laws, and instructed with those
studies of arts, that might address her as a noble Sacrarie of God.
Anticipating virtue, she urged and pressed more hard the flower paces of her
years, which hardly could endure the long demurres of age, of vhom was Nature
ashamed as it were to impose any laws of longer attendance. For even now in
her first age, there shined many Dotes in her, as stars in the heavens in a
serene night, like sparkling gemmes fixed in their orbs; since SHE had in her
whole life, as you know, a marvelous society of al Virtues, wherewith SHE woue
that loome of her age, as with singular and most excellent figures, in whom the
absolute consent and harmony of al Virtues have magnificently conspired, that
Beauty should not violate Shamefastnes; gravity, infringe lowlines; meekenes,
gravity; Simplicity, Majesty; facility, constancy; lastly (which til then
was never heard of) that the name of Mother should be nothing injurious to
Virginity. Al Virtues strove alike in HER, and al had the victory. Nor yet
was SHE destiture of the gifts of Nature likewise, while a certain Divinity
of beauty dazeled the aspects of men. So Epiphanius very nigh describes her,
The bashful forhead (seat of shamfastnes) soft and gently arose; beneath the
black and archie brows, shined forth the bright lamps of HER eyes, which how
powerfully they pierced and penetrated the heavens, who knows not? The nose
most gracefully inflecting, made a handsome kind of pillaster to her forhead;
lips somewhat thinner, the receptacle of a meek elocution, and celestial
graces; a great affability of speech; a singular modesty of gate; a
countenance, graceful without softnes or leuitie, grave without statelines, set
always in a perpetual sereanes, which hardly could admit the least impression
of laughter. It were long to prosecute the rest; I shall have said al things,
saying, SHE is the MOTHER of GOD. But this dignity when all the tongues, I say
not of men only, but even of the Angels themselves, shall proclaim and set
forth, do what they can, shall be enforted to cry out: De dilecta nunquam satis.

THE PLAT-FORME OF THE GARDEN.
WHerefore, my GENIUS, I would wish thee, to enter into the large, spacious,
and ample GARDEN of our SACRED PARTHENES, and there behold those specious, and
most delicious Objects; all, so wholly consecrated to her service, that they
seem as borne to express her praises; every one, to help thee out, to
accomplish and perform this task so hard to undertake, and impossible to be
done so worthily, as SHE deserves. Go, I say; survey her GARDEN, beset with
the bashful ROSE, the candid LILLY, the purple VIOLET, the goodly
HELIOTROPION, sprinkled al with DEWES, which the busy BE gathers as it
falls from the HEAVENS, dressed with an IRIS, as with a silver MOON, instead
of a torch, and enameled with miriads of STARS, as lesser lamps, to afford it
light, in the obscurity of the night; enclosed round, and compassed-in with a
wall, where on an OLIVE, you may behold the iollie PHILOMEL to perch, chanting
her Roundelayes; and on the other side, a flourishing and stately PALM; and
likewise see a goodly HOUSE of pleasure, standing therein before you; and if
you mark it well, you shall discern that domestical and almost inseparable
companion thereof, the HEN, there scraping in the dust for food, wherein She
finds a precious Margarit or PEARL; and on the top thereof espy an innocent and
meek DOVE, as white and candid, as the driven snow; for in this GARDEN are al
things pure. Where likewise in a place more eminent and conspicuous then the
rest, you may behold a fair and beautiful FOVNTAIN, artificiously contrived
with pipes so under ground, as waters al, when need requires. And if, my
Genius, al these will not suffice, to make up full thy Quire of Lauds, to
magnify thy SACRED PARTHENES, ascend upon that MOUNT before thy face; and with
an Opticon discover thence, the Ocean SEA, and inuit it likewise with the
rest, to bear a part; and for a fuller complement of al, wave but a little
banner to some SHIP or other, to come-in with all her fraught of magnificent
praises. For all within ken or view of that same MOUNT, are subjects and dear
Deuotes of our Sacred and Incomparable PARTHENES.

But soft, my Genius; ere thou lead thy Reader into the Maze or Labyrinth of
the beauties therein contained, pause here a while, to consider how to behave
thy self, before (I say) thou let him in, to speculate that Magazin of
beauties; which being so mysterious and delicious an Object, requires not to be
rashly looked upon, or perfunctoriously to be slighted over, but, as the manner
is of such as enter into a Garden, to glance at first thereon with a light
regard, then to reflect upon it with a better heed, to find some gentle
mystery or conceit upon it, to some use or other; and then liking it better,
to reuiew the same again, and so to make a Survey thereupon to the same use.
This would I have thee punctually observe in all, to guide thy Reader with, in
this present GARDEN of our sacred PARTHENES. First then shall thou present him
with the Symbol it self, set-forth in manner of a Devise, with an Imprese and
Motto, expressing the allusion to the SACRED PARTHENES herself, in some
mystery of hers, or attribute belonging to her. Then shall thou take the
Imprese being the Symbol by itself, and dally as it were with some natural and
apt Character upon it; being no more, then certain superficial Glances,
deciphering it in some sort, but lightly only, for a first entertainment of thy
Reader. The^ with Morals, on the Motto, shall thou but touch or reflect upon
the Paragon herself for the present, and no more. Then looking back with a
fresh reuiew on the Symbol itself, by way of an Essay, shall thou make a fuller
Survey thereof, discoursing on the Paragon herself, to match compare, and
parallel them together, to find out some Elogies or other, in praise of our
SACRED PARTHENES. Thence to satisfy the Eye as well as the Understanding, for
his greater delight, thou shall pause a while, to lead him to behold, as in a
Tapestrie, the Symbol turned into an Emblem, piously composed; where for the
clearer understanding thereof, the same shall be indicatiuely expressed in a
Poesy, made for the purpose. Then shall thou make him sit down a while, to
ponder, consider, and conte^plate some things besides, conducing to the further
discovery of the hidden mystery, contained in the Symbol itself, to the
honor of our SACRED PARTHENES, as certain Speculations or Theories thereon. And
after al, shall thou inuit him to Apostrophize with the Paragon PARTHENES
herself, under the Symbol so handled, being the utmost scope, and full fruition
of the whole; and so conclude the piece with some boon or suite, correspondent
to the present occasion, in every one. And this method would I have thee keep
in all. Now then, being thus admonished, I license, and freely give thee leave,
to lead thy Reader first into her private Garden (for Princes, you must know,
and great Ladies too, besides their public, have some private Garden of their
own) where, though enclosed, yet with the wings of Contemplation, may he
secretly view, reflect, reuiew, survey, delight, contemplate, and enjoy the
hidden and sublime perfections therein, and lastly obtain, no doubt, any
reasonable suite at the hands of the SACRED PARTHENES in respect thereof, for
his reward.

THE I. SYMBOL. THE GARDEN.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE GARDEN is a goodly Amphitheater of flowers, The Impres^^^.
upon whose leaves, delicious beauties stand, as on a stage, to be gazed on;
and to play their parts, not to see so much; as to be seen; and like Wantons to
allure with their looks, or enchant with their words, the ciuets and perfumes
they wear about them. It is even the pride of Nature, her best array, which
she puts on, to entertain the Spring withal. It is the rich Magazin or Burse
of the best perfumes or Roman wash: A poesy of more worth, then a bal of
pomander, to make one grateful where he comes; the one being sweetly sweet, the
other importunely. It is a Monopoly of all the pleasures and delights that are
on earth, amassed together, to make a dearth thereof els-where, and to set what
price they list upon them? It is the precious Cabinet of flowrie gems, or gems
of flowers: The shop of Simples in their element, delighting rather to live
delicious in themselves at home, where they are bred, then changing their
conditions, to become restoratiues to others; or to dye to their beauties, to
satisfy the covetous humor of every Apothecarie, to enrich himself with their
spoils. It is the Palace of Flora's pomps, where is the wardrobe of her
richest mantles, powdered with stars of flowers, and al embroadred with
flowrie stones. It is the laughter and smile of Nature: Her lapful of flowers,
and the Garland she is crowned with in triumphs. It is a Paradise of pleasures,
whose open walks are Tarrases, the Close, the Galleries, the Arbours, the
Pauillions, the flowrie Bancks, the easy and soft Couches. it is, in a word, a
world of sweets, that live in a fair Community together, where is no envy
of another's happiness, or contempt of others poverty; while every flower is
contented with its own estate; nor would the Dazie wish to be a Rose, nor yet
the Rose contemnes the meanest flower.

THE MORALS.
SACER PRINCIPI.
IT is a Maxim in all Arts: There is no rule without exception. The More.
And Sanctuaries, we know, in all good Christian Commonwealths have been ever
allowed of. Who is he so rude; that dares lay hands upon the vessels marked
with the Prince's Arms? Or who presumes to disannul or cancel his Privy or
Broad Seals? The Prince's closet is shut to al, but to the Prince himself. His
Signet is a Key, that opens all the posterns of his Court. There is no Prince,
who, besides his common treasure, has not a private casket of his own. When
the world was drowned, there was an Ark, that safely floted on the Main; nor
all the Cataracts of Heaven, were able to ouerwhelme it. The Jews indeed had
their Cities of Refuge, and the King of Jews no less his sanctified City.
It was a great Praculum to violate the immunities of those; What think you then
of his private City? Has he a City for himself, and not a Garden private to
himself? Doubtless he has. He has then a private Garden of his own; and keeps
the keys himself. Long live the Prince then, to enjoy his Garden; Capit comme
de^^us:
and cursed be he; that shall but with the mouth or heart seem to violate the
sacred closures of his Garden. Quia PRINCIPI SACER.

THE ESSAY.
I will not take upon me to tell al; for so of a Garden of flowers, The Review.
should I make a Labyrinth of discourse, and should never be able to get forth.
Cast but your eyes a little on those goodly Allies, as sowed al over with
sands of gold, drawne-forth so straight by a line. Those Cros-bowes there (be
not affrayed of them) they are but Cros-bowes made of Bays; and the
Harquebusiers, wrought in Rosmarie, shoot but flowers, and dart forth musk.
Those Beasts likewise, horrible there and dreadful to see to, are but in jest;
all that menace they make, is but a show only. Al those armed Men with greenish
weapons, and those Beasts al clad in skins of green, are but of Prim, Isop, and
Time, al herbs very apt to historify withal. I will quite pass over those
little Groves, Thickets, and Arbours, and speak nothing of those Pety-canons
there and Quiristers, chanting their Complines in the Evening, and Nocturnes in
the Night, mingling their pretty Mottets, which Nature learnes them, of their
own accord. Nor will I here speak a word of those Waterworks, Conduits, and
Aquaducts, which yet might you hear to make a gentle murmur throughout,
affording an apt Base for the birds to descant on. I have me to the Flowers
only most proper to our GARDEN here. Behold, I pray, those Bushes, al enameled
with ROSES of so many sorts; these here apparrelled with the white of
Innocence; those there with a scarlet tincture; one wel-nigh withered embalmes
the air with its perfume, and makes a show with its golden threads, and al its
treasure; that other is yet in its folds, and dares not hazard so much as to
peep forth; this here puts forth the bud, and now half-open smiles withal, and
shows forth a glimps of its purple, through a cliff of the green Cafe, wherein
it is; which the theeuish birds would soon come to steal away, were it not
for the Garrison of thorns, that serves for a Corpsde-guard to that Queen of
flowers. Behold there the Lillies of ten sorts; some yet hidden in their green
cups; others half borne; and the rest newly disclosed. What think you? are they
not exceeding fair? You would say, they were of white Satin, streaked without,
and al embroadered within with gold; you can hardly tell, whether they be milk
condensed into leaves, or figured snow, or silver flower-de-lis'd, or a star
al musked. Those yellow ones, would you not verily think them to be golden
bells? and that red one, a little purse of crimson-satin? and those others, some
goodly vessels of Emeralds, or the like? But mark a while; see you not those
beds strewed with a thousand Violets? some yellow, some purple, some white,
some speckled, and some party-couloured, some Carnashion, and some changeable.
Behold those fair and beautiful Tulips there; those rich Amaranths, cerulean
Hiacinths, Pansies, the gemmes of the goodly IRIS; the scarlet Gilloflower,
the Pinks, the Marygolds, and a thousand other flowers. O what a Paradise of
flowers is this! What a Heaven of muskie stars, or Celestial Earth al starred
with flowers, empearled with gemmes and precious stones! A land of promise, full
of milk and honey! Behold, I say, the ROSE, dedicated (they say) to that little
elf Cupid; whose threads are as golden hayres; whose thorns in steed of
arrows; whose fire, a flash of luster; and whose leaves are wings; few can
touch it, without touch of love unto it; and it costs them dear, who meddle
with it. The LILLY hangs the head down; for modesty, I suppose; though it
can not blush, for having nothing to blush at; her flower being al so white and
without spot. They say, She was borne of the milk of Juno; howsoever she is
called the Royal flower, the Rose of Juno. Note there the humility of the
VIOLET, how like to the strawberrie she keeps by the ground, hiding, what she
can, her beauty in her leaves, but is discovered whether she will or no; partly
by the flashes of her luster, breaking forth unawares between the leaves, not
so reserved as they ought; and partly with the odor she can not choose but
send forth. The Tulip is a singular ornament to this Garden; look and observe
it well. How were it possible, one would think, so thin a leaf, bred and
nourished in the same air, and proceeding from the same stem, should be golden
in the bottom, violet without, saffron within, bordered on the edge with fine
gold, and the prickle of the point blew as a goodly Saphir? and a hundred
others of several fashions, as if they had striuen to dress themselves to put
the eyes into pain, not knowing where to bestow themselves. There again, may
you note another, not unlike to a Columbin, very gracious to see to, enameled
with drops of gold, and a thousand other the like varieties; so as of
necessity we must needs confess, that GOD is very admirable in his works,
since on so poor a thing, as a slender stalk, grow such a number of excellent
varieties. And now I address myself to Thee, the Sovereign and Mystical
GARDEN itself, the Paragon of Gardens.

THE DISCOVRSE.
I Speak not here of the Couent-Garden, the garden of the Temple, The Survey.
nor that of the Charter House, or of Grayes-Inne Walks, to be had and enjoyed
at home; nor of the Garden of Padua, or of Mountpelier, so illustrious for
Simples, I speak not of the Garden of Hesperides, where grew the golden
Apples, nor yet of Tempe, or the Elizian fields. I speak not of Eden, the
Earthly Paradise, nor of the Garden of Gethsemany, watered with Blood flowing
from our Sauiour's precious body: But I speak of Thee, that GARDEN so known
by the name of HORTVS CONCLVSVS; wherein are al things mysteriously and
spiritually to be found, which even beautifyes the fairest Gardens: being a
place, no less delicious in winter, then in Summer, in Autumn, then in the
Spring; and wherein is no season to be seen, but a perpetual Spring; where are
al kinds of delights in great abundance, that can possibly be devised; where
are fair and goodly Allies, straight and even, strewed al with sands, that
is, a straight, virtuous, and Angelical life, yet strewed with the sands and
dust of her proper Humility; where are Arbours to shadow her from the heats of
concupiscence; flowrie Beds to repose in, with heavenly Contemplations; Mounts
to ascend to, with the study of Perfections: where are herbs, and Simples,
sovereign medicines of al spiritual maladies, where (I say) are the Flowers of
al Virtues: The LILLY of spotles and immaculate Chastity, the ROSE of
Shamfastnes and bashful Modesty, the VIOLET of Humility, the Gilloflower ol
Patience, the Marygold of Charity, the Hyacinth of Hope, the SVN-FLOWER of
Contemplatio^, the Tulip of Beauty and gracefulnes. In this GARDEN ENCLOSED
are certain risings to be seen of Hills in eleuations of mind, and Valleys
again in depressions and demissions of the same mind, through annihilation;
here likewise are Vines of spiritual gladness, and Groves of a retired solitude,
to be found. Here whole Quiers of Angels are accustomed to to sing their
Alleluyas, at al hours, in lieu of the Phil^mels in the silence of the Night;
in steed of the Larks, at the hour of Prime; in place of the Thrush, the
Linet, and Canarie-bird, at al Hours. Here spring the limpid fountains of al
Graces; whence stream the little rils and brooks watering the Paradise on al
sides, and thence abundantly flowing to the rest of Mortals. Here are Pooles
for the harmles fry of her innocent thoughts, like fishes here and there to
pass up and down in the heavenly Element of her mind; here and there certain
labyrinths formed in the herbs of Her endless perfections. Here lastly are
statues of Her rare examples to be seen, Obelisks, Pyramides, Triumphal Arches,
Aqua-ducts, Thermes, Pillars of Eternal Memory, erected to Her glory, in
contemplation of her Admirable, Angelical, and Divine life.

But that which sets forth and adornes this incomparable and mysterious GARDEN
most, is the special Privilege and Prerogative it has, not only over all the
Gardens of the world besides, but even also of the Terrestrial Paradise itself;
for that the Garden of Eden, or Terrestrial Paradise, was not so exempt from
Sin, but the place where Sin began; and was not so free from the Serpent,
but that he could get-in and work the mischief; so as for avoiding more enfuing
dangers, it was necessary to place at the gates thereof for ever after, an
Angel-Porter of the Order of the Cherubins, with a fiery and two-edged sword,
to guard the same. Whereas this GARDEN (our LADY) was a GARDEN shut-vp indeed
from the beginning, and divinely preserved Immaculate, from Her first
Conception, adorned with all those sorts of flowers and plants of Graces,
Virtues, and Perfections I mentioned above; whereto no Serpent, nor Original
sin, much less Actual, could have acces, but was always even from her first
beginning, a most delicious Paradise and GARDEN shut-vp from al invasions of
Enemies.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THe Virgin was a Garden round beset
With Rose, and Lilly, and sweet Violet.
Where fragrant Sentss, without distaste of Sin,
Inuite^ GOD the Son to enter in.
But it was closed: Alma signifyes Enclosed and a Virgin shut up in Hebrew.
Alma's shut up, we know,
What Gardener then might enter in to sow?
Or plant within this Eden? Or, what birth
Might be expected from a virgin-earth?
The Holie-Spirit, like a subtle wind,
Peercing through al, only a way could find.
As the Earth brought forth at first, how't is not known:
So did this Garden, which was never sown.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, how our Lord GOD had planted a Paradise of delights, that
is, the Virgin MARIE, The Contemplation.
from the beginning, to wit, in the East; wherein he placed Man, whom he had
framed, because indeed he put CHRIST in her womb, through the operation of the
Holie-Ghost. Which place in truth is very pleasant; because whatsoever is
delightful in a Garden, was abundantly found in Her: there being the Cedar of
high Contemplation, the Cypres of odoriferous fame and sanctity of life, the
Laurel of Constancy, the Palm of glorious Victory, the Mulberrie of
Patience, the Myrtle of Mortification, the Olive of Mercy, the Almond of
Fruitfulnes, the Figtree of Deliciousnes, the Plane-tree of Faith; for the
Plane has leaves like to our Escuchions, or Targets, and therefore signifies
Faith; for that Faith is a Target against the temptations of the Devil; But
especially the Tree of Life, whereof S. Augustine says thus: The Virgin MARIE
is said to be a Paradise, in the midst whereof is the Tree of Life, with whose
leaves the sick are cured, whose odor reuiues the, dead, whose taste sweetens
the bitter, whose shadow refreshes the wretched, and whose aspect rejoices the
Angels.

Consider then the amenitie and pleasure of this GARDEN of our Lady. For there
were Pomgranats, that is, an ordination of Virtues, and a wonderful sweetness of
Devotion; for lo, Pomgranats have their grains disposed in an admirable
order, and are indeed most delicious fruits; to which kind of Apples the Spouse
inuites her Spouse, saying: Let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat the
fruit of his apples. There likewise was the Cypres with Nara, that is
odoriferous fame and profound humility; because the Cypres is an oderiferous
tree, and the Nard a most humble herb. There was Nard and Saffron, to wit,
fervent Charity, and Humility of Celestial Contemplation; because the Nard is
a hot herb; and Saffron has a golden color. There were Canes and Cinnamon,
withal the trees of Libanus; because in her was a singular purity of
Conscience, an excellent odor of good Fame, and Incorruptibilitie of the
flesh. For the Cane has its virtue in the pith; the Cinnamon has its odor in
the bark; and the wood of Libanus is incorruptible: And lastly was there both
Mirrh and Alloes, with all the prime Unguents; because in Her was bitterness of
tribulation for her Sonne's passion, the bitterness of compassion for the
affliction of the miserable; and the sweetness of devotion was in Her mind. For
Mirrh and Alloes are bitter; and the Unguents sweet and delicious.

Ponder lastly these words of the Canticles: Cant. 4.
Come Southern wind, and blow upon my garden, and the spices shall flow forth.
Where by the Southern wind is understood the breath of the Holie-Ghost. For the
South Wind is a hot, humid, and fruitful wind; which even blew in the Virginal
Garden of our LADY, for that it made her hot through Charity, humid through
Piety, and fruitful through plenty of good works: and so flowed She with
odoriferous Spices, whose odor as balm did recreate GOD; and like Cinnamon
comforted the whole world: because Cinnamon co^forts the stomach; and like unto
Mirrh did drive away Devils; for that indeed the smell of Mirrh expels the
worms.

THE APOSTROPHE
SHALL be made to the INCOMPARABLE VIRGIN, The Colloquie.
as to the Abstract of perfections, in this or the like manner: O most
Sovereign Princess, Lady of Paradise, yea a Paradise itself of al
perfections: Most pure Virgin, most chaste Spirit, Virgin full of grace, Mirror
of purity, Pattern of sanctity, Sun of chastity, Model of innocence,
Image of virtue, Example of perfection, Vessel of singular piety, Mother and
Mistress of Christian Religion, blessed Band, delicious Garden, the Devotion of
the whole world: Be al Virtues, O my dear Aduocat, afforded me. O Lady,
Sovereign creature among the pure; obtain them for me, I beseech thee from
the bottom of my heart, through the sweetnesses of thy immaculate Conception,
and thy blessed childbirth; through the sweet nourishment of the precious
milk, given to thy Son, GOD and MAN, the King of Kings; by those sacred and
divine kisses, which thou so reverently gave him in his tender infancy. O
grant me those flowers of thy delicious Garden, I beseech thee; and after al,
to behold Thee triumphant in the Celestial Paradise.

THE II. SYMBOL. THE ROSE.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE ROSE is the Imperial Queen of Flowers, The Impresa.
which al do homage to, as to their Princess, She being the glory and
delight of that Monarchy. She is herself a Treasury of al Sweets, a Cabinet
of Musks, which She commends to none to keep, but holds them folded in her
leaves; as knowing well, how little conscience is made of such stealths. If any
have a will to seek Diamonds among flowers, he may seek long enough ere he
find them; but if a Rubie he seeks for, the ROSE is a precious Rubie. It is
the Darling of the Garden-Nimphs, and the cause sometimes perhaps of much
debate between them, while each one strives to have it proper to herself,
being made for all, and is verily enough for all. It is the Palace of the
flowrie Numens, environed round with a Court-of-Guard about her, that stand in
a readiness with iauelins in hand, and the Qui va la in the mouth, with whom is
but a word and a blow, or rather whose words are blows, that fetch the blood.
It is the Metropolis of the Graces, where they hold their Commonwealth, and
where the Senate of al odoriferous Spices keep their Court. It is the chiefest
grace of Spouses on their Nuptial days, and the Bride will as soon forget her
fillet as her Rose. It is the maisterpeece of Nature in her garden-works, and
even a very spel to Artizans to frame the like; for though perhaps they may
delude the eye, yet by no means can they counterfeit the odor, the life, and
spirit of the Rose. When Flora is disposed to deliciate with her minions, the
Rose is her Adonis, bleeding in her lap; the Rose her Ganimed, presenting her
cups full of the Nectar of her sweets. It is even the Confectionarie-box of the
dantiest Conserues, which Nature has to cherish-vp herself with, when she
languisheth in Autumn. The Cellarie of the sweetest lickours, either wine or
water; her wines being Nectars, and her waters no less precious then they,
whose dried leaves are the empty bottles. In a word, the Rose for beauty is a
Rose, for sweetness a Rose, and for all the graces possible in flowers, a very
Rose; the quintessence of beauty, sweets, and graces, al at once, and al as
epitomized in the name of ROSE.

THE MORALS.
CASTO PERFVSA RVBORE.
IT is a common Saying: The honest Bridegroom, The Motto.
and the bashful Bride. For so when Rebecca first was brought to the youthful
Isaac, as a Spouse, she put her scar for veil before her eyes. So Rachel did,
and many others. Lucretia the Chaste chose rather to wallow in her blood, then
to survive her shame, wherein she blushed indeed, but yet without cause; for yet
still she remaynes in all men's mouths, the Chaste Lucretia. The heart and cheeks
have their intelligences together, and the purest blood is messenger between
them. The heart is put into a fright; the obsequious blood comes-in anon, and
asks: What ayle you, Sir? Go, get you up, and mount to the turret of the
cheeks, my only friend, and call for help; the blood obeyes, and makes the
blush, that rayseth such alarmes, intender Virgins most especially. What fears
the Virgin, when she blushes so? The wrack of her honor; you will say. How so?
Is Honor in the Body, or the Mind? If in the Mind, the Mind is a Citadel
impregnable, not subject to violence, nor to be betrayed, but by itself. Then
blush not, Virgin, for the matter; thy hold is sure enough, and thou in
safety, if thou will thyself. But this of al other Virtues, never is safe and
secure enough; this of al others fears the very shadows themselves, and
trembles like an Aspin-leaf at the least motions. Now looks she pale like a
very clowt; and now through modesty, the color mou^tss into her cheeks, and
there sets-vp his ruddie standard, as if the Fort were his; til fear again
preuayling, plucks it down And these were the vicissitudes our Sacred VIRGIN
had, when her glorious Paranimph discoured his Embassage to her in her secret
closet, presenting her a shadow only, seeming opposite to her chaste Vow; where
at She trembled in his sight, CASTO PERFVSA RVBORE.

THE ESSAY.
BEhold here the Princess of flowers, the Pearl of Roses, The Reuiew.
with all its varieties: the Damask Rose, the Musk-Rose: The Red, the Cinnamon,
the Carnation, the Province, the White, the Savage Rose (which grows in the
Eglantines) and lastly the Golden Rose, fair indeed to behold, but not so
sweet. The Rose grows on a speckled thorn, swelling into sharp or pointed
buttons somewhat green, which riues by little and little, and opens at last,
then vnbuttons and discloses its treasure, the Sun unfolds it, and opens the
lights and leaves, making it display itself, and take life, so affording it the
last draught of beauty to its scarlet; and now having perfumed it, and made
the infusion of Rose Water therinto, in the midst appears, as in a cup,
certain golden points, and little threads of Musk or Saffron, sticking in the
heart of the Rose. But to speak of the fires of its Carnation, the snow of the
white Satin, the fine Emralds, cut into little toungs round about, to serve as
a train to wayt upon it; of the Balm and ambergrees, that breathes from this
little crop of gold, which is in the midst; of the sharpnes of the thorns, that
guard it from the little thieves, that would be nibling it away with their
beaks; of the juice and substance, which being squeezed, embalmes al round
about it, with its favor, of a hundred hidden virtues; as to fortify the heart,
to clear the cristal of the eyes, to banish clouds, to cool our heats, to
stirre-vp the appetite, and a thousand the like, were a world to deal with;
but I hasten to the Mistris-flower herself, who mysteriously sits in this
goodly oeconomic of Sweets and beauties, as in her Bower, wherein She delights
to shroud herself.

THE DISCOVRSE.
Two things in the Rose chiefly do I note: The Survey.
what inwardly it contains, and what virtue and quality the Rose outwardly
gives forth. It is strange, the same should be hot and cold together; cold in
the leaves, hot in the seed; so as passions proceeding of excessive heat, it
alayes and qualifyes with its leaves; and with the heat and vigor of its
seeds, it quickens and virifyes the frigid and melancholy affections of the
body. Some men are tepid, yea cold in the love of God; they are so dull and
stupid in Divine things, that they cannot raise up the mind from terreue and
earthly cogitations, to sublimer thoughts; being immured with base affections.
But our Mystical Rose, with the seed of Grace in her, wherewith She was
replenished, inflames their hearts to the love of God. Oh seed of our Rose!
(...).
She shall not fear her house for the colds of the snowes; for all her household
are clothed double. This snow so cold, is a frigiditie of mind; but against
this cold she clothes her Deuotes with double suites of charity, to God and
their Neighbor. Some also are hot, and most desperately inflamed with the fires
of Concupiscence; these heats she tempers and extinguishes with the deawes of
her refrigerating grace, as with the leaves or mantle as it were of her
gracious protection.

The Rose, the more it is wrung or pressed, the sweeter odor it sends forth,
and yealds such a redolent fragrancie withal, that al are wonderfully taken
with the odoriferous breath it gives: and this our Rose, the more she was wrung
and pressed with the cruel fingar of tribulations and afflictions, the greater
her sanctity appeared. Being banished into Egypt, she gave forth a most
fragrant odor of Patience, wherewith she embalmed al Egypt, and fructifyed
afterward into an infinite race of Deuotes, to her and her Son; witness the
Paul's, the Anthonies, the Hilarions, the Macarians of Egypt. In the Passion of
her Son, transfixed with the sword of sorrow, she yealded a sweet perfume of
perfect Faith. In other afflictions and tribulations she imparted the
communicatiue odor of Compassion. For the torments which he suffered of the
Jews, she sent up the fragrancie of Thanksgiving to the heavenly Father,
from the Thurible of her Heart. And in the desolation she felt after his
Ascension, for the absence of her Beloved, she powered forth incense of her
holy Desires and incomparable Devotion. After al which odours, O give me
leave, most sweet and odoriferous Rose, through desires and devotion to run
after thee; or, do thou but draw me after thee, Cant. 1.
unto the odor of thine ointments.

The Rose grows on thorns, but puts not on their nature; the thorns are
churlish and rough, while the Rose is sweet and gentle. And Our Rose sprung
indeed from the thornie stock of the Jewish race, but yet took nothing of the
condition of thorns with her. The Jews were Proud and haughty, She most
humble; they full of vices, she fully replenished with grace; the Jews, we see,
are Infidels, she the pattern and mirror of Faith; the Jews covetous of
earthly and terrene things, and she most thirsting after celestial. She sprung
likewise from the thornie Eua; but yet took not after her nature. O thou
Virgin (says S. Bernard) most flourishing Rod of Iesse! through whom was
recovered in the Branch, what had perished in the Root! Eua was a branch of
bitterness, Marie a branch of eternal sweetness. An admirable and most profound
dispensation of the Divine Wisdom! that such a Rod should grow from such a
Root; such a Daughter from such a Mother; such a Freeborn from such a
Bond-slaue; such an Empress from such a captive; from so dry a Thorn, so
flourishing a Rose.

What the Rose gives outwardly forth, are the objects of three principal
Senses: of Seeing, Smelling and Touching; and for the first, who sees not, that
has the benefit of eyes, how gorgeous the Rose is among all the flowers of the
Garden, alluring and attracting the eyes of all that enter into it? So our
incomparable Rose, was exceeding fair; and with incredible beauty, seemed
gracious and amiable to the eyes of al. H^st. 2.
She was a glad spectacle unto GOD, Men, and Angels; to GOD, because so
specious to her Son, her Spouse, her GOD. The King desires thy beauty, and
says therefore: Show me thy face, for thy face is comely. psalm.
Unto men, she was so admirable for beauty and grace, that S. Denis, that
great light of the Militant Church, beholding her, acknowledged himself to have
been dazeled, and nigh transported from himself. And for the Angels, hear what
the Prophet says: All the rich of the people, shall implore thy countenance. And
who are these rich, but the Angels, who beyond others enjoy the riches of the
heavenly Kingdom? Whence She is said to be the Glory of Jerusalem, the
gladness of Israel, the honor of her people.

As for the odor she gaue-forth of her Sanctity, Judith. 14.
it is said: The odor of thy garments; which is of her outward virtues, Cant.
4.
being as the odor of incense, a grateful Sacrifice to God, which recreates
those that are edifyed therewith.

And for the sense of Touching in the Rose, it is understood in a spiritual
sense. Hear S. Bernard: Why fears human frailty to approach to Marie? you
shall find nothing terrible; She is wholly sweet and gentle; and being so sweet,
is therefore to be sought-for, and embraced through devotion. Take her then,
and she shall exalt thee; when thou shall embrace her, thou shall be glorified
by her.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THe Virgin sprung even from the barren earth, The Pause.

A pure white Rose was in her happy birth,
Conceau'd without a thorn. This only Flower
The Father raised by his Almighty power.
When the Angel said, she should conceive a Son,
She blushed, and asked, how it should be done?
The Holie-Ghost inflamed, and so the white
By him was made a Damask fiery bright.
Lastly her Son made her purple red,
When on the Cross his precious Blood was shed*
No Faith of Mortals then but had a stain,
Excepting hers; for she was died in grain.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
a gallant and odoriferous Rose, growing on a pricklie and thornie stem, and
men with admiration to stand pointing at it, saying to one another: What is
that, there so shot-vp, so beautiful to behold, from so ragged, sharp, and
harsh a thorn? And then ponder, how the Angels stood amazed, seeing so our
Mystical Rose transplanted from Hierico, into the Heavenly Paradise; or
ascending rather so flourishing from the Desert, when there was like
questioning amongst them, at her glorious Assumption, asking: Who it was, Cant,
vlt.
that ascended flowing with delights?

Consider then the Rose, while it grows in the Garden, and flourishes, as it
were alive; how it cheeres and glads the eyes of al with its glorious presence;
and how, after it is cropped from its stem also, which is the death of the said
Rose, what an odor it has with it, even after it has been persecuted with
fire in the fournace of the Still, as well in the water, as in the cake; and then
think, what a mirror and pattern of sanctity Our Lady was, during her abode
here in the garden of the World; and how she multiplied her favors to
mankind, especially after she was translated thence, and had been proved and
exercised with infinite tribulations, leaving an unspeakable odor behind, of
miracles and graces; witness the innumerable Votes that hang on her Temples and
Chapels throughout the world.

Ponder lastly, that of Roses are made, sometimes Electuaries, sometimes Oils,
sometimes Playsters, and Conserues very sovereign and medicinal for many
diseases, namely four: for first, the Rose fortifyes the stomach, and comforts
the heart; secondly, it stops the flux of the venture; thirdly, it clarifyes the
eyes; and finally, heales the headache. So our Mystical Rose comforts the heart,
in affording it the Charity of GOD; restraines the flux of sins, through the
Fear of GOD, which she gives to eschew sins withal; clarifyes the eye of the
understanding, by imparting to it the knowledge of Divine things; and cures the
head, These, 5,
which is hope, being the helmet of health, when she rayseth our tepid hope, to
desire Celestial things; and therefore says: I am the mother of fair
dilection, Ecel, 24
of fear, of knowledge, and of holy hope.

THE APOSTROPHE.
FLower of flowers, The Colloquis
O Rose of roses, O Flower of roses, O Rose of flowers! Shore me up with
flowers, because I languish for love of thy love Jesus, the bud of thee, o
Rose, little in thy womb greater in thine arms, and then fairest of al, when
opened thoroughly and displayed on the Cross. By that precious bud of thine, I
beseech thee, and the sheading of his most precious blood, thou would change
my thorns into roses; and present me, as a Rose of sweet odours, to thy Son,
and not as thorns for fuel of the fire of his indignation. O grant me this, I
beseech thee; and here do I present thee, in honor of thee, the Mystical
Rose, and thy Son, thy sovereign Bud, the Hymn that follows: Salve CHRISTI
sacra Parens,
Flos de spina, spina carens,
Flos, Spinati gloria.
Nos spinetum, nos peccati
Spina sumus cruentari;
Sed tu spinae nescia.


THE III. SYMBOL. THE LILLY.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Lilly is the Scepter of the chaste Diana; The Impresa
whose Flower-deluce, the crown; and stem, the handle; which she chastely
wealds amidst the Nimphs of flowers. It is a Siluer-Bel, without sound to the
ear, but full of sweets to the brim; and where it can not draw the ears, the
eyes it will; and inebriats the curious with its ouer-sweets. It is a Box of
Ciuets, which opens to the Zephirs, and prodigally powers forth its spices to
the standers roundabout, though they come not very nigh it, Flora it seems
has no other Purse, then this of candid saffron, without strings to shut it
up; so prodigal she is of her sweets which she well knows can never al be
disbursed. Who had not seen a Lilly heertofore, especially the Flower-deluce,
the Prince of Lillies, would start (no doubt) as with the sight of a
Garden-Comete, and call in his friends perhaps to gaze on a Blazing Star or
Garden-Miracle. It is the ensign of France, even vying with the British or
Lancastrian Whiter Rose; if not so happy for her Union with the Red, the
Ensign of Peace, yet in this more happy, that she never was divided, to have
need of such a Union, as ever standing of herself. It is a Quiver of amourous
shafts, with golden heads, which some call hammers rather, against lust, to
blunt the thorns of lewd Concupiscence. A very Purselin cup, replenished
within, with the rarities of Nature, enough to stupify and astonish the curious
in the search of secrets. It is besides a precious Pot of the purest
Alablaster, filled with the inualuable Spicknard of Arabia; for sent and odor,
as it were, fellow unto that, the blessed Magdalen powered on her Maister's
head; and if you will not believe me, approach but to the vessel itself, and you
shall feel it straight. To say no more, no snow is found to be more white then
it, nor gives a greater flash of lightning in the eyes then it, that sweetly
dazels and not duls the sight.

THE MORALS.
NIVEO CANDORE NITESCEN
THey are truly chaste, The Motto.
whose mind and body never yet admitted stayne in the virgin-wax of their pure
integrity, in either part. Chaste is she held to be, and so is truly, that
vows her chastity, and keeps the same, howbeit once stained perhaps, at
least with impurities of mind, and washed again with the Lauer made of the
purest Blood of the immaculate Lamb, she seems indeed to follow the Lamb,
wheresoever he goes. The Turtle-Widowes are accounted chaste, and so they are,
that having lost their virginal integrity, are re-borne anew, as it were, both
in mind and body, with a chaster purpose, never more to choose another
earthly Mate, or Turtle-Doue, to follow and consort withal; but instead of
such, make choice to linck themselves from thence-forth to a heavenly Spouse;
and who, trow you, but the Spouse of Spouses? and that for ever. The
Vestal-Virgins were esteemed such by all their Flamins, though they had but a
bodily integrity, and no more, while the mind perhaps was secretly a
Prostitute to al impurities. And if there was any of them, as some there might
be, who kept both the one and other sort of purities indeed, yet were they not
vowed perpetually to be such; and so were chaste, though they shined not with
that snowie chastity; which, if it be, were, and ever shall be so, is not yet
the perfectest chastity of al, nor any way such, as the Queen of Virgins was,
and therefore worthily said to be: NIVEO CANDORE NITESCENS.

THE ESSAY.
WHEN Nature is in her cheifest iolitie, she tapistryes the whole Universe with
a world of delicious flowers. The Reuiew.
And to say truth, these flowers are even the smiles and laughters of the
Earth, that sees herself now delivered of the cruelties of the Winter, and long
captivity. She seems therein to take pleasure, recreate, and disport herself;
to diaper the face of the earth in a thousand fashions, enameled with as
manierarities; while the gentle breaths of Zephirus, with the sweet influences
of Heaven, mixing their moystures, with the heats of the April-Sun, make that
whole diversity, which is in the bosom of the earth, al sowed-ouer with a
thousand seeds, now mortifyed with the austerities of the winter. When they are
come forth, Nature solicitous of these treasures so odoriferous, seeks to
guard them carefully, and adorn them curiously; arming some with thorns,
others with prickles; covering these with rough, and others with large and
shadie leaves, to conserve their luster. Among the which the Lilly carries
hers very long, and green, the stem, high and round, straight, united, fat, and
firm, al clothed with leaves. On the top whereof, grow out as it were certain
wyers, with heads thero^, or buttons somewhat long, of the color of the
herb, which in time grow white, and fashion themselves in form of a bell of
satin or silver. From the bottom and heart thereof, grow upright, some little
wyers of gold, with heads like hammers of the same. The leaves whereof, of an
exquisit whitnes, al streaked and striped without, go enlarging themselves,
like a bell, as before is said. The seed remains in these hammers of gold. The
stem to carry the head the better, is knotted and strengthened through-out; for
that the Lilly is ever with the head hanging down-wards, and languishing, as
not able to bear up itself. There are some of them red, some of them azure.
These are al so delicious, that even to behold them were a great delight.

THE DISCOVRSE.
THE Liseron is a Lilly also, The Survey.
though a bastard of that kind, without odor and those wyers above, made as an
essay, or practice, and first draught of Nature, endeavoring so to form
patterns, to frame some maister-piece of the true Flower-deluce, the Prince of
Lillies. Our incomprable VIRGIN is this Flower-deluce, that Princess of
Lillies, for the many sympathies and fair resemblances it has with it. The
Lilly is white without, and gold within, and both within and without, most
fragrant and odoriferous; and the Blessed VIRGIN was most fair and beautiful
in her flesh, through the candor of her virginity: Sap. 7.
she, the candor of the eternal light; and the glass without spot. In mind
she was al inflamed, as the burnisht gold, Gold (as Aristotle says) can not be
corrupted; nor could Her Charity be ever extinguished. For, Cant, 8. c
many waters, as it is said, can not extinguish charity. And how sweet She
was both inwardly and outwardly, who sees not, that considers her Humility, in
the lowlines of her heart within, and outwardly in her conversation? Which
Humility of hers sent forth such an odor unto God, 1. Cant 1
as allured and attracted him to her: When the King was in his seaty, my Nard
gave forth an odor: to wit, her Humility: And these are the Lillies:
Virginity, Humility, and Charity, which chiefly environed the Blessed
Virgin, while her little JESUS was hanging at her breast, being fed among
Lillies; for if these be not Lillies, what are they?

Again the Lilly has a straight stem or stalk, tending wholly and directed
upwards, but the leaves pendant and hanging downwards; and the Virgins mind
like a staf was always straight, and tending to GOD, in yealding him thanks
for his benefits, and ever magnifying his holy Name. For as the Lilly
whatsoever odor and candor it has, directs it to heauen-wards: So MARIE,
what sanctity or grace soever she had, offered it up al unto GOD, But for the
leaves, her words, they were always bent to the earth, in speaking perpetually
most humbly of herself. Whence said she so affectuously: My soul does magnify
our Lord; behold the stem of this Lilly, how straight it was, and how directly
ascended to the Heavens: But see the leaves now, and mark how they look
downwards: He has regarded the lowlines of his handmayd, and the like.

The Lilly besides is always fragrant, and of a most sweet odor; and our
Lilly was perfumed with an odoriferous ointment, which made her so fragrant
and redolent, composed of three odoriferous spices: aromatizing as Balm, Eccl
24.
Mirrh, and Cinnamon. For she was Embalmed by the Divinity, when the Deity was
lodged in her; spiced with Mirrh, through the gift of Angelical purity and
Virginity; and enflamed with a sweet Divine love, which is as the powder of
Cinnamon here understood, hot in smell, and taste; hot in smell, and therefore as
love, draw me with the odor of thy Ointments, to wit, with the love of thy
heavenly graces; hot in taste, and therefore Divine; because we are bid to see
and taste, how sweet our Lord is. Of which ointment it is said in the Canticles:
Cant. 2.
The odor of thine ointments, is beyond al spices.

Besides, the Lilly has the root and stem, six-square or corner-wise. So the
root of Charity in this Paragon, has six points with it: the first, a love of
GOD above al things; the second, wherewith she loved her own soul, conseruing
the same in all sanctity; the third, wherewith she loved her body, keeping it
entirely for the Divinity; the fourth, wherewith she loved her domestics and
familiars, instructing them in all virtue; the fifth, wherewith she loved her
friends, in GOD; The last, wherewith she loved her enemies, for GOD.

And to conclude, as the Bed-chambers of Kings are adorned with Lillies, that
they may rest more deliciously among them; so the Virgin, not the Chamber only
of a King, but of GOD also, was dressed-vp and beset al with Lillies
round-about; according to that: Thy womb as a heap of corn hedged-in with
Lillies; Cant. 7.
for she was al encompassed with Lillies: above, being enclosed with the Lilly
of eminent Charity; beneath, with the Lilly of profund Humility; inwardly,
with the Lilly of internal Purity; outwardly, with the Lilly of Virginity;
on the right hand, with the Lilly of Temperance, in prosperity; on the left,
with the Lilly of Patience, in adversity; before, with the Lilly of
Providence, in future things; behind, with the Lilly of Gratitude, for passed
benefits. And since she was so environed and enclosed with Lillies of al sides,
the Church sings of her: As the days of the Spring, do the flowers of the
roses enuiron her round. Cant. 2.
Among which flowers of Roses and Lillies, the Beloved, that is CHRIST, is
feeding: My beloved to me, and I to him, who seeds among the Lillies.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
A Pure-white Lilly, The P^use.
like a silver Cup,
The sacred Virgin humbly offers up.
Her constant, steadfast, lowly Heart (the foot,
Which al supports) is like this flower's root.
The stem, her right Intention; and the bole
(The flower itself) is her chaste spotless Soul.
The yellow knobbes, which sprowting forth are seen,
Isradiant Love, which guild's her Cup within.
In lieu of liquides, is a fragrant sent:
Her virtues odours, which she does present.
Her Son accepts al, that she offers up,
GOD, Part of her inheritance, and Cup.
THE THEORIES.
Contemplate first, The Co^templation,
how al thorns conceive but thorns. For what should thorns conceive but merely
thorns? Corrupt mothers bring forth into the world but men, which merely are
but men and sinners. But the Virgin Mother conceived the Holy of Holies. She
now a Lilly conceived, and afterward produced the true Lilly of the valleys;
a Lilly of Virginity, the Lilly of Majesty: through whose candor is
darkness expelled; with whose odor, are raised the dead; with whose touch, are
the leaprous cleansed, and all the infirm and diseased cured. And therefore how
much this Lilly of ours, is to be exalted above all the other Daughters, judge
you, and ponder it well.

Consider then, that though there were many other Virgins besides, conspicuons
and eminent for sanctity, yet were as thorns; for that they had some blemish
in them; since, howbeit they were pure in themselves, yet the fomes of sin
was not extinguished in them; who were indeed as thorns to others, that have
been touched and incited with concupiscence toward them. Whereas the
Virgin Mother was wholly privileged from al guilt, in whom was that fomes
altogether extinguished, and was accomplished with so intense a Chastity,
that with her inestimable Virginal purity, she so penetrated the hearts of the
beholders, as she could not be coueted of any; but for the time rather
extinguished al lust of concupiscence in them. O beauty of Virginity and
Humility, wherewith the Son of GOD was so allured and ravished!

Ponder lastly, that as the Lilly has a most efficacious virtue against
leaprosie, ulcers, and the holiefire, as also against the stinging of serpents:
So the blessed Virgin being conceived as a Lilly, was endued with such virtue
of the Divine grace, that neither the leaprosie of Original sin, the fire of
concupiscence, nor the biting of the old Serpent, could any ways hurt her.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Lilly of Lillies, and next the Lilly (thy dearest Son) the purest of al
Lillies. The Colloqute
Alas! most pure and immaculat Virgin, shall I always live in the flauerie and
servitude of this impure flesh of mine? And shall I ever be troubled and vexed
with these unchaste cogitations, and impure apprehensions; which so macerate my
unwilling soul? Oh, thou elevated and raised above al pare creatures, most
blessed Virgin, I say Blessed with all benediction! how long? Alas! how shall I
sustain the body of this death, this impure thistle of the body, with its
thorns? Alas, when shall I be delivered and rid thereof?

THE IV. SYMBOL. THE VIOLET.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Violet is truly the Hermitesse of flowers, The Impresa
affecting woods and forests, where, in a lowly humility mixed with
solicitude, she leads a life delicious in herself, though not so specious to
the eye, because obscure. She is a great companion to the Primrose, and they
little less then sworn sisters; with whom, when she is disposed, she will
recreate herself whole nights and days; and you shall likely never find them
far asunder. When they are so in company in the wood together, where she is
bred and borne, they make an excellent enamel of blew and yelow; but being by
herself alone, as in her celle, she is a right Amethyst. Had June been in
quest; to seek her Bird, as strayed in the woods, she would easily have
thought these purple Violets had been her Argoe's eyes, as shattered here and
there, and dropped down from her Peacocks train; and so well might hope to have
found her Bird again, as Dear are traced by their footing. She is even the
Wanton among leaves, that plays the Bo-peep with such, as she is merry and
bold withal; whom when you think you have caught, and have now already in your
hand, she slips and leaves you mocked, while you have but her scarf only, and
not her self. She is the Anchoresse, sending forth a fragrant odor of her
sactitie, where she is not seen; which she would hide full feign, but can not.
She is the Herald of the Spring, wearing the Azure-coat of Arms, and
proclaiming sweetly in her manner to the spectatours the new arrival of the
wel-come guest. She is the Primitiae or hasty present of Flora, to the whole
Nature. Where if the Rose and Lilly, be the Queen and Lady of Flowers, she
will be their lowly handmayd, lying at their feet, and yet happily (for worth)
be advanced to lodge in the fairest bosoms, as soo^ as they; as being the
only Fair affecting obscurity and to lie hid, which other Beauties hate so
much.

THE MORALS.
HVMI SERPENS EXTOLLOR HONOR.
Virginity indeed is a specious and glorious thing, The Motto.
and has somewhat of the Angel with it: but yet nothing so happy as Humility
is, which has in truth somewhat else withal, as it were Divine. Virginity and
purity invited the Word to take up his lodging in the Virginal womb; but
Humility was it, that strook-vp the bargain between the Immaculat Hostess and
the Divine Guest. And hence arose the source of al her aduancements. The Angels
are pure indeed, but lower then their nature is, they can not stoop; since
Lucifer himself even after his fall retained his nature still, which he could not
forgo: t^rice happy they, had they not aspired higher then they were indeed.
But the Eternal Word could stoop so low, and really did, to be less then
Angels. If purity then be a glorious, specious, and Angelical thing, Humility
is a virtue more then Angelical, as being Divine. The Angels would feign have
risen higher, but could not; they tried their wings, and with that Iearus (that
daring youth) had a shameful fall. But the purest of al Virgins in contemplation
of the Eternal Word, ready to stoop so low, whereas she was to be truly the
Queen of Angels, styles here herself the lowly handmayd of our Lord; when
creeping on the ground as low as might be, she came to be exalted to the
highest dignity next her Son, in human nature, and might worthily say: HVMI
SERPENS EXTOLLOR HONOR.

THE ESSAY.
ONE would think, The Reuiew.
the Author of Nature had made choice of the Violet, to couch his enamel, and
to make the delicatnes of his pencil shine therein, and the fairest colors of
the world, to border the mantle of the Spring withal. There are some purple,
but with the finest purple; some as snow, fashioned into little flowers, like
curdled milk, and blazoned as with Argent leaves, al sown thick with little
odoriferous stars: Others are of Ore musked, or of Violcts metamorphosed into
most sweet gold, cut into blossoms. There are some decked with a hundred and a
hundred leaves neatly fitted together, and al as grafted into one stem,
which casting themselves into a round and folding within one another through a
sweet oeconomie, agree to frame and compose a very dayntie and delicious
Violet, as fair as sweet, mingling, with a gentle confusion, a thousand
colors, which simpathize exceeding well, and glad the eye. Behold the Violet
of March and April; May and June have theirs apart, being of a changeable
color, having the top and edge of purple, white in the midst, and gilded
beneath in the bottom. What a marvelous enamel to see the argent, the purple,
the Ore, and azure of the leaves, which shade round-about, al coming forth of a
little green tuft, from a little sprig, with a string, that serves as a pipe for
Nature to distill her musks, that breathe from thence. The leaves are somewhat
round in their peering forth, and iagged; and then after extend they in length,
and spread themselves. Their great virtue comes from a little fire well tempered
in them, and a sweet heat, which is the predominant quality of their
complexion, and makes them sweetly bitter. To renew their forces again, when
they are decaying, they steep them in vinagre; and it is incredible, the
virtues these little flowers have; for they mollify hardness, alay heats, and
extinguish infla^mations: the juice softens the venture, dissipates and euacuats
choler, sweetens the asperitie of the lights, alayes the fire that burns the
breast; with infinite other things, most sovereign for use.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BEHOLD now the Violet, The Survey.
which after the Rose (the Queen of flowers) and the Lilly (the honor of
gardens) I should think might follow well in Our Ladies Garden, as an excellent
Type or Symbol of her. It is flower well known to al, familiar and domestical
with all Nations. For where have you a Garden, that has not store of them? yea
the woods together with the Primrose seem to be as strewed with them as
tapistryes; they are so diapred al-ouer with those flowers. And our glorious
VIRGIN is as easy and familiar to approach unto, as it. The honor of this
Violet, is in the Spring; or rather is the Violet, the honor of the Spring.
Because the hoarie and horrid Winter now passed over, and the rigid frosts and
snowes dissolved, the pleasant season of the Spring returning, the Earth seems
to put forth the Violet, as the primitias of flowers, together with the
Primrose her inseparable companion, to welcome it with; a hasty present
indeed, but yet a rare one. The spring of Grace so appearing, and opening the
breast, after so tedious a Winter ouerpast, of horrid Sin and frozen
Infidelity, our MARIE the Violet, or the Violet-Marie rather, is put forth, as
a joyful present to glad the time withal.

This flower I find now to affect the hills and mountains, though there want no
store and plenty of them in the plains and valleys also; and, as gardiners
use to say, it loves to be transplanted to and fro. And so our Violet here was
no less transplanted in her Visitation, when she Rifing up, went hastily into
the mountains. For lo, this Violet sprung at first and grew in the valleys, to
wit, of herself; but was then transferred and removed into the mountain of
Perfection, to the mountain of Glory, mountain of Fame, Honor, and
Exaltation: but yet was admirably planted in the valley of Humility. A strange
thing truly, and more then a Garden-miracle, that our Violet should still
remain in the valley, and yet be placed on a Mountain! yea the higher she was
exalted on the Mountain, the better she was rooted in the Valley: both on the
same Mountain, and in the same Valley, at one and the self-same time. Now,
Philosopher, tell me, what would you more? can not the same thing be in two
places at once? It may; MARIE on the Hill of exaltation, and the self-same MARIE
in the Valley of demission, fulfilling therein the precept of the Wife-man: How
much greater thou art, Eccles.
do thou humble thyself in all.

And now see, I pray, the haste the Violet makes above al flowers, to
entertain the Spring; and then to behold our Violet made to clime the
mountains, would make you wonder, to see her in such haste. For who would not
admire to see a tender Virgin, great with child, to fly from the valley, over
hills and dales, through thick and thin, to the mountain-tops? But yet wonder
not, while we daily see great engines moved, and that most swiftly too, by force
of fire: GOD is our consuming fire. Deuteronomy* 4.
This fire then the Virgin carried in her bosom; She is stirred and excited
with the blast of the Holie-Ghost, unto offices of piety. The fire breaks
forth; what marvel then, if it carries so the engine of the body with it? I
say, what marvel, while the Spirit of GOD, whose Symbol is Fire, carries her so
fast through public places, to shun the aspect of men (so contrary to the
inclination of Virginal modesty) to hide herself in the house of her Cosen?

The Violet, as the Rose also, being planted near the leek, or garlic, becomes
more fragrant in odor; so as the ungrateful sent of the one, gives a sweeter
favor unto the other; and therefore the Gardener plants it near unto them, to
have it send forth a greater odor. Now the Virgin Mother being in herself a
most odoriferous Violet above al other Violets and roses of the world, breathed
from herself the sweetest odor of al virtues. The odor of her garments were
as the odor of the fulfield. But in her house at Nazareth, which ^ignifyes
Flowerie, this Violet shined less, and, as a Violet, lay hid within her
leaves. Wherefore it seemed good to the expert Gardener, her heavenly Spouse
in her womb, to transfer this Violet with his Spirit into the mountains of
Judea, being places al set with garlic and leeks, as I may term it; Where
Zachary and Elizabeth sat sheading of tears for the Redemptsion of Israel,
the proper effect of those herbs; which She through her coming wiped away, and
further gave forth a greater odor of sanctity, then ever; for lo, she filled
the whole house with the odor of her Virtues.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
IN Heaven the humble Angels GOD beheld; The Pause.

And on the earth, with Angels paralel'd,
The lowly Virgin viewd; Her modest eye,
Submissiue countenance, thoughts that did rely
On him, that would exalt an humble wight,
And make his Mother. Alma, never in sight,
With virtues, fragrant odours, round beset,
Close to the earth lay like the Violet;
Which shrouded with its leaves, in covert lies,
Found sooner by the sent, then by the eyes.
Such was the Virgin raised to be Heavens Queen,
Who on the earth neglected, was not seen.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
how, as Pliny says, the Violet is sovereign against the Squinzi in the
throat, the Catharre in the eyes, and Impostumes in the body. So S. John
Baptist was before his Sanctification, being as vlcerous and impostumat, as we
al before Baptism, through Original Sin: Elizabeth continually pouring forth
tears, for the barrenes and sterilitie as well of the Sinagogue, as of herself:
and Zacharie's throat being stopped with the squinzi of Infidelity, so as he
could not speak. MARIE the Violet entering into this Hospital, the impostume^
of John vanished, the defluxions of Elizabeth ceased, and Zacharie's squinzies
were vnstopt; and finally health was restored to the whole house.

Consider then again, how, as Pliny says, the seed of the Violet, is the
infallible destruction of the Scorpion; then which, what more expressly in
Symbolical Theology declares the Mother of GOD to be a Violet? For this
malediction was given by GOD against the accursed Serpent, from the first
beginning: I will put enmities between thee and the woman; and thy seed and her
Seed; and she shall tread (or it shall tread) thy head. No seed more opposite to
the Scorpion, then that of the Violet: nor none to the Serpent so much, as the
Seed of the Virgin, JESUS.

Ponder lastly, how the Violet by some is called the Flower of the Trinity;
perhaps for the triple color which is found therein: for that, as in the
Violet are seen the violet, the purple, and the golden color; and as those
colors in the natural, so in the Violet MARIE may you consider, the Violet
color of Humility, the purple of her Chasti^^e, and the golden color of
Maternitie or Charity in her; since her Charity was the cause of her
Maternitie, and consequently, she the Violet of a Trinity.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Fair and goodly Flower, the true Aurora of the Spring, The Colloquie
the gladsome Herbinger of the Spring of grace, thou fairest of al flowers, and
yet who holdst the lowest place, still grounded in thy Nothing! O that this true
contempt of my-self were planted once and rooted in the ground of my heart! that
this lowlines of heart, I say, O Lady Violet, and humility of spirit, were
imprinted for ever in my soul! Oh obtain for me. Alas! due. I conjure and
bes^e^h you to it, by all the reuerences and respects, which the Son of God,
the Wisdom of the Father, has yealded you in heaven; and which the Great GOD
your Son no less has afforded you on earth.

THE V. SYMBOL. THE HELIOTROPION.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Heliotropion is the lofty Cedar of flowers, The Impresa
wherein the Sun, could he nestle himself, would choose of all the rest to build
his neast; for birds, we know, breed where they hant most, and delight to
harbor and converse in, all the day. It is even the Eye, and nothing else but
Eye, to behold the Sun; which she never shuts, til he sincks down in Tethis's
bed; where being drowned over head and ears, she wincks and shrowds herself
the while, in the thin eyelids of her leaves, to meditate upon him. It is the
Arsenal of crimson-flags displayed to the Pithian Apollo, in despite of Mars,
whom she adores as God of Arms as well as Books; whereas Mars, if you take him
from his spear and shield, can neither write nor read. It is the Gnomon of
the Garden, a Dial artificially made in herbs, to express all the hours of
the day; a very needle, pointing to its radiant Star; which being so restles
as it is, makes her as restles every whit; with this difference only, that he
measures infinite degrees of Heavens, and she as many points. It is a very
Mart of silks, sarcenets, taffeties, and satins, al of Gingeline in grain,
because in fashion. If the Rose excel in savor, which she professes not to
utter in her shop, she vows to be more loyal and constant to her Paramour,
then it. She is so amourous, and dotes so much upon him, that she can not live
without his conversation; which she has so much, as she almost is turned and
quite metamorphosied into him, and now become already in the Garden, what he is
in his Zodiac, the true and real flower of the Sun, or Sun of Flowers, as he
himself the Sun of stars, or that great Star they call a Sun. It is the true
Alferes of herbs, bearing up the standard of Flora, amidst the rest of
flowers; the Pharus, to direct the Garde^-Nimphs, when they loose themselves in
the labyrinth of flowrie knots or Maze of flowers: the Beacon al on fire, to
give warning to the rest of flowers of the arising of the Sun, to beware of his
parching rays, for fear of withering before their times. It is even the
Daphne of flowers, whom Phoehus follows all the day; and, if she fly, she has
her eye on her shoulder, to look behind her, as she runs.

THE MORALS.
AD ME CONVERSIO EIVS.
PIctures likely are so framed, that be you in the room, The Motto.
in any part, they will seem to look upon you. Look where the Panther is, in
woods and forests, there will commonly other beasts resort, to look and gaze
upon him; whether it be the beauty of his spotted coat, or sweetness of his
breath, which attracts, I know not; but this is sure, the effect is so, as I
have heard. The Turtle seems to have no eye but for his mate; and where they
sit together, their eyes will be as glued upon each other. The Pole that draws
the Needle to it, the lodestone that attracts the iron, the ieat that pulls the
fescue, what is it el's but a natural instinct, or Moral rather I may say, of
more then mutual love that makes the one so powerfully to allure, and the other
to be so easy and wiling to be drawn? This I am sure of, Virtue is so
specious, and so goodly a thing, that it draws the eyes of al to look upon
her; and where they have not hearts to follow her fair steps, yet will they
stand to gaze upon her, and admire at least. The little JESUS lying in the Crib,
like a Loadstone drew the Shepherds from their flocks, Kings from their
peoples, a Star from the rest of the fellowship of stars, yea even the
Angels from the Heavens, to sing a Gloria in excelsis unto God, and peace to
men: What trow you, but a secret instinct, that could be no less then
Heaue^lie and Divine, made so great a conversion of Terrestrials and Celestials
to a little Infant? And as for the Mother her self, that held him in her lap the
while, she before sitting in her little Nazareth obscure, drew so the eyes of
the Almighty to her, that He could not choose, but so convert himself unto
her, as to descend and lodge within her, and she truly say: AD ME CONVERSIO
EIVS.

THE ESSAY.
THE honor of our Gardens, and the miracle of flowers, at this day, The Reuiew.
is the Heliotropion or Flower of the Sun; be it for the height of its stem,
approaching to the heavens some cubits high; or beauty of the flower, being as
big as a man's head, with a fair ruff on the neck; or, for the number of the
leaves, or yellow, vying with the marigold; or, which is more, for all the
qualities, nature, and properties of the Flower, which is to wheel about with
the Sun; there being no Needle, that more punctually regards the Poles, then
does this Flower the glorious Sun. For in the morning it beholds his rising; in
his journey, attends upon him; and eyeth him still, wheresoever he goes; nor
ever leaves following him, til he sink down over head and ears in Tethis's
bed, when not being able to behold him any longer she droops and languishes,
til he arise; and then follows him again to his old lodging, as constantly as
ever; with him it rises, with him it falls, and with him rises again.
Nature has done well in not affording it any odor at al; for with so much
beauty and admirable singularities, had there been odor infused therinto, and
the sweetness of odoriferous flowers withal, even men, who are now half mad in
adoring the same for its excellent gifts, would then have been stark mad
indeed, with doting upon it. But Nature, it seems, when first she framed a
pattern for the rest, not being thoroughly resolved, what to make it, tree or
flower, having brought her workmanship almost unto the top, after a little pause
perhaps, at al adventure put a flower upon it, and so for haste, forgot to put
the Musks into it. Whereupon, to countervaile her neglect heerin, the benign
Sol, of mere regard and true compassion, graced her by his frequent and
assiduous look with those golden rays it has. And as the Sun shows himself
to be enamoured with her, she, as reason would, is no less taken with his
beauty, and by her will (if by looks we may guess of the will) would feign be
with him. But like an Estrich, with its leaves as wings, it makes unprofitable
offers, to mount up unto him, and to dwell with him; but being tied by the root,
it does but offer, and no more. It is like the Scepter which the Payn^ms
attribute to their Deity, that bears an Eye on the top; while this flower is
nothing else but an Eye, set on the point of its stem; not to regard the
affairs of Mortals so much, as to eye the Immortal Sun with its whole
propension; the middle of which flower, where the seed is, as the white of the
eye, is like a Turkie-carpet, or some finer cloth wrought with curious
needle work, which is al she has to entertain her Paramour.

THE DISCOVRSE.
COuld there be devised a more noble Symbol of our Incomparable LADY then this
flower, The Survey.
regarding indeed the true Sun (...) Justice, whom she followed still in the
whol^ course of her life, unto her death? Therefore, whom we have already
represented, as a Rose, Lilly, and Violet, let us now contemplate, as a true
Heliotropion. Compare we then, first, by certain Analogies, the Sun, being
the king of Planets, with the Sun of Justice, King of the Sun and Planets;
and the Heliotropion, with the Virgin Marie, The Sun chief of Planets, fills the
earth with his influences: the Sun of Justice, the world, with the effects of
his power. The Sun of Planets is the First cause, among the Seconds; the Sun of
Justice the First before them al; that trauerses al places, this penetrates al
hearts; that lends his light to the moon and stars, this gives both life and
being to al creatures. The Sun, the Planet, is the origin of life, the Sun of
Justice, life itself; that is soueraignly visible, this most soueraignly
intelligible. In the Sun of Planets, is fruitfulnes, light, and heat,
essentially but one and the self same thing; and the Sun of Justice, with the
Father, and the Holie-Ghost, substantially is but One God. The Sun of Planets
was never without these properties; nor the holy Divinity of the Sun of
Justice, without these Three eternal Persons. And for our Lady herself, our
fair Heliotropion, as the Sun of Planets illumines the Stars, so the Sun of
Justice enlightened her thoughts. The Sun of Planets, is the eye of the world,
the joy of the day, the glory of heavens, the measure of times, the virtue of
plants and flowers, the perfection of the stars: and the Sun of Justice, is
the eye of her thoughts, the joy of her heart, the glory of her soul, the rule
of her desires, the vigor of her spirit, the master of her loves, and even
the center of her propensions. He was, I say, the object of her looks, the
Monark of her wills, the thought of her thoughts, the light of her
understanding* and the absolute Moderatour of al her passions.

Look where the Sun is, the Heliotropion, being nothing else but eye, has the
same still cast upon it: and so the Virgin had the eye of her soul, still on the
Sun of Justice. Cant 1. 10.
I to my beloved, and his conversion to me. Examine each day of her blessed
life; run over the hours, tell the quarters, discuss the moments, and you
shall always find her turned to the Sun. In her Nativity, an Heliotropion; in
the Presentation, an Heliotropion; in the Annunciation, an Heliotropion; in the
Purification, and every action, a true Heliotropion. For she never said, did,
or thought any thing, which she directed not to GOD as to the Author, which
she reduced not to him as to the last end, which she began not for his service,
and finished not for his glory, and lastly, wherein she followed not her Son,
that true Sun of justice, which is to be a true Heliotropion indeed. And for
her bodily eyes, she was directly so, when she stood dolourous by the tree of
the Cross, on the top whereof was CHRIST the true Sun indeed in the height of
the Zodiac, as in his proper Orb, when not only with the face, but with the
whole body also she regarded her Son, and with eyes fixed attentively indeed,
beheld him fully: and as the flower Heliotropion is wont to flag with the
leaves at the setting of the Sun, so likewise was she (had she been left only
to the strength of nature) ready to fall and sinck to the ground, when her
Son drooped.

Pliny wonders at the Holiotropion, for converting itself to the Sun, even
under a clowd, and that in the night also; but MARIE, our true Heliotropion
here, takes not her eye of Contemplation of from her Son so much as in the
night. For many Doctors most constantly hold her Contemplation was never
interrupted so much as in her sleep; and that she slept in body, but waked in
heart. I sleep, and my heart wakes. There was never known a time more clowdie,
nor ever night more obscure then that, wherein the Sun of Justice being set, the
whole light seemed quite extinguished; nor any, Heliotropion appeared in the
Garden of the Church, so to gaze on the Sun under a clowd, but only those two
beautiful Heliotropions, John and MARIE; never creatures better resembled that
flower, being of the selfsame posture, of the same pale sad color, and with
the whole countenance cast still upon him, and she especially, not taking off
her eye from him, who was enwrapped in the clowd of Death.

Behold now this rare Heliotropion of Ours, even at the point of death, as she
lay a-dying; dying, do I say, or sleeping rather? For if the death of any
mortal wight may be termed a sleep, surely that of the Mother of God is not to
be called a death so much, as a sweet Sleep. She lies in her deathbed, as
burning al with love, like a true Heliotropion turning to her Son, still
casting her eyes upon him. I to my beloved, and his conversion unto me. The
Eternal Father, like the Sun; darts most radiant beams of love upon her: she
endeauours of the other side; with reciprocal looks of love, as darts; to
return to him the like, but sincks and fayles in the midst of the endeavor,
and like a flower hangs down the head, and dies. With this kind of death, the
Fathers of the Church, clients of that great Mother, affirm, she was
translated from the earth, and assumpted into heaven.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
Here you behold the handmaide of the Sun, The Pause.

That waits upon him, as his stallions run.
There in the Moon an other flower attends,
And follows her, that borrowed brightness sends
Upon its gazing eyes. Eve, like this flower,
Was al for change. Her happiness an hour
Continued not. Alas! 'twas altered soon;
Affected Deity, was like the Moon,
Which she beheld. But Marie's thoughts were high,
Upon the Sun of Justice fixed her eye;
Her Soul, with all her powers were still thereon,
As flowers and leaves of Heliotropion.
THE THEORIES.
CONTEMPLATE first, The Contemplation.
how as soon as the golden Sun peers and puts forth his head in the morning,
the Heliotropion displayes itself to the Sunnie beams, circles with the Sun,
and when he comes to the West, bows down the head, and sits with him. So
MARIE, as sooneas CHRIST, the Sun of Justice, arose in his nativity, framed
and composed her countenance to his, with him fetching her compass in the
Zodiac of his life, she ordered her course, as it were, by the same coasts: by
the South of Love, when he redeemed mankind; by the North of Patience, in so
many adversities; by the East of Resignation, when he satisfied the Eternal
Father, by his passion; and lastly in the West, in the setting of her Son the
Sun, in her solitary retirement til his glorious Resurrection, the new Aurora
of the Eternal day.

Consider then, how we first convert not ourselves to the Sun of Justice, nor
attract the rays of the Divine benignity unto us: but he with a gracious cast
of his beams, upon the Heliotropion of our heart, excites the flower, and
allures it to turn the face unto it back again. Convert me, and I shall be
converted, Ierem. 31. 18.
says the Prophet. But the Mother of God, the true Heliotropion indeed, does
otherwise; and therefore, I to my beloved, that is, I convert myself unto him;
and so it follows: and his conversion unto me.

Imagine you behold artificially painted, a JESUS sporting in his Mothers
arms; look which way you will, of any side, he always seems to have his
eyes cast upon you. So surely the most sweet face of JESUS, whose eyes shine
like stars, of their parts are always converted toward thee; so as if thou
perceauest not thyself to be especially regarded by them, it proceeds no whit
from them, but from thyself, who turnest away thy face, or do not mark or
eye them at al. Whereas our Heliotropion here never takes off her eyes from her
Son, Cant.
but has them always cast upon him: and therefore truly may say: I to my
beloved, and his conversion unto me.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Fairest Virgin-flower! Thou most specious and amourous Heliotropion, more
happy then the rest of flowers for those especial favors from thy Spouse, The
Colloquie
being no less then the glorious and radiant Sun of Justice. O gracious Queen
of flowers! O Sacred Prodigy of al Gardens, and m^st stupendous Heliotropion,
the miracle of Paradise, the amazement of Philosophy, wonder of Nature,
fruitful Virgin. Virgin Mother! O mediate for me, with thy amourous Sun, thy
Son, and obtain for me, through thy example, I may become a true
Heliotropion, with mine eyes still cast upon thee my object, and may receive
like glances from that al-seing Eye.

THE VI. SYMBOL. THE DEAW.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Deawes are the sugared stillicids of Nature, The Impresa
falling from the Limbeck of the Heavens, as so many liquid pearls, and every
pearl as precious as the truest Margarits. They are liquifyed Cristal, made
into so many siluer-orbs as drops. They are the very tears of Nature,
dissolved and soft through tenderness, to see the Earth so made a Libian Desert,
which she supplies of mere compassion with the ruin of herself. No tear she
sheads, that sta^ds her not in as much, as a drop of her dearest blood. They
are the grain and seed, once reaped from the Ocean fields, and sown again
upon the Earth, for a better harvest. They are the sweatie drops of Tethis
face, which the benign Sol exhales and wipes away for the use of Tellus. They
are the Ma^na of Nature, to vye with those Corianders, food of Pilgrims, made
by Angels: with this unhappiness, they could not be co^gealed, to make a food so
much for me^, as a Nectar for the pla^ts to drink. They are the Protheus of
fresh waters, diuersifying into as many colors, as they light upon; and are
so courtly withal, as they will easily comply with every thing they meet
with; and likely seem to put-on the form, the garb, and qualities of every
one: so as I verily believe, had they but toungs to speak, they would say the
same with every one, that can so temporize with all. And as the showers were
wrung and drawn from Magdalen through contrition of her sad and clowdie heart:
so these Deawes are wrung and strained from heaven, through compression and
mutual collision of the clouds. The Bees are the most laborious and industrious
Factours for these Pearls; and they will venture for them, as far into the
air, as any Moor shall diue into the seas for the best pearls. In fine, they
are the Milk of Nature, wherewith she is disposed to suckle creatures at her
own breast.

THE MORALS.
RORE MADENS, RORE LIQVESCENS.
THE sweats of that great Monark, The Motto.
were held to be perfumes; and why? Perhaps because they took some Deity to be
in him, for his so strange and prodigious Conquests. The trees that have a
gummie and viscous lickour in them, look what they have within, the same they
often put forth; and if they sweat at al, they sweat but gummes. The Spouse, when
he knocked so long at his Spouses door, and could not be let in, was al wet
with Deawes from heaven; and no marvel, that Deawes should fall on him, from
whom al Deawes proceed; since Deawes exhaled from the earth, do thither distill
again. When the Savior of the world was borne, arose a Spring of oil, to
signify the infused Oil of Grace was then powered forth into the world. And
what is Oil in drops, but Deawes of oil? and what is it to spring, but to
ascend upwards? what to Deaw, but to spring down? Our Savior then being Oil
of Grace, was dissolved al into Deawes of graces, when he was borne. In this,
look what the Son was, the same the Mother is, with this difference, He the
Fountain of Grace and Mercy essentially the same, she the fountain likewise,
but participant of his; and as He through her distills down Deawes of Grace and
Mercy: so she from him distills the selfsame Deawes of Grace and Mercy; and
therefore rightly RORE MADENS, RORE LIQVESCENS.

THE ESSAY.
HERE now, The Re^iew.
must I needs confess mine ignorance; for otherwise should I loose myself, in
considering of the one side, the account which GOD and Nature make of the Deaw;
and of the other, the poornes of this little creature in itself. The voice of
men, that set it forth, is more rich and copious far, then what soever is in
the Deaw ilself; it is but even a little fume, and oftentimes an unwholesome
exhalation raised from some corrupt marshes or other, drawne-vp to the second
stage of the Air (being the Matrice as it were of Nature, whence hayls,
snowes, frosts, and the like proced) if it arrive so high; where being
dissolved, and recollecting itself, within a little after thickens and turns
into little tears, which falling down again, affords us nothing but a mere
Seren infected, and breeds often very mortal catharres, lighting on our heads.
See now a trim and goodly thing, for us to make such reckoning of. And yet how
many treasures do I see enclosed within these little drops, within these
grains of Cristal liquifyed? What think you the^, is it ought else, then a
little water? Oh, do no think so of it; for if Pliny say true, that the Deaw
takes the quality of the thing it lights on, that which to you seems to be a
water only, is Sugar in the Reeds of Madera, Hypocras in the vine, Manna in the
fruits, Musk in the flowers, Medicines in the Simples, Amber in the Poplers,
the very milk of the breasts of Nature, wherewith she nourishes the Universe.
The Deaw it is which falling on our gardens, empearls them with a thousand
muskie gemmes: Here it makes the Rose, there the Flower deluce; here the
Tulips, there the violets; and a hundred thousand flowers besides. It is the
Deaw, that couers the rose with scarlet, that clothes the lilly with
innoce^cie, the violets with purple, which embroders the marygold with gold,
and enriches all the flowers with gold, silk, and pearls, that metamorphosies
itself, here into flowers, there into leaves, and then to fruits in sundry
sorts; it is even the Protheus and Chamaeleon of creatures, clothing itself
with the liuerie of all the rarest things; here scarlet, there milk, here the
emerald, the carbuncle, gold, silver, and the rest.

THE DISCOVRSE.
But now come we to the mystical Deaw indeed, The Survey.
the Incomparable Lady and Queen of all the Meteors of this Region of ours, or
of the other, the thereal or Celestial. Who if she were not the Deaw itself,
she was the Fle^ce al steept in Deaw, and consequently may well be held for
Deaw; for she is said to be full of Grace, which is a kind of Deaw. The Deaw is
properly engendered in the spaces and regions of the Air, tempered with heat
and cold. Three Regions there are: The Heavens, the World, and Hell. This Deaw
of Grace, was not engendered in the upper Region, that is, in Heaven; nor was
the work of the Incarnation of CHRIST effectually wrought therein, because he
assumed not the Angelical nature: He apprehended not the Angels; 2. Pet 2.
Nor beneath, that is, in Hell: because he redeemed not Devils, or spared the^,
or showed mercy to them: God pardoned not the Angels sinning; Gal. 4.
But it was engendered in the midst, that is, the Incarnation was wrought in
this middle Region. because therein the Divine hypostastis assumpted human
nature to itself. God sent his Son made of a woman. Now was this Deawing or
Incarnation made, as I said, of hot and cold. For God vouchsafed to become Man,
for two respects, that is, out of abundance of charity, of the one side, which
was excessive heat, and out of a general misery of ours, which was a kind of
benumming cold. From this heat therefore, to wit, from this Charity of GOD, and
from this cold, the general misery of mankind, was wrought roration or
Deawing, that is, the Incarnation of the Son of God; with this only
difference, that there, was a temperate heat and cold together, but here a
heat, Ephesians. 2
with a great excess, through his too much charity, wherewith he loved us,
and a great frigiditie of languour in us, Psalm.
or a languishing frigiditie: Because al have declined, and are become
unprofitable.

Moreover, this roration or Deaw we speak of, was made in our Virgin-earth,
who being watered with Celestial Deaw, brings forth the Nazaraean flower, that
says of himself: I am the flower of the field. Again: Let flow thy speech
like Deaw, and as drops upon the gras. To which the Church alluding says: Let
him descend into the Virgins womb like Deaw therein. ^see 14.
This earth therefore so moystned and watered with Deaw, produced the Lilly of
Paradise. I the Deaw of Israel budding like the Lilly. This Israel is
interpreted a man seeing God, and here signifyes our incomparable Lady, who was
truly Masculin in all her actions, beholding, as it were, the Divine Essence,
through Contemplation.

I will now then marvel no more, that GOD leaving al other creatures, should
take complacencie as he does to be the Father of Deawes, the Scriptures saying:
Who begat the drops of deaw? Job 38.
and who is the Father of rain? You would say, he mea^t that there is nothing,
which better represents the Divine generation of the Son, which is begotten
of the Father by way of Understanding; from whence as from a fruitful clowd,
distills the Divine Deaw of the Word: Let my word flow like deaw. But for the
Incarnation itself, it seems to be just the very same. For the Sun of the
Divinity therein united to the little poor vapor of our mortality has
fertilizd this beautiful Paradise of the Church, the Deaw watering the same,
which fell from the Five Wounds of JESUS, that deawie clowd suspended in the
air, and hanging on the tree of the Cross.

Hence it is, that GOD makes so great account of this Deaw; for when he would
make a feast for his people, in the wilderness, he did it by means of the Deaw,
which was then converted into Manna, and Manna virtually into al meats. And if
GOD would make him a chamber al of gold, or a cabinet for himself, surely he
would choose the Deaw to be his house: Who puts the clouds his bower etc. Psalm.
God makes as exact esteem of a simple drop of Deaw, as of all the world
besides. Before thee (says Solomon) is the whole world as a drop of
morning-deaw. You wonder now at a small matter; but I will tell you yet a thing
more strange, which is, that since the Son GOD of a little grain of mustard
says: The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed etc. me
thinks, I might say as well: The kingdom of heaven is like to a drop of Deaw:
For the Savior of the world, who is the grain of mustard seed, is likewise
this same rich drop of Deaw. For as the Son of God in outward appearance was,
as it were, no body, nor seemed to make any show, yet when the Sun of the
Divinity once began to appear in him, he showed himself to be the virtue of
Paradise, even so a little drop of Deaw falling from the heavens, for example,
on the Flowerdeluce, would seem perharps to you but a little round point of
water, and a mere grain of Cristal, but if the Sun do but shine upon it, Ah!
what a miracle of beauty it is? while of the one side it will look like an
Orient-pearl, and being turned some other way, becomes a glowing Carbuncle, then
a Saphir, and after an Emerald, and so an Amethist, and al enclosed in a
nothing, or a little glass of all the greatest beauties of the world, that seem
to be engraued therein; so many drops, so many Orient-pearls, so many drops
of Manna, wherewith the Heavens seem to nourish the earth, and to enrich
Nature, as being the Symbol of the Graces, wherewith GOD does water and
fertilize our souls.

For what should that Flcece of Gedeon signify, but the Grace of graces, the
admirable grace of the Incarnation of Christ to be wrought in the conception of
the Divine Word, in the virginal womb or fleece of the said Gedeon, which was
replenished with the Deaw of the Holie-Ghost, in liew of the very Deaw; that
is, where descended the fulness of the Divinity, she being worthily called and
compared to a fleece, since she has clothed the true Lamb of God with her
flesh, who takes away the sines of the world? O Virgin worthy of al grace! How
art thou graced indeed, and favored above all the Daughters of Jerusalem! since
thy head, JESUS CHRIST, came so to thee, full of Deaw, and reposes in thy chaste
bower?

THE EMBLEM.
Benedicta inter mulieres. lucae. c. i.



THE POESY.
NOt like a duskie cloud, The Pause.
which Sol exhales,
Nor like a gloomie mist, that shrowdes the vales:
But from the Earth, the Sun of Justice drew
A purer vapor, which dissolved the Deaw,
Distilling from the Limbeck of the skies,
Our dry and barren Earth does fertilize.
The barren womb erst was accursed; but she,
Though Virgin, was a fair and fruitful tree.
Women bring forth with paineful throbs and throws;
She was a Mother, but not one of those.
Among women blessed, drawn by heavens radiant beams,
Twixt clowd and mist, pure Deaw twixt both extremes.
THE THEORIES.
COnsider first, that as Eve our first Parent and Mother of us al, was not
created immediately of earth, The Contemplation.
as Adam was, but taken from his rib (it being a privilege only due to Adam,
so to be framed of virgin-earth) and was therefore called Virago, fetching her
extraction as it were a Viro: So our second Eve, our Spiritual and Celestial
Mother, adopting us, and engendring us as children, through the Deawes of
Celestial graces procured us from heaven, was not made of virgin-extraction
herself, that is, was not framed of the Divine or Angelical nature, as a Deaw
exhaled from the virgin-element of waters, but of the pure human nature, as
drawn from the mixed, bitter, and brackish waves of the Sea, by that great
Architect of heaven, the Sun of Justice, giving her the name of MARIA, to wit,
a mari amaritudinis, as it were, fetched from the Ocean of bitterness of human
kind. And now with her graces and favors, as Deawes falling from heaven,
perpetually does nothing, but shower down upon her children and Deuotes.

Consider then, how our Lady became as a marine Coucha, or Oyster of the Sea,
which opens itself to receive the heavenly Deaw into her Lap, that so the
precious Gemme might be engendered in it, which when it has received once, it
closes up again, not to loose so precious a depositum, til it be fairly
delivered, and brought forth in time prefixed. Even so our incomparable Lady,
the precious vessel of so heavenly and Divine a Deaw, having once conce aued
the same within her virginal Womb, retires herself into her Nazareth, to
ruminate on the mystery she had within her, until necessity drew her to
Bethleem and the time prefixed of the delivery of her fruit was come; for then
as purely as she received it, she gave it up most perfect and complete, and
made thereof a rich present to the world.

Ponder lastly, how the Deaw being a mere extract from the Seas, exhaled by the
virtue of the Sunnie rays, which when he can hold no longer, lets it fall to
comfort and refresh al fublunarie things, and drawing it again unto himself,
lets it fall again for the same end; and so will do, to the end of the world,
for the comfort and solace of mankind. So the humanity of our Savior Christ,
as a waterie Deaw, being extracted from the virgin Marie (amaro mari) and
through the Sunnie rays of the Divinity assumpted up to heaven in the
glorious Ascension, through love not able to stay any longer, descends again
in the blessed Sacrament, to recreate and refresh us Mortals, and so as often
as we desire, is ready to visit us with his supercelestial and divine Deaw,
and thus til the consummation of the world.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Thou great Lady, Mother of grace and mercy, The Coll^quie.
who in a strange and marvelous manner have been replenished with the Deaw of
grace in a sovereign degree; I beseech thee, intercede for me, that I may
likewise be replenished and filled with grace, fervor, love, and the Divine
delights of thy Soune, whom thou receauedst from heaven as the Deaw fallen into
thy virgin-lap. And this I beg O blessed Virgin Mother, through the virginal
milk, wherewith thou fedst that little great GOD in person; and by the tears
of joy thou sheadst for the dear embraces of so great a Son of thine; and by all the sweetnesses of his Divinity, which made thy blessed soul to liquify
with joy. O Lady, O Virgin Mother, O my sweet Advocate, to thee do I recurre
to impetrate these grates for me, at his hands, who sitting on thy lap, and
hanging at thy breasts, can deny thee nothing.

THE VII. SYMBOL. THE BE.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THe Be is that great little Architect of houses made of wax, The, Impresa.
as of plaster of Paris, al ciment, and no stone, while you find not a stone
or rub in all his works. He is a great Enginer in that mould, working his subtle
mines til he be al in a sweat, which in truth is no more then a moisture he
has with him through his so much padling, and meddling with deawes. It is a
world to see, what mines and countermines they will make amongst them, to
supplant one another, whereupon many suits of law arise between them. For you
must know, they have a notable government, and a wise and politic reason of
State with them, which though it may seem to partake of al, yet is in truth a
pure Monarchal rule, and surely the best. As the Venetians have their Duke or
Doague, they have their King, enthroned doubtless and invested with a more
absolute authority then he, and yet not apt to slide or degenerate to Tyranie,
as some would imagine. And if the Venetians have their Senate and Magnificoes,
they have the same. The King for sword of justice, has his sting, which he
wears for terror rather then use, whose best arms is a certain sweet and
serene Majesty with him, which makes him loved rather then feared, if not
feared for love: yet were any so refractarie as not to love so sweet a
Majesty, he could tell, how to bend the brow. He is then the great Dictatour
above al, and true Augustus Caesar of that great Common wealth of little
Romans. The Be of al others makes his vintage in the Spring, because his
chiefest harvest is ^n the sugared deawes, that fall upon the tender blossoms,
at that time, whereof part they tun up in pi^^es, for the purpose, to brew
their meade with, against the winter; and churning the rest as handsom^ as they
may, they make it into a kind of butter, ^e call honey, which they crock and
barrel up for ^reatest merchandise. They are but Pigmies, in ^espect of the
Giants amongst them, whom for their ^undring voice, they call humble-bees. Nor
can you ^now the rest by their voices only, while the least ^il carry as great
a horn about him, as the biggest ^f them. They are notable husbands abroad, and
^ood huswiues at home; for so they are both, or neither, as hanieg no sex
amongst them; which if they have, they are Mayds, or Bachelours every one,
because they have no marriages with them, as living very chastely together like
so many Angels.

THE MORALS.
OPEROSA ET SEDVLA.
Labor and Industry are Brother and Sister, The Motto.
dwelling in the same house. He is strong and robustuous with Atlas shoulders;
She as quick and nimble of the other side. It is incredible, what these two are
able to do, when they join together; they will work wonders, move mountains,
and run through stitch with every thing. Rome indeed was not built on a day,
but yet with labor and industry in short time became the Metropolis of the
whole world. What a work was that, which the infamous Incendiarie, to eternize
his name, ruined in a moment, which Labor and Industry had reared-vp from the
very foundation to the roof? The great Mausoleas, Amphitheaters, Piramids
(and what not?) have al been built and finished by them. If Labor once fail,
Industry anon rouze^ him up: and then will they roundly fall to their wor^^ as
fresh as ever. Wheresoever they meet, he is the Body, and she the Soul; and
as the Body and Soul^ can not be divided without ruin of the person, (...)
Labor without Industry is no body, and will presently come to naught. The
Grace of the Holie-Ghos^ wheresoever it is, is Industry itself, and knows
(...) delays; it is as gunpowder set on fire, which carries the bullet,
though of lead, more swift then an arrow where it goes. The tender
Virgin Mother of God had ^his powder of Industry in her, when conceauing with
fire, through the match of Fiat, she flew so ^imbly over hills and dales to her
Cosen Elizabeth, the subject of Charity; wherein truly she showed herself
OPEROSA ET SEDVLA.

THE ESSAY.
The Be is the greatest Politic in the world; The Reuiew.
the government of their little commo^-wealth is most admirable. The King is he
that has the best pre^se^ce with him, and a Royal look; al his subjects obey
him with submission and reverence, not doing any thing against their oath of
allegiance. The King himself is armed with Majesty and beauty; if he have a
sting, he never makes use of it, in the whole manage of his estate. He carries
nothing but honey in his commands; one would not believe the great severity
and courtesy there is amongst them, living in community, with good
intelligences abroad, al goes with them with weight and measure, without error
or mistakings. In the winter they keep wholly within, not knowing otherwise how
to defend themselves from the force of the weather and violence of the winds,
and hold their little assemblies, in some place deputed for that effect, and
keep correspondencies one with another; but for the drones and idle bees, they
banish them quite from their commonwealth. They commit not themselves to the
discretion of the weather abroad, until such time as the beans begin to blow,
and from that time they will loose no day from labor. They frame the wax from
the juice which they suck from flowers, herbs, and trees; and for honey they
derive it also from trees and gommie reeds, having a glue and viscous lickour
on the^. They will make their wax likewise of every herb and flower; save only,
they never light on a dead or withered one. Their sting is fastened in their
belly; and when they stick it so, as they cannot draw it forth again without
leaving the instrument behind, they die of it; and if the sting remain but
half, they live as castrat, and become as droans, not being able to gather
either honey or wax.

THE DISCOVRSE.
THE mellifluous Doctor S. Ambrose, The Survey.
in his sweet book of Virgins, says: the Be feeds of the deaw, engenders not
at al, and frames the honey. Which three properties peculiarly and singularly
appertain to Virgins; but most expressly and sublimely of al to the Sacred
Virgin herself, the Queen of Virgins. For as al other creatures live of the
earth or water, as birds, beasts, and fishes, some few excepted, to wit, the
Camaeleon of the air, and the Salamander of the fire; the Be, as a choicer
creature, more curious then the rest, feeds no worse then of the deaw, that
falls from Heaven; and whereas al other creatures (not bred of putrefaction)
are subject to libidinous heat in their kinds, the Be is free thereof, and
multiplies by a way more chaste; and where other creatures are wholly maintained
at their Maister's charge, and some will eat you more then their bodies are
worth, or their labor comes to, the Be makes its own provision of itself,
and leaves his owner rich with the booty and spoil they make of the flowers
of the field, without any cost or charge of the Master; so industrious they
are, to the great confusion of men. Just so our Lady, not taken with the bayts
and allurements of this world, for spiritual life, lived not but of the
heavenly deaw of Divine grace; being capable of no other heat, then of the
chaste and amourous fire of Divine Love; not conceauing Fruit, but by an
admirable, mysterious, and miraculous way, through the work of the Holie-Ghost,
remaining a Virgin before, in, and after her Childbirth; and lastly framed
without any cost or merits of ours, that Honey of honies, that Honie-comb
distilling, which carries the honey in his lips.

The honey indeed is engendered in the air through the favor and influence of
certain stars; as in the Canicular days, we may note betimes in the morning,
the leaves to be charged and sugared with it. Such as go forth at that time,
before day, shall find themselves to be moistened therewith, which the Bees suck
from the leaves and flowers, and tunne-vp in their little stomaks, to discharge
again, and to make it perfect honey in all points, for the use of men. So our
incomparable Virgin receiving this Deaw or honey of the Eternal Word, as it
came from Heaven, into her Virginal womb, so wrought it in her, as being
delivered thereof, it proved a honey most apt for the use of man; the true Bread
of Life indeed. Most happy Be! and a thousand times most blessed HONEY!

Where it is to be noted, that Bees are exceedingly delighted with these
things: first, with fair and serene weather; for then those deawes more
plentifully fall and are more delicious: and of the contrary in the raynie and
more boisterous weather they are wholly hindered from their vintage, as it were,
or gathering those sugared deawes. Secondly, they are pleased much with
abundance of flowers; from whence they gather their purest honey; for though
the deawes fall upon the leaves, and they gather it no doubt from them also, yet
is it not so delicious and pure; for the nature of deawes participats much of
the places they light on, which makes the Be far more busy and industrious
on the flower, then on the leaves. Thirdly, they are won with a sweet sound.
For Aristotle says, they are exceedingly allured with the harmony of music
and sweet sounds; which we ordinarily practice now adays, to stay them with,
when they are in a great consult to take their flight and be gone; for then
with the striking of a pan only instead of other music are they brought to
settle themselves near home; so Musical they are. And lastly, they joy greatly
insweet wine, as we find by experience and daily practice, as often as they
begin to swarm, and are now on the wing and point to travel into foreign parts.

Al these things the Blessed Virgin was exceedingly affected to, and had them
al, as it were, within her; as first a serenitie in the internal conscience,
where appeared no clowd in the air of her Mind, and where the pacifical
Solomon sat peacefully indeed as in his Iuorie Throne. All the glory of the
King's daughter, was wholly within her. Then had she the flowers of al Virtues
and Graces within her, to wit, the diversities of al virtues, the lillies of
chastity, the blush and mo^estie of the rose, the hope of the Violet, the
charicie and Divine love of the Heliotropion, and the like. Her soul was a
Garden of al flowers, and no less then a Paradise, which had the Archangel as
Paranimph and Guardian thereof, with the two-edged sword of Humility and the
chaste Fear of God. O delicious Paradise, and more then terrestrial, even when
she was dwelling on the earth! Thirdly she was affected to Music, and very
rare and singular therein, as appears by that excellent and melodious Canticle
of hers, the Divine Magni^^at, so chanted now adays in the world, and taken-vp
in the Church, for an admirable piece of that Art, to vye with the Angels, the
Cherubins, and Seraphins themselves, to frame the like. Nor yet was she so
pleased, to hear herself sing only, as to listen to her Spouse, the voice of
her beloved knocking and saying: My sister, open unto me; to whom she would
answer again: Behold, my beloved speaks unto me. Oh let thy voice still sound
in mine ears! and a thousand other affects of her Musical heart would she daily
sing besides to the Angelical troops, which environed her round. And lastly for
her love to wine, that is, to the Angelical Nectar, she was daily feasted with,
of spiritual gladness, as tastes before hand, of her future joys, which might
appear by the quantity she took of those wines, and the quality again by
the frequent ecstasies of love she would break into, remaining in her Closet,
as we may piously believe, being inebriated therewith.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
TO Bethlem's silly shed, The Pause.
me thinks I see
The Virgin hasten like a busy Be;
Which in a tempest subject to be blown,
In lieu of ballast, bears a little stone;
As 'twere with oars beats to and fro his wings,
Collects heavens deaw, which to the hiue he brings.
Within that storehouse lies the daily frait.
Lets fall the stone, Even so of greater weight,
Cut without hands, the Virgin now is gone
To lay the prime and fundamental stone,
Heavens Deaw condensed was in the honie-comb.
She was the Be, the Hiue her Sacred Womb.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
how little soever the Be seems, yet how great its excellencies and
eminencies are; and measure not the singular properties it has, with the
outward show it gives forth. For though it seem no more indeed, then as raised
but a little higher then an ordinary fly; yet is it a miracle in nature, an
astonishment to men, and a lively Symbol of our Blessed Lady; who being so
singular and eminent in all prerogatives and graces, Celestial and Divine, made
no greater a show, then she did in being so private in her Closet or Oratorie,
where she was, as a Be, in her Cel a-framing the delicious honey of her
admirable examples of life, to sweeten the world with, for after-ages. Where
you may note her stupenduous humility, that seeing herself elected the Mother
of God, and consequently the Queen of Angels and men, yet held herself to be
no more then as a serviceable Be, to work the precious honey of Man's
Redemption, in her Virginal Womb, when she said: Behold the hand-mayd of our
Lord.

Consider then, that as one of the properties of the Be is, when it is on the
wing, and fears to be carried away with the winds of the air, to take up a
stone, to keep itself steadie therein, through the poyse thereof: So our blessed
Virgin, in her highest contemplation of heavenly mysteries, which was frequent
and ordinary with her, would take herself to her little Jesus, the mystical
stone (for Christ was a Stone) for fear of being carried away with the wind of
vanity; S. Paul
she would fly and soar aloft, but yet hold her to her little Nothing, which
she ever took herself to be. O admirable humility of our incomparable and
industrious Be!

Ponder lastly, that if the Be is so admired for its singular guists of
Continency, of Policy, and Industry, and especially so affected by all men
for the benefit of the honey they receive from it; how admirable needs must
the blessed Virgin be? so chaste, as to be the first, and only pattern of al
Chastity, both Virginal, Coniugal, and Vidual; so wise, politic, and
welgouerned in herself, to have Sensuality so obedient to Reason, and Reason
to GOD, as to have no deordination in her, either of the inferior to the
superior part; and so industrious withal, as to work so exquisit a loome of al
Perfection, as well Human as Angelical, in the whole course of her divine life.
Yea how ought she to be honored and worshipped of us al, for the Celestial and
Divine fruit she brought us forth, that mellifluous Honey of the Divine Word
Incarnate and made Man in her most precious and sacred Womb?

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Great Monarkesse and Princess of intercession in heaven, The Colloquie
most constant and immovable in thy Virginal purpose, who had rather not to
have been so great in the kingdom of God, then to falsify thy promise and vow
of perpetual Virginity, if in being the Mother of God, the same had been put
in the least danger: O help me then to guard this inestimable treasure of
Chastity in my state of life! by that sweetest Honie-comb thou hredst within
thee, and broughtst into the world, thy dearest Son. Ah, let me not be
perfidious, disloyal, or a breaker of my faith, nor rash in my good purposes
made to His Divine Majesty. For that, O sovereign Lady, displeases him
highly, and offends thee likewise, dear Princess of Virgin-soules.

THE VIII. SYMBOL. THE HEAVENS.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Heavens are the glorious Palace of the Sovereign Creator of al things;
The Impresa
the purple Canopie of the Earth, powdered over and beset with siluer-oes; or
rather an Azure Vault enameld al with diamants, that sparckle where they are.
And for that there is aloft above this seeling, they make a pauiment likewise
for the Intelligences and Angelical Spirits, strewed, as become such
inhabitants, with stars. It is a Court, where those blessed Spirits, as
Pensioners, stand continually assisting in the King's presence, with the favor
to behold him to face in his greatest glory, while the Stars as Pages attend
in those spacious Hals and lower rooms. If al together, should make up the
body of an Army ranged and marshalled in the field, the Spirits themselves
would make the Caualrie, and the Infanterie the Stars, S. Muhael General of
the one, and Phoebus of the other; where even as the Foot, that are as the
Corpse of the whole Batallions, make a stand; so remain the whole multitude of
Stars al fixed in the Firmament, while the Planets, which are as the Colonels
of the rest, with the speedy Coursers of their proper Orbs, fly up and down to
marshal the Legions, and to keep the Companies in their due squadrons. If they
shoot, their shafts and darts, they send, are but their influences they power
on mortals and terrene things, good and bad; some sweet, of love; as those
which Venus shoots from her Regiment, headed with gold; some with steel, as
those of Mars, and his troops; and some again, as more malignant, dipped in
venom, as those of Saturn and the Caniculars. As the Earth has beasts, the
Heavens have their Lion and Bear, the great and less. Where the Sea has
fish, the Heavens have theirs, and waters enough, as well above as under the
Firmament. As the Air has birds, the Heavens have Angels, as birds of
Paradise. And if the upper Region of the Elements be of fire, the Seraphins are
al of amourous fires of Divine love, and the highest order of the blessed
Spirits.

THE MORALS.
CAPACITATIS IMMENSAE.
THat great Galleasse or Argosey of Noe clapped under hatches the Epitome of the
world; The Mott^.
which yet virtually contained that vast volume or tome of the greater World.
The Troyan horse held a whole Ambuscado in his belly of warlick Grecians in
complete armor. Yea the Eye of man, though de facto it reach no farther then
the Hemisphere only, yet of itself is able to extend to the full immensitie of
the whole Sphere, were it placed as Center thereof, But that were to make the
Heavens the visible Object of the Eye only: I will then go further. The Heart of
man as it is, how little soever, if it be well purged, is able to walk through
the heavenly vaults, both above and beneath; I mean, contemplate the Stars
and Spirits themselves, with the immense capacity of that wast dwelling of
theirs. But what were all this but a mere extension and perlustration of the
mind only, wholly occupied in measuring Intellectual Objects? It is the Local
continency, I mean, as the kernel is contained in the shel, and the like. I
say that great Amphitheater of Pompey was but a nutshel, as it were, of so
many sons of men, compared with the Globe of the Earth, and the earth with
the Zodiac of the Sun, and the Sun again being paraleld with GOD himself. It
is GOD only, who truly beholds al Objects, both Intellectual and Visible; and
truly contains them al, being present to al, comprehends al, is Al in All. And
yet this great AL, whom the Heaven of Heavens can not co^taine, has the
Virgin-Womb of the immaculate Mother of God conceaned and held in her lap, as
the Church sings; an therefore is said to be, and that most rightly, and
worthily too, CAPACITATIS IMMENSAE.

THE ESSAY.
THe Heavens with their circuit, The Reuiew.
cloathe and mantle all the world, and with the sweetness of their influences
nourish the same, and distill a life into it. They are the House of GOD; the
floare and pauiment of Paradise; the Garden of the Angels, al beset with
stars instead of flowers, with an eternal Spring; the Temple of the
Divinity; and the azured Vault of the Universe. The number of the Heavens has
not always been agreed upon; for one while they believed, there was but one
only, wherein the ^tarres did sweetly glide here and there, and glance along,
as in a liquid cristal flood. Sometimes have they allowed of eight, by reason
of so many diverse Motions and Agitations very different in them; then nine;
then ten, and then eleven; and if perhaps some new Gal^laeus should devise and
frame us other spectacles or opticons to see with, we are in danger to find out
yet some new Stars and Heavens never dreamed of before. This round Machine
makes its circular reuolutions through an unspeakable swiftnes. But that is a
mere tale, which Plato tells, to busy men's brains with, to say, the Stars
and Heavens yeald a sound or delicicus melody through their motion and
stirring up and down; whereas truly the sweet sliding and shuffling of the
Heavens, the accords so discordant of contrary motions, those sweet
conjunctions and divorces of Stars, is it truly which is called, the sweet
harmony of the Heavens. They would likewise make us believe, the Heavens were
al engraued over, because the Zodiac is composed and distinguished into twelve
Figures of Beasts, therein cut, as with a chisel; and the whole Figure and face
of Heaven were as fully stockt with beasts, carved and fashioned so to beautify
the Heavens; and therefore will some have Caelum to take its denomination from
caelatum, as much to say, as carved and engraued; But in effect, are nothing
else but certain assemblies and congregations of Stars together, which the
fantasies of men has fashioned in Figures and Constellations; which being so
taken, resemble some kinds of beasts, but in truth have so small resemblance
with them, as that which they call a Bear, might as well be termed an Ape; and
Necessity makes us to accept it for good coin, and GOD himself with Job makes
use of such manner of speech, in naming them Orion, the Hyades, and the like.
This great Bowl of the Heavens, roules and turns about an Axeltree, fixed in a
certain place, and flies with the winged swiftnes it has; the Angel gives it
the whirle about, and makes it turn round according to the Divine providence,
crowning the world with its vaulted Arch enameled al with stars.

THE DISCOVRSE.
THvs are the Heavens expressed in themselves; The Survey* ^arth. Angl. l. 8.
c. 2.
and now let us seek another Heaven, these ancients never dreamed of. One
Author diuides the Heavens into seven parts; the Aerean, Aetherean, Olympian,
Fiery, Firmamental, Waterie, and Empyreal. But we will content ourselves with
these three only, the Syderean, the Cristalin, and Empyreal. And for the first,
we shall find our Queen of Heaven to be so the Queen thereof, as she is a
Syderean or Starrie Heaven herself, if we regard but the ornaments she is
decked with, as so many stars. For as that Heaven is adorned with variety
of Stars; so she with diversity of al Virtues. The beauty of Heaven, Eccl.
4^.
to wit, of Marie, is the celestial glory of the Stars, that is, the
glorious variety of al Virtues. For as for the ornaments of this Heaven, it is
said in the Apocalypse: She had a crown of twelve stars upon her head. Apoc.
12.
Now in this number of Twelve is a double number of Six, which is the number of
Perfection, and signifyes the Saints, as well those which are in glory and
Celestial Paradise, as those, who are as yet on their way thither; who al
honor, crown, and adore this blessed Virgin, as their Queen and Lady. For
as the Heaven with its proper Orb and certain reuolutions, carries all the
moving stars along with it, so she induces all the Saints, to join in
intercession with her.

The Cristalline Heaven she is, being a Heaven as composed of the waters above
the heavens; which is hardened, as it were, and made solid, like Cristal; the
matter being nothing else but waters hardened and condensed, as some think, not
much unlike to the crust of Cristal, which is solid, lucid, and most pure: And
so the waters of our Lady were solid, that is, her Virtues were confirmed; and
lucid, that is, transparent, because through them she might contemplate and
behold the glory of GOD; 1. Cor. 3.
according to that: But we with face revealed, shall speculate the glory of
GOD. The form of this Cristalline Heaven, is Spheral and round, which is truly
the most Capacious, the Perfectest, and Fairest of al figures; and so is she
most Capacious, as becomes the habitatio^ of GOD, according as the Church
delivers: Who^ the Heavens could not contain, have thou held in thy Womb; the
Perfectest, because endued with all virtues: Eccl. 24.
In me is grace, of the way and verity; most Fair, because stained with no
blot, nor ever touched with any blemish, so much as Venial: Thou art wholly
fair, my friend, Cant.
and there is no blemish in thee.

She is the Empyreal Heaven, which is the habitation of the Saints, and a
Heaven al of light, of an infinite capacity, and imme^se sublimitie. The
blessed Virgin then is resembled to this Heaven: First, for her unspeakable
Claritie, because she is now wholly radiant and resplendent in Celestial glory,
having beneath, the Moon under her feet, and on her head, a crown of Stars,
and for the rest clothed with the Sun. Secondly, for her great capaciousnes;
for as there can be thought no place of greater capacity, then the Empyreal
Heaven, so can no creature be found of greater Charity, then Marie. For she
had an ample Womb, which was able to receive GOD; She had an ample
Understanding, which had the knowledge of al Divine things; an ample Affect she
had, for her singular compassion on the miseries of all the afflicted. Thirdly,
for her highness and sublimitie; for as Heaven is the highest of al bodies, so
is she higher far then al Spiritual creatures, as well Angelical as
Reasonable. Thy magnificence is raised, Psalm.
that is, the Virgin Marie, to whom GOD has showed very great things, yea
above all the Heavens, as well Material as Rational, because appointed Queen
over al Saints; and therefore says of her self: Who has wrought great matters
for me* who is potent* and holy is his name.

Which things S. Epiphanius considering, in his Sermon of the Praises of our
Lady, Epip. in laud. Mariae.
breaks forth into these words* O impolluted Womb, having the circle of the
heavens within thee, which bare the incomprehensible GOD most truly
comprehended in thee? O Wo^b more ample, then Heaven, which straightened not GOD
within thee! O Womb* which art even very Heaven indeed, consisting of seven
Circles, and art more capacious far then them all O Womb more high and wider*
then are the seven Heavens! O Womb, which are even the eight Heaven itself,
more large then the seven of the Firmament. So he. And S. Chrysologus thus:
Cherisoh. Ser. 11s.
O truly blessed, who was greater then Heaven, stronger then the Earth, wider
then the World! For GOD, whom the world could not contain, She held alone; and
bare him, that bears the world; yea bare him, who begat her, and nursed the
nourisher of al living things. But yet hear what S Bonauenture says heerof:
Bonau. in spec. c. 50.
Thou therefore (says he) most immense Marie, art more capacious then Heaven,
since whom the Heavens could not hold, thou have held in thy lap; thou art more
capacious then the World: for whom the whole world could not hold, has been
enclosed within thy bowels, being made Man.

But especially indeed is the blessed Virgin said to be the Empyreal Heaven,
because as that same being the proper place of Beatitude, where GOD clearly
manifests himself to the Blessed, face to face: so the Wo^b of the blessed
Mother of GOD, was the first of al wherein GOD in a permament manner
communicated to the soul of Christ our Lord, the clear and blessed vision of
himself; since certain it is, that from the beginning of his Conception, he was
truly a comprehensour; and yet in his way, and a true viatour. Which no doubt
is a singular praise of the Virginal womb; that, where the wombs of other women
are merely the shops of Original sin, as David lamented ( And my mother
conceived me in sins) which makes one unworthy of the vision of GOD: Psalm. 50
the Virgins Wo^b of al others should be a place for the blessed Vision, and
the only first shop of Beatitude. So as well might the Woman of the Ghospel cry
out: Blessed is the Womb, that bare thee.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THE Blessed Virgin, The Pause.
even from her birth,
Was like a Heaven without a clowd, on earth;
Where fixed Stars did shine, each in his place,
As she increased by merits more in grace;
Til full of grace (as is with stars the sky)
Gabriel salurtes. Then more to glorify
This Heaven, from his, the Sun of Justice came,
Light of the world, with his eternal flame.
Lo, how the Angels from the Empyreal sphere
Admire this Heaven on earth, that shines so clear,
Contesting with their glorious Orb above,
And with the Seraphins in burning love.
Empyreal Heaven! For in her makes abode
The first blessed Soul, that had the sight of GOD.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as the Heavens in their motions commit no error, The
Contemplation.
because they are always obedient to the Intelligences or moving Angels that
move and guide them: so likewise the Blessea Virgin could slide into no error
of sin, because she punctually observed the Holie-Ghost, her Motour and
proper Intelligence, as it were, in all things; while being moved with such
motions, she was carried to GOD through fervent love, as being the wheel of
GOD, whereof Ezechiel speaks ( Which was carried wheresoever the spirit went;
Ezech.
for the spirit of life was in the wheels) now in praying for us to her Son,
now directing the Angels themselves unto our ministry, and then exhorting the
blessed Spirits to pray for us, Behold of what agilitie and motion this Heaven
is!

Consider then that even as from heaven; and its ^ights, we receive all the
chiefest benefits of Nature, especially the growth and prosperity of plants,
without which nothing would succeed or come to any thing: so from this
glorious Virgin Mother we likely receive the most notable favors and gifts we
have from GOD. For as the Heaven visits the earth, affording its light by day
and night, by means of the two great torches, Sun and Moon, and millions of
lesser lights, which with their influe^ces besides do fructify the same, and
with their sweet showers in a manner inebriate it, and cool it again, when
need requires, with dryer clouds, yea enrich it also, with gold, silver, and
precious stones: so our incomparable Lady visits and illustrats the whole
universal Church with her admirable examples, and with the gifts of the
Holie-Ghost inebriats the same, stores it abundantly with good works, and
enriches it with an infinite treasure of al virtues: Psalm.
and therefore is it said: Thou have visited the earth.

Ponder lastly, how among al things which have any stuff, matter, or dimesion
in them of length, breadth, or thicknes, there is no incorruptible thing to be
thought on, but only the heavens; for all mixed things, whatsoever they be,
corrupt at last, and the Elements we see continually corrupt; save only the
Celestial body, which is wholly incorruptible of its own nature: So in like
manner, whenas all the Children of Adam, begot according to Nature, are liable,
and obnoxious to the corruption of Original sin; and al women loose in
co^ceauing, the integrity of the body; yet this Heaven of Marie, through
especial grace and prerogative of her Son, was made incorruptible, according
to either part, of soul and body: Of the soul truly, because the co^tagion
and corruption of Original sin touched not her so much as a moment only; and
of body also, because though indeed she were a true and natural Mother, and
conceived her Son most truly indeed, yet knew she no corruption at al,
observing and keeping perpetually, the Virginity of mind and body. How
worthily therefore, is she compared to Heaven for this so strange and admirable
incorruptibilitie in her?

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Great Miracle of the world, The Colloquie.
or little world of miracles; not Queen so much of Heaven alone, as the Heaven
of the King of thee, Queen and Mistress of the Heavens; thou only maister-peece
of the Almighty hand; O Divine Throne, not second unto any; Thou living Ark
of Alliance; and the Elder Sister of al creatures, who wast a Mother and a
Virgin a Virgin, and a Mother, al in one; a Maiden and a Nurse, a Nurse and yet
a Maiden, the Mother and the Nurse of God and Man, a Virgin and a Maid for
ever. By that glorious virgin-fruit of thine, the astonishment of Angels, which
so miraculously thou broughtst into the world, after thou had so long
afforded him thy precious Womb, as a gratful and delicious Paradise of Heaven:
Grant, we beseech thee, by that shower of grace in Him, which fell through thee,
O mysterious Heaven, that we may come at last to that Heaven of his glory,
which he has purchased for us with his more then precious Blood.

THE IX. SYMBOL. THE IRIS.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Iris is the radiant and refulgent Bow of Heaven, The Impresa.
that shoots but wonders to astonish the world with. It is the Thiara, or
fairest dress of Nature, her shining Carkanet enchaced with the richest
jewels. It is the Triumphal Arch of the heavenly Numens, set-vp in triumph as
a Trophey of Beauty, to allure the eyes of al, to stare and gaze upon it. The
Protheus of the Seas could never take so many shapes upon him, as the Iris
diuersifyes its colors. And for the Camelion of the air, she doubtless used
no other pattern then it, to coppie forth the great variety of colors she
assumes. This Prodigy of Nature, lives in and by the Air, but has its whole
subsistence in the Eye only. Open the eyes, and there it is; but shut them up,
and it will vanish. It is indeed the fair and goodly mirror of the heavenly
Intelligences themselves, which they will gaze on, as their leisure serves them,
and break at their pleasure, if they like it not, to make them new perhaps to
please them better. If the Angels would lay aside their wings, and go afoot, I
do not think, they could have a better way to descend by, and ascend again,
then by this Causway, paued al with jewels here and there, and where not, al
strewed with tapistries; the Turkey ones are nothing like; nor those of
Barbary come near them; while those the mothes will eat, and time destroy
their colors, and they fade; but these, will last til al be quite worn out.
They seem al as made by the same hand; they are so like; look what you have
to day, the same you have to morrow. And surely no other Artizan then he that
made you this, can make you such another. They say, it is a nothing in itself;
which if it be, it is a pretty Nothing, that so with nothing should make the
heavens so beautiful, nay more, so rich, and al with nothing.

THE MORALS.
PACIS FERO SIGNA FVTVRAE.
THE Scythian Tamberlan, The Motto.
the terror of the House of Ottomans, had in his wars, three Ensigns: the
red, the black, and white; which he used to advance upon occasions; whereof the
white especially signified Peace and a reconciliation offered; which if
refused, the red, and then the black succeeded. Castor and Pollux in the
Heavens, are held to be sweet, propitious, and pacifical Stars. The Halcion
in time of a tempestuous storm at Sea appearing on the decks, is a
comfortable, and little less then a certain sign of a calm and quiet Sea,
whereat Mariners will cheer up, as no such thing had ever happened. The Spring
immediately follows the bitter and sharp Winter; the signs are the buds
appearing then, in the tender and green twigs. When the Lion is in his chiefest
rage, and when he roars most dreadfully of al, and for anger beats himself with
his tail in mere despite, let come but a tender Virgin, by, the while, and
appear in his sight, his courage will fail him, and he be a Lamb in a Lion's
skin. The Lion of Judah roared then, when the Lord of Hoasts, to extirpate human
kind, so let go the Cataracts of heaven, to drown the world, with a total
deluge of waters covering the earth; when lo, the white flag was spread in the
Heavens, in form of an Iris, representing the pure and immaculate Virgin of
Virgins, which made the Lion to let fall his creast, and to enter into a league
with all mankind, to drown it no more; and therefore our Lady herself was a
true Iris, and may rightly be called, and truly is, that PACIS FERO SIGNA
FVTVRAE.

THE ESSAY.
THE Iris or Rainebow is that goodly mirror, The Reuiew.
wherein the humane spirit sees very easily its own ignorance, and wherein the
poor Philosopher becomes Banckrout, who in so many years can know no more of
this Bow, then this, that he knows nothing to the purpose, and that it is a
Noli me tangere; since as many as have mused thereupon, have but broken their
brains about it to their own confusion. For of the one side, there is nothing
of less being, in the whole pourtrait of Nature, being framed of a goodly
Nothing, diuersifyed and diaperd with false colors, dressed-vp with a feigned
beauty, the matter nothing, its durance a moment. It is a Bow without an
arrow, a bridge without a Basis, a Crescent not increasing, a phantasme of
colors; a Nothing, that would feign show to be somewhat. And yet is this rich
Nothing a miracle of beauty, among the fairest things of the world, which
being compared thereunto, are even as nothing. Would you have riches? The whole
Bow is nothing else then the carkanet of Nature, enameled with all the precious
Jewels she has; some are Pearls, others have the sparcle of the Diamant, the
flames of the Carbuncle, the twincle of the Saphir; I should say rather it is
the maister-peece, wherein Nature had embrodered al her rarest stones, and
placed the richest piece of her treasures, which she can sever at her pleasure:
It is the Collar of her Order, her chain of pearls, and the fairest of al her
Cabinet, wherewith she decks herself, to please her Spouse, the Heavens. Good
God! what a goodly Nothing is this, if it be no more, that carries such
beauty and riches with it? It is said, that great High way of milk, which
appears in the heavens, was the way of the Gods, when they went unto the
Co^sistorie of Jupiter; but it is a fable: whereas I should think, that were
there any ordinary way for the Angels to descend down unto the earth by, or for
men to mount up to heaven, there could be no fayrer the^ this Bridge always
tapistryed, and paued with so bewtiful stones.

THE DISCOVRSE.
GOD himself takes such complacencie in the Rainebow, The Survey.
that when he is in the highest point of his just choler, if he cast but his
eye thereupon, he is suddenly appeased. I will look on my Bow, and will remember
etc: says he. Genesis
And no marvel surely; since the Bow, he regards so much, is the Symbol here of
his dearest Mother, the Incomparable Virgin.

Let us see then, how this heavenly Bow deciphers the Queen of Heaven, this
mirror of Nature, and the astonishment of mankind. The Generation and extract
of any thing discouers it most. This Iris then or Raynebow, is caused by the
reflection of the Sunnie beams, upon a lucid clowd, concaue and waterish.
Clouds are engendered of the marine vapors or exhalation of the seas, where
the vapoural parts of the Ocean are attracted by the virtue of the Sun; which
conglomerated together, engender a clowd, when the brackishnes of the
Seawater is turned to sweetness. And so was our Lady a true clowd, since in
her were found these marine vapors, that is, incredible tribulations, bitter
and brackish of themselves, though to her made sweet, through the force and
virtue of Divine Love. The Sunnie beams therefore, that is, the grace of GOD
being a ray, as it were, of the Divine Essence, reflecting on the purest
Virgin, a lucid clowd, concaue and waterish, produced the Iris or Rainebow in
the Hierarchy of the Church, as in the firmament of the Heavens; and therefore
called the Iris or Celestial Bow, a sign of the Reconciliation of GOD with all
mankind. She was concaue through humility, and therefore very apt to receive
the rays of the Sun of Justice, the influence of Divine graces; as she was
waterish no less through compassion and piety, because her heart was a Spring,
and her eyes as continual-standing pooles of tears.

A bow commonly has a string, is bent with an arrow in it, and has the horns
converted toward us, as menacing the Foes. Our Blessed Vigin is a Bow indeed,
but without the string of severity, because most just; and without menaces and
fear, because most sweet; and has two horns withal, to wit, Grace and Mercy,
which she holds toward us; while grace she affords to the just, and mercy
to sinners, and is therefore called the Mother of Grace, and Mother of Mercy.

Above al, the Rayne-bow has its proper subsistence in color, which it
seems to borrow (as Bede says) of the four Elements. For, of the fire it
contracts a ruddie color; from the water a Cerulean; from the air, the
color of the Hyacinth; and from the earth, the green it has: al which seem
spiritually to be found in our Celestial Bow, the Incomparable Lady; for red
she was, being wholly inflamed with the fire of Divine love, which she took
from the Divine fire, God being our consuming fire: a fire indeed, that burns
and consumes others, but not her; because although she were a bush, and burning
too; yet incombustible. She might borrow that color likewise from her dead
Son, as he lay on her lap, being taken from the Cross, al bathed with his
precious Blood, which mixed with her fair complexion, might well appear like
to flames, in our heavenly Iris.

She had the Cerulean, which is the color of the Sea, because she is properly
the Star of the Sea, and has therefore a great correspondencie with that
liquid Element; and through mere compassion, was become, as it were; al liquid,
according to that of the Psalmist: My heart is become as dissolved or liquifyed
wax; as well for the abundance of tears she was wont to shed, as the purity of
her mind, which made them so limpid and clear.

She had thirdly the color of the Hyacinth; which she took, as from the
air; since al her conversation was in the air, as it were, abstracted from
the earth, or terrene cogitations. She was wholly as the Bird of Paradise, which
has no feet to touch the earth with; and from the time that her Son ascended
to heaven, from the mount Oliuet, she could do nothing but cast up her eyes
thither-wards* and so powerfully perhaps contracted that color* through the
vehemency of her attention, and application to that object, til her Assumption
happily, when she left it by the way in her Bow, to remain for ever, as a sign
of her purity.

But now to conclude with the green, which she took from the earth, what might
it be, but a continual Spring of al Graces and Virtues, which she practiced on
earth? Look into a garden, in that season of the Spring; and whatsoever your
eyes can behold truly delicious there, in the greennes of the plots and
arbours, both open and close, and in the green-sword allies and bancks; your
understanding shall be able to parallel and find-out her virtuous conversation on
earth. For if you consider her green walks, they were al as straight, as
garden-walks; for straight were the paths of her whole life. If on the arbours,
you shall find her continually in her closet; her plots were nothing else, but
how to become more gratful to her Son, her Spouse, her Lord; and those
always new and ever green; so as in the garden of her mind, was a perpetual
Spring to be seen of al virtues, while she lived amongst us: no marvel then,
the green was so dear unto her, to be put into her bow.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
FRom heaven the Father viewes his Son below
Upon the Cross, The Pause.
as on a cloud a Bow,
When vapors from the earth exhaled arise.
The Mother likewise sees with mourning eyes
Her Son al black and blew, pale, wan, and red,
Green with a crown of thorns fixed on his head.
Al which reflect, and by reflection die
The Mother, like a Rainbow in the sky.
To her for mercy when the Sinner sues,
The Son his Mother as a Rainbow viewes,
That pleades for mercy, to her Son appeals,
Who signs the Pardon, and his Wounds are Seals.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
that if Nature be able to frame so rare a piece of workmanship as the
Rayne-bow; and that no wit of man can truly comprehend the reason of its form
and figure, with the admirable diversity of colors in it, so as among her
other works most choice and rare, the same is accounted as a cheef miracle in
Nature, in the visible Heavens: I imagine the while, what GOD himself is able to
do in his works of Grace, being disposed, as it were, to vye with Nature in
framing an Iris likewise, in this Heaven of Heavens, to astonish not Mortals
only, but the Angels and blessed Spirits themselves, better able to judge of
the diversity of colors in her, to wit, the mysteries and graces, wherewith
he has adorned her.

Consider then, that as the Rayne-bow of itself is no more then a mere Meteor
in the air, if it be so much, whose whole luster it takes from the Sun, and
vanisheh as soon as he is either in a clowd, or has his aspect some other
way, since it is wholly of him, and so of him, as without him it is nothing: So
our Incomparable Virgin-Iris, whatsoever she was of herself, she esteemed as
nothing, not so much as a Meteor, as it were, in the Celestial Hierarchy of
Heaven, attributing al to the Sun of Glory reflecting his rays so powerfully
upon her, to make her appear so glorious as she does, the most refulgent Bow,
or Carkanet of Heaven, the delight of the Angels, and the gracious sign of
Reconciliation to Mortals with her only Son, the Sun of Justice, whose she
is wholly, and ever was.

Ponder lastly, how as the Rayne-bow of itself, is nothing else, but exhalations
and vapors extract from the Seas, and drawne-vp into the air, by the heat of
the Sun. So this Iris is the Quintessence, as it were, extracted from the Sea
of the generation of Adam, through particular favor and privilege of the Sun
of Justice, to become first a light clowd, that is, capable of Celestial rays;
and then being concaued through humility, to bear him in her womb, and to
have the form of a Celestial Bow, enriched with such diversities of al Graces.

THE APOSTROPHE.
OH specious Iris! The Colloquie.
Hand-mayd of the Sun of Justice, in thine own account; and yet esteemed of all the world besides, the glorious Queen of Heaven, and placed as a radiant Iris
or Anckour of our hope and reconciliation to GOD thy Son, whose unbent Bow
thou art, sure Sign of Peace. Ah then! shall I always live thus? Shall I
always walk the labyrinth of the fraylties and inordination of my soul, for
want of a Clue to guide me forth, and to lead me unto the true love of my GOD,
the only Lovely and Amiable above al lovely and amiable things? Shall I
always walk thus, by the brinck of Hell, unruly, unmortifyed, curious,
sensual, and vain? O my most deer Divine Mother; guard me with the bow of thy
safeguard and protection, and make intercession for me, O thou proclaimed
Happy through al nations; hear my desires, have pity on my tears, let my
sights mount up unto thee. O receive them, I pray, most gracious and auspitious
Iris of the Empyreal Heavens.

THE X. SYMBOL. THE MOON.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Moon is the Dowager, The Impresa
and Queen-Regent of the Firmament, that rules that Monarchy by turns with
Titan her brother, with this happiness above him, that his government over some
of his provinces is found too hot and intolerable, and held as tyranous; but
hers more benign and sweet over al. She is so good, as she seems to spend her
whole demeanes upon the poor and indige^t. And as she is charitable to al, she
is eue^ prodigally profuse of the treasure of her influe^ces of on her nearest
kin about her, especially Tellus her Sister, more necessitous then stands with
her gentle breast, to see her in; and therefore as made for her alone, she
seems to apply herself to her only. And to the end she may still have to give,
she is still borrowing from her elder Brother new and fresher lights, from the
rich Magasin of his greater splendor; whereof she spends so fast, as she is
often forced to break and become Bankerout, and as often by her Brother set
aflote again, with a new stock, as brisk as ever. She holds besides very
fair correspondences and good intelligence with the Seas, and those so good,
as never fail without some prodigy or other. They use to tax her of
inconstancy; but they do her wrong; for She is constant still, in that
inconstancy of hers, they charge her with; how then inconstant? The spots they
note her for, show but how good a glasserepresentatiue she is, that so figures
something, which they call a Man, which I scan not here. She is fair and
beautiful, and yealds to none but to the Sun, and that for reverence, and good
respects. She is a great riser in the night, which she does to good purpose,
still obliging the whole world through many favors. She is indeed the precious
Diamant of the rest of Stars, cut round of the larger size, and sometimes
Crescent-wise, as she is pleased to communicate herself, and take away the
veyle before her face.

THE MORALS.
BENIGNA ET FACILIS.
THe Children of Israel indeed, though they acknowledged GOD for the Author
and Creator of al things, The Motto.
yet not to be dazeld with his glory, were still calling upon Moses to speak
to them, and not the Lord. The Kings of China are neuerseen to their Subjects,
but negotiate their Royal affairs by the trusty hands of their Eunucks about
them; and they dispense his favors here and there according to his mind. By
them gives he audience to Ambassadors; and by their hands, receaues the
presents, suits, and requests of al; and gives dispatches by them: and so his
Subjects do more sweetly taste his benignities and favors, and seem more
freely to communicate with him. The Understanding or Reason has the common
Sense for chief dispenseresse, and the Executiue powers for ministers, while al
things are not done immediately by himself. Tyberius had Seianus as it were his
right hand. He that would have a favor at the hands of Alexander, would apply
himself straight to his dearest Ephestion, and he was sure to have his suit.
Yea the great S. Peter himself, how great soever in his Maister's favor, would
still be pulling of S. John by the sleeue, to put forth his doubts and his
requests to his Master for him. And the great Assuerus had his gracious and
benign Hester always by his side; who did nothing but communicate the
Prince's favors to his people with a pious and prudent hand. This was the
Virgin Mother right, to our great Assuerus indeed; and therefore is she here
most truly and aptly styled: BENIGNA ET FACILIS.

THE ESSAY.
THE Moon of al others, is a Planet the nearest to the earth, The Reuiew.
and most familiar with it. It is the Sun of the night; her course and decourse
never fayles; her glass is clear according as she looks on the Sun; and
sometimes do we see but a certain list, as it were, and Crescent of Silver;
sometimes it waxes again, and makes a demie O or half circle, and then grows
it to be wholly orbicular and round; her Argent is always dimmed, with some
shadows and certain obscurities, that seem to fashion a face with them. She
supplies the defaults of the Sun, and often shines in fellowship with him, and
mingles her rays with his, even at midday. The simplicity of Painters heerin
is discovered, in that ordinarily painting her in company with the Sun, they
make her horns, to look to the Sun-wards; wherein truly are they quite
mistaken; for the back is it, which is turned to the Sun, and not the horns; for
she has no claritie in her, but that which she borrowes of the Sun, presenting
him in lieu thereof, her mirror and glass to look upon. She is the Sister of
the Sun; and, as I said before, the Sun of the nights, which pearceth the
thicknes of their darkness, with her silver rays; somewhat moist, and sweetly
co^forting the tediousnes of them, being otherwise gloomie and dark of
themselves. A Star she is, that lives but of loan, and has the visage
always upon change: She is the Mistress of the Sea, the Queen of the Night, the
Mother of Deawes, the sweet Nurse of the Earth, the Guide of Mariners, the
Glass of the Sun, the Companion of his travels, the Guardian of his light, and
Depositaria^ of the day and treasures of the heavens: the second Glory of the
firmament, the Empress of Stars, and Regent of this world beneath, where she
has her jurisdiction and demeanes. She marks-out the months and years, and
the ages, as they run, and through her sweetness tempers the burning heats of
her brother the Sun. When she is diametrally set under the Sun, and interposed
between him and the earth, she ecclipseth him, and robs the earth of the beams
of the Sun; and the shadow of the earth of the other side being cast over her,
ecclipses her, and suffers her not to enjoy the Sunnie rays: but the point of
the shadow of the earth, not mounting near so high, makes no ecclips at al in
the other stars.

THE DISCOVRSE.
NOw what may this Moon denote and signify to us, The Survey. Cant. 5 Eccl. 53
Psalm.
but the glorious Queen of Heaven? For she is al fair as the Moon: She is,
as the Moon, full in her days: and a perfect Moon, because Her Throne as the
Sun in my sight, and as a perfect Moon for ever. She is a Moon therefore, yea
far more beautiful then the Moon ever was, or ever like to be. For as the
Moon indeed has her light borrowed, very gracious to behold, but none of her
own, being merely a light reuerberated from the Sun: So the Virgin truly,
though her light be borrowed, and none of her own, as simply hers, yet hers it
is indeed, though borrowed of her Son, the Sun of Justice, as daughter of the
King. For all the glory of the King's daughter is within her etc: not outwardly
only in the voice of people, always doubtful, ever uncertain, for the most
part undeserved, and of little subsistence and permanencie, but intrinsecally
in her most certain, meritorious, and for ever. Besides, the Moon has her
light often ecclipsed, and loses wholly her light for a time; but the blessed
Virgin, though she seemed to be ecclipsed, through the vehemency of her
sorrow, when she saw her Son so shadowed by a clowd, in the time of his
Passion, yet for her constancy of faith she could not be ecclipsed so, as to
despair of his Resurrection. I will not cease unto the end of the world. Eccl
22.
Well might the Apostles fail at that time, but Marie never. Moreover as the
Moon is variable and subject to changes, in the light it affords to Mortals (an
argument accounted of weakness of brain, Eccl. 22.
while the fool, as the Wiseman says, is changed as the Moon) let us see,
what cha^ges and mutabilities they are. One is of the mind, which is often
moved through diverse affecti^ons; another in the body, which is subject to
manifold alteration and corruption; an other of fortune, because temporal
things are always a flowing or ebbing, a flux or reflux, the loss of guilt
and offense which is in sinners, who always are sliding from vice to vice. But
our Lady has al these changes and mutabilities under her feet, since the Moon
indeed is placed under her feet; while she always retained the constancy of
her mind, and Vow of Virginity; she put on the glory of Immortality on her
body; she trampled al terrene and temporal things under foot; and lastly
through a singular prerogative was ever privileged from sin. Furthermore,
the Moon has her light al speckled over with little spots: but our blessed
Lady had no blemish or spot at al, either in her thoughts, because always
pure and immaculate; or in her body, because Angelical. Thou art wholly fair,
my friend, And there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4.
I say, most fair in cogitations, affections, and intentions; and spotles in all. Oh beautiful Moon, transcending any heavenly Planet or Star in the
Firmament, as far in dignity and excellency, as so heavenly a Lady and
Queen of Heavens can surpass her Rational, Sensible, or Insensible subjects!

The Moon is sometimes wholly obscure, sometimes wholly lucid and bright, and
sometimes partly obscure, and partly resplendent; wherein it resembles the
Virgin right. For the Moon, as S. Augustine says, is obscured either when it is
under a clowd, or when ecclipsed, or when renewed, as in the new Moon: So the
blessed Virgin in this world, was thrice or three manner of ways obscured.
First, through her excessive humility, which was a kind of obscure clowd, that
ouershadowed her brightness or splendor in the eyes of the world. Black I am
but beautiful; as if she had said: Cant. 1.
I am outwardly black through humility, but inwardly beautiful in grace and
majesty. Secondly, through acerbitie and bitterness of sorrow; and this in the
Passion of her Son, as I said above, where she suffered an ecclips in the
veheme^cie of her greef. The Sun, that is to say, Christ, shall be turned into
darkness through death; and the Moon, to wit, the blessed Virgin, into blood,
I^el 2.
that is, into dolor. And thirdly, through corporal death; for then became she
obscure in a sort, when her soul departed from her precious body so obscured,
as it were to become a new Moon again in her Assumption; and then indeed was
she a moon most perfect for ever.

Secondly this Moon of ours, was wholly lucid, in her Assumption, because she
was glorified in soul and body, and received there her double Stole; and
likewise shines upon us, with her infinite favors and graces, which she daily
sends us. For then indeed as the Moon is wholly bright and lucid, when she
shines in the beginning, midst, and to the end of the night: by which night is
tribulation both signified and usually understood: And as some Saints there
are, who help the afflicted, in the beginning of the night as it were; others,
who suffer men to fall into tribulation, and to be tempted, in the beginning and
middle, but help and succor them at the end: the blessed Virgin shines with
her favors upon the distressed, as well in the beginning, in affording courage;
and in the middle, in giving perseverance; as in the end, in placing the crown
on their heads. This is she, when others fail, who never fayles; whom other
Saints for sins justly forsake, she never leaves; and while others seem to
subtract their suffrages, she always helps.

Thirdly, this Moon was partly lucid and partly obscure; and this truly in the
Passion of her Son, where both she was obscured, and yet gave light; obscure,
through inte^se sorrow, yet lucid by most firm Faith. For as when the Sun is
ecclipsed, the Moon being opposed between us and the Sun, appears wholly
obscure: so when the Sun of Justice suffered ecclips at his death, the blessed
Virgin became wholly dark, that is, quite ouercast and full of sorrow; And yet
notwithstanding she shined even then likewise, because she kept the light of
Faith vnextinguished in her. Prou. vlt.
Her light shall not be extinguished in the night. Surely two Heavens there are,
which yet never lost their light, nor ever are like to do: to wit, Christ for
one, who neither with death did forgo the light of his Divinity, but his
Deity was both with his body in the Sepulcher, and with his soul in Limbus:
and his Mother the other, who never lost the light of grace and faith within
her.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THe Empress of the Sea, The Pause.
Latona bright,
Draws like a lodestone by attractiue might
The Oceans streams, which having forward run
Calls back again, to end where they begun.
The Prince of darkness had ecclipsed Eues light,
And Mortals, clowded in Cymmerian night,
Were backwards drawn by Eve, as is the Maine;
^T was only Marie drew to GOD again:
(...) chaste Diana, with thy silver beams,
Fluse and reflux (as in the Oceans streams)
^Tis thou can cause, O draw! and draw me so,
That I in vice may ebb, in Virtue flow.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
that if the Moon being so fair, beautiful, and perfect, be so accounted of
Mortals; and for the manifold influences and favors, which she continually
imparts to creatures, be held in so great veneration, as to share in their
opinion with the Sun himself, in the government of the world, whom the Paynim
Gentilitie holds to be a GOD, and her Brother, and she his Sister,
notwithstanding she has yet so many blemishes, defects, and spots appearing
in her, who can except against the Churches devotion, in so magnifying our
Lady, who is truly so fair, beautiful, and perfect indeed, without any the
least blemish, or spot in her; and so beneficial withal, as to communicate her
graces unto us in a far higher nature, and those in a measure so immense? Or
who can tax us, for stiling her the Queen of heaven, who is not only the
Sister, the Friend, the Dove, and beautiful Spouse of the Sun o^ justice, but
even his most immaculate Mother, the fountain of al her prerogatives besides;
when especially we afford her no more honor, then may worthily be due to a
mere creature?

Consider then, that as in the opinion of such as hold the Moon increasing to
have her horns directed toward the rising of the Sun; but decreasing, or being
in the wayne, to have the horns pointing to the setting of the Sun: So our
heavenly, Angelical, and spiritual Moon, the Incomparable Virgin Mother, had
certain addresses and preparations, of humility and Virginity, wherewith she
disposed herself, to embrace her Sun in her arms, in the morning of his birth,
as he lay in the Crib: And at his setting again, that is, at his Passion,
regarded him with two other horns as it were; to wit, with the sorrow she had
for his death, of the one side; and the joy, she received of the other, for the
Redemption of the world.

Ponder lastly, how though the Moon, while it is just over the earth, and the
Sun in oppositio^ thereunto, in a right diameter beneath the same, is
shadowed, obscured, or ecclipsed: Yet our mystical Moon, when Christ, our true
Sun indeed, descended and abid in hell, which is under the earth, and our Moon
remaining there over it, lost not the light of Faith, of his present
Resurrection; for that the shadow of the earth, that is, the infidelity of
terrene things, could not ascend unto her, whereby the darkness of Infidelity
comprehended her not.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Empress of the world, Lady of the Universe, Queen of Angels, The Colloqui^.
standing in the Moon, and crowned with Stars in Heaven by God Almighty;
most wise, most good! Oh regard me, I beseech thee, from the top of the heavens
with thy sacred influences from thence; and have pity upon me most miserable
wretched sinner in all points. Present, O sacred Virgin Mother, al my pouerties
to GOD, al my perils, al my miseries and necessities, to thy Son. For so will
he take pity on me, and open his hand, and afford me his Benediction, through
thy gracious intercession. This grant, I beseech thee, most radiant and
resplendent Moon, who shinest in heaven, and shall for all eternity,

THE XI. SYMBOL. THE STAR.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Stars are the glittering la^ps of Heaven, The Impresa.
set up as so many lights, in the close or upper seeling of the ample Theater
of the world. They are as sparckling Diamants strewed in the Firmament, to
entertain the World with, as a goodly maister-piece of the great CREATOVR.
They are the silver Oes, al powdered here and there, or spangles sprinkled over
the purple Mantle or night-gowne of the heavens: the seed of pearl, sown in
the spacious fields of the Heavens, to bring forth light. Have you seen a
stately Mask in Court, al set round, and taken up with a world of beautiful
Ladies, to behold the sports and revels there? Imagine the Stars then, as
sitting in the Firmament, to behold some spectacle on Earth, with no other
light then their own beauties. If that great Pan they speak of, were that man
sitting in the Cabin of the Moon, the Stars would be his Sheep and lambs,
feeding in those ample downs of heaven; which not appearing by day (their
proper night) you must suppose to be lockt-vp in their folds for fear of those
Bears and Lions in the Welkin. As Cinthia in the Heavens is even the very same
that Diana is in the woods and forests, the Stars by consequence are her
Nimphs, who encompas her about, and da^ce the Canaries in her presence, while
so they seem in twinkling to dance and foot-it in the same place. They are
extremely given to mortification, and to a strange annihilation of themselves;
that being so great as they are, they appear to be so little in the eyes of
men; yea many of them, are so passionatly addicted to it, as they appear not
at al. They affect equalities amongst them; and be any of them never so great,
they will show to be no greater then the rest. Their greater height and
eminency in degrees swelles them not a whit or puffs them up, but diminishes
their creasts, and abates them rather. In fine, they are a happy
Commonwealth, deuoyd of envy or ambition; where well may you hear of
conjunctions of Houses, but no iarres and discords amongst them, that ever I
could hear of.

THE MORALS.
IN ITINERE PHARVS.
WHEN Theseus was puzzled and entangled in Minos Labyrinth, The Motto.
he found the twist of Ariadne to deliver him thence. The little Bird with the
red breast, which for his great familiarity with men they call a Robin, if he
meet any one in the woods to go astray, and to wander he knows not whither,
out of his way, of common charity will take upon him, to guide him, at least
out of the wood, if he will but follow him; as some think. This am I sure of, it
is a comfortable and sweet companion, insuch a case. It is the manner in all
countries likely, in doubtful ways especially, where they seem to cross one
another, to set up Pillars with hands, directing and pointing this way or that
way; and you will not believe, what comfort it affords to weary Pilgrims, whose
every step out of their right way, is a grievous corrasiue to them. The Kings
had a Star, as companion in their pilgrimage, to the Crib. And the Pastors
of the Church, are as so many Stars, to lead their Sheep, and to guide
their subjects in the pilgrimages of their own salvation. When the havens are
crooked and perilous to pass to and fro, the public care of common safeties,
in the night especially, prouides some burning torch or other, upon some
turret-top, to admonish the Mariners, where they are, and fayrly to guide and
direct them into the wished port. This same provision has the Wisdom
likewise of the great CREATOVR found out, to comfort and direct us, no less,
in the open Seas, exposing a certain Star among the rest, as a sure and
infallible Pharus: But more truly and abundantly far, in ordaining the
Incomparable Virgin Marie, his blessed Mother, to be our Star in the
dangerous and tempestuous Sea of the world; and therefore is here very truly
said in the Motto: IN ITINERE PHARVS.

THE ESSAY.
THE Stars, The Reuiew.
as sown up and down the Heavens, are the thicker and massiue parts of
Heaven, certain Buttons of Crystal as it were, which serve as a grace and
entertainment to Heaven. By these silver channels, Nature distills her
influences upon us, and insensibly distributes favors. They are the eyes of
Nature, which without cease serve us as a Court-of-guard for watchfulnes; the
Jewels of Nature, wherewith ordinarily she dresses herself, Sometimes they send
forth their fire and rays; sometimes they eclipse their beauty, and strip
themselves of al refulgence. There are some, who can punctually tell you, the
course and trauails of the Stars, their aspects, their encounters, and their
fruits; the marriages and divorces of the Planets, their defects and ecclipses,
their risings, their settings, their asce^dants, their conjunctions, and the
whole ^economie of the Heavens. For the swiftnes of their motions, it is a
thing almost incredible, what they write, that one Star in the firmament,
should go 200000. Italian miles in a minute of an hour; so as neither the
flight of a bird, nor force of an arrow, nor the furious shot of a Cano^ nor
any thing of the world, can approach or come near the imaginable swiftnes of
these Stars; bus yet most true, Besides all this, there is no Star, thahath
not a particular virtue with it, though vnt known to us. The clowded Stars
cause infallibly rain; others, frost; some, snow; others shead abundant
deawes; some sow their hayle; others open the mouth and gates of the winds;
others fold the world in clouds; others send down mistie fogs; and others
contribute to the production and generation of Minerals; and when the Sun and
the Canicular Star are in conjunction, and match together, the world burns
with outrageous heats. It is a dreadful thing, to consider the greatness of
these Stars, their distance in the Heavens, and the inexplicable swiftnes of
their courses and reuolutions. You shall have a Star which shows no bigger
then a crown, that is a ^15. times greater then the earth. Goodness of GOD! Who
would imagine this beauty, to see such a Boule of Cristal al of fire, to cast
down here beneath a thousand benedictions on the earth, by means of its
rays, and the sweetness of its influences?

THE DISCOVRSE.
THvs far then of Stars in general; The Survey.
which being thus decyphered, may seem, as so many glorious Suns, in the
Firmament of the Heavens, but are indeed as the Common People of that Celestial
City and Kingdom, compared with the Sun himself, sitting in the midst of
Planets, as the King of Heaven, to whom all the rest of Stars make up a Court;
among whom, as a choice Hester, is one especially selected by that great
Assuerus of Stars, to cast his most amorous glances and fairest influence
upon. This happy and auspicious Star is known and called by diverse names,
according to the offices she discharges in the great Assuerus his house. For
first is she styled by the name of Venus, not as the Goddess of Love, which
the Poets feign, but for that she disposes them to love, whom she lwayes, and
exercises her virtues on. Secondly, she is called the Morning-Starre, because
she shows and declares the Morning now at hand, and even begins the same
herself with her burning torch, to glad the world withal, who then begins to
shake off sleep, and disperse the mistie vapors, which so long had shadowed
and clowded over the Gemell Stars or Eyes of the Microcosmes of men. Thirdly,
they call her Lucifer, in that her light exceeds so much the other Stars; so
as well she may be said, the Hester of the^ al. And fourthly, she is termed the
Hesperus, for as much as she respects the ensuing night, and greatly illustrats
the same with her more then ordinary splendor and light; so as she glads the
world therewith, and draws al eyes to gaze upon her.

Such is this special Star indeed, the glory of the Heavenly Orbs; but lo,
we have another Star in hand, dwelling in the upper Region of the Empyreal
Heavens, that greatly symbolizes with this; but as far exceeds it
(Analogically speaking) as the great Assuerus, Sun of Justice, excelles the
same of this our Firmament; or as much as this same Firmament itself, where GOD
eternally reigns in his Empyreal and Celestial Court: to whom, I say, these
several titles may aptly agree, according to these other things, which are said
of her: I am the Mother of fair dilection, and of fear, and of knowledge, and
of holy hope. Eccl 24.
This Star is the blessed Virgin, that may well be termed Venus, because she
enflames men's hearts with Divine love; and therefore is said to be the Mother of
fair dilection. Then the Morning-Starre; for that she is the beginning of a
new life; as the morning is the commencement of the ensuing day, and therefore,
of fear. For fear is the beginning of grace and of a new life; according to
that of the Psalmist: The fear of GOD, is the beginning of wisdom. Again,
she is said to be the Lucifer, for that she gives the beginning of Divine
knowledge, and so is the Mother of knowledge; And lastly Hesperus, since she so
piously regards and illumines sinners, who are in the darkness of wickedness and
sin; and for that cause is fayd to be the Mother of holy hope. She is
likewise called the Morning-Starre, because appearing to Mortals, she is the
most certain and infallible sign of the approach of the day of grace, and
rising of the Sun of Justice.

This Star besides is called the Star of the Sea; and that most fitly, if
Philo most skilful of the Hebrew tongue be worthy to be believed, to whose
interpretation Beda assents, Phil. de Mar^no. Bonau. in opera.
and the Doctor S. Bonauenture in his Gloss of the Blessed Virgin; yea the
Catholic Church, while she sings the Aue Maris stella, and again Stella
Maris, succurre cadenti. And truly, if Stella be said of stando for its
stabilitie and immobilitie, then needs must Marie be a Star, whose firmitie
and stabilitie in good, is known to be such, as she never stepped a whit from the
will of GOD; which to no other creature once of riper years was yet afforded,
Jacob. 3. Bern. Ser. Super Mis.
since (as the Apostle S. James says) We have al offended in many things. But
for the glorious Virgin, as S. Bernard Says, She was a Star, because that as
the Star sheads its rays without corruption, so she powered forth her Son
without impeachment of her Virginity; And as the Star thereby looses no
light: ^o the Virgins Son empayred not the light of her integrity any
ways. Read but S. Bonauenture in his foresaid Glass, Bonau. in spec.
and he will tell you, how fitly the Virgin here bears the office of the marine
Star. For it is read (says he) and true it is, that the custom of Mariners
is, that when they determine to sail unto some land, to make choice of some
one Star, by whose sign they may be lead without error into that part they
desire to arrive unto. And such truly is the office here of Marie our Star,
who directs the Mariners through the vast sea of the world, in the Ship of
Innocence or Penance, to the shore of the Heavenly country. And not unlike
to this, Pope innocent writes, being cited likewise by the said S. Bernard in
the same place. By what helps (says he) may ships among so many perils arrive
at the shore of that Heavenly country? Surely by these two, that is, through
the Wood, and Star, to wit, through faith of the Cross, and virtue of that
Light, which Marie, that Star of the Sea, has brought us forth.

Now therefore as that Star guides and directs the sailors to their port: So
this blessed Virgin is worthily called the Star of this te^pestuous Sea of
the world, while in the midst of the storms of this life, she lends so her
light to such as sail to heauen-wards; and through her example and patronage
continually directs them to the Haven of the Heavenly country. Bern. Ser. 20.
Which S. Bernard knew well when he said: This is the glorious and renowned
Star very needfully raised upon this great and spacious sea, shining with
merits, and illustrious in examples: if the winds of temptations arise, if thou
lightst upon rocks of tribulations, if thou be tossed by the waves of pride,
and hoysed up with the surges of ambition, look on the Star, call upon Marie,
let her not depart from thy heart, let her not depart from thy mouth; And says
presently thervpo^: In following her thou strayest not; imploring her, thou
despayrest not; in thinking on her, thou errest not; while she protects, thou
fear not; thou art not weary, while she guides; and she propitious, thou
landst securely at the part; and shall find in thy felf, how worthily it was
said: the Virgins name was Marie.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THe glorious Sun withdrew his beams of light; The Pause.

My sin was cause: So I in dismal night
Am sailing in a stormy dangerous Maine;
And ere the sun (I fear) return again,
Shall suffer shipwreck, where the fraite's my Soul.
My only Hope's a Star, fixed near the pole,
But that my Needle now has lost its force,
Once touchd with grace, and sail out of course.
Star of the Sea, thy sun has given thee light;
Til he brings day, guide me in sins dark night.
I seek, what Sages heertofore have done,
Guided by thee a Star, to find the sun.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
that howbeit a Star be said, by many degrees to be greater then the Earth,
yet seems it to be but a spangle or fiery point only in that immense and vast
vault of the Firmament. So likewise the Blessed Virgin though she be the
greatest Star in the Heavenly Hierarchy, yet thought she always humbly of
herself; and seemed the least and meanest of all the Daughters of Jerusalem,
while she lived on earth. For she was humble in mind, in word, and fact: in
mind, because she ever preferred others before herself; as Joseph: Thy Father
and I with heaviness have sought thee; In word, because she called not herself
the Mother of GOD, nor Lady of the world, nor Queen of Heaven, but the
handmayd of CHRIST, when she replied so: Behold the ha^dmayd of our Lord; and
again. He has regarded the lowlines of his handmayd; And lastly in fact,
because that after she was now become the Mother of GOD; she made herself the
handmayd of Elizabeth, when she ministered to her for three months together
that she remained with her.

Consider then, how this Star of ours is as the Pole- Star or axeltree of
the Firmament. For as the whole circumference of the lesser Stars
encompasseth the Pole, and the wheel enuirons the axeltree round: So is the
whole Firmament of Saintlie and Angelical Stars, about this singular and
sovereign Star, that is, the whole Celestial Court of blessed Spirits,
wheel, as it were; and beset the Virgin round, because they enco^passe and
enuiron her about as the Queen and Lady of the^ al, according to that which
the Church sings: Like the days of the springtime do the flowers of roses
and lillies of the valleys beset her round, that is, the Orders of Confessors
and Virgins; and the Prophet says: The Queen stood at thy right hand, in a
garment al of gold with variety beset round. For the Saints are a certain robe
or garment of the blessed Virgin, adorning her richly indeed like a Lady or
Queen, where the Apostles afford the embroderie of gold; Martyrs, the ground of
scarlet, Confessors, Saphyrs and Emeralds; and the Virgins, the Orient Pearls
and Diamonds.

Po^der lastly, that as this Star is moved most swiftly by the motion of its
Superior, to wit, of the upper firmament or chief Mouer, because it daily
carries it about the world; but moves most slowly of its own motion, for that
they say it moves but one degree in a hundred years. So the blessed Virgin,
our delicious Star, moved never of her proper motion, but through the motion
of her Superior, to wit, the Holie-Ghost; for as much as moved by the
Holie-Ghost made she a vow of Chastity, and kept her virginity inviolable,
and that perpetual; moved by the Holie-Ghost, she gave her assent to the
Conception of the Son of GOD in an instant; being moved to go to serve her
Coseu, presently she climbd the mountains; being moved (so great with child,
and near her time) to go to Bethlem, she went her ways; and lastly moved to
return again, immediately she returned. Behold how she moved not of herself,
but merely of the Holie-Ghost, which was within her, and guided and directed
her in all things: for other motion in moral actions had she none.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Glorious Star! O Mother of mercy! we have heard, The Colloquie.
thou art full of grace; and grace is it which we have need of. O full of grace!
O radiant Star! we, who are thy humble Suppliants, present our selves before
thy Son, great King of Israel, with sack cloth on our back, ashes on the
head, and cords about our necks, confessing our offenses in thy sight, that by
thy means, we may obtain pardon of them. Look toward the North here of our
affliction, O Star of the Sea; thou art our confidence; interpose thyself,
between thy Son and thy servants; that of the one side thou may appease his
wrath, and of the other cancel our sins; that through the heat of thy rays,
O Divine Star, the frigiditie of our soul may be warmed again, that by thy
aspect, the heat of the Holie-Ghost may viuify us. O grant the same, most
Orient and bright Star of Heaven.

THE XII. SYMBOL. THE OLIVE.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Olive, The Impresa
the Fig, and Vine, are the three Triumuiri, that might well have shared the
Monarchy of trees between them; as having the voices of all the Tribunes on
their parts. But the Olive especially refused the scepter, as greater in
itself, then the flash and luster of Purple and Diadem could make it. It is the
true Agathocles, contented with his sallets in an earthen dish. It is even the
meek and innocent Dove of trees, as the Dove is the Olive of birds, having such
sympathy and fair correspondencies with them. It was once the gladsome mirth
and joyful solace of Noe's heart; was then, and is still the Ensign of peace and
mercy. It is the Herald of Arms, that passes freely to and fro, amid the
holbards and squadrons of pikes, and cries but out: hold your hands, and al is
whist. It decks the brows of Poets, equal with laurel, since Apollo and
Minerua were as brother and sister, and dear to each other. It works the same
effects, that Music does to revive the Spirits after a dearth, like a lively
Galyard, after a doleful and sad Pauen. And for the Oil, the blood of the
Olive, it is the quintessence and cream thereof. It is the fat or butter of the
garden, and foyls the Dayrie, as more wholesome, and agreeable with our first
nature. If the Vine be the Dearling of Bacchus, the Olive is so to Minerua,
that being the Cellar of the one, and this the Apothecaries shop of the other.
The Oil is so coy and delicate, so reserved and recollected in itself, as it
opens no doors to admit any stranger into its house. It is fiery and
haughty in its nature, and will mount and ride on the back of al his fellows.
Yet will it slily insinuate and familiarize itself with its neighbors; for
there is nothing will encroch so much and show so slick and smooth a brow. And
finally it is the joyful smile of the husbandman, and the leaping of his heart,
his barn, his cellar, and his whole Riches. It is the Wardrop to cloth his
children, wherewith he pays his rent, and lives as merry as his Landlord does.

THE MORALS.
SPECIOSA ET FRVCTIFERA.
THE Lion is a stately and princely creature, The Motto.
and held to be the King of beasts, but is not fruitful; because lightly they
whelp but one at once, and that but rarely too, as once in five years only;
while the Wren will bring fortha 16. or 20. young in a neast, that besides a
little skin and bone is little more then a tuft of feathers. The Sicamour is a
goodly and beautiful tree, and has so fair a leaf, so smooth and delicat, as
a reasonable Taylour might well have made thereof a gown and cloak for Adam and
Eve. And yet this galland tree is wholly barren; whereas the Slow, though she
bear a world of fruit, they are but sour, and she no more then a thorn, Sara,
the wife of Abraham, was so fair and beautiful, as Abraham himself had some
little iealousies of her; and Pharao was so passionatly enamoured with her, as
to snatch her away from him, and to carry her to his Court. But yet she was
not fruitful, while she had much ado, to bring an Isaac into the world. Lia
indeed was very fruitful, and brought her Jacob many children; but she was but
bleer-eyed and ill-favored, and Jacob illuded in taking her for another. Rachel
indeed was gracious and extreme fair, but barren, that with all her Mandragoras
was hardly able, to bring her Jacob a Joseph; and the little Benjamin cost her
her life. Only the Virgin Marie was truly fair and fruitful both together,
who remaining still a Virgin, was yet so fruitful, as to bring forth not a
Joseph, or a Savior of a few, or a Benjamin, Woe to his mother, but a JESUS and
a Savior indeed of the world, being the true Primogenitus of an infinite
offspring of Christians, succeeding in the world; and particularly of true
Parthenians. And therefore was truly SPECIOSA ET FRVCTIFERA.

THE ESSAY.
BY the Olive, The Reuiew:
is understood the tree, the fruit, the oil. As for the tree, if man be a
tree, turned vpside down, as some will have it, whose body is the trunck, his
legs and arms the branches, and whose head the root, where, by the mouth, it
takes its nutriment; the Olive is that tree, since no other tree resembles him
so well. For no other tree, is so ciuilized as it; no other tree so useful and
profitable to the neighbor; no other tree, so medicinal. The first makes him a
Citizen, at least a free Denison amongst men; the second, a Merchant; and the
third, a Physician; and what are these but trades, faculties, and professions
of men? Minerua was the first as the Paynim Antiquity will have it, who
found-out the culture and planting of the Olive, and expressio^ of the lickour
thence, or pressing of the Oil; howbeit they grant the Plant had been ever
existing, and had grown before, but altogether unknown to men, among the
other trees. And for a good while was not the Olive to be found, but with the
Athenians; and therefore the Epidaurians contracted with them, to send them
yearly Olive branches for their Sacrifices. And for as much as the lickour of
the Olive, as the Oil expressed, is apt for all arts, they held Minerua was the
Inuentresse of al arts. For surely, there is hardly any Art, that makes not
use of this unctuous lickour, we call Oil of Olives. There are two sorts of
these Oliue-trees; the one Civil, as I said, and fit for Cities, bred and
trained up in Gardens, well clothed with Oliue-coulour suits without, and faced
or lined with ash-coulour within; the other Wild, and fitter for the forests,
being somewhat of a harsher and more churlish disposition; as being full of
thorns and prickles mingled with the leaves, and whose fruit seldom or never
come to good, as having little acquaintance or familiarity with the Sun, that
perfects al things, by reason of the thickets of the forests where they dwell,
which hinder it. But for the nobler and more generous Olive, they are high and
tal of stature, well branched, and with as many arms and hands to feed us
with, as had Briarius to sling and hurt with. Their flowers and blossoms
cluster together, like to grapes; the fruit, made Oual-wise, being long and
round, about the bigness of our damsons; whose bones within, were they as small
as the flesh is good, the marcha^ts needed not to venture so far as to the
Indies for gold or spices, while Spain and Italy would hold them trade
enough. As for the Oil, the Poets, who are punctual and Religious in their
Epithets, are wont to adorn and mark out al other lickours with their proper
attributs, as to term the milk, candid; the honey, liquid gold; the Rose,
crimson; the wine, brisk; but the Oil of al others, they call humid, a quality
common to al lickours, chiefly, for that it has no ariditie of any mixture
with it, as other lickours have, even the water itself, there being nothing
more smooth, slick, and less porie, then it. It has besides very fair
correspondencie with the eyes, and little less then good will between them;
affording itself to be easily gazed on, as a glass; and though not so
transparent as other lickours, yet more reflectiue and representative, then
others. It is apt to burn, as being so liquid, as I said; for were it ayrie,
it would vanish into smoke; if earthly, turn to ashes; but being humid, it
spends itself, and nourishes the fire. Finally this sweet lickour, as the
friend and dear companion of Nature, restores the frail forces, comforts the
languishing vigor, repayres and nourishes the body in decay, clarifyes the
voice, dissipates, resolves, and quite consumes the coldness of humors, and
asswages tumors; and what not?

THE DISCOVRSE.
THE Sacred Scriptures show, The Survey Iudic. 9.
that when the Trees decreed among themselves, to elect a King, the first they
cast their voices on, to have advanced to that Regal dignity, and weild the
Scepter, was the Olive of al other; for that, the first and principal thing
they require in such a one, to govern subjects with, must needs be Piety and
Mercy, whose type indeed the Olive bears. No man denies, but the Incomparable
Virgin is worthily here compared to the Oliue-tree; of whom is said: Eccl. 24.
As it were an Olive specious in the fields. Since then that Supreme,
Sovereign, and more then Royal dignity of Mother of God, was conferred so
upon her in her Annunciation, as on the mystical Olive, after the receiving of
that Imperial title, her Charity and Mercy appeared more then ever, as became
a Quee^. And as in the Annuntiation of the immaculate Mother of God, the Dove
was a true type of her; so is the Oliue-tree no less, whereon she sat a
lively and represe^tatiue figure; between which two, are so great
correspo^dencies, which Philisophers call a sympathy. Call then to mind that
admirable Dove, which Noe, the great restorer of the world, from that vast and
huge Argo^rie of his, or rather unmeasurable Chest, wherein he had enclosed and
shut-vp the world, as under lock and key, sent forth to be his Spy and
Intelligencer abroad, to understand, how matters went with the other world so
buried under waters. Who flying freely through the empty world, within the
liquid air, prying every where with the pearcing cast of her little eyes, the
elder world beginning now at length to discover some part of its lamentable
ruins, when she might well have lighted either on some stately Cedar, or
victorious Palm, upon some mountainous Cypress, or robustuous Oak, or else on
a prudent Mulberrie, the most sweet Fig Tree, or most flourishing Almond: yet
she belike as slighting them al, and al other kinds of plants or fruits
whatsoever, made choice of the Olive to set her little foot upon; and with her
little bil, as a wise and ingenious Spy, to fasten on some proof or argument, to
bring away with her of the fair dispatch of her negotiation, which was to
bring her master certain and infallible tidings of the discovery and
recovery anew of that greater world. Returning to the Arck again, as
Scriptures testify, she brought along with her a branch of that Oliue-tree: the
70. read a leaf, a sprig of Olive, or, as others, a fescue (as it were)
thereof, to wit, with leaves, or the top only and most slender twig of an upper
bough, as Del^ius expounds it; for so might the Dove very easily twitch it off.

Wherefore we aptly mark the Olive in the whole Mystery of the Annunciation,
as the Symbol of Mercy and Peace. For in the same was made the first beginning
of human Redemption, as also of the Divine benignity and liberality; which to
the end that Patron and lover of men the Son of GOD might truly show, it was
needful, through the bowels of mercy to visit us rising from above; which in
this Mystery was truly done, when Gabriel taking the person of an Ambassador,
delivered his Embassage to Marie, whom if you conceive as the Dove of Noe,
bringing in his hand a sprig of green and flourishing Olive with him, as the
ensign of his Legation, you shall not think amiss; since the Oliue-branch is
even with the Gentiles themselves, the Symbol of mercy, but in a singular and
peculiar manner denotes to us the Virgin in the Theater of the Annunciation.

But here may we demand with S. Ambrose: how came it to pass, the Olive should
flourish so suddenly after the Deluge, and put forth a twig so soon? doubting,
whether that leaf (for so he calls it) sprung before the flood, or, during it;
concludes it did, and that the just Noe rejoiced, to see some fruit reserved of
the old seed; and gathered thence a notable sign of the Divine Mercy, for
that as then he had removed the deluge, showing the fruit which the inundatio^
could not hurt, as holding the little branch of green Olive to be a sign
thereof, which even flourished in the midst of the waters and universal
inundation of vindicatiue Justice, since this Olive of Mercy could not be
drowned, swallowed, or withered wholly. Wherein truly may we worthily contemplate
our blessed Virgin Marie expressly deciphered, as the especially and most
singularly preserved plant of this mysterious Olive, which even flourishing
before the flood, ceased not likewise to be green and prosper in the very
flood. For if the just man worthily rejoiced to behold yet some fruit to
remain of the old seed; could he choose but admire this mystical branch of our
Olive here, which even so great an universal flood of Sin could no whit
damage?

Here now the Hebrews would have Mount-Oliuet not to have been covered wholly
with the waters of the flood, and how that branch of Olive was taken from that
Mount-Oliuet. Others report it to have been fetched out of Paradise. Both which
I hold fictitious, if we speak of the Mount or Paradise in a literal or
historical sense; and otherwise most certain, if we understand it in the
mystical. For the Mother of Christ is mystically indeed the Mount of Olives,
and she also the Paradise of pleasure, wherein our Lord has placed the man whom
he had formed. This Mount of Olives then, this Paradise, no flood of
ouer-flowing sins has drowned or covered.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
NOT without cause the Oliue-tree is slow
And backward in it is growth: The fruit does show, The Pause.

By the oil it yealdes (the type of Mercy) long
We did expect, before that tender, young,
And fruitful tree, the Olive, from the earth,
(The blessed Virgin) sprung, by whose blessed birth,
The oil of Mercy, from the fruit did slow,
Which with the tree grew up, and grew up so,
As the first Olive tree, not slow in growth,
But branched, and leau'd, and fruitful. Mercy both
(Like oil) the Tree and Fruit, produce: a Priest
Messiah in her Womb's anointed Christ.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
that as the Olive is ever green, both in Summer, Winter, Spring, and Autumn;
and what hew it receaues in the Spring, it still retains the dead of Winter,
when al other trees besides have either no leaves, or else are changed into
other colors, as tasting the common calamity of al Plants, some few
excepted. So the incomparable Virgin Marie never lost the flourishing greennes
of her sanctity, either in the smiling Summer of her abundant consolation in
her joyful passages with her deer Son; or in the sad Winter of her greatest
desolatio^, as when she lost him in the Temple, and when she found him
afterward hanging on a foreign tree, so strangely altered, as he could hardly
be known, in his passion; nor in the Spring of her youth, while she lived in
the house of her Parents, and especially in the Temple of our Lord, during her
minority; nor yet in the Autumn of her elderage, since look what fervor she
had in youth, the same she still retained in her elder years.

Consider then, how the blessed Virgin, and her deer Son, were both Olives,
to wit, the fruits of Olives. For as the Olives are first green, Isid.
then red, then brown or black: so was the Virgin Mother green through the
precious and ifitemerate flower of her Virginity; red, through her burning and
enflamed Charity; and brown or black, Cant. 1.
through humility. I am black behold the brownnes of her humility; but fair:
see there the flourishing state of her Virginity; like to the skins of
Salomo^: where you may note the rednes of her charity. And for her Son, the
young Olive, He was green in his whole conversation. Leuit. 23.
If in green wood they do this, what will be done in the dry? Isay. 69.
He was red in his passion: Wherefore is thy garment red, and thy vestments
like to those, who stamp or tread in the press? And black he was, at his
death: while the Sun became black as a Sackcloth.

Ponder lastly, how Christ himself was truly the Olive; and the Virgin Mother,
but as the Olive. He was truly the Olive, because he had the total and
universal Mercy with him, and was indeed the natural Mercy himself, since it
was indeed his very nature, and proper to him, to have mercy, and take
compassion of al: while the Virgin was but as an Olive; for that she was so
accustomed to pity, and so ready and prompt to compassion, as she seemed in
a sort most like unto him.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Delicious and fruitful Mother, The Colloquie.
do thou show thy self a true Mother; and do not reject me from thy bosom,
so open to al sinners. O Virgin Mother, O Olive truly fruitful in the house of
GOD: according to thy name, let me prove the effects thereof: for thy name
dilates itself like Oil; thou healest the wounded, thou give light to the
ignorant; thy name seems to carry a bitterness with it, and yet affords us a
sweet and delicate oil or balm of mercy and grace, more sweet then honey, or
the honie-comb, and thy name, Eccl. 25.
in the mouth, is full of suauitie and delectation. O how fair is thy mercy,
in time of tribulation! For then do thou power it forth, when the necessity
is most evident, Mother of mercy, who presentst thyself most prompt to al,
that err and go astray: Do me the grace, to participate of the fruit of thy
name: Give me a special devotion to praise thee, a love to love thee, and a
perfect humility to follow thee, through the fruit of thee, the Olive, thy
blessed Son JESUS.

THE XIII. SYMBOL. THE NIGHTINGAL.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Nightingal is the little Orpheus of the woods, and the true Amphion of the
forest, The Impresa.
that has for Lyre the little Clarigal, or Organ of his throat; wherein he is so
expert, as not contented to outstrip others, he will never lyn, til with running
his divisions, he has put himself to a Nonplus, for want of breath: and then
will look about him, as he had done some thing, and some notable conquest, when
it is but himself or his own Echo he has so foiled, and put to silence. He
is the pety Quirister of the Groves, that sings his Anthems and pretty
Alleluyas in the night, giving the word to Chantecler, the obstreperous Cock,
to ring the world an Alarm or peal to Mattins. He is so proud of his music,
and has so good a conceit thereof, as he will not consort with any other
minstril besides, to fil-vp his melodious Symphonies, but will alone have all the
pipes to himself. He is a true Musician indeed, that has a little of the
fantastic with him; and will in a humor, if he jar but never so little with
himself, of mere choler be ready to break his pipes to pieces. It is well he
sings no words or Dittyes to his Sol-fa; for if he did, we should doubtless
loose our selves, and be ravished and reft of our senses. And much I doubt,
whether the Intelligences themselves would not quite give over their music, to
listen to his Mottets. His usual songs are certain Catches and Roundelayes he
has, much after the manner of the French Braules; you would take him verily to
be a Mo^sieur of Paris straight, if you heard but his preludiums; for then
indeed is he set on a merry pin. Sometimes again will he be in a melancholy
dump, and strik you such Notes, as Dowland himself never strock, in all his
Plaints and Lachrymies. It is then perhaps, when he feels so the prickle at his
breast, in the midst of his Nocturns. For then like a right Michael-Angelo with
his statue framed to the life, which seems to live and breath, will he make his
pipes to speak out plainly: Ay me! Ah! Eheu! They are Hermits al, for the most
part, and keep in the wilderness; and are so contemplative, as they hate the
Cities, and never come there but as Captives, sore against their will. It is
marvel, there is such store of them, and that ever they should leave the single
life, and betake them to the coniugal state, but that Chastity indeed is a
strain beyond their Ela.

THE MORALS.
IN ORE MELOS, CORD IVBILVS.
IT is a common Proverb: Musica in luctu, The Motto.
importuna narratio: as much to say, as Music in mourning, is a harsh hearing.
And yet the Raven has had the commendation of a good voice, and been seriously
told, she had a good one; but whosoever it was, he did but to flatter her
grossly to herface, and spoke not as he thought indeed, but to bring her into a
foole's Paradise, and to sooth her up for some politic ends of his own. But
what have we here to do with such Saxtons, as she, that rings but knells to
passengers out of this world? Welfare the Swan yet, who though she sings very
dolefully, yet does it very sweetly; nor should I think the Swallow had reason
of her side, to contend with her for skill in music; for if her tune be
reasonable good, she has no varieties; and though she sing very cheerfully and
has iubiley in the heart, yet has she no great melody in her mouth. The
Philomel is truly she of al wind-instruments, that carries the silver bell away.
For she will iug-it forth both cheerfully and sweetly to. She will sing from the
heart, as having an innocent soul of her own, not an ounce of care within, nor
so much as a Doit of debts to pay. A good Musicia^ indeed can not choose but be
an honest man; nor do I see, how an honest man can be ought else, then a good
Musician; since Music is no more then a harmony and sweet accord of diverse
tones into one melody, without any jar or discord between them. And Man is a
Harp; the Powers and Faculties of the Soul, the strings; and Reason, the
Harper. If Reason then plays well his part, which makes the honest man, Oh what
a harmony there is in all, and especially where the tongue and heart agree
together? When David played on the harp, the il Spirit fled from Saul. And why?
because he hates unity and concord: Whereas had he iarr'd but never so little,
the Spirit had stayed no doubt. Is it so in the Harp, and not in the Organ of
the voice? No doubt it is. As the hand striks, what the heart dictats, so the
mouth puts forth, of the abundance of the heart. The heart then of the
Incomparable Virgin, so innocent and free from al engagements, how cheerful of
necessity must it needs be? and being so full of glee and iubiley, how must she
needs exhale and vent forth melody? and consequently, how divinely brake she
forth into that melodious Canticle of her Magnificat? And if ever else where,
was that truly verifyed in her: IN ORE MELOS, CORD IVBILVS.

THE ESSAY.
IT is one of the prettiest sports of Nature, The Reuiew.
when she is in her deepest silence, to hear the little Nightingal to warble,
in telling and recounting her delights and pleasures to Zephirus and the
forests, tuning a 1000. Canzonets, and sweetly cutting the air with
repetitio^ of a hundred thousand semi-semi-quauers, which she lets go without
cease. To take her pleasure and recreation, she will balance her self upon a
branch that shakes, to dance Laualtoes as it were at the Cade^ce of her lighter
so^gs, and to match her voice with the silver streams of a crystal current,
gliding there along, which breaking against the little pibles, murmures and
sweetly purls, while she pearches and sets herself just over a banck enameled
al with little flowers. This little Musician alone making up a song of four
Parts, and a full Quire of music, you would say she held within her throat, a
thousand Quiristers, and as many Violins, and that the little cornet of her
beak were in steed of all the wind-instrume^ts. It is admirable in so small a
body, so clear, so sweet, so strong, and pleasant a voice should be found;
that in the Spring, when trees begin to bud their leaves, whole days and
nights perpetually she should sing without intermission at al. For whence from
so little a bird, so bold and pertinacious a spirit? Whence that force of
containing yet the soul, in chanting so many diversities in the continuation
of one song? and where, I pray, are the lively streightnings and remissions of
the voice contained? Whence so artificious and so perfect a knowledge of
music, so ingenious a modulation, so gratful a tone to the ears, which now
with a continued breath is drawn out at length, now turns again with a
strange and admirable variety, distinguished with a slicing voice, and then
with a wreasted, peeced together? There is truly no Song so hard and abstruse,
which she can not express, full, flat, sharp, quick, long, high, mean, base,
what more? Now in these little throats, are al kinds of songs to be found entire
and perfect; which, with so much labor, with so much industry, and with so
many instruments invented, the Art of man has devised. But oh what sport it
is, when this little feathered voice, this pretty harmony in the shape of a
bird, this little end of nothing, as it were, being viuifyed with music, is
even ready to kill herself with singing, when she hears the counterfeit
Nightingal (the Echo) to mock her, in repeating and returning her whole
melody again! For then she mounts up, as it were, to the heavens, and then
stoops again to the Center of the earth, she flies, she follows, she sighs,
she sobs, she is angry, and then pleased again, she mingles the sharp with
the sweet, the sharp with the B. flat; one while a Chromatick, then a sweeter
stroke, now strikes a Diapente, and the^ a Diapaso^. She counterfets the
Hawboy, Cornet, and Flute; she deuids, she gargles, and has her Groppo, the
trills, and the like, and al in that her little throat, but yet can vary
nothing, but the Echo imitates and expresses; til at last, as it were, she
loses al patience, falls into a little chafe with herself, in that seeing
nothing, she hears notwithstanding, and so flies into some bush to hide her
self for shame, til pricked with a thorn, at last she is pushed to sing again;
which she does without measure, where al is delicious as before.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BUT what are al these to the sweet modulations of Mary's voice, The Survey.
wherewith she tuned a Canticle of her Divine Soul, surely a magnifying of
GOD, to be imitated of no Nightingal else inferior to her self, whether we
regard the manifold variety of her voice, or the delectable sweetness, or
pertinacitie in the co^tinuation thereof? The Orpheans, Amphions, Arions, the
Orlandos, and Marenzas, yea the Sirens them selves, with casting down their
eyes would go their ways confounded, and break their harps and other
instruments into pieces, had they heard the melody of that Divine Voice of
hers. O let thy voice then sound in mine ears? for thy voice is sweet. Cant.
The Nightingals are said to be of two sorts: some conversant in the mountains,
and some in the marshes; which will appear by the manner of their singing,
there being no comparison between them; since the one does far excel the other,
whether it be the little pipes of their organs be stopped by the vapors of those
humid places, I know not, but am sure of this, that Julius Alexandrinus upon
the 9. book of Galen, puts a notable difference between them; for thus he
says: It is noted, that the Nightingals of the plain and marish places, Alex
9 l. Galen.
are wont to give forth a voice a great deal shirler, then those of the
mountains, the organ of the voice relenting no doubt through too much moisture,
as they cannot have so smart, cunning, and tunable a voice with them, as the
others have.

Behold then our Lalie a Nightingal of the mountains: For Marie arising went
into the mountains, and so became the Nightingal of the mountains. She
inhabited not the fens or marshes of dissolute lubricitie, abode not in the
playnes of an ordinary virtue, but left the valleys of baser cogitations,
aspired to the tops of Heroical virtues, placed the nest in the sublimitie of
Divine contemplations, and dwelt in the top of the mount of Perfection; whence
proceeded that sweet voice, more sweet then any mortal harmony besides: My
Soul does magnify our Lord.

Let others with the tongue, hand, or breath charm the delicate ears; let
them wind the Cornet, with a thousand diminutions, run divisions on the
Harpsicon or Virginals: Let them pay the Violin as much as they will, spatter
the Lute, touch the Orpharion never so sweetly, the Cithern, Pandore, and the
Harp itself: Yet this Canticle of Magnificat in my mind exceeds them al, and
will stand for Organs, Flutes, Cornets, Harps, Lutes, Citherns, Pandoras, and a
thousand the like. This is the Music indeed that pleased GOD, and which I like
best, which the syllables of the Soul and heart do make, while the tongue
plays the Harp. GOD magnifyed Marie because he made her great; Marie magnified
GOD, because she proclaimed him Great.

When I think of our Nightingal, what have she made to go unto the mountains,
it comes into my mind, what a certain Author has, writing of the nature of
things: That the Nightingal is wont to sing with expedition and celeritie.
Vliss. Aldr. Ornith. l. 28. p. 780.
But what are the causes of her so hasty and precipitous speed? The
Naturalists will tell you: perhaps, because she fears, least the time of her
singing pass away; perhaps she hastens, least her tunes otherwise would seem
harsh and vngratful to delicate ears; perhaps, because she would charm the
ears more powerfully and politely withal. But why made Marie such have then?
Let Ambrose tell us: The Virgin made have, that she might not remain long in
public out of her house. Learn, you Virgins, says he, not to stay in the
streets, nor to hold unprofitable chats in public. Again let Ambrose tell us:
She hastened for joy, wherewith the Virgins heart exulted to GOD. Let him tell us
a third time again: The Virgin being full of GOD, whither should she go but to
the higher places, with full speed? The grace of the Holie-Ghost knows no
delays. Let Origin yet tell us: For that CHRIST, who was in the Virgins womb,
made have to sanctify John, and cleanse him from Original sin. O let our
Nightingal therefore sing apace.

But hearken awhile, you Musicians, how the Nightingal sings; observe her well,
and you shall note, how she pauses not, but equally sings at length with a
continual breath without any change, still holding out her wind to the full: now
she sings her diminutions, and diuides in infinitum; now she wrigles and curles
her voice as it were, now she lengthens it again, now she draws it back; one
while she chants forth longer verses, as they were Heroicks; another while,
more short and sudden, much like unto Saphicks; and sometimes again, extreme
short as Adonicks. Now she tunes with a fat and grosser voice, you would verily
say, it were a Sack but at least: anon rings she forth a most shril treble, as
fetched a note above Ela at least; clear; to fill the ears with a silver sound;
sweet, to charm the hearing with deliciousnes, running Descant as it were,
upon the ground of her lower Notes; and now she goes smooth and even again,
now seem you to hear a Tenor voice, then a Counter, and a Counter-alt
following and chasing one another with certain fugnes. But Oh terrene Philomel,
thou art but a babbler here, with all thy trilloes, if thou standst in
competencie in Music with this Divine Nightingal.

Let us hear then this Celestial Bird: My soul does magnify the Lord. What is
this I hear? What is it, that filles so mine ears? What is it? what a melody
and most delicious sound it makes? which being conjoined with unequal pauses,
but yet distinct, with certain quauer-rests, and not with an artlesse voice
unskillfully come off, nor with affectatio^ ridiculously handled; nor with a
swelling of the throat uncomely to see to, nor expressed with instruments il
tuned, but most divinely and sweetly done, with a gratful inflection of the
natural voice, which tempering the Flat with the Sharp, the rough with the
sweet, the obscure with the plain and perspicuous, the ligatures with the
free, the slow with the quick, in one expresses most different harmonies. Let
(...) the music Magnificat etc. which if we relish well, and the ears of our
soul be not wholly out of tune, we shall find most melodious indeed, and framed
not only with admirable artificiousnes and skill, but tempered with a singular
sweetness and variety withal. For therein is heard the height of Divinity in
the Treble, My spirit has exulted in GOD my SAVIOVR: the vileness of the
Humanity, and so the bottom and the Base of demission, He has regarded the
lowlines of his hand maid: the Alt of Power, He has done great things for me,
who is powerful: the Tenor of Mercy, And mercy from generation to generation
to them that fear him: the Grave or Flat of vindicatiue Justice, The proud
has he dispersed in the mind of their heart: the Sharp of Exultation, My spirit
has exulted in GOD my SAVIOVR: the Sweet of Refection and refreshment, He has
filled the hungry with good things: the Chromatick or harshnes of Rebuke, The
rich has he sent empty away: the fatnes or fulness of Fidelity, He has
received his child: the artificiousnes of Revelation, As he has spoken: the
consonance of both Instruments, to Abraham and his seed for ever.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
EVE, like a Nightingal, was placed to sing
In Eden, where, with everlasting spring.
GOD for her solace pleasant arbours raised,
Had she with lowly strains her Maker praised. The Pause.

But to an Alt her mind aspired too high,
Would be like GOD, affecting Deity,
Therefore from Eden's spring she was expelled,
Sad Philomel, to mourn: Til GOD beheld
A Nightingal with an exulting strain,
That magnifyed her Lord. But down again
She lowly stooped, and iug'd it, when she said:
He has beheld even me a servile Maid.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as the searchers into natural things; The
Contemplation:
have delivered, al birds have their peculiar Notes, which are as their proper
Dialects, in the region of their kinds, and by which, when they are not seen,
they are easily distinguished one from another, save only the Nightingal, which
has no proper Note of its own, but rather alone is a Quire of all the Musical
birds in the world. So is it right with our heavenly and divine Nightinga; for
as al other creatures chant forth the praises of their Creator with Notes each
one in their several kinds, our Nightingal warbles them, with the diversity of
al voices, with the voice of the Angels, of men, and of things that want both
reason and sense.

Consider then, that, as Pliny says, the Nightingal sings not so
artificiously by nature so much as by art; while the young are taught to warble
of the elder. The younger (says he) do meditate and receive their verses from
the elder to practice, to imitate: the scholars attentively listen, and prove
their Notes, and by turns hold their peace. You may note a correction in the
learner, and a kind of reprehension in the teacher. Where behold, how S. John
was a young Nightingal; and if you doubt it, ask of him, if he be so or no: he
will tell you: He is the voice of the desert; Which is nothing else but a
Nightingal. For if you pull but the feathers of his titles from him, you will
find but a voice, and nothing else; and what is that but a Nightingal, that
sings as it is taught by an elder one? when being in his Mothers womb, and
hearing this our Nightingal, to lead him a verse of her Canticle of Magnificat;
he proving to follow and sing likewise, as then could no more, but skip and
dance.

Ponder lastly, that as the Nightingal, though often she be iouial and full of
glee, and out of iolitie of heart does often sing in the public groaues among a
thousand of other quiristers besides, vying and inuiting them al to sing to the
praise of their common Creator: Yet will she sometimes by herself alone be
singing in private also in a bush, where having a thorn at her breast, it is
incredible, the varieties she will put forth, that were even able to ravish the
Intellige^ces themselves, could they hear her at leisure, and were not
occupied already with their own Music. So our blessed Virgin, the Nightingal
of Heaven, though she would often sing in the company of Angels, as likely was
she rarely without their company, with whom she would chant Alleluyas more
audible and melodiously; yet sometimes again she would retire herself, and the
thorns of her dearest beloved through a lively memory sticking at her breast,
and pricking the heart, it can not be imagined, how dolefully, and yet how
sweetly, she would sing.

THE APOSTROPHE.
BEhold, The Colloquie.
great Chorist and Rectrice of the Angelical Quire, we poor petty-Quiristers
beneath, have our eyes cast upon thy al-commanding Rod, to moderate our Time,
that with due proportion here on earth, we may answer in some manner to that
upper Quire in heaven, chanting the praises of our common Lord and great
Creator. o Marie, o Divine Nightingal; thy Quire beneath is held in the whole
Church: but thy private School is kept in the Co^claue of the Heart, where thou
art wont to teach thy Deuotes, to sing aright, how with the Voice, the Heart
should iump withal, and the hand and foot be keeping a just Time, that is, with
our heart, voice, example, and good works, that we keep an even time with thee,
in correspondencie of that great Magnificat of thine. Come then, great
Chantresse of heaven, and errect thy school within my heart, and teach it to
sing forth his praises with out cease. Lo here, I say, let thy voice sound in
mine ears; for thy voice is sweet.

THE XIV. SYMBOL. THE PALM.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Palm is the invincible Champion among trees, The Impresa
whose chiefest point of valor consists in bearing injuries and oppressio^s,
without shrinking. It is even a very Atlas, for the breadth and sturdines of
its shoulders; which the more you load, the stoutlyer it stands to it: It is
for name and qualities a Phoenix right; and therefore as they sympathize much,
the Phoenix will lightly take up his Inn no where else. And verily I think, if
the Phoenix were to be a tree, it would be no other; and I doubt much whether if
the Palm could metamorphize itself, it would wish to be any other, then it
is. It is a whole provision for the use of man: so as a new married couple
might well go o^ house with such a stock. They are even as Turtles among trees,
and constant Lovers to each other. They are so amourous one of an other, as
they will hardly live without the society of each other; and yet so chaste, as
they breed and bring forth without contaction. As the Turtle-widowes sit
mourning on a withered branch, or die of greef; so will the Palm in loosing his
mate become a withered tree, and pine away. If diverse sexes they have with them
(as some think) they are the constant Ulysses, and chaste Penelope; if not, a
Damon and Pithias. Of al trees, the Palm comes nearest to a reasonable soul,
if Loyalty and friendship be according to reason, who are so passionatly
carried toward each other. No marvel then the Palm alone, is so taken up to
heaven, as Scepter of the Martyrs, where naught but reasonable things can have
admittance. The Male, that bears no fruit himself, in a manner is endless and
everlasting, because Dateles, as without dates; and the femal though fruitful
and full of dates, yet bearing pulles her not down, but is for all her dates as
durable every whit as the other. They are the Hermit's Kitchen and Refectorie
at once; whose dates they eat no otherwise then as they come already cooked
and dressed on the tree. They show a far off like Tropheys hanged with Fauchions
or Turkey Scimiters; but nearer hand, as laden and adorned with strange
leaves, instead of arms or branches without boughs. By reason whereof no bird
can hansomely perch upon them: which privilege is only reserved to the
Phoenix, where she willingly and deliciously plants her cradle, her couch, her
Temple of the Sun, her Altar of holocausts, and finally her tomb at one.

THE MORALS.
DEPRESSA RESVRGENS.
THE Virtues of Fortitude and Patience may seem as two, The Motto.
but are easily reduced to one, that is, to a stout Patience, or patient
Fortitude. If you divide them, Fortitude attempts without temeritie; and having
once begun, without al fear goes through with it. Patience has large
shoulders, and fit to bear a burden of injuries, which it suffers not of
pusillanimitie or baseness, as not daring to revenge it self, but out of a true
and Christian magnanimity, because he may not. Fortitude seeks not dangers,
but meeting with them, bears them bravely indeed with courage and good
success. Patience is so subject to it self, as injuries can not subdue it, as
holding this Maxim, that the whole victory consists in yealding. Fortitude is
sole Mistress of it self, submitting passions to Reason's lore, through which
interior victory it works its own peace. Patience walks above Nature, so
long as it is beneath itself. Fortitude is troubled at nothing, but for
displeasing the Sovereign Good, and fears nothing but Sin. Patience makes
use of Laws for its only protection, not for revenge, and its own forces, to
eschew indignities and not to offer them. If Fortitude have a quarrel in hand,
it regards not the arm, but the cause, not how stout it is, but how innocent;
and where it has equity for warrant, well may it be maistered, but not
vanquished. The contrary events, do only exercise, but not affright it; and
whenever it is pressed with affliction, it acknowledges the invisible hand
to be over it, that lays very sensible scourges upon it, against which it
dares not rebel or murmur a whit. This stout Patience then, or patient
Fortitude, this Heroical constancy (I say) the glorious Virgin had, through
the whole course of her blessed life, but especially in bearing the dolours of
her Sonne's passion, so equal, and perseuering so long at the foot of the
Cross, and not fainting the while, but remaining firm on her feet, so
victorious a Palm of Cades, as well might she say indeed: DEPRESSA RESVRGENS.

THE ESSAY.
THE Palm, The Reuiew.
of trees is it, that bears away the palm. It is even the Tower of Plants,
both for height and strength at once; for if the Pine be higher, it is the
weaker; if the Oak be stronger, it is nothing near so high; and therefore with
Antiquity it was the Symbol of constancy and victory. It is (as I may say)
the Phoenix of trees, with which it has such simpathies, as what with the
Etimologie of the name, being the same in Greek, and the fair correspondencies
they have with each other, in Authors they are much confounded. And for the
Phoenix, she will neast herself in none other. The Palms are likewise the
Turtles among trees; for they are Male and Female, as they; they match and
pair together as they, and are as loyal as they, and full as chaste as they.
For in the absence of each other, they produce no fruit, and yet (wherein they
much exceed the Turtles) they bring the^ forth without co^taction of branch or
root, but it is enough that they enjoy each others company; and so great a
sympathy they have withal, that if they be transplanted from each other, they
mourn and languish likewise, if not dye. The Palm is even the Magazin of al
provisions, for the use and sustentation of man. The Indians have need of many
things, and lo the Palm supplies the^ al; so as if any one be industrious
among them, or any thing be very profitable, they will say immediately: Behold
the Palm. It affords them oil, wine, and bread, as they handle it; with the
leaves they cover their houses, as we with tiles; they write thereon, instead of
paper; if they put themselves to sea, the Palms do furnish them with all
things necessary thereto; and not only with victuals, but even the very vessel
in itself is nothing else but Palm. The trunck and branches yeald them masts
and boards; the leaves being wouen, make up their sails; with the bark, they
frame their tacklings and cordage. So as not without some miracle, as it were,
may you say, when you see a Man-of-warre of theirs, or a marchant's ship,
behold a Palm, how it rides upon the seas.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold here the true triumphant Palm indeed, The Survey.
the Queen of Heaven, who notwithstanding al her combats and bitter agonies in
the passion of her Son, yet still she triumphed over al, especially in her
glorious Assumption: I am exalted as a Palm in Cades, that is, in my
Assumption, since Cades is interpreted: Translation; for who sees not the
Assumption of the Mother of GOD, to be nothing else, but a certain translation
of her from this Militant to the Triumphant Church? A Palm being oppressed
with a heavy weight, was put up in the Obsequies of Marguerit of Austria, with
this Devise: Subacta mole resurgo; representing therein, how the Just shall arise
at the last Resurrection, like the Palm, more fair and beautiful then before;
though formerly oppressed, by the burden of death and of human necessity. And
so was it with our incomparable Lady in an eminent degree, especially (I say)
at her glorious Assumption.

Among the Palms, there are Male and Female; and the Female never brings forth
fruits, but standing opposite by her Male; and hence it is, that two Palms,
being planted by two banck-sides of a river, are the Hieroglifick of Nuptials,
with Valerius: and especially, say I, of the Spiritual Nuptials between the
Spouse, and his Spouse, between Christ and his blessed Mother. Among these
Palms likewise, is noted this difference; that the Male grows and flourishes
sooner then the Femal; and so fares it here with our two Palms, our Savior
Christ, and his dear Mother. Where, of the first says the Prophet: The just
shall flourish like the Palm; And the latter says of herself: Psalm. 31
I am exalted like a Palm in Cades; with this difference, Eccl. 24.
that Christ much sooner then his Mother arising to immortal life, seemed to
flourish sooner: Psalm. 27.
as he testifyes of himself: And my flesh has flourished. But the blessed
Virgin dying some years afterward, and gloriously resuscitated, did flourish
indeed, but so as after him.

It is said moreover, that though the Palm grow higher then many trees, yet
never arriues it to the height of the Cedar. So likewise, though our mystical
Palm, our admirable Lady, were raised and exalted so high, as she far
transcended the glory of al men and Angels, yet to the height of the glory of
Christ, very aptly signified by the Cedar, was she never assumpted, as well for
sublimitie as innated incorruptibilitie; because our Lord Christ as well in the
Triumphant as Militant Church is the Head of the mystical Body, whereof his
Mother was a member only, though the noblest part of al, as being the neck.
Heerto may be added that pretty Devise of Mark Anthony, being this: a Pillar
wreathed and composed about with two branches, the one of Palm, the other of
Cypress, with this Motto: Erit altera merces; signifying thereby, the
recompense of a generous man, was either a noble Victory, or an honorable
Death; for that the Palm representing victory, the Cypress of the other side
is a Symbol of death, being ordinarily used in the Funerals and Sepulchers of
the dead. So was all the life of the blessed Virgin a perpetual standing pillar
or Trophey, as is were, of incredible Mysteries, especially in the palm of her
glorious Assumption, yet by the means of the Cypress of her death, since that
was to be the way and the next step to her highest advancement, and the
greatest victory of al.

The Palm, is sharp and rough beneath, but smooth and handsome above; wherein
S. Gregory says in his Morals, the life of the just man is aptly represented,
being bitter and rough in the exterior show and in the sensitive part, but yet
sweet and delightful through contentments which the soul receaues the while:
So was the whole life of the Mother of GOD nothing else but a life of pains and
doulours, especially at the passion of her dearest Son, which through
compassion she made her own, but yet sweet for the end, to wit, of a life of
rest and repose afterward in the kingdom of Heaven, and of the ineffable
joys of her glorious Assumption by the way, as riding in Triumph. Which Saint
besides, makes yet another note, which is this; that the Palm heerin is
differing from other trees, in that the other are gross beneath, and grow
slenderer upwards; while the Palm of the contrary, is slender beneath, and
bigger and grosser, the higher it goes: So were the thoughts of the blessed
Virgin, the true Palm indeed, as poor and slender down to the earth-wards,
but substantial and solid up to the Heavens, whose conversation doubtless, as S.
Paul says, was wholly in Heaven.

Strange things are reported of the Palms, to live mutually, and dye
together. A singular type surely of the Sympathy between our two Palms, our
Christ and his blessed Mother, affording one life, and as it were one self-same
death between them both. For Christ dying, she languished as dead; and he
arising from his Sepulcher after his death, she revived again as it were from
death. And so that same Epitaph more fitly might be applied to these Divine
Lovers, our amourous Palms, which a certain Poet of ours had framed for a
pair of profane Lovers, dying both with one and the self-same sword: His being
was in her alone,
And he not being, she was none,
They joyed one joy; one grief they grieved;
One love they loved; one life they lived.
The hand was one, one was the Sword,
That did his death, her death afford.


THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
PHaenix (in Greek a Palm) does aptly suit
With that rare bird the Phaenix, here the fruit;
Which, The Pause.
when bright Phoebus scorching heames displayes,
A neast of Spices (to renew his days,
By a second birth) upon this tree he makes:
Where burnt to ashes so himself forsakes,
Made young, that he retains what he had been.
Thus the only Son of God, to abolish sin,
Midst burning flames reuest with mortal plume,
Reuiues man's nature, which he does assume;
The Virgin- Phaenix is the fruitful tree,
Where God in flames of Love, newborn would be.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
in the Palm, what a gratful shade it affords to weary travelers on the way,
preserving them from the scorching rays of the Sun, and yealding them Dates to
expel hunger, and not so only, but is a notable delicacie besides. The Monks
and Fathers of Egypt, Thebarda, and Arabia, would make a goodly living with a
Palm Tree only by a crystal river side, subministring them al things needful,
for meat, drink, and cloth, to satisfy nature. O rare and admirable tree! But
then consider the Palm of Paradise; I say, the admirable Virgin Palm, under
whose shadow and protection, we are saved from the outrageous heats of
concupiscence, fed with the delicious examples of her life, and clothed with
the habits of her virtues, and especially refreshed with the sweet
consideration of the limpid streams of her purest chastity, no less then
Nectar in the taste.

Consider then, how as the Palm is rough without, narrow beneath, and broad on
the top, whereon the Phoenix takes delight to build his neast: So was our blessed
Lady in exterior show but coorse in the eyes of her Nazarean neighbors,
being held for no more, then a Carpenter's wife; while she was truly indeed the
Palm of Cades. Beneath she was narrow, that is, in the love of terrene things,
whereon she touched as it were, but in a point only of the human nature, not
acquainted with the impurities and miseries thereof: but broad on the top, that
is, in Divine contemplation, and love of celestial things, where she always
dwelt in the highest; and where the glorious Phoenix, the eternal Word, had
taken up his neast for so many months, to issue thence a human Phoenix, her
true and natural Son indeed.

Ponder lastly, that as the Palm ever flourishes and never withers, so our
Incomparable Mother of GOD, had always fresh and flourishing thoughts, being
holy and chaste; green and intentions, because most pure and neat; and green
and flourishing affections, because very lively and active in the service of
the Highest, whose lowly handmayd, notwithstanding her maternitie, she would
be; nor decayed or withered ever, because ever entire and never once subject to
corruption; Eccl. 24.
not in body, because embalmed with the Deity: As Cinnamon and balm
aromatizing I have sent forth an odor; not in soul, because being united with
the Soul, of her Son, they were made in a manner both as one, as by this is
insinuated: A sword shall pierce through thy very soul: that is, thy soul,
which is his; or his, which is thine: nor in Spirit, because through love she
was truly converted into GOD; and S. Hierom says: The grace of the Holie-Ghost
had fully replenished her, and Divine Love had made her wholly white.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Stately and victorious Palm of Paradise, The Colloquie.
most triumphant Queen of heaven, City of refuge, Temple of Safeguard, House
of the Living GOD, fair Couch of the mystical Solomon, and his Throne of
Iuorie! Oh Sanctuary of GOD, the Arck of peace, Seat of Wisdom, the Rest and
repose of the most high GOD, the glorious Cabinet of a thousand and a thousand
gifts of the most blessed Holie-Ghost, the precious Reliquatie of al infused
graces! O sacred Pauilion, where GOD sets himself in the shadow of the rays of
his great glory; most delicious Lady, most pure and gracious, in the midst of
those Celestial pleasures, and Divine delectations of thine: Grant, I beseech
thee, that I always rest under the shade of thy branches, within the folds of
thy protection and sweet mercy, in this life; and when I shall finish the
course of my pilgrimage, in this vale of miseries, it would please his
Omnipotency, to unite my heart and spirit, with his more then holy Spirit, by
the sacred linck of his most fair and transforming love. This do I beg as the
feet of thee, most sovereign Palm of the heavenly Paradise.

THE XV. SYMBOL. THE HOUSE.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE House is an artificious Plasme, The Impresa
framed by the hand of man, for his use and habitation. It is a creature made
in spite of Nature, to vye with her: That forasmuch as Man only is borne naked,
and without a house to put his head in, afforded him by Nature, Art taking
compassion on him, abundantly supplies the defect. There is nothing comes so
suddenly to so great a growth, as it; for whereas an Elephant being one of the
greatest among beasts, and yet by many degrees not so big as many Houses are,
he is twenty years ere he comes to his full growth: a goodly house will be
reared, and brought to perfection in less then a year. Plants will not grow
without rain, or waters cast upon them, where this plantation has no need of
waters, but rather al industries are used to keep them out. The Tortoyes in
this respect, is better housed, not charged with reparations as long as his
Lease lasts, for term of his life: but yet having none else to trust, to look
unto it, he is feign to carry it about him. The Cockle has his house, tiled
with slate; which having no lock and key too, he is forced to keep at home for
fear of thieves. And not so much as the poor snayle but has a house of his
own, which in his pace, like a Peddler with his pack, will he carry about him
throughout the world, and do that with time, which the Sun can no more then
do, with all his swiftnes, Nay you eat not an Oyster, but you vn-house him and
put him out of his tenement. The Sun is the house of light, that needs no
windows, being nothing else but light. And for the 12. principal houses and
Palaces in the Heavens, they are but weakly built without foundation, more
then the Astronomers working brains. The Moon is the house of the Flux and
Reflux of the Seas, who thence go in and out by turns at their pleasures. The
Almond is a house of the kernels within, which never comes forth til the roof
comes fluttering down about her ears, that costs her life. The Hiue, is a
house and College of Bees, where they live Collegially together; the Combs
are their Refectorie. The Birds, for proper houses, have their neasts; whose
children are the young ones, and she the good huswif that keeps at home.

THE MORALS.
SEEDS SAPIENTIAE.
Look where the Prince is, The Motto.
there is the Court; and where the Court, there his Seat. Wisdom is the
Prince of the whole Microcosme of man: His Court then, and seat must needs be
in the Power of the Understanding, where he chiefly resides, and not where
soever his dominion stretches; for so should he be in every place in person,
which stands not with the Majesty of so great a Prince. Well may his Ministers,
like Purseuants and Heralds, perform and execute the Royal commands: as the
hands, to make provisions to maintain the State; the feet, to travel for that
purpose; the eyes, to keep Centenel in the turrets of his palace, and that
near to his person, against foreign iuuasions, and the like: but yet the Prince
himself in his Royal person departs not a whit from his proper Chamber of
presence, the Intellect. And GOD himself, the Monarck of the whole Universe, is
seen to be every where within his Dominions, through his essence, power, and
presence, but not in that particular manner, as he is in heaven, in his proper
seat; or as he was in earth, in his humanity, or in the Sacrament itself most
mysteriously and Divinely. For to speak in general, his seat is every where:
The Heavens, are the roof; the Stars, the Seelings; the earth al diaperd and
diuersifyed with infinite colors, his footstool and pauements; and the maruels
of Nature, his shop of wonders, but his proper and peculiar seat, where he
resides in, as in his Court, is either in the Empyreal Heaven (as I said) or in
Christ's excellent Humanity, or in the most Venerable and dreadful Sacrament
of the Altar; nor has he made choice of any other seats to dwell in, as not
worthy or able to comprehend him. Where then had Wisdom properly set up his
seat, but in that palace he had built for himself, founded in so great an
humility, and so well sustained with the seauen-fold pillars of the
Holie-Ghost, I mean, in the Virgin-Womb of the Incomparable Lady? who
receiving, and so long entertaining the Wisdom Increated, in her virginal
Lap, as the true Solomon indeed, reposing sweetly in his Iuorie Throne, may well
be styled: SEEDS SAPIENTIAE.

THE ESSAY.
A House being a mere artificial, The Reuiew.
and no natural thing, has its first subsistence in the Idea of Man's brain;
according to whose model, good or il, the house so built, proves good or il. We
recurre then to the Architect, for direction in all. This Architecture is a
sovereign Mistress of building, which gives the addresses, for disposing all the
parts of a house, with relations in themselves, in comlines, proportion,
ornaments, situation, distances, eleuations, and a thousand of the like; of al
which yealds it a pertinent and satisfactorie reason to the curious examiners,
why every thing is so done, this and not that. Some are Architects by hand
only, and no more, who frame their buildings by roat, taking forth copyes here
and there, but can afford no reason at al for what they do, nor invent ought
that is worth a rush; and for a final reason say nothing but, such is the
custom so to do. Others are Architects by book only, and by discourses which
they have read; but they have no hands to put in practice, and know but the
Theorie only; such as they, are good for nothing, but to build a house for
Plato, of Ideas, al suspending in the air. The good Architect should linck his
spirit with his hand, and the compass with his reason, setting his hand to work,
as well as the brain. The first do frame but bodies without a soul; the
second, souls without a body; the third do build the whole, and are men of
note and reputation indeed. The perfect Architect indeed should be ignorant in
no Science; otherwise, if he do well, it is by chance, or else by nature, as
beasts do, which do many goodly things, and know not why, nor wherefore. He
had need be a Painter, to make his plains, eleuations, designs, and to
copie-out a thousand rarities to please the fantasy withal; a Geometrian, to
handle the compass, for the use of Circles, rulers, squares, plummets, and the
like; To have the Perspectiue, to let-in lights into his house, to steale-in
the day in certain corners, to content the eye with diverse aspects; and if not
directly to introduce the Sunnie rays, at least obliquikly through reflections;
The Arithmetic, to cast up and calculate the charges he is at, to number the
materials and degrees that belong thereto; The History: for all the enrichments
of buildings, Arms, statues, and other ornaments, are nothing else but
History, true and feigned, which if he knows not, he shall commit a thousand
errors; To have Philosophy, to know the nature of beasts, the seas, the
elements, flowers, fruits, and al whatsoever in nature; Astrology and Physic,
in planting his house in a wholesome and sound climat, in choosing the best Sun,
a good wind, the purest air, wholesome waters, a fair and free prospect, a
good situation for pleasure and profit. This is certain, that al art is then in
truest perfection, when it may be reduced to some natural Principle or other.
For what are the most judicious Artizans, but the Mimiks of Nature? This same
in our House is seen, comparing it with the fabric of our natural bodies,
wherein the high Architect of the world has displayed such skill as even
stupifyes the human reason to enter into it: Where the Heart, as the Fountain of
life, is placed in the middle, for the more equal communication of the vital
spirits; the Eyes seated aloft, to comprehend the greater circuit in their
view; the arms, proiected on each side for the use and commodity of reaching;
Briefly, the place of every part, is determined by the use. Wherefore, the
principal chambers of delight (as Studies and Libraries) should be toward the
East: for the Morning is a friend to the Muses; Al offices requiring heat, as
Kitchins, Stil-houses, stoues, and rooms for baking, brewing, washing, or the
like, would be Meridional; All that needs a cool and fresh temper, as Cellars,
Pantries, Butteries granaryes, to the North; and so likewise al Galleryes
appointed for gentle motion, especially in warm climes, to the West.

THE DISCOVRSE.
THe chiefest grace, splendor, and glory of a house, The Survey.
is, that the Master thereof, who dwelles therein, be markable and illustrious
for singular and eminent virtues; since the chiefest ornament of a house is,
the virtue of the Lord thereof. Now then the blessed Virgin, being eternally
ordained to be a House and habitation of the Divine Word Incarnate, and wherein
the Holy of holies for nine months, and the endless Fountain of al sanctity
was corporally to inhabit, this sacred House must borrow needs so great a
sple^dour and dignity, as no other, nor the Empyreal heaven itself, might any
ways compare with it. What more? Howbeit the glory of that ancient house and
Temple of Solomon were great, yet can none deny this defect in it, for being
incapable to hold the greatness of GOD in its ample galleries and spaces, even
by the genuin confession of Solomon himself: 3. Reg. 8
If the Heaven and the Heaven of heavens can not contain thee, how much less
this house which I have built? But the golden house of the blessed Virgin, more
capacious then the heavens themselves, Ier. 31. Eccl.
did close in and enco^pas the greatness of GOD on every side, as Jeremy
says: A woman shall encompas a man. And the holy Catholic Church itself
sings: Whom the Heavens can not contain, have thou held in thy Lap.

Besides that, which highly aduanceth and sets forth the glory of a house,
this same prerogative is of no small moment, to have been deciphered,
delineated, plotted, and contrived, and even raised and built from the first
foundation by a skilful and exquisit Architect. Behold GOD himself, the Supreme
Architect, not only designed this House, but even finished it himself, and
brought the same to that eminent perfection, Prou. 86.
it is of: I have been eternally ordained. Behold the plotting, co^triuing,
Psalm. 86.
and designing of our House; The Highest himself has founded her, where note
the foundation.

I know, how Ovid in his Metamorphosis describes the house of the Sun very
elegantly in this manner: The Palace of the Sun, on pillars highly placed,
With burnisht gold did shine, and Pyrops stone,
And seeling roofs with purest Iu'rie graced.
But who sees not, how this House here, wherein the Sun of Justice dwelt, did
far exceed the same, whose ornaments surpasses those, by infinite degrees?
for whose golden pillars, were the Gifts of the Holie-Ghost erected in her;
for whose Pyropus or Carbuncle, which even glowes like a burning cole, her most
ardent Charity abundantly supplied; and for the white and purest iuourie, her
inviolable and immaculate Virginity. Whence, while the most blessed Virgin
Marie more ple^tifully abounded with the gifts of the Holie-Ghost, she burned
more ardently with Charity; and in virginal purity was more neat, then the
heavenly Spirits themselves; surely more strong and stately Pillars sustained
this house, more precious Carbuncles enriched it, and purer Iuourie adorned it,
then those others did the Ouidian Palace of the Sun.

I have sanctified this House, which thou have built, to put my name eternally
therein, 3. Reg. 9.
said GOD to Solomon, not being yet (as I suppose) affected so to that material
house, as he pretended thereby rather to show the love he bare to his spiritual
house, and yet corporal both, of his Incomparable Mother, whom he has so
sanctified with his eternal predestination before, and enriched so with his
personal presence, to put his name eternally in her. For that saying can not so
well be verified of the house built by Solomon, which was afterward demolished
and razed; but rather of Marie here, who shall be said and preached for ever,
the Temple of GOD, the holy House, where al glory has entered in, as to a
chaste Bower, and which has never been ruined like that of Solomon; for that
her foundations have been planted in the holy mountains, as David says, that
is to say, by the Divine Persons of the Holy Trinity; while the power of the
Father has confirmed her in goodness, the Son has illustrated her with
Wisdom, and the Holie-Ghost preserved and established her in his grace.

Material houses, which are built but of frail matter and tra^sitorie stuff,
Job. 4*
diversely fall to rubbage, and are soon demolished quite, as Job says: Who
dwell in clay houses, have a terrene foundation. But the body of Marie, howbeit
otherwise framed of a frail matter, is nevertheless so consolidated and
confirmed through the fire of the Holy Ghost, as she is subject to no
demolishment or dissolution at al; and as she said in the Canticles, that
leaning or resting on her wel-beloued, she was strong as the mountain of Sion,
Cant 2.
having such confidence in him. So as truly the prophecy of Aggeus was fully
accomplished in her: Agg. 2.
That the glory of the latter house should be greater then that of the former.
For as in the building of the first, was heard no noise or the least stroke of
any hammer: so here in this House of Marie, could not be heard so much as the
least sound or touch of Original Sin, so built by the Divine Wisdom, who
was a more expert Architect by far, then Solomon was, of whom is verifyed that
which David so long before had prophesied and foretold: Ps. 111.
That glory and riches should be in the house of the Divine Wisdom, and its
justice shall be perpetual.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
HAu, The Pause.
Who dwells here? A Virgin. What are you?
A Paranymph sent far, am come to sue
For one that pilgrime-like would lodge this night
Under your roof, and be a mortal wight,
Comes as a Bridegroom. Here Is no harboring seat.
But h'is a Monarch. Then for me too great.
H'is GOD. He now, and ever lodged with me.
Would be a child, your Son. How can this be?
By the Holie-Ghost you shall be shadowed ore;
You let him in by keeping closd your door.
Then be it done. One Fiat banished night,
And now an other brings from heaven the Light.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as in every House well built, The Contemplation.
and orderly disposed, there is a Dining-roome at least; and a hansome chamber
for some principal guest to lodge in; so this gol^e^ House, the Mother of GOD,
which he had so eternally prepared for himself, was not contrived without them
both. And first for the Dining-roome, King Solomon made him a Throne of the
wood of Libanus; which woode^ Throne was the blessed Virgin, because the
heavenly Prince and bridegroom sat and lay sweetly reposed in her arms and
womb delightful unto him, while he took flesh of her. She was a Bride-chamber,
because a golden couch. For as gold is beautiful, incorruptible, and refulgent:
So was her virtue golden, because beautiful for sincerity of manners;
incorruptible, through privilege of Virginity; and refulgent, for her luster
of Virtues. O how beautiful! behold the beauty of her manners, Chaste
generation: Sap. 4.
see the privilege of Virginity; With clarity: note the luster of Virtues.

Consider then, that as a House has also Galleries for recreation and delight,
so had our Mystical House here, delicious galleries to walk in, and, for
variety, three: to wit, the lower, the middle, and the upper gallerie. The
lower was sustained with silver pillars; and therefore is it said, that
wisdom erected silver pillars. The middle was paued with precious stones,
according to that: The middle was strewed with charity. The highest was hanged
with silks and purples; and therefore is added a purple ascent. The lower
gallerie of this virginal house, was the precious body of the Virgin; the
middle, her purest soul; and the highest, her sublime and Angelical spirit.
Her body was the lower gallerie, because her sensuality was never prone to
evil, but always comfortable to reason. Her soul, the second; because strewed
with precious stones, that is, Divine virtues. Her Spirit was the upper
gallerie, and adorned with purple ha^gings, for being so enflamed with
charity, or wounded with the sorrow of her Sonne's passion, or sprinkled with
his blood.

Ponder lastly, as a house, especially the Palace of Kings, requires to be
spacious and ample; so was this House, our Lady, being the House of GOD, most
spacious and wide; according to that which the Church sings of her: Whom the
heavens can not contain, have thou held in thy lap. Secondly, wide and ample
in compassion, while she receaues al, and refuses none, into the bowels of her
mercy; receiving the tempted, in prtoecting them from the snares of the Devil;
Sinners, in obtaining mercy and grace for them; the Just, in conseruing the^
in grace obtained; and lastly the Dying, in receiving their souls into her
protection: and therefore said to be Mother of grace, and mother of mercy.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Sacred House, The Colloquie.
Temple of the Divinity, and Divine Tabernacle of the living GOD! A work
surely much greater the^ the workma^ship of the world besides! O sacred Palace
framed by the Divine hand, with admirable art, and most exquisit and choice
matter; a piece of workma^ship without peer, erected by the Divine Wisdom,
imputrible Arck incorruptible vessel, Celestial Temple, City of God. Psalm. 86
Oh what glorious things are said of thee! Thou wast ordained eternally, Eccl.
24.
before the earth was made. The Lord has possessed thee from the beginning of
his ways, Prou. 8.
and thou wast before his works. Thou wast begot, when as yet there was no
abysses seen; thou wast formed before mountains were yet placed. When he
prepared the heavens, was thou present. By all the se fair prerogatives we
beseech thee, Incomparable piece of his handie work so long designed and
premeditated before hand, and so exactly framed at last to his own Idea and
design, that in us likewise his eternal design of predestination through our
defaults may not utterly perish.

THE XVI. SYMBOL. THE HEN.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Hen is that gentle Heart, that contents herself with the common Apellatiue
of her sex; The Impresae
and as others ambitiously vsurp strange titles, as in Hawks, for males or
females (as the manner is) to be called Lady, Mistress, and the like, she will
go no higher then the style of plain Goodwif, and be called the Hen, and will
take it amiss, to be termed otherwise. Yet is she the dear consort of the
generous Chantecler, and his dearest beloved partner, and most indiuidual
companion. She is very familiar and domestical, and that so truly as she will
never go from home so much as a flights shot. But is so kind-harted to al,
especially to her own children, as she has not a dish, which she shares not
among them. It is sport to see, how she knocks to her dresser, to have the^
come quickly, if she have but a bit worth the eating, and then to see what
strife there will be amongst the little fry of them, for a single grain of corn,
as the ambitious of the world for a Crown and scepter, or as Caesar and Pompey
for the Empire and Dictatourship of Rome itself; while the Hen falls a deluing
and digging afresh for more. She will be as fierce as a Tigre or Nemean Lioness
against the assassinats, who are so bold at to seize on her family, when she
will bristle her self and fly in the faces of the cruelest Bandites that are of
the la^d, or Pirates of the air, on behalf of her brood; and triumph as fast,
if she come but handsomely off with her own. And then must all the world take
notice of her conquests, and she be recounting the same to her deer consort,
who will swel thereat and bristle as fast; and even menace the skies in his
greatestcholer. She is no great Arithmetician, and has but a shallow memory;
for she never knows, how many young she has; and so she have any at al, she
is pleased alike. She loves not her children so much, as the name of Mother;
which holds in one, as well as a 100. She is not a Castle, or Bulwark, which
keep their stands attending the assailants; but as a Pinck at sea, well manned,
will meet and encounter the Adversaries themselves, and defye them to their
teeth, and with the sails of her wings will seem to fetch the wind of them, to
fly the fuller into their faces. But if she be let alone, and not provoked,
there is noe Dove more meek and gentle them she.

THE MORALS.
TVTELA FIDISSIMA.
IT is hard to say, The Motto.
which is better, to give protection to others, or to find it for themselves;
this am I sure of, the first is more specious and glorious, the latter more
happy and secure. It is said indeed: Beatius est dare quam accipere, because
it is supposed, who has to give, has otherwise no need to crave, wherein the
beatitude consists; whereas who finds protection now, was of late in distress,
or fear of danger; so as though he has the happiness now, to dry up his
waterie eyes, yet not the privilege, to have them never to dry. To give
protection, inuolues a power to be able to afford it; to take the same, implies
a necessite to recurre unto it: the first has a kind of obligation with it, if
not of justice, of charity at least, to yeald his succors: in which estate he
ever stands, and consequently in a state of servitude, because obliged. But the
second discouers his impotencie only, and present il condition; but yet with a
hope of enfranchizment, and a kind of title unto it; yea many times an
absolute freedom and quite discharge of further cares. The truth is, howsoever
the first, as it is more honorable, so is it more happy, and as approaching
nearer to the sovereign excellency of GOD himself, is acquit from any
imperfection of servile obligation; but al what is, is merely a goodness in him,
that seems to put the obligation upon him, which is no more indeed, then a
kind of virtue in him, that makes him so prompt and ready to help the
miserable in all necessities. This excellency and singular privilege the
glorious Vrgin has, of power, to protect; and of benevolence, to have the will
to protect; with the happiness besides of an infallible efficacy in all
whatsoever she undertakes. And therefore is she implored of al, and held to be
the common Sanctuary of the necessitous that fly unto her, and especial
Patroness and sure Protectrice of her Deuotes, and by consequence rightly and
deservedly called: TVTELA FIDISSIMA.

THE ESSAY.
THE Cock is very glorious, The Reuiew.
when he has al his attires and accoutrements about him; for then he will
strout it, as a soldier right; he buckles himself against his enemies, and
with his wing making a target or buckler, defends, couers, and shroudes the
chickens from the assaults of the Raven; and falls a quarrelling with every
one, either friend or so, that approches or but looks upon them. And for the
Hen herself, before she lays her eggs, as others do, she begins to provide and
take care for her lying down. For she chooses her a quiet place to breed in,
and builds a neast or couch to sit in, and makes it very soft, as knowing well
her eggs would bruise and destroy one an other, if they be not commodiously and
handsomely laid. Her young are no sooner hatched, but she presently clucks them
with her wings, least the cold or sharper air should hurt them; and is so
tender of them, as that if a Kite or Wesel come in sight of her, receiving them
under the shadow of her wings, she opposes herself as a stout champion against
them, with a great clamor and outcry, to strike a terror into them, defending
them herself with spur, bill, and wings, with might and main, so as she will
rather even dye in the place in defense of her brood, then by flying away leave
them in any danger. To some she will present her wings to cluck beneath, to
others yeald her back to mount upon, nor has she any part about her, which
she is not willing to afford them what she may, to cherish and conserve them;
nor that truly without joy and alacrity, as appears by their kackle and tone
they have at such times. When she is alone, and has no more to care for then
herself, she trembles at the Hawke and buzard, and will fly away from them; but
if she have young, and espy any danger near, she comes forth like a Lion
against them in their defense, and fights oftentimes far beyond her forces.

THE DISCOVRSE.
NOW is this Hen truly a gallant Symbol of the fruitful Mother of GOD, The
Survey.
as well for the plenty of eggs she lays (for they will lay, some two, and some
three a day) as also for breeding so each month of the year, whereof though
Aristotle and Pliny except the two winter-moneths, yet experience shows and
some Authors affirm, they will lay also in those months, and some there are,
that will lay two a day even in those months likewise; which surely is a great
fecunditie, not lightly found in any foul besides. For lo, the blessed Virgin
has a double fecunditie with her, one natural, and the other mystical: the
natural, in bringing forth CHRIST, whose natural Mother she was; and being his
Mother, she was Mother in a sort to as many, as are called an are truly
Christians: whilst of this one her seed became multiplied beyond the Stars in
heaven, and above the sands, that lie on the Sea-shores. But what shall I say of
her mystical fruitfulnes, which even filles and embraces the whole world, that
inuocates and calls upon the name of MARIE, as their common Mother? Behold all the kingdoms thereof, and all the ample Provinces, and you shall find them full of
her Deuotes and Children. Nor is Hungary only her proper damilie, which title
she has taken, and yet holds from the donation of S. Stephen King of that
Nation, who freely and devoutly once consecrated the same to the Mother of GOD;
but even our England is known also by the name and title of our Ladies Dowry:
Yea Erance, Spain, Italy, and Germany, and the rest of the Kingdoms and
Provinces of the world, whose affection and devotion is no less to this common
Parent, our Incomparable Lady, the Mother of GOD. But nothing demonstrates her
spiritual secunditie so much as the innumerable multitude of Families of the
Sodalitie o^ her Immaculate Conception, the true Parthenian Children of our
sacred Parthenes. For in how short a time, throughout al Europe first, and then
through America, the new world, the Indies as well the East as West, have
Sodalities of al sorts and conditions whatsoever either Secular or
Ecclesiastical been instituted, under the sovereign and most blessed name of
MARIE? which with all observance and due worship serve her as the Mother of GOD,
and their common Parent: while they doubt not by her means to be led and
conduced to a better life, and to obtain Eternal salvation, if they serve her
truly indeed, and but observe the Rules of her said Sodalities.

Besides the property, the Hen has to defend her chickens, during life, this
is singular in her, that even after death, she is sovereign and medicinal for
infinite diseases, and her body the choycest diet for the sick and infirm. And
therefore is the Cock consecrated to Esculapius the Inuentour of Physic.

And for our Lady, what need I say more then that versicle of her Litanies:
Salus Infirmorum? because she procures health both of body and soul. For is
there a disease in any part of the body of man, even running through the
whole Catalogue of maladies, whereto present remedy has not been begd and
obtained of our mysterious Hen, the sovereign Mother of GOD? O what a thing it
were to reckon up the Temples and Chapels, and therein the Votes, tables, and
waxen images set up as testimonies of her infinite cures! Nor helps she the
body more the^ the soul. For Pride she heales no less, the^ the headache;
Vanity no less, the^ the vertigo or turning of the head; Wrath no seldomer
the^ the fre^zie; Sloth, the^ the Lethargy: Ignorance as easily, as the Pin
and web in the eye; Lust, as the disease belonging to it: Gluitonie, as the
Consumption: and Avarice, as the dropsy.

There is yet another thing which I note in the Hen, Arist l. 9. c. 49.
not so much out of Aristotle, as by experience, though Aristotle has it
likewise: that the Hen is a great scraper in the dust, which especially they do
for three causes: as well by busking therinto satisfy the itching they have in
themselves, and to me^d their plumes and feathers, as also to shakeoff the
veni^ about the^. Our Hen likewise most willingly busked and rould herself in
herdust and ashes also. Dust is the beginning of huma^ generation, and the
origin of our vile extractio^; and Ashes the very Epilogue thereof: whence both
are the Symbol of our birth and end; and thence Humility. Al me^ are earth and
ashes. Why art thou proud, thou earth and ashes? Ec. 19.
In these cogitations and the like, Ec^. 10.
as in a heap of dust, the most Blessed Virgin continually volued herself,
reuoluing nothing so much in mind, as her dust and proper extraction. Whence
that: Behold the handmayd of our Lord. God has regarded the lowlines of his
hand maid.

But how then, O mysterious Hen, love thou dust so well, hating al fowlnes and
sordities so much? Feltst thou the itching of Vanity a whit, that thou
should scrape in that sort? No, not the least itching of vain ostentation
infested thee, the immaculate Virgin. Or would thou have pranckt thy quils
and plumage of supernal affects? It was not needful, since they were without
any lets to hinder them at al. Or was thy intention, to shake off at least any
evil cogitations? Not so likewise; no such thing had ever access or ingresse
into that purest mind. No temptation of arrogancy, ostentation, or pride could
ever find admittance there. But truly, this it was; thou louedst Humility,
which thou knew to be gratful and acceptable to thy Son, which could no
where more appear, then in the dust of human nullitie, then in the ashes of
mortality, and thy proper annihilation. An other reason may be also, why thou
diggest so in the dust of thy Nothing: to find, as Hens are wont in the dust,
some food more acceptable to them; for this is a maine cause likewise of their
so frequent scraping in the dust; and who knows perhaps, whether they may not
light on a gemme or no? for so it has been known. The most humble Virgin
Marie indeed even nourished herself with humility, as a most sauourie food
unto her; this she supposed to lie in the dust of her proper abiection; and
therefore with claws of consideration, never left she digging and scraping it
forth; nor was she any whit deceived; the earth of her abstraction, gave her
abundantly to feed most deliciously. And which is more, she found, in so doing,
the precious gemme indeed, which was so enamoured with her humility, as he
even stoopt into the dust, to be there found by this mysterious and blessed Hen.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
NO mother, The Pause.
like the Hen, preserues her young,
Protects, and shelters with her wings; her tongne
Is clucking with a sad and doleful note;
Call's back her chickens, when they are remote;
And if they come not, chides sharp, shril, and loud;
With beck and tallions fights for them. Thus shrowed,
OVirgin Mother, while the Puttock flies,
(The Prince of darkness) who with watchful eyes
Seeks for my Soul, his prey. The Hen is known,
Careful of al. Yet if she has but one,
Her care's as great. So's thine of one, or other.
Then to me Sinner, show thy self a mother.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, the great magnanimity of the Hen, The Contemplation.
in defense of her chickens, as above said. And then reflect upon the courage
and fortitude of our victorious Patroness, the glorious Virgin, especially in
the protection likewise of her Children; for to her enemies is she terrible as
a battle well arrayed. As an army well marshalled, is a terror to the enemies,
and makes them fly at the sight thereof, before they enter into fight: so are
the Devils danted at the presence of this invincible Champion, standing in
defense of her Clients and Children.

Consider then, the great compassion of the Hen toward her young; which
appears in this, that with the sick and infirm, she will be infirm; she is so
sollicitous in feeding them, as she finds not a grain, but she calls them to
her, to participate thereof: And for her care of preserving them from danger,
she clucks them under her wings, from the rapin of the kites, and the like
ravenous foul. And then weigh withal the tender compassion the Virgin Mother
has ever shown toward us her Children and Servants, in being so sollicitous
to feed us, while she was on earth, with the food of her doctrine: She has
opened her mouth in wisdom, and the law of clemency in her tongue; and for
custody, Pro. 31.
how she hides us under her wings, and protects us from the snares of the
Devil. For this is she, Ap. 12.
to whom was said, that two great wings were given her: The one, the wing of
Mercy, to which Sinners do fly to be reconciled to GOD; according to the
Prophet: Protect me under the shadow of thy wings; The other, that of Grace,
under which the Just remain, to be conserved in grace, and may say with him
likewise: She has shadowed us with her shoulders.

Ponder lastly, how the Hen not only sits upon her own eggs, but sometimes
strangers likewise, as the eggs of Ducks and pea-hens, put into her nest, which
being hatched, the Ducks according to kind will betake themselves to the waters,
and there diue and plunge themselves over head and ears; and the young pea-hens
enamoured with their own beauty will forsake their tender nurse that bred them
up. And then weigh withal, how many strange and vngratful children our
mysterious Hen, the admirable Virgin, cherishes and nurse; with her daily
protection, who requite her il for all her care in trayning them up.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Queen of Angels, saluted hy the Archangel, The Colloquie.
adored by the Powers of Heaven, Mistrisse of Virtues, Duchess of
Principalities, Lady of Dominations, Princess of Thrones, more highly
advanced then the Cherubins themselves, more enflamed with ardour os Divine
love, then all the Seraphins; The first next to God, the second in the Role or
Register of the Predestinate: Thou most terrible to thy foes, as an Host well
arrayed; and yet infirm with the infirm, as a Hen amid her chickens, most
tender of them, and a most sure bulwark for them, against al incursions and
assaults of foreign and domestic enemies, either visible or invisible. O thou,
who through thy Son, and thy matchles humility, have crushed the Serpent's
head: through thy holy prayer and intercession, I beseech thee, let Satan be
trampled likewise, under thy Servants feet. O grant this same, mysterious and
Indulgent Bird of Paradise.

THE XVII. SYMBOL. THE PEARL.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Pearl, or Margaret, the Lillieamo^g Jewels, is the peerlesse Gemme of
Nature, The Impresa
so much happier then the rest, as nobler descended then they: this being bred
in the womb of the sea, and they in the bowels of the earth. If they be
stillicides from Heaven (as some think) they are the milkie drops distilled
from Juno's breast, which Sol parcheth into seeds; which seeds empearle in
those little Ouens lying on the beach. The Diamant that sparcles so, though rich
indeed, arriues not to that wealth without trade, and exercise of the Ieweller,
in passing the file and chizel, whereas the Pearl needs none of those to raise
its fortunes by, but is truly borne a Ptince. They are the ordinary companions
of the greatest Ladies, and so chaste as they will be dandling in their necks,
without sensuality in themselves, or those they dally with, without iea^ousie
of any. They are true Subsidie-men, and such Sureties indeed, as their credit
will be taken for as much as they are worth. If you would epitomize an ample
estate, and put the same into a little Compendium, with Bias to carry your
wealth about you, sell what you have, and put it into Pearl. If you have any
suit in Court, it will purchase greater friends, and procure you better
preferments, then the best deserts. Like a pin and web, it will put out the eyes
of Linceus himself, not to see what he should. It is the key, that will set open
the Iayle to the worst conditions; and the bolt to shut upon the best
deseruings. What civil wars could never effect, the Pearl or Union has
infallibly brought to pass, to wit, the ruin of that great Triumvirat, being
disunited or dissolved: what would it then have done, if united? It is called
Oriental, as much to say, as it makes al men to arise unto it, to do it homage:
and will make you more place in a throng of people, of mere respect, then a
rufling Whifler shall do with torch in hand. In fine, it is a rich Treasury of
rarities enclosed in a box of Pearl.

THE MORALS.
PRECIOSA ET CAELESTIS.
RAre things are likely precious, The Motto.
and precious rare: not that scarcity alone should set the price, or price and
value make them rare; but that the ordinance of GOD is such, to have them so,
that things which are excellent in themselves, should be rare and scarce to be
found, that pearls (for worth) might not be cast to swine, or trampled under
foot. Monsters are rare indeed, and yet most hateful, and prodigious. It is the
worth then that gives the price to things. The Sybils Books were valued less
being nine, then when they were but three; not for the plenty of the nine, or
scarcity of the three; but to let Tarquinius see, the true estimate and value
of each one; and had he not perhaps taken her at last at her word, as he did,
he had paid as much for one alone, as for the nine, or gone without it. Yea
gold itself, were it as common happily as many other things are of little
worth, would yet be in as great esteem as now it is, through a certain
excellence it has in itself above others. And therefore S. John did very well,
to dress up GOD al in gold, and paue the Paradise of joys with the same: for
otherwise, do I fear, that many an one, would never have had any great
thirst after it; who perhaps would better have liked the horns of Lucifer, tipped
with gold, then those of the Moon with silver, or the burning cristal of the
Sun. Who would think, that a piece of earth, taken, as it were, with the
disease of the yelow Iaundise, being no more indeed then a yelow earth, a
glittering Stone, a kind of froth boiling from Hell, should have such a power
upon reasonable men? So as well it may seem, to be the Golden Age, since al is
set upon gold; they wish but gold, they speak or think of nothing else but
gold, when lo, the Gold of gold, the precious Margarit of Pearls, is truly
valuable indeed, the Incomparable Virgin Mother, I mean, who is either the
Pearl itself, or Mother of the true Oriental Pearl, which descended from
heaven, and therefore is worthily called: PRECIOSA ET CAELESTIS.

THE ESSAY.
THE true Pearl has a luster of silver with it, which will not soil a whit,
nor wax yellow; The Reuiew.
its skin fears no nipping of the frosts, nor the tooth of Time. It is bred in
the Sea, and seems to disdain the fare of its Hostess, the Scallop, wherein
it is a prisoner, while it takes its food from the heavens, and has its whole
alliance with them. They use to counterfeit the same in a thousand manners with
glass, and above al, with the Mother-Pearl, in beating it to powder, and
making a past thereof, and then causing pigeons to let it down, which with
their natural heat do boil and polish it in the manner it is, and then put it
forth again. The Mother-pearl engenders from the heavens, and lives but of
celestial Nectar, to bring forth her Pearl withal, either silver, pale, or
yelowish, according as the Sun makes it, or the air, whence it feeds, be more
or less pure. Receiving then the deaw of Heaven into the gaping shel, it
forms little grains or seeds within it, which cleave to its sides, then grow
hard, and geale, as it were: and so Nature by little and little polishes them
through favor of the Sunnie beams, and at last they become the Oriental
Pearls; and as the Deaw is greater or less, the Pearls become the bigger and
fayrer. The Pearl in powder, is good in a manner for all maladies. It grows not
only in the flesh of the fish, but in the mother itself, or shel without the
fish. It is tender within the mother, but grows hard as soon as taken out of
the water. The greatest gallantrie of Ladies, is to have them dangling at their
ears by half dozens, whence are they called Cymbals; they will say likewise: a
fair Pearl in the ear, is as good as an Usher to make them way in a press.
Cleopatra wore two of them, which were worth a million and a half; whereof one
she swallowed down, being first dissolved by vinagre.

THE DISCOVRSE.
IF you look now into the mysteries of al natural Secrets, The Reuiew.
you shall find none to symbolize better with the Virgin Marie, this Margarit of
ours, then this same Pearl or precious Margarit of the Sea: if especially we
regard but the names only, wherewith they are styled, the one of Marie, the
other of Margarit, and both having so great alliances with the Seas: the one
being, amarum mare, a bitter sea: and the other, as wholly borne and bred in the
seas; the one importunatly begd and obtained of GOD, by Anna her Mother: and
the other, as greedily gaped-after from the Heavens, and especially from the
Sun, by the Mother of Pearl, so properly called by like, for her motherlie and
maternal appetite to engender and bring forth; and we al know, what Pearls of
sanctity are lightly brought into the world, with so great importunities. But
if we look into the other congruities between them, we shall find them to
sympathize so, as we may well term our Virgin Mother, a Pearl or Margarit of
the Heavens, as the other of the Seas.

The Margarit, as I said, is bred in the Sea; which Isidor affirms, and that
in this manner. At certain times of the year, to wit, in the Spring and
Autumn, the cockles, oysters, or scollops, or call them what you will, approach
to the Seashore, and lie there gaping, and opening themselves, and receive the
celestial deaw into their bowels; from the coagulation whereof, as abouesayd,
are the Margarits engendered. Now this Shelfish, oyster, or Mother-Pearl (for
the Mother, or issue Pearl, are al of a substance, as mothers and embrions use
to be) is the Virgin-Mother-Pearl it self, which opened her Virginal soul, at
her mysterious Annunciation, in the Spring of the year, by the quiet shore of
her tacit and silent contemplation, to receive the heavenly Deaw, the new
Margarit: that is, to conceive that precious Pearl, Christ Jesus, in her womb.
For she opened her consent, to the great Angel, her singular Paranimph, to obey
GOD in all things, saying: Behold the handmayd of our Lord, etc. and her soul
likewise to the Holie-Ghost, to ouershadow her: and after the opening thus of
her free consent, and her Angelical soul, the Celestial deaw of the
Holie-Ghost descended into her, and so this infant- Pearl was divinely begot in
the virginal womb of the Virgin Mother - Pearl. Of which deawing of the
Holie-Ghost, and opening of the Blessed Virgin thereunto, it is prophetically
said: Deaw you heavens thereupon, Isay. 45
and let the clouds rain down the Just; let the earth open and bring forth
the Savior.

These Pearls besides, if they be right Margarits indeed, are fair, white, and
clear; for such as are so, are truly of the best, and a great deal better then
those which are dimmer, and of a yellow and duskish color. For those which
are fair, white, and clear, are bred of the morning-deaw; and the others, of
thar which falls in the euenings. And our Incomparable Margarit, was
predestinate so from the morning of the eternal Decree in Heaven, so created,
as it were, ab initio and ante secula, while the other pearls of less regard
were only produced in the evening, after that sin was brought into the world.

This Margarit therefore so fair, so white, and clear, signifyes our heavenly
Margarit and glorious Virgin, who was beautiful and fair in mind through a
more then Angelical purity of hers consisting in the mind; most snowie and
white in body, through an immaculate chastity and virginity; and clear and
sincere in works, through a simple sanctity, and Saintlie simplicity in all
her actions, in the whole course of her blessed and incomparable life, which
she led on earth.

I said above, that Pearls being stamped and beat to powder are holesom,
sovereign, and medicinal for many maladies; whereof I find the Naturalists
chiefly to reckon three: First, they are purgative, because they purge and
euacuate the body of al noxious and superfluuous humors; secondly,
restrictiue, staying the flux of blood or venture; and thirdly, they comfort and
corroborate the heart, being ready to faint or swoune through debilitie of the
spirits, or the vital parts. To these infirmities, the applications of these
pownded Pearls so beat to powder, are of singular avail. In this manner the
Blessed Virgin, being seriously pressed with importunity of prayers, and often
urged and called upon with incessant vows, relenting and mollifyed at last, as
fallen into powder, applies herself, first through a purgative power to purge
us of our sins, by procuring us the grace of Contrition, and the wholesome
Sacrament of Penance, to bewail and purge our sins past; secondly, with her
restrictiue virtue, to restrain the soul from flowing and falling again into
future sins; and thirdly, with her restoratiue, comfortatiue, and
corroboratiue power, to strengthen and fortify the heart, in present occasions
of sins.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
A Rare and precious Pearl is hardly found,
That Is Great, and Heavy, Smooth, pure-white and Round. The Pause.

The Son of God came from his heavenly Throne,
Factour for Pearls, aet last found such an one.
Great, to contain himself; and Heavy, full of grace.
And therefore sunck unto a Handmayds place.
Smooth without knob of Sin. Virgin pure-white.
Round in perfection, more then mortal wight.
This pleased his eye; a long time having sought,
Gave all that ere he had, and this he bought.
Vnion's a Pearl (no twins) itself, but one;
Such was the Virgin Mother Paragon.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, how this Pearl or Margarit is usually called, The
Contemplation.
as we said, by the name of Union; whether it be for the great union and
sympathy there is, between the Mother and the Pearl, I know not; for you can
not mention the Mothers name, but needs must you bring-in the Pearl withal: or
for the union of the Celestial deaw, with the Conchal nature, to make up a
Pearl, in the lap of the fish, I will not say: this I am sure of, that our
blessed Pearl here is called Deipara, as much to say, as the Mother of GOD; nor
can she be so called a Mother, as she is, but GOD must needs be united to her,
to make up her name.

Consider then, that as the Mother-pearl, being otherwise only a mere shel-fish
of its own nature, and of no greater a rank then a plain oyster of the Sea:
yet through the appetite she had to suck, and draw in the heavenly deaw into
her bowels, obtained the especial privilege and prerogative, to become indeed
the Mother of the true oriental Pearl. So the virgin mother, though she were,
as she said herself, the silly handmayd of our Lord, and of our human nature,
subject to the natural fray leties thereof; yet through a singular immunitie
with the purity of her intention, integrity of body, and Angelical candor
of mind, disposing herself most affectuously and ardently indeed, to receive
the Celestial deawes from heaven, that is, the grace of perfect Union with GOD,
in her pure soul, she deserved to become the Mother of the Pearl of Pearls,
sweet JESUS.

Ponder lastly, that if a mere Pearl, being so basely bred in an oyster-shel,
whose extract at the best is but mere Deawes let fall from the nether Region of
the Air, and those but drops of fresh water, as it were impearled in the fish,
through benefit of the Sun should come to be so highly prized as we have said,
being no more then a mere seed of Pearl somewhat fairer then the rest of that
kind; how are we to prize and magnify, trow you, our heavenly Pearl here,
whether you mean the Pearl, or Mother herself? the Pearl himself, for being
such a Pearl so truly descending from heaven; and her, for being the Mother of
such a Pearl.

THE APOSTROPHE
MOST sweet, most debonnaire Virgin Mother, The Coll^quie.
the Immaculate through emphasis, the Mother of faeyre dilection, Mother of
Jesus, regard me poor wretched soul, and obtain, that my heart and affection
be pure and clean, at least like the seed pearl, according to the proportion of
my litlenes, and my body wholly free, from the duskish blemishes of the least
sins, and that by day and night my thoughts being repurged from al
immundicities and unclean objects, the flourishing bed of my Fancy, may never
be soyled more, to offend thine eyes, and those of the Immaculat Pearl of thy
womb, the Spouse of my soul, CHRIST JESUS.

THE XVIII. SYMBOL. THE DOVE.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Dove is the true and perfect type of Love; The Impresa
let them but change caps with each other, and the Dove shall be Love, and Love
a Dove. If Venus betake her to her Chariot, she is drawn with the teame of
four of them, as Poets say. This are we sure of, the Holie-Ghost, the
essential Divine love, has been seen to appear, as carried with Charity, in
the form and figure of a Dove. The Doves are never in their proper element
more, nor better pleased, then in digging them holes in the rock, and planting
their little pauillions there. And the Eyes (the Agents of Love) like a pair of
twin-like Doves have set up their rests, and built their nests, as it were, in
the hollow concaues of the brows, in service of Love. The Dove is the trusty
messenger, or winged Post of the Air, that carries letters to and fro, in
matters of the greatest importance; which she fayles not to deliver with the
hazard of her life, nor ever misseth, but it costs her the best blood of her
body. She is even an arrow, and verily as swift as it, but without a steely
head to hurt withal, as having no gaul within her, or curstnes in the bil. She
is a very sociable creature, and apt for Cities; witness their Douecots, where
they live in great peace and neighborhood together; and not of fear, as
some, do they flock together in great troops, but merely of love and charity
one to an other. She is very abstemious and religious in her diet, and will not
feed on those fleshpots of Egypt, that first came-in with that Patriark and
second Parent of our kind; contenting herself with bread alone, allowed even
from Adam's time, who tilled and ploughed the first of any. She is hot by
nature, and yet of condition a Moses for meeknes, and even the very Lamb of
birds; if not so able to cloth our nakedness with her wool as he, yet surely
she would, if she could; yet ever ready and prompt to lodge us in her downs.
And when she can not stead us otherwise, she will afford her body, to be
sacrificed by us, as an entire holocaust of her good nature.

THE MORALS.
IN FORAMINIBVS PETRAE.
WHO will give me the wings of a Dove (the Prophet says) and I will fly and
rest? The Dove would fly, The Motto.
and then rest: fly in the exercise of al virtues, and then rest in the
contemplation of the Divine attributes; or fly in the meditation of our
Sauiour's life, and then rest in the deep contemplation of his bitter passion;
fly in reading the Divine Scriptures, that point us the Rock; and rest in
digging in the holes of the said Rock, the blessed stigmats of his venerable
and sacred wounds. For Reading indeed, though it much avail to lead us to the
Rock, yet dives not so deep into the Rock, as serious Meditation does; and
Meditation though it dig into the Rock, yet dwells not so quietly there, nor
rests so sweetly in the Rock, as a deep Contemplation does; while Reading
regards but the shel only, that is, brings to the Rock; Meditation, the kernel,
that is, digs into the Rock; but Contemplation swallows and relisheth the
kernel, that is, dwells and sets up its rest in the Rock. Reading looks but
superficially therinto; Meditation bores and enters into it; but Contemplation
dives and sounds into the depth. Reading exhibits the breasts of the
Mother Church, in opening the books of the Old and New Testament; but
Meditation, and more Contemplation, wrings them, to fetch out the milk to
nourish withal. Reading crops off the ears of corn; and Meditation and
Contemplation, as with the fingar and thumb, wrings out the grain; then grinds
it to meal, til it comes to be bread and food of men. And this the tender and
compassionate Mother did, who flying, like to the Dove, all the time of her
life, never rested herself, til finding her Son, become a Rock of scandal and
reproach, and piteously bored on every side, she enters into them, and dwelles
within them; and if you ask her, where she is, might very well answer: IN
FORAMINIBVS PETRAE.

THE ESSAY.
THE Dove, the Mercury of birds, the faithful Messenger of Noe, The Reuiew.
the friend to the Olive, has properly no color of her own to know or
distinguish her by; so is she universal for all; in this only she is singular
above the rest, that being of what color soever, her neck being opposed to
the Sun will diuersify into a thousand colors, more various then the Iris
itself, or that Bird of Juno in all her pride; as scarlet, cerulean,
flame-coulour, and yealding a flash like the Carbuncle, with vermilion,
ash-coulour, and many others besides, which have no name, but as you borrow
them from other things. And though she be never so chaste, innocent, and loyal
to her mate, yet can she not avoid his jealousy. Which you may see, and it is
a pleasant contemplation to note the while, when the Cock returns to his
Douecot, how, discovering his iealousies, his little breast will swel up to the
bigness of his body; then with the voice to break forth into a hoarse and
angry note; by and by to walk in state, as it were, and encompas his mate
about; and with the show of a wrothful Nemesis, rake the ground, with the swift
trayling and strotting of his train, and that you may not doubt but he is
angry indeed with the pecking of his bil, and strokes of his wings he
persecutes the poor wretch, deserving it not. Yet she abides very patient to
al, nor is troubled a whit at his causeles indignation, proceeding out of
vehemence of love; she flies not away to shun him, and withdraw herself, but
rather approaches nearer and closer to him; she returns not blow for blow
again, but meekly endures and suffers al; until the diuturnitie of sufferance
and her meekness do vanquish and mollify the choler and fiercenes of the
furious thing. And so at last the Cock forgetting his suspicion, is quite
tamed; and laying the enemy aside, puts on the Lover, returns to
reconciliation of friendship again; and the joining of their bills together,
with more ardent affection, renewes the same, as the flame is increased with
the sprinckling of frigid drops thereon. She is a meek creature, and has no
gaul; she feeds on no living thing; she brings up others young, she makes
choice of the purest grain, she builds in the rocks, she has groans for
singing notes, and sits very willingly by the waters side, that she may
suddenly shun the haw ke foreseen by his shadow therein; and a thousand other
qualities besides.

THE DISCOVRSE.
NOW then, as the Dove builds her nest not in trees nor on the earth, The
Survey.
but in the holes and concauities of the Rock, not so curious as some birds be,
to plaster and trim up their nests, or to seek for the softest downs to
prepare their beds with, against the hatching of their young: So our Lady, the
mystical Dove we treat of, built not a whit, nor placed her heart, in the baser
earth of terrene desires, nor in the higher thrones of princely Majesty's, but
eue^ in the wounds and passions of her dearest Son. Arise, my friend, make
have, Can^. 20.
my Dove; I say, make have, and come into the holes of the rock, where our Dove
is said to inhabit. In the holes of the rock, I say, because in her thoughts
and remembrance was she still conversant and lodged, as it were, in the wounds
of Christ. Or we may say, and not unaptly to, that Christ had sundry nests, to
wit, the Crib, the Cross, and his Sepulcher or monument. In these nests now of
Christ, our Dove would often inhabit, because she would often visit these
places with incredible ardour and devotions. Of which opinion is doubtless S.
Hierom, S. Hier.
thoughhe say, perhaps: Perhaps, says he, through excess of love she is said
to have dwelt in the place, where her Son was buried. For one hardly would
believe, how much internal love and affection is fed with looks.

The Dove again feeds not on the flesh of other fowls and birds, as some do,
but of the graynes of corn, and that the select and most choice of al. Nor was
our Dove, the blessed Virgin, affected or given to terrene and worldly things,
but to Celestial and eternal; she fed not on the fleshpots of Egypt, nor yet
of Manna, being but only the bread of Angels, but rather fed of the Bread of
life, the thing represented by that Manna, she fed on the sweet thoughts of the
Divine Word it self Incarnate in her womb, Joan. 10.
and fed of that grain of corn, whereof it is said: Unless the grain of corn
falling into the earth be mortifyed and die etc. This grain of corn refreshes
and satiats; and therein may signify our Savior Christ, according to the
Psalmist: He satiats thee with the fat of corn; Isay. 63.
and has rednes without, in regard whereof may it signify the flesh of Christ;
agreeable to that: How red is thy garment etc: and besides is white within, and
expresses the soul, Sap. 7.
which is fulgent and bright with the candor and splendor of purity; For
indeed it is the candor of light, And therefore in the Canticles the Virgin
says: My heloued is white and red, and chosen of a thousand; White, for his
blessed and diuinifyed soul; Cant. 3.
red, for his precious flesh, embrued with is blood; and the choice of a
thousand, for his sovereign and supreme Divinity. This Dove then fed of such
a grain, because she was wholly and fully delighted with the Divinity and the
Humanity of Christ.

And for her groans, the ordinary music of the Lyre of her heart, they were
the lamentable and sad accents, which the Passion of her deer Son had caused
in her. For lo, this Dove with the rest of that desolate and mourning flight of
Mary's, her fellow-doues, did nothing else, but sigh and groan, in beholding
the only Pearl of doves, her dearest Son, in so piteous a plight, so
hampered and entangled in the fowler's nets. Like Doves that meditate, they
groned sore, as the Prophet says, especially this Dove above the rest, the
incomparable Virgin-Doue, being the natural Dam and parent of the poor
distressed one, most sadly pouring forth a flood of tears without measure.
Whence S. Anselm says in a certain place: S. Anselm.
My most merciful Lady, what fountains may I say brake forth of thy purest
eyes, when thou saw thy only innocent Son to be scourged, bound, and so
cruelly entreated before thee, and the flesh of thy flesh so mangled in thy
sight? what groans shall I imagine thy breast sent forth the while, when thou
heardst him say: Woman, behold thy Son; and again: Behold thy mother? For
she could not see her Son to be so crucified, without groans, and motherlie
laments for her dying Son, the joy of her heart, and heart of al her joys, so
pierced with a soldiers spear, that even transfixed withal the mothers
breast, a very Niobe of tears, or rather Noome of bitter groans.

Now for the wing, which so eternizeth the Doves, and makes them most
illustrious among fowls of the highest pitch, this I note, they love not much
to fly alone, bur to assemble themselves in flights. The blessed Virgin, is
that Woman clothed with the sun, of whom it is said in the Apocalypse, that
two wings were given her to fly with, in the desert; which two wings are the
wings of Love and Hope, wherewith she flies into Heaven. Who will afford me
wings as the Dove? But yet she would not fly alone, but draw others also to fly
along with her, to wit, the Apostles, during her life, and through her example
afterward al other Saints.

They were accustomed of old, the better to attract strange pigeons to their
houses, to use this industry or slight, to annoint some one tame and
domestical Dove with an ointment, which they knew most grateful unto them, and
so anointed to let it fly at large; when she so flying in the air, through
the fragrance of the odours about her, would draw to her a number of them; and
so she, who first flew alone, would return back again in triumphing manner.
The Virgin of herself alone at first was the only lover of vowed Chastity,
who professed, she knew not, nor ever would know man. This Dove then the
heavenly Fowler had sent forth into the air of the world, as anointed with
the perfume of al graces, and especially of Chastity; but now she flies with
an innumerable number of Virgins, led by her example, singing altogether with
one consent that verse: We will run after the odor of thine ointments; the
young virgins have loved thee, O lovely Dove.

Lastly, for the sitting of the Dove by the waters side, hear what the
Holie-Ghost in the Canticles says: Thine eyes like Doves upon riuer-waters,
Can. 5.
which are washed with milk, and sit by the fullest streams. S. Hierom, that
great Contemplatour of Celestial Secrets upon the Canticles, speaking of this
most holy Virgin, how she was assumpted to Heaven, says: I saw one specious
as a Dove ascending from the waters. She was a beautiful Dove, as it were;
because she showed the form and simplicity of that Dove, which came upon
Christ, coming out of the streams of waters. Now as the Dove is said to dwell
upon the streams, as well to discover the shadow of the hawke, as to refresh
herself against the heats: So the blessed Virgin rests and abides upon the
fulness of the floods of the Holie-Ghost, as well to admonish her Deuotes to
beware the Diabolical snares, as to enjoy the plenitude of the waters of the
same Holie-Ghost, to wit, the gifts thereof.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
THE Holie-Ghost, The Pause.
that nestles like a Dove,
Betwixt the Father and the Son above,
Is flowne from Heaven to seek a mate below,
A Virgin, chaste, pure Dove, as white as snow
Fethred; a like consort; she without gal,
Simple and mild; he Love essential.
Thus they accord, as they in color suit,
And to the flower correspond's the fruit.
The Virgin's shadowd, yet remains pure white;
(Shadows expeld) the substance brings to light.
But while her Son is shadowd on the Cross,
The mourning Columbam nigram pingeba^t Aegypty ad significanda^ ^idua^ c^stam
and constantem; inquit Pierius.
Dove in blackes laments her loss.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation.
how the Dove, being a most pure creature, fears to be defiled, and abhorres
whatsoever is foul and sordid, as appears by that which happened in Noe's
Flood. Noe sent forth a Dove after forty days, to discern whether the
waters were fallen and ceased upon the face of the earth or no, who not finding
whereon to rest her foot, returned into the Ark again; and the reason was, Gen
88.
as S. Augustm thinks, that though the tops of hills appeared bare, yet they
remained moist and slymie, and therefore the Dove being a nice and delicate
bird, and extremly amourous of purity and cleannes, would by no means put her
foot thereon. And here reflect upon the Virgin pure, in whom no spot appeared
of Original Sin at al, in that great inundation and deluge thereof in Adam,
but remaining in the Ark of her Innocence Immaculate, because the mother of
the Immaculate Lamb.

Consider then the singular providence of the Dove, which is a part indeed of
the prudence of this creature, in that to shun the hawke, she shrouds herself
in the secret holes of the Rock, and there securely reposeth in great peace.
And then consider, how this Dove of Doves, this same most prudent Virgin, being
higher then the rest, and more profound, had placed her nest or chamber in
Christ her Rock; where being always safe and kept inviolable, the slights of
the Devils and the subtleties of Heretics could do nothing against her; but
what they did, was against the Rock itself, rebounding back upon the impious
themselves, like the waves against the cliffes, the ships against the shelfs,
the rusling of the winds against the towers, the fomie froth against the beach,
the edge of the sword against the Adamant, the reed against a target, drifts of
snow against a helmet, fire against gold, and lastly a slender cloud against
the Sun.

Ponder lastly the great similitude and resembla^ce, which is between the
salvation of men's lives in Noes Ark, and that of Souls in the Church, whose
foundation was laid in the Virgin-mothers womb, our true Dove indeed, at the
Annunciation of the Angel Gabriel, when that stupe^dious miracle of grace was
wrought within her. But as then that Dove of the Ark carried only the message
of salvation, the figure of that embassage here brought by Gabriel, whom when
you behold so painted with a bra^ch of Olive in his hand, as a token of peace
and mercy, what see you else, but Not's Dove, bearing a bough of olive, in the
feet?

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Most innocent Dove, The Golloquie.
Lady of meeknes! O would you please to remember me for my good, most sober and
^emure Virgin, and amourous Mother of my dearest Spouse, Oh pray the eternal
Love for me; reject me not poor wretch, most wretched Sinner, so wholly
immortifyed in all my senses, who here present myself before your goodness in the
dema^d and pursuit of man suetude of mind. Oh grant, most precious
Virgin Mother, that I perish not for ever, and be lost. O admirable Lady,
Lady, I say, of heaven and earth next GOD your dearest Son, placed above all the Hierarchies of Heaven: Let me not quite perish, Queen of the heavenly
Empir^; for alas, what profit will there be in my utter ruin? Alas, Alas, let
me not fall, a caytif and unworthy worm as I am, to nothing, or worse then
nothing, so wholly drowned in Sin and vice.

THE XIX. SYMBOL. THE FOVNTAIN.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Fountain is the liquid Glass or Mirror of the Naiades, The Impresa
where they haunt to contemplate their beauties in; or rather is the Nymph
herself, who gazing on her proper beauty, through a strange Metamorphosis of
self-loue had lost herself in her own Glass. Hence it is, she runs the Hay,
as it were, in the meadows, to seek herself in the waters which she is
herself, got forth to take the air, in the fields abroad; and as it runs, it
plays on the Harpsicon the while, whose iacks are the pible stones, checking
the little waves as strings, that so with purling frames the harmony it makes.
The feathered Nimphs there, are much taken with it, especially the Swan, that
will be tuning her Descant to that ground. All the care she takes, is but to
haste to pay her rents, which she does to the Brooks and Rivers, as Bay life's
to that great Exactour, who takes them grumbling, as never satisfied. She is
the breast of Nature, and Nature the Nurse that suckles al things with her
milk, and is so good a Nurse and so prodigal of her sugared lickours, as where
she can not else communicate herself, of her own accord will she break out into
Springs: Springs so called indeed, because they leap and spring forth of the
earth. For so shall you see the little lambs and kids pricked with this milk of
Nature, well concoct with youthful heat, to spring, to iump, and frisk; whence
doubtless the season of the Spring took first the name. For what is the
blossoms, trow you, to spring and bud forth, but for Nature to break out as
into Springs? The Rose springs forth, while Nature breaks a vein as it were,
that springs into a Rose. The Lilly springs, while Nature spilles her crystal
milk, that sprouts into a Lilly. The Springs and Fountains therefore, are the
life of Nature, if the life, as some maintain, abide in the veins, which may
well be. They are the very ticklings of Natures heart, that make her sprug up
herself in the season of the Spring, to court the world with, in her best
array. For then she crowns herself with a garland of al flowers, puts on the
mantle of her goodly meadows diapred al over, and tricks and decks up her
hair, the fruitful trees, with gemmes of blossoms of infinite varieties, to
feast and entertain the newborn world.

THE MORALS.
PERENNIS ET INDEFICIENS.
AL things that are, The Motto.
have their certain terms; and there is a stint and period to be seen, in all
things. Be they treasures of immense riches how vast soever, they may be summed
with good Arithmetic, to a last farthing. The Cataracts of waters, in Noe's
time, that powered down so fast, at last were exhausted quite, and gave leisure
to the Earth, to swallow and digest so huge a draught. They were neither
perpetual, for they lasted but a time; nor yet without measure, for it may be
supposed the Springs were dried, or that the hand of GOD had put a sluice to the
torrents. Elias called for rain, and it powered down so fast, as many were
affrayd of a second deluge; but the glut and tempest ceased in a certain time,
and al was well. To leave these, and to come to Man, whose pride makes him
oft-times to pretend to a kind of eternity of felicity; Let him lift up his
crest never so loftily, his pride will soon have a fall. Alexander how great
soever, when he saw he could not eternize himself, and become dreadful enough
otherwise, used a stratagem, which was to be drawn by Apelles in sundry
manners, now mounting on his Steed, that brave Bu^ephalus, in the action of
making the earth to tremble with his looks; and then to be admired in the habit
and equipage of a GOD, calling himself the Son of Jupiter Amon; but the truth
is, his looks made not the earth to quake, but only in his picture; nor was he
adored, but in his pourtrait, and he no more then a mortal man, whose Aurora
and cursorie day, had a speedy sunset.

Nero caused a coin of gold to be stamped, where his own effigies was engraven
of the one side, and of the other Fortune enchained at the foot of a Rock, with
this word: Nec scopulos metuo. But he shortly found the contrary, when killing
himself, he suffered shipwreck in the sea of his own blood. Otho represented
himself in such pieces of gold, with his hand armed with thunder, with this:
Alijs non ^tor armis. But soon the spring of his life and Reign, was the
winter of his death; and what death but a death which his life deserved? There
is nothing sure and perpetual in this world; but al things slide away like
running streams from the springhead, which leave not so much behind them, as
the memory of their passage. The Spring only is it, which still remaynes, whose
waters after they have run an endless time, shall then but seem to begin to
run, as being an Abyss of waters sprung from an endless source. Look then
what the Spring is of elemental liquids, the same is the Mother of GOD, an
endless fountain of spiritual graces and perfections, and is truly the FONS
PERENNIS ET INDEFICIENS of al Graces.

THE ESSAY.
TO speak of the Fountain truly, The Reuiew.
as the thing deserves, one had need of a fountain of wit and brain about him,
to decipher it aright. For who can draw a picture of one that can not sit, but
is ever iogging up and down? For lo, the fountain water never stands, but has
the palsy in the veins, that will not rest. It is sometimes taken for the
Fabric itself; as built of stone; which if we should, the diffitie would
increase. For so were we obliged to express as many forms well nigh, as there
are fancies in the Brain. For some shall you see of one fashion, some of
another, as every one abounds in his sense. Witness that so artificially
wrought by the famous Michael Angelo de Bonaro^i in figure of a Woman washing
and winding of linen clothes in her hands; in which act of hers, she straynes
forth the Fountain-waters. Another have I seen of an Elephant spouting the
waters from his Proboscides or trunk, to the pleasures of the Spectatours;
another of a Whale, that spouted the waters so high, as even did diselement the
same into a dust or powder of waters. Another so cunningly set and contrived,
as what with the waters so disposed, and the Sunnie rays together, it would
make a perfect Iris in the eyes of al men; and a thousand other, while Art in
nothing more will vye with Nature, then with her workmanships of this kind. The
Fountain therefore is properly neither the manufacture alone so wrought, nor the
water of itself, as it creeps in the veins of the Earth. For so the one were a
liuelesse Statue of Man or beast, and the other a Spring only, and no Fountain;
The one would be but a dead or sensles Carkas, and the other only in the
Concha, as the blood abiding in a boule; so as to have a Fountain indeed it
must be alive, and have the silver blood, as in the veins, that spouts,
streams, or trickles from it: Such as Niobe herself was transformed into a
Living Fountain, as it were, when she wept out her eyes; such, I say, as
Magdalen was at her Maister's feet, or as that great Porter of Heaven and the
Keeper of the keys thereof, when he so bitterly wept at the Cock-crow. I can
not tell, whether there can be a brauer sight, then such as these, curiously
represented in marble, with the azure veins appearing in the body, and the
rest of the lineaments lively set forth; and then to behold the trickling
streams to fall from the eyes, either as pearls by drops, or as open Cataracts
burst forth.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold we now the Incomparable Fountain itself of living waters of Grace, The
Survey.
that flow from thence: to wit, the Signed Fountain, the most pure Virgin
Mother of GOD, according to that of the Canticles: The fountain of gardens,
Cant* 4.
the well of living waters which flow with violence from Libanus; and again:
My sister is a signed or sealed Fountain. She is a Fountain placed by or near
GOD; she is a Fountain turned into a River; She is a perpetual Fountain; and
lastly a sweet and pleasant Fountain. She was a signed fountain, because she
was likewise an enclosed Garden. She was a Garden, because Her understanding
was full of faith, and knowledge of GOD, with infinite variety of flowers of al
kinds; and closed it was, because no error or ignorance might enter therinto.
She was a Garden, because her affect was full of love to GOD and her Neighbor;
and closed, because no terrene love or base desire of the flesh or world, could
find access to her heart. She was a signed Fountain, because her Virginal womb
was full of the water of Celestial grace; and signed, because sealed with the
irreuocable Vow of perpetual and immaculate Virginity. She was a Fountain
placed near to GOD, Because with thee is the Fountain of life; A Fountain, in
that she refrigerates from the heat of concupiscence; and a Fountain of grace,
for that she viuifyes from the death of mortal sin; and because she is very
near to GOD, she plentifully and abundantly powers forth herself to al.

This little Fountain increased to a huge River, and flowed into very many
waters. Hest. 11.
For lo she was a little fountain in her humility and conversation; but then
grew into an immense River, in her Annunciation and Conception of the Son of
GOD; and flowed into many Waters in her glorious Assumption, when she flows
so abundantly, as al participate of her fulness; as well they without (as yet in
banishment) as those also in the streets of the Celestial Jerusalem; according
to that of Solomon in his Proverbs: Prou 5.
Thy fountains are derived abroad, and thou diuidest thy waters in the streets.
She is a perpetual Fountain, because (as Esaias says) a Fountain of waters,
whose waters never fail. Esaias. 1. 6.
Other Fountains will soon dry up, but this never, For the love of the world is
no endless or perpetual Spring, but slides away, goes, and comes, and often comes
to naught; but is a Cestern rather, that will in time be exhausted, and that ere
very long. Hier. 2.
They have left me the Fountain o^ living Water, and framed to themselves
broken Cesterns that leake and can hold no water. Lastly, this Fountain of
Ours, is sweet and pleasant. For as Springs and Fountains of waters, arising
from the Sea* and passing through veins, as it were, and subterranean places,
become very fauourie and sweet; and that by certain degrees, having first of al
a kind of bitterness with them, and then a more gratful, and lastly a pleasant
and delicious taste. So the blessed Virgin like a Fountain springing from the
source and origin of the bitter and harsh people of the Jews, was through a
singular and especial prerogative preserved from the least tack of those
brackish waters, whence she came; and being divinely sanctified by the
Holie-Ghost, became a most delicious Fountain of al graces; according to that
of Judith: The bitter fountains are made sweet to drink. Iud. 5.
From whence, as from a public Conduit of a City, the universal Church
deriues infinite streams of graces and favors. And, as in great Cities there
is wont to be some Conduit or Concha, or most ample and spacious Channels
erected in the open marketplace, from whence may al at their pleasure fetch
waters without limit or restraint, for all their uses; besides some special
pipes conueighed into some men's houses, as a singular favor: So the blessed
Virgin, like a copious and endless Conduit, abundantly affords the waters of her
graces to all that have their recourse to her for them; and more particularly
and familiarly to those, that are her special Deuotes, as being of her families
and holy Sodalities.

Let us now see then, what waters she affords; for surely her waters are full of
Virtues. And first, they cool and refrigerate, and are therefore most welcome
to the thirsty soul. And as Fountain Water in Summer is more cold, and hotter
in Winter: so the Incomparable Virgin, in the summer of prosperity gives fresh
and cool waters, to wit, a cooling and refrigerating grace, that the mind be
not too much enflamed with terrene affects; but in the winter of Adversity
yealds her waters hot, that is, inflaming, least the mind with adversities
being too much depressed, might cool, and at last grow utterly cold in the
love and service of God. As these waters cool, so do they quicken and viuify
withal; and are therefore called living or the waters of life. Number. 13.
Heart the clamor of this people, and open them the treasure, the fountain of
living water.

These Fountain-waters have an humectiue and vegetative virtue with them, to
water and to make things prosper and grow up. C^n. 2.
A fountain ascended from the earth, watering the universal superficies. So
Genesis. And for growing, Esaias says: The shower falls and snow from heaven,
and returns no more; Esa. 55.
but inebriates the earth, powers upon it, and makes it to spring and grow up.
For the earth indeed is said, first to put forth the blade of the wheat, then
the green ear, and lastly it becomes a ripe and ful-grayned ear of corn. And
this heavenly Fountain of ours, first makes the earth of our soul, to put
forth the green herb of the fear of God, which is the beginning of a new
life; then the green ear of Penance, which is bitter and sharp; lastly a full
perfect fruit in the ripe ear, which is Charity; since Dilection is the
fulness of the Law.

And to conclude, Romans 13.
the virtues of these waters have the power to ascend and mount up, according
to that: The water which I shall give you, shall be (in her) a Fountain of water
arising and springing to eternal life. And as the nature and property of the
water is especially in pipes to arise the higher, I. 4.
the lower it falls: so the Virgin stooping to the center of her Nothing, is
advanced so high, above the Cherubins and Seraphins themselves; and so
consequently the waters of grace, that flow to us from her, raise us the higher
in Heaven, while by her example we stoop down and abase our selves, and
especially despise these base and terrene things.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
IT had not rayn'd, and so the earth was dry,
No showers of Grace were falling from the sky.
An universal drought possessed the Land
With dearth and famine; The Pause.
God's reuengeful hand
On Eve, passed to her progeny, For sin,
Man's soul, like earth dried up had ever been,
But that there did a cristal Spring arise,
To drench the barren soil, and fertilize:
For Naamans (Iordan-like) it made a flood,
That flowd with Grace. Turbata est in sermon cius.
'Twas Troubled (not with mud,
While She Is called full of grace) But sinner I
Am troubled, 'cause I want. Fountain, supply.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as an Aqueduct has length and breadth with it: The
Contemplation.
so our glorious Virgin, the Fountain, I mentioned above, of living waters, as
an Aqueduct has so great a length, as she reaches even from heaven to the
earth; according to that mellifluous Doctor: Marie is an Aqueduct, S. Ber.
whose top like Jacob's ladder, reaches to Heaven. And the breadth of this
Aqueduct is such, as she was able to contain the Divine Fountain itself, as
the same S. Bernard affirms: A Fountain is borne to us, Idem.
because that Celestial vein has descended by the Aqueduct, though not
affording us the whole plenty of the fountain, yet pouring out certain
stillicides of grace, into our dry and arid hearts.

Consider then, that as we can not derive the waters of the Heavens into our
Conduits on earth, without some conueyance or other: so can we not expect the
waters of Grace to come from thence without some Aqueduct of Grace, which is
the blessed Virgin, the Incomparable Fountain thereof; for that, as S. Bernard
says, the floods of graces were wanting so long to human kind, for that as yet
no Aqueduct had made intercession for it. Seek we therefore grace through the
invocation of Marie, Mother of Grace; and whatsoever we offer to GOD, commend
we to Marie, that grace may return back by the same channel, by which it
flowed.

Ponder lastly the manner how this Aqueduct or Fountain of ours communicates
its waters; for to some she communicates in manner of a Well, to some again in
manner of a Spring, and thirdly to others in manner of Riuer-waters. The Well
has its waters hid in the bottom of the pit, and not to be drawn without some
difficulty: in which manner she communicates herself to sinners only, to whom
the waters of grace are hidden, but yet to be fetched and had with the labor of
contrition and penance. but the water of the Spring is drawn without labor
at al, and flows continually: and in this manner she communicates herself to
pious Souls and her Deuotes, because continually she affords them graces with
much facility; and lastly, as touching the River, that flows so with great
abundance, she communicates and powers forth herself to the Blessed Souls,
with ineffable graces, which are not communicable to mortal wights.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Virgin Marie, The Colloquie.
Fountain of grace, Fountain, I say, of the Paradise of pleasure. Thou cristal
Well of the living waters, which flow with impetuositie from Libanus, O signed
and sealed Fountain, such as the Wiseman so points forth, that beganst to rise
from the earth of a barren soil, to fructify the world with thy Merits, and to
water it with thy Graces. Thou little Fountain as then, now grown to a great
and ample River, who in thy birth appearing as a little Spring by humility, and
then a Fountain of more note, and so increasing still with sanctity in
conversation becamest atlast to be a swelling River, when so thou conceauedst
in thy Wo^b, the source of al graces, that precious Oil CHRIST JESUS; so as
now from the plenitude of this Fountain, through al places of the Church, have
balsomed liquours been derived to us, Obtain, o incomparable Virgin,
inexhaustible Fountain of Graces, of that dear Son of thine, that the waters
of his Celestial graces may so water my soul, that through spiritual ariditie
it be not enforced to languish utterly. This I beseech thee, thou Fountain of
living waters.

THE XX. SYMBOL. THE MOUNT.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Mount or Mountains are of the noblest and best extraction of the earth,
and therefore aptest to take fire; The Impresa
witness Aetna or Mongibel. They are as great Barons in England, and Grandes in
Spain, for their eminency above the rest of Hills, in the Vpper-house, and the
other as Knights and Bourgeses of the Lower; the Vallyes being no more then the
Commons of the Land, who choose them out to stand for the people. They are the
Cedars of the earth, and Cesars in the Senate of the highest towers, as topping
them al and keeping them under. They are the Piramides of mould, more ancient
and more lasting then those of Egypt; and the true Mausoleums of the Monuments
of Nature; the stately Collosses of earth, erected as Gog Magogs among the
lesser people of the Hills or Hillocks. They are as Saul's, far higher then their
brethren by head and shoulders: and the rest as little David's, more fit to keep
sheep in the lower playnes. Had not Mount Arrarat stood so a tipt-toe as it
were, the Ark had been forced to have made a longer navigations, and Natures
shop had not been opened so soon, to expose her Specieses of living things to
the new world, nor yet the doors and windows thereof so soon had been vnbolted
within. The Mountains then, are as Atlas shoulders; to sustain and bear up the
Welkin with. If the earthly Paradise be yet on earth, it must be surely on
some Mountain top, or else as hanging in the air, and so no earthly Paradise.
They are the Rocks of the Air, against the which the racking clouds, like
Argoseyes, dash and break themselves, and suffer shipwreck. They have the
honor of the first salutes of the glorious Sun, in the Aurora of his first
appearing; and have his last kisses, ere he go to bed. They have their
intelligences with the Intelligences themselves; and were they not so pursie
and vnweildie, might even dance to their musicks, howsoever they may listen to
them as they stand.

THE MORALS.
IN VERTICE MONTIVM.
THere is nothing honorable, that is not good; The Motto.
nothing good, that is not equitable; and nothing equitable, that is not wholly
opposite to al deordinations. True honor consists in fearing GOD; and to spare
neither life nor ought that is dearest, in augmentation of one's glory. It
stands not upon its Ancesters, in seeking so much to borrow luster from them,
as to earne it of itself. So as if it can not arrive to their virtue, who have
left it any Title by inheritance, it blushes more for its own infirmity
therein, then vaunts of the blazon of its House, whose greatness makes it not
haughty or imperious, but rather, as the fixed stars, the higher it is, the
less it desires to appear; nor regards it so much an outward pomp, or
swelling o^te^tation, as the solid verity of a Soul truly noble. Courtesy
and sweetness can no more be severed from it, then the body from the soul, to
remain true honor; nor does it of any base facility to insinuate with, but
out of a natural courtesy coming from a true esteem of its self. None more
inclined to compassion toward the afflicted, or more disposed to succor them,
then it; and then most, when they have least help otherwise, and less
possibility to requite. It is more careful to yeald true honor to the
Creator, then to receive it from any one. In a word, it so behaues itself, as
it holds the Body of true honor, to consist not in the blood or dignity
only, but the Soul in the eminence of virtue above others. This true Nobility
and honor the glorious Virgin had in high measure, who being lineally
descended from the race of Kings, and, which is more, exalted to the sovereign
degree of the Mother of GOD, and consequently raised above all the hills of the
blessed Spirits in Heaven, yea the Cherubins and Seraphins themselves; styled
herself, the handmayd of our Lord, being arrived, I say, to sit IN VERTICE
MONTIVM.

THE ESSAY.
MOVNTAINS are one of the gallantst things in Nature, especially if we regard
the Prospect they afford, to deliciat the eyes with; The Reuiew.
when taking a stand upon some good advantage, you behold from thence a goodly
river underneath; which in token of homage, as it were, runs kissing the foot
thereof, along as it goes. But the most delicious it is, when you see on the
other side, a vast plain suspended before you, and diuersifyed with little
risings, hills, and mountains, here and there, which bounding not the view too
short, suffers the eyes with freedom to extend themselves into the immensitie
of Heaven, while the River, creeping along the meadows with Meander-windings
encloses the Hill about, in form of an Island, whence many vessels of al sorts
riding there at ancker, may be discryed, the nearest questionles very easily
discerned, and the rest farther off through interposition of ba^cks between,
not perceived, the tops of the masts only appearing, like a Grove or wood in
winter without leaves; the little closes or fields thereabout, with the
hedge-rowes enuironing the same, seeming as Garden-plots hedged in with prim;
and the lanes and high ways as dressed into allies. The verdures give forth
themselves delicious to behold, like a La^dskap in a table, with all the greenes
to be found in the neck of a mallard, here a bright, there a dark, and then a
bright and a dark again, and al by reason of the leuels, with the risings, and
fallings together, with the lights and reflectio^s caused through the dawning
of the day in the morning or twylight of the evening, the rays of the sun
being an open enemy to such near prospects, offending the view with too much
simplicity and sincerity of dealing. It is a great curiosity in Nature, to
enquire how these Mountains first came up, so to surmount the lesser Hills and
lower vallyes; or whether Nature intended them first, or no. If so; how came
she partial? if not, how came they to be so? and a thousand other devils they
raise besides, which no ordinary Coniurer can lay. But such would I have to
ask the Vallyes, how they came to be so beneath the Hills or higher Mountains?
which if they satisfye, I undertake, the Mountains shall as much. But the truth
is, he that puts generositie in some above the rest, and made not al of the
same euennes and tenor of mind: and so in other things he made a Cedar and a
shrub, a Pine and a bramble, an Alexander and a Diogenes, a Caesar and an Irus,
a Giant and a dwarf: so made he Mounts of Pelion and Ossa, and the vales of
Mambre and Iosaphat. These, from the first, were so created mountains and
vallyes; unless perhaps, as with the Angels, al were once as mountains, til
Lucifer and his Accomplices aspiring higher then they should, were thrown
headlo^g, and made the vales of Hellish feinds: So such as will aspire to be so
wise, to search into the secrets of God's hidden Architecture, shall be rankt in
the number of the silly vales, in punishment of their daring folly to presume
so much.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BUT then to speak of the Mount of Mountains, The Survey.
placed in the Garden of the Empyreal Heavens, where al are Mounts, and this
the Mount paramount above them al; is a work of a higher nature, the
Incomparable Virgin MARIA, I mean, that admirable and mysterious Mount, so
like in name and quality to that of Mo^nt-Moria, a certain hill in the City
of Jerusalem. For as on that Mount-Moria, Solomon first founded his Temple, the
house of GOD: so in this our Montain Maria, was the heavenly and Celestial
Temple of the true Solomon raised indeed, which he said within three days
should be re-edifyed again, in case it were ruined, to wit, the Temple itself
of the humanity of JESUS CHRIST. Moria signifies the land of vision; and what
land more worthy to be seen the^ Marie, the Mother of GOD? Moria is said to be
a high and stately land, and next to GOD: and there is nothing so high and
sublime as Marie is, no not the Angels nor Archangels, nor yet the Cherubins or
Seraphins themselves. Moria is interpreted shining o^ illuminating: and Marie
being clothed with the Sun, illumines Mortals, and truly shines, as being truly
the Star of the Sea. Moria, Pagnin
as some Authors say, is derived of the Hebrew Mori, which signifyes my mirrh,
and Iah, which is GOD, as much to say as GOD is my mirrh. And was he not truly
her mirrh indeed, when she stuck him so in her bosom, as he lay in her lap,
being taken from the Cross, according to that: my beloved to me is a bundle of
mirrh? and she herself no less then mirrh; if we look into her name, which is
Marie, quasi amarum mare, a Sea as bitter as mirrh itself; Eccl. 24.
of whom is said: As a choice mirrh have I yeaded a sweetness of odor: Maria is
derived also, as some will have it, from the Hebrew mereh, which is teaching,
and iah, GOD; teaching; who taught indeed, when being seated as Solomon in his
Throne, or rather Wisdom itself in its Scholastical Chair, in the Womb of
the Virgin Mother, for so many months, he read to the world such a Lecture of
humility, patience, charity, and al virtues particularly in his Incarnation;
but especially in the Crib, and arms of his Mother, when teaching both Jew and
Gentil, in the Shepherds and Magi, at his Birth and Manifestation, he so
taught them the Ghospel. It is finally interpreted the Rain of GOD, where you
may judge what a shower of grace by this our Marie was powered into the world,
when Anna, as a dry and barren clowd, for many years before, was at last
delivered of her; and she powered into the world, as a shower of rain, after a
tedious famine, to fertilize and fructify the earth.

Nor is Marie our Mount restrained to Moria only, but Sinaj also seems to
represent her, no less in regard that Hill is accounted the Mount of mercy and
promise, as well as she. This Sinaj is situated in the province of Madian,
whereof Oreb is a part, and where our Lord appearing to Moses in a bush, and
taking compassion on the affliction of his people, promised to free them, from
the bondage of the Egyptians, through the power of this mighty hand, Exodus
as we have it in Exodus. And so was the Blessed Virgin Marie, as the Queen of
mercy, promised and prefigured in the same Bush, wherein our Lord appeared to
Moses; and for the rest, were the promises likewise performed in her, of the
Redemption and deliverance of the Human kind, from the thraldom and slavery
of the Devil, while the Son of GOD took flesh of her for our ransom and
delivery. Our Lord descended on mount Sinaj etc. That mount was likewise as
the Rendeuous and haunt of our Lord; for there the Angel appeared often on
behalf of our Lord, and spoke familiarly to Moses; and therefore it is said of
him in the Acts: Act 7.
He appeared to him in the desert of mount Sinaj, in the flame of a fiery
bush. And so was the Blessed Virgin saluted, and as frequently visited by the
Angel, and instructed no less of the Word of life. Sinai was a Mount of rain,
and Deaw: and so was the Blessed Virgin, Psalm. 71
in conceauing the Son of GOD; according to that: He shall desce^d as rain on
a (...). Sinaj was the Mount of the Divine habitation; for so, according to
Josephus was the common opinion in those days. And the Blessed Virgin was
truly the habitation and dwelling of GOD. Ps. 110.
She was the mount in whom GOD took much delight. Sinaj was the Mount of
wisdom and learning; for therein was the Law delivered to the people by the
hand of Moses: so likewise the Blessed Virgin Mother brought him forth to the
world, who is the Word and Wisdom of the Father; who is our Captain and
Lawgiver, through who^ do Kings reign, and the giuers of Laws decree just
things. She was a Mount distilling the oil of mercy; a Mount of peace and
alliance; a Mount of pastures to feed on; a Mount, where it pleased GOD to
inhabit, Psalm. 75. 67 41.
as David said, the Mount of GOD, the fat Mo^ut, the holy and little Mount,
which Esaias fortold of, which should be prepared, Isai. 2.
and to which all the world should resort for pleasure, and repair for sweet
consolation; the Mount familiar to the Angels, in their frequent visits.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
Again is raised (while Mortals feign, and err)
The Statue of Nabucodonozer. Th. P^

Heresy on feet of Clay and Iron stands,
Which have no Union. Lo, cut without hands
A stone falls from a Mountain. Sh' had a Son,
Who (having vowed) said: How can this be done;
I know no man. 'Twas then the work alone
Of the Holie-Ghost: Thus without hands the Stone
Fell from the Mountain. Head, breast, arms, and al
By striking of the feet, demolisht, fall.
O, with that Stone, this Monsters feet misled,
May she break down, that crushed the Serpe^^^
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that as Libanus is a Mount of indeficient waters; The
Contemplation.
for that, there, according as we have it in the Ca^ticles, are springs of
living waters, which flow with a force and violence; and Libanus itself is a
fountain and spring of floods; while on the foot thereof, two fountains arise,
the one Ior, the other Dan; which sliding and falling into one, do make the
Jordan at last, as S. Hierom says. So our Incomparable Virgin is truly a
Libanus likewise of endless and indeficie^t waters, whose graces and favors
continually flow to Mortals; nor can those springs of hers be ever dry, to wit,
her perpetual virginity, and stupendous humility; which being so united in
her Annunciatio^; produced such a Jordan of al graces in the person of her
dearest Son our Savior Christ.

Consider then, that as Mount Libanus is a Mount of fragancie and sweet odours;
and therefore it is said; Like Libanus having the odor of sweets. For there
are trees that bear the incence, Ec. 39.
and many odoriferous herbs besides, do there grow. So in our sacred Libanus,
the Virgin Marie; are the delicious odours of al virtues, with the Incence of
sublime prayer and contemplation; the perfumes of sanctity and holy
conversation, the mirrh of mortification and memory of death, while her life
was nothing else, but a continual languor of perpetual mortification, as well in
denying herself the pleasures, contentments, and delights of the world, as in
sighing and groaning so much after heaven, where her whole conversation was. And
therefore is it said in the Canticles: Fly my beloved, resemble the goat and
fawn of the deer on the Mountains of spices, as much to say, as fly from the
vanities of the world, and high you to Libanus the mount of Spices, to the
Blessed Virgin the Libanus of al graces.

Ponder lastly, that as Libanus is interpreted white, for the candor of the
snow, which perpetually couers the same: so is our Libanus no less white, yea
a great deal more, through the candor of perpetual Virginity, which is a
kind of whitnes of the flesh; and as Libanus through the abundance of the
Deawes, and much quantity of raynes, that fall upon it, abounds with principal
herbs, fat pastures, and excellent fruits: so in our Libanus of the Blessed
Virgin; do flow the deawes of Divine grace, and the raynes of spiritual
knowledge: and therefore abounds she so with the rich pastures of the sacred
Scriptures, and Celestial understandings of high Mysteries, with plentiful
herbs of the flourishing green of al virtues, and especially laden with the
galla^t fruits of souls. Oset. 14.
Her root shall break forth, as that of Libanus; her boughs shall grow out, and
her glory shall be as the Olive, and her odor as of Libanus; says the Prophet.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Queen of Angels and Archangels, The Colloquie.
of Patriarks, Prophets; and Evangelists; of Apostles, Martyrs, and
Confessors; of Doctors, Anchorits, and Hermits, and especial^y the Crown and
glory of Virgins, Widows, and of al holy Women, in the coui^gal state. o
Mountain among the lesser hills of al those Saints, that have been ever, are, or
ever shall be. O excellent Mountain, O eminent Mountain. O Mount, whose air is
temperate and never troubled, where no Serens of inordinate concupiscences ever
fall, and where no injury of times ever works any mischief. Mountain of
pleasure, delicious Paradise, the Libanus of sanctity, the Sinaj of Majesty,
and terror to the reprobate, the Caluarie of compassion of thy Sonne's
passion, the Thabor of Divine mysteries, the Oliuet of joy and eternal
happiness: In a word, O mount of heaven and fair habitation of the Heaven of
Heavens, O Virgin, Alas, make me of thy condition, draw my soul from the
servitude of sin, from the affection of the world, and tyranny of the flesh;
and put my feet on the Mountain of perfection, that so approaching nearer to
thee, I may come to inbabit with thee, above the clouds, O grant this same, I
beseech thee, for his sake, who came down from heaven to meet thee, in the
clouds, accompanied with miriads of Saints, and blessed Spirits, at thy
glorious Assumptio^.

THE XXI. SYMBOL. THE SEA.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Seas, are the great Diet, or Parliament held of Waters, at the first
creation of the world, The Im^resa
when GOD himself was the only Speaker of the House; where they met of
compulsion rather then fair accord, while every whispering of sinister breath
puts them al into combustion, when for the time, there will be no dealing with
the^, so implacable they are, that the stoutest are feign to vale-bonet and
stoop unto them. They are great Usurers, and likely never let go any pawnes
they once lay hold of, which they extort full sore against their wills who leave
the^ in their clutches. They are infinite rich with such booties, and may well
compare with their neighbor Pluto or Mamo^ himself. They will sometimes
notwithstanding be very calm, courteous, and seren: so as they will inuit the
houshold-Nimphes and Halcions to sing and dance to the noise of their music,
and of a sudden change the key and tune so, as none but Dolphins ca^ brook the
stage, or keep measure with their boisterous time, in the unruly Revels they
keep. As the Earth, have they also their mines of richest wealth, lying in the
bowels of their Abysses, which enjoy no other light, the^ their own lusters,
nor ever are like to do; such covetous misers they are of their pelf. They have
likewise their dales and mountains to, but those so restles, as no beasts can
graze upon them, going upon four, but such as take any benefit of those
pastures, are feign to go on their breasts. They are the humid firmament
without firmnes, where all the stars are moving Planets. They are the clowdie
or waterie air, where the birds make use of fins instead of wings. Only the
Element of fire has no frienship with the^, but is at deadly fewd with them,
and therefore goes as far from them, as possibly it can, because they never
meet, but it pays well for it, with its own destruction. They scarcely
acknowledge any deity above them, or homage due to any but the Moon, to
whom they are very punctual and obsequious, nor miss her a moment with their
service, at her beck to go and come as hawks in a line, or horses with the
bit, that dare not go amiss. Most think, they are phlegmatic, because so
humid, but rather I take them, to be of a melancholy complexion, with the
gift of tears only, for that their waters are ever brackish and bitter as
tears are. In fine, they are another world in themselves, wherein GOD has
plu^ged and drencht the diversities of al earthly creatures.

THE MORALS.
AB A MARO MARE, A MARI MARIA.
THE Egiptians for characters, The Motto.
had pictures; of pictures, made they books; wherein they had need to have been
excellent Morallists, and consequently good Naturallists, to know the natures
and properties of al creatures. I add withal, some part of their wits also,
should have layne in their fingars ends, to shape forth with cole or chisel, so
many diversities of things. Adam our first Parent, gave them the first ground
thereof, when from the beginning he so called and assembled all the newborn
creatures to give the^ names, as a Baylif of some great Lord should go about,
to mark this Maister's sheep, with special marks, notes, or signs of whose
they are. And this he did, by the pattern and example first given him by GOD in
himself and his consort, the first that ever took any name; while he was
called Adam, as signifying, de terra terrenus, and she Virago, a viro desumpta.
The Patriarks after him still practiced the same, which Adam did; assigning
names very apt to al their children, as the present occasions put them in the
head, or rather as divinely inspired by him, that best can skill, to single out
and call each thing by its proper name. Hence Joseph, as his type, was called a
Savior and Iosue likewise, for the same reason. S. John the Baptist his
Precursour was called Grace, which John imports, to signify the coming and
approach of Grace indeed, in the Messiah at hand. Yea JESUS, which signifyes
Savior, came at last with that name assigned him from al eternity, and lastly
given him by the Paranymph Angel, with the surname of Emanuel, as much to say,
as Deus nobiscum. And so the Incomparable Virgin, was Divinely sorted with the
name of MARIE, that fitted her so right. For she was indeed a Sea of bitterness,
through the seauenfold sword of sorrow, that pierced her heart; and therefore
rightly. AB A MARO MARE, A MARI MARIA.

THE ESSAY.
THE richest pieces of Eloquence, The Reuiew.
and Poetry are borrowed of the Sea; be it for descriptions of some notable
shipwreck, or to express the blustering winds, which furrow the face of that
liquid Element, raising up billows, that dash and wash as it were the very
face of the Heavens, and seem to plunge the Stars in the surges of the
wrathful Nemesis or Thetys rather; or lastly in expressing some Naumachias, or
sea fights, or that of the Remora, that Caesar of Caesar's in captiuing so, in a
floating Castle, Caligula the Roman Monark, to the stupour and amazement of the
world. These are the uses Poets make thereof, but Philosophers go further yet,
and tell us stranger things of this stupendous work of Nature, of the Flux and
Reflux thereof, and fair correspondences it has with the Moon. The fabulous
Antiquity has reckoned ever the Sirens those chanting Nimphs, and great
enchantresses, to be the Hostesses of the Sea; and even the sagest of them in
their follies, take it for a grace to their Goddess Venus, to fetch her
extraction from the impure flames of the waves. This we know by experience, the
foam and froth of the Sea, being dried with the rays of the Sun, convert to
sponges, and they again into pomice-stones, as light as Venus herself; it is
ordinarily veyled with vapors, curtened over with clouds, enwrapped with fogs,
and sometimes buried in Cimerian darkness; then of a sudden it changes the
countenance, and becomes a cerulean Sea, as various in hew, with as many
colors, as the changeable neck of a Dove gives forth with the reflection of
the Sun; when the former furrows al of wrath in the face of this stern Ocean
will turn to smiles and daliances with his amorous Tethis; the Halcion, the joy
of Mariners will straight appear upon the decks of ships to glad the
passengers, and the Dolphins da^ce before them with a pleasant glee; the
waterie pauements seem as swept the while, to inuit them likewise to dance
laualtoes with the^; and the gentle Eurus and Zephirus in disposition to tune
their pipes for the purpose. And for Cosmographers (whom we must believe,
unless with measuring the world ourselves, we will disprove the^) they tell us,
the Ocean is that universal Choas of waters, which enuirous the land of al
sides: for look what coasts soever they sail unto, they always find the Seas
to waft the^ thither; which on the east is called the Indian Sea: on the West
the Atlantic: on the North and the Regions opposite, the Pontick and the frozen
Sea: and on the South, the Red or Ethiopian; beyond al which, many striving to
reach to the utmost shores, have made vast nauigations, and have sooner found
their victuals to fail them, then ample spaces of immense waters undiscovered.

THE DISCOVRSE.
BEhold here a singular Symbol of cur Incomparable Virgin, The Survey.
a vast and immense Sea of Charity; for so is she pleased to go shadowed at
this time, nor may it seem to any strange, she should do so, or we presume so
to style her, since lo the Blessed Cyprian terms her, not a Microcosme only,
as we are al, but even an ample, co^pleat, and universal World within herself,
adorned with the Species of al creatures, I read, says he, and understand,
that Marie is a certain intelligible and admirable world, whose land is the
soliditie of humility; whose Sea, the latitude of Charity; whose heaven, the
height of Co^templation; whose sun, the sple^dour of Understanding; whose
moon, the glory of Purity; whose Lucifer, the brightness of Sanctity; whose
cluster of seven stars, the seauen-fold Grace; and whose other stars are
the beautiful ornaments of the rest of her admirable Virtues.

The Histories report, that Helena among the Grecian Beauties carried the prize
away; and that Zeuxis, a most exquisit painter, in the Age immediately
following, would needs draw her pourtraict, though he had never seen her while
she lived: and therefore gathered he together all the fairest damzels in those
parts, and whatsoever he found rare and excellent in any, he would exactly put
into his piece, not leaving, til he had finished a most admirable piece of
work, delineated from them, which even ravished the eyes and hearts of al. So
may we say of our blessed Lady, Mother of the eternal King, that she was an
abstract of all the perfectio^s possible, dispersed not only in that sex, or the
huma^ kind, but even likewise in the Angelical nature itself; and therefore well
might be called a Sea of al perfectio^s; since both her name, in the Hebrew,
sounds as much as Sea; and as the Sea is nothing else, but a certain
congregation together of al waters, Genesis 1.
so is she no less an assembly and congregation of al graces and perfections
to be found elsewhere.

The Sea indeed has three properties; It is the Spring and origin of al
fountains; it is always full; and is bitter and brackish in taste. Our Lady
likewise is the spring and origin of al graces, from whose virginal womb did
JESUS flow, the fountain of this Fountain, the increated Grace, from the
plenitude of whose grace, we al receive grace, in what measure soever we become
capable of. And as from the sea do flow great quantities of waters which it
receaues again, not being kept; so do graces flow from the Sea of Marie in
great plenty; yet with flowings and ebbings, through our ingratitude, and not
making use thereof. But if after our neglect of her favors we return, as we
ought, to beg them again, though we receive no effectual benefits by her first
offers which we refused, yet does she daily offer them again; with this
difference from those flowings of the liquid seas, that they go and come to and
fro of course, and at certain times with stints; but she is ready every
moment to communicate her favors without limits, so we will but open the
channels of our hearts to let them in.

As al Wels, Springs, and Fountains derive from the Sea, the Sea virtually
contains the nature and qualities of al Well-springs, current fountains, and
rivers. By which waters are aptly understood the three degrees of graces, which
through our Lady flow into our hearts; to wit, the Incipient or preuenient
grace, in the first beginnings of our conuersio^s; the Proficient, by which we
proceed; to virtuous actions through grace received; and the Perfect grace,
which is the full consummation thereof, and is indeed a constant perseverance to
the end in all virtues. This Incipient or commencing grace, is signified by the
Well or spring of living waters; because these springs have their waters secret
and hidden under ground; they suddenly arise, and no man knows from whence,
and so preuenient grace, is by us not merited at al, but springs, and is powered
into us, through a secret and hidden inspiration of GOD, no man can tell how, or
whence, but often comes through the intercession of the Incomparable Mother of
mercy, and the Sea of graces, being called the living Waters, for that by this
grace, are sinners dead in sins, as viuifyed to life. The Fountain Water, is
understood to be grace Proficie^t; whereof is said: the Fountain of the Gardens;
which gardens of GOD, are the good Proficients in grace, and virtues; in whom
are the herbs and plants of al virtues, in a flourishing state; which yet
could not spring at al, nor grow a whit, much less seem to prosper and
flourish, unless by this fountain they were watered with grace, being a Fountain
indeed ascending from the earth, Genesis 2.
which waters the universal face thereof. By the Riuer-water, which flows with
violence, is perfect grace to be understood, which is said to flow with
violence, because such as are replenished therewith, are very earnest and
sollicitous in the works of virtue, and proceed with fervor therein. Esech. 1
Look where the force of the spirit leads them, thither will they go with a
violence and impetuositie as it were.

The Sea is always full, and never wastes; and so our Lady was announced by the
Angel, to be full of grace, as truly she was a vast and immense Sea of al
graces. Of whom the mellifluous S. Bernard says upon those words of, ^ern.
Aue gratia plena: In the mouth truly was she full of affability; in her womb,
with the grace of the Deity; in her heart, with the grace of chatitie; in her
hand or work, with the grace of mercy and liberality. So likewise are the
waters of the Sea exceeding bitter; and our Virgin Marie was amarum mare, that
is a bitter Sea, for diverse respects, First for sorrow, for the loss of her
Son in the Temple: Behold thy Father and I have sought thee with sorrow. Then
was she bitter, merely of compassion, in beholding the Spouses in the Nuptials
to be abashed and confounded for want of wine; she had compassion of the Jewish
nation, while she saw them to be reprobate and forsaken of GOD; She pitied the
Apostles in seeing them dispersed in the passion of her Son; But especially
was she bitterly sorry at the passion of her Son, when the sword of sorrow
tra^sfixed her heart; and lastly was she bitter for her tedious pilgrimage here
so long: Psalm.
and therefore would she say: Alas, how my ^i^grimage is prolonged!

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
NO sooner was the infant-world disclosed, The Pause.

But that God's Spirit on the Sea reposed:
Borne on the waters did impart a heat
By influence divine: a fertile seat
He made that vast and barren Ocean's womb
It Was fruitful when the Holie-Ghost was come.
The sacred Virgin was a Sea like this,
But darkness on the face of the Abyss,
Was never on her Soul, that shined bright
From her first being; for GOD said: Let light
Be made: the Word was in this Sea comprised,
When the Holie-Ghost the waters fertiliz'd.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, that when the world was first created, and that the waters
were divided, as it were, The Contemplation.
by the Firmament, while part was put above the Firmament and part beneath, the
waters beneath on the earth, were called by the name of Maria, or Seas; and the
Spirit of GOD, as we have it in Genesis, did incubare super aquas cover, as we
say, or ouershadow the waters: Which was a work of the first Creation. So in
the work of our Redemption, where the blessed Virgin, Maria by name, which
signifyes the Seas also, it pleased the Eternal Word, leaving the delicious
bosom of the heavenly Father to descend into this Sea, of human miseries to
take them upon him; and the Holie-Ghost likewise to ouershadow her withal.

Consider then in the Temple of Solomon, that as besides other riches and
ornaments there, as the Propitiatory above; the Cherubins and Seraphins of
each side thereof, the golden Candlestick in the midst, the Altars of Perfumes
and of Propitiation, here and there, with the lamps, the Veyle, the Ark, and
the like in their places, was planted a great vessel of Brass, full of water,
at the entrance of the said Temple, where the Priests were to cleanse
themselves, before they entered to Sacrifice; and this Vessel was called, Mare
aeneum, or the brazen Sea. So ought the Priests in our Churches before they
enter or approach unto the dreadful Sacrifice of al Sacrifices, the Sacrifice
of the Mass, to recurre to this Mare aeneum, our Blessed Lady, to procure
them a purity of soul, to assist thereat, or approach thereunto.

Ponder lastly, that as GOD, the sovereign Lord of al things, communicates his
offices and charges to men according to his most holy and Divine dispensation
very suitable and agreeable to every one: as to Moses the office of a
Lawgiver to his people of Israel; to Aaron the office of high Priest; to
Iosue, of Captain and Leader of them into the land of promise; and consequently
gave them talents accordingly to discharge the same very punctually in all
things. So is it likely, that in choosing his Mother, he used the self-same
tenor in his fair disposition thereof, to wit, in appointing her so to be the
Star of the Sea, he ordained her no doubt to be the Lady of the Sea, as her
name imports. Now then as in the Seas, he has drencht and plunged, as it were,
an other world, since there is no living creature but has its like in the Sea
also implicitiuely, he has likewise appointed her to be the Lady and Mistress
of all the world. For how should she save from shipwreck, if were not Lady and
Mistress of the waves and winds? And how should she be Lady of the Seas alone,
if she were not the Lady likewise of the land? Since she who is styled the
Lady of the Seas, is the true and natural Mother of him, who is Lord both of
Sea and land, and all the world.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Lady of the Ocean, The Colloquie.
Star of the Sea, Sea of graces, Fountain; of life, Spring of living waters,
that flow from the Libanus of the candor of glory! Thou great Abyss of
limpid waters, whose bottom, none can reach unto; whence nothing arises, but
the purest exhalations of Paradise; light clowd, whence nothing falls but
deawes and showers of graces. O immense Ocean of Charity, which bear up al
things, and where easily nothing sincks; bitter, but in the dolours and
passions of thy Son; sweet to the creatures, that live of thee, or depend
upon thee. O grant, I beseech thee, that wholly relying on thee, I perish not,
and by neglecting thee and thy service, I incur not thy disgrace, nor so
running on the rocks of thy displeasure, I split not on them, nor suffer
shipwreck of my soul.

THE XXI. SYMBOL. THE SHIP.
THE DEVISE.


THE CHARACTER.
THE Ship is the artificial Dolphin of the Seas, The Impresa
that much addicted to music, is never set on a merrier pin, then when the
winds whissel to her dancing. It is a floating Castle, that has the gates open
indeed, but trusts to her Battlements, which she has well planted with Canons
and Sacres, wherein she more confides, then many do in Sacred Canons; her whole
salvation depending upon them. It is a little Commonwealth, whose whole Reason
of State consists in iealousies, and spies, which she sends up to her
turret-tops, to discover, if the coasts be clear, still standing on her guard,
against the neighbor waves, that seek but to swallow her up. And al her care
is, to walk upright amidst her enemies, least unawares they arrest her, and
cite her to appear at Pluto's Court, for every error or default of the least
ship-boy. There is no Bride requires so much time to dress her on her
wedding day, as she to be rigd, whenever she goes to sea. If they have their
fillets to bred and wreath their hairs with, she has her tacklings to trim
her up; whose ropes are as many and as intricate as they; if they have their
veyles to spread upon them, she has her sails, to hoyse up to go her ways.
It is the Lion of the seas, that fears no Monsters, but is as dreadful
herself, as any Monster, having as many mouths as Gun-holes, and in every
mouth a Serpent tongue, that spits and vomits fire, and which even spits her
teeth too, in the face of her enemies, which often sincks them under water. It
is one of the prettiest things in the world, to see her under sail, how like a
Turkiecock she strouts it out, as brauing even the Elements themselves, both
above and beneath her, whereof the one she ploughes with her slicing share, and
braues the other with her daring look. She is an excellent swimmer, bnt no good
diuer at al; which she never does, but sore against her will, and that with so
il success, as likely she is never seen more. The first that ever was seen to
our Antipodes, was thought by them to have had indeed a living soul with her;
else would the simple people say, how could so great a bulk, so easily wind and
turn it sell every foot; and this, because they knew but the Oar only, and
not the Rudder. What would they have said then, had they known the effects of
her Card and Compass? doubtless she had a reasonable soul. She likely never goes
without her Pages with her, to wit, her Longboat and her Cockboat, whereof she
makes such use now and then, as without them, she might starve for ought I
know. She is very civil, if a Marchant-man; but when she is a Man of war,
then Merchants beware, and look to your selves.

THE MORALS.
DE LONG PORTANS PANEM.
IN the Temple of Solomon, no gold would serve his greatcuriositie, The Mott^.
but that of Ophir. Which the Southern Quee^ of Saba knowing well perhaps,
thought no doubt her presents would be gratful to him, coming so from parts
remote. Who is he that is not taken much with very toys that come from China,
which carry I know nor how in themselves, (at least in our opinion) a kind of
luster with the^, greater far then otherwise they would. The prese^ts which
the Magi brought unto the Crib, coming from the East were deemed by them sit
presents for a King, yea for a GOD. And how were Iosue and Caleb the Spies and
Intelligencers of the people of Israel extolled and magnifyed at their return
with those rare and admirable booties fetched from Canaan? And yet the gold of
Ophir was but gold, a yellow earth; the presents made by Saba, such as that
Country afforded; and those India^ toys, but toys indeed. Yea the gifts the
Magi brought, had greater luster with them from the giuers hearts, then from
themselves; and more respected for the place to which, the^ whence they came.
And for those foreign fruits, they came indeed from the la^d of promise, from
Palestin, which was but the figure only of the Heavenly country. But lo, our
Incomparable Virgin like a Ship, most richly fraighted, has brought us Bread
from far. What bread; but the true and living bread? How far? As far as
Heaven. But how bread? Bread whose corn was haruested in the Mighty man's
rich Boozfield, framed by the hand of the Master Baker himself of a most pure
meal or flower, to wit, of the immaculate Blood of the holy Virgin herself,
baked in the Oven of an arde^t Love, which She has brought into the world. And
therefore is truly said: DE LONG PO^TANS PANEM.

THE ESSAY.
I Can not tell, whether in the world besides, be a more stately fight to
behold, then an English Ship under sail, riding in the Ocean, and cutting the
watrie playnes with her sharp keel, The Reuiew.
in case she have a galla^t gentle gale in the poop; for then they feast it,
and make good cheer, who are the living souls abiding in this bulk of human
art, compiled together in despite of Nature, to frame a living creature more
then she intended, that neither should be fish nor foul, yet live in the air
and water. But if the Seas prove rough, and all the marine Mo^sters vise up
against her, co^spiring with the blustering Spirits of the air; to sinck her
quite, it is a sport to see, how she rides and prances on his crooked back,
sporting herself the while, and making a mere scoff at al their menaces* There
is an infinite number of several sorts of these artificial creatures in the
world, each country almost having their kinds. There are Ships, Pinaces, Hoyes,
Barks, Ketches, Galleyes, Galeons, Galleasses, Frigots, Brigandines, Carackes,
Argoseyes, for the Seas; to say nothing of Lighters, Barges, Tiltboats,
Lighthorsmen, Oars, Canoas, and Gundeloes, for the Rivers. The Ships do fly
and swim together, with the help of ^ayles only; the Galleyes and their
like, as Swans do sometimes fly, and sometimes paddle with the oar. They have
maine masts, cross sails, top and top galla^ns, they have stern, poop,
rudden, ancker, cable, decks, tacklings, gunnes, andigun-holes, where they have
Canon Demy-cano^, Saker, Culuering; not to speak of the small shot, as muskets,
harkebuses, and firelocks, and a thousand more. And so much for the sensles
body of this bulk in itself. But then to speak of the soul, or policy, and
oeconomie of this admirable artificial creature, or moving world, it is a
business no less, to set them down. For as for the Officers which are simply
necessary either in the Admiral or Vice Admiral of a Fleet or Royal Armado at
the seas, there is a General, a Lieutenant General, a Captain, a Pilot, and the
Pilot's mate; a Master, and the Maister's mate; a Merchant, and a Marcha^t's
mate; the Master of the Ship-boyes, a Secretary, a Surgeon; a Boatswain, a
Purser, Dispensers, Cooks, Canonier, and his mate, with vndergunners,
ship-boyes and mariners without number. The Captain commands absolutely in all
things; the chief marcha^t has power over the merchandise and commerce only.
They double so the principal Officers, that one may supply the others want. The
Secretary sets down the marcha^dize the Ship is fraighted with, and takes
account of goods vnladed. The Pilot has no other command, but in what concerns
the navigations. The Master has command over all the Mariners and sailors of
the Ship; and of all the provisions and victuals; he places and remoues the
Officers at his pleasure. The Masters of the boys are the ablest of all the
mariners, and have the care of the cordages, sails, and tacklings, and the
like, and command the young mariners, and do only give correction to the
Ship-boyes.

THE DISCOVRSE.
But now come we to our mystical Ship, whose ways in the vast seas the
Oraculous Solomon admired so much. The Survey.
This had for Architect and Shipwright no less then the Blessed Trinity
itself, wherein the Divine persons bestowed their chiefest Architecture. For
the Heavenly Father employed his Omnipote^cie therein as far as the subject
was capable of, the eternal Word made use of his wisdom, in preserving so
entire the seal of integrity, and the Holie-Ghost showed his Love, by
infusing such a plenitude of grace into her. The matter she was framed of, tells
us she was of herself, of wood doubtless most sacred and mysterious. As the
Cedar am I exalted in Libanus, and as the Cypress in mount Sion; Eccl. 24.
as the beautiful; Olive in the fields; and am exalted as the Planetree near
the waters in the streets. This Ship then was made of the Cedar of virginity,
in that the Cedar is odoriferous and incorruptible; and therefore signifyes her
virginity, which made her grateful and odoriferous to GOD, and kept her flesh
immaculate and incorrupted. It was made of Cypress, which is a wood so strong
and solid, as shrincks and yealds not with any burden, being qualities most
apt for shipping: nor would the charity of the blessed Virgin permit her ever,
to shrinck under the weight of tribulations. Cant. 8.
For Love is strong as death. She was made of the Olive of piety, which
always flourishes, and looks green, in that her piety never failed any,
either in the Spring of their youth, in the Autumn of their age, in the Winter
of tribulation, or in the heat of inordidinate concupiscences. She was further
made of the Plane-tree of humility; for the Plane is a most spacious and
ampletree; and humility made the Virgin most ample and illustrious; because
thereby she received him into her womb, whom the Heaven of heavens was not able
to contain, since S. Bernard says: She pleased with her virginity, but
conceived through Humility.

Her stern, is her wisdom and discretion; her Oars most sacred and holy
affects; the Mast, high and sublime contemplation; the Galleries, pure and
chaste conversation; the ropes and tacklings, the cords of love, unity and
concord; the Anckor, firm hope and confidence in GOD; the deckes and hatches,
external and holy example and edification; the sails, cleanes and purity of
body, joined with the blush of shamfastnes, The Pilot or Master of the ship,
the Holie-Ghost, which steered, guided, and directed her in the whole
navigations of her sacred life. For if they be led by the Holie-Ghost, who are
the sons and children of GOD, how much rather shall she be governed by it, who
is acknowledged to be not only the Daughter but likewise the natural Mother of
GOD!

The form and figure of a Ship we know to be open above, close beneath,
straight in the beginning, narrow in the end, broad in the midst, and very
deep. And this ship of ours the Incomparable Virgin, according to the superior
part of the Soul, was open to receive Celestial gifts, but as for the
inferior, wholly shut up from terrene affections; and moreover so strict in the
beginning of her Co^ception, as Original sin could find no place to stayne
her in; She was narrow in the end of the Passion, while for the death of her
Son she was put to diverse streights; in the midst she was most, capacious or
broad, because, as we said, Who^ the heavens could not hold, she held and
contained in the lap of her wo^b; Lastly she was deep through humility, when
being raised to the top of the highest dignity of being the Mother of GOD, she
calls herself his lowly ha^dmayd saying: Behold the handmayd of our Lord. But
for the M^st indeed, Luc. 1.
and tree of this Ship, it was CHRIST Our Lord, Luc. 23.
the very same, who called himself green wood, saying: If this be done in
green Wood, what shall become of the dry? Erected also, Heb. 7.
as S. Paul says: Being made higher then the heavens; raised in, and born of
the Virgin Ship. Of which tree or mast, Ex. 27.
we have this in Exodus: They took out a Cedar from Libanus to make be no other
then Christ erected in this Ship of our Virgin here.

The Ships are made for burden; and for as much as Nations oftentimes stand in
need of each other, they serve for transportation of commodities to and fro,
and especially corn from the fruitful to barren countries, with the abundance
of the one to supply the necessities of the other. And therefore the blessed
Virgin, as we have in the Proverbs, was made as a Merchants ship, Pro 31.
bringing her bread from far and remote parts. For even from the fertile and
most fruitful soil of the Celestial Paradise, brought she indeed that
supersubstantial bread, into the barren coasts of this world; Lue. 6.
which bread says of itself: I am the living bread, who descend from heaven,
wherewith the faithful are fed and nourished. Whence appears, how far off
this mysterious ship brought the Celestial Bread unto us, being no less then
from heaven to the earth, an immense distance; showing yet a greater distance
of natures, in that this Bread consists of the Divine and human nature, which
are infinitely distant one from the other, together with the distance of
merits; because no merits had ever deserved, that for our sakes GOD should
become Man; Which bread it seemed she likewise made her self, so signified by
that Woman in the Ghospel, who mingled together the three ha^d-fuls of meal,
as here are united the soul, the body, and the Divinity itself. O glorious
Baker of so heauenline bread! O Divine bread so mysteriously made! And most
rich and precious Ship, that conueighed the same to us from parts so remote!

Lastly, as the Ship uses the Winds only to sail with, and the Galley passes
not to and fro without the help of oars: So likewise between the blessed
Virgin, and the rest of Saints, this difference is; that they, as Galleyes,
perform the navigations of this life, with the strength of the oars, as it
were, against the wind and tide of carnal difficulties, and travel with infinite
encounters of worldly assaults, unto their heavenly Country. But the blessed
Virgin with the gentle gale of the Holie-Ghost, and the most sweet push
thereof, was conueighed thither. And as the Ship is driven with twelve sorts of
several winds; the blessed Virgin like a prosperous Ship, with the twelve
fruits of the Holie-Ghost, which S. Paul reckons up, as with so many
favorable winds, without rebellion or impugnation of sin, or any Remora, to
stop her course, was sweetly wafted to the haven of the Celestial Country.

THE EMBLEM.


THE POESY.
A Jewish Rabby says, the Angels fed
On Manna; But an other, The Pause.
better read,
Affirmes' it was Light condensed (and so made meat.
For men, (which shined before God's glorious seat,
As food of Angels. True; for one of three,
The Second Person of the Trinity
Descends, and says, He is the living bread,
He was the light whereon the Angels fed:
Which, when the Holie-Ghost over cast his shade
Was first condends'd, when Flesh the Word was made
In Mary's womb, wherewith our Souls are fed.
She is the Ship, that brought from far her bread.
THE THEORIES.
COntemplate first, The Contemplation. Reg 3.
that as Ships of Solomon, as we read of in the book of Kings, brought most
precious gold from Ophir, to adorn the Temple he had built to the Majesty of
GOD; So our mystical Ship, brought forth our Lord, the finest gold; not from
Ophir truly, but from the most precious Mines of Heaven; with whose merits, as
the daughters of Jerusalem, decked their heads in memory of Salomon's yealow
hair and Crown: So the Catholic Church is most gloriously enriched,
honored, and delighted, by our second Salomon's glorious merits, through whose
value and inestimable price, great su^mes of debts are defrayed; with whose
admirable virtue, as with a most present antidote, are the sick and infirm
cured, and the hearts of the faithful comforted; and finally through his
marvelous luster and bright splendor, the Temple of the Church incredibly
shines.

Consider then, that whereas other Ships are subject to infinite dangers in the
Seas, being tossed with te^pests and oftentimes cast away and swallowed up in
the waves, or dashed against the Rocks; for Ecclesiasticus says: Ec. 43.
Who travel on the seas, do recount their perils: either tyrannized by the
winds, or falling into the hands of Pirates or running on the Sirtes or Scylla,
and falling sometimes into the gulf of Charibdis, and lastly allured through
the Sirens songs, to their own destruction: Yet this Ship of our Lady here,
while of the one side, the storms of Original sin had no power upon her, so
as she felt not the least internal rebellion of the body or mind, against the
rectitude of Reason; and of the other was inuincibly through the Divine
assistance preserved against the assaults of the ghostly Enemy: So as neither
the Syrtes or Scylla of riches, nor the Charibdis of worldly honor, nor the
Pirates of Concupiscence, nor the Sirens of eternal delights, could stopp or
hinder her, in the fair navigations, she made unto the heavenly Country.

Ponder lastly, that as heretofore in the universal Deluge and flood of Noe, in
that general inundation of the wrath and fury of GOD, was no man saved or any
living creature besides, except such only, as fled to the Arck of Noe, built in
effect as a goodly and stately Ship: So no sinner escapes the indignation of
GOD, but such as hye themselves and fly unto the Virgin Mother for refuge,
according to that of S. Bernard. If thou darestnot approach to the Majesty of
GOD, least thou melt as wax before the fire; go to the Mother of Mercy, and
show her thy wounds, and she for thee will show her breast and paps, and the
Son to the Father his side and wounds. The Father will not deny the Son
requesting; the Son will not, deny the Mother craving; the Mother will not deny
the sinner weeping. My children, why fear you to go to Marie? she is not
austere, she is not bitter, but milk and honey is under her tongue. This is
the Ladder and honey is under her tongue. This is the Ladder of sinners, this
my great confidence, this the whole reason of my hope. And what meruel? For can
the Son repel the Mother? or be repelled of the Mother? Neither one, nor
other. Let not therefore humane frailty fear to approach unto her; For she is
wholly sweet, and sweetness itself.

THE APOSTROPHE.
O Thou ^al and goodly Arck, The Colloquie.
thou valiant Woman, valiant by excellence, more fair then Rachel, more
gracious then Hester, more pleasing then Sara, more gentle and generous then
Judith, more sweet and chaste then Abiseig the Sunamite, more officious and
prudent then Abigail, more magnanimous then Debora, more illumined then Marie
the Sister of Moses. Thou who have found grace before the eyes of GOD, work
with thy prayers most dear Lady, O my most noble Princess, that I may always
find grace before thy Son. Thou who through thy Son have broken the head of
the Serpent; crush likewise through thy holy prayers his head under thy
Servants feet. Thou Ship of the great GOD, who from those counries so far
remote have brought to us the bread of Paradise, true GOD in flesh Grant, I
beseech thee, I may be fed with the bread of grace, of life, and wisdom; and
that receiving the sacred bread of Angels, which is the precious Body of sweet
JESUS thy Son, I may even suck in the fountain itself, the most sweet
pleasures, and the most pleasing sweetnesses of the Divinity, and be wholly
inebriated with the torrent of Divine consolations.

THE CONCLUSION TO HIS PROPER GENIUS.
NOW here, my Genius, shall thou dismiss thy Reader, with his Ship full fraught
with the praises of the sacred Parthenes; and shutting up thyself in this
Parthenian Paradise, walk in it up and down by thyself alone, without eye or
arbiter, to witness the secret aspirations of thy heart; while contemplating with
thyself, this great rich Magazin of the treasures of Nature, enclosed in this
spacious and ample GARDEN of our SACRED PARTHENES, thou enter into thyself a
while, gathering the fruits and flowers, at least of good desires, from the
objects themselves. Not be a whit dismayed, though they put thee to the blush,
to be taught thy duty so, from irrational and insensible things; but yeald and
submit thy heart, to learn of each creature, how to serve the common Creator
of us al. And as thou walk up and down, taking a view of those curious
knots of euer-flourishing and green herbs, say this unto thyself: When shall I
order and compose my greener and inordinat affections in so fair and goodly a
decorum, and so sweet proportion? Walking in the Allies, say: Lord, conduct me
by the straight and ready way; and show me thy kingdom. Noting the neatnes of
those walks, how trim and smooth they are, say: When shall it be, I be so
curious, to purge and take away the impurities from my heart? The great
diversity of flowers, will present to thee, the great multiplicitie and
wel-nigh infinity of thy thoughts, as various as numerous, and al as
tra^sitorie as they. If thou see a swarm of Emo^ts at thy feet, charged and
laden al with graynes of corn, and carrying them with toil, unto their little
Grayneries, one groaning with his load, another newly discharged thereof, most
lightly and nimbly running for another, say unto thyself: Oh slothful wretch,
look on these people here, how they labor to mayntaine that paltrie little
carkas of theirs, of small continuance; and thou to mayntaine thy soul, in good
estate, so created for Eternity, art so little laborious, and industrious. When
thou beholdst the trees, full laden with their fruits, so feign to be shored up
beneath; remember the menace of fire, the Savior made against the barren tree.
When thou see the plants, to be watered so, against the scor ching of the
Sun, think and say inwardly in thyself: When shall, we with our tears appease
the auenging Wrath of the Divine Justice? The fair and beautiful Pansyes, but
without al sent or odor, will tell thee, of the unprofitable agitations of thy
soul; the Time, the bitterness of displeasures; the Poppie, that lulles the
soul a-sleep, will admonish thee of the sweet ecstasies and rauishments of
heavenly Contemplation, thou neglectest so much; the Rubarb, or herb called
Patience, will put thee in mind of that Virtue, which gives it the name; the
Balm, of a good and fair reputation. Nor stay thou here, but run to
resalute the proper and peculiar Family likewise the genuine Symbols of the
Sacred Parthenes, so mentioned above; and note the documents they will yeald
thee, for thine own behoof; and then take thy leave of al. The private Garden
will teach thee to keep thy virtues close, if thou have any; and not very
easily to loose their odor, through a voluntary publishing the same to
others. Saluting the Rose, environed with thorns, think, there is no
contentment to be found, without displeasures. Beholding the Lilly among
briars, imagine Chastity is so conserved amid austerities. The Violet will
figure thee a low and humble esteem of thyself; which yet is a fragrant and
delicious flower. The Heliotropion, which has always its look to the
Sun-wards, and follows it by day, and closes up again with the night, will put
thee in conceit of the true Sun of Justice indeed thou oughtst to follow, and
should be the whole object of thy soul. The Deaw, that falls from Heaven, will
remember thee of the heavenly graces, that were shed and distilled from
Heaven, by the coming of the Holie-Ghost in form of fiery tongues. The busy
and industrious Be, which bounds and rebounds so aloft in the air as she
flies, will call to thy mind, those words of thy great Master: Work, and
negotiate while tune lasts. The Heavens, will attract thy thoughts, to heavenly
things; the Rainbow, move thee to pardon injuries, and immediately to reconcile
thee, to thine enemies. The Moon will tax thee of inconstancy, like to hers;
the Star, raise up thy thoughts to a virtuous emulation, to become a Star
indeed, in the heavenly Hierarchy, as it is so fixed in the celestial
Firmament. The Olive will warn thee, to be always green in thy good purposes,
and fruitful in good works. The Nightingal, will let thee hear a taste or
relish, as it were, of the heavenly Quiers, and sacred Alleluya's, sung by the
Angels in Heaven. The Palm, will stir thee to Martyrdom; at least, to
fortitude in difficult atchieuements. The House, will call the heavenly mansions
and Tabernacles into thy thoughts, which are permanent for ever. The Hen, will
cause thee to fly, to the heavenly protection. The Pearl, will inuit thee to
sell al thou have, to purchase that of the Heavenly Kingdom. The Dove, will
retire thee, and draw thee into solitude. The Fountain, will allure thee, to
drinck of the waters, which the Savior mentioned, that spring to eternal life.
The Mount, will call thee to a higher degree of perfection; the Sea, represent to
thee an Ocean of grace, to launch forth thy Soul, as a webrigd Ship, into that
Main, to arrive at last into the Haven of Eternal Happiness; and that
especially through the steering of our Sacred Parthenes,

Cui Laus and gloria in secula, Amen.
THE EPILOGVE TO THE PARTHENIANS
THus, Gentle Parthenians, you have viewed, reflected, reviewed, surueyed,
paused on, and contemplated the Mysterious and delicious GARDEN of our Sacred
PARTHENES; and after al implored and importuned your sovereign Ladie-Mistris,
and mine, under so many apt and rich Symbols. So graciously she has daigned,
to condescend, for our pleasure and devotion, as it were, to deliciate with us
in these irrational Species of things, made al but to express (you would
think) her praises, and all the peculiar Deuotes of hers, our dear Companions,
in her service. Where you must note, that these are but they only, which wait
and attend upon her, in her GARDEN; and that she has infinite other Clients and
Deuotes besides, in created things, as forward al, to offer up themselves, in
her service; I mean, in this Symbolical Theology, to give forth Elogies,
Encomiums, and Panegyricks, to her sacred praise. For testimony whereof, you
might observe, the GARDEN being shut up, two noble creatures likewise, though
too late, to be admitted with the rest, to come in with their Devises and
Emblemes, to express no less in her honor, then the rest had done. But the
GARDEN, as I said, was shut already, nor would our leisure afford us more, then
to receive their Escuchions only, and to hang them thus on the Postern, as you
see,

THE PHOENIX.
THE DEVISE.


THE MORALS.
NEC SIMILIS VISA, NEC SECVNDA.
ONE City holds not two Lisanders, The Motto.
the ancient Proverb says; nor the Heavens two Suns, say I; which never
appear in show only without a Prodigy. Hercules had thought, he had set a
spel to the world, when he set up his Pillar so in the then utmost Spanish
Gades, and called it his Non plus vltra. But alas! Since that, has a new whole
world been discovered, far beyond it. One Painter with his art deceived the
birds, with a bunch of grapes, and he thought verily he had done a great piece
of matter; when comes me another straight, and with his art likewise, deludes
the very Painter himself in his own art. One draws me a line, which he held
to be indivisible; comes me another with a lighter touch, and cuts that line
asunder with another line. It is often seen, the Scholar goes beyond the
Master, Plato excelled his Master, Aristotle his, and so have infinite others;
the reason yealds that Reverend Father Southwel in his Spiritual Poems. Devise
of man, in working has no end;
What thought can think another thought can mend?
GOD, when he framed the world, might as well have built many more, and happily
a second better then the first, and so a third, and so a fourth, because al are
in the compass of his Omnipotency; but so can not man do in his works; for still
there will be found an utmost term, beyond the which he can not pass; because
he is finit. The Giants in their big conceits, had framed in their imagination
a Stayre-case up to Heaven, by setting Pelion upon Ossa's back; but when they
had brought it to a certain pitch, they could rear their building no whit
higher, but down comes Ossa much sooner then he got up; and al was but a
Castle in the air, which hangs there still, the foundation being shrunck away.
Such are the works of Mortals; and so are they limited in all they do. GOD only
is he, who is boundles in all. Yet when he framed the Incomparable Virgin Marie,
and chose her to be his Mother, he made her so incomparable a Pha^enix, not
only to al, that ever were, or shall be, but even to such, as he intended or was
able to frame; since being not able to be greater then he is himself, he could
not make her to be a greater Mother then she is, *making her his own Mother;
and therefore well may besayd: NEC SIMILIS VISA NEC SECVNDA.

THE CHARACTER.
THE Phoenix, is the Caesar of birds, The Inpresa.
and sole Dictatour amongst them, which admits no Pompey in his kind: and
therefore Nature has framed but one at once, to take away the cause of civil
iarres. He is the miracle of Nature, and a prime maisterpeece of her
workmanship; wherein she seems, contrary to her custom, to show some art. He
is even the honor of Arabia Felix, or the felicity of that Region; the
offspring of the Sun, that might well have been his father, if either two Suns
had been possible, or two Phenixes at once. He is a Treasurer, or rather an
Usurer of spices, with the interest of his life. He is the Heir apparent to
himself, and fears no other's claim to that nature; bred of ashes, and, as we
al, to ashes must return again; and yet immortal, while he dies not, but
renewes rather; and not as the Hawke, which mewes his feathers only, but
himself. The Tomb is his cradle, the Fire his midwif, himself the Damme, the
Sun his Sire. There being but one at once, they are framed without a pattern,
and yet so like, as they are taken for the same. He can speak much of others
Ancesters, but nothing of his own. He is the Alpha and Omega of his kind, the
first and last, because always the same. Being solitary, he is apt to
scruples, but puts them over through the innocence of his life; for though by
nature he be a Prince, yet dares he not say We, because there is no more then
he. If he steal, they are but spices, whereof he makes no conscience, because
for his Altar of Holocausts; nor has any Casuist with him, to put that
scrupule into his head. And being so accessarie to his own death, he makes as
little scruple of that also, as done through the inspiration of Nature, as he
calls it, to maintain his House, and to raise his seed. Were he not well
known otherwise to the Arabians, to be a bird, by many fair demonstrations,
it had been a wonder, that people had not chosen him for a GOD. But GOD, it
seems, would not permit it, as a special favor to this singular and
miraculous Bird. Like the Camelion, he lives by the air; and no marvel, the
spirit of birds should live of its proper Element, the air being the Eleme^t
of birds, as the waters of the fish. The Fire he makes his Purgatory in this
world; and that so efficaciously, as he becomes renewed to an other life, or
like the Snake, which changing his coat only, is still the same, but yet more
fresh. Whereby observing the precept, he puts off the old man, to be take him
self to a new being, in newnes of life.



BEhold, how Death aims with his mortal dart,
And wounds a Phaenix with a twin-like heart.
These are the hearts of Jesus and his Mother
So linkt in one, that one without the other
Is not entire. They (sure) each others smart
Must needs sustain, though two, yet as one heart.
One Virgin Mother, Phoenix of her kind,
And we her Son without a father find.
The Sonne's and Mothers pains in one are mixed.
His side, a Lance, her soul a Sword transfixt.
Two hearts in one, one Ph^nix love contriues.
One wound in two, and two in one reuiues.
THE SWAN.
THE DEVISE.


THE MORALS.
AD VADA CONCINENS ELISII
ARistotle says, that harmony and Musrck, is a worthy, great, and Divine
thing, whose body is composed of parts discordant in themselves, The Mot^^.
and yet accordant one with the other; which entering into the body by the ear
with I know not what divinity as it were, rauisheth the soul. The World
therefore is much obliged to the first Inuentour of Music, being the sweet
charm of all the annoyes of our pitiful mortality. For even they, who are
plunged in the abyss of al evils, at the least touch of sweet Music, do even
swim, and vault like Dolphins (as Poets say) at the feet of that Minstrel
Orion. What grief or trouble is so great, that reuiues not, when a gentle
Treble mounts vpto he^auen, and there soaring and houering aloft, as on the
wing, comes like a Falcon at last to seize upon the Base, as a prey, even to
the loss of breath and sense of hearing? or when the Base after a long pursuit
of the Treble, and not able to reach it as it would, as in a rage in despite
with itself, seems to precipitate and plunge itself even to the Center of the
earth? Who would not wonder, to see the gentle Orpheus have such power upon
savage beasts, to make them to forget their prey and chase, to feed and fatten
themselves with such mincing diuisio^s, and by the ear feed on those Divine
viands? who, when he made his Harp to speak, and his fingers to run so fast,
marrying his Angelical voice to the miracle of his strings, he made even the
people of the Seas to cast themselves in sholes upon the Strond, to listen to
him; and the Sirens to come forth and dance upon the green banck-side, al
diaperd with flowers; the Bears and Lions to quit the Forests, running in
troops to lie at the feet of their sweet Tyrant. But away with these fables
now, and cast we our eyes and ears upon that Divine Harp, fallen from Heaven
to the earth, into the hands of David, who causing his strings to speak and
chant forth his Heavenly and Divine Psalms, so did exorcise and dispel the
Devil from his Hold. This Music therefore is an essay, as it were, and taste of
Paradise itself, while in Heaven they seem to do nothing but sing the greatness
and maruels of GOD, in two Quiers, of the Angels of the one side, and of the
blessed Saints of the other. But then, what music made the white delightful
Swa^, sitting on the Bancks, not of Po, Meander, or Euridanus, but on the
brinck of Death? Not of Cocitus, Stix, or fiery Flegiton, but of the playnes
of Elizeum, that is, by the shores of Paradise; when, like the Swan, feeling
her purest blood to tickle her heart for joy of her approaching passage out of
this world, we may piously conjecture she tuned forth her Divine Canti^le anew
for a Farwell to the world and a last Adieu; and therefore worthily is said: AD
VADA CONCINENS ELIZEI.

THE CHARACTER.
THE sweet delightful Swan is that delicious Siren of the Brook; The Impresa
the living Ghost, that walks and hants those humid playnes, as if confined to
her Eliseum there. She is much taken with the pleasant banck of the Continent,
and spends much time therein, but yet will not trust it with her household, nor
there be brought to bed, but rather hires some Island for the purpose; and the
rent she pays, is some part of her children. She likes to have her walks and
gardens there, for her delights; but her mansion house, for more security, will
she have well gyrt with an ample and spacious Moat. It is strange to see, how
solitary she lives; and yet otherwise, you would think her, though she seems
highly to affect that life, made for Cities and the Court; her clothing al,
save her Spanish-leather buskins, from top to toe, of the richest Mineuers; her
gate, stately and Maiestical; her garb and fashion, grave, yet not affected,
or sprung from an ouer-weening of herself. She rather pitties the company of
men, and their good fellowships, as feastings, bancketings, and pastimes, then
hates them for it, and so neglects them rather, with a demisse eye, then with a
brow contracted, or a lookmore Cinick, to appear Diogenes, or a Tymo^, a hater
of men, rather then the deboishments of their ma^ners. As she is solitary and
melancholy by nature, she is very Musical, as likely are al such; but chiefly
doats she on the wind-instruments, and is never seen without her Howboy;
wherewith, when she list, will she enchant the very Sirens themselves with the
melody she makes; but then especially, when feeling the chimes of her passage
out of this world to sound within her, as a presage of her death to others, she
will ring forth such a peale of delicious and chromatick strains mixed
together, as would move devotion in the hearers rather, then compassion, while
they will judge straight, she had a pure soul of her own. She is a right
Hermitesse; and has her sallets proper to herself alone; and as she loves them
well, she will feed of no man's picking, but her own. Other whiles she lives in
state, and keeps her kitchen, as the manner is in some places, in the Cellars,
and lower rooms; which by reason of the moystnes of those places, are always
under waters; but she likes them never the worse for that, but rather so much
the better; for so she feeds on her sallets very fresh, but new-gathered. She
is further much delighted, to take her pleasure on the waters, for her mere
disport and recreation; and will have no other boat, then her own Barge, nor
other oars then her own; and being so good a Swimmer, makes a pastime of it,
to tilt her boat quite over head and ears. She is very hale, and has a long
breath, and will keep her head under water, longer then any Moor shall do, that
hunts for pearls.



WHEN mild Fauonius breathes, with warbling throat
The milk-white Swan chants with a sweeter note;
But sweeter yet her Music far excels,
When death approches, which her tune fore-tels.
So the holy Spirit breathing from above
Upon the Virgin, r^ys'd with wings of love,
Her heavenly Muse unto a higher strain
In her melodious Sonnet, But again,
When gentle death drew near, she high aspires
To tune an Antheme with the Angels Quires.
Thy Cygnets (mother Swan) on thee rely;
O make them white, that they may singing dye.
FINIS.

