A REPORT OF A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING SVpreme power in affairs of Religion.
Manifesting That this power is a right of Regalitie, inseparably annexed to the
Sovereignty of every State: and that it is a thing both extremely dangerous,
and contrary to the use of all ancient Empires and Commonwealths, to
acknowledge the same in a foreign Prince.

(...).

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for John Hardy, and are to be sold by John
Flasket, dwelling at the sign of the black Bear in Paul's Church yeard. 1606.

THE SVMMARIE.
1 THe occasion of this discourse. 2 The proposition: That supreme power in
Ecclesiastical affairs is a right of Sovereignty. 3 Sovereign or
maiesticall power must be perpetual. 4 Sovereign power must also be absolute.
5 Affairs of greatest importance are annexed to the Sovereign Majesty. 6
Nothing in a State of so great importance as is Religion. 7 Affairs of
Religion are to be managed by those who bear the Sovereignty. 8 It is
dangerous for others to be depended upon in regard of Religion. 9 Two policies
aunciently observed for avoiding these dangers: To exclude external
ceremonies; and to commit the ordering of matters in Religion, to the
Sovereign authority within the State. 10 Instance of the first. 11 The second
practiced by the Jews. 12 By the Egyptians. 13 By diverse other people. 14 In
the Empire of Assyria. 15 In the Empire of Persia. 16 In the Empire and
principal States of Greece. 17 In the Empire of Rome under the government of
Kings. 18 In the popular State of the Roman Empire. 19 In the Roman Empire
under heathen Emperors. 20 In the Roman Empire, under the first Christian
Emperors. 21 Matters of External or accidental form in the Church, depended
altogether upon the first Christian Emperors. 22 Many laws of the first
Christian Emperors attributed unto Popes. 23 Matters of Faith or of Essential
form, ordered by direction and authority of the first Christian Emperors. 24
The eight general Councels called and confirmed by Emperors. 25 A strife
between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, whether should be greatest. 26
Diverse Emperors favored the Bishops of Constantinople. 27 By giving this
prerogative to the Bishops of Rome, the East Empire was dismembered. 28 The
absolute power of the Bishops of Rome in Ecclesiastical affairs, reduced the
West Empire not only to a feeble state; but to be held in Vassalage to the Sea
of Rome. 29 By the same power the Bishops of Rome claimed Sovereignty also,
over diverse principal kingdoms in Europe, and generally over all States in
the world. 30 Diverse distresses by this means occasioned. 31 The Conclusion.
32 Certain questions propounded.
TO HIS HONORABLE FRIEND SIR I. P. Knight.
SIr, holding my self beholding unto you, for many kind courtesies, I cannot
but oftentimes bend and busy my devise, to think how (in some sort) to thank
you for the same; and if not fully to discharge, yet freely to acknowledge and
profess my debt: to satisfy (I say) in desire, when in deed I am not able.
But, howsoever in other performances I shall be weak, yet I will not fail to
leave a large memory of your true habit of honesty and virtue: and in the
mean season not omit to visit you with such exercises of pen, as the
streightnes of other occasions shall permit me leisure to contriue. For this
present I have made choice to present unto you, a small enlargement of certain
passages of speech, lately raised at the table of N. which, being much
frequented by persons of most principal note, has commonly the great variety
of dishes, answered with like variety of discourse.

The first part of the dinner was passed over in a the goodness of our fare,
by close feeding upon the same. At the last silence was broken, and some
speeches spent in matters of conceit. In which vein one of the company took
often occasion to speak of a Terrible blow; alluding to the same words in that
letter, whereby the late practice against his Majesty and the whole body of
the State, was beaten out and brought into light. Hereupon N. did break forth
into a liberal commendation of the Lord Mounteagle, to whom the letter was
directed: affirming, that he was a personage of true honor and merit, for
that by his felicity and faith, not only the lives of many thousand
particular persons, and whatsoever else was dearest unto them, but the life
also of this Empire was at that time preserved; that his high Nobility,
enobled and made precious both with courtesy and magnanimity, had now justly
placed him in the foremost rank of same. He proceeded to declare, the fashion
of that hot and hateful attempt: what fair opportunity was thereby opened to
secure our selves, from the fiery fury of those homebred enemies, who, rather
than we should not be destroyed, would ouerwhelme us in the ruins of the
state: That severity could not hereupon be interpreted cruelty; that hereupon
nothing could be interpreted to be done in regard of religion, but only for
the necessary defense of our safety.

This speech was diversely taken, according as affections were diuersely
disposed; some did lively, some faintly, and (as it was coniectured) fainedly
approve it; none did openly oppose against it.

From this, they fell to talk of the Bill propounded in Parliament against
Recusants; and of the Oath of supremacy, which was appointed generally to be
taken. Of the first they did but sparingly speak, as being a matter then
handled in highest place of deliberation: upon the second they maintained a
longer stay. N. repeated many conueniences for which this Oath ought generally
to be taken. Whereto a certain Knight replied, not directly contradicting
him, but inuoluing his intents in such soft and nice distinctions, that he
seemed rather to declare that he would not have the Oath imposed at all, then
in what fashion he would have it imposed.

These obscure speeches having bred some incertaintie, whilst every man rather
coniectured then assured what should be meant: and controversies of conu^niencie
being not always easy to be determined by way of discourse, because all men
are apt to attribute much to their own conceits; I drew the question to a
higher degree. Affirming, that it seemed not only convenient, but necessary
also in all grounds and reasons of State, that a King who acknowledges no
superior under God, should be acknowledged to have supreme authority under
God in Ecclesiastical affairs: That this is a principal point of Regalitie,
and therefore necessarily annexed to the sovereign majesty of every state:
That it is a hard matter if not impossible, for any nation, either to grow or
long time to continue very great, wherein a foraine power does hold the
regiment in Religion: That in all ancient Empires and Common wealths it has
been used, That;

I could not finish that which I was about to speak, being interrupted by a
confused clamor of three or four at the table, who esteemed that which I had
said, not for a paradoxe, but for an Adoxe, or flat absurdity: seeing many
Christian countries, both lately and at this present, have admitted forain
government in matters of religion.

By this time the Basins and Ewers were set upon the table, and all of us were
attentive to the giving of thanks. After we had washed, and the cloth was
taken away. N. in this sort renewed speech.

What has been the use of ancient Empires and Commonwealths, concerning
supreme government in matters pertaining to religion, I have not (I do
confess) observed: But it seems indeed, that the political government in
Ecclesiastical affairs should be a point of Regalitie; and that it is a hard
matter, if not impossible, for any state either to grow or long time to
continue very great, wherein a foreign power does hold the regiment in
religion. At the least, either to grow or continue any greater, then that
foreign power shall think expedient.

That which from me was openly rejected, being allowed by N. and in the very
same words by him repeated, found good acceptance among the rest. Whereupon I
took occasion to say, that speech (I perceived) was oftentimes like unto
coin, which passed for current, not in regard of the metal only, but
chiefly in regard of the stamp that was set upon it.

Nay, said N. beautifying his speech with a courteous smile, we will also bring
your metal to the touch. There is but one truth in religion, which is not
subject to any humane power: but the discipline thereof, or matters of
circumstance and external form, are held by our Church to depend upon the
power of the Prince. If question be made touching matter of substance, the same
also may be determined within the realm, by the Clergy thereof, assembled
together by authority of the Prince. Or if the Clergy of any other country
should be taken to assistance or advice, they come as equals, and not as
superiors. For so Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34.
reports, that Cyprian Bishop of Carthage did advise with the Bishop of Rome,
concerning the affairs of the Church: and that Dyonise of Alexandria Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 46. and lib. 7. cap. 5. and 9.
advised in like sort with Cornelius, Stephen and Sixtus Bishops of Rome,
without attributing unto them either title or quality, otherwise then as men
of their own order and rank.

Now, I have read many controversies in Divinity concerning this question,
whereof the multitude does rather cloy then content; and therefore I will not
embarke you in that disputation. If you can make proof out of other writers,
that this authority in matters of religion, is a right of Regalitie, it will
follow (I suppose) that it cannot without apparent danger depend upon a foraine
power. If also you do manifest, that in all principal Empires and
Commonwealths, this authority has bin exercised by the chief in state, you
may probably conclude that it is a Regalitie. For these rights do little
vary, but remain in a manner the very same in all states, of what kind soever
they are. And although true religion is revealed unto us by God, yet religion
in the general proceeds from nature; in regard whereof, there is some
coherence and community in all sorts of religions; as to acknowledge that
there is a God; to worship him; to worship him by oblation and sacrifice etc.
For although all nations do not acknowledge and worship the true God, yet
there is no nation (as Cicero De Not. deo. lib. 1.
says) which does not both acknowledge and adore some. These general points
which naturally, or by consent of nations are common in religion, may well be
considered without contending which religion in particular is true. For this
will hardly by all parties be agreed: because every man (as Philo says Phil.
de leg^^.
) either by use or by instruction judges his own religion best. So Chrysostom.
in Act. homil. 33.
Chrysostom affirms, that in all differencies of religion, every man will
say, I say true Singuli dicunt, ego verum dico.
. But this argument which you have propounded being new; this point being not
pointed at by any whom I have seen, I would gladly here you fortify the same.

The argument being new (answered I) and now newly raised into question, you
must not engage your expectation too far; I shall do much, if I minister
some matter for better judgments to work into form.

The rights of Sovereignty or of majesty, so termed by Cicero; and by Liuie,
the rights of Empire, and of Imperial Majesty; by Tacitus, sacraregni; by
Aristotle, (...); by the Lawyers, Sacra sacrorum; sacra indiuidua; iura
sublimia; by the Feudistes, iura regalia; are nothing else, but an absolute and
perpetual power, to exercise the highest actions and affairs in some cretaine
state. These are the proper qualities of Sovereign or Maiesticall power; that
it be both absolute and Romans to their Dictators, by the Lacedaemonians to
their Harmostes; by many Kings to their Regents, Viceroyes or Lieutenants. But
because they have no propriety of power inherent in them, but only an
execution or exercise thereof committed to their charge, under limitation of
time; because also it may upon just cause be revoked within that time; they
are not accounted to have the same in Soueraignetie. And this holds true,
although such power be committed for a very long time; as the Athenians did to
their great Archos for ten years: although it be committed also in a most
ample manner, which the ancient Latins called optima lege, without
controlement or account; such as had the Pontifices in Rome; or as the Cuidians
every year chose 60. of their Citizens whom for this cause they called
Amimones; that is, men without imputation or account. And lastly, although it
be without certain limitation of time; as sometimes had the Regents of France,
created for the infancy, fury or absence of their King; who before the law of
Charles the fifth, dispatched matters in their proper name.

Again, if it be perpetual but not absolute, as either depending upon some
other, or else given either Charles the fifth Emperor to the Senate of Milan;
To confirm the constitutions of the Prince, as also to infirm and abrogate
the same; to dispense contrary to the statutes; to make enablements, give
prerogatives, grant restitutions etc. that no appeal should be made from the
Senate etc. And whatsoever they should do, should have like force as if it
were done or decreed by the Prince. Non tamen possit delictorum veniam
tributre, aut litteras saluiconductus reis criminu^ dare.
Yet might they not grant pardon for offenses, or give letters of safe conduct
unto parties convicted. So likewise in the ancient form of inaugurating the
Kings of Arragon, the great Magistrate or Justice said thus unto him: We who
are in virtue not inferior, and in power greater then thy self, create thee
King; yet with this condition, that one amongst us shall have more power and
command then thy self.

I will not particularly rehearse what actions are proper unto sovereign
power: generally it may be that upon the ordring of them depends, not only
the honor and dignity, but the safety also and liberty of the people; not
the flourishing constitution only, but the very life and being of the
Commonwealth; it has been thought fit by general consent of Nations, that
they cannot be managed by any other authority, than that wherein the
soueraignetie is settled; whether it be in one man, as in a Monarchy; or in a
few, as in an Aristocrace; or in all, as in a popular or Democraticall
government. They cannot be usurped, they cannot be Alex. in l. filiae qua de
lib. and post. Card. Flor. and Ias. in prooem. s^^^. Mart. l and. in c. 1. qui
feud. da. Imola. in Rub. ae ^e^b. obl^g.
prescribed they cannot be distracted or aliened from the same, they cannot be
absolutely exercised by any other, than by them who bear the supreme
Majesty. They to whose trust a Commonweal is committed, must order the
chiefest affairs of the same: they who are appointed for the very head of a
society, must give both direction and motion to the principal actions of the
whole body. And therefore they are termed sacra sacrorum Baid. in prooem. seud.
, as has been said; and also, iura indiuidua Cyn. in l. si viua. c. de bo mat.
Bald in auth. hoc amplius. c. de side^ com. Ang. Bald. in l. om^es C. de
praescript. Plat. in l. si quis decurto. Feli. in Rub de praese 10. And^ in
cap. vlt. de praeb. lib. 6. Alex. cons. 141. lib. 1. no. 2.
because they are ((...)) the firm foundation and groundworke of a state, and
can no ways be separated from the sovereignty thereof.

But there is nothing in a Commonwealth of so high nature, nothing of so
important weight, as is Religion; for this conserueth families, as Euripides In
Bacchis: (...).
testifies, and is a most excellent ornament in a City Eu^^p. (...) supplic.
(...).
: yea, Lactantius affirms it the only means Trast. de ^ra. cap. 12. re^^gto
and ^imor deisolus est qui custodit hominam inter sesoctetatc^.
: and that without religion the life of man would be filled with all
foolishnes, madness and mischief. So likewise Plutarch Plut. contra Colot.
calls religion, the band which contains all societies, and the very
foundation of justice and laws (...).
. For as a building cannot be either fair or firm, if the foundation be not
fairly and firmly laid; so if there be defect in this part of government,
the whole frame of state will be neither seemly nor yet sure. Sinesius says
Orat. de regno.
; First let piety be settled, the base and pillar whereupon this Statue of a
kingdom shall firmly stand (...).
. Plutareh Plut. contra Colot.
was of opinion, that a City might more easily be built and not upon the
ground, than a Commonwealth either constituted or conserved, if you take away
Religion (...).
. And therefore Numa in Liuie ^^u lib. 1.
did first of all establish Religion as a most effectual thing to settle the
unskillful multitude Omntum primum rem ad multitudinem imperitam efficacissima,
deorum metum inveiend^ ratus.
. Afterward also Valerius Valcr. lib. 1. cap. 1.
witnesses, that the City of Rome made less estimation of all things than of
Religion Om^ia post religi^^en ponenda ciuita^ nostra duxit.
. For this cause likewise Aristotle Arist. 7. P^l^t. cap. 8.
affirms, that the principal care in a Common wealth must be concerning
matters of Religion (...).
. First, for that it setleth obe^tence and quiet within the state; being a
bridle to retain men in order and in awe: for so Cyrus reasons in Xenophon
Xenoph. P^d. lib. 8. (...).
: If all men should be religiously affected they would bear themselves more
just and upright in carriage, both among themselves and toward him. Secondly,
for that it is an assured defense; for so Trismegast^s says A^ud La^tantium
11. inst cap. 16. (...).
; Piety is a custody and defense. Thirdly, for that it aduanceth victories
abroad: For so Cicero Cic orat de (...). rest on non call^ditate ^word ^robo^c
sed pie^a^e ac relligione omnes gentes nation(...) super au^sse.
aduoweth, that, not by policy, not by power, but by piety and religion, the
Romans vanquished all other nations. And so Valerius has written: Va (...)
lib. 1. cap. 1. Non dubitauerunt sacris imperia seraire: its sererum humanarum
futura regimen existimantia, si diuinae po^^^^^ae been atque constaater essent
samelata.
Empires have not thought much to submit themselves to sacred service,
supp^sing to obtain the rule of humane affairs, if they were we and
constantly serviceable in divine. Also the Poets; H^rat.
Dis te minorem quod geris, imperas. Generally, for that in all affairs
whether public or private, it draws our endeavors to a prosperous event, for
the most part better found in the end, than it can be coni^ctured by the
means. For so Aristotle did acknowledge Arist. Rhet. ad Alex. (...).
, That God is more favorable and inclinable to those by who^ he is most
honored.

On the contrary, it is impossible for that State to stand, much less to
flourish and thrive, where those two extremes of religion are highly in
strength, whereto Plutarch Plut. in Camillo.
says, the weakness of man is exceeding prone; (...).
the one is vain superstition; (...).
the other is cold carelessness and proud contempt. The first Plutarch Plut. in
Sertorio. (...).
does appropriate to barbarous people; Seneca Senec. epist. 124. Superstitio
error insanus est, am^dos colit, quos colit violat.
terms it a mad error: Cicero Cic. 1. de siuib. superstitione qui est
imbutus, quietus esse non potest.
says that it stirs the minds of men and makes them unquiet. And that it
breaks the courage and heart, Lucretius does in these words affirm: Faciunt
animos humiles formidine diuum depressosque premunt ad terram. The second is
called by Hermes, Herm. cap. 12. (...).
a great disease and sickness of the soul, making it inclinable to all actions
that are evil. From hence arises discord and disturbance in the state: from
hence Cicero Cic. 5. in Ver. omnia prospera eueniunt colentibus D^os, aduersa
speraeatibus.
says, great calamities are cast upon it: which is also confirmed by that of
Horace: Di multa neglecti dederunt,
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.


For these causes Cicero De not. deo li. 2. eorum imperus remp. amplificatam
qui religio^^^s paruissent.
observed, that the Commonwealth of the Romans was most enlarged under the
command of them, who had religion in regard. After him Constantine the Emperor
left written, l. 16. in qualibet. de Episc. and cle. C. Theod.
that a Commonwealth is contained in order, more by religion then by travail
of body. And Justinian also professed, Nouel. 42. circa fi.
that he was the more careful about the government of the Church, because, If
that be kept in good fashion and form, the other parts of government shall
thereby be redressed (...).
.

Hereupon also it is necessarily expedient, that they who bear the
sovereignty of State, should always manage the affairs of religion; either
by Optatus) is a part of the State: and (as another said) Afer episc. Religio
debet esse in rep. non contra.
Religion must be in a Commonwealth, and not the contrary. Upon which ground
Diotogenes in Stoboeus said; A perfect King must of necessity be a good
Commander, and Judge, and Priest (...).
And again: the best must be held in honor by the best, and that which
rules by him that bears rule (...).
. But Aristotle in this point is most express, (For I must often cite these
Authors to give satisfaction unto those, who regard more by whom a thing is
spoken, then what is said.) Arist. Polit. lib. 3. (...).
The King (says he) is ruler and directer of those things that pertain unto
the Gods. Whereunto somewhat agrees that of Iustine; Justin. lib. 8. Iure ille
a dijs proximus habetur, per quem deorum maiestas vindicatur.
he is accounted next unto God by whom the Majesty of God is maintained.

For, how should he be esteemed a Sovereign, who, in the greatest actions and
affairs of the State, acknowledges the jurisdiction of another greater then
himself? what majesty should he be adjudged to bear, who is under the
authority of another man? to reuerse his judgments, to correct his laws, to
restrain or constrain him at pleasure and with case? Religion is seated
within the soul and conscience of man, and is a most potent ruler of the same.
The life (says Pliny Lib. 14. not. hist. Religione vitae constat.
) consists in religion. If then the consciences of a people be commanded by a
stranger, if their souls be subject to a foreign power, if their lives be at
the service of an external Prince; it is but a weak, but a dead dominion,
which the natural Prince shall hold over their bodies. That Prince whose
subjects souls are in subjection to a stranger for matters of religion, shall
neither prevail more against his enemies, nor bear greater authority amongst
his own people, then that stranger shall limit him leave.

Cic. in 5. in Verrem. omnes religione mouentur.
, but when they are also thrust on by those, who make it their purchase (as
Liuie speaks tiu lib. 4. quibus quaestui sunt capti superstitione animi.
) to possess souls with superstition, then do they not inconsideratly only,
but in a wild fury run and rush upon most desperate adventures. The
multitude (says Curtius Curt. lib. 4. vbi vana religione capta est, melius
vatibus quam ducibus suis paret.
) being weak, fierce and mutable, when it is once possessed with vain
religion, is more obedient to their Priests, then to their Commander or Prince.

Diodorus Siculus Lib. 6. cap. 10
has a memorable History concerning this point, of the Priests of Jupiter, in
the Island Meroe, environed with the river Niliu; who held the people of
Aethiopia in so superstitious dependancie upon them, that they would send to
them at pleasure, and give in charge the slaughter of their Kings; no man
making offer either to deny or to delay their cruel command. until Ergamenes,
a King of Aethiopia suddenly surprised and slew them all, whereby both their
office and authority did surcease.

Florus Flo. 3. cap. 16.
writes that Eunus a slave counterfeiting a fanaticall fury, and pretending
some divine inspiration, was able to see 60. thousand armed men in the face of
the Romans, even in the principal time of their policy and strength; being
then hardly able to deliver Sicilia from his subjection. Josephus reports
Joseph. 2. bell. Iud. cap. 12.
of an Egyptian in the time of the Emperor Claudius, who bearing himself to
be a Prophet, under that pretext adioined 30. thousand men unto him, in the
country of Judea; with whom he maintained head against the forces of the
Romans. Tacitus Tac. 2. hist.
writes the like of Maricus, who giving forth that he was the God and
deliverer of Gallia, drew 8. thousand men unto him, with whom he attempted
against the Roman garrisons.

One of our late writers Bodin. lib. 1.
reports, that because in one chapter of the Alcoron, all the Musulman
Princes are forbidden to call themselves Lords, except their Caliph or great
Vicar of their Prophet Muhamed, by color thereof, the Mohammedan Bishops
usurped absolute soueraignety, above all their Princes; disposing of
principalities at their pleasure, under the name and title of governments. At
last the Muselman Princes supposing that Chapter not to have been inserted by
Mahamed their Lawgiver, but by their Caliphes, for advancing their own
authority, at such time when of diverse corrupt Alcorons they composed one,
long time after the death of Muhamed; they took advantage of a division among
their great Bishops, when three of them did take upon them the title of great
Caliph together, and thereupon the Princes of Persia, the Curdes, the Turks,
the Tartars, the Sultans of Egypt, the Kings of Marrocco, of Fez, of Telensin,
of Tanes, of Bugia, the people of Zenetes, and of Luntune quitted themselves of
their obeisance to the Caliphes, and maintained Sovereignty within their
states.

Elmahel in Africa Leo. lib. 2.
, having gained a great opinion of sanctity among the people of Marocco,
raised them against Abraham their King, and dispoyled him both of his Empire
and life. Leo. lib. 3.
With like industry and art an other impostor called Chemin Mennal stirred the
people against the King of Fesse, and constrained him by arms to yield unto
him the kingdom of Temesna. Annal. Turc.
Schacoculis being of the sect of the Persians, by pretense of piety gathered
such strength, that he took many Cities in Asia, overthrew the Turks forces
in three great battles, and brought his whole Empire to a dangerous distress.

How John of Leiden, a Tailor by his trade, set all Germany in vproare and in
arms, by bearing himself to be a principal man in religion, it scarce
exceeds the memory of this present age. And what practices in this kind, have
been either achieved or attempted in other Christian countries, I shall have

In regard of the first, the Jews would not converse Socrates and Protagoras
were condemned, Anaxagoras and Aristotle were accused for holding opinions
contrary to their received religion. Josephus writes Joseph. lib. 2. co^it.
sp^^^. (...).
, that the Athenians had a severe law against any man who should speak a word
in religion, against that which was established by law. The Scythians put
Anacharsis to death, for performing the tites of Bacchus after the manner of
the Grecians. Liuie writes that among the Romans, the Aediles received in
part of their charge, Ne qui ^isi Romani dij, neue alto more quam patrio
colerc^tur.
that no external religion or ceremony should be brought in. And to the same
purpose M. Aemilius recited a decree; Liu. lib. 15. ne quis in publico sacroue
loco, nouo au^ externo ritu sacrificaret.
that no man should sacrifice in a public or sacred place, after a new or
external rite. How often (says the same Liuie Lib. 39. quoties patrum
auorumque aetate negotiu magisti, atibus datum est, vt sacra externa sicri
vitarent.
) have our fathers and ancestors given charge to the Magistrates, that
external ceremonies should be forbidden? Maecenas in Dio Dio lib. 52.
gave this exhortation and advice to Augustus; (...)
Observe religion after the fashion of your country, and compel others to do
the like: but those who bring in strange and foraine rites, hate and correct;
because they persuade many to work alterations, from whence conspiracies, and
seditions are oftentimes occasioned.

Concerning the second point, Iustine Justin lib. 36. mos est apud Iudaeos, vt
cosdem reges and sacerdotes hab rent.
reports that it was a custom among the Jews, to have the same men both
Princes and Priests. This was at sometimes true in the government of the Jews.
At other times the Kings gave order in matters of religion, and appointed not
only inferior Priests and officers (as did Josias 2. Chron. 35. 2.
) but also high Priests (as did King Solomon 1. Reg. 2. 25.
) to execute the same. For this cause Moses left in charge Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
, that the King should read in the book of the law all the days of his life;
that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
that law, and those ordinances for to dee them. For this cause also they were
sacred with oil, to declare (says Eusebius Lib. 1. Ecclesihist.
) both their duty and authority in matters of religion. From hence it
proceeded, that as the Kings proved good or evil, so the true religion was
either observed or neglected. From hence also Tacitus Lib. 3. hist. Iudaeis
sacerabtij hon^s firmamentum potentiae erat.
has written: The honor The Scriptures do further testify, that Melchisedeen
was both King and Priest; and that Balak King of Moab offered sacrifice
together with Balaam.

Marcilius Ficinus affirms In praef. lib. Trismeg.
out of Plato, and Seuerus in Stob^^us Sermon 41.
that their custom was to elect Priests out of their Philosophers: and out of
their Priests, whom Diodorus Lib. 2. cap. 3.
places next in dignity to the King (as Strabo Strab. lib. 11.
writes of the Priests of the Albanes) to make choice of the best approved for
their King. Whereupon Mercurius the grandchild of that Mercury, who was son
to Jupiter and Maia, being called by the Egyptians Tenot, by the Grecians was
named Trismegistus, which signifies thrice greatest, because he was the
greatest Philosopher (for so is he also termed by Tertullian Aduers. Valent.
) the greatest Priest and the greatest King; although Suidas coniectureth that
name to be given him, because he did expressly write of the Trinity.

Strabo says Stra. lib. 5.
, that in Aritia he was a King who was Priest of Diana; the same is confirmed
by Suetonius In Calig c. 35
, and mentioned by diverse Poets, namely Ovid De art amand. lib. 1.
. Ecce suburbanae templum nemorale Dianae,
Partaque per gladios regna nocente mann.
And Lucane Lib 3.
; Qua sublime nemus Scythicae qua templa Diana. And Valor. Flaccus Argonant.
lib. 2
; -- Etsol^ non mitis Aritia regt. And la^tly by Martial Epigram. 64. lib. 9.
; Qua tri^ne nemerosa petit, dum regna viator
Octauum demina marmor ab vrbe legit.
The like does Hartius I^ bell. Alexand.
report to be observed in the Temple of Be^ona, in Cappadocia. The like also
does Virgil Aeneid. 3.
write of Anins:

^^ Rex idem hominum phoebique, facerdos. Diodorus Siculus Lib. 6. cap. 10
affirms, that the Priests of Strabo testifies Lib. 12.
that in Zela, the Priest had supreme both dignity and authority in all
things. Just. lib. 11.
Iustine writes, that Mida, son of Gordius King of Phrygia, being by Orpheus
entered into the orders of the sacred and solemn mysteries of those times,
filled all Phrygia with religion: wherewith he more assured himself, then he
did by arms. Tacitus De mor, Ger.
reports that among the Germans, it was permitted to no man to beat or bind
or otherwise to punish, but only to the Priests. Strabo says Lib. 12.
that in Cuma of Pontus the Priest did wear a Diadem twice in the year, which
is the ensign of a King. Vitru^i^s Lib. 2. cap. 8.
declares that among the Trallians, the principal Priest had a princely
Palace appointed for his abode. Diodorous Siculus Lib. 17. cap. 4.
Orosius Oros. lib. 4. cap. 6.
and Pausanias Paus. in Baeot. sieve lib. 9.
do write, that the priest of Hercules in Tire was apparrelled in purpure, and
did wear a Diadem upon his head. Herodiane Herodian. lib. 5.
writes, that the Priest of the Sun among the Phoenicians, was attired in a
long garment, consisting only of purpure and gold; and did wear a Crown of
gold set with precious stones; and that Heliogabalus, being Emperor of Rome
did exercise that priesthood. Ferd. Lopex Lib. 1. hist. Ind. cap. 14.
affirms, that the Kings of Malabar in East India are Priests or Bramenes,
and must die in their sacred place, as men consecrated unto God. And in China
there is an ancient law, that no religion be brought in, without allowance of
the King and of his Council: he that violateth this law is punished by death.

Berosus has left written, that Ninus first dedicated Temples to Jupiter Belus
and Juno his parents, and caused them to be honored as Gods. Zamies Ninias
his son exceedingly both amplified and adorned these Temples. Belochus with
the rule of his Empire exercised also the office of the high Priest of the same
Jupiter Belus; and for that cause the name Belochus was given unto him.

Cic. de diuinat.
.

Leptines Apud Arist. Rhet. 3. cap. 10.
and Iustine Just. lib. 5.
do rightly term them; the ceremonies of their religion were ordered by
their Kings. The Athenians had their (...) or King, as Demosthenes testifies
Contra Neaeram.
, who was president and chief directer in all their sacred ceremonies.
Xenophon says De Repub. Laced.
, that the Kings of the Spartanes or Laced ^monians, so soon as they were
assumed to that state of dignity, did discharge also the office of chief
Priest, to the celestial and Lacaedemonian Jupiter. Alexander the great
Monarch of Greece did oftentimes offer sacrifice, give order for their kind of
religious observations; and at the last commanded divine honors to be done
unto Q Curt.
himself.

Sacrorum omnium potestas sub regibus est^: Let all sacred matters be under
the power of Kings. Which law was stablished by their first King Romulus, but
seems also to have been more anciently in use: insomuch as Seruius Lib. 10.
Aeneid. super illud Virgilij. Vigilas ne deu^ gens? Aenaea? vigila.
notes, that Virgil always brings in Aeineas as president both in action
and drection in all offices of their religion. Whereof Ovid Fast.
also seems to make mention in these words.

Vtque ea nunc certaest, ita rex placare
Numina lanigerae coniuge debet ouis.
After Romulus, Numa Po^pilius performed al those sacrifices and rites Liu.
lib. 1.
, which afterward were committed to y^ Dial Flamen. Dyonisius Halicarnassaeus
Hali. lib. 2.
and Plutarch Plut. in Numa.
do affirm, that he did bear the office of Pontifex: Liuie Liu. lib 1. Dec.
1.
writes, that he committed the same to one of the chief Senators named
Marcius. Of these two Kings Cicero Cic. lib 2. de not. Deo.
says: Romulus auspicijs, Numa sacris constitutis fundamenta ieccrunt Romanae
ciuitatis. The Kings succeeding performed the most high and sacred rites of
their religion; with whom as Liuie Lau. 1. Decad. lib. 2.
writes, the Priests took often advice, concerning sacrifices and al sorts of
ceremonies: Whereupon Dionysius Halicarnassaeus affirms (...).
, that they had the principality or chiefest rule of sacred matters, and of
sacrifices, and that all things pertaining to divine worship were ordered by
them.

After that the Kings were cast out of state, that Senate before cited out of
Liuie, for excluding the use of foraine ceremonies and rites: but more plainly
it appears in that it was decreed; Nequa Bacchamalia Romae neue in Italia
essent, si quis tale sacrum solenne ac necessarium duceret, nec sine religione
ac piaculo se id omit. lere posse, apud pr^torem vrbanum profiteretur, partor
senatum consuleret: Si ei permissum esset cum in senatu centum, non minus
essent, ita id sacrum fieret, dum ne plus quinque sacrificio interessent.
that no Bacchanalls should be kept either at Rome or within Italy: if any man
should esteem such sacred solomnitie to be necessary, and that he could not
omit it without offense and violation of Religion, he should declare the same
to the city Praetor, the Praetor should consult with the Senate. If it should
be permitted him when a hundred (and no fewer) should be assembled in Senate,
that solemnity might be performed, so that no more than five should be present
at the Sacrifice.

And although the name of King at that time was hateful to the Romans, yet
they created a King whom they called Rex Sacrificulus Liu. lib. 2.
, or Rex sacrificus Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.
, to perform those offices of their religion, which in former times were
proper to their Kings Festus Pompeius lib 17.
. His office was not annual but perpetual Dio^. Halic. lib. 4.
; which joined to his high title, lest it should draw him to dangerous
attempts, they stripped him of all civil authority. He might not bear either
charge in the army Dionys. vbi 5.
, or magistracy in the common wealth. Plut. Probl. cap. 63.
He might not make any oration to the people, nor deal with them about public
affairs. His authority was restrained only to religion; to offer sacrifices,
and to determine doubts, if any did arise. His person was sacred as Seruius
notes Ae^eid. 8. super illud Virgilij. Nec no Tarquinnium ciectum Porsenna
Iubebat accipere.
, so that neither violence notr despite might be offered unto him: And yet the
greatest Pontifex was preferred before him Li^. 1. Dec. lib. 2. D on^s. lib. 5.
Feuestel. de sacer^. c. 1^
; insomuch as in their festival solemnities he was placed next to their
greatest Pontifex, above all the Flaminos Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.
. His daughters might not be compelled to become Vestals Fea^stel. de sacred
Romans
. His wise was called Regina sacrorum Festus Pomp. lib. 9.
; who every Calendes did offer sacrifice to Macrob. and Ovid. de ^ast.
Juno, her head circled with a white wand of a Pomegranate tree, called
inarculum; to whom the Vestals resorted upon a certain day in the year, to
admonish her not to neglect the solemn rites committed to her charge.

They erected also a College of Pontifices Lin 1. Dec. lib. 10.
, First consisting of four, afterward increased to eight, lastly by Sylla
enlarged to fifteen App^an. Plut. Plin. secundus de vir. illust. cap. 75.
. Their office was both to preserve and interpret all solemnities pertaining to
their religion; to keep a true record and remembrance of them: to be careful
that no Roman ceremony were neglected, and no external observation brought
in: to determine what things were sacred, and what profane: to appoint what
sacrifices were to be offered, upon what days, in what Temples, in what manner,
and whence the charge should be supplied Liu. lib. 1.
; to decide doubts concerning funeral obsequies, performancies of vows and
oaths, observation of festival times and such like. If in any matter they did
differ in judgment, that was observed wherein the greatest part, being three
at least, did fully agree. They had also the interpretation of the Civil law
Cic. de legib. lib. 2.
, which for many years was reputed sacred among the Romans. They kept the
Annals (as Cicero says Cic. de orat. lib. 2.
) of most memorable accidents, and atchieuments every year, which were termed
Annals maximi, as Macrobius Lib. 3. Saturn. ca. 2.
does write; and did set them forth in a white table called album pontificium,
out of which it was free for any man to write them. It was also a part of their
charge to repair the bridges Varr. lib. 1. de ling. lat. Plut. in Numa.
, which until the time that Aemilius was Questor were made of timber Marlianus
in topographia vet Romans
, and not fastened together with any iron or brass Halicar. lib. 3 and 5. Plin
lib. 36. cap. 11.
. These were esteemed sacred by the Romans, and if they were in any part
decayed, they might not be repaired but with sacrifices and other ceremonious
obseruancies. From hence it is commonly supposed that they were called
Pontifices; but Scaeuola (as Varro Deling. lat.
says) did more properly derive that name from posse and facere, not only in
regard of their eminent authority, but because the word facere in ancient
Latin did signify to sacrifice, as Vigil speaks:

Cum facer em vitula. The principal of this College was called Pontifex
Maximus; who, as Iestus Pompeius Lib. 11.
and Valerius Maximus Lib. 1. cap. 1.
do write, was the greatest Judge in their religion. And although other priests
could not bear Empire in the army, or office in the state Plut. Prebl. cap.
113.
, or be carried upon horse Plut. Probl. cap. 39. Gellius lib 10. cap. 15.
Festus Pompeius lib. 5.
, or be three nights absent from the city Plut. d. ca. 39.
; yet the same man might be Consul or Censor, or Praetor, or Magister equitum,
(the greatest offices of that common wealth) and also greatest Pontifex: As
Liuie writes of P. Liciunius Crassus Lau. 3. Decad. lib. 8.
, and M. Marcellus ^^u. 4. Decad. lib. 3.
and of diverse others. This Pontifex Maximus was so highly honored in the
populare state of Rome, that he was reputed to approach near unto the degree
of dignity which the kings held in former times Plut. Probl. ca. 13.
, insomuch as L. Florus reports Florus epist. lib. 47.
, that a fine was imposed upon C^. Tremelius Tribune of the people, for using
uncivil speeches against M. Aemilius Lepidus, the greatest Pontifex. A
Sergeant was appointed to go before him Plut. Prebl. cap. 113.
, he was carried in a Coach-chaire, called Curules sella Liu. Decad. 3. lib. 5.
, which was reputed a royal ensign, because Romulus used the like by example
of the Hetruscanes Liu. Decad. 1. lib. 1.
. His doors were adorned with green Laurel Plia. lib. 15. cap. 30.
; if he undertook any office or charge, he was not liable (as were other men)
either to controulement or account Halicar. lib. 2 (...).
, whether to the Senate or common people. His proper ornament was a hat Apul.
apol. 1.
, in token of his lofty estate. If any offender did sly unto him, that day
he was protected from punishment Plut. Probl. cap. 111.
. He was married after a special manner, called confarreatio Boet. in top.
Ciccr. lib. 2.
. His wife must be of singular example, and he might not iterat marriage the
second time Tertul. de exhor cast. and ad vxorem l. 1.and in praescript.
; he might not behold a dead body Joseph. antiq. 3. cap. 10.
; he might not foil his hands with blood Liu. 3. Decad. lib. 10.
; and neither give nor assist sentence of death. He was chief not only of
the College of Pontifices Liu 4. Decad. lib. 10.
, but also of him that was Rex sacrorum; the Augures; Flamines and vestale
Virgins; upon whom he might impose either fine or other punishment, as the
quality of their offenses did require. All their sacred matters whether
public or private did principally depend upon his direction. And yet this
authority was often borne (as has been said) by the highest civil Officers
of that Common wealth: the election of him pertained to the people Cicer. in
orat. del. Agraria. and in lib. de amic ti^. Halicar lib. 2. Pater c. lib. 2.
Su^t. in N^rcn^. ^a. 2
: and provocation or appeal did lie also from him to the people. For so Linie
Liu. 4. Decad. lib. 10.
writes that a contention did arise, betwixt C. Seruilius the greatest
Pontifex, and L. Cornelius Dolabesta, Du^muir, because the Pontifex commanded
him to abdicate his office, that he might be inaugurated Rex sacrificus, in
place of Cornelius Dol^bella. This when the D^umuir refused to do, the
Pontifex set a fine upon him; for which cause he appealed and brought the
matter before the people. Many tribes being assembled and the difference
debated on both sides, they commanded the Du^muir to be obedient to the
Pontifex* and yet they remitted his fine, in case he should abandon his
office. In the mean time the heavens Pontifex.

The Commonwealth of y^ Romans being changed again to the government of one,
the chiefest authority in all affairs depended upon the Emperors: For so
Tertul. in apolog.
Tertullian acknowledges the Heathen Emperors to be A Deo setuxdi, post cum
primi, ante omnes and super omnes.
second and inferior only to God before all, and above all. Again he says,
Tert^ad Scapulam. Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Dio secundu^, solo Deo
minorem.
We worship the Emperor as a man next unto God, and inferior only to God. So
did Epist. Elutherij citat. inter ll. E. 1.
Eleutherius in those times Bishop of Rome, write unto Lucius King of Britain
Vos es^is Vicarius Dei in regno, iuxta prophetam Regium.
; You are Gods Vicar within your own Realm, according to the Prophet David.

Augustus annexed the greatest pontificate to the imperial dignity, to whom
the people by the law of Royalty transferred all their power as well in
religious as in civil affairs. Suetonius writes In C. Caesare. ca. 13.
, that C. Caesar was at one time greatest Pontifex, and also Augur. Seruius Ad
1. 3. and 6. Aencid.
testifies, that C. Caesar being Pontifex, M. Terrentius Varro did write unto
him a book, concerning their sacred and religious rites. Again, Suetonius In
Galba. c. 8
affirms, that Galba did bear three Priest-hoods. The same Suetonius In
Claudio. cap. 22.
says, that Claudius Caesar had the Priesthood in such honorable estimation
that he never made choice or nomination of (...), until he had been sworn. In
regard of this connection of the Empire and pontificate, Tacit. Annal. (...). 3.
Tacitus did write: nunc deum munere summum pontificem su^^^um hominum esse.

The greatest pontificate was also borne by Vespasian, Traiane, and diverse
other Roman Emperors: the Majesty of which Emperors was esteemed most sacred,
in so much as divine both titles and adorations were given unto them. Their
Statues and Images were sacred and adored, as Tacit. lib. 14
Tacitus and Veg. lib. 2. c. 5 and 6.
Vegetius do report; it was treason for any man either to pull away, or to
violate those who did fly unto them; to melt them also, and also to fell them
L. qui statuas. l. non contra. bit. D. ad Iud. may.
. Tacitus writes Tacit. lib. 3.
that L. Ennius was accused of treason, for melting the Image of the Prince:
which accusation although Tiberius did forbid to proceed, yet Suetonius
affirms In Tiberio. cap. 58.
, that he commanded one to be arraigned, for taking the head from the statue of
Augustus, and setting another upon the same. This kind of accusation grew to
that degree, that it was capital for a man, to bear the Image of the Prince
stamped in money, or engraven in a Ring, to any unclean or unseemly place.
Yea, Seneca, says De benefic. lib. 3.
, that under the Empire of Tiberius, a certain noble man was accused of
treason, for moving his hand to his p^iuie parts, in making vrin, when he did
wear a ring upon (...) finger, whereon was engraven the Image of the Prince:
So great was the reverence borne unto them.

Upon this general both authority and use, for Princes to manage divine
affairs, St. Hierom In Job. cap. 1.
has said, Priuilegium offe^endi primogenitis, vel maxim Regibus debebatur.
The privilege to offer sacrifice was due to the first borne, but most of all
unto Kings.

And yet in these times, the Emperors reserred many matters pertaining to
their religion, to be determined by the Senate; partly for expedition and ease,
partly for that they would not draw all authority from the senate at once. So
Tacitus Tacit. 2. annal.
writes of a decree of the Senate, for expelling of the ceremonies of the
Egyptians and of the Jews Desacris ludaicis Aegyptijsque pellendis.
. Likewise under Claudius a decree of the Senate was made, that the Pontifex
should consider what ceremony of the Aruspices should be retained Viderent
pontifices quae retinenda firmandaque Aruspicum essent.
. So Tiberius referred to the Senate whether Christ should be received among
the Roman Gods, which in no case they would consent to decree; because he had
been worshipped for God, without the public authority of the Empire. The like
is reported to have bin both purposed and propounded by Hadrian; who commanded
also that Temples should be built in every City, without any Idols. The like
purpose in Alexander Seuerus is affirmed by Lampridius In Seuero.
to have been crossed, upon assurance made unto him, from those who gave
answer by inspection of Entrails, that if Christ should be received for God,
all men would become Christians, and the other Temples should be forsaken.

But, when he that would not be worshipped with other Gods, was both admitted
and adored for God Socrates In Proaem. lib. 5.
testifies in these words: From that time when the Emperors began to be
Christians (...)
, the affairs of the Church depended upon them; in so much as the greatest
Councels were always assembled by their appointment. So Chrysostom Ad Pop.
Antioch. hom. 2.
calls the Emperor, Summitatem and caput.
the height and head of all men in the world: and one that has no equal upon
earth Parem vllum super terram non habet.
. And so did Leo the first write to the Emperor Leo, Debes Imperator
incunctanter aduertere, regiam potestatem tibi, non solum ad mundi regimen, sed
maxim ad ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam.
that royal power was given him, not only for government of the world, but
especially for the safeguard of the Church. And so likewise Gregory Bishop of
Rome affirmed Epist. lib. 3. ca. 100. and 103
, that power is given to Princes from heaven, not only over Soldiers but over
Priests. Optatus says Contra Parmen. lib. 13. super Imperatorem non est nisi
solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem.
: there is no man above the Emperor but only God who made the Emperor. But
this is most evidently declared, in the answer of Demetrius Chomatenus In
respons. O^^ent.
in these words: Imperator, vt communis (...) ^^istens and nominatus.
synodalibus praeest sententijs, and robur tribuit: ecclesiasticos ordines
componit, and legem dat vitae politi^que little qui altari seruiunt.
The Emperor being both in common estimation, and in very truth a skillful
governor, is president and gives strength to synod all sentences; he sets
Ecclesiastical orders in form, he gives law for the life and civil carriage
of those who serve at the Altar. And again: Vt vno verbo dica, solo
sacrificand^ (...) ininisterio, reliqua pontificalia priuilegia Imperator
representat.
to speak in one word, the office of sacrificing only excepted, the Emperor
represents the other privileges of a Bishop. And therefore St. Augustine
Cont Coe^^on. and epist. 48. and epist. 50.
enu^ighed against the heresy of the Donatists; in that they affirmed, that
the Church ought not to use either laws or any assistance from Princes. And
that speech of Donatus Donat. Mel^uit. l. 2.
was justly condemned. Quid est imperatoricum ecclesia? What has the Emperor
to do with the Church?

Two parts in the Church may separatly be considered, the external form,
which consists in the political government thereof; and the essential
form, consisting in the true substance and foundation of faith. Concerning the
first, we may find many Constantine nouel. 43. and 49. in princ.
the great, Anastatius l. 18. C. de sacros. eccles.
and Justinian D nouel. 43. and 49.
the first established order, for expense and form of funerals. The Emperors
Gratian, Valentinian the second, and Theodosius the great l. 2. C. de sacros.
eccles.
, prohibited that any corpse should be interred within the seats of the
Apostles or Martyrs. Honorius and Theodosius ordained, how many Deacons should
be in the Church of Constantinople l. 4. C. co.
; and what immunities every Church should enjoy l. 5. C. co.
. Leo and Anthemius forbad alienation of lands pertaining to the Church l. 14
C. co.
. Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius did prohibit l. 9. C. de episc. and
cler.
that any should be received for a Diaconisse, who was not aged above fifty
years; which was afterward confirmed by Justinian nouel. 6. ca 6.
. Honorius and Arcadius forbad l. 17. C. de episc. and cler.
, that Clerks should have any thing to do with public actions or pleas.
Justinian added nouel. 123. ca. 10.
, that they should abstain from play, and from all open spectacles and shows.
Leo and Anthemius l. 29. C. de episc. and cler.
enjoined Monks and religious persons, not to depart out of their Monasteries,
and to live in that modesty and sincerity whereto the imperial laws did bind
them: and that no Clergio man should be ordained by way of corruption l. 30. C.
co.
: or conuented in Judgment, in a place far distant from his abode l. 31. C.
co.
. Justinian ordained l. 22. C. de episc. audien.
, that upon a certain day in the week Bishops should go and visit the
prisons, to enquire for what cause every prisoner is detained, and to admonish
the Magistrates, to execute justice. In another constitution novel. 3.
he ordained, what manner of Clerks should be ordained in the Church; that
Clerks should not remove themselves from a less Church, to a greater; and
that the rents of the Church should be expended to godly uses and acts. He
appointed also novel. 5.
the time for monastical profession, and the rules which Monks should lead.
He established his ordinance novel. 6.
for the election, life and behavior of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
persons; that they reside upon their charge; that they resort not to the Court,
except they be expressly called; that they celebrate not divine offices in any
place which is not consecrated to the service of God. novel. 58.
He declared what causes should be lawful for divorce and separation of
marriage novel. 117.
; as Theodosius the younger, and Valent. the third had done before him l. 8. C.
de repud.
. He ordained also that the holy Scriptures should be read in the vulgar
tongue, and appointed what translations should be in use nouel. 146.
.

It would be both tedious and unnecessary to make long stay upon rehersall of
those imperial laws, which have bin both received and reverenced for
government of the Church. For Justinian professed l. 1. C. de vet. iur. enuc
legu authoritas and diuinas and humanas res been disponit.
, that by authority of the laws, both divine and humane affairs were well
ordered; and again, nouel 133. (...).
there is nothing but may be examined by authority of the Emperor; for he
receives from God a general principallitie and government over all men. The
same is acknowledge by Pope Gregory, in his epistle to Mauritius lib. 2.
epist. 100 Ad hoc potestas super omnes homines dominoru^ meoru^ pictati
coesitus data est, etc.
: To this end is power over all persons given from heaven unto my Lord, for
assistance of good men, and enlargement of the way to heaven. Whereupon
Espencaeus says Espenc. com. in Tit. 3. digres. 10. Gregorius magnus agno
se^bat, Imperatoribus conc^ssum esse dominari sacerdotibus.
; that Gregory the great did ingeniouslie acknowledge a soueraignetie in
Emperors over priests. So Balsamon Bals. in Council Chalced. cap. 12.
has said, that the Emperors had power to appoint patriarchall seas,
according to the power given them from above. Whereto does that of Isodore
agree c. Principes 23. q. 5.
; Princes of the world have their authority and power in the Church, that the
ecclesiastical discipline should be held in strength; that they who will not
observe it by admonition of the priest, should be constrained by force of the
Magistrate. Yea, diverse of the papal decrees, for ordering of Ecclesiastical
Codex of Theodosius. The Canon Iudicantem 13. q. 5.
, expressing the office of a Judge in cognizance of causes, attributed by
Gratian to Pope Eleutherius, was made by the Emperor Constantine l. 1. C. de
Iudic. in C. Theod.
. The Canon, si quis Iratus 2. q. 3. de poe. di. 1.
, attributed to Pope Fabian, against accusers, is a law of the same Emperor
Constantine, in the Codex of Theodosius. The Canons which go under the names
of the same Fabian 3. q. 6. c. 1.
, of Sixtus 3. q. 6. c. 16. and 17. and 2. q. 8. c. 4.
, and of Hadrian 2. q. 3. c. 3.
, concerning the same subject, are found to be made by Gratian the son of
Valentinian the first. The decrees of Pope Caius c. Episcopis. 3. q. 5.
, and of Pope John c. reintegranda. q. e.
, for restitution of Church goods, taken from Bishops, when they were forced
from their sea, are the Edictes of the same Emperor Gratian. The Canon qui
ratione 3. q. 9.
attributed to Pope Damasus, for order in accusations, is comprised in
Theodosius Code, under the name of the same Emperor. The Canon nullus 2. q. 7.
, under the name of Pelagius was made by the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius.
The Canon quisquis 2. q. 8.
, under the name of Eutychian, was promulged by the Emperors Honorius and
Theodosius. The Canon consanguineos 35. q. 6.
, for separation of marriage contracted within the prohibited degrees of
consanguinity, is a constitution of the Emperor Constantine the great. The
Canon Priuiligia 25. q. 2.
, for confirmation of the privileges of the Church, under the name of
Anacletus, is a constitution of the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian. In a
word, the volume of decrees is filled with diverse constitutions of Christian
Emperors, either assumed by Popes, or attributed unto them, without expressing
either the name or authority of the Emperors. And touching the rest, Pope
Honorius c. 1. ext. de iu^am calum.
acknowledged, that it was by decree of the Emperor Justinian Imperator
Iustinianus decreuit, vt canones patru^ vim legum habere oporteat.
, that the Canons of the Fathers should have the force of laws.

Now, when any difference did arise in matters of faith; when any great schism
or disturbance was maintained in the church; the Emperors did use to assemble
their Bishops in common Council, and Nicephorus Niceph. lib 8. cap. 14.
and Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 2. de vita Constantini.
do write, that Constantine the great, having employed Hosius Bishop of
Corduba, for composing the difference betwixt Alexander Bishop of Alexandria,
and Arrius; wherewith the Eustachius Bishop of Antioch, or rather (as the Canon
law affirms c. futuram. 12. q. 1.
) Constantine himself was president Constantinus praesid^^s sa^ctae synodo,
quae apud (...) congregata est.
. The form of faith agreed upon in this Council, was presently confirmed by
Constantine, and both imparted and imposed upon others, who had not bin
present; and charge given under pain of death, that none should secretly
preserve any of the books of Arrius from the fire Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6.
. Afterward the same faith was both declared and confirmed by constitution of
the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius l. 2. C. de sum. trin.
.

The general Council of Constantinople was assembled against the heresy of
Macedonius, by Theodosius Niceph. lib. 12 ca. 10.
the great. The Bishops assembled in this Council wrote thus in humble manner
unto the Emperor Theodosius; Obsecramus clementiam tuam, vt, quemadmodum
literis h^norasti ecclesiam, quibus nos con^ocasti, ita sinalem conclusionem
nostrorum decretorii corrobores sententia tua and sigillo.
We beseech your Majesty, that as you have honored the Church, by your
letters, wherewith you have called us together, so it may please you to
confirm the final conclusion of our decrees with your sentence, and with your
seal.

The general Council of Ephesus was assembled by authority of Theodosius the
younger Niceph. lib. 14. ca. 34.
against the heresy of Nestorius. The decrees of this Council, together with
the decrees of the Council of Nice, containing the profession of Christian
Faith, was confirmed by a constitution of Theodosius and Valentinian l. 3. C.
desum. trin.
, whereby also the writings of Nestorius are condemned to the fire.

The fourth general Council was appointed by authority of the Emperor
Martian Euagr. lib. 1. ca. 2.
, first to be held at Nice, afterward upon certain occasions it was assembled
at Chalcedon. In this Council, Euagrius Lib. 2. cap. 4.
writes, that both the Bishops and temporal Judges did oftentimes suspend
their decrees in this sort; Unto us it seems right (...).
, if it shall also like our most virtuous and godly Lord the Emperor. And in
the end it is thus concluded; Vid. d. conc. Chalc.
all our doings being referred to the Emperors Majesty. Lastly, the decrees
of this Council touching Christian Faith, were confirmed by a public
constitution of the same Emperor Martian l. 4. C. de sum. trin.
.

The fifth oecumenicall Council was assembled by Justinian the first 3. vol
council.
; and the sixth by Constantine the third; both of them in the City of
Constantinople. The last of these Councels Constantine subscribed, after that
he had commanded that ten Bishops of the East, and ten of the West should
repair to his Court, and open to him the decrees of the Council: (...).
That he might consider (says Sozomenus) whether they were agreed according to
the Scriptures, and that he might further determine and conclude what were best
to be done.

In brief, Cardinal Cusanus Cus. de conc. l. 3. ca. 16.
does acknowledge that he did evermore find Sciendum est quod in vniuersalibus
octo concilus semper inuen^o imperatores, and Iudices suos, cum senatu primatum
hab^isse.
, that the Emperors and their Judges, with the Senate, had the primacie, and
office of presidence in the eight general Councels. In regard whereof Odoacer
Conc. To. 3.
did in this sort expostulate with Pope Symachus, and the Clergy of Rome.
Miramur quicquam tentatum fuisse sine nobis; nam viuente nostro presbytero sine
nobis nihil tentari oportuit.
We marvel that any thing has been attempted without us; for without us
nothing should have been done, our Priest being alive. In like manner
Nicephorus Niceph. in praesat. ad Emanuel.
did write to the Emperor Emanuel Paleologus; Tu es dux professionis fidei
nostrae etc.
You are the captain of the profession of our faith, you have reformed the
Temple of God from Merchants and exchangers of the heavenly doctrine, and from
heretics, by the word of God.

During this time, a stiff strife did arise betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and
the Bishops of Constantinople (as did once among the Disciples of Christ Marc.
9. 35. Luc. 9. 46.
) whether of them should be greatest. In the Council of Nice it had been
decreed Can. 8.
, that the first place should be given to the Sea of Rome, the second to
Alexandria, and the third to Antioch: for the City Platina, Plat^n vita (...)
3.
and out of him Sabel. Aencid. 8. lib. 6.
Sabellicus do write, that where the head of the Empire was, there also should
be the principal Sea. The Bishop of Rome answered, that the City of Rome,
from whence a colonie was brought to Constantinople, was in right to be
esteemed the head of the Empire: for the Graecians did use to style their
Prince (...), Emperor of the Romans: and they themselves were also called
(...) Romans.

Platina In vita Bonifacij 3.
affirms; that diverse Emperors favored the Bishops of Constantinople. In
the Council of Chalcedon Can. 28.
it was decreed, that the Church of Constantinople should stand in one degree
of dignity, and enjoy equal privilege with the Church of Rome. The same
equality was also decreed in the second Council of Constantinople In trip.
hist. lib. 9. cap. 13.
, and confirmed by constitution of Honorius and Theodosius l. 6. C. de sacros.
eccles. ^vnic. C. de priuil. vrb. Constable. lib. 11.
. By a constitution of Leo and Athemius l. decernimus C. de sacros. eccles.
, the Bishop of Constantinople is declared to have precedence of place (...).
before all others: which law was alleged by Photius Nomoca. tit. 1. cap. 5.
to confirm the primacie of the Patriarch of Constantinople l. Constantino*
p^litana 24 C. de sacros. eccl.
. Justinian declares Constantinopolitana ecclesia omniu^ aliarum est caput.
that the Church of Constanti^nople was the head of all other Churches. Which
constitution is omitted in some editions of Justinians Code. Mauritius Platin.
in vita Gregor^^ 1.
admonished Gregory the first, to bear obedience to John Bishop of
Constantinople.

Afterward, Pope Gregory the third, with much ado (as Platina writes)
obtained of Phocas* Emperor, or rather (as Zonoras and P. Diaconus In vit.
Pho^^.
do discribe him) the wild, drunken, bloody, adulterous tyrant of
Constantinople, that the Sea of Rome Leo surnamed Iconomachus, had caused the
Images of Saints to be taken down. Finally, they pulled the west-part of the
Empire from their subjection, and left the residue, with that mortal maime, to
be a pray to the barbarous infidels.

Vicars of Jesus Christ; the Spouse of the Church; the Sovereign Bishop, and
Prince of all others; the Masters and Lords of all the world; (for these are
the titles which Innocent the third, Boniface the eight, Clement the fifth and
diverse others have assumed) by exempting also both the persons and goods of all
the Clergy, from secular subjection; and by binding all men to their
obedience, in matters which concern the soul; they have always been able to
stir up, not only weighty wars against the Emperors, but also most
stiff and unnatural rebellions. Which disordered demeanor Carrion accounts
the only cause, Car. lib. 4. sceleribus pontificum hoc imperium languesactum
est. Luit prand. lib. 6. ca. 6. Cuspinian and Theodo. de Nihem. in vita Otho 3.
that brought the Empire to a feeble state.

So John the third combined with Berengar the third, and Adalbar his son, who
pretended themselves to be Kings of Italy, to make head against the Emperor
Otho the great. Pope John the eighteenth made league with Crescentius, and
mutined the people against the Emperor Otho the third. Benedict. 9. to stay
Henry the black from entering into Italy, stirred Peter King of Hungary to
bear himself for Emperor; to whom he sent a crown with this inscription.

Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa coronam. Gregory the seventh, who was the
first that enterprised to cause himself to be elected and consecrated, without
the consent and against the pleasure of the Emperor; and who set forth a
decree, whereby he excommunicated all those who should affirm, that either the
consent or knowledge of the Emperor was herein necessary; opposed against the
Emperor Henry the fourth, first Rodulph Duke of Suauie, giving charge to the
Archbishops of Men^s and of Collen to consecrate him Emperor: to whom also he
sent a crown with this inscription.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rudolpho. Afterward, weary of nothing so
much as of quiet, he stirred Ecbert Marquis of Saxony against the same
Emperor. Galasius the twelfth raised against Henry the fifth Emperor, the
most part of his subjects, and especially the Archbishop of Ments; whom he so
strongly seconded with the Normanes that were in Sicilie, that the Emperor was
constrained to quit his quarrel, and to yield the collation of Bishoprics to
the Pope. Innocent the second raised against Lothaire the twelfth, Roger the
Norman, whom he invested in the Duchy of Pouille, which the Emperor claimed
to be a fiffe of the Empire. At the last the contention was composed by
mediation of S. Bernard, who then lived, and was with the Emperor; wherein the
Pope sped so well, that he was joined with the Emperor in holding Bauier. The
same Innocent the second raised Guelphus Duke of Bauier against Conrade the
third, whom he aided with money and all other convenient means. Bart. in
tract. de Gaelph. and Gib.
This war was so villanouslie cruel, that it give beginning to the two
factions of the Guelphes, who took their name from this Duke of Bauier; and of
the Gibelins, so called of Wi^bling, which was the place where the Emperor
Conrade had bin brought up.

Against Frederick Bar^arossa, who succeeded Conrade, Hadrian the fourth
raised them of Milan, and the other Lumbards; Alexander the third stirred the
Dukes of Saxon and of Austrich, aiding them with all his power to intertaine
disquiet in Almaine. Pope Celestine the third excommunicated Henry the sixth
Emperor, the successor and son of Frederick Barbarossa; and deprived him
of all his dignities: making this the means to avoid him out of Italy into
Almaine. Against Philip, brother unto Henerie the sixth, Pope Innocent the
third caused Otho Duke of Saxony to be elected Emperor; whereby the Empire
was embroiled with a bloody war. Against Frederick the second, Pope
Honorins the third raised the Lumbards in rebellion, adjoining the Sic^ians to
the side, and the greatest part of the other Italians. All these troubles were
so tempestuous, that the Emperor Radulph of Haspurge could never be persuaded
to pass the Alps for his coronation; affirming, that Italy was the den of
the Lion, whereof the entrance was fair, but the issue fearful.

Clement the fifth armed and opposed Rebert King of Sicilie against the
Emperor Henry the seventh; because he would not do homage and swear faith
to the Sea of Rome: and in the end caused him to be empoisoned by a Iacob^e,
in giving him the sacred host. What troubles had Jews of Bauier against
Frederick of Austrich, who was elected Emperor at the same time with him, by
the faction of Pope John the 22? The same troubles were continued by Pope
Clement the sixth, who caused Charles the fourth King of Boheme, to be elected
Emperor; and yet he could not enjoy the Empire until after the decease of
Jews. This Charles was a weak Prine, both in counsel and courage; who in
favor of the Popes did extremely both enfeeble and abase the Empire of Rome.
Nauclerus writes, Genesis 46.
that he entered the city of Rome on foot, in derision whereof a certain
Senator began a speech which he made to the people with these words: Ecce Rex
tuus venit tibi mansuetus; Petrarch, who lived at that time, did also write
between scorn and disdain of this deiection of the imperial Ma^estie.

I omit the tragedies which Eugenius the fourth raised against the Emperor
Sigismond, principally to impeach the Council of Basil. I omit that which Paul
the second did to chase Frederick the third out of Italy. Generally they
always endeavored to endomage the Emperors; not only as hating them, (for so
Gu^cc^ardine Guice. in comment. polit.
says y^ it grew into a proue^b; It is proper to the Church to hate the
Caesar's) but as fearing to be endomaged by them. In the end, partly by opposing
enemies, and partly by raising rebellions against the Emperors, the Popes have
bin able to expel their government out of Italy. Whereof our country man
Sanderi Sand. lib. 4. de clau. David. Stupenda res, and supra quam dici potest
admiranda, vt cum pot^utissi^i qu^ que imp^. (...) per al^quot saecula ownem
suam vim in exterminandis ex vrbe Roma ponti^icibus Romany, frustra
explicuissent; nun^ e contrari^, pontifices Romani abs^ vlia vi, Romanos
Imperatores ex ar^^ Imperij semou^runt; palat^s Caesarum alque ad^o tota vrbe
in su^^ potestatem conuersa.
in this sort has written: It is a thing more admirable then can be vtte^ed,
and able to make a man astonished, that when the most puissant Emperors did
for many ages display all their forces to no purpose, for driving the Roman
Bishops from the city of Rome; now to the contrary, the Roman Bishops without
any power, have removed the Roman Emperors from the tower of the Empire, and
made themselves Lords of the Palaces of Caesar's, and turned the whole city
into their proper power.

This is true (Master Sanders) which you have said; but neither is it worthy
of any wonder, neither i^ it all that which the Popes have done. What marvel
is it that most puissant Emperors could never prevail against the Bishops of
Rome, when their own subjects were persuaded, that they drew their swords
against heaven, and made offer (like those Giants of whom the Poets write) to
scale the skies, and to pull God out of his throne? Where subjects have bin of
other opinion, there Princes have prevailed against many Popes. Again, what
necessity had the Popes to use force of arms, when the consciences of men were
under their command? whilst this rule held good, cloisters and Colleges were
in stead of Castles unto them; and religious persons were in steed of many
armies. These were their garrisons, these their soldiers; these quelled the
courage of all their enemies, by thundering forth threats against those who
disobeyed them; not of death, which might be peradventure either contemned or
else avoided; but of damnation, which as it is most terrible, so was it held
for this cause unavoidable. For so Boniface the eight decreed, In extrauag.
vnam sanctam. Porto subesse Rom Pont* omnem humanam creaturam declaramus,
dicimus, diffiaimus and pronuntiamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis.
that upon necessity of salvation all men must be subject to the Bishop of
Rome. These forces were planted within every state, and by these might any
state be supplanted:

By these means the Bishops of Rome were easily able, not only to drive the
Roman Emperors from the chief tower and seat of the Empire, but also,
making one wrong the cause of another, to reduce them to a very low degree,
both of power and of authority within Almaine; and to hold them as no better
then vassalls to their Sea. Tibi d^mina. 63 did. c. ^enerab^lem. de elect.
(...). in c licet. n. 8. de so. comp.
For, after that eight Emperors had been excommunicate by Popes; Namely,
Frederick the first, Frederick the second. Philip, Conrade, Oath the fourth,
Laws of Bauaria, Henri^ the fourth, and Henri^ the fifth, (which was occasion
enough for their subjects to revolt, and for other Princes to invade) the
succeding Emperors, partly unwilling, but principally unable to sustain so
sad and heavy blows, submitted themselves to the papal power; renounced the
right, which by long custom they claimed, in election of the Pope and of other
Bishops. And to the contrary, the Emperor Charles the fourth, acknowledged by
his letters Patents, Incip. post pedum oscula.
that although he was elected Emperor by the Princes, yet he was to be
confirmed by the Pope, and to receive the Imperial crown from him. Whereupon
Pope Pius the fifth, did sharply rebuke the Emperor Ferdinand by his Legate,
for neglecting to receive of him the Imperial Crown; neither would he admit
the Emperors excuse, but had proceeded by excommunication to compel him, had
he not by entreaty of the French King, and of King Philip of Spain the
Emperors kinseman, been otherwise appeased.

In the form of the coronation of the Emperors, which was approved by the
Emperor Charles the fourth, and is kept in the Vaticane at Rome, many servile
ceremonies are contained. As, that the Emperor supplieth the office of a
subdeacon, in ministering to the Pope when he says Mass; and that after diume
service he holds the stirtop, whilst the Pope mounteth to horse; and for a
certain space leads his horse by the bridle. Add heereto the kissing of the
Popes feet, as Charles the fifth did, at Bononia, at Rome, and last of all at
Marsielles in Prouence, in the presence of diverse other great Princes: add
their humb^e subscriptions to the Pope; I kiss the hands and feet of your
holiness: add that they must seek the Pope for receiving the Imperial
crown, whereforuer he shall be; and follow him if he chance to remove: with
diverse like tokens and testimonies of de^ection of the Majesty of that State,
and subjection thereof to the Sea of Rome. For further declaration whereof,
Pan. c. causam. qui fill. fi. le. etc. solita. de ma. and ob. c nou^^. de (...).
etc. (...). n. 8. des^ comp. and in c. ^. n. 2. 3. 4. depro bat.
during the life of the Emperor, the Popes challenge to be his Judge; and the
Imperial feate being void, they claim the exercise of Imperial power, and
have given inuestitures and received fealty, of those who held of the Empire;
as of John and Luchi^, Vicounts of Milane. Anno 1341.
For which cause the Canonists also (who set up these strings to the highest
strame) do maintain opinion, that the Emperor cannot resign his Imperial
dignity to any other then the Pope: and that it is a streine of heresy Feli.
in c. firmissime, n. 1. de haeret.
, not to believe that the Emperor is subject to the Pope: and that the Emperor
is but the Popes Minister Molina. tract. 2. de Just. disput. 29.
, to use his sword only at his beck. Lastly, Pope Clement the fifth,
expressly declared by decree Cle. Romani de Iurc^^^.
, that the oath which the Emperor makes to the Pope, is no other then an oath
of fealty.

Naples, Sicilie, Jerusalem, Sardinia, Corsica, Arragon, Portugale, Navarre,
Ireland, England, Scotland, Poland, Hungary. to which Cuiacius Cuia^ c. 7. de
Imp.
adioyneth the kingdom of France, which Pope Boniface the eight, declared to
be deuolued to the Church, for the contempt and disobedience of King Philip the
fair. And Pope Alexander the sixth in dividing the late discovered parts of the
world, between the Kings of Castile and Portugale, expressly reserved to his
Sea, the Jurisdiction and soueraignety of them, by consent of both Kings; who
from that time became his vassals, of all the purchases and conquests which
before they had achieved, or intended to enterprise in times to ensue.
Generally, they do challenge temporal sovereignty in all countries Pan. in c.
fi. de Baptism.
; habitually at the least; which at pleasure they may produce into act Pan. in
c. 1. de so. comp. and in c. 1. de probat.
, whereby the subjects of any State may have recourse unto them Pan. in c. si
duobus de appell.
; to some complaint or suite against their Prince Pan. in c. 1. de prob. n. 2.
and 3. and n. 6.
; to be relieved or protected by them, and to receive privileges and
immunities at their hands Pan. in c. per vencrabilem. n. 1. qui fill su^t
legitti.
. Whereby also they may judge the actions of Princes; and upon such cause as
they shall think meet, punish, excommunicate, de prive them, denounce public
war against them Pan. in d. c. per vencrabilem. and in c sicut. n. 12. de
iureiur. and in c. and sinecesse. de do. inter vir. and vx. Pius 5. in bulla.
: free their subjects from subjection unto them. As Pope Pius the first, not
only absolved the subjects of England from their alleagance to the late Queen
Elizabeth, but commanded them also to turn^ traitors, and take arms against
her. After which Bull few years passed without some notable attempt, either
against her person, or against the State.

It would be very redious to give but a light touch; to all the desperate
distresses that hereupon have bin occasioned, in diverse foraine countries;
which out of their Annal; may be furnished with ease. And the sequel John.
What has been lately, what freshly, what is daily attempted, it cannot
possibly escape the memory of those that live in this present age: and for
help of those who are to succeed, report there of shall be made at large, in a
history Intended for the times lately passed, and now presently running. The
accumulating of these examples in this place, would be a matter of some labor,
for clearing that which has little doubt.

Thus much in substance, but somewhat more briefly delivered: it seemed that
there was not any man in that presence, who, either in reply or in supply,
had not somewhat to say. That only was a hindera^ce to the discharging of their
minds, which is pleasantly said to have dissolved the Parliament of women;
because they could not agree to speak one at once. Many showed themselves so
impatient of silence; and they who upon aduisement could have said least, were
upon the sudden most frank and forward in words. At the last, that which was
the cause that no man could have free liberty of speech, did drive them all
into a dumb dumpe: which opportunity was forthwith apprehended by a thick
Theologian, whose formal attire, countenance and carriage, was a good supply
to other defects. And so, having composed himself to al complements of
gravity and grace, he began his speech after the set and solemn manner of
those disputers, who, contenting themselves with commendation of memory, do
more diligently endeavor to repeat then to reply.

State do follow. That nothing is of so high nature in a State, as is religion:
and that therefore the ordering thereof is annexed, as a right of Majesty, to
the sovereign power; whether it be settled in a King, or in the Nobility, or
in the people^ For, seeing religion commands the conscience, and holds the
soul in subjection, if supremac^^ therein be acknowledged to be in a foreign
Prince, the sinews of domestical sovereignty are cut in s^nder. You have
brought certain examples of dangerous consequence, when either strangers or
subjects have bin followed for religion. You showed y^ for avoiding the like
dangers, two policies were anciently observed; one consisted in excluding
external ceremonies and rites; the other, in settling the government for matters
in religion, in the supreme power and authority in the State. That this last
was practiced among the Jews, Egyptians and in diverse other countries. In the
four great Monarchies also, of Assyria, of Persia, of Graecia, and of Rome. Of
Rome (you say) first, under the government of Kings; secondly, in the popular
state; thirdly, under Heathen Emperors; and lastly, (for a good space) under
Christian Emperors; who in matters of circumstance and of external form in
religion, both used, and were acknowledged to have supreme authority: of
whose laws, diverse were afterward either assumed by Popes, or attributed unto
them. Concerning matters of substance, and of internal form, they assembled
general Councels; wherein they held the Primacie; and confirmed the acts of
them by Imperial decree. You declared also, that when Constantinople was
advanced to be the head of the Empire, a stiff strife did arise betwixt the
Bishops of Constantinople and of Rome, whether should be greatest; that diverse
Emperors favored the Church of Constantinople; but at the last, Pope Boniface
obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that the Sea of Rome should be the chief of
all other Churches. This you account an error in government; to settle a power
of so high quality, in a place far distant from the principal strength of
the Empire. For hereby the Bishops of Rome did grow to such greatness, that
they drew the west part of the Emp^^e to revolt; and left the residue for a
pray to the ba^barous Infidels. Lastly you have showed, that the Bishops of
Rome, advancing their authority by degrees, have been of power, to reduce the
west Empire to a feeble state; and to hold, not the Emperor alone, but all the
chief Kings in Europe, either as vassals or as tributaries to their Sea.
Generally, that they have challenged Sovereign jurisdiction over all Kingdoms
and Commonwealths in the world: whereby they have cast diverse countries, and
among others this Realm of England into desperate distresses.

Now, before answer should be offered to all these several points, I would
think it fit, (under the leave of better Judgments) to take some reasonable
respite to advise upon them; because questions of this high nature, are not
always the same which suddenly they seem: and he bewrays too great opinion
of his own sufficiency, who presently will undertake a controversy of this
weight. But, if Christ has committed supreme power in religion to the Sea of
Rome, then is no place left to these rules and reasons of state.

Nay (answered N.) I have protested before, that we have neither leisure nor
lust to engulphe our selves in such an Ocean. If Christ has committed to the
sea of Rome! This is a large supposall indeed; and that which will never settle
in the opinion of many, who are otherwise firmly affected to the doctrine of
the Church of Rome. Yea, I am assuredly persuaded, that the violence of
ambition has pulled many Bishops of Rome from their own judgment, in making
cla^me to that authority which they never had either title to hold, or
ability to rule. For diverse of them being suddenly borne out of a low retired
state; namely, from some Cloister or heremitage, into an unknown Sea of
absolute authority, they were ouerswayed therewith, like a small boat with
too large a sail: And being men for the most part, spent in age, untrained in
experience, and neither by nature nor by education of ability, to conceive the
bounds and degrees of great affairs, they took to themselves a licentious
liberty; supposing it reasonable, yea altogether necessary, that all the
Kings and Princes of the earth, who hold their estate immediately from heaven,
who receive their power from the hand of God, should be subject to the
pleasure, the passions, the fiery fury; the ignorance, the errors, the
malice, of one haughty and humerous man, whose weakness is subject (as it has
bin plainly declared by their lives) to all immoderate motions of humanity.
And all this upon no other ground but because Christ said to S. Peter; Thou art
Peter, Matthew. 16.
and upon this rock will I build my Church etc. But what is this to Supremacy?
what is this to the Bishop of Rome? diverse questions must be cleared before
this will serve the one or the other.

For, first it is but weakly assured, that S. Peter ever do follow. Secondly,
it is less assured that ever he was Bishop of Rome. For, being an Apostle, his
charge was general; Matthew. 28.
go teach all nations; and therefore not to be, as a Bishop, either limited or
settled in any one particular place. Or if we will say, that either by
appointment or by choice, some part of this general charge was apportioned to
S. Peter; then this seems, or rather is most assured to have been Judea, by
that which S. Paul has written: that, the Gospel of Circumcision was
committed unto Peter, Galath. 2. 7.
as the Gospel of the uncircumcision was unto him. And therefore we find in
Scripture, Act. 23. 11.
that S. Paul was expressly sent to Rome; but that S. Peter was ever at Rome,
we hold it by tradition. This is further confirmed by the long aboade which S.
Peter made in Judea, and by the short stay which is possible he could have made
at Rome, even by computation of them who best favored the dignity of that Sea.

With that he called for Onuphrius, and out of him read unto us, that S. Peter
lived after the death of Christ 34. years, 3. months and odd days; that
the first nine years he remained in Judea; that in the tenth year after
Christ's Passion, in the end of the second year of the Empire of Claudius, he
departed from Judea for fear of Agrippa, from whose imprisonment he had been
delivered by an angel; Act. 12.
that after he had travailed preaching through many countries, he came to Rome,
and there contended with Simon Magus: That after four years, Agrippa being
dead, for fear of whom he ^orsooke Iudaea, he returned to Jerusalem, and was
there present at the Council of the Apostles, wherein circumcision was
abrogated: That after this he remained seven years at Antioch; that in the
beginning of the Empire, of Nero he returned to Rome, and from thence travailed
almost thorough all the parts of Europe: that coming again to Rome in the
last year of Nero, S. Paul and he were there martyred.

To this agrees that which Ireneus says; Iren. de bares. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Funda^tes beati Apostoli Petrus and Paulus Romanam ecclesiam, adminish and^^
ecclesiae ^p^sc^patum tradidcrunt l^no.
The blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, laying the foundation of the Church of
Rome, committed to Linus the Bishopric, or charge of administration of that
Church.

Now, said he, the third question is, whether by these words, Thou art Peter,
etc. Christ gave unto S. Peter any special power or Jurisdiction, either
spiritual or secular, more then unto the residue of the Apostles; where he did
exercise; when make claim to any such power; by which of the Apostles it was
acknowledged; by what ancient father of the Church aduowed. For diverse
testimonies of S. Paul do bear against it: Aug^tract. 50. ad cap. 12 lo. Cypr.
in tract. de simpli^cler.
S. Augustine, S. Cyprian and others of principal authority in the Church do
expressly deny it. Whereas the Scripture gives so large and plain
testimony, both for the title and authority of Kings, as it seems no
greater can be added thereunto.

The fourth question may be, whether any power was given unto S. Peter, as
Bishop of Rome: (which before the ascension of Christ he could not be)
otherwise, how falls it, that the same should be rather fixed in the Church
of Rome, then in any of those Churches, where it is manifest by the scriptures
that he remained many years, employing himself in the exercise of his charge?

Fifthly, what assurance can we have, that the power which is said to be
committed to S. Peter, was to be transmitted entirely to any of his successors
in place, who are so far from being mentioned, as it is nothing probable that
ever they were meant. For, as Matthias was not the worse for succeeding unto
Judas in place; so is not any man the better, only for his local succession
to S. Peter.

Lastly, seeing the promises of God are with exception; if we continue in
obedience to his will: and therefore, although all the land of Canaan was
expressly promised to Abraham and to his seed for an everlasting possession,
Genesis 17. 8.
yet was the posterity of Abraham, for their disobedience, first cast out of
the greatest part thereof, and afterward dispossessed of all. 2. Sam. 7. 16.
Psalm. 89. 36.
And although the kingdom of Israel was expressly promised to David and to his
seed for ever, yet the succession was broken off, by reason of their sins.
Apoc. 2.
Again, seeing the Church of Ephesus, although furnished with many excellent
virtues, was threatened notwithstanding, that the candlestick should be
removed out of his place, only for that their first love was abated. If we
should suppose (supposall is free) that express promise was made to S. Peter,
and to his successors the Bishops of Rome, that they should represent the
authority of Christ upon earth; it will be a hard piece to persuade men, who
have not abandoned their own judgment, that this power was not long since
either expired or revoked, by reason of the dissolute disorders, the irregular
outrages and impieties, which have bin ordinary in that Sea. Marc^lline
sacrificed unto Idols; Liberius was an A^ian; another a Nestorian; Anastasius
the second embraced the error of Acatius. Sabinian was a man of base
behavior, and altogether opposite to the virtues of S. Gregory* Constantine
the second procured himself to be elected by corruption and force. Joan the
eighth, was a woman and a harlot. Romanus, Theodorus, John the tenth, and
Christopher, were infamous for seditions, symonie, lust, and other base abuses
in life. John 11. the bastard of Pope Sergius, was elected by favor of
Theodora his mistrisse. John the 13. was accused of many vile villainies before
the Emperor Otho the great. Boniface the 7. attained his place by corruption,
and maintained it by sacrilege. Siluester the second, was a Magician, and came
to his dignity by couenanting with the devil. Benedict the 10. was compelled
to quit his place, because of his Symony. Boniface the 8. was advanced like a
Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a dog. What? shall we say, that all
these were the oracles of heaven? the heads of the Church? the guides and
grounds of religion? the successors of S. Peter? the Vica^s general of Jesus
Christ? will worldly Princes endure such, who are not only unserviceable unto
them, but dishonorable, but rebellious, for their liefetenants? And seeing good
life is a sruite of faith, seeing faith is expressed by actions of life, shall
we say that these men who lived in this sort, could neither err nor fail in
faith? Alas, how then would they have lived, if they could have erred or failed
in faith?

I will not dig deep into this dunghill; I will not speak of the heresies of
John the 23. of the scandalous deportments of Eugenius the 4. of the Incests,
Sorceries, poysonings, and cutthroat cruelties of Alexander the 6. of the
covetousness, the cruelties, the periuries, the blasphemies, the adulteries, the
Sodometries, the disdainful pride, the cunning dissimulatio^, and other
infamous behauior of diverse other Bishops of Rome. I will not speak of the two
monsters lately hatched within that Sea, to the broad blemish of religion, to
the utter overthrow of civil society: the one aequiuocation; the other
par^icide of Princes, and raising rebellions for the cause of religion. In one
word to the point of our purpose, as Christ denied the Jews to be the children
of Abraham, Ioh. 8. 39.
because they did not the works of Abraham; and as S. Paul said, that the
children, Romans 4. 16. and 9. 7. Galat. 3. 7.
not of the flesh, but of the faith of Abraham, were to be accounted his
seed: in regard whereof, S. John also said, that many affirmed themselves to
be Jews, Revel. 2. 9.
who were not: so we may safely defend, that the true succession of S. Peter,
and of the other Apostles consists, not in coming after the^ in place, but
in holding their doctrine, and imitating their godliness in life. This (says
Gregory Nazianzene) (and not succession in place) is in proper sense to be
taken for succession. De laudibus Athanas^, (...)
For to express the same judgment and mind, is to possess the very same
Chair; the difference of Sea, is the difference in opinion, for doctrine and
for life. This is a succession in truth and indeed; that is only a succession
in name. Strato^les published in the city of Athens, that whatsoever the
tyrant Demetrius should ordain, the same was to be esteemed holy before God,
and just before men. When Cambyses was desirous to espouse his Sister, the fact
was justified by this law of the Persians; The King may do what soever he
please. Doubtless, (said he) many Bishops of Rome in claiming Hyperbolicall
power, to bear through Diabolical dristes, have bin rather successors to
these men, then unto any of the Apostles.

To conclude, with answer unto those who can find a difference between the
Pope and the Pope; between the Pope as being a man, and the Pope as being
Bishop of Rome; between the Pope in his Consistory, and the Pope in his
Palace, or among his Soldiers in the field; Fulg. collectan. lib. 6.
between the Imperial and Pontifical Pope; I will tell you what Fulgosius,
he that was thrown out of state in Liguria, reported of a certain Archbish^p
of Colen. As this Archbishop being also Duke of Colen, passed through a small
Village in Germany, with so great a trame of armed men (according to the
fashion of that people) that it nearly approached the greatness of an army; a
certain country fellow brake forth into a loud laughter against him. And
being therefore presented before the Archbishop, he boldly said, that he
could not refrain both to laugh and to admire, considering the great poverty,
the great humility, wherein the Apostles passed the travails of this life,
that they who carry themselves for the Apostles successors, should thus
plunge themselves both in plenty and in pride. Simple fellow, said the
Archbishop, I do now bear the state and presence of a Duke; I represent an
Archbishop when I am within the church. At this speech, the fellow did ^ise
into a more broad and bold laughter. And being demanded the cause thereof, I
pray you, said he, whilst this Duke ruineth the Church, both by action and
example, how is the Bishop in the mean time busied; and when this Duke for
this cause shall go to the devil, what shall then become of the Bishop?

There was not any amongs us, who did not countenance this conceit with a
smile. And this had put a period to our discourse, had not one maintained it
with further speech; that he would gladly hear these questions so fully
followed, as then he saw them fairly laid. Assirming, that thereby he
supposed it would appeate, that it is impossible to find a work of so great
weight, as is the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, upon so weak and feeble a
foundation. But this will require (said he) both the leisure and labor of
some excellent Divine.

True (answered N.) and yet many of these questions have a mixture of
humanity: a mixture also both of the Civil and Canon law. And I have often
maruailed (with that he cast a side countenance upon me) by what means it
falls, when in other countries the professers of these laws are most
accomplished scholars, and fittest for matters of mixed professions; that in
England only, either they are not so, or are not so (at leastwise) reputed.

I was forward to have answered. But it appeared that the intent of N. was, by
crossing into this question to cut off the other. For, refer^ing this point to
a more private conference between him and me, he fell into variety of other
talk. So, the time being well spent, after some ceremonies of courtesy, all of
us withdrew, whither our particular occasions did lead.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9. lin. 5. read Synesius. page 10. in marg. read (...)* p. 11. in marg.
^. read (...). ibid (...). p. 16. l. 30. read Dianae. p. 17. lin. 21. read
Diodorus. p. 21. lin. 10. read Virgil. ibid. lin. 13. read Festus. p. 25. lin.
15. read ceremonies. p. 31. in marg. ^. read (...). p. 33. lin. 10. read
Constantinople. ^ page 38. in marg. read c. tibi domin^.


