The History of graunde Amoure and la bell Pucel, called the Pastime of
pleasure, co^teining the knowledge of the seven sciences, and the course of man's
life in this world. Invented by Stephen Hawes, grome of king Henry the seventh
his chamber.

Newely perused and imprynted by John Wayland, aucthorised a prynter, by the
Queen's highness most gracious letters patentes.

The contents of this book.
HOw graunde Amoure walked in a medowe, and met with Fame enuyronned with
tongues of fire. Ca. i. Of the sweet report of Fame; of the fair lady la bell
Pucell, in the tower of Music. cap. ii. How Fame departed from graunde Amoute,
and left him governance and grace, and how he went to the tower of doctrine.
ca. iii How he was let in by countenance the portresse and of the marvelous
building of the same tower Capitu. iiii. How science sent him first to Gramer,
where he was received by dame congruitie. ca. v How he was received of Logyke.
ca. vi How he was received of Rethorike, and what Rethoryke is. ca. vii Of the
first part called Invention, and a commendation of Poets. ca. viii A
replication against ignorant persons. ca. ix Of disposition the. ii. part of
Rethorike. ca. x Of Elocucion the third part of Rethorike, with coloring of
sentences. ca. xi Of pronunciation, the. iiii. part of rethorike. ca. xii Of
memory, the. v. part of rethorike. ca. xiii A commendation of Gower, Chaucer,
and Lid gate. ca. xiiii Of Arsmetrike. ca. xv Of music mu^dain, humayn, and
instrume^tal. ca. xvi How graunde Amoure was enamoured of la bell Pucell in the
tower of musyke, and met with counsel in a temple. ca. xvii Of the dolorous
and lowly disputation between la bell Pucell, and graunde Amoure. ca. xviii How
la bell Pucell granted graunde Amoure love, and of her dispiteous departage.
ca. xix Of the great sorrow that graunde Amor made after her departing, and of
the words of Counsel. ca. xx How graunde amoure went to Geometrye, and what
Geometry is. ca. xxi Of dame Astronomy. ca. xxii Of the direct operations of
nature. ca. xxiii Of the five internal wits. ca. xxiiii Of the hye influences
of the supernall bodies. Capitu. xxv. How graund amoure departed from the tower
of science, and went to the tower of chyualry, where he was let in by
fortitude. ca. xxvi Of the marvelous argument, between Mars and Fortune. ca.
xxvii How Mynerue led graunde amoure to king Melyzyus, which made him
knight. ca. xxviii How he departed from king Melyzyus, w his greyhoundes, and
attendaunce his varlet, and met with false report, that changed his name to
Godfrey gobilyue. ca. xxix How graunde amoure in the temple of Uenus made his
supplication. ca. xxx. The copy of the letter that Uenus sent to la bell Pucell.
ca. xxxi How Godfrey gobiliue was taken of Correction and punished. ca. xxxii
How graunde Amoure disco^fited the gyaunt w three heads, and was received w.
iii. ladies. ca. xxxiii How he met with Perceuerau^ce, and reposed him in the
manor place of dame comfort. ca. xxxiiii How he vainquished a gyau^t with
seven heads and was received of seven ladies. ca. xxxv How he made oblation to
the goddess Pallas, and sailed over the tempesteous floude. ca. xxxvi How he
discomfited the wonderful monster of the. vii. metalles made by enchau^tment.
ca. xxxvii How he was received of la bell Pucel. ca. xxxviii The marriage of
graunde Amoure, and la bell Pucell. ca. xxxix How when graunde Amor had lived
long with la bell Pucell, was arested by age, that brought to him policye and
avarice. ca. xl How he was arested by death. ca. xli How remembrance made his
epitaphy on his grave. ca. xlii How Fame came into the temple with burning
tongues, and of her praise. ca. xliii How Time came into the temple in a
marvelous similitude, and of his replication. ca. xliiii How Eternity came
into the temple, and of her virtuous exhortation. ca. xlv The excusation of the
Aucthour. ca. xlvi.

To the Reader.
SI the that all men for the most part by a natural inclination, desire
rather to spend their days in pleasure and delectable pastimes, then in
paineful studyes and tedious labors. And yet nevertheless by the secret
inspiracion of almighty God (all men in general) so insaciately thirsts for
the knowledge of wisdom and learning, that some for very earnest desire thereof
(though nature grudgeth) cease not to spend their days and hours, with such
continual and importunate travail in seeking the same, that having no regard
to the over pressyng of Nature, in searchynge with all diligence for the true
vain of knowledge, do suddenly bring forth their own confusion. Some
contrariwise (whom nature to much rules) being discomforted with painful
and tedious study, rather chose to be drowned in the stinkyng floude of
ignorance, the^ with so much sweat and pains, to sail (with a by wind)
into the pleasant Island of wisdom and science, which thing considered (most
gentle Reader) I offer here unto the for thy better instruction this little
volume, containing and treatyng upon the seven liberal sciences, and the
whole course of man's life, first compiled and devised by Stephen Hawes
gentleman, grome of the chamber to the famous Prince and second Solomon, king
Henrye the seventh. A man (as by his worckes appears) of a pleasant wit,
and singular learning, wherein thou shall find at one time, wisdom and
learning, with myrthe and solace. So that herein thou may easelye find (as
it were in pastyme) without offense of nature that thing, and in short space,
which many great clerks without great pains and travail, and long
continuance of time heretofore could never obtain nor get, which as it was
first entitled by the Aucthoure, to be the pastime of pleasure, and under the
same title so dedicated to the said worthy Prince, by the Aucthoure thereof:
so shall thou good reader with deliberate readyng thereof, find it not only
the Pastyme of pleasure, but also of profit.

Fare well.
To the high and mighty Prince, Henry the seventh, by the grace of God, king of
England, and of France, Lord of Irelande. etc.
RIght mighty prince, and redoubted souerayn
Sailing forth well, in the ship of grace
Over the waves of this life uncertain,
Right toward heaven, to have dwelling place
Grace does you guide, in every doubtful case
Your governance, does ever more eschew
The sin of slouthe, enemy to virtue.
Grace stirs well, the grace of god is great
Which you has brought to your ryall se,
And in your right, it has you surely set
Above us all, to have the soueraintie:
Whose worthy power, and regal dygnitie
All our rancour, and our debate began cease
And has us brought, both welthe, rest, and peace.
From whom dyscendeth, by the ryghtful line
Noble prince Henry, to succeed the crown
That in his youth, does so clearly shine
In every virtue, casting the vice adowne:
He shall of fame, attain the hye renown
No doubt but grace, shall him well enclose
Which by true right, sprang of the red rose.
Your noble grace, and excellent hyenes
For to accept I beseech right humbly,
This little book, oppressed with rudenes
Without rethoryke, or color crafty:
Nothing I am expert in poetry,
As the monk of Bury, flower of eloquence
Which was in the time of great excellence,
Of your predecessor, the. b. king Henry,
Unto whose grace, he did present
Right famous books, of parfit memory:
Of his fayuyng with terms eloquent.
Whose fatal ficcions, are yet permanent.
Grounded on reason, with cloudy fygures
He cloked the troth of al his scriptures.
The light of troth, I lack cunnyng to cloak
To draw a curtayne, I dare not to presume
Nor hyde my matter, with a misty smoke
My rudenes cunnyng, does so sore consume
Yet as I may, I shall blow out a fume
To hyde my mind, underneath a fable
By covert color, well and probable.
Besechyng your grace, to pardon mine ignorance
Which this feigned fable, to eschew idleness
Have so compiled, now without doubtaunce
For to present, to your hye worthiness
To follow the trace, and all the perfitenes
Of my master Lydgate, with due exercise
Such feigned tales, I do find and devise.
For under a color, a truth may arise
As was the guise, in old antiquitye
Of the Poets old, a tale to surmise
To cloak the truth, of their infirmitye
Or yet on joy, to have moralitye
I me excuse, if by necligence
That I do offend, for lack of science.
Your graces most bounden servant Stephen Hawes, one of the gromes of your
majesty's Chamber, the. xxi. year of your prosperous raygne.
How graund Amor walked in a medowe, and met with Fame, enuironned with
tongues of fire. Chap. i.
WHen Phoebus entered was, in Geminy
Shinyng above, in his fair golden spear
And horned Dyane, then but one degree
In the crabbe had entered, fair and clear
When that aurora, did well appear
In the depured air, and cruddy firmament
Forth then I walked, without impediment
In to a medowe both gaye and glorious
Which Flora depainted with many a color
Like a place of pleasure most solacious
Encensyng out, the aromatike odoure
Of zepherus breathe, which that every flower
Through his fume, does alwaie engender
So as I went among the flowers tender
By sudden chance, a fair pathe I found
On which I looked, and right often I mused
And then all about, I beheld the ground
With the fair pathe, which I saw so used
My chance or fortune, I nothing refused
But in the pathe, forth I went a pace
To know whither, and unto what place
It would me bring, by any similitude
So forth I went, were it right or wrong
Till that I saw, of royal pulcritude
Before my face, an image fair and strong
With two fair hands, stretched out along
Unto two hye ways, there in particion
And in the right hand, was this description
This is the straight way of contemplacion
Unto the joyful to were perdurable
Who that will walk, unto that mancion
He must forsake, all things variable
With the vain glory, so much deceyuable
And though the way, be hard and dangerous
The last end thereof, shall be right precious.
And in the other hand, right fair written was
This is the way, of worldly dignitye
Of the active life, who will in it pass
Unto the tower, of fair dame beautye
Fame shall tell him, of the way in certaintye
Unto la bell pucell, the fair lady excellent
Above all other, in clear beauty splendent
I beheld right well, both the ways twain
And mused often, which was best to take
The one was sharp, the other was more plain
And unto my self, I began to make
A sudden argument, for I might not slake
Of my great musyng, of this royal image
And of these two ways, so much in usage
For this goodly picture was in altitude,
Nine foot and more, of fair marble stone
Right well favored, and of great altitude
Though it were made, full many years agone
Thus stood I musing, my self all alone
By right long time, but at the last I went
The actyue way, with all my whole intent
Thus all alone, I began to travail
For the on my way, by long continuance
But often times, I had great maruayle
Of the by paths, so full of pleasaunce
Which for to take, I had great doubtaunce
But evermore, as nere as I might
I took the way, which went before me right
And at the last, when Phoebus in the west
Began to avail, with all his beams merye
When clear Dyana, in the fair southest
Began for to rise, lightyng our emispery
With clouds clear, without the stormy pery
Me thought a far, I had a vysyon
Of a picture, of marvelous facyon.
To which I went, without longer delay
Beholding well, the right fair portayture
Made of fine copper, shydyng fair and gaye
Full well truly, according to measure
And as I thought, nine foot of stature
Yet in the breast, with letters fair and blewe
Was written, a sentence old and true
This is the way, and the sytuacion
Unto the toure, of famous doctrine
Who that will learn, must be ruled by reason
And with all his diligence, he must incline
Slouthe to eschew, and for to determine
And set his heart, to be intelligible
To a willing heart, is naught impossible
Beside the image, I adowne me set
After my labor, my self to repose
Till at the last, with a gaspyng net
Sloth my head caught, with his whole purpose
It vayled not, the body for to dispose
Against the head, when it is applied
The head must rule, it can not be denied
Thus as I satte, in a deadly slomber
Of a great horn, I heard a royal blast
With which I awoke, and had a great wonder
From whence it came, it made me sore aghast
I looked about, the night was well nere past
And fair golden Phoebus, in the morrow graye
With clouds read, began to break the day
I saw come ridyng, in a valey far
A goodly Lady, enuironned about
With tongues of fire, as bright as any star
That fiery flambes, ensensed always out
Which I beheld, and was in great doubt
Her Palfrey swift, rennyng as the wind
With two white greyhou^ds, that were not behind
When that these greyhoundes, had me so espied
With faunyng chere, of great humility
In goodly haste, they fast unto me hied
I mused why, and wherefore it should be
But I welcomed them, in every degree
They leaped often, and were of me right feign
I suffered them, and cherished them again
Their collers were of gold, and of tyssue fine
Wherein their names, appeared by scripture
Of Dyamondes that clearly do shine
The letters were graven fair and pure
To read their names, I did my busye cure
The one was governance, the other named grace
Then was I glad, of all this sudden case
And then the Lady, with fiery flambe
Of brennyng tongues, was in my presence
Upon her palfrey, which had unto name
Pegase the swifte, so fair in excellence
Which sometime longed, with his preminence
To king Percius, the son of Iubiter
On whom he rode, by the world so far
To me she said, she marueyled much why
That her greyhoundes, showed me that favor
What was my name, she asked me truly
To whom I said, it was la graunde Amoure
Besechyng you to be to me succoure,
To the tower of doctrine, and also me tell
Your proper name, and where you do dwell.
My name quod she, in all the world is known
Iclipped Fame, in every region
For I my horn in sundry wise have blown
After the death, of many a champion
And with my tongues, have made aye mention
Of their great acts, again to revive
In flaming tongues, for to abide on live.
It was the custom of old antiquitye
When the golden world, had domination
And nature high, in her authority
More stronger had, her operation
Then she has now, in her digression
The people then did, all their busye pain
After their death, in Fame to live agayue
Record of Saturn, the first king of Crete
Which in his youth, through his diligence
Found first plowing, of the lands sweet
And after this, by his great sapience
For the commen profit, and benevolence
Of all metalles, he made division
One from an other, by good provision.
And then also, as some Poets feign
He found shotyng, and drawyng of the bow
Yet as of that, I am nothing certain
But for his cunning, of hye degree and low
He was well beloved, as I do well know
Through whose labor, and aye busy cure
His fame shall live, and shall right long endure
In whose time reigned, also in Thessayle
A part of Greece, the king Melizyus
That was right strong, and fierce in battle
By whose labor, as the storye she weth us
He brake first horses, wild and rigorious
Teaching his men, on them right well to ride
And he him self, did first the horse bestryde.
Also Mynerue, the right hardy Goddess
In the same time, of so high renown
Vainquished Pallas, by her great worthiness
And first made harneys, to lay his pride adowne
Whose geeat defense, in every realm and town
Was spredde about, for her hye chyualtye
Which by her harneys, wanne the victory
Does not remain, yet in remembrance
The famous acts, of the noble Hercules
That so many monsters put to vtteraunce
By his great wisdom, and hye prowes
As the recule of Troy, bears good witness
That in his time, he would no battle take
But for the wealth, of the commens sake
Thus the whole minds, were ever fixed and set
Of noble men, in old time to devise
Such things as were, to the common profit
For in that time, such was their goodly guise
That after death, their fame should arise
For to endure, and abide in mind
As yet in books, we may them written find.
O ye estates, surmouutyng in noblenes
Remember well, the noble paynyms all
Now by their labor, they wanne the highness
Of worthy fame, to raygne memorial
And them applied, ever in special
Things to practice, which should profit be
To the comen wealth, and their heirs in fee.
Of the sweet report of Fame, of the fair Lady la bell Pucel, in the tower of
music. Chap. ii.
AND after this, Fame began to express
Of ieopardous way to the tower perilous
And of the beautye, and the semelinesse
Of la bell Pucell, so gaye and glorious
That dwelled in the tower so marvelous
Unto which might come, no manner of creature
But by great labor, and hard adventure
For by the way, there lie in wait
Gyantes great, diffigured of nature
That all deuoureth, by their evil conceit
Against whose strength, there may no man endure
They are so huge, and strong out of measure
With many serpents, foul and odious
In sundry likeness, black and tedious
But beyond them, a great sea there is
Beyond which sea, there is a goodly land
Most full of fruit, replete with joy and bliss
Of right fine gold, appears all the sand
In this fair realm, where the tower does stand
Made all of gold, enameled about
With noble stories, which do appear without
In which dwells by great aucthoritye
Of la bell Pucell, which is so fair and bright
To whom in beautye, no pear I can see
For like as Phoebus, above all stars in light
When that he is, in his spear aryght
Does excede, with his beams clear
So does her beauty, above other appear
She is both good, aye wise, and virtuous
And also descended of a noble line
Rich, comely, right meke, andbou^teous
All manner virtues, in her clearly shine
No uyce of her, may right long domyne
And I dame Fame, in every Nation
Of her do make the same relation.
Her sweet report, so my heart set on fire
With brennyng love, most hot and fervent
That her to see, I had great desire
Saiynge to Fame, O Lady excellent
I have determined in my judgment
For la bell Pucell, the most fair lady
To pass the way, of so great ieopardye.
You shall quod Fame, attain the victory
If you will do, as I shall to you say
And all my lesson, retain in memory
To the tower of doctrine, ye shall take your way
You are now within a days journey
Both these greyhoundes, shall keep you company
Look that you cherishe them full gentely.
And countenance the goodly portres,
Shall let you in, full well and nobly
And also she we you, of the perfectnes
Ofall the seven sciences, right notably
There in your mind, you may ententifely
Unto dame doctrine, give perfect audience
Which shall enfourme you, in every science
Fare well she said, I may not now abide
Walk on your way, with all your whole delight
To the tower of doctrine, at this morrow tide
Ye shall to morrow, of it have a sight
Keep on your way, now before you right
For I must hence, to specifye the deeds
Of their worthiness, according to their medes.
And with that she did, from me depart
Upon her stead, swifter then the wind
When she was gone, full woeful was my heart
With inward trouble, oppressed was my mind
Yet were the greyhoundes, left with me behind
Which did me comfort, in my great vyage
To the tower of doctrine, with their fawning courage.
So forth I went, tossynge on my brain
Greatly musing, over hill and vale
The way was troublous, and ey nothing plain
Till at the lalte, I came to a dale
Beholding Phoebus, declinyng low and pale
With my greyhoundes, in the fair twy light
I sat me down, for to rest me all night.
Slouthe upon me, so fast began to crepe
That of fine force, I down me laid
Upon an hill, with my greyhoundes to sleep
When I was down, I thought me well apayed
And to my self, these words then I said
Who will attame, sone to his iourneys end
To nourishe slouthe, he may not condiscende.
How Fame departed from graunde Amoure, and left with him governance and
Grace, and how he went to the tower of doctrine. Ca. iii.
THus the^ I slept, til that Auroras bemes
Began for to spread, about the firmament
And the clear su^ne, with his golden stremes
Began for to rise, fair in the orient
Without Saturnus, black encombrement
And the little birds, making melodye
Did me awake, with their sweet armony.
I looked about, and saw a craggy roche
Far in the west, near to the element
And as I did then, unto it approach
Upon the top, I saw refulgent
The royal tower, of moral document
Made of fine copper, with turrettes fair and hye
Which against Phoebus, shone so marvelously
That for the very perfect brightness,
What of the tower, and of the clear sun
I could nothing, behold the goodlines
Of that palaice, where as doctrine did won
Till at the last, with misty winds done
The radiant bryghtnes, of golden Phoebus
Auster began cover, with clouds tenebrus.
Then to the tower I drew nere and nere
And often mused, of the great hyghnes
Of the craggy rock, which quadrant did appear
But the fair tower, so much of riches
Was all about, sexangled doubtless
Gargeyld with greyhoundes, and with many lions
Made of fine gold, with diverse sundry dragons
The little turrets, with images of gold
About was set, which with the wind aye moved
With propre vices, that I did well behold
About the towers, in sundry wise they houed
With goodly pypes, in their mouths ituned
That with the wind, they pyped a dance
Iclipped, amor de la hault pleasaunce.
How he was let in by Countenance the porteres, and of the marvelous
buildynge of the same tower. Capitulo. iiii.
THE tower was great, and of marvelous wydenesse,
To which there was, no way to pass but one
Into the tower, for to have an intresse
A greece there was, ychesyled all of stone
Out of the rock, on which men did gone
Up to the tower, and in likewise did I
With both the greyhoundes, in my company
Till that I came, to a royal gate
Where I saw standing, the goodly portres
Which axed me, from whence I came alate
To whom I began, in every thing express
All mine adventure, chance and business
And eke my name, I told her every dell
When she heard this, she liked me right well
Her name she said, was called countenance
Into the busy court, she did me then lead
Where was a fountain, depured of pleasaunce
A noble spring, a royal conduit head
Made of fine gold, enameled with read
And on the top, four dragons blew and stout
This dulcet water, in four parts did spoute
Of which there flowed, four rivers right clear.
Sweter the^ Nysus, or Ganges was their odor
Tygrys, or Eufrates, unto them no pere
I did then taste, the aromatike licoure
Fragrant of fume, sweet as any flower
And in my mouth, it had a marvelous cent
Of diverse spices, I knew not what it mente
And after this, further forth me brought
Dame countenance, into a goodly hall
Of Jasper stones, it was wonderslye wrought
The windows clear, depured all of crystal
And in the roufe, on hye over all
Of gold was made, a right crafty vine
Instead of grapes, the Rubies there did shine.
The flore was paued, with berall clarified
With pillars made, of stones precious
Like a place of pleasure, so gayely glorified
It might be called, a palaice glorious
So much delectable, and solacious
The hall was hanged, hye and circuler
With clothe of arras, in the richest manner
That treated well, of a full noble story
Of the doubty way, to the tower perilous
How a noble knight, should win the victory
Of many a serpent, foul and odious
And the first matter, then appeared thus
How at a venture, and by sudden chance
He met with Fame, by fortunes purueyaunce.
Which did him she we, of the famous pulcritude
Of la bell Pucell, so clear in beauty
Excellyng all other, in every similitude
Nature her favored, so much in degree
When he heard this, with fervent amity
Accompanied, with grace and governance
He took his way, without encombraunce
Unto the right famous, tower of learning
And so from thence, unto the tower of chiualry
Where he was made knight, the noble king
Called Melyzyus, well and worthily
And furdermore, it showed full notably
Upon the arras, imbrodred al of blew
What was his name, with letters all of grew
Thus with his verlet, he took on his way
To the perilous tower, and sytuation
Metyng Folly, as he rode on his journey
Ridynge on a mare, by great illusion
After whom, ensued fast correction
And in her hand, a strong knotted whippe
At every iarte, she made him for to skyppe.
And then correction, braught la graund amor
Unto the tower, whereas he might well see
Diverse men, making right great doloure
That defrauded women, by their duplicitie
Yet before this, in perfect certayntie
As the arras well did make relation
In Uenus temple, he made his oblation.
After which he met, an hydeous giant
Having three heads, of marvelous kind
With his great strokes, he did him daunt
Castyng him down, under the linde
With force and might, he did him bind
Strikyng of his heads, then euerychone
That of all three heads, he left not one
This terrible gyaunt, yet had a brother
Which graunde amoure, destroyed also
Having four heads, more then the other
That unto him wrought mikel woe
But he slew sone, his mortal foe
Which was a great gyaunt, with heads seven
To marvelous, now for me to neuen
Yet more over, he put to vtteraunce
A venomous beast, of sundry likeness
Of diverse beasts, of right great mischaunce
Whereof the pycture, bare good witness
For by his power, and his hye worthiness
He did discomfyte, the wondrous serpente
Of the same metals, made by enchauntment
And eke the clothe, made demonstration
How he wedded, the great lady beauteous
La bell Pucell, in her own dominacion
After his labor, and passage dangerous
With solemn joy, and mirthe melodious
This famous storye, well pyctured was
In the fair hall, upon the arras.
The marshall, yclipped was dame Reason
And the yewres, also obseruaunce
The panter Pleasaunce, at every season
The good butler, curteys continuance
And the chief coke, was called temperaunce.
The lady chamberlayne, named fidelitye
And the hye steward, Liberalitye.
There sat dame Doctrine, that lady gent
Which called me, unto her presence
For to know all the whole intent
Of my coming, unto her excellence
Madame I said, to learn your science
I am comen, now me to apply
With all my cure, in perfect study.
And yet also, I unto her then showed
My name and purpose, without doublenes
For very great joy, than were endued
Her cristall eyes, full of lowlines
When that she knew, for very sikernes
That I was he, that should so attain
La bell Pucell, with my busy pain.
And after this, I had right good there
Of meat and drink, there was great plentye
Nothing I wanted, were it chepe or dear
Thus was I served, with delicate dishes dainty
And after this, with all humility
I went to doctrine, praiyng her good grace
For to assign me, my first learning place
Seven daughters, most expert in cunnyng
Without folly, she had well engendered
As the seven Sciences, in virtue so shinyng
At whose increase, there is great thanks re^dred
Unto the mother, as nothing surrendered
Her good name, and her dulcet sound
Which did engender, their original ground.
And first to gramer, she first me sent
To whose request, I did well obey
With diligence, forth on my way I went
Up to a chamber, depaynted fair and gaye
And at the chamber, in right rich array
We were let in, by high aucthoritye
Of the right noble, dame congruitie.
How Science sent him first to Grammar, where he was received by dame
Congruitie. Capi. v.
THe lady Gramer, in all humble wise
Did me receine, into her goodly scole
To whose doctrine, I did me aduertyse
For to attain, in her artyke pole
Her gilted dew, for to oppress my dole
To whom I said, that I would gladly learn
Her noble cunnyng, so that I might decerne
What that it is, and why that it was made
To which she answered, then in special
Because that cunnyng, should not pale ne fade
Of every science, it is origynall
Which does us teach, ever in general
In all good order, to speak directly
And for to write, by true artografy.
Sometime in Egypt, raygned a noble king
I clipped Enander, which did well abound
In many virtues, especially in learning
Which had a daughter, that by her study found
To write true latin, the first perfect ground
Whose goodly name, as her story says
Was called Carmentis, in her living days
Thus in the time, of old antiquity
The noble Philosophers, with their whole delight
For the commen profit, of all humanity
Of the seven sciences, for to know the right
They studied many, a long winters night
Each after other, their parts to express
This was their guise, to eschew idleness.
The pomped carkes, with fode delicious
They did not feed, but to their sustinaunce
They followed not their flesh so vycious
But ruled it, by prudent governance
They were content, always with suffisaunce
They coueted not, no worldely treasure
For they knew, that it might not endure
But now adays, the contrary is used
To win the money, their studies be all set
The commen profit, is often refused
For well is he, that may the money get
From his neighbor, without any let
They think nothing, they shall from it pass
When all that is, shall be turned to was
The brittle flesh, nourisher of vices
Under che shadow, of evil slogardy
Must ne des haunt, the carnal delyces
When that the brain, by corrupt glotony
Up so down, is turned then contrary
Frail is the body, to great unhappiness
When that the head, is full of dronkennes.
So do they now, for they nothing prepence
How cruel death, does them sore ensue
They are so blinded, in worldly negligence
That to their merit, they will nothing renew
The seven sciences, their slouthe to eschew
To an others profit, they take now no keep
But to their own, for to eat, drink, and sleep
And all this dame Gramer, told me every dele
To whom I harkened, with all my diligence
And after this, she taught me right well
First my donet, and then my accedence
I set my mind, with percyng influence
To learn her science, the first famous art
Eschuyng idleness, and laiyng all aparte
Madame quod I, for as much as there be
Uiii. parts of speech, I would know right feign
What a nowne substantive, is in his degree
And wherefore it is, so called certain
To whom she answered, right gently again
Saying always, that a nowne substantyue
Might stand without help of an adiectyue
The latin word, which that is referred
Unto a thing, which is substanciall
For a nowne substantive, is well auerred
And with a gender, is declinall
So, all the eight parts in general
Are latin words, annexed proprelye
To every speech, for to speak formally
And Gramer is, the first foundement
Of every science, to have construction
Who knew Grammar, without impediment
Should perfectly have intellection
Of a lytterall cense, and moralizacion
To construe every thing ententiflye
The word is Grammar, well and ordinately
By word the world, was made originally
The hye king said, it was made incontinente
He did command, all was made shortly
To the world, the word is sentencious judgment
I marked well, dame Gramers sentment
And of her then, I did take my license
Going to Logyke, with all my diligence
How he was received of Logyke. Capit. vi.
SO up I went, unto a chamber bright
Where was wont, to be a right fair Lady
Before whom then, it was my hole delight
I kneled adowne, full well and mekely
Besechyng her to enstruct me shortly
In her noble science, which is expedient
For man to know, in many an argument
You shall quod she, my science well learn
In time and space, to your great vtilitye
So that in me lokyng, you shall then discern
A friend from foe, and good from iniquity
Right from wrong, ye shall know in certaintye
My science is, all the ill to eschew
And for to know, the false from the true.
Who will take pain, to follow the trace
In this wretched world, of troth and ryghteousnes
In heaven above, he shall have dwelling place
And who that walks, the way of darkness
Spendyng his time, in worldely wretchedness
A mids the earth, in hell most horrible
He shall have pain, nothing extinguyssyble
So by Logyke, is good perceueraunce
To divide the good, and the evil a sunder
It is always, at man's pleasaunce
To take the good, and cast the evil under
If God made hell, it is thereof no wonder
For to punyshe man, that had intelligence
To know good from ill, by true experience
Logyke always, does make probacion
Prouyng the pro, well from the contrary
In sundry wise, by argumentation
Grounded on reason, well and wondersly
Who understood, all Logike truly
Nothing by reason, might be in pleadynge
But he the truth, should have in knowlegyng
Her wise doctrine, I marked in memory
And took my leave, of her hye person
Because that I might, no longer tarry
The year was spent, and so far then gone
And of my lady, yet sight had I none
Which was abidyng, in the tower of musyke
Wherefore anon, I went to Rethoryke.
How he was received of Rethoryke, and what Rethorike is. Capit. vii.
THan above Logike, up we went a stayre
Into a chamber, gaylye glorified
Strowed with flowers, of al goodly air
Where sat a Lady, greatly magnified
And her true vesture, clearly purified
And over her head, that was bright and shene
She had a garlande, of the laurel grene
Her goodly chamber, was set all about
With depured mirrours, of speculation
The fragraunt fumes, did well encense out
All misty vapors, of perturbacion
More liker was, her habitation
Unto a place, which is celestial
Then to a terrayne, mancion fatal
Before whom then, I did knele a down
Saying, O star of famous eloquence
O gilted Goddess, of the high renown
Enspyred, with the heavenly influence
Of the dulcet well, of complacence
Upon my mind, with dew aromatike
Distyll adowne, thy lusty Rethoryke
And depaynt my tongue, with thy royal flowers
Of delicate odours, that I may ensue
In my purpose, to glad my auditors
And with thy power, that thou me endue
To morallise, thy litterall censes true
And cleanse away, the mist of ignorance
With depured beams, of goodly ordinannce.
With humble ears, of perfect audience
To my request, she did then incline
Saying she would, in her goodly science
In short space, me so well indoctrine
That my dull mind, it should enlumyne
With golden beams, for ever to oppress
My rude language, and all my symplenes
I thanked her, of her great gentleness
And axed her, after this question
Madame I said, I would know doubtless
What Rethorike is, without abusyon
Rethorike she said, was found by reason
Man for to govern, well and prudently
His words to order, his speech to purifye
Five parts has Rethorike, for to work true
Without which five, there can be no sentence
For these five, do well evermore renew
The matter perfect: with good intelligence
Who that will se them, with all his diligence
Here following, I shall them specifye
According well, all unto mine ordinary.
Of the first: called Invention. And a commendation of Poets. Capit. viii.
THe first of them, is called Invention
Which surdeth, of the most noble warke
Of. v. inward wits, with whole affection
As writes right many a noble clarke,
With misty color, of clouds dark
How commen wit, does full well elect
What it should take, and what it shall abiecte
And secondlye, by imagination
To draw a matter, full facundious
Full marvelous, is the operation
To make of naught, reason sentencious
Clokyng a truth, with color tenebrous
For often under, a fair feigned fable
A truth appears, greatly profitable
It was the guyse, in old antiquitye
Of famous poets, right ymaginatife
Fables to feign, by good aucthoritye
They were so wise, and so inuentyfe
Their obscure reason, fair and sugratyfe
Pronounced truth, under clowdy fygures
By the invention, of their fatal scriptures
And thirdly, they had such a fansy
In this hye art, to be intelligible
Their fame encreasyng, evermore truly
To slouthe ever, they were inuyncible
To their woeful hearts, was naught impossible
With brennyng love, of insaciate fire
New things to find, they set their desire
For though a man, of his propre mind
Be inuentyfe, and he do not apply
His fantasye, unto the busye kind
Ofhys cunning, it may not ratifye
For fantasye, must needs exemplifye
His new invention, and cause him to entende
With whole desire, to bring it to an end
And fourthly, by good estimation
He must number, all the whole circumstaunce
Of this matter, with breuiacion
That he walk not, by long continuance
The perambulat way, full of all variaunce
By estimacion, is made annunciate
Whether the matter, be long or breuiate
For to Invention, it is equipolent
The matter found, right well to comprehend
In such a space, as is convenient
For properlye, it does ever pretend
Of all the purpose, the length to extend
So estimation, may right well conclude
The perfect number, of every similitude
And yet then, the retentife memory
Which is the fifth, must ever agregate
All matters thought, to retain inwardlye
Till reason thereof, has made aprobate
And by scripture, will make demonstrate
Outwardly, according to the thought
To prove a reason, upon a thing of naught
Thus when the fourth, has wrought full wo^derly
Then must the mind, work upon them all
By course ingenious, to run directly
After their thoughts, then in general
The mind must cause them, to be memorial
As after this, shall appear more openly
All whole expressed, by dame Philosophye.
O trust of virtue, and of royal pleasure
Of famous Poets, many years ago
O insaciate couetise, of the special treasure
Of new inuencion, of idleness the fo
We may you laud, and often praise also
And specially, for worthy causes three
Which to this day, we may both here and see
As to the first, your whole desire was set
Fable to feign, to eschew idleness
With ampliation, more cunnyng to get
By the labor, of iuuentife business
Touching the truth, by covert likeness
To disnull vice, and the vycious to blame
Your deeds thereto, exemplified the same.
And secondly, right well you did endite
Of the worthy acts, of many a conqueroure
Through which labor, that you did so write
Unto this day, rayneth the honor
Of every noble, and mighty warrior
And for your labor, and your bnsy pain
Your fame yet lives, and shall endure certain
And eke to praise you, we are greatly bound
Because our cunnyng, from you so precedeth
For you thereof, were first original ground
And upon your scripture, our science ensues
Your splendent verses, our lightness renueth
And so we ought, to laud and magnify
Your excellent springes, of famous poetry.
Capitu. ix.
BUt rude people, oppressed with blindness
Against your fables, will often solisgise
Such is their mind, such is their folishnes
For they believe, in no manner of wise
That under a color, a troth may arise
For folyshe people, blinded in a matter
Will often err, when they of it do clatter
O all ye cursed, and such evil foles
Whose sightes be blinded, over all with folly
Open your eyes, in the pleasant schools
Of parfect cunnyng, or that you replye
Against fables, for to be contrary
For lack of cunnyng, no marvel though you err
In such science, which is from you so far
For now the people, which is dull and rude
If that they do read, a fatal scripture
And can not moralize, the similitude
Which to their wits, is so hard and obscure
Then will they say, that it is seen in ure
That naught do poets, but depaynt and lie
Deceiuyng them, by tongues of flattery.
But what for that, they can not defame
The Poets acts, which are in effect
Unto them selves, remains the shame
To disprayse that, which they can not correct
And if that they, had in it inspect
Than they would it praise, and often eleuate
For it should be to them, so delicate.
Capitulo. x.
THe second part, of crafty Rethorike
May well be called, disposicion
That does so hye matters aromatike
Adowne distyll, by consolation
As old Poets, make demonstration
That Mercury, through his preeminence
His natives endueth, with famous eloquence
By very reason, it may right well appear
That diverse persons, in sundry wise delight
Their consolations, does contrary so steer
That many minds, may not agree aryght
Such is the planets, of their course and might
But what for that, be it good or ill
Them for to follow, it is at man's frewyll.
And disposicion, the true second part
Of Rethorike, does evermore dyrect
The matters found, of this noble art
Geuyng them place, after the aspect
And often time, it has the inspect
As from a fair, perfect narration
Or else by a steadfast, argumentation
The which was constitute, by beginning
As on the reason, and if apparaunce
Of the cause, then by outward semyng
Be hard and difficult, in the vttraunce
So as the mind, have no perceueraunce
Nor of the beginning, can have audience
Then must narration, begin the sentence
And if it be, a little probable
From any manner steadfast argument
We order it, for to be right stable
And then we never begin our sentment
Recityng letters, not convenient
But this commutation, should be rufused
Without cause or thing, make it be used
This that I write, is hard and covert
To them that have, nothing intelligence
Up so down, they make it often transuert
Or that they can know, the, experience
Of this craft, and facundious science
By disposition, the rethoricyan
To make laws, ordinately began
Without disposicion, none order began be
For the disposition, ordreth every matter
And gives the place, after the degree
Without order, without reason we clatter
Where is no reason, it vayleth not to chatter
Disposition, ordreth a tale dyrectlye
In a perfect reason, to conclude truly
The fatal problemes, of old antiquitye
Cloked with mist, and with clouds dark
Ordered with reason, and hye aucthoritye
The troth did show, of all their covert warke
Thus have they made, many a noble clarke
To disnul mischefe, and inconvenience
They made our laws, with great diligence
Before the law, in a tomblyng barge
The people sailed, without perfectnes
Through the world, all about at large
They had no order, nor no stedfastnes
Tyil rethoricians, found justice doubtless
Ordeynyng kings, of right high dignity
Of all commens, to have the soueraintie.
The barge to stere, with law and justice
Over the waves, of this life transitorye
To direct wrongs, and also preiudyce
And tho that will, resist a contrary
Against their king, by justice openly
For their rebellion, and evil treason
Shall suffer death, by right and reason
O what laud, glory, and great honor
Unto these poets, shall be notified
The which distilled, aromatike lycoure
Clensyng our sight, with order purified
Whose famous draughtes, so exemplified
Set us in order, grace, and governance
To live dyrectlye, without encombraunce.
But many one, the which is rude and dull
Will despise their work, for lack of cunnyng
All in vain, they do so hale and pull
When they thereof, lack understanding
They grope over, where is no felyng
So dull they are, that they can not find
This royal art, for to perceive in mind
Capitu. xi.
ANd then the third part, is elocution
When invention, has the purpose wrought
And set it in order, by disposicion
Without this third part, it vayleth right naught
Though it be found, and in order brought
Yet Elocution, with the help of Mercury
The matter exorneth, right well facundiously
In few words, sweet and sentencious
Depaynted with gold, hard in construction
To the artike ears, sweet and delicious
The golden Rethoryke, is good refection
And to the reader, right consolation
As we do gold, from copper purifye
So that Elocution, does right well clarifye
The dulcet speech, from the language rude
Tellyng the tale, in terms eloquent
The barbary tongue, it does far exclude
Electyng words, which are expedient
In latin, or in english, after the intent
Encensyng out, the aromatyke fume
Our language rude, to exile and consume
But what avails, evermore to sow
The precious stones, among gruntyng hogs
Draffe unto them, is more meter I trow
Let an hare and swyne, be among curre dogs
Though to the hares, were tied great clogges
The gentle beast, they will regard nothing
But to the swyne, take course of runnyng
TO cloak the sentence, under misty fygures
By many colors, as I make relacion
As the old poets, covered their scriptures
Of which the first, is distribution
That to the evil, for their abusion
Does give pain, and to the worthy
Laud and praise, them for to magnifye.
Of beast or bird, they take a similitude
In the condition, like to the party
Feeble, fair, or yet of fortitude
And under color, of this beast privily
The moral sense, they cloak full subtillye
In praise or disprayse, as it is reasonable
Of whose faynyng, first rose the fable
Concludyng reason, greatly profitable
Who that their fables, can well moralyse
The fruitful sentences, are delectable
Though that the ficcion, they do so devise
Under the color, the truth does arise
Concludyng reason, riches, and cunnyng
Pleasure, example, and also learning.
They feigned no fable, without reason
For reasonable is, all their morality
And upon reason, was their conclusion
That the commen wit, by possibility
May well adiudge, the perfect veritye
Of their sentence, for reason openly
To the commen wit, it does so notifye.
Riches.
Their fruitful sentence, was great riches
The which right surely, they might well domine
For lordeship, wealth, and also noblesse
The chance of fortune, can sone determine
But what for this, she can not decline
The noble science, which after poverty
May bring a man, again to dignitye
Science.
Their sentence is cunnyng, as appears well
For by cunnyug, their art does engender
And without cunnyng, we know never a dele
Of their sentence, but may sone surrender
A true tale, that might to us render
Great pleasure, if we were intelligible
Of their cunnyng, nothing impossible
Pleasure.
O what pleasure, to the intelligent
It is to know, and have perseueraunce
Of their cunnyng, so much expedient
And thereof, to have good vtteraunce
Readyng new things, of so great pleasaunce
Feadyng the mind, with fode insaciate
The tales new, they are so delicate.
Example.
In an example, with a misty cloud
Of covert likeness, the poets do write
And underneath the truth, does so shroude
Both good and ill, as they list acquit
With similitude, they did so well endite
As I hereafter, shall the truth soue show
Of all their misty, and their fatal dew.
The poets feign, how that king Athias
Heaven should bear, upon his shoulders hye
Because in cunnyng, he did all other pass
Especially, in the high astronomye
Of the six planets, he knew so perfectly
The operations, how they were domified
For which poets, him so exemplified.
And in likewise, unto the sagittary
They feyne the centaures, to be of likeness
As half man, and half horse truly
Because Mylizyus, with his worthiness
Did first attain, and break the wildenes
Of the royal stedes, and right swiftly
His men and he, rode on them surely.
And also Pluto, sometime king of hell
A city of Greece, standing in the ssayle
Between great rocks, as the book does tell
Wherein were people, without any fail
Huge, fierce, and strong in battle
Tyrauntes, thieves, replete with treason
Wherefore poets, by true comparison
Unto the devils, black, and tedious
Did them resemble, in terrible figure
For their misliuyng, so foul and vycious
As to this day, it does appear in ure
Of Cerberus, the defloured picture
The porter of hell, with three heads ugly
Like an horrible giant, fierce, and wonderly.
Because always, his customed tyranny
Was eleuate in heart, by high presumption
Thinkyng him self, most strong and mighty
And secondly, he was destruction
Of many Ladies, by evil compulcion
And thirdly, his desire insaciable
Was to get riches, full innumerable.
Thus for these three vices abho^minable
They made him, with three heads serpentine
And like a fend, his body semblable
For his pride, avarice, and also rapyne
The moral sense, can sone illumine
The fatal picture, to be exuberaunt
And to our sight clear, and not variaunt.
Also rehearsed, the cronicles of Spain
How redoubted Hercules, by puyssaunce
Fought with an Ydre, right great certain
Having seven heads, of full great mischannce
For when that he, with all his valeaunce
Had stricken of an head, right shortly
An other anon, arose right sodaynely.
Seven sophims, full hard and fallacious
This Ydre used, in preposition
Unto the people, and was full rygorious
To devour them, where lacked responsion
And when one reason, had conclusion
An other reason, then incontinent
Began again, with subtle argument.
For which cause, the Poets covertly
With seven heads, does this Ydre depaynt
For these seven sophims, full right closely
But of rude people, the wits are so faint
That with their cunnyng, they can not acquaynt.
But who that list, their science to learn
Their obscure fygures, he shall well decerne
O redolent well, of famous poetrye
O clear fountain, replete with swetenes
Refleryng out, the dulcet delicacye
Of four ryuers, in marvelous wydenes
Fayrer then Tygrys, or yet Eufrates
For the first river, is understanding
The second river, close concludyng.
The third river, is called nouelrye
The fourth river, is called carbuncles
Amiddes of whom, the tower is so goodly
Of Uyrgill, stands most solacious
Where he is entyred, in stones precious
By this fair tower, in a goodly grene
This well does spryng, both bright and shene
To understanding, these. iiii. accident
Doctrine, perseueraunce, and exercise
And also thereto, is equipolent
Evermore, the perfect practice
For first doctrine, in all goodly wise
The perseuerant truth, in his booth of will
In understanding, for to know good from ill
So famous poets, did us endoctrine
Of the right way, for to be intellectife
Their fables they did, right so ymagyne
That by example, we may void the strife
And without mischefe, for to lead our life
By the aduertence, of their stories old
The fruit whereof, we may full well behold
Depaynted on arras, how in antiquity
Destroyed was, the great city of Troy
For a little cause, grounded on vanitye
To mortal ruin, they turned their joy
Their understanding, they did then occoy
Nothing prepensyng, how they did prepare
To scourge them selves, and bring them in a snare.
Who is oppressed, with a little wrong
Reuengyng it, he may it sone increase
For better it is, for to suffer among
An injury, as for to keep the peace
Then to begin, which he shall never cease
War once begone, it is hard to know
Who shall abide, and who shall overthrow.
The high power, honor, and nobleness
Of the mighty Romans, to whose excellence
All the wide world, so much of greatness
Unto their empire, was in obedience
Such was their famous port, and preeminence
Till win them selves, there was a contrauersy
Making them lose, their worthy sygneoury
It is ever, the ground of Sapience
Before that thou, accomplish outwardly
For to reuolue, understanding and prepence
All in thy self, full often inwardely
The beginning, and the middle certainelye
With the end, or thou put it in ure
And work with council, that thou may be sure
And who that so does, shall never repent
For his deeds is founded, on a perfect ground
And for to fall, it has none impediment
With surenes, it is so high walled round
In wealth and riches, it must needs abound
On every side, it has such ordinance
That nothing can, do it anoyaunce
Thus the Poets conclude full closelye
Their fruitful probles, for reformation
To make us learn, to live dyrectly
Their good intent, and true construction
Showing to us, the whole affection
Of the way of virtue, wealth, and stablenes
And to shut the gate, of mischeuous entres
And evermore, they are ymaginatyue
Tales new, from day to day to feign
The erryng people, that are retractiue
As to the right way, to bring them again
And who that list, their sentence retain
It shall him profit, if he will apply
To do thereafter, full conuenientlye.
Carbuncles, in the most dark night
Does shine fair, with clear radiant beams
Exilyng darkness, with his rays light
And so these Poets, with their golden streams
Deuoyde our rudenes, with great fyery leames
Their centencious verses, are refulgent
Encensyng out, the odoure redolent.
And is their work also extinguishible
Nay truly, for it does shine right clear
Through clouds dark, unto the odible
To whom truly, it may nothing appear
Where cunning fails, the science so dear
Ignorance hates, with fervent envy
And unto cunnyng, is mortal enemy.
O ygnoraunce, with slouthe so oppressed
Open thy curtayne, so right dymme and dark
And evermore remember, the behest
Of thy labor, to understand thy warke
Of many a noble, and right famous clarke
Fie upon sloth, the nourisher of vice
Which unto youth, does often preiudyce
Who in youth list, nothing to learn
He will repent him, often in his age
That he the cunnyng, can nothing decerne
Therefore now youth, with lusty courage
Rule thy flesh, and thy slouthe assuage
And in thy youth, the science engender
That in thine age, it may the worship render
Cunnyng is light, and also pleasant
A gentle burden, without greuousnes
Unto him, that is right well appliaunt
For to bear it, with all his business
He shall attaste, the well offruitefulues
Which Uirgyll clarified, and also Tullius
With latin pure, sweet, and delicious.
From whence my master lidgate derified,
The depured rethorike, in English language
To make our tongue, so clearly purified
That the vile terms, should nothing arage
As like a pie, to chatter in a cage
But for to speak, with rethorike formally
In the good order, withouten vylany.
And who his books, list to hear or see
In them he shall find, elocution
With as good order, as any may be
Keeping full close, the moralization
Of the truth, of his great intencion
Whose name is regestred, in remembrance
For to endure, by long continuance.
Now after this, for to make relation
Of famous rethorike, so in this party
As to the fourth part, pronunciation
I shall it show, anon right openly
With many branches, of it sykerly
And how it takes, the whole effect
In every place, degree and aspect.
Capitu. xii.
WHen the matter, is found by invention
Be it merye, or yet of great sadness
Set in a place, by the disposition
And by elocucions, famous clearenes
Exornate well, and ready to express
Then pronunciacion, with chere and countenance
Conveniently, must make the vtteraunce.
With humble voice, and also moderate
According, as by him is audience
And if there be, a right hye estate
Then under honor, and obedience
Reasonably done, unto his excellence
Pronouncyng his matter, so facundious
In all due manner, to be sentencious.
For though a matter, be never so good
I fit be told, with tongue of barbary
In rude manner, without the discrete mode
It is disturbaunce, to a whole company
For to se them, so rude and boystously
Demean them selves, vtteryng the sentence
Without good manner, or yet intelligence
It is a thing, right greatly conuenable
To pronounce the matter as it is convenient
And to the hearers, right delectable
When the vtterer, without impediment
With right good manner, countenance. and intent
Does tell his tale, unto them treatably
Keeping his manner, and voice full moderatly
This is the custom, that the poets use
To tell their tale, with all due circumstaunce
The vylayne courage, they do much refuse
That is boysteous, and rude of governance
And evermore, they do to them auaunce
Nurture, manner, and all gentleness
In their behauyng, with all semelines.
And thus the gentle, rethorician
Through the labor, of his royal cleargye
The famous nurture, oryginally began
Oppressyng our rudenes, and our folly
And for to govern us, right prudently
The good manner, increases dignity
And the rudenes, also iniquity
The famous poet, who so list to here
To tell his tale, it is solatious
Beholding his manners, and also his chere
After the manner, be it sad, or joyous
If it be sad, his chere is dolorous
As in bewaylyng, a woeful tragedy
That worthy is, to be in memory.
And if the matter, be joyful and glad
Like countenance, outwardly they make
But moderation, in their minds is had
So that outrage, may them not overtake
I can not write, to much for their sake
Them to laud, for my time is short
And the matter long, which I must report.
Capitulo. xiii.
ANd the. v. part, is then memoratyfe
The which, the perfect ministration
Ordinatly causes, to be retentyfe
Driuyng the tale, to good conclusion
For it behooves, to have respection
Unto the tale, and the very ground
And on what image, he his matter found.
If to the orator, many a sundry tale
One after other, treatably be told
Then sundry images, in his closed male
Each for a matter, he does then well hold
Like to the tale, he does then so behold
And inward, a recapitulation
Of each image, the moralization
Which be the tales, he grounded privily
Upon these images, signification
And when time is, for him to specifye
All his tales, by demonstration
In due order, manner, and reason
Then each image, inward dyrectly
The orator, does take full properly
So is enprynted, in his propre mind
Every tale, with whole resemblaunce
By this image, he does his matter find
Each after other, withouten variaunce
Who to this art, will give attendaunce
As thereof to know, the perfectnes
In the Poets schole, he must have intresse
Then shall he know, by perfect study
The memorial art, of rethorike defuse
It shall to him, so well exemplifye
If that him list, the science to use
Though at the first, it be to him obtuse
With exercise, he shall it well augment
Under clouds dark, and terms eloquent.
But now of days, the sin of auaryce
Exileth the mind, and the whole delight
To covet cunnyng, which is great prejudice
For insaciatly, so blinded is their sight
With the silver, and the gold so bright
They nothing think, on fortune variable
Which all their riches, can make transmutable
The old sawes, they right clean abject
Which for our learning, the poets did write
With avarice they are so sore infect
They take no head, nothing they write
Which morally, did so nobly endite
Reprouyng vice, praysyng the virtue
Which idleness, did evermore eschew.
Now, will I cease, of lusty rethoryke
I may not tarry, for my time is short
For I must proceed, and show of arismetrike
With diverse numbres, which I must report
Hope inwardely, does me well comfort
To bring my book, unto a fynishment
Of all my matter, and my true intent.
Capitu. xiiii.
O Thoughtfull heart, tombled all about
Upon the sea, of stormy ignorance
For to sail forth, thou art in great doubt
Over the waves, of great encombraunce
Without any comfort, safe of esperaunce
Which the exhorts, hardely to sail
Unto thy purpose, with diligent travail.
Aufryeus auster, blows frowardlye
Toward the land, and habitation
Of thy well favored, and most fair lady
For whose sake, and delectation
Thou have take, this occupacion
Principally, right well to attain
Her sweet reward, for thy busy pain.
O pensyfe heart, in the stormy pery
Mercury northwest, thou may se appear
After tempest, to glad, thine emispery
Hoyse up thy sail, for thou must draw near
Toward the end, of thy purpose so clear
Remember the, of the trace and dance
Of poets old, with all thy purueyaunce.
As moral Gower, whose sentencious dew
Adowne restareth, with fair golden beams
And after Chaucers, all abroad does show
Our vices to cleanse, his depared streams
Kindlyng our hearts, with the fiery leames
Of moral virtue, as is probable
In all his books, so sweet and profitable
The book of fame, which is sentencious
He drew him self, on his own invention
And then the tragidies, so piteous
Of the nintene ladies, was his translation
And upon his ymagination
He made also, the tales of Caunterbury
Some virtuous, and some glad and merye
And of Troylus, the piteous doloure
For his lady Cresyde, full of doublenes
He did be wayle, full well the langoure
Of all his love, and great unhappiness
And many other books doubtless
He did compyle, whose goodly name
In prynted books, does remain in fame.
And after him, my master Lydgate
The monk of bury, did him well apply
Both to contryue, and eke to translate
And of virtue, ever in especially
For he did compyle, then full nyally
Of our blessed lady, the conversation
Saint Edmundes life, martred with treason
Of the fall of Princes, right woefully
He did endite, in all piteous wise
Following his auctoure, Bocas rufully
A right great book, he did truly compryse
A good ensample, for us to despise
This world so full, of mutabilitie
In which no man, can hane a certainty.
And three reasons, right greatly profitable
Under color, he cloked craftily
And of the chorle, he made the fable
That shitte the bird, in a cage so closely
The pamflete, shows it expreslye
He feigned also, the court of sapience
And translated, with all his diligence.
The great book, of the last destruction
Of the city of Croye, whylome so famous
How for a woman, was the confusion
And between virtue, and the life vicious
Of Gods and Goddesses, a book solacious
He did compyle, and the time to pass
Ofloue he made, the bright temple of glass
Were not these three, greatly to commend
Which them applied, such books to contriue
Whose famous draughtes, no man can amend
The time of slouthe, they did from them drive
After their death, for to abide on live
In worthy fame, by many a nation
Their books, their acts, do make relation
O master Lydgate, the most dulcet spryng
Of famous rethoryke, with ballade royal
The chief original, of my learning
What vayleth it, on you for to call
Me for to aid, now in especial
Sythen your body, is now wrapte in chest
I pray God to give, your soul good rest
O what loss is it, of such a one
It is to great truly, for me to tell
Sythen the time, that his life was gone
In all this realm his pere did not dwell
Above all other, he did so excel
None sithe his time, in art would succeed
After their death, to have for their mede
But many a one, is right well expert
In this cunnyng, but upon authority
They feign no fables, pleasant and couerte
But spend their time, in vaynefull vanity
Making ballades, of fervent amity
As gestes and trifles, without fruitefulnes
Thus all in-vayne, they spend their business
I little or naught, expert in poetrye
Of my master Lidgate, will follow the trace
As evermore, so his name to magnifye
With such little books, by Gods grace
I fin this world, I may have the space
The little cunnyng, that his grace me sent
In time among, in such wise shall be spent.
And yet nothing, upon presumption
My master Lydgate, I will not envy
But all only, is mine intencion
With such labor, my self to occupy
As white by black, does shine more clearly
So shall their matters, appear more pleasant
Bisyde my draughtes, rude, and ignorant
Capitu. xv.
Now in my book, further to proceed
To a chamber I went, replete with riches
Where sat arismetrike, in a golden wede
Like a lady pure, and of great worthiness
The walls about, did fnll well express.
With gold depainted, every perfect number
To add, detray, and to divide a sunder.
The roufe was painted, with golden beams
The windows cristall, clearly clarified
The golden rays, and depured streams
Of radiant Phoebus, that was purified
Right in the bull, that time so domified
Through windows, was resplendishant
About the chamber, fair and radiaunt
I kneled down, right sone on my knee
And to her I said, O lady marvelous
I right humbly, beseech your majesty
Your art to show, me so facundious
Which is defuse, and right fallacious
But I shall so, apply mine exercise
That thevery truth, I shall well devise
My science said she, is right necessary
And in the mids of the sciences all
It is now set, right well and perfectly
For unto them, it is so special
Numbering so, their works in general
Without me, they had no perfectnes
I must them number, always doubtless
Without number, is no manner of thing
That in our sight, we may well se
For God made all, at the beginning
In number perfect, well in certainty
Who knew arsmetrike, in every degree
All manner number, in his mind were had
Both to detray, and to divide and add.
But who will know, all the experience
It behooves him, to have great learning
In many things, with true intelligence
Or that he can, have perfect rekenyng
In every number, by expert cunnyng
To rehearse in english, more of this science
It were folly, and eke great negligence.
I thought full long, till I had a sight
Of la bell Pucell, the most fair lady
My mind upon her, was both day and night
The fervent love, so perst me inwardly
Wherefore I went anon, right shortly
Unto the tower, sweet and melodious
Of dame music, so gaye and glorious.
Capitu. xvi.
WHen splende^t Phoebus, in his middaye spear
Was high in Gemine, in the fresh season
Of lustye May, with golden beams clear
And dark Dyane, made declination
When Flora flourished, in this nation
I called unto mind, right inwardly
The report of Fame, so much ententislye
Of la bell Pucell, in the tower musical
And right anon, unto the tower I went
Where I saw, a temple made of Crystal
In which musyke, the lady excellent
Played on base organes, expedient
According well, unto dyopason
Dyapenthe, and eke dyetesseron
In this temple, was great solemnity
And of much people, there was great prease
I looked about, whether I could se
La bell pucell, my langour to cease
I could not se her, my pain did increase
Till that I spied her, above in a vaute
Which to my heart, did make so sore assaut.
With her beauty clear, and sweet countenance
The stroke of love, I could nothing resist
And anon, without longer circumstaunce
To her I went, or that her person wist
Her thought I knew not, she thought as she list
By her I stood, with heart sore and faint
And did my self, with her sone acquaynt.
The commen wit, did full little regard
Of dame musyke, the dulcet armonye
The ears heard not, for the mind inward
Uenus had wrapped, and taken fervently
Imagination, wrought full privily
The fantasye, gave perfect judgment
Always to her, for to be obedient.
By estimation, much doubtfully I cast
Whether I should, by long time and space
Atteyne her love, or else to love in waste
My heart sobbed, and quaked in this case
I stood by her, right near in the place
With many other, fair ladies also
But so fair as she, I never saw no mo.
The feast done, dame musyke did go
She followed after, and she would not tarry
Fare well she said, for I must part you fro
Alas thought I, that fortune does so vary
My sad body, my heavy heart did carye
I could not speak, my heart was near broken
But with my head, I made her a token
When she was gone, inwardely then wrought
Upon her beauty, my mind retentife
Her goodly figure, I graued in my thought
Except her self, all were expulsyfe
My mind to her, was so ententyfe
That I followed her, into a temple far
Replete with joy, as bright as any star.
Where dulcet Flora, her aromatyke dew
In the fair temple, adowne did distyll
All abroad, the fair dropes did show
Encencyng out, all the vapors ill
With such a swetenes, Flora did fulfill
All the temple, that my gown well showed
The lycoure sweet, of the drops endued
And so to a chamber, full solacious
Dame musyke went, with la bell Pucell
All of Jasper, with stones precious
The roufe was wrought, curiously and well
The windows glased, maruelously to tell
With clothe of tissue, in the riches manner
The walls were hanged, hie and cyrculer
There sat dame music, with all her minstrelsy
As tabours, trumpets, with pipes melodious
Sakbuttes, organs, and the recorder swetely
Harpes, lutes, and crowdes right delicious
Cimphans, doucemers, with claricymbals glorious
Rebeckes, claricordes, each in their degree
Did sit about their Ladies majesty
Before dame music, I did knele adowne
Saying to her, O fair Lady pleasant
Your prudence reigns most hye in renown
For you be ever, right concordaunt
With perfect reason, which is not variaunt
I beseech your grace, with all my diligence
To instruct me, in your novle science
It is she said, right greatly profitable
For music does set, in all unity
The discord things, which are variable
And deuoydeth mischief, and great iniquity
Where lacks music, there is no plenty
For music is concord, and also peace
Nothing without music, may well increase
The seven sciences, in one monacorde
Each upon other, do full well depend
Music has them, so set in concord
That all in one, may right well extend
All perfect reason, they do so comprehend
That they are way, and perfect doctrine
To the joy above: which is celestine
And yet also, the perfect phisyke
Which appertcyneth, well to the body
Does well resemble, unto the musyke
When the inward intrailes, turns contrary
That nature can not, work dyrectly
Then does phisyke, the parts interiall
In order set, to their original.
But yet phisyke, can not be liberal
As the seven scyences, by good authority
Which leads the soul, the way in special
By good doctrine, to dame eternity
Only of phisike, it is the property
To aid the body, in every sickness
That is right frail, and full of brittlenes
And because phisike, is appendant
Unto the body, by help of medicine
And to the soul, nothing apportenaunt
To cause the body for to incline
In eternal health, so the soul to domine
For to the body, the sciences seven
Does teach to lead, the soul to heaven
And musyke it self, is melodious
To rejoice the ears, and comfort the brain
Sharpyng the wits, with sound' solacious
Deuoydyng bad thoughts, which did remain
It gladdeth the heart, also well certain
Length the life, with dulcet armonye
As is good recreation, after study.
She commanded her minstrels, right anon to play
Mamours the sweet, and the gentle dance
With la bell Pucell, that was fair and gay
She me recommended, with all pleasaunce
To dance true measure, without variaunce
O lord God, how glad then was I
So for to dance, with my sweet lady.
By her proper hand, soft as any silk
With due obeysaunce, I did her then take
Her skin was white, as whales bone or milk
My thoughts was ravished, I might not aslake
My brennyng heart, she the fire did make
These daunces truly, musyke has me taught
To lute or dance, but it auayled naught.
For the fire kindled, and waxed more and more
The dauncyng blewe it, with her beauty clear
My heart sickened, and began to wax sore
A minute. vi. hours, and. vi. hours a year
I thought it was, so heavy was my chere
But yet for to cover, my great love aryght
The outward countenance, I made glad and light
And for fear mine eyes, should mine heart bewray
I took my leave, and to a temple went
And all alone, I to my self did say
Alas what fortune, has me hither sent
To deuoyde my joy, and my heart torment.
No man can tell, how great a pain it is
But if he will feel it, as I do iwysse
Alas O lady, how cruel art thou
Of piteous doloure, for to build a nest
In my true heart, as thou do right now
Yet of all ladies, I must love the best
Thy beauty thereto, did me surely arest
Alas with love, when that it does the please
Thou may cease my care, and my pain sone ease.
Alas how sore, may I now bewail
The piteous chance, which did me hap
My ladies lokes, did me so assail
That sodaynely, my heart was in a trappe
By Uenus caught, and with so sore a clappe
That through, the great stroke did perse
Alas for woe, I could not reuerse.
Farewell all joy, and all perfect pleasure
Fare well my lust, and my likyng
For woe is comen, with me to endure
Now must I lead, my life in mournyng
I may not lute, or yet dance, or sing
O la bell Pucell, my lady glorious
You are the cause, that I am so dolorous
Alas fair lady, and mine own sweet heart
With my service, I yield me to your will
You have me fettred, I may not astart
At your pleasure, you may me save or kill
Because I love you, will you me spyll
Alas it were, a piteous case in deed
That you with death, should reward my mede.
A a, that I am right woe begone
For I of love, dare not to you speak
For fear of nay, that may increase my moan
Anay of you might, cause my heart to break
Alas I wretch, and yet unhappy peke
Into such trouble, misery, and thought
With sight of you, I am into it brought
And to my self, as I made complaint
I spied a man, right nere me beforue
Which right anon, did with me acquaynt
Me think he said, that ye are near forlorn
With inward pain, that your heart has borne
Be not to pensyfe, call to mind again
How of one sorrow, ye do now make twain
Mine inward sorrow, ye begin to double
Go your way quod I, for ye can not me aid
Tell me he said, the cause of your trouble
And of me now, be nothing afraid
Me think that sorrow, has you ouerlayed
Drive of no longer, but tell me your mind
It may me hap, a remedy to find.
A a quod I, it vayleth not your speech
I will with you, never have medlyng
Let me alone, the most unhappy wretch
Of all the wretches, that is yet living
Such is the chance, of my bewaylyng
Go on your way, you are nothing the better
To me to speak, to make my sorrow greater
For so the he said, remember things three
The first is, that ye may sorrow long
Unto your self, or that you aided be
And secondly, in great pains strong
To muse alone, it might turn you to wrong
The third is, it might you well ease truly
To tell your mind, to a friend right trusty
It is a jewel, of a friend of trust
As at your need, to tell your secretenes
Of all your pain, and fervent lust
His council sone, may help and redress
Your paynefull woe, and mortal heaviness
Alone is naught, for to think and muse
Therefore good son, do me not refuse.
And sithe that you are, plunged all in thought
Beware the pytte, of dolorous despair
So to complain, it vayleth you right naught
It may so fortune, ye love a lady fair
Which to love you, will nothing repair
Or else ye have lost, great land or substance
By fatal chance, of fortunes ordinance
Tell me the cause, though that it be so
In case you love, I know it by experience
It is a pain, engendryng great woe
And hard it is, for to make resistaunce
Against such love, of fervent vyolence
The love is dreadful, but nevertheless
There is no sore, nor yet no syckenes
But there is a salve, and remedy therefore
So for your pain, and your sorrow great
Council is medicine, which may you restore
Unto your desire, without any let
If ye will tell me where your heart is set
In thy chair of sorrow, no great doubt it is
To find a remedy, for your pain I wys
A physician truly, can little decerne
Any manner sickness, without sight of vryne
No more can I, by good counsel you learn
All such woeful trouble, for to determine
But if you mekely, will to me enclyne
To tell the cause, of your great greuousnes
Of your inward trouble, and woeful sadness
Then I began, with all my diligence
To hear him speak, so grounded on reason
And in my mind, did make aduertence
How it was wholesome, in tribulation
To save a good, and a true companion
For to know my sorrow, and woeful grefe
It might me comfort, and right well relefe
And of him then, I asked this question
What was his name, I prayed him me tell
Council quod he, the which solucion
In my woeful mind, I liked right well
And privily I did, his lesson spell
Saying to him, my chance and destiny
Of all other, is the most unhappy.
Why so quod he, though fortune be strange
To you a while, turnyng of her face
Her louryng chere, she may right sone chaung
And you accept, and call unto her grace
Despair you not, for in good time and space
Nothing there is, but wisdom may it w^^
To tell your mind, I pray you to begin.
Unto you quod I, with all my whole assent
I will tell you truth, and you will not bewraye
Unto none other, my matter and intent
Nay nay quod he, you shall not se that day
Your whole affiaunce and trust, well ye may
Into me put, for I shall not vary
But keep your council, as a secretary.
And then to him, in the manner following
I did complain, with sighyng tears deep
Alas quod I, you shall have knowlegyng
Of my heavy chance, that causes me to weep
So woe I am, that I can never sleep
But wallowe and tumble, in the trappe of care
My heart was caughte, or that I was ware
It happened so, that in a temple old
By the tower of music, at great solemnity
La bell pucell, I did right well behold
Whose beauty clear, and great humility
To my heart did cast, the darte of amity
After which stroke, so hard and fervent
To her excellence, I came incontinent
Beholding her chere, and lovely countenance
Her garments rich, and her propre stature
I regestered well, in my remembrance
That I never saw, so fair a creature
So well fauouredly, create by nature
That hard it is, for to wryght with ynke
All her beauty, or any heart to think.
Fayrer she was, then was queen Helene
Proserpyne, Cresyde, or yet Ypolyte
Medea, Dydo, or young Polexyne
Alcumena, or queen Menelape
Or yet dame Rosamonde, in certainty
None of all these, can have the preeminence
To be compared, to her high excellence
During the feast, I stood her near by
But then her beauty, increased my pain
I could nothing, resist the contrary
She wrapped my heart, in a brennyng chain
To the musical tower, she went then again
I went after, I could not be behind
The chain she haled, which my heart did bind.
Till that we came, into a chamber gaye
Where that music, with all her minstrelsy
Diverse base daunces, most swetely did play
That them to here, it was great melody
And dame music, commanded courteously
La bell pucell, with me then to dance
Whom that I took, with all my pleasaunce
By her sweet hand, beginning the trace
And long did dance, till that I might not hide
The painful love, which did my heart embrace
Because whereof, I took my leave that tide
And to this temple, where I do abide
Forth then I went, alone to bewail
My mortal sorrow, without any fail,
Now have I told you, all the very troth
Of my woeful chance, and great unhappiness
I pray you, nothing with me to be wroth
Which am drowned, in careful wretchedness
By fortune plunged, full of doublenes
A a said council, doubt ye never a deal
But your disease, I shall by wisdom heal
Remember you, that never yet was he
That in this world, did lead all his life
In joy and pleasure, without adversity
No worldly thing, can not be without strife
For unto pleasure, pain is affirmatife
Who will have pleasure, he must first apply
To take the pain, with his cure busely.
To deserve the joy, which after does ensue
Rewardyng pain, for the great business
No doubt your Lady, will upon you rue
Seeing you apply, all your gentleness
To do her pleasure, and service doubtless
Hard is the heart, that no love has felt
Nor for to love, will then incline and melt.
Remember ye, that in old antiquity
How worthy Troylus, that mighty champion
What pain he suffered, by great extremity
Offeruent love, by a great long season
For his lady Cresyde, by great tribulation
After his sorrow, had not he great joy
Of his lady, the fairest of all Troy
And the famous knight, yclipped Ponthus
Which loved Sydoyne, so much entirely
What pain had he, and what care dolorous
For his lady, with love so marvelously
Was not her heart, wounded right woefully
After his pain, his lady did her cure
To do him joy, honor, and pleasure.
Who was with love, more woefully arrayed
Then were these twain, and many other mo
The power of love, had them so asayed
That and I list, I could rehearse also
To whom true love, has wrought mykle woe
And at the end, have had their desire
Of all their sorrow, for to quench the fire
Languishe no more, but pluck up thy heart
Exile despair, and live a while in hope
And keep your love, all close and covert
It may so fortune, that your lady will grope
Somewhat of love, for to drink a soap
Though outwardely, she dare not let you know
But at the last, as I believe and trow.
She can not keep it, so priuye and close
But that somewhat, it shall to you appear
By countenance, how that her love arose
If that she love you, the love it is so dear
When you come to her, she will make you chere
With countenance, according unto love
Full privily, for to come to her above
Sending of love, the messenger before
Which is her eyes, with louelye lokes sweet
For to behold you, then ever more and more
After the time, that you together mete
With loving words, she will you then great
Sorrow no more, for I think in my mind
That at the last, she will be good and kind
Alas quod I, she is of hye degree
Borne to great land, treasure, and substance
I fear to sore, I shall disdayned be
The which will trouble, all my greuannce
Her beauty is, the cause of my penance
I have no great land, treasure, and riches
To win the favor, of her noblenes.
What though quod he, draw you not back
For she has enough, in her possession
For you both, for you shall never lack
If that ye order it. by good reason
And so in perfect consideration,
She will with love, her grene flouryng age
Pass forth in joy, pleasure, and courage
Youth is always, of the course right light
Hot, and moist, and full of lustines
Most of the air, it is ruled by right
And her complexion, has chief intresse
Upon sanguine, the airs holesomenes
She is not yet in all, above. xviii. year
Of tender age, to pleasure most dear
Gold or silver, in any manner of wise
For sanguyne youth, it is all contrary
So for to covet, for it does arise
Only engendered, upon the malencoly
Which is dry, cold, and also earthly
In which the gold, is truly nutrified
Far from the air, so clearly purified
Thus couetise, shall nothing surmount
Your young ladies heart, but only nature
Shall in her mind, make her to account
The great loss of youth, her special treasure
She knows she is, a right fair creature
No doubt it is, but yet privily among
So hye is nature, with his works strong.
That she of force, the man's company
Must well covet, for she may not resist
Dame natures work, which is so secretly
Though she be maid, let her say what she list
She would have man, though no man it wist
To make her joy, when nature does agree
Her thought is hers, it is unto her free.
Who spares to speak, he spares to speed
I shall provide, for you convenient
A gentle time, for to attain your mede
That you shall go, to your lady excellent
And right before, take good aduisement
Of all the matter, that ye will her show
Upon good reason, and in words few
Thus past we time, in communication
The after none, with many a sentment
And what for love, was best conclusion
We demed often, and gave a judgment
Till that in the even, was refulgent
Fair golden Mercury, with his beams bright
About the air, castyng his pured light
Then to a chamber, sweet and precious
Council me led, for to take my rest
The night was wete, and also tenebrous
But I my self, with sorrow oppressed
Did often muse, what was for me best
Unto my fair lady, for to tell or say
And all my dread was, for fear of a nay.
Though that my bed, was easy and soft
Yet did I tomble, I might not iye still
On every side, I turned me full often
Upon the love, I had so set my will
Longyng right sore, my mind to fulfill
I called council, and prayed him to wake
To give me council, what were best to take
Ha ha quod he, love does you so prick
That yet your heart, will nothing be eased
But evermore, be feeble and sick
Till that your lady, has it well pleased
Though ye think long, yet ye shall be pleased
I would quod I, that it were as ye say
Fie fie quod he, drive such despair away
And live in hope, which shall do you good
Joy comes after, when the pain is past
Be ye pacient, and sober in mode
To weep and wail, all is for you in waste
Was never pain, but it had joy at last
In the fair morrow: rise and make you ready
At nine at the clock, the time is necessary
For us to walk, unto your Lady gent
The bodies above, be then well domified
To help us forward, without impediment
Look what ye say, look it be derified
From perfect reason, well exemplified
Forsake her not, though that the say nay
A woman's guise, is evermore to delay.
No castle can be, of so great a strength
If that there be, a sure siege to it laid
It must yield up, or else be won at length
Though that tofore, it has been long delayed
So continuance, may you right well aid
Some woman's heart, can not so harded be
But busy labor, may make it agree
Labor and diligence, is full marvelous
Which brings a lover, to his promocion
Nothing to love, is more desierous
Then instaunt labor, and delectation
The harded heart, it gives occasion
For to consider, how that her servant
To attain her love, is so attendant.
Thus all in co^munyng, we the night did pass
Till in the air, with clowes fair and read
Risen was Phoebus, shinyng in the glass
In the chamber, his golden rays were spredde
And Dirane, declinyng, pale as any lead
When the little birds, swetely did sing
With tunes musical, in the fair morning
Of the dolorous and lowly disputation, between la bell Pucell, and graunde
Amoure. Capit xviii.
Council and I, then rose full quickly
And made us ready, on our way to walk
In your clenly wede appareled properly
What I would say, I did unto him talk
Till on his book, he began to calke
How the sun, entered was in Geminy
And eke Dyane, full ot mutabilitie
Entered the Crabbe, her propre mancion
Then right amiddes, of the Dragons head
And Uenus and she, made conjunction
From her combust way, she had her so sped
She had no let, that was to be dredde
The assured air, was depaynted clear
With golden beams, of fair Phoebus spear
Then forth so went, good council and I
At. by. at clock, unto a garden fair
By musikes tower, walled most goodly
Where la bell Pucell, used to repair
In the sweet morning, for to take the air
Among the ffowers, of aromatyke fume
The misty air, to exile and consume
And at the gate, we met the portresse
That was right gentle, and called curtesye
Which salued us, with words of mekenes
And asked us, the very cause and why
Of our coming, to the garden sothell
Cruely saled we, for nothing but well
A little to speak, with la bell Pucell.
Truly quod she, in the garden grene
Of many a swe^e, and sundry hour
She makes a garlande, that is very shene
With trueloues wrought, with many a color
Replete with swetenes, and dulcet odoure
And all alone, withouten, company
Amiddes an harber, she sits pleasauntly
Now stand you still, for a little space
I will let her, of you have knowledgyng
And right anon, she went to her grace
Tellyng her then, how we were coming
To speak with her, greatly desirynge
Truly she said, I am right well content
Of their coming, to know the whole intent
Then good curtesy, without tariyng
Came unto us, with all her diligence
Praiyng us, to take our entering
And come unto, the ladies presence
To tell your errande, to her excellence
Then in we went, to the garden glorious
Like to a place, of pleasure most solacious
With Flora painted, and wrought curiously
In diverse knottes, of marvelous greatness
Rampande Lions, stood up wonderfly,
Made all of herbs, with dulcet swetenes
With many dragons, of marvelous likeness
Of diverse flowers, made full craftily
By Flora colored, with colors sundry
Amiddes the garden, so much delectable
There was an harber, fair and quadrant
To Paradise, right well comparable
Set all about, with flowers flagrant
And in the middle, there was resplendishaunt
A dulcet spring, and marvelous fountain
Of gold and asure, made all certain
In wonderful, and curious similitude
There stood a dragon, of fine gold so pure
Upon his tail, of mighty fortitude
Wrethed and skaled, all with asure
Having three heads, diverse in figure
Which in a bathe, of the silver great
Spouted the water, that was so dulcet.
Beside which fountain, the most fair lady
La bell Pucell, was gayly sittyng
Of many flowers, fair and royally
A goodly chaplet, she was in making
Her here was down, so clearly shinyng
Like to the gold, late purified with fire
Her here was bright, as the drawn wyre
Like to a lady, for to be right true
She ware a fair, and goodly garment
Of most fine velvet, all of Indy blewe
With armines powdered, bordred at the vent
On her fair hands, as was convenient
A pair of gloves, right slender, and soft
In approchyng nere, I did behold her often.
And when that I came, before her presence
Unto the ground, I did knele adowne
Saying O Lady, most fair of excellence
O star so clear, of virtuous renown
Whose beauty fair, in every realm and town
Endued with grace, and also goodness
Dame Fame the her self, does evermore express
Amoure. Please it your grace, for to give audience
Unto my woeful, and piteous complainte
How fervent love, without resistance
My careful heart, has made low and faint
And you thereof, are the whole constraynt
Your beauty truly, has me fettred fast
Without your help, my life is near hand past.

Pucell. Stand up quod she, I marvel of this case
What sudden love, has you so arrayed
With so great pain, your heart to embrace
And why for me, ye should be so dismayed
As of your life, ye need not to be afraid
For ye of me now, have no great awe
But when ye list, ye may your love with draw

Amoure. Then stood I up, and right so did she
Alas I said then, my heart is so set
That it is yours, it may none other be
Your self has caught it, in so sure a net
That if that I may not, your favor get
No doubt it is, the great pain of love
May not assuage, till death it remove.

Pucell. Truly quod she, I am obedient
Unto my friends, which do me so gyde
They shall me rule, as is convenient
In the snare of love, I will nothing slide
My chance or fortune, I will yet abide
I thank you, for your love right humblye
But I your cause, can nothing remedy.

Amoure. Alas madame, if I have enterprised
A thing to hye, truly for my degree
All those causes, which I have commised
Has been on fortunes, gentle unity
Trustyng truly, that she would favor me
In this case, wherefore now excuse
Your humble servant, and not me refuse

Pucell. Ha ha, what vayleth all your flattery
Your feigned words, shall not me appose
To make mine heart, to incline inwardly
For I my self now, do nothing suppose
But for to prove me, you flatter and gloss
You shall not dye, as long as you speak
There is no love, can cause your heart to break

Amoure. I would madame, you had prorogatiue
To know the priuitie, of my perfect mind
How all in pain, I lead a woeful live
Then as I trow, ye would not be unkind
But that some grace, I might in you find
To cause mine heart, which you fettred sure
With brennyng chains, such woe to endure

Pucell. By very reason, I may give judgment
That it is the guise, of you euerychone
To feign you sick, by subtle argument
When to your lady, you list to make your moan
But of you true, there is few or none
For all your pain, and words eloquente
With dame repentance, I will not be shent

Amoure. O sweet madame, now all my destiny
Unhap and happy, upon you does know
If that you call me, unto your mercy
Of all happy, the most happy I trow
Then shall I be, of hye degree or low
And if ye list, so me then to forsake
Of all unhappy, none shall be my make.

Pucell. Your fortune on me, is not more applied
Then upon other, for my mind is free
I have your purpose, often inoughe denied
You know your answer, now certainty
What need your words, of curiosity
Woe here no more, for you shall not speed
Go love an other, where ye may have mede.

Amoure. That shall I not, though that I continue
All my life, in pain and heaviness
I shall not change you, for none other new
You are my lady, you are my mistress
Whom I shall serve, with all my gentleness
Exyle him never, from your heart so dear
Which unto his, has set you most near

Pucell. The mind of men, changes as the moon
If you mete one, which is fair and bright
Ye love her best, till ye se right sone
An other fayrer, unto your own sight
Unto her then, your mind is turned right
Truly your love, though ye make it strange
I know full well, ye will it often change.

Amoure. Alas madame, now the bright lodes star
Of my true heart, where ever I go or ride
Though that my body, be from you a far
Yet my heart only, shall with you abide
When then you list, ye may for me provide
A remedy sweet lady, of my heart
It is your own, it can nothing astart.

Pucell. Nay truly, it can nothing be mine
For I thereof, take no possession
Your heart is yours, by substanciall line
It is not in my domination,
Love where ye list, at every season
Your heart is free, I do not it accept
It is your own, I have it never kept.

Amoure. Alas madame, ye may say what yon list
With your beauty, ye took mine heart in snare
Your lovely lokes, I could not resist
Your virtuous manner, increases my care
That of all joy, I am deuoyde and bare
I se you right often, when I am a sleep
And when I wake, do sigh with tears deep

Pucell. So great deceit, among men there is
That hard it is, to find one full stable
Ye are so subtle, and so falfe iwys
Your great deceit, is nothing commendable
In stories old, it is well probable
How many ladies, has been right falsely
With men deceived, ill and subtly

Amoure. O good madame, though that they abused
Them to their ladies, in their great deceit
Yet am I true, let me not be refused
Ye have me taken, with so fair a bait
That ye shall never, out of my conceit
I can not wrinche, by no wile nor croke
My heart is fast, upon so sure a hoke

Pucell. Ye so said they, til that they had their will
Their will accomplished, they did fle at large
For men say well, but they think full ill
Though outward swetenes, your to^g does enlarg
Yet of your heart, I never can have charge
For men do love, as I am right sure
Now one, now an other, after their pleasure

Amoure. All that madame, I know right perfectly
Some men there be, of that condition
That them delight, often in nouelry
And many also, love perfection
I cast all such nouels, in abiection
My love is set, upon a perfect ground
No falshede in me, truly shall be found.

Pucell. Ye say full well, if ye mean the same
But I in you can have no confidence
I think right well, that it is no game
To love vnloued, with percing influence
You shall in me fiude, no such negligence
To grant you love, for ye are unthrifty
As two or three, to me does specify.

Amoure. Was never lover, without enemies three
As envy, malice, and perturbaunce
Their tongues are poison, unto amity
What man on live, can use such governance
To attain favor, withouten variaunce
Of every person, but right privily
Behind his back, some says vnhappilye

Pucell. Truth it is, but yet in this case
Your love and mine, is full far a sunder
But though that I do, your heart so race
If I dread you, it is thereof no wonder
With my friends, I am so sore kept under
I dare not love, but as they accord
They think to wedde me, to a mighty Lord

Amoure. I know madame, that your friends all
Unto me, sure will be contrarious
But what for that, your self in special
Remember there is, no love so joyous
As is your own, to you most precious
Will you give your youth, and your flouryng age
To them, against your mind in marriage

Pucell. Against my ininde, of that were I loathe
To wedde for fear, as them to obey
Yet had I rather, they were somewhat wroth
For I my self, do bear the lock and keye
Yet of my mind, and will do many a day
Mine own I am, what that I list to do
I stand untied, there is no joy thereto,

Amoure. O sweet lady, the good perfect star
Of my true heart, take ye now pity
Think on my pain, which am tofore you here
With your sweet eyes, behold you and se
How thought and woe, by great extremity
Has changed my hue, into pale and wanne
It was not so, when I to love began.

Pucell. So me think, it does right well appear
By your color, that love has done you woe
Your heavy countenance, and your doleful cheer
Has love such might, for to array you so
In so short a space, I marvel much also
That ye would love me, so sure in certain
Before ye knew, that I would love again

Amoure My good dear heart, it is no marvel why
Your beauty clear, and lonely lokes sweet
My heart did perce, with love so suddenly
At the first time, that I did you mete
In the old temple, when I did you great
Your beauty my heart, so surely assayed
That sith that time, it has to you obeyed

Capitu. xix.
Pucell. YOur woe and pain, and all your languishyng
Continuaily, ye shall not spend in vain
Sithe^ I am cause, of your great morning
Nothing exile you, shall I by disdain
Your heart and mine, shall never part in twain
Though at the first, I would not condescende
It was for fear, ye did some ill entende

Amoure With thought of ill, my mind was never mixed
To you madame, but always clean and pure
Both day and night, upon you whole perfixt
But I my mind, yet durst nothing discure
How for your sake, I did such woe endure
Till now this hour, with dreadful heart so faint
To you sweet heart, I have made my complaint
I demed often, you loved me before
By your demenoure, I did it espy
And in my mind, I judged evermore
That at the last, ye would full secretly
Tell me your mind, of love right gentlely
As ye have done, so my mercy to crave
In all worship, you shall my true love have

Amoure. O lord God then, how joyful was I
She looked on me, with lovely countenance
I kiste her once or twice, right swetely
Her depured vysage, repleate with pleasaunce
Rejoiced my heart, with amerous purueyaunce
O lady clear, that perst me at the rote
O flower of comfort, all my heal and bote
O gemme of virtue, and lady excellent
Above all other, in beauteous goodlines
O eyes bright, as star refulgent
O profounde cause, of all my sickness
Now all my joy, and all my gladness
Would God that we were, joined in one
In marriage before, this day were gone

Pucell. A a said she, ye must take pain a while
I must depart, by the compulcion
Of my friends, I will not you begile
Though they me lead, to a far nation
My heart shall be, without variacion
With you present, in perfect sikernes
As true and stable, without doublenes
To me to come, is hard and dangerous
When I am there, for gyantes ugly
With monsters also, black and tedious
That by the way, awaite full cruelly
For to destroy you, ill and utterly
When you that way, do take the passage
To attain my love, by hye advantage.

Amoure. All that madame, was to me certified
By good dame Fame, at the beginning
When she to me, of you well notified
As she came from, the tower of learning
Of all such enemies, the might excluding
I promise unto you, here full faithfully
When I depart, from dame astronomy
That I will to, the tower of chiualry
And for your sake, become aduenturous
To subdue all enemies, to me contrary
That I may after, be right joyous
With you my lady, most sweet and precious
Woe worth the cause, of your departing
Which all my sorrows, is in renuyng.
Alas what pleasure, and eke without disport
Shall I now have, when that ye be gone
Ha ha truly, now without good comfort
My dolorous heart, shall be left alone
Without your presence, to me is none
For every hour, I shall think a year
Till Fortune bring me, unto you more near
Yet after you, I will not be right long
But haste me after, as fast as I may
In the tower of chiualry, I shall make me strong
And after that, pass shortly on my way
With diligent labor, on my journey
Spite of your enemies, I shall me so speed
That in short time, ye may reward my mede
I thank you quod she, with my heart entire
But yet with me, ye shall make couenaunte
As I to you, am right lefe and dear
Unto no person, ye shall so aduaunte
That I to love you, am so attendaunt
For any thing, your council not bewraye
For that full sone, might us both betray
And to tell me, I pray you heartily
Yonder is council, how were you acquainted
He is both honest, and true certainly
Does he not know, how your heart is fainted
With fervent love, so surely attainted
If he so do, yet I nothing repent
He is so secret, and true of intent
Truly madame, because ye are content
I shall you tell, how the matter was
When that your beauty, clearly spendent
Into my heart, full wondersly did pass
Like as fair Phoebus, does shine in the glass
All alone, with inward care so rent
Into a temple, forth on my way I went
Where that I walked, plunged in the pit
Of great despair, and he then me met
Alas he said, me think ye lose your wit
Tell me the truth now, without any let
Why ye demean, such mortal sorrow great
Avoid quod I, you shall nothing it know
You can not help me, in the case I trow
But he such reason, and fruitful sentence
Did for him lay, that I told him all
When he it knew, with all his diligence
He did me comfort, then in special
Unto my mind, he bade me to call
Who spares to speak, he to speed does spare
Go tell your lady, the cause of your care
By whose council, grounded in wisdom
To the intent, I should speed the better
And right shortly, I did then to you come
But dread always, made my sorrow greater
After great pain, the joys is the sweter
For who that tastes, painful bitterness
The joy to him, is double swetenes
And therwithall, I did unto her bring
Council my friend, and full right meke
Did him receive, as he was coming
And of all things, she did him beseke
After her parting, the same weke
To haste me forward, to my iourneyes end
Thereto quod I, I do well condescende
Fare well quod she, I may no longer tarry
My friends will come, of that were I loathe
I shall retain you, in my memory
And they it knew, they would with me be wroth
To love you best, I promise you my troth
And then mine eyes, great sorrow showed
With tears salt, my chekes were endued
Her eyes graye, began to look right read
Her gaye white color, began for to pale
Upon her chekes, so the drops were spredde
Which from her eyes, began to aduale
From her sweet heart, she did the sighs hale
Never before, as I trow and wene
Was such departing, true lovers between
We wiped our chekes, our sorrows to cloak
Outwardly fayning us, to be glad and merry
That the people should, not perceive the smoke
Of our hot fire, to light the emispery
Though inwardly, with a stormy pery
The fire was blown, yet we did it cover
Because abroad, it should nothing perceuer
Out of the garden, to an haven side
Forth we went, where was a ship right large
That tarried there, after the flowyng tide
And so then did there, many a boat and barge
The ship was great, five. C. tun to charge
La bell Pucell, right anon me told
In yonder ship, which that ye behold
Forth must I sail, without longer delay
It is full sea, my friends will come sone
Therefore I pray you to go hence your way
It draws fast now, toward the none
Madame quod I, your pleasure shall be done
With woeful heart, and great sighs often
I kissed her lips, that were sweet and soft
She unto me, nor I unto her could speak
And as of that, it was no great wonder
Our hearts swelled, as that they should break
The fire of love, was so sore kept under
When I from her, should depart asunder
With her fair head, she did low incline
And in like wise, so did I with mine

Of the great sorrow that graunde Amoure made after her departing, and of the
words of Council. Capitu. xx.
HEr friends and she, on their way they sailed
Along the haven, god them save and bring
Unto the land, I heard when that they haled
With a great peale of gunnes, at their departing
The marueylouse tower, of famous cunnyng
No gunne was shot, but my heart did weep
For her departing, with woeful tears deep
Council me comforted, as ever he might
With many stories, of old antiquity
Remember he said, that never yet was wight
That lived always, in great tranquillity
But that him happed, some adversity
Then after that, when the pain was past
The double joy, did comfort them at last.
Ye need nothing, for to make great doloure
Fortune to you, has been right favorable
Making you, to attain the good favor
Of your lady, so sweet and amiable
No doubt it is, she is true and stable
And demean you so, that in no wise
No man perceive, or of your love surmise.
Be hardy, fearce, and also courageous
In all your battles, without feebleness
For ye shall be, right well victorious
Of all your enemies, so full of subtilnes
Arm you with wisdom, for more surenes
Let wisdom work, for she can stedfastlye
In time of need, resist the contrary
Was never man, yet surely at debate
With Sapience, but that he did repent
Who that is ruled, by her high estate
Of his after wit, shall never be shent
She is to man, right beneuolent
With walls sure, she does him fortify
When it is need, to resist a contrary.
Was never place, where as she did guide
With enemies, brought to destruction
A remedy, she can so well provide
To her high work, is no comparison
It has so strong, and sure foundation
Nothing there is that can it molifye
So sure it is, against a contrary
Of her always, it is the perfect guise
To begin nothing, of mutabilitie
As is the war, which may sone arise
And will not down, it may so sturdy be
The beginner often, has the iniquity
When he began, wisdom did reply
In his great need, to resist the contrary
The mighty Pryant, sometime king of Troy
With all his city, so well fortified
Little regarded, all his wealth and joy
Without wisdom, truly exemplified
His proper death, him self he nutrified
Against his war, wisdom did replye
At his great need, to resist the contrary
And where that wisdom, rules hardines
Hardines then is, ever invincible
There may nothing, it vainquishe or oppress
For prudence is, so well intelligible
To her there is, nothing impossible
Her grounded work, is made so perfitely
That it must needs, resist the contrary
To woeful creatures, she is goodly leche
With her good sister, called patience
To the tower of joy, she does them tell weche
In the way of hope, without resistance
Who to her l^st, to apply his diligence
She will him bring, to worship shortelye
That he shall well, resist the contrary.
Right so let wisdom, your sorrow surrende
And hye you fast, unto dame Geometry
And let no thought, in your heart engender
Eur after this, speak to astronomy
And so from thence, to the tower of chiualry
Where of the worthy king Melyzyus
You shall be made, sone knight aduenturous
And fare you well, for I must from you go
To other lovers, which are in despair
As I did you, to comfort them also
It is great need, that I to them repair
Haboundaunt tears, their hearts do refleire
Fare well quod I, my good friend so true
I would with me, ye might always ensue
Then again I went, to the tower melodious
Of good dame music, my leave for to take
And privily, with these words dolorous
I said O tower, thou may well aslake
Such melody now, in the more to make
The gemme is gone, of all famous port
That was chief cause, of the great comfort
Whilome thou was, the fair tower of light
But now thou art, replete with darkness
She is now gone, that shone in the so bright
Thou wast sometime, the tower of gladness
Now may thou be, the tower of heaviness
For the chief is gone, of all thy melody
Whose beauty clear, made most sweet armony
The fair carbuncle, so full of clearenes
That in the truly, did most purely shine
The pearl of pity, replete with swetenes
The gentle gillofloure, the goodly columbine
The redolent plant, of the dulcet vine
The deed aromatike, may no more encense
For she is so far, out of thy presence
A a truly, in the time so past
Mine errande was, the often for to se
Now for to enter, I may be aghast
When thou art hence, the star of beauty
For all my delight, was to behold the
A tower tower, all my joy is gone
In the to enter, comfort is there none
So then inwardly, my self bewaylyng
In the tower I went, into the habitacle
Of dame music, where she was singyng
The ballades sweet, in her fair tabernacle
Alas thought I, this is no spectacle
To feed mine eyes, which are now all blind
She is not here that I was wont to find.
Then of dame music, with all lowlines
I did take my leave, withouten tariyng
She thanked me, with all her mekenes
And all alone, forth I went musyng
A a quod I, my love and likyng
Is now far hence, on whom my whole delight
Daiely was set, upon her to have sight
Farewell sweet heart, farewell, farewell, farewell
Adieu, adieu, I would I were you by
God give me grace, with you sone to dwell
Like as I did, for to se you daily
Your lowly cheer, and gentle company
Reioysed my heart, with fode most delicate
Mine eyes to se you, were insaciate
Now good sweet heart, my lady and mistrys
I recommende me, unto your pity
Besechyng you, with all my gentilnes
Yet other while, to think upon me
What pain I suffer, by great extremity
And to pardon me, of my tude writing
For with woeful heart, was mine endityng
Capitu. xxi.
SO forth I went, upon a craggy roche
Unto the tower, most wonderfully wrought
Of Geometrye, and as I did approach
The altitude, all in my mind I sought
Six hundred fore, as I by number thought
Quadrant it was, and did heue and set
At every storm, when the wind was great
Thus at the last, I came into an hall
Hanged with arras, rich and precious
And every window, glased with Cristall
Like a place of pleasure, much solacious
With knottes sexangled, gaye and glorious
The^^^^^ did hang, right high and pleasantly
By geometry made, right well and craftily
In this marvelous hall, replete with riches
At the hye end, she sat full worthily
I came anon, unto her great nobles
And kneled adowne, before her mekely
Madame I said, ye work full royally
I beseech you, with all my diligence
To instruct me, in your wonderful science.
My science said she, it is most profitable
Unto astronomy, for I do it measure
In every thing, as it is probable
For I my self, can right well discure
Of every star, which is seen in ure
The marvelous greatness, by me measuryng
For god made all, at the beginning.
By good measuryng, both the height and depenes
Of every thing, as I understand
The length and breadth, with all the greatness
Of the firmament, so passing the land
And who my cunnyng, list to take in hand
In his emispery, of hye or low degree
Nothing there is, but it may measure be.
Though that it be, from us hye, and far
If any thing fall, we may it truly se
As the sun or moan, or anyother star
We may thereof, know well the quantity
Who of this science, does know the certentie
All maistries might, measure perfitely
For geometrye, does show it openly
Where that is measure, there is no lackyng
Where that is measure, whole is the body
where that is measure, good is the living
Where that is measure, wisdom is truly
where that is measure, work is dyrectly
Where that is measure, natures workynge
Nature increases, by right good knowledgynge.
Where lacks measure, there is no plenty
Where lacks measure, sick is the courage
where lacks measure, there is iniquity
where lacks measure, there is great outrage
where lacks measure, is none advantage
where lacks measure, there is great glottony
Where lacks measure, is most unhappy
For there is no hye, nor great estate
Withouten measure, can keep his dignity
It does preserve him, both early and late
Keeping him from, the pit of poverty
Measure is moderate, to all bounty
Greatly needful, for to take the charge
Man for to rule, that he go not at large
Who loves measure, can not do amiss
So perfitely is, the high operation
Among all things, so wonderful it is
That it is full, of all delectation
And to virtue, has inclination
Measure also, does well exemplify
The hasty dome, to swage and modefye.
Without measure, woe worth the judgment
Without measure, woe worth the temperaunce
without measure, woe worth the punishment
without measure, woe worth purueyaunce
Without measure, woe worth the sustenaunce
Without measure, woe worth the sadness
And without measure, woe worth the gladness
Measure measuryng, measuratly takes
Measure measuryng, measuratly does all
Measure measuryng, measuratly makes
Measure measuryng, measuratlye guide shall
Measure measuryng, measuratly does call
Measure measuryng, to right hye preeminence
For always measure, is ground of excellence
Measure measures, measure in effect
Measure measures, every quantity
Measure measures, always the aspecte
Measure measures, in certainty
Measure measures, in the stabilitie
Measure measures, in every doubtful case
And measure is the lodestarre of all grace.
Affect of measure, is long continuance
Quantity without measure is naught
Aspect of measure, deuoydeth repentance
Certain would weye, all things thought
Stabilitie, upon a perfect ground is wrought
Case doubtful may, yet a while abide
Grace may in space, a remedy provide
Countenance causes, the promocion
Naught avails (...), without attendaunce
Repenaunce is after all abusion
Thought before, would have had perceueraunce
Wrought how should be, by deed the mischaunce
Abide nothing, till thou do the deed
Provide in mind, how thou may have mede.
Promocion grows, after good governance
Attendaunce does, attain good favor
Abusion is causer, of all variaunce
Perceueraunce causes the great honor
Mischaunce always, is rote of doloure
Deed done, can not be called again
Mede well rewarded, both with joy and pain.
Then I took my leave, and went from Geometry
Toward astronomy as fast as I might
For all my mind, was set right inwardly
Upon my lady, that was fair and bright
My heart with her, was both day and night
She had it locked, with a lock so sure
It was her own, she had thereof toe cure
Capitu. xxii.
THen forth I went, into a medowe grene
With flora painted, in many a sundry color
Like a gay goddess, of all flours the queen
She encensed out, her aromatike odoure
The brethe of zepherus, increased the flower
Amyddes the medowe fair, resplendishant
Was a pauilion, right hye and quadrant.
Of grene sarcenet, bordred with gold
Wherein did hang, a fair astrology
Which often astronomy, did full well behold
Unto whom then, I came full shortly
And kneled adowne, before her mekely
Besechyng her, of her great gentleness
Of her science, to show the perfectnes.
My science said she, it is right reasonable
And is the last, of the sciences seven
Unto man, it is also right profitable
Showing the course, above of the heaven
Right marvelous, for any man to neuen
Who knew astronomy, at every manner season
Might set in order, every thing by reason.
Also the other. vi. sciences liberal
By astronomy, principally were found
And one were lost, they were vanished all
Each upon other, has so sure a ground
In all the world, that is so wide and round
Is none so wise, that can them multiply
Nor know them all, right well and surely.
The high astronomer, that is God omnipotent
That the first day, divided all the light
From the darkness, with his will prepotent
And the second day, with his excellent might
The waters above, he did divide a right
From the earthly waters, which are inferial
The third day, herbs and fruits in special
In earth he planted, for to have their life
By diverse virtues, and sundry growyng
So to continue, and be vegitatife
And the fourth day, he set in workyng
The bodies above, to have their mouyng
In the. xii. signs, them selves to domifye
Some rethrogarde, and some directly
The fifth day, he did fishes make
In the sea, the great stormy flowde
To and fro, their courses for to take
And in the water, for to have their fode
Like to the same, cold always their blood
The sirt day, beasts with fowls sensatiue
And man also, with soul intellectyue.
The seventh day, he rested of his work
Nothing constrained, as of werines
As writes many a right famous clarke
But that he had, accomplished doubtless
His purposed purpose, by infinite prowes
As to us does most plainly discure
The perfect ground, of holy scripture
Thus God him self, is chief astronomer
That made all thing, according to his will
The sun, the moon, and every little star
To a good intent, and for no manner of ill
Withouten vain, he did all thing fulfill
As astronomy, does make apparaunce
By reason he weyed, all things in balaunce
Capitulo. xxiii.
ANd for as much, that he made nature
First of all, to have domination
The power of her, I shall anon discure
How that she takes, her operation
And where upon, is her foundation
I simple and rude, oppressed with negligence
Shall discriue the might, of her preeminence
For though that angel be invincible
In palpable, and also celestial
Without substance, as incencible
Yet have they nature, which is angelical
For nature, naturyng, naturate made all
Heaven and earth, and the bodies above
By course of nature, for to work and move.
On man or beast, without any miss
She works directly, after the aspect
Of the matter, be it more or less I wisse
And does thereof, the whole form direct
After the quality, it does take effect
If there be more, then may one suffice
A by member, she will then more devise.
As that in ure, ye may it daily se
Upon one hand, some has thombes twain
And other also, sometime arms three
The superstuitie, is cause thereof certain
Which that dame nature, does constrayne
So for to do, for she leseth naught
Of the matter, but has it wholly wrought.
And in likewise, where is not sufficient
Of the matter, for the whole formation
There lacks a member, by great impediment
So that there can be, no perfect fashion
As may be judged, by perfect reason.
After the quality, of the matter lackyng
So lacks they, of natures formyng.
Some lacks a leg, some an arm also
Some a finger, and some more or less
All these causes, with many other mo
Nature works, so directly doubtless
Upon the matter, as I do express
After the quality, in many a sundry wise
The kind of her, we ought nothing despise.
Some be fair, and replete with grace
Some be fair, and yet right unhappy
Some be foul, and can sone purchase
Lands and possessions, to them shortly
Some be fools, and some be right wittye
Whereupon I shall show a difference,
Of the. v. wits, by good experience.
Capit. xxiiii.
THe eyes, the ears, and also the nose
The mouth and hands, inward wits are none
But outward offices, as ye may suppose
To the inward wits, which do judge alone
For unto them, all things have gone
By these outward gates, to have the knowleging
By the inward wits, to have decernyng
These are the five wits, remouyng inwardly
First commen wit, and then ymagination
Fantasy, and estimation truly
And memory, as I make narration
Each upon other, has occupation
First the commen wit, unto the front applied
Does think, decerne, it may not be denied
Of the eyes, the office only is the sight
To se the fair, the low, or altitude
The white or black, the heavy, or the light
The little or great, the weak or fortitude
The ugly favor, or yet the pulcritude
This is the use, of the eyes enteare
To se all things, which may well appear.
But of them selves, they can decerne nothing
One from an other, but the commen wit
Decerneth colors, by spiritual cunning
To the five inward wits, it is so well knitte
Nothing is seen, but it does judge it
It does decerne, the good from badnes
The hye, the low, the foul, the fairenes
The nose also, every air does smell
But yet it has, nothing authority
If it be sweet, for to judge and tell
But the commen wit, does it in certainetie
Decernyng savors, in every degree
Knowing the sweet air, from the stinkyng
When that the nose, thereof has smellyng
The ears also, right well give audience
Unto a tale; hearing it right perfectly
But they can not, discern the sentence
To know whereupon, it does so ratify
Upon great wisdom, or else upon folly
Thus whether the tale, be right good or badde
By the commen wit, the knowledge is had
Folly has ears, as well as Sapience
But he can not determine, by his hearing
What tale it is, for lack of intelligence
For the commen wit, is all understanding
And that he lacks, to give him knowing
Wherefore the ears, are but an intresse
To the common wit, that shows the perfectnes
The mouth tastes, both sweet and bitterness
But the commen wit, decerneth properly
If it be sour, or replete with swetenes
Nor yet the hands, feel nothing certainly
But the commen wit, decerneth subtly
Whether it be hard, moist, or of drynes
Hot, heavy, soft, or yet cold doubtless
Thus commen wit, works wondersly
Wpon the. v. gates, which are receptatyue
Of every thing, for to take inwardely
By the commen wit, to be affirmatyue
Or by decernyng, to be negative
The commen wit, the first of wits all
Is to decerne, all things in general
And then secondly, ymagination
When the commen wit, has the thing elect
It works by all, due inclinacion
For to bring the matter, to the whole affect
And fantasy, then has the whole aspect
The ymagined matter, to bring to finishment
With good desire, and inward judgment
And estimacion, does well comprehend
The space, the place, and all the purueyaunce
At what time the power, might entende
To bring the cause, unto perfect vtteraunce
Often it weygheth, the cause in balaunce
By estimation, any thing is numbered
By length or shortness, how it is accombred
Fiftely the mind, when the fourth have wrought
Retained all, till the mind have made
An outward knowledge, to the matter thought
Because nothing, shall decline and fade
It keeps the matter, nothing rethrogarde
But dyrectly, till the mind have proved
All such matters, which the. iiii. have moved
Plato the cunnyng, and famous clarke
That well expert, was in Philosophy
Does right rehearse, upon natures warke
How that she works, upon al wondersly
Both for to minishe, and to multiplye
In sundry wise, by great direction
After the matter, with all the whole affection
In my native language, I will not express
More of her work, for it is obscure
Who will thereof, know all the perfectnes
In philosophy, he shall find it right sure
Which all the troth, can to him discure
No man can attain, perfect runnyng
But by long study, and diligent learning
Capit. xxv.
THe right hye power, nature naturyng
Naturate made, the bodies above
In sundry wise, to take their workyng
That about the world, naturallye do move
As by good reason, the philosophers prove
That the planets and stars, instruments be
To natures workyng, in every degree.
God gave great virtue, to the planets all
And specially, unto depured Phoebus
To enlumine the world, ever in special
And then the moon, of her self tenebrous
Made light with the beams, gay and glorious
Of the sun, is fair resplendishaunt
In the long night, with rays radiaunt
By these twain, every thing has growing
Both vegitatiue, and censatyue also
And also intellectiue, without leasyng
No earthly thing, may have life and go
But by the planets, that move to and fro
When that God set them, in operation
He gave them virtue, in diverse fashion
Some hot and moist, and some cold and dry
Some hot and dry, moist and cold
Thus every one, has virtues sundry
As is made mention, in the books old
They show their power and work, many a fold
Man upon them, has his disposion
By the naturate power, of constellation
What should I write more, in this matter hye
In my maternall tongue, oppressed with ignorance
For who that list, to learn astronemye
He shall find, all fruitful pleasaunce
In the latin tongue, by goodly ordinance
Wherefore of it, I will no longer tarry
For fear from troth, that I happen to vary
Of dame astronomy, I did take my license
For to travel, to the tower of chiualry
For all my mind, with percyng influence
Was set upon, the most fair lady
La bell Pucell, so much ententiflye
That every day, I did think fiftene
Till I again, had her sweet person seen.
TO you expert, in the seven science
Now all my masters, I do me excuse
If I offended, by my great necligence
This little work, yet do ye not refuse
I am but young, it is to me obtuse
Of these matters, to presume to endite
But for my learning, that I list to write
Under obedience, and the correction
Of you my masters, expert in cunnyng
I me submit, now with whole affection
Unto your perfect understanding,
As evermore mekely, to you enclinynge
With diligent labor, now wout doubtaunce
To detray, or add, all at your pleasaunce.
How graunde Amoure came to the tower of chiualrye. Capi. xxvi.
WHen clean Aurora, with her golden beams
Began to enlumine, the dark clowdy air
And co^bust Dyane, her great fiery lemes
Amiddes of the bull, began to reflayre
Then on my journey, my self to repair
With my verlet, called attendaunce
Forth on I rode, by long continuance
With my greyhounds, both grace and governance
Over an hill, and so down in a valey
Among the thorns, of great encombraunce
The goodly greyhoundes, taught me on my way
So forth I passed, my troublous journey
Till that I came, into a royal plain
With flora painted, in many a sundry vain
With purple color, the flower enhewed
In diverse knottes, with many one full blewe
The gentle gillofloure, his odoure renewed
With sundry herbs, replete with virtue
Among these flowers, as I did ensue
Castyng my sight, sodaynely so far
Over a tower, I saw a flambynge star
Toward this tower, as I rode nere and nere
I beheld the rock, of marvelous altitude
On which it stood, that quadrant did appear
Made all of stele, of wondrous fortitude
Gargeylde with beasts, in sundry sunilitude
And many turrettes, above the towers hye
With images was set, full marvelously
Toward this tower, forth on my way I went
Till that I came, to a mighty fortress
Where I saw hang, a marvelous instrument
With a shield and helmet, before the entres
I knew nothing, thereof the perfectnes
But at aucuture, the instrument I took
And blewe so loud, that all the tower I shoke
When the porter, heard the hydeous sound
Of my right lusty, and stormy blast
That made the walls, thereof to redounde
Full like a knight, that was nothing aghast
Toward the gate, he gave him self to haste
And opened it, and asked my name
And fro whence I came, to certify the same.
My name quod I, is graunde Amoure
Of late I came, from the tower of doctrine
Where I attained, all the high honor
Of the seven sciences, me to enlumyne
And from thence, I did determine
Forth to travail, to this tower of chiualry
Where I have blown, this blast so suddenly
When he heard this, right gentilly he said
Unto this tower, ye must resort by right
For to renew, that has been long decayed
The flower of chiualry, with your whole delight
Come on your way, it draws toward night
And therwithall, he led me to his ward
Me to repose, in pleasant due safeguarde
After the travel, my self for to ease
I did there rest, then in all goodly wise
And slept right well, without any disease
Till on the morrow, the sun did arise
Then up I rose, as was my perfect guise
And made me ready, into the court to go
With my verlet, and my greyhoundes also
The gentle porter, named stedfastues
Into the base court, on my way me brought
Where stood a tower, of marvelous highness
That all of Jasper, full wondersly was wrought
As any man, can printe in his thought
And four images, above the tower there were
On horse back armed, and every one a spear.
These images were made, full curiouslye
With their horses, of the stele so fine
And each of them, in their places sundry
About were set, that clearly did shine
Like Dyane clear, in her celestyne
And under each horse, there was full priuelye
A great whele made, by crafty Geometry.
With many cogges, unto which were tied
Diverse cords, that in the horses hollow
To every ioynte, full wonderslye applied
When the wheles went, the horses did follow
To trotte and galop, both even and morrow
Breakyng their spears, and could them discharge
Partyng a sunder, for to turney at large
Capi. xxvii.
BEside this tower, of old foundation
There was a temple, strongly edified
To the high honor, and reputation
Of the mighty Mars, it was so fortified
And for to know, what it signified
I entered in, and saw of gold so pure
Of worthy Mars, the marvelous picture.
There was depaynted, all about the wall
The great destruction, of the city of Troy
And the noble acts, to raygne memorial
Of the worthy Hector, that was all their joy
His dolorous death, was hard to occoye
And so when Hector, was cast all down
The hardy Troylus, was most high of renown.
And as I cast my sight so aside
Beholding Mars, how wonderfully he stood
On a whele top, with a lady of pride
Haunced about, I thought nothing but good
But that she had, two faces in one hode
Yet I kneled adowne, and made mine orison
To doubty Mars, with great devotion
Saying, O Mars, O god of the war
The gentle lodestarre, of an hardy heart
Distyll adowne, thy grace from so far
To cause all fear, from me to astarte
That in the field, I may right well subvert
The hydeous monsters, and win the victory
Of the sturdy gyauntes, with famous chyualry
O prince of honor, and of worthy fame
O noble knights, of old antiquity
O redoubted courage, the causer of their name
Whose worthy acts, Fame caused to be
In books written, as ye may well se
So give me grace, right well to recure
The power of Fame, that shall long endure.
I thought me past, all childely ygnoraunce
The. xxi. year, of my young flouryng age
I thought that Uenus, might nothing auaunce
Her strength against me, with her lusty courage
My wit I thought, had such advantage
That it should rule, both Uenus and Cupide
But alas for woe, for all my sudden pride.
WHen that Phoebus entered was, in Geminye
Toward the crabbe, taking ascension
At the time, of the great solemnity
From heaven above, of Gods descention
In a great temple, with whole entencion
As I went walkyng, my self to and fro
Full sodaynely, Uenus wrought me such woe
For as I cast then, my sight all aloft
I saw Uenus, in beauty so clear
Which caused Cupide, with his dart so soft
To wound my heart, with fervent love so dear
Her loving countenance, so high did appear
That it me ravished, with a sudden thought
Alas for woe, it auayled me right naught
To give audience, unto the melody
Of waytes and organs, that were at the feast
Love had me wounded, so sore in wardly
What was to do, I knew not the best
Replete with sorrow, and deuoyde of rest
Sithen the time, that she my heart so wounded
My joy and pride, she has full low confounded.
And so now, for to attain her grace
As thou do know, become aduenturous
Besechyng the, in this perilous case
O Mars me succoure, in time tempestious
That I may pass, the passage dangerous
And to thy laud, honor, and glory
I shall a temple, right strongly edifye
Well then said Mars, I shall the fortify
In all thy war, as fast as I can
But for thy pain, I know no remedy
For Uenus raygned, when that thou began
First for to love, making the pale and wanne.
And of the truth, to make relation
Thou was borne under, her constellation
Wherefore thou must, of very perfect right
Unto her sue, by the disposicion
Which the constrayneth, with whole delight
For to love ladies, by true affection
Such is her course, and operation
Wherefore when thou have learned perfitely
The for to govern, by prudent chiualrye.
Then to fulfill, thy right hye enterprise
Forth on thy way, thou shall thy journey take
Unto a temple, in all humble wise
Before dame Uenus, thine oblation to make
Which all thy pain, may sone redress and slake
For at that time, she holds a parliment
To redress lovers, of their impediment
Aha quod fortune, with the faces twain
Behind sir Mars, I have a great maruayle
That thou do promise him, that he shall attain
Unto his purpose, with all diligent travail
Through thine aid, eke strength and counsel
Sythence depends, in mine ordinance
Him to promote, or bring to mischaunce
My power, estate, and royal dignity
Does turn the whele, of worthily glory
Often up so down, by mutabilitie
Have not I promoted, full noblye
Many a low degree, to raygne full royallye
And often have made, a transmutation
Of worldely wealth, into tribulation
Thus can I make, an alterasion
Of worthily honor, which does depend
All only in my dominacion
Through the world, my whele does extend
As reason does, right well comprehend
Of my great chances, which are unsure
As daily does appear well in ure.
If I should work, with perfect stedfastnes
As to exalt some, to be honorable
And that they knew, by perfect sykernes
That it should dure, and not be variable
It were a thing, unto me culpable
For great orguel pride, should them so blind
To know them selves, they should lose their mind
Thus when that they, should them selves forget
And in no wise, their own person know
Full little then, they would by me set
That them exalted, to hye degree from low
And by my chance, could naught the^ overthrow
Thus should they do, and dread me nothing
Wherefore my whele, is evermore turnyng
And where that I, should turn my face
Castyng some, in pytte of pouertye
They were condemned, without any grace
As for to attain, any prosperity
Which were a cause, of great iniquity
For rich men's goods, I must often translate
Unto the pore, them for to eleuate
And thirdely, I should lose my name
For this word fortune, is well derified
Of an accident chance, both good or shame
When that the deed, is so exemplified
Wherefore by reason, I must be duplified
And nothing stable in my hye warke
As writes many, a right noble clarke
Therefore by reason, I must be mutable
And turn my whele, right often up so down
Labouryng in works, which are unstable
On some to laughe, and on some I must frown
Thus all about, in every realm and town
I show my power, in every sundry wise
Some to descend, and on some to arise
Wherefore my power, does right well excel
Above the Mars, in thine house enclosed
For to rule man, thou have power never adell
Save after the, somewhat he is disposed
Thy constelation, has him so apposed
Who under the, takes his nativity
Yet God has given him, power to rule the
Wherefore I am, of a far higher power
Then thou art, for there is no defense
Against my will, at any time or hour
And in my name, there is a difference
For in these words, in my magnificence
Predestinate, and also desteny
As I shall show, anon more formably
Predestinate, does right well signify
A thing to come, which is prepared
None but God does know it openly
Till that the deed, cause it to be declared
For many a one, when they well fared
Full little thought, that tribulation
To them was ordained, by predestination
The desteny, is a thing accident
And by the work, does take the effect
Till it be done, it is ay precedent
No man from it, can him self abject
Thus every chance, does fortune direct
Wherefore by reason, la graunde Amoure
Must sue unto me, to do him socoure
A ha quod Mars, such a one as thou
I never knew, before this season
For thou thy self, do so much enproue
Above the heavens, by exaltation
But what for all, thy commendation
Art thou now any thing substanciall
Spiritual, or else yet terrestrial
How can a work, p^^fitely be grounded
But in these two, and thou art of those
Wherefore for naught, thou may be confounded
For naught in substance, can nothing transpose
Of none effect, thou can thy self disclose
How have thou power, in any manner of case
In heaven or earth, without a dwelling place
But that Poets, has made a figure
Of thee, for thy great signification
The chance of man, so for to discure
According to a moralization,
And of the truth, to make relation
The man is fortune, in his proper deed
And not thou, that causes him to speed
What neadeth him, unto him self to sue
Since thou art, the deeds of his chance
Thou to rule man, it is a thing not true
Now whereupon, does hang this ordinance
But accedent, upon the governance
Of the hye bodies, which does man dispose
The deed to do, as him list purpose.
Capi. xxviii
TO hear of Mars, the marvelous argument
And of Fortune, I was sore amassed
Till that I saw, a lady excellent
Clearly armed, upon whom I gased
And her arms, full privily I blased
The shield of gold, as I well understand
With a lion of asure, through passande.
To me she came, with lowely countenance
And bade me welcome, unto that mancion
Leadyng me forth, with joy and pleasaunce
Into an hall, of marvelous fashion
Right strongly fortified, of old foundation
The pillars of yuory, garnished with gold
With pearls set, and brodred many a fold
The flore was paued, with stones precious
And the roufe, was braunched curiously
Of the beaten gold, both gaye and glorious
Knotted with pommaunders right swetely
Encencyng out, the ill odours misty
And on the walls, right well did appear
The siege of Thebes, depaynted fair and clear
There were knights, pla^yng at the chestes
Which saw Minerue, lead me in the hall
They left their play, and all their business
And welcomed me, right gently withal
With sir Nurture, then most in special
Accompanied of his brother Curtesy
They made me chere then, full effectuallye.
And after that, they brought me up a stayre
Into a chamber, gayly glorified
And at the door, there stood a knight right fair
Y clipped truth, right clearly purified
His countenance was, right well modified
To me he said, that before mine entresse
Him for to love, I should him promise
Of right he said, I have in custodye
This chamber door, of king Melizyus
That no man enter, into it wrongfully
Without me truth, for to be chiualrous
Here knights be made, to be victorious
I shall you promise, quod I fayethfully
You for to love, and serve perdurably
Abide quod he, I will speak with the king
Tell me your name, and habitation
And the chief cause, now of your coming
That I to him, may make relation
To know his mind, without variation
La graunde Amoure, my name is said I
The cause of my coming, intentifly
Is forbicause that I have enterprised
Now for the sake, of fair la bell pucell
To pass the passage, which I her promised
That is so dangerous, with serpents cruel
And for as much, as I know never a deal
The feats of arms, to attain honor
I am come to learn, with diligent labor
Then forth he went, unto the majesty
Of king Melizyus, the mighty conqueroure
Saying O power, so hye in dignity
O prince victorious, and famous Emperor
Of iustyng truly, the original flower
One graunde Amoure, would be acceptable
In your hye court, for to be tendable
With all my heart, I will quod he accept
Him to my service, for he is right worthy
For unto doctrine, the hye way he kept
And so from thence, to the tower of chiualry
He shall attain, great acts wondersly
Go on your way, and bring him fast to me
For I think long, him to behold and se
And then the good knight truth, incontinent
Into the chamber so pure, sone me led
Where sat the king, so much beniuolent
In purple clothed, set full of rubyes read
And all the floor, on which we did tread
Was cristall clear, and the roufe at night
With carbuncles, did give a marvelous light
The walls were hanged, with clothe of tissue
Brodred with pearls, and rubies rubiconde
Mixte with emeraudes, so full of virtue
And bordred about, with many a dyamonde
An heavy heart, it will make ioconde
For to behold, the marvelous riches
The lordship, wealth, and the great worthiness
There sat Melizyus, in his hye estate
And over his head, was a pair of balaunce
With his crown, and scepter, after the true rate
Of another worldly king, for to have governance
In his hand a ball, of right great circumstaunce
Before whom then, I did knele adowne
Saying O Emperor, most hye of renown
I the beseech, of thine haboundaunt grace
Me to accept in this court, the for to serve
So to continue, by long time and space
Of chiualry, that I may now deserve
The order right, and well it to observe
For to attain, the hye advantage
Of the enterprise, of my doubty vyage
Welcome he said, to this court ryall
Mynerue shall arm you, with great diligence
And teach you the scates, of arms all
For she them knows, by good experience
In the old time, it was her science
And I my self, shall give you a worthy stead
Called galantyse, to help you in your need.
I humbly thanked, his great highness
And so to Mynerue, I did then apply
Which did me teach, with siker perfitnes
For to haunt arms, right well and nobly
Sapience me ruled, well and prudently
Thus among knights, for to just and tourney
Mynerue me taught, in sundry wise all day
It was a joyful, and a knightly sight
For to behold so fair, and goodly a sort
Of good knights, armed clear and bright
That I saw there, which did me well exhort
Arms to haunt, with courageous comfort
Mynerue me taught, my strokes and defense
That in short space, was no resistance
Against my power, and mighty puissaunce
To my wilful heart, was naught impossible
I bare my self, so without doubtaunce
My heart made, my courage invincible
Of which the trou the, was sone intelligible
With my behauyng, before the preeminence
Of king Milizyus, famous excellence
Which right anon, for dame Mynerue sent
And me also, with sir truth to obey
We thought full little, what the matter meant
But unto him, we took anon the way
Entryng the chamber, so fair, clear, and gay
The king us called, unto his person
Saying, I will graunde amoure anon
Truly make knight, for the time approaches
That he must haunte, and seek adventure
For la bell Pucell, as true love requires
And first of all, began to me discure
The high order, how I should take in cure
And then anon, he began to express
What knighthode was, to perfect sykernes.
Knighthode he said, was first established
The commen wealth, in right to defend
That by the wrong, it be not minished
So every knight, must truly condescende
For the commen wealth, his power to entende
Against all such rebels contrarious
Them to subdue, with power victorious
For knyghthode is not, in the feats of war
As for to fight, in quarrel right or wrong
But in a cause, which truth can not defarre
He ought him self, for to make sure and strong
Justice to keep, myxt with mercy among
And no quarrel, a knight ought to take
But for a truth, or for the commens sake
For first good hope, his leg harneyes should be
His habergion, of perfect ryghteousnes
Gyrde fast, with the girdle of chastity
His rich placarde, should be good business
Brodered with alms, so full of larges
The helmet mekenes, and the shield good fayeth
His sword Gods word, as. S. Paul says
Also true wydowes, he ought to restore
Unto their right, for to attain their dower
And to uphold, and maintain evermore
The wealth of maidens, with his mighty power
And to his sovereign, at every manner hour
To be ready, true, and eke obeysaunt
In stable love fyxte, and not variaunt
Thus after this noble, and solemn doctrine
He made me knight, and gave me in charge
Unto these points, right low to incline
And to stere well, the frail tumblyng barge
Over vain glory, when I sail at large
When the wind is right, the barge can not fail
Unto his purpose, so with hardines to sail
I did well regester, in my remembrance
Every thing, which he has to me told
And right anon, in good resemblaunce
The king I thanked, with courage right bold
Of his great gifts, and grace many a fold
Which unto me, right openly he showed
With golden drops, so liberally endued
I took my leave, of his right hye estate
And then Mynerue, into the hall me brought
Accompanied of troth, my faithful mate
Us for to solace, there lacked right naught
That any man, can prynte in his thought
The knights all, unto their arms went
To bring me forward, with a true intent
And Mynerue armed me, as she could devise
And brought unto me, my fair barbed stead
On whom I mounted, in all goodly guise
With shield and spear, as nothing to dread
In right to fight, for to attain my mede
So with me went, both my greyhounds twain
And good attendaunce, my verlet certain.
The good knight troth, brought me on my way
Accompanied then, with sir Fidelity
With haute courage, betrapped fair and gay
With shinyng trappers, of curiosity
And then also, there rode forth with me
The sturdy knight, well named Fortitude
With the noble veterane, sir Consuetude.
And eke sir Justice, and sir Misericorde
Sir Sapience, with good sir Curtesye
With famous nurture, and then sir Concord
Accompanied me, full right gently
Out of the castle, ridyng royally
And dame Mynerue, the chiualreous Goddess
Did me endue then, with hearty hardines
And when we came, into a goodly plain
Right of them all, I took my license
Me thought it time, that they turn again
Unto the king, with all their diligence
I made mine oath, with percyng influence
Unto them all, for to remain full true
In steadfast love, all treason to eschew
Full loathe they were, fro me to depart
Every one of them, as ye may understand
With salt tears, full woeful was my heart
When all on row, they took me by the hand
Adue they said, and grace with you stand
You for to aid, when that you do fight
And so they turned, unto the castle right.
And good dame Mynerue, unto me then said
Be not adredde, of your hye enterprise
Be bold, and hardy, and nothing afraid
And rather dye, in any manner of wise
To attain honor, and the life despise
Then for to live, and to remain in shame
For to dye with honor, it is a good name
Farewell she said, and be of good cheer
I must depart, I may no longer tarry
Ride on your way, the wether is full clear
Seek your adventure, and look ye not vary
From your hye order, by any contrary
And therwithall, forth on her way she rode
Right so did I, which no longer abode
With both my greyhoundes, and my verlet
Through the plain, and into wilderness
And so aloft, among the hills great
Till it was night, so thick of darkness
That of constraint, of very werines
We lighted adowne, under an hill side
Unto the day, to rest us there that tide.
And when my page, my helmet unlaced
He laid it down, underneath my head
And to his leg, he my stead enbraced
To grase about, while on the grass he fed
And then also, his horse in like stead
With both our greyhoundes, liyng us nere by
And sloth our heads, had caught so sodaynely
That all the night, we slept in good rest
Till against day, began to neye and cry
My stead galantise, with a roaryng breast
And eke began, to stamp full marueylouslye
Whose hye courage, awaked us wondersly
And right anon, we cast up our eyes
Beholding above, the fair crystal skies
Seeing the clouds, rayed fair and read
Of Phoebus, risyng in the orient
And aurora, her golden bemes spredde
About the air, clearly refulgent
Withouten mistye black, encombrement
Up I arose, and also my page
Making us ready, for to take our voage
Capit. xxix.
ANd so forth we rode, till we saw afar
To us came ridyng, on a little nagge
A folyshe dwarf, nothing for the war
With a hode, a bell, a foxtayle, and a bag
In a pyed coat, he rode brygge a brag
And when that he, unto us drew nigh
I beheld his body, and his visenamye.
His head was great, betled was his brows
His eyes holowe, and his nose crooked
His bryes brystled, truly like a sowes
His chekes heerie, and God wotte he looked
Full like an ape, here and there he toted
With a pyed bearde, and hangyng lyppes great
And every tothe, as black as any get
His neck short, his shoulders stood awry
His breast fat, and bolne in the waste
His arms great, with fingers crokedly
His legs kewed, he rode to me fast
Full like a patron, to be shaped in haste
Good even he said, and have good day
If that it like you, for to ride merely away.
Welcome I said, I pray the now tell
Me what thou art, and where thou do dwell
Sotheych quod he, when I cham in kente
At home I cham, though I be hither sent
I tham a gentilman, of much noble kynne
Though Iche be cladde, in a knaves skin
For there was one, called Peter Pratefast
That in all his life, spoke no word in waste
He wedded a wife, that was called Maude
I trow quod I, she was a gorgious baude
Thou lie quod he, she was gentle and good
She gave her husband, many a furde hode
And at his meals, without any miss
She would him serve, in clenly wise iwys
God love her soul, as she loved clenlines
And keep her dishes, from all foulenes
When she lacked clowtes, without any fail
She wyped her dishes, with her dogs tail
And they had issue, Sym sadle gander
That for a wife, in all the world did wander
Till at the last, in the wynters night
By thamys he sailed, and arrived a right
Among the nuns, of the grene coat
He went to land, out of his pretty boat
And wedde there one, that was comen of new
He thought her stable, and faiethfull, and true
Her name was Betres, that so clenlye was
That no filthe by her, in any wise should pass
For in her lise, that any man could spy
She let no fart, nor yet fiste truly
And between them both, they did get a son
Which was my father, that in Kent did won
His name was Dauy dronken nole
He never drank, but in a fair black bole
He took a wife, that was very fair
And gate me on her, for to be his heir
Her name was Alyson, that loved naught else
But evermore, to ryng her black belles
Now are they dead all, so mote I well thryue
Except my self, Godfrey gobilyue
Which ride about, a wife me to seek
But I can find none, that is good and meke
For all are shrewes, in the world about
I could never mete, with none other route
For some devils will, their husbands beat
And those that can not, they will never let
Their tongues cease, but give three words for one
Fie on them all, I will of them have none
Who loves any, for to make him sad
I wene that he become, worse then mad
They are not steadfast, nothing in their mind
But always turnyng, like a blast of wind
For let a man love them, never so well
They will him love again, never a deal
For though a man, all his life certain
Unto her sue, to have release of pain
And at the last, she on him do rue
If by fortune, there come another new
The first shall be clean, out of her favor
Record of Creside, and of Troylus the doloure
They are so subtle, and so false of kind
There can no man wade, beyond their mind
Was not Aristotle, for all his clergy
For a woman wrapped, in love so marvelously
That all his cunnyng, he had sone forgotten
This unhappy love, had his mind so broken
That evermore, the salt tears down hayled
When the chance of love, he him self bewailed
Aferde he was, of the true love to break
For saying nay, when he thereof should speak
Till of constraint, of woeful heaviness
For to have remedy, of his sore sickness
When he her spied, right secret alone
Unto her he went, and made all his moan
Alas he said, the cause of my woe
Mine only lady, and mistress also
Whose goodly beauty, has my heart enrached
With fervent love, and fiery lemes entached
Wherefore take pitye, of the paynefull sorrow
Of me your servant, both even and morrow
She stood right still, and heard what he said
Alas quod she, be ye no more dismayed
For I am content, to fulfill your will
In every manner, be it good or ill
Of this condition, that ye shall release
Me first of woe, and great distress.
For I my self, have thought many a day
To you to speak, but for fear of a nay
I durst never, of the matter meue
Unto your person, lest it should you grieve
Nay nay quod he, with all my whole entente
I shall obey, to your commandment
Well then quod she, I shall you now tell
How the case stands, truly every dele
For you know well, that some women do long
After nyce things, be it right or wrong
Right so must I, upon your back now ride
In your mouth also, a bridle you to guide
And so a bridle, she put in his mouth
Upon his back she rode, both north and southe
About a chamber, as some clerks wene
Of many persons, it was openly seen
Lo what is love, that can so fore blind
A Philosopher, to bring him out of kind
For love does pass, any manner of thing
It is hard, and privy in workyng
So on the ground, Aristotle crept
And in hs teeth, she long the bridle kept
Till she thereof, had inoughe her fill
And yet for this, he never had his will
She did nothing, but for to mock and scorn
This true lover, which was for love forlorn
But when he knew, the point of the case
The fiery anger, did his heart enbrace
That he him self, did anon well know
His anger did, his love so overthrow
And right anon, as some Poets write
He that great mockage, did her well acquit.
Did not a woman, the famous Uirgyle
By her great fraud, full craftily begile
For on a day, for his own disport
To the court of Rome, he began to reforte
Among the ladies, the time for to pass
Till at the last, like Phoebus in the glass
So did a lady, with her beauty clear
Shine through his heart, with such love so dear
Then of great force, he must needs obey
She of his mind, bare both the lock and key
So was his heart, set upon a fire
With fervent love, to attain his desire
She had him caught, in such a wily snare
Great was his pain, and much more his care
To find a time, when it should be meued
To her of love, and he nothing repreued
Thus every day, by ymagination
In his mind, was such perturbation
And at the last, he had found a time
He thought to speak, and unto him no crime
Mercy lady, now in all humble wise
To her he said, for if ye me despise
So has your beauty, my true heart arrayed
It is no marvel, though I be afraid
To you to speak, if that you deny
My purpose, truly I am marde utterly
So do I love you, with all my heart entere
With in ward care, I bye your beauty dear
I must abide, with all my whole entente
Of life or death, your only judgment
With feigned ears, of perfect audience
She did him hear, geuyng this sentence
Uyrgyll she said, I would feign you ease
Of your trouble, and of your great disease
But I wotte not how, that it should be
Without turnyng us, to great dishonestie
If it be known, then both you and I
Shall Be reheyted at, full shamefully
But what for that, I have me bethought
A pretty craft, by me shall be wrought.
Ye know my chamber, joins to a wall
Being right hye, and a window withal
Sone at night, when all folk be at rest
I shall take a basket, as me thinks best
And thereto I shall, a long coarde well tie
And from the window, let it down privily
Right so when it is, adowne on the ground
Ye may well enter, in it both hole and sound
And my two maidens, the which secret be
Shall anon help, to hale you up with me
Lo in this wise, you may have right well
Your own desire, in short space every dell.
At a. xi. of the clock, in the night so dark
They did appoint, for to fulfill this warke
He often thanked, her great gentilnes
And so departed, with great gladness
And so he went, unto his study
Passing the time, him self full merely
Till that the clock, did strike aleuen
Then to the wall, he went full even
And found the basket, at the ground already
And entered into it, full sodaynlye
Waggyng the rope, which the lady espied
Which to the window, right anon her hied
With her two maidens, she did him up wind
Amiddes the wall, and left him there behind
That was five fadom, and more from the ground
When him self, in such a case he found.
Alas he said, mine own lady save
Mine honesty, and what ye list to have
Ye shall have it, at your own desire
Now wind me up, my heart is on fire
Thou shall quod she, in that place abide
That all the city, so right long and wide
May the behold, and the matter know
For mine honesty, and thy shame I trow
So there he hong, till noone of the day
That every person, which went by the way
Might him well se, and also behold
And unto them, the very cause she told
Lo how with shame, she her love rewarded
His pain and sorrow, she nothing regarded
Thus at the last, he adowne was brought
Replete with shame, it vayled him right naught
Thus with great anger, he his love confounded
Healyng the stroke, which that she had wounded
And by his craft, he in Rome did drenche
Every fire, for he left none to quench
And toward Rome, a great circuit about
There was no fire, that was un put out
He at her buttockes, set a brennyng cole
No fire there was, but at her ars hole
She turned her toute, that was crispe and fat
All about Rome, did fetch their fire thereat
One of an other, might no fire get
It would not kindle, without he it fet
From her ars, by the magykes art
She blewe the fire, when she let a fart
Thus every man, might behold and se
With the light of fire, her pretty priuitye.
Thus all the city, upon her did wonder
For perfect sorrow, her heart was nere a sunder
And thus Uyrgile, with crafty subtilnes
Rewarded her falshode, and doublenes
All this I tell, though that I be a fool
To the young knight, for thou may go to schole.
In time coming, of true love to learn
Beware of that, for thou can not decerne
Thy ladies mind, though that she speak the fair
Her heart is false, she will no troth repair
Nay quod I, they are not all disposed
So for to do, as ye have here disclosed
Aha quod he, I trow well yebe
A true lover, so mote I thrive and the
Let not thy lady, of thy heart be rother
When thou art gone, she will sone have an other
Thus forth we rode, till we saw a far
A royal tower, as bright as any star
To which we rode, as fast as we might
When we came there, adowne my stead I light
So did this Godfrey gobiliue also,
Into the temple, after me began go
There sat dame Uenus, and Cupide her son
Which had their parliament, right newly begone
To redress lovers, of their pain and woe
Which in the temple, did walk to and fro
And every one, his bill did present
Before Uenus, in her high parliament
The temple of her royal consistory,
Was walled all about, with yuorye
All of gold, like a place solacious
The roufe was made, of knottes curious
I can nothing, extend the goodlines
Of her temple, so much of riches
This Godfrey gobilyue, went lightly
Unto dame Sapience, the secretarye
That did him make, this supplication
To the goddess Uenus, with breuiation
O lady Uenus, of love the Goddess
Redress my pain, of mortal heaviness
I did once woe, an old maiden rich
A foul thief, an old wydred wiche
Fair mayed I said, will ye me have
Nay sir so God me keep and save
For you are evil favored, and also ugly
I am the worse, to se your visnamy
Yet was she fouler, many an hundred fold
Then I my self, as ye may well behold
And therwithall, he caused to depaynte
His face and hers, all under his complainte
And to Uenus, he made deliverance
Of his complaynt, by a short circumstaunce
Which right anon, when she had it seen
Began to laughe, with all the court I wene
Lo here the figures, of them both certain
Judge which is best favored of them twain.
THus godfrey gobilyue, did make sucha sport
That many lovers, to him did resort
When I saw time, I went to Sapience
Showing to her, with all my diligence
How that my heart, by Uenus was trapt
With a snare of love, so privily bewrapt
And in her tower, to have a dwelling place
I seek adventures, to attain her grace
Her name quod I, la bell Pucell is
Both east and west, she is well known ywys
And my name, la graunde Amoure is called
Whose heart with pain, she all about has walled
With her beauty, which dame nature create
Above all other, in most high estate
Well said Sapience, I think in my mind
Her love and favor, you shall attain by kind
And I will draw, to you incontinent
All your complaynt, as is convenient
Unto dame Uenus, to see directly
For your pain and sorrow, sone a remedy.
She drew my piteous lamentation,
According to this supplication.
The Supplication. Capit. xxx.
O Uenus lady, and excellent Goddess
O celestial star, having the souerayntie
Above all other stars, as lady and princes
As is according, unto your deitye
Pleases it now, your great benignity
Unto my complaynt, for to give audience
Which burn in love, with pearcyng vyoence
For so it happened, that the lady Fame
Did with me mete, and began to express
Of a fair lady, which had unto name
La bell Pucell, come of hye noblesse
Whose beauty clear, and comely goodlines
From day to day, does right well renew
With grace brydled, and with great virtue
She told me, of her fair habitation
And of the ways, thereto full dangerous
Her sweet report, gave me exhortation
Unto my heart, for to be courageous
To pass the passage, hard and troublous
And to bring me out, of great encombraunce
She me delivered, both grace and governance
So forth we went, to the tower of science
For to attain, in every artyke poole
And first doctrine, by good experience
Unto dame Gramer, did set me to schole
Of misty ignorance, to oppress the dole
And so I ascended, unto dame logyke
And after her, unto lusty Rethortke
Till at the last, at a feast solemply
To a temple I went, dame musyke to hear
Play on her organs, with sweet armony
But then on loft, I saw to me appear
The flower of comfort, the star of virtue clear
Whose beauty bright, into my heart did pass
Like as fair Phoebus, does shine in the glass
So was my heart, by the stroke of love
With sorrow perst, and with mortal pain
That uneath I might, from the place remove
Where as I stood, I was so take certain
Yet up I looked, to se her again
And at adventure, with a sorry mode
Up then I went, where as her person stood
And first of all, my heart began to learn
Right well to regester, in remembrance
How that her beauty, I might then decerne
From top to tooe, endued with pleasaunce
Which I shall show, withouten variaunce
Her shining here, so properly she dresses
A loft her forhcade, with fair golden tresses
Her forheade stepe, with fair brows ybent
Her eyes gray, her nose straight and fair
In her white chekes, the fair blood it went
As among the wite, the red to repair
Her mouth right small, her breathe sweet of air
Her lips soft, and ruddy as a rose
No heart on live, but it would him appose.
With a little pit, in her well favored chynne
Her neck long, as white as any lillye
With veins blewe, in which the blood ran in
Her pappes round, and thereto right pretye
Her arms slender, and of goodly body
Her fingers small, and thereto right long
White as the milk, with blewe veins among.
Her fete proper, she gartred well her hose
I never saw so fair a creature
Nothing she lacks, as I do suppose
That is longyng, to fair dame Nature
Yet more over, her counteuaunce so pure
So sweet, so lovely, would any heart enspire
With fervent love, to attain his desire.
But what for her manners passes all
She is both gentle, good, and virtuous
Alas what fortune, did me to her call
Without that she be to me pitiful,
With her so fettred, in pains dolorous
Alas shall pity, be from her exiled
Which all virtues, has so undefiled
Thus in my mind, when I had engraued
Her goodly countenance, and fair figure
It was no wonder, that I was amassed
My heart and mind, she had so taken in cure
Nothing of love, I durst to her discure
Yet for because, I was in her presence
I took arquayntaunce, of her excellence
My heart was drenched, in great sorrow deep
Though outwardly, my countenance was light
The inward woe, into my heart did crepe
To hide my pain, it was great force and might
Thus her sweet beauty, with a sudden sight
My heart has wounded, which must needs obey
Unto such a sorrow, now alas well away.
For she is gone, and departed right far
In her country, where she does abid
She is now gone, the fair shinyng star
O lady Uenus, I pray the provide
That I may after, at the morrow tide
And by the way, with heart right rigorious
To subdue mine enemies, to me contrarious.
And yet thy grace, most humbly I pray
To send thy son, little Cupide before
With loving letters, as fast as thou may
That she may know, somewhat of pains sore
Which for her sake, I suffer evermore
Now lady Uenus, with my whole intent
Of life or death, I abide thy judgment
Well then said Uenus, I have perseueraunce
That you know somewhat, of mighty power
Which to my court, sue for acquaintance
To have release, of your great pains sower
Abide a while, ye must tarry the hour
The time runs, toward right fast
Joy comes after, when the sorrow is past
Alas I said, who is fettred in chains
He thinks long, after deliverance
Of his great woe, and eke mortal pains
For who abides painful penance
Thinks a short while, a long continuance
Who may not speak, with her he loves best
It is no wonder, though he take no rest.
Abide quod she, you must a while yet tarry
Though to have comfort, ye right long do think
I shall provide for you a lectuary,
Which after sorrow, into your heart shall synke
Though you be brought now, unto deaths brinke
Yet dread exile, and live in hope and trust
For at the last, you shall attain your lust
And specially, I give to you a charge
To fix your love, for to be true and stable
Upon your Lady, and not to flee at large
As in sundry wise, for to be variable
In corrupt thoughts, vile, and culpable
Prepence nothing, unto her dishoncstie
For lone dishonest, has no certainty
And sithen that I, was cause you begone
First for to love, I shall a letter make
Unto your lady, and send it by my son
Little Cupide, that shall it to her take
That she your sorrow, may detraye or slake
Her harded heart, it shall well reuolue
With piteous words, that shall it desolue.
And right anon, as the manner follows
She caused Sapience, a letter to write
Lo what her favor, unto me avails
When for my sake, she did so well endite
As I shall show, in a short respite
The gentle form, and tenoure of her letter
To speed my cause, for to attain the better
The copye of the Letter. Capi. xxxi.
RIght gentle heart, of grene flowryng age
The star of beauty, and of famous port
Consider well, that your lusty courage
Age of his course, must at the last transporte
Now truth of right, does our self exhort
That you your youth, in ydlenes will spend
Withouten pleasure, to bring it to an end
What was the cause, of your creacion
But man to love, the world to multiplye
As to sow the sede, of generation
With fervent love, so well conveniently
The cause of love, engenders perfitely
Upon an intent, of dame Nature
Which you has made, so fair a creature
Then of dame Nature, what is the intent
But to accomplish, her fair sede to sow
In such a place, as is convenient
To Gods pleasure, for to increase and grow
The kind of her, ye may not overthrow
Say what ye list, ye can nothing deny
But otherwhile ye think, full privily
What the man is, and what he can do
Of chamber work, as nature will agree
Though by experience, ye know nothing thereto
Yet often ye muse, and think what it may be
Nature provoke, of her strong degree
You so to, as has been her old guise
Why will you then, the true love despise.
In our court, there is a byll presented
By graunde Amoure, whose heart in duresse
You fast have fettred, not to be absented
From your person, with mortal heaviness
His heart and service, with all gentilnes
He to you owes, as to be obedient
For to fulfill, your sweet commandment.
What you avails, your beauty so fair
Your lusty youth, and gentle countenance
Without that you, in your mind will repair
It for to spend, in joy and pleasaunce
To follow the trace, of dame Natures dance
And thus in doing, you shall your servant heal
Of his disease, and hurt you never a deal.
One must you love, it can not be denied
For hard it is, to void you of the chance
Then love him best, that you have so arrayed
With fiery chains, fettred in penance
For he is ready, without doubtaunce
In every thing, for to fulfill your will
And as ye list, ye may him save or spill
Alas what pain, and mortal woe
Were it to you, and ye were in like case
With him dismaide, which you have rayed so
Would you not then, think it a long space
In his sweet heart, to have a dwelling place
Then in your mind, ye may reuolue that he
Most long does think, that joyful day to se.
Is not he young, both wise and lustye
And eke descended, of the gentle line
What will you more, have of him truly
Then you to serve, as true love will incline
But as I think, you do now determine
To fyxe your mind, for worldly treasure.
Though in your youth, ye lose your pleasure
Alas remember, first your beautye
Your youth, your courage, and your tender heart
What pain here after, it may to you be
When you lack that, which is true lovers desert
I tell you this, your self to convert
For little know ye, of this pain iwys
To live with him, in whom no pleasure is.
Where that is love, there can be no lack
Fie on that love, for the land or substance
For it must needs, right sone a back
When that youth has, no joy nor pleasaunce
In the party, with natures suffisaunce
Then will you, for the sin of avarice
Unto your youth, do such a prejudice.
Thus sithen Nature, has you well endued
With so much beauty, and dame Grace also
Your virtuous manners, has so much renewed
Exile disdain, and let her from you go
And also straungenes, unto love the foe
And let no couetise, your true heart subdue
But that in joy, ye may your youth ensue
For I of love the Goddess, dame Uenus
Right well do know, that in the world is none
That unto you, shall be more joyous
Then graunde Amoure, that loves you alone
Sithe he so did, it is many days agone
Who ever saw, a fair young heart so hard
Which for her sake, would se her true love marde
And so shall he, without ye take good head
Ifhe so be, ye be cause of the same
For love with death, will ye reward his mede
And if ye do, ye be to much to blame
To love vnloued, ye know it is no game
Wherefore me think, ye can do no less
But with your love, his pains to redress.
If ye do not, this may be his song
Woe worth the time, that ever he you met
Woe worth your heart, so doing him wrong
woe worth the hour, that his true heart was set
woe worth disdain, that would his purpose let
woe worth the flower, that can do no boot
Woe worth you, that perst him at the root
Woe worth my love, the cause of my sorrow
Woe worth my lady, that will not it release
woe worth fortune, both even and morrow
woe worth trouble, that shall have no peace
Woe worth cruelty, that may never cease
Woe worth youth, that will no pity have
Woe worth her, that will not her love save.
Woe worth the trust, without assurance
Woe worth love, rewarded with hate
woe worth love, replete with variaunce
woe worth love, without a friendly mate
woe worth the heart, with love at debate
woe worth the beauty, which took me in snare
woe worth her, that will not cease my care
Woe worth her manners, and her goodlines
Woe worth her eyes, so clear and amiable
woe worth such cause, of my great sickness
woe worth pity, on her not tendable
woe worth her mind, in disdain so stable
woe worth her, that has me fettred fast
And woe worth love, that I do spend in waste.
Wherefore of right, I pray you to remember
All that I write, unto you right now
How your true love, is of age but tender.
His humble service, we pray you allow
And he him self, shall evermore enprowe
You for to please, and give the soueraintie
How can you have, a more true love then he.
And fare ye well, there is no more to say
Under our signet, in our court royal
Of September, the. xxii. day
She closed the letter, and to her did call
Cupide her son, so dear in special
Commaundyng him, as fast as he might
To la bell Pucell, for to take his flight
So did Cupide, with the letter fly
Unto la bell Pucels domination
There that he sped, full well and wondersly
As I shall after, make relation
But to my matter, with breuiacion
A turtle I offered, for to magnifye
Dame Uenus hye estate, to glorifye.
She me exhorted, for to be right hardy
Forth on to travail, and to dread nothing
I took my leave, of her full humbly
And on my way, as I was ridyng
This Godfrey gobilyue, came rennyng
With his little nagge, and cried tarry, tarry
For I will come, and bear you company.
Capit. xxxii
ANd forbicause, that I was then full sad
And by the way, he made me good game
To have his company, I was somewhat glad
I was not proud, I took of him no shame
He came to me, and said ye are to blame
So to ride louryng, for a woman's sake
Unto the devil, I do them all betake.
They be not steadfast, but change as the moon
When one is gone, they love another sone
Who that is single, and will have a wife
Right out of joy, he shall be brought in strife
Thus when Godfrey, did so merye make
There did a lady, us sone overtake
And in her hand, she had a knotted whippe
At every yerke, she made Godfrey to skipe
Alas he said, that ever I was borne
Now am I take, for all my mock and scorn
I looked about, when that I heard him cry
Seeing this lady, on her palfrey ride hye
Madame I said, I pray you me tell
Your proper name, and where that ye dwell
My name quod she, is called Correction
And the tower of chastise, is my mancion
This strong thief, called false report
With vilayne courage, and an other sort
And vile perlers, false conjecture
All these I had, in prison full sure
But this false report, has broken prison
With his subtle craft, and evil treason
And this journey, privily to speed
He has cladde him, in this foles wede
Now have I answered you, your question
And I pray you of, a like solution
You seem me think, for to be a knight
I pray you tell me first, your name aright
My name quod I, is la graunde Amoure
A well quod she, you are the perfect flower
Of all true lovers, as I do well know
You shall attain, la bell Pucell I trow
I know right well, ye are aduenturous
Onwarde your way, to the tower perilous
And for as much, as the night is near
I humbly pray you, for to take the cheer
That I may make you, in my tower this night
It is here by, you shall of it have sight
And I pray you, to help me to bind
This false report, as you should do by kind
What Godfrey quod I, will ye chaung your name
Nay nay qood he, it was for no shame
But alas for woe, that she has me taken
I must obey, it can not be forsaken
His fete were fettred, underneath his nagge
And bound his hands, behind to his bag
Thus Correction, with her whippe did drive
The little nagge, with Godfrey gobilyue.
Till at the last, we began to approach
Her royal tower, upon a craggy roche
The night was come, for it was right late
Yet right anon, we came to the gate
Where we were let in, by dame Measure
That was a fair, and a goodly creature.
And so Correction, brought me to the hall
Of get well wrought, glased with cristall
The roufe was gold, and amiddes was set
A carbuncle, that was large and great
Whose virtue clear, in the hall so bright
About did cast, a great marvelous light
So forth we went, into a chamber fair
Where many ladies, did them selves repair
And at our coming, then incontinent
They welcomed us, as was convenient
But of Correction, they were very glad
Which false report, again taken had
There was queen Panthasile, with Penalape
Queen Helene, and queen Menelape
Queen I thesyle, and queen Proserpyne
The lady Meduse, and young Polixyne
With many more, that I do not rehearse
My time is short, I must fro them reuerce
And dame Correction, into a chamber led
Me right anon, for to go to my bed
What need I show, of my great cheer and rest
I wanted naught, but had all of the best
And so I slept, till that aurora clear
Began to shine, amiddes her golden spear
Then up I rose, and my verlet also
Which made me ready, and to my stead did go
And dame Correction, at this morrow tide
Did me entreat, a while to abide
And right anon, my breakefast was brought
To make me cheer, there wanted right naught
And after this, dame Correction
Did lead me to a marvelous dongeon
And first she led me, to the upper ward
Where shamefastnes, did us well regard
For he was iaylour, and had at his charge
Every rebel, not for to go at large
In the first ward, there went to and fro
Both men and women, that might no further go.
But yet they hoped, for to have releue
Of their enprison, which did them so grieve
These prisoners, when true love was meued
They would drive of, and not release the grieved.
And for this cause, by equal judgment
Like as they did, here have they punishment
And shamefastnes, lower did us bring
Where we saw men, that were in tormentyng
With many ladies, that their mouths gagged.
And false report, on me his head wagged
Then right anon, a lady began to scrape
His furred tongue, that he cried like an ape
And vile Peller, in like wise also
His tongue was scraped, that he suffered woe
And yet we went, into a deper vale
Where I saw men, that were in great bale
In hollow bushes, they did hang alofte
Their heads downewarde, for to fall vnsoft
And two ladies, did their bodies beat
With knotted whippes, in the flesh to frete
That the desire, it should sone aswage
And specially, of the vylayne courage
These men, with sugared mouths so eloquent
A maidens heart, could right sone relent.
And these young maidens, for to take in snare
They feign great woe, and for to suffer care
The folyshe maidens, did believe they smarted
That to their will, the men, them converted
Thus when that they, had them so begiled
And with their fraud, these maidens defiled
They cast them of, they took no longer keep
Go where ye list, though they cry and weep.
Therefore these ladies, with their whippes hard
Their bodies beat, that their bodies has marde
And every man, as he has deserved
A pain there is, which is for him observed
Thus when I had, all the prison seen
With the torment, of many a one I wene
And forth we went, again to the hall
My stead was ready, and brought to the wall
And of the ladies, clear in excellence
I took my leave, with all due reverence
And thanked Correction, with my heart entire
Of my repose, and of her loving chere
To me she said, remember you well
Of the sweet beauty, of la bell Pucell
When you her heart, in fetters have chayned
Let her have yours, in likewise retained
Look that your heart, your word, and countenance
Agree all in one, withouten variaunce
It the for pitye, do release you your pain
Consider it, and love her best again.
Be true and secret, and make none aduaunt
When you of love, have a perfect grant
And if ye will come, unto your will
Both here and see, and then hold you still
Dreadc you nothing, but take a good heart
For right sone, after you from hence depart
Right high adventures, unto you shall fall
In time of fight, unto your mind then call
If you prevail, you shall attain the fame
Of hye honor, to certify the same
And therewith I light, upon my stead
Madame I said, I pray God do you mede
Fare well she said, for you must now hence
Adue quod I, with all my diligence.
How graunde Amoure discomfited the Gyaunt with three heads., and was
received of three fair Ladies. Capi. xxxiii.
WHen golden Phoebus, in the Capricorn
Began to ascend, fast unto Aquary
And Ianus bifrus, the croune had worn
With his frosty bearde in January,
When clear Dyana, joined with Mercury
The cristall air, and assured firmament
Were all depured, without encumbrement.
Forth then I rode, at mine own adventure
Over the mountains, and the craggy rocks
To behold the countres, I had great pleasure
Where coral growed, by right hye stocks
And the Popingayes, in the tree tops
Then as I rode, I saw me beforne
Beside a well hang, both a shield and a horn
When I came there, adowne my stead I light
And the fair bugle, I right well beheld
Blasyng the arms, as well as I might
That was so graven, upon the goodly shield
First all of silver, did appear the field
With a rampyng Lion, of fine gold so pure
And under the shield, there was this scripture.
If any knight, that is aduenturous
Of his great pride, dare the bugle blow
There is a gyaunt, both fierce and rigorious
That with his might, shall him sone overthrow
This is the way, as ye shall now know
To la bell Pucell, but withouten fail
The sturdy gyaunt, will give you battle.
When I the scripture, once or twice had read
And knew thereof, all the whole effect
I blewe the horn, without any dread
And took good heart, all fear to abject
Making me ready, for I did suspect
That the great gyaunt, unto me would haste
When he had heard me, blow so loud a blast.
I alite anon, upon my gentle stead
About the well, then I rode to and fro
And thought right well, upon the joyful mede
That I should have, after my pain and woe
And of my lady, I did think also
Till at the last, my verlet did me tell
Take heed quod he, here is a fend of hell
My greyhoundes leaped, and my stead did start
My spear I took, and did look about
With hardy courage, I did arm my heart
At last I saw, a sturdy gyaunt stout
Twelve foot of length, to leare a great route
Three heads he had, and he armed was
Both heads and body, all about with brass
Upon his first head, in his helmet crest
There stood a fanc, of the silk so fine
Where was written, with letters of the best
My name is falshode, I shall cause incline
My neighbors goods, for to make them mine
Always I get, their land or substance
With subtle fraud, deceypt, or variaunce
And when a knight, with noble chyualry
Of la bell Pucell, should attain the grace
With my great falshode, I work so subtly
That in her heart, he has no dweilyng place
Thus of his purpose, I do let the case
This is my power, and my condition
Love to remove, by a great illusion
And of the second head, in a silken tassell
There I saw written, ymagination
My crafty wit, is withouten fail
Love for to bring, in perturbacion
Where la bell Pucell, would have affection
To graunde amoure, I shall a tale devise
To make her hate him, and him to despise.
By my false wit, so much ymaginatife
The truth full often, I bring in disease
Where as was peace, I cause to be strife
I will suffer no man, for to live in ease
For if by fortune, he will be displease
I shall of him, ymagen such a tale
That out of joy, it shall turn into bale.
And on the third head, in a stremer grene
There was written, my name is pariury
In many a town, I am known as I wend
Where as I list, I do great injury
And do forswere, my self full wrongfully
Of all things, I do hate conscience
But I love lucre, with all diligence
Between two lovers, I do make debate
I will so swear, that they think I am true
For ever falshode, with his own estate
To a lady comes, and says to eschew
An inconvenience, that ye do not rue
Your love is naught, ymagination knows
I swear in likewise, and anon she troweth
That we have said, is of very truth
Her love she casts, right clean out of mind
That with her love, she is wonderfly wrough
with feigned kindenes, we do her so blind
Then to her lover, she is full unkind
Thus our three powers, were joined in one
In this mighty gyaunt, many days agone
And when that I, had seen every thing
My spear I charged, that was very great
And to this gyau^t, so fiercely coming
I took my course, that I with him met
Breakyng my spear, upon his first helmet
And right anon, adowne my stead I light
Drawyng my sword, that was fair and bright.
I clipped Clara prudence, that was fair and sure
At the gyaunt I stroke, with all my valeaunce
But he my strokes, might right well endure
He was so great, and huge of puysaunce
His glaue he did, against me advance
Which was. iiii. foot, and more of cuttyng
And as he was, his stroke dischargyng
Because his stroke, was heavy to bear
I lept aside, from him full quickly
And to him I ran, without any fear
When he had discharged, again full lightly
He rored loud, and swear I should abye
But what for that, I struck at him fast
And he at me, but I was not aghast.
But as he fought, he had a vauntage
He was right hye, and I under him low
Till at the last, with lusty courage
Upon the side, I gave him such a blow
That I right near, did him overthrow
But right anon, he did his might enlarge
That upon me, he did such strokes discharge
That I uneath, might make resistance
Against his power, for he was so strong
I did defend me, against his vyolence
And thus the battle, dured full right long
Yet evermore, I did think among
Of la bell Pucell, whom I should attain
After my battailles, to release my pain.
And as I looked, I saw then auale
Fair golden Phoebus, with his beams read
Then up my courage, I began to hale
Which nighe before, was agone and dead
My sword so entered, that the giant bledde
And with my strokes, I cut of anon
One of his legs, amiddes the thyghe bone.
Then to the ground, he adowne did fall
And upon me, he began to loure and glumme
Enforsyng him, so for to rise withal
But that I shortly, unto him did come
With his three heads, he spitte all his venyme
And I with my sword, as fast as could be
With all my force, cut of his heads three.
When I had so, obtained the victory
Unto me then, my varlet well said
You have demeaned you, well and worthily
My greyhoundes lept, and my stead then brayed
And then from far, I saw well arrayed
To me come ridyng, three ladies right sweet
Forth then I rode, and did with them mete.
The first of them, was called Ueritie
And the second, good Operation
The third also, yclipped Fidelity
All they at once, with good opinion
Did give to me, great laudation
And me beseched, with their heart entire
With them to rest, and to make good chere.
I granted them, and then backewarde we rode
The mighty gyaunt, to se and behold
Whose huge body, was more then five cart lode
Which lay there bledyng, that was almost cold
They for his death, did thank me many a fold
For he to them, was enemy mortal
Wherefore his three heads, they took in special
And then Ueritie, on the first fane
Did set aloft, of falshode the head
And good Operacion, in likewise had taken
Of ymagination, that full fore then bledde
Upon his head aloft, upon his banner read
And in likewise, Fidelity had served
Periuries head, as he had well deserved
And with sweet songs, and sweet armony
Before me they rode, to their fair castle
So forth I rode, with great joy and glory
Unto the place, where these ladies did dwell
Set on a rock, beside a spryng or a well
And fair Obseruaunce, the goodly portresse
Did us receive, with solemn gladness
Then to a chamber, that was very bright
They did me lead, for to take mine ease
After my trouble, and my great sturdy fight
But three wounds I had, causyng my disease
My pain and woe, they did sone appease
And healed my wounds. with salve aromatike
Tellyng me of a great gyaunt lunatike.
Whose name truly, was called Uariau^ce
Whom I should mete, after my departing
These ladies, unto me did great pleasaunce
And in the mean while, as we were talkyng
For me my supper, was in ordeynyng
Thus when by temperaunce, it was prepared
And then to it we went, and right well fared
Tell me quod Ueritie, if you be content
What is your name, so hye aduenturous
And who that you, into this coast has sent
Madame I said, I was so amorous
Of la bell Pucell, so fair and beauteous
La graunde amoure, truly is my name
Which seek adventures, to attain the fame
A ha quod she, I thought as much before
That you were he, for your great hardines
La bell Pucell, must love you evermore
Which for her sake, in your hye nobles
Does such acces, by chyualrous excess
Her gentle heart, may nothing deny
To reward your mede, with love full fervently.
Thus did we pass time, in all manner of joy
I lacked nothing, that might make me solace
But evermore, as noble Troylus of Troy
Full often I thought, on my fair ladies face
And her to se, a much longer space
When time was come, to rest I was brought
All to me longyng, there lacked right naught
What should I wade, by perambulucion
My time is short, and I have far to sail
Unto the land, of my conclusion
The wind is east, right slow without fail
To blow my ship, of diligent travail
To the last end, of my matter troublous
With waves enclosed, so tempestuous.
Right in the morrow, when aurora clear
Her radiaunt beams, began for to spread
And splendent Phoebus, in his golden spear
The crystal air, did make fair and read
Dark Dyane, declinyng pale as any led
When the little birds, swetely did sing
Lauds to their maker, early in the morning.
Capit. xxxiiii.
UP I arose, and did make me ready
For I thought long, unto my iourneys end
My greyhoundes lept, on me right merely
To cheer me forward, they did condescende
And the three ladies, my cheer to amend
A good breakefast, did for me ordain
They were right glad, the gyaunt was slain.
I took my leave, and on my way I ride
Through the woods, and on rocks hye
I looked about, and on the hill abode
Till in the vale, I saw full hastily
To me come ridyng, a lady sikerly
I well beheld, the hye way so used
But of this lady, right often I mused.
Till at the last, we did mete together
Madame I said, the hye God you save
She thanked me, and did ask me whither
That I so rode, and what I would have
Truly quod I, nothing else I crave
Of the hye God, but to be so fortunate
La bell Pucell, to have to my mate.
What is your name, then said she
La graunde amoure, for sothe madame quod I
Then was she glad, as any one might be
And said she was sent, fro mine own lady
Tidings I said, I pray you heartily
Your lady quod she, is in perfect health
And would be glad, to hear of your wealth.
She promised you, in a garden grene
To love you best, of any creature
So do the she yet, as I think and wene
Though that disdain, brought her to her lure
But of her heart now, you shall be sure
Be of good chere, and for nothing dismaye
I spoke with her, but now this other day.
And she my self, unto you has sent
My name is called, dame Perceueraunce
A little before, that I from her went
To her came Cupide, with great circumstaunce
And brought a letter, of Uenus ordinance
Which unto her, he did anon present
When she it read, and knew the intent,
All inwardly, full wondersly dismayed
Withouten word, she did stand right well
Her harded heart, was full well delayed
What for to do, she knew not good or ill
You for to help, or let you so spyll
Disdain and Strangenes, did stand then thereby
Seeing her countenance, they began to draw nigh.
Madame quod they, why are ye so sad
Alas quod she, it is no marvel why
Right now, of Cupide, a letter I had
Sent from Uenus, full right marueilously
By which I have, perceived utterly
That a young knight, called graunde amoure
Does for my sake, suffer such doloure
That of constraint, of woe full heaviness
He is nere dead, all only for my sake
Shall he now dye, or shall I him relese
Of his great woe, and to my mercy take
Abide quod Strangenes, and your sorrow slake
Have you him seen, in any time before
Yes yes quod she, that does my woe restore.
At penticost, no we many days agone
Music to hear, at great solemnity
To and fro he walked, him self all alone
In a great temple, of old antiquity
Till that by fortune, he had espied me
And right anon, or that I was ware
To me he came, I knew naught of his care
He seemed gentle, his manners right good
I beheld right well, all his condition
Humble of chere, and of goodly mode
But I thought nothing, of his affliction
But his behauoure, showed the occasion
Of fervent love, as then in mine intent
I often did deem, and give a judgment
So after this, I did then sone depart
Home to my country, where I did abide
When I was gone, full heavy was his heart
As Cupide says, I must for him provide
A gentle reamedy, at this sudden tide
And for my sake, he is aduenturous
To subdue mine enemies, to me contrarious
A quod Disdain, know ye his substance
Why will you love, such a one as he
Though he seem gentle, and of good governance
You shall have one, of far hier degree
He is nothing mete, as it seems me
To be your fere, your favor to attain
What is it to you, though he suffer pain.
Could your self, let his eyes to have a sight
Of your beauty, or his heart to be set
What skilleth you, though that he dye this night
You called him not, when he with you met
And he will love you, you can not him let
Be as be may, ye shall have mine assente
Him for to forsake, as in most expedient
Alas madame, then said dame Strangenes
When he comes hither, your courage abate
Look hye upon him, beware of mekenes
And think that you shall have, an hye estate
Let not graunde amoure, say to you chekmate
Be strange unto him, as ye know nothing
The perfect cause, of his true coming
And in mean while, came to her presence
Dame Peace and Mercy, and to her they said
Alas madame, consider your excellence
And how your beauty, has him so arrayed
If you have him, ye may be well apayed
And doubt you not, if that ye love for love
God will send riches, to come to you above.
Will you for love, let him dye or perish
Which loves you so, with fervent desire
And you your self, may his sorrow minishe
That with your beauty, set his heart a fire
Your sweet lokes, did his heart enspire
That of fine force, he must to you obey
To live or dye, there is no more to say
Alas quod Peace, will ye let him endure
In mortal pain, withouten remedy
Sithen his heart, you have so taken in cure
Your hastye dome, look that ye modefy
Exile Disdain, and Strangenes shortly
And send Perceueraunce, as fast as ye may
To comfort him, in his troublous journey
Then in her mind, she began to reuolue
The loving words, of Mercy and Peace
Her hardy heart, she began for to dissolve
And inwardly, she did to me release
Her perfect love, your great pain to cease
And did exile then from her, to wilderness
Both dame disdain, and eke dame strangenes.
And did me send, to you incontinent
With this goodly shield, that ye should it were
For her sweet sake, as is convenient
It is sure, ye shall not need to fear
The stroke of sword, or yet the grate of spear
She prays you, for to be of good chere
Above all men, ye are to her most dear.
Now said Perceueraunce, I pray you repose
This long night, with my cosen comfort
A gentle lady, as any may suppose
She can you tell, and also well exhort
Of la bell Pucell, with a true report
I thanked her, of her great goodness
And so we rode, with joy and gladness.
Till that we came, unto a manor place
Moted about, under a wood side
Alight she said, for by right long space
In pain and woe, you did ever abide
After an ebb, there comes a flowyng tide
So down I light, from my goodly stead
After my pain, to have rest for my mede.
Then dame Perceueraunce, on the way me led
Into the place, where did us gentillye mete
The lady Comfort, without any dredde
With countenance, that was demure and sweet
In goodly manner, she did us then great
Leadyng us, to a chamber precious
Dulcet of odoure, and most solacious.
And privily, she asked a question
Of Perceueraunce, what I called was
La graunde amoure, without abusion
Cosen quod she, he does all lovers pass
Like as does Phoebus, in the pure glass
So does his deeds, extolle the soueraintie
Of the dark gyaunres, by high acthoritie.
When she it knew, she was of me right feign
Nothing I lacked, that was to my pleasaunce
After my travail, and my woeful pain
Good meat and drink, I had to sustenaunce
We sat together, by long continuance
But evermore Comfort, gave exhortation
To me of patience, in tribulation.
Think well quod she, that in the world is none
Which can have pleasure, without woe and care
Joy comes after, when the pain is gone
Was never man, that was deuoyde or bare
Always of joy, after his woeful snare
Who knows pain, and has been in trouble
After his woe, his joy is to him double.
It may so fortune, that la bell Pucell
Has diverse friends, that be not content
That her favor, ye should attain so well
For you, of them, she may often be shent
But what for that, she shall not her repent
And if her friends, be with you angrye
Suffer their words, and take it patiently
Against their ill, do unto them good
Them for to please, be always diligent
So shall you swage, the tempesteous floode
Of their stormy minds, so impacient
And inwardly, they shall them selves repent
That they to you, have been contrarious
In such fyrye anger, hot and furious.
Thus by your wisdom, ye shall them so win
Unto your friends, that did you so hate
For it is reason, you should obey your kynne
As by obedience, both early and late
Make them your friends, without the debate
For evermore, the spirit of patience
Does overcome, the angry vyolence.
Be hardy, bold, and also courageous
For after that, ye be gone from hence
You shall mete, with a gyaunt rigorious
Having seven heads, of ill experience
You shall subdue him, with your prudence
And other adventures, shall unto you fall
Which Fame shall cause, to be memorial
When it was time, I was brought to bed
So all the long night, I endured in rest
With such a slouthe, itaken was my head
That my soft pyllowe, I found a good gest
For long before, I was so oppressed
With inward trouble, that I might not sleep
But often wake, and sigh with tears deep
Capit. xxxv.
WHen morning came, up anon I rose
And armed me, as fast as I might
Forth for to travel, unto my purpose
I took my leave, and on my stead I light
Thankyng dame Comfort, of her chere that night
She with Perceueraunce, in my company
Forth on the way, we rode full merely
Over the hethe, till we saw from far
A royal castle, right strongly fortified
Bulwarks about, accustomed for war
On a craggy roche, it was so edified
Walled with get, so clearly purified
To which we rode, and drew nere and nere
Till in our sight, did openly appear.
A mighty gyaunt. xv. foot of length
With heads seven, and armed full sure
He seemed well, to be a man of strength
Then quod Perceueraunce, ye must put in ure
This day your power, in honor to endure
Against this gyaunt, your mortal enemy
Be of good cheer, you shall have victory.
Besides this gyaunt, upon every tree
I did se hang, many a goodly shield
Of noble knights, that were of hye degree
Which he had slain, and murdered in the field
From far this gyaunt, I right well beheld
And toward him, as I rode my way
On his first head, I saw a banner gaye
Wherein was written, dissimulation
Whose nature false, is full of flatery
That under a feigned commendation,
Can cloak a mock, and fraudefull subtly
So does he love, deceive often privily
For the blind love, does perceive right naught
That under honey, the poison is wrought
And the second head, was a banner blewe
In which was written, in letters right white
Delay my name is, that can long eschew
A true lover, with my fatal respite
That love for love, shall not him acquit
For evermore, I lie often in a wait
Love to delay, and cast him from consayte.
On the third head, in a banner square
Al of read, was written discomfort
Causyng a lover, for to drown in care
That he of love, shall have no report
But lokes hye, his heart to transport
And I my self, shall him so assail
That he in love, shall nothing prevail
On the fourth head, on the helmet crest
There was a stremer, right white, large, and long
Where on was written, with bise of the best
My name is variaunce, that ever among
The mind of love does chaung, with great wrong
That a true lover, can not be certain
Love for his mede, right steadfast to retain.
And yet aloft, on the fifte helmet
In a black banner, was written envy
Whose heart ever, inwardly is fret
When graunde amoure, should attain his lady
He museth often, in him self inwardly
To let the lady, for to set her heart
On graunde amoure, for to release his smarte.
In a russet banner, on the sixth head
There was written, this word detraction
That can open, in a covert stead
His subtle male, replete with treason
To cause a lady, to have suspection
Unto her true lover, with his bitter tale
That she her love, from him then did hale.
On the seventh head, in a banner of riches
Was written, with letters all of grew
My name truly, is called doublenes
Which I do owe, unto all ladies true
At a time unware, my det shall be due
To graunde amoure, for to make him repent
That he his love, on la bell Pucell spent.
When in my mind, I had well agregate
Every thing, that I in him had seen
Both of his head, and of his hye estate
I called for help, unto the heaven queen
The day was fair, the sun was bright and shene
Beside a river, and a craggy roche
This gyaunt was, which spied me approach.
He hurled about, and cast his shield before
And took his axe, of mighty fortitude
That was of length. xx. foot and more
Which he had used, by long consuetude
To dance true lovers, and their power exclude
I took my spear, and did it well charge
And with hardines, I made my force enlarge.
I took my course, and to the gyaunt ran
On his second head, breaking then asunder
My mighty spear, that he to rore began
With so base a cry, that I had great wonder
His seven heads so rored, like the thunder
Right from my stead, I light to the ground
And drew clara prudence, that was whole and found
The mighty gyaunt, his axe did up lift
Upon my head, that the stroke should fall
But I of him, was full ware and swift
I lept aside, so that the stroke withal
In the ground lighted, beside a stone wall
Three foot and more, and anon then I
Did lepe unto him, strikyng full quickly.
But above me, he had such altitude
That I at him, could have no full stroke
He stroke at me, with many strokes rude
And called me boy, and gave me many a mock
At the last he said, I shall give the a knock
That with thy brains, I shall the trees depaynt
Abide quod I thou shall be first full faint.
And right anon, I by me espied
On the rocks side, twelve steps full sure
And then right fast, I upon them hyed
That we were both, about one stature
My strength I doubled, and put so in ure
The great strokes, that I cut of anon
Six of his heads, leauyng him but one
When he felt him self, hurt so grievously
He stretched him up, and lift his axe a loft
Strikyng at me, with strokes wondersly
But I full swiftly, did give back full often
For to deuoyde, his great strokes vnsoft
When he saw this, he thought him forlore
With a hideous voice, he began to rore
The battle dured, between us right long
Till I saw Phoebus, declinyng full low
I auaunced my sword, that was sure and strong
And with my might, I gave him such a blow
On his seventh head, that he did overthrow
When he was down, he began to cry and yell
Full like a serpent, or a fend of hell.
When I saw this, as fast as might be
A down I came, and did then unlace
His seventh helmet, right rich for to see
And him beheaded, in a right short space
And then full sone, there came to the place
Perseueraunce, and my verlet also
Alas they said, we were for you right woe.
But we were glad, when ye had forsaken
The low vale, and up the craggy fair
For your advantage, the hye way had taken
Thus as we talked, we did seladies fair
Seven in number, that were debonaryre
Upon white palfreys, each of them did ride
To us right gentilly, from the castle side.
The first of them, was named Stedfastnes
And the second, Amerous purueyaunce
The third, was Joy, after great heaviness
The fourth of them, was dame Co^tinuaunce
And the fifth of them, called dame Pleasaunce
The sixte was called, Report famous
The seventh amity, to lovers dolourous
And right Anon, with all humility
They light adowne, and then incontinente
Each after other, they came unto me
I ^issed them, with all my whole entente
Hayle knight they said, so clear and excellent
Which of this gyaunt, our hydeous enemy
So worthily, has won the victory.
Ladies he said, I am much unworthy
So to accept, your great praise and fame
They prayed me, to keep them company
I will quod I, or else I were to blame
They prayed me, to show them my name
La graunde amoure it is, I said in deed
And then said they, no wonder though ye speed.
No doubt it is, but ye shall obtain
La bell Pucell, so right fair and clear
We were with her, exiled by disdain
And then besieged, in this castle here
With this great gyaunt, more then a whole year
And you this night, if it do you please
In this pore castle, shall take your ease.
I thanked them, and so I rode anon
Into the castle, of old foundation
Walled about, with the black touch stone
I took there then, my recreation
Among these ladies, with commendation
And when time came, that they thought best
To a royal bed, I was brought to rest.
After my weary, and troublous travail
I took mine ease, till that it was day
Then up I rose, without any fail
And made me ready, for to ride my way
But then anon, into the chamber gaye
The seven ladies came, with Perceueraunce
Saying they would, give me attendaunce.
And bring me, to la bell Pucell
Where that she is, in her court royal
And likewise, as Phoebus does hye excel
In brightness truly, the fair stars all
So in beauty, and virtue special
She does cxcede, any earthly creature
That is now made, by fair dame Nature
We brake our fast, and we made us ready
To la bell Pucell, on our way to ride
My stead was brought, I lept up shortly
So did the ladies, they would nothing abide
Thus forth we rode, at the morrow tide
Out of the castle, with all joy and pleasure
Forth on our way, at all adventure.
Capi. xxxvi.
SO long we rode, over hill and valey
Till that we came, into a wilderness
On every side, there wild beasts lay
Right strange and fierce, in sundry likeness
It was a place, of dissolute darkness
The ladies and I, were in fear and doubt
Till at the last, that we were gotten out.
Of the great wood, upon a craggy roche
When clear Dyana, in the scorpion
Against fair Phoebus, began to approach
For to be, at her whole opposition
We saw from far, a goodly region
Where stood a palaice, hye and precious
Beyond an haven, full tempestuous
Then said Perceueraunce, behold ye and se
Yonder is the palaice, gaye and glorious
Of la bell Pucels great humility,
A place of pleasure, most solacious
But then we spied, a fend fallacious
Beyond the haven, at the sure entresse
Blowyng out fire, by maruey lous widenes
The fire was great, it made the ylande light
He rored loud, it seemed like the thunder
But as me thought, he was of great might
To know his likeness, we were far asunder
But of the fire, we did often wonder
We asked Perceueraunce, what that it might be
Alas quod she, with fraud and subtiltye.
Of dame Strangenes, and of dame Disdain
When la bell Pucell, did them so abject
Because that they might not, reuert again
With mortal envy, they did then coniect
To make a feude, in likewise to direct
Sir graunde amoure, with the fervent fire
Of evil treason, to let his desire.
For dame Disdain, the crafty sorceres
With art magyke, has wrought full craftily
Of the. vii. metalles, a dragon doubtless
And dame Strangenes, by her nygromancy
Has closed therein, a fend right subtly
That the fire encenseth, by great outrage
But graunde amoure, shall it well assuage
Beneth this roche, there is well fortified
An old temple, to the laud and glory
Of wise dame Pallas, it was so edified
We will ride, unto it full lightly
And do oblation, unto her truly
She will us tell, by good experience
How we may escape, the brennyng vyolence.
So to the temple, of dame Pallas
Anon we rode, and did light adowne
Of depured cristall, her whole image was
The temple walls, were right old and brown
And then right sone, before her high renown
Prostrate we fell, mekely to the ground
And suddenly, we were cast in a sownde
Thus as we lay, in a deadely chance
We thought to her, we made peticion
And all in english, with long circumstaunce
She showed us, all the whole condition
Of the marvelous, serpents operation
And did show us, a perfect remedy
To withstand, all the craft of Sorcery
And in likewise, as the manner follows
In depured verses, of crafty eloquence
Every thing, unto us she shows
And first of all, with all our diligence
These verses we said, unto her excellence
But she with crafty, verses eloquent
Gave us an answer, full expedient.
When golden Phoebus, in the first hour
Of his own day, began for to domime
The sorceresse, the false root of doloure
All of gold, that was so pure and fine
Of the best, made the head serpentyne
And eke thereof, she did make his face
Full like a maid, it was a wonders case.
And every hour, as the planettes raygned
She made the serpent, of the metalles seven
Till she her purpose, had fully attained
And when five bodies, above on the heaven
Went retrogarde, marvelously to neuen
With diverse quartyls, and the moon combust
In the dragons tail, to let a lovers lust.
These cursed witches, disdain and straungenes
Made the monster, of a subtle kind
To let my purpose, and all my gladness
But that dame Pallas, of her gentle mind
Of marvelous herbs, a remedy did find
And anon a box, of marvelous ointment
She took to me, to withstand the serpent.
Thus all esmarueyled, we did then awake
And in my hand, I had the ointment
Closed in a box, of which I should take
To anoint my harneys, for the serpent
Which shall deuoyde, his fire so fervent
And my sword also to cause to depart
Astrothe the fend, so set with Magikes art.
THen when the sun, with his beams merry
Began to rise, in the fair morrow gray
All about, lightyng our emispery
Exilyng mistes, and dark clouds away
And when we saw, that it was bright day
Nere by the ryuage, at the last we spied
A goodly ship, which unto us fast hyed
And right anon, by the riuage side
She cast an anchor, and did us than hayle
With a peale of gunnes, at the morrow tide
Her bonet she veiled, and began to strike sail
She was right large, of three tops without fail
Her boat she made out, and sent to the land
What that we were, to know and understand
That so did walk, by the river coast
And with two ladies, we sodaynely met
So when that they, were come to us almost
From their ship boat, curiously counterfaite
Hayle knight they said, now from a lady great
Called dame Patience, we are hither sent
To know your name and all the whole intent
What you make here, and the ladies all
Truly quod I, over this stormy flowde
We would have passage, now in special
Tarry she said, it were to you not good
There is a serpent, evil, right fierce, and wood
On the other side, which will you devour
Nay then quod I, my name is graunde amoure
I have discomfited, the gyauntes terrible
For la bell Pucell, the most fair lady
And for her sake, shall be invincible
Of this great monster, to have the victory
You have quod they, demeaned you nobly
And we anon, to our lady Patience
Will give of you, perfect intelligence
Thus they departed, and to their boat they went
And the royal ship, yclipped perfitenes
They did aborde, and then incontinent
Unto dame Patience, they began to express
My name, mine acts, and all my prowes
Ha ha quod she, how glad may I now be
Which in this place, may him both hear and se
And in great haste, she made them row again
Toward the land, with all due reverence
For to receive me, and the ladies certain
And so we then, with all our diligence
Entered the boat, without resistance
And did aborde then, perfitenes so sure
Which the great waves, might right well endure
And Patience, with great solemnity
Did me receive, and the ladies also
Welcome she said, by hye aucthoritye
I am right glad, that it has happened so
That la bell Pucell, must redress your woe
And on your self, with your worthy deeds
Of Fame and her, has won right hie medes
And then their anchor, they weyed in haste
And hoyst their sail, when many a clarion
Began to blow, the morning was past
But Afrycus auster, made surrection
Blowyng his belowes, by great occasion
So forth we sailed, right plain southwest
On the other side, where the Serpent did rest
How graunde Amoure discomfited the wonderful monster of the seven metalles,
made by enchauntment. Capit. xxxvii.
ANd at the land, we arrived than
With all the ladies, in my company
Which to pray for me, sodaynely began
To the God Mars, lodestarre of chiualrye
I took my leave, of them full gentilly
And right anon, to find out my fo
This mortal dragon, I went to and fro.
Till at the last, beside a craggy roche
I saw the dragon, which did me espy
And nere and nere, as I began to approach
I beheld his head, with his great body
Which was mishaped, full right wondersly
Of gold so shine, was both his head and face
Full like a maid, it is a marvelous case.
His neck silver, and thick like a bull
His breast stele, and like an Olyphant
His forelegges laten, and of feders full
Right like a Gripe was every tallaunt,
And as of strength, he nothing did want
His back before, like bristles of a swyne
Of the fine copper, did most clearly shine.
His hinder legs, was like to a catte
All of tynne, and like a Scorpion
He had a tail, with a head thereat
All of lead of pliaunt fashion,
His heart stele, without menission
Toward me he came, roaryng like the thunder
Spittyng out fire, for to se great wonder.
In his forheade, with letters all of grew
Was written, my name is malice privy
That old debate, can full sone renew
Between true lovers, with color crafty
Against graunde amoure, I shall so fortifye
My evil subtle power, and cursed courage
To let him truly, of his hye passage.
I took my box, as Pallas commanded
And my sword and shield, with all my armure
In every place, I right well anointed
To hardines, I took my heart in cure
Making me ready, and when I thought me sure
I took my sword, and with an hardy heart
Toward the dragon, I began to starte
And as I began, my great stroke to charge
He blewe out so much fire innumerable
That on the ground, I did my might discharge
The smoke was dark, full greatly domageable
And the hot fire, was so intolerable
About me fliyng, that uneath I might
Through my vysure, cast abroad my sight.
But the sweet ointment, had such a virtue
That the wild fire, might nothing endomage
Me through heat, for it did extue
The Magikes art, with great advantage
Causyng the fire, right well to assuage
And with my sword, as nothing aghast
Upon the serpent, I did strike full fast.
His body was great as any tun
The devil about, did his body bear
He was as egre, as Grype or Lion
So with his tallantes, he did my harneyes tear
That often they put me, in a mortal fear
Till at the last, I did his body perce
With my good sword, he might it not reuerce.
Right there withal, the dragon to brast
And out there flewe, right black and tedious
A foul Ethiope, which such smoke did cast
That all the ylande, was full tenebrous
It thundered loud, with clappes tempestious
Then all the ladies, were full fore adreade
They thought none other, but that I was dead
The spirit vanished, the air waxed clear
Then did I look, and behold about
Where was the tower, of my lady so dear
Till at the last, I had espied it out
Set on a rock, right hye without doubt
And all the ladies, with perceueraunce
To me did come, with joy and pleasaunce.
Forsothe quod they, you are much fortunate
So to subdue, the serpent venomous
Which by sorcery, was surely ordinate
You for to slay, with fire so vycious
Blessed be Pallas, the goddess glorious
Which that you taught, a perfect remedy
For to deuoyde, the craft of forcery.
It was no wonder, though that I was glad
After the pain, and tribulation
That in many places, I right often had
For to attain, the hye promocion
Of la bell Pucelles domination
Considering, in my passage dangerous
All I subdued, to me contrarious
And then right sone, with great solemnity
So forth we rode, to the solemn mancion
Of la bell Pucelles, worthy dignity
Which was a tower, of marvelous fashion
Replete with joy, without suggestion
Walled with silver, and many a story
Upon the wall, enameled royally.
So at the last, we came unto the gate
Which all of silver, was knotted properlye
Where was a lady, of right hye estate
Which us received, well and nobly
And then Perceueraunce, went full shortly
To la bell Pucell, showing, every thing
Of mine adventure, and sudden coming.
How graunde Amoure was received of la bell Pucell. Capit. xxxviii.
WHen she it knew, then right incontinent
She called to her, Peace and dame Mercy
With Justice and reason, the lady excellent
Pleasaunce, grace, with good dame memory
To wait upon her, full ententiflye
Me to receive, with all solemn joy
A down her chamber, she went on her way
And in the mean while, the gentle porteresse
Called countenance, on my way then me led
Into the base court, of great widenes
Where all of gold, there was a conduite head
With many dragons, enameled with read
Which did spoute out, the dulcet lycoure
Like crystal clear, with aromatike odoure.
Aloft the base tower, four images stood
Which blewe the clarious, well and wondersly
Aloft the towers, the golden fanes good
Did with the wind, make full sweet armony
Them for to here, it was great melody
The golden towers, with cristall clarified
About were glased, most clearly purrified
And the grauel whereupon we went
Full like the gold, that is most pure and fine
Withouten spotte, of black encombrement
About our fete, it did right clearly shine
It seemed more like a place celestine,
Then an earthly mansion, which shall away
By long time and process, an other day.
And toward me, I did se then coming
La bell Pucell, the most fair creature
Of any fair earthly person living,
Which with me met, with cheer so demure
Of the shinyng gold, was all her vesture
I did my duty, and once or twice iwys
Her lips soft, I did full swetely kiss.
Aha quod she, that I am very feign
That you are come, for I have thought long
Sythen the time, that we parted in twain
And for my sake, you have had often wrong
But your courage, so hardy and strong
Has caused you, for to be victorious
Of your enemies, so much contrarious.
With her fair hand, white as any lillye
She did me lead, into a royal hall
With knottes kerued, full right craftily
The windows fair, glased with cristall
And all about, upon the golden wall
There was enameled, with fygures curious
The siege of Troy, so hard and dolorous
The floor was paued, with precious stones
And the roufe, of marvelous Geometry
Of the sweet Cypres, wrought for the nonce
Encensyng out, the evil odours mistye
Amiddes the roufe, there shone full wonderfly
A poynted Dyamonde, of marvelous bygnes
With many other, great stones of riches.
So up we went, to a chamber fair
A place of pleasure, and delectacion
Strowed with flowers, flagraunte of air
Without any spotte of perturbacion
I beheld right well the operation,
Of the marvelous roufe, set full of Rubies
And tynst with saphers, and many turkeys
The walls were hanged, with golden arras
Which treated well, of the siege of Thebes
And yet all about us depured was,
The cristallyne windows, of great bryghtnes
I can nothing extend the goodlines,
Of this palaice, for it is impossible
To show all that unto me was vysible.
But la bell Pucell, full right gentilly
Did sit adowne, by a window side
And caused me also, full swetely
By her to sit, at that gentle tide
Welcome she said, ye shall with me abide
After your sorrow, to live in joy and bliss
You shall have that, you have deserved iwys
Her redolent words, of sweet influence
Degouted vapoure, most aromatike
And made conversion, of my complacence
Her depured, and her lusty rethorike
My courage reformed, that was so lunatike
My sorrow defeted, and my mind did modefy
And my dolourous heart, began to pacifye.
All thus my love, we began to devise
For each of other, were right joyous
Then at the last, in a marvelous wise
Full suddenly, there came unto us
Little Cupide, with his mother Uenus
Which was well cladde, in a fair mantell blewe
With golden hearts, that were perst a new
And round about us, she her mantle cast
Saying that she, and her son Cupide
Would us conioyne, in marriage in haste
And to let know, all your court so wide
Send you Perceueraunce, before to provide
To warn your ladies, for to be ready
To morrow by time, right well and solemnly
We answered, both our hearts were in one
Saying that we, did right well agree
For all our foes, were added and gone
Right glad I was, that joyful day to see
And then anon, with great humility
La bell Pucell, to a fair chamber bright
Did me then bring, for to rest all night
And she took her leave, I kissed her lovely
I went to bed, but I could not sleep
For I thought so much, upon her inwardely
Her most sweet lokes, into my heart did crepe
Percyng it through, with a wound so deep
For Nature thought, every hour a day
Till to my lady, I should my debt well pay.
Of the great marriage, between graunde Amoure, and labell Pucell. Capit. xxxix.
THen Perceueraunce, in all goodly haste
Unto the steward, called Liberality
Gave warnyng for to make ready fast
Against this time, of great solemnity
That on the morrow, hallowed should be
She warned the cook, called Temperaunce
And after that the ewres Obseruaunce.
With Pleasaunce the panter, and dame Curtesy
The gentle butler, with the ladies all
Each in her office, was prepared shortly
Against this feast, so much triumphall
And la bell Pucell, then in special
Was up by time, in the morrow graye
Right so was I, when I saw the day.
And right anon, la bell Pucell me sent
Against my weddyng, of the saten fine
White as the milk, a goodly garment
Braudred with pearl, that clearly did ^^^ne
And so the marriage for to determine,
Uenus me brought, to a royal chapel
Which of fine gold, was wrought euerydell.
And after that, the gay and glorious
La bell Pucel, to the chapel was lead
In a white vesture, fair and precious
With a golden chaplet, on her yelowe head
And Lex ecclesie, did me to her wedde
After which weddyng, there was a great feast
Nothing we lacked, but had of the best
What should I tarry, by long continuance
Of the feast, for of my joy and pleasure
Wisdom can judge, without variaunce
That naught I lacked, as ye may be sure
Paiyng the sweet due debt of nature
Thus with my lady, that was fair and clear
In joy I lived, full right many a year.
O lusty youth, and young tender heart
The true companion, of my lady bright
God let us never, from other astart
But all in joy, to live both day and night
Thus after sorrow, joy arrived aryght
After my pain, I had sport and play
Full little thought I, that it should decay.
Till that dame nature, naturyng had made
All things to grow, unto their fortitude
And nature naturyng, waxt retrograde
By strength my youth, so for to exclude
As was ever, her old consuetude
First to augment, and then to abate
This is the custom, of her hye estate.
THus as I lived, in such pleasure glad
Into the chamber, came full privily
A fair old man, and in his hand he had
A crooked staff, he went full wekely
Unto me then, he came full softly
And with his staff, he took me on the breast
Obey he said, I must you needs arest.
My name is age, which have often seen
The lusty youth, perish unhappily
Through the desecte, of the self I wene
And evermore, I do think in wardly
That my deeds of youth, were of great folly
And thou thy self, right joyous may be
To live so long, for to be like to me.
Happy is he, that may well over pass
The narowe bridge, over fragilitie
Of his wanton youth, brittle as the glass
For the youth is open, to all frailtye
Ready to fall, into great iniquitye
Full well is he, that is brydled fast
With fair dame Reason, till his youth be past
I obeyed his rest, there was no remedy
My youth was past, and all my lustines
And right anon, to us came Policye
With auaryce, bringyng great riches
My whole pleasure, and delight doubtless
Was set upon, treasure insaciate
It to behold, and for to agregate.
The fleshely pleasure, I had cast aside
Little I loved, for to play, or dance
But ever I thought, how I might provide
To spare my treasure, land and substance
This was my mind, and all my purueyaunce
As upon death, I thought little or never
But gathered riches, as I should live ever.
BUt when I thought, longest to endure
Death with his dart, arest me suddenly
Obey he said, as ye may be sure
You can resist, nothing the contrary
But that you must, obey me naturally
What you avails, such treasure to take
Sythens by force, ye must it now forsake.
Alas quod I, nothing can me aid
This worldely treasure, I must leave behind
For earth of earth, will have his debt now paid
What is this world, but a blast of wind.
I must neades dye, it is my native kind
And as I was, at this conclusion
To me did come, dame Confession.
With dame Contricion, which began to bewail
My sins great, with whole repentance
And Satisfaction, without any fail
With dame Conscience, did weye in balaunce
How that they might, then without doubtaunce
My treasure and good, so gotten wrongfutly
To restore again, to the rightful party.
Of holy church, with all humility
My rightes I took, and then incontinent
Nature auailed in so low degree
That death was come, and all my life was spent
Out of my body, my soul then it went
To Purgatory, for to be purified
That after that, it might be glorified.
Capi. xlii.
THe good dame Mercy, with dame Charity
My body buried, full right humbly
In a fair temple, of old antiquity
Where was for me, a dyrege devoutly
And with many a mass, full right solemnly
And over my grave, to be in memory
Remembrance made, this little epitaphy.
O earth on earth, it is a wonders case
That thou art blind, and will not the know
Though upon earth, thou have thy dwelling place
Yet earth at last, must needs the overthrow
Thou think the, to be no earth I trow
For if thou did, thou would then apply
To forsake pleasure, and to learn to dye.
Pride.
O earth of earth, why art thou so proud
Now what thou art, call to remembrance
Open thine ears, unto my song aloude
Is not thy beutye, strength, and puissaunce
Though it be cladde, with clothes of pleasaunce
Uery earth, and also worms fode
When earth to earth, shall turn the blood.
Wrath.
And earth with earth, why art thou so wroth
Remember the, that it vayleth right naught
For thou may think, of a perfect truth
If with the earth, thou have a quarrel sought
Amiddes the earth, there is a place ywrought
When earth to earth, is turned properly
The for thy sin, to punish wondersly.
Envy.
And earth for earth, why have thou Envy
And the earth upon earth, to be more prosperous
Then thou thy self, fretyng the inwardly
It is a sin, right foul and vycious
And unto God, also full odious
Thou think I trow, there is no punishment
Ordained for sin, by egall judgment.
Slouthe.
Toward heaven to follow on the way,
Thou art full slow, and think nothing
That thy nature, does full sone decay
And death right fast, is to the coming
God grant the mercy, but no time enlongyng
When thou have time, take time and space
When time is past, lost is the time of grace
Couetise.
And when earth to earth, is next to reuert
And nature low, in the last age
Of earthly treasure, earth does set his heart
Insaciatly, upon couetise to rage
He thinks not, his life shall assuage
His good is his God, with his great riches
He thinks not, for to leave it doubtless.
Glotony.
The pomped clerks, with fode delicious
Earth often feadeth, with corrupt glotony
And not hynge, with works virtuous
The soul does feed, right well ententifly
But without measure, full inordinately
The body lives, and will not remember
How earth to earth, must his strenthe surrender
Lechery.
The vile carcass, set upon a fire
Does often haunt, the sin of lechery
Fulfillyng the foul carnal desire,
Thus earth with earth, is corrupt marueyloussye
And earth on earth, will nothing purifye
Till earth to earth, be near subverted
For earth with earth, is so perverted.
O mortal folk, you may behold and se
How I lie here, sometime a mighty knight
The end of joy, and all prosperity
Is death at last, through his course and might
After the day, there comes the dark night
For though the day, be never so long
At last the belles, ringeth to euensong
And my self, called la graunde amoure
Sekyng adventure, in the worldely glory
For to attain, the riches and honor
Did think full little, that I should here lie
Till death did mark me, fuil right privily
Lo what I am, and whereto you must
Like as I am, so shall you be all dust
Then in your mind, inwardly despise
The brittle world, so full of doublenes
With the vile flesh, and right sone arise
Out of your sleep, of mortal heaviness
Subdue the devil, with grace and mekenes
That after your life, frail and transitory
You may then live, in joy perdurably.
Capit. xliii.
ANd as remembrance, mine epytaphy set
Over my grave, in came dame Fame
With brennyng tongues, without any let
Saying that she would spread about my name
To live in honor, without any shame
Though that dead were, my earthly body
Yet my renown, should reign eternally.
The power, estate, and royal dignitye
Of dame Fame, in every region
Is for to spread, by hye aucthoritye
The noble deeds, of many a champion
As they are worthy, in mine opinion
For though his body, be dead and mortal
His fame shall endure, and be memorial.
Did not graunde Amoure, with his royal deeds
Win la bell Pucell, the most fair lady
And of hye honor, attained the medes
In the demeanyng him, so worthily
Sleyng the great terrible giauntes ugly
And also the fyrye monster vyolent,
Of the seven metalles, made by enchauntment
About the world, in every nation
That evermore, he shall abide alive
Of his great acts, to make relation
In books many, I shall of him contriue
From one to other, I shall his name so drive
That evermore without extinguishment
In burning tongues, he shall be parmanent
Hector of Troy.
Unto this day, raygneth the hye renown
Of the worthy Hector, prince vyctorious
About is spread, in every region and town
His noble acts, and courage chyualrous.
In full many books, right delicious
Unto the readers, who list to give audience
To hear report, of his great excellence
Iosue.
And in likewise, duke Iosue the gent
Which was right strong, and fierce in battle
Whose noble feats, high and excellent
I have caused, with diligent travail
To abide in books, without any fail
Who list his story, for to see or here
In the bible it does right well appear.
Judas Machabeus.
Also the noble and hardy feats of war
Of Judas Machabeus, I about have cast
In every nation, for to raygne afar
Though that his life, out of this world be past
His fame shall prospere, and shall never waste
Thus with my power, of every worthy
I spread his deeds, in tongues of memory.
David.
Did not king David, a lions jaws tear
In his tender youth, he so hardy was
The lions crueltye, might nothing him fear
And after that, he slew great Golias
All in his time, he did in honor pass
And I dame Fame, without any doubt
Have spread his name, in all the world about.
Alexander.
Also king Alexander, the noble conqueroure
Whose great power, in all the world was known
Of me dame Fame, he wanne the honor
As I my trumpe, after his death have blown
Whose sound aloude, can not be over thrown
Thus in flaming tongues, all about I fly
Through the world, with my wings swiftly.
Julius Cezar.
And of the worthy, Cezar Julius
All about, with golden beams bright
His name shall dure, and be full glorious
In all the world, with ardaunt tongues light
His Fame shall raygne, he has it won by right
For to abide, and ever to augment
Withouten let, or yet impediment.
Arthure.
Also yet Arthur, the good king of Britayne
With all his knights, of the round table
I now dame Fame, shall make to remain
Their worthy acts, high and honorable
Perpetually, for to be commendable
In royal books, and gestes historiall
Their Fame is known, right hye tryumphall.
Charles.
And then Charles, the great king of France
With all his noble dousepers also,
As Roulande and Oliver, of his alyaunce
With all the residue, and many other mo
Their fame increases, runnyng to and fro
The hardy deeds, did them magnifye
Unto me Fame, their names to notify.
Godfrey of Boleyn.
And Godfrey of Boleyn, of hardy courage
That of the paynyms wanne the victory
His worthy acts did their strength aswage
Whose fame renowned is full openly
About the world reygnyng so royally
In stamyng tongues to be intelligible
His most hie acts so much invincible.
And in likewise without abatment
I shall cause for to be memoryal
The famous acts so high beneuolent
Of graunde amoure my knight in special
His name shall dure and be eternal
For though his body be wrapped in claye
Yet his good fame shall remain always
And right anon she called remembrance
Commaundyng her right truly for to write
Both of mine acts and my governance
Which than right sone began to endyte
Of my feats of arms, in a short respyte
Whose goodly stories, in tongues several
About were sent, for to be perpetual.
And thus I Fame, am ever magnified
When earth in earth, has taken his estate
Thus after death, I am all glorified
What is he now, that can my power abate
Infinite I am, nothing can me mate
The spryng of honor, and of famous clerks
My self I am, to renown their warkes.
Capitu. xliiii.
ANd as dame Fame, was in laudation
Into the temple, with marvelous likeness
Suddenly came Time, in breuiacion
Whose similitude, I shall anon express
Aged he was, with a bearde doubtless
Of swalowes feaders, his wings were long
His body federed, he was hye and strong.
In his left hand, he had an horology
And in his right hand, a fire brennyng
A sword about him, gyrte full surely
His legs armed, clearly shynynge
And on his noddle, darkely flaming
Was set Saturn, pale as any lead
And Jupiter, amiddes his foreheade.
In the mouth Mars, and in his right winge
Was splendent Phoebus, with his golden beams
And in his breast, there was resplendishyng
The shinyng Uenus, with depured streams
That all about, did cast her fyrye leames
In his left wynge Mercury, and above his waste
Was horned Dyane, her opposition past.
My name quod he, is in division
As time was, time is, and the time future
I marvel much, of the presumption
Of thee dame Fame, so puttyng in ure
Thy great praise, saying it shall endure
For to be infinite, evermore in prease
Seeing that I, shall all thy honor cease.
Shall not I time, destroy both sea and land
The sun, and moan, and the stars all
By very reason, thou shall understand
At last shall lose, their course in general
On time past, it vayleth not to call
Now by this horologe, it does well appear
That my last name, does evermore draw near.
In my right hand, the great fire so fervent
Shall burn the time, and also minyshe
The fatal tongues, for it is accident
Unto me time, all things to peryshe
When my last end, I shall accomplish
And thus in vain, thou have thy labor spent
When by me time, thou shall be so brent.
In eternity, before the creation
Of author and man, all thing was visible
In Gods light and due probacion
Of his godheade, which is intelligible
To whom nothing, can be impossible
For in my self, a hye and sufficient
Before all things, he was refulgent.
Unto whom only, is apparaunce
Of my last end, as mine origynall
Was in his sight, without doubtaunce
For only of him, it is especial
The hye power, and godhead infinall
The future tence, to know dyrectly
Unto whom, it appears openly.
I am the lodestarre, to dame eternity
When man of earth, has his creation
After the minute, of his nativity
He takes then his operation,
Upon me time, at every season
In the same hour, the world was create
Originally, I took mine estate.
Could the nine worthyes so vyctorious,
Do all their acts, without time or space
Time is a thing, both gaye and glorious
When it passes, with virtue and grace
Man in this world has a dwelling place
Either hell or heaven, without leasyng
Always he gets, in his time spendyng.
Withouten time, is no earthly thing
Nature, fortune, or yet dame Sapience
Hardines, clergy, or yet learning
Past, future, or yet in presence
Wherefore I am, of more hye preeminence
As cause of fame, honor and clergy
They can nothing, without him magnify.
Do not I time, cause nature to augment
Do not I time, cause nature to decay
Do not I time, cause man to be present
Do not I time, take his life away
Do not I time, cause death take his say
Do not I time, pass his youth and age
Do not I time every thing assuage.
In time, Troy the city was edified
By time also, was the destroction
Nothing without time, can be fortified
No earthly joy, nor tribulation
Without time, is for to suffer passion
The time of earth, was our destruction
And the time of earth, was our redemption
Adam of earth, son of virginity
And Eve by God, of Adam create
These two, the world dampened in certainetie
By disobedience, so foul and vycyate
And all other, then from them generate
Till peace, and mercy, made right to incline
Out of the Lion, to enter the vyrgyn.
Like as the world, was destroyed totally
By the vyrgyns son, so it seemed well
A vyrgyns son, to redeem it pyteously
Whose hye Godheade, in the chosen vessel
Forty wekes, naturally did dwell
Nature wekes, naturally did god of kind
In the virgyn, he did such nature find.
Thus without nature, nature wondersly
In a virgyn pure, openly has wrought
To the God of nature, nothing truly
Impossible is, for he made of naught
Nature first, which naturyng has taught
Naturately, right naturate to make
Why may not he then, the pure nature take.
By his Godheade, of the virgyn Mary
His elect mother, and arcke of testament
Of holy church, the blessed luminary
After the birthe, of her son excellent
Uirgyn she was, yet always permanent
Disnullyng the sects, of false ydolatry
And castyng down, the fatal heresy.
Thus when I time, in every nation
Raygned in rest, and also in peace
And Octauian, in his domination
Through the world, and the peopled preace
Letters had sent, his honor to increase
Of all the number, for to be certain
For to obey him, as their sovereign.
In whose time God took his nativity
For to redeem us, with his precious blood
From the devils bond, of great iniquity
His heart was perst, hangyng on the rode
Was not this time, unto man right good
Shall not I time, evermore abide
Till that in Libra, at the dreadefull tide
Of the day of dome, then in the balaunce
Almighty God, shall be just and egall
To every person, withouten doubtaunce
Each as they did deserve in general
Some to have joy, some pain eternal
Then I am past, I may no longer be
And after me, is dame Eternity.
ANd thus as Time made his conclusion,
Eternity in a fair white vesture
To the temple came, with whole affection
And on her head, a dyademe right pure
With three crowns, of precious treasure
Eternity she said, I am now doubtless
Of heaven queen, and of hell empress.
First God made heaven, his proper habitacle
Though that his power, be in every place
In eterne heaven, is his tabernacle
Time is there in no manner, of case
Time renneth always, his end to embrace
Now I my self, shall have no endyng
And my maker had no beginning.
In heaven and hell, I am continually
Withouten end, to be in extinguissible
As evermore, to rain full royally
Of every thing, I am invincible
Man of my power, shall be intelligible
When the soul, shall rise against the body
To have judgment, to live eternally.
In heaven or hell, as he does deserve
Who that loves God, above every thing
All his commandments, he will then observe
And spend his time, in virtuous living
Idleness will evermore be eschuynge
Eternallioye, he shall then attain
After his labor, and his busy pain
O mortal folk, reuole in your mind
That worldly joy, and frail prosperity
What is it like, but a blast of wind
For you thereof, can have no certainty
It is now so full, of mutabilitie
Set not your mind, upon worldly wealth
But evermore, regard your souls health.
When earth in earth, has taken his corrupt taste
Then to repent, it is for you to late
When you have time, spend it nothing in waste
Time past with virtue, must enter the gate
Of joy and bliss, with mine hye estate
Without time, for to be everlasting
Which God grant us, at our last endyng
Now blessed lady of the health eternal
The quene-of comfort, and of heavenly glory
Say to thy sweet son, which is infinal
To give me grace, to win the victory
Of the devil, the world, and of my body
And that I may, my self well apply
Thy son and the, to laud and magnify.
Explicit. The pastime of pleasure.
The excusation of the Aucthoure. Capit. xlvi.
INto all Poets, I do me excuse
If that I offend, for lack of science
This little book, yet do ye not refuse
Though it be deuoyde, of famous eloquence
Add or detray, by your hye Sapience
And pardon me, of my hye enterprise
Which of late, this fable did feign and devise.
Go little book, I pray God the save
From miss metryng, by wrong impression
And who that ever, list the for to have
That he perceive, well thine intencion
For to be grounded, without presumption
As for to eschew, the sin of ydlenes
To make such books, I apply my business.
Besechyng God, for to give me grace
Books to compyle, of moral virtue
Of my master Lidgate, to follow the trace
His noble fame, for to laud and renew
Which in his life, the slouthe did eschew
Making great books, to be in memory
On whose soul, I pray God have mercy.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by John Waylande, dwelling in fletestrete, at the sign
of the Sun. over against the Conduite. Anno do. M. D. L. iiii. The. i. day of
June.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


