SERMON OF THE STEWARDS DANGER: Preached at Paul's Cross the 15. of August by
JOHN HAYVVARD: And now published at the earnest request of diverse well disposed.

LVKE. 16.11, 12. If then you have not been faithful in the wicked riches, who
will trust you in the true treasure?

And if you have not been faithful in another man's goods, who shall give you
that which is yours?

AT LONDON Printed for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop at the
West door of Paul's. 1602.

THE STEWARDS DANGER.
LVKE 16.1, 2. 1. And he said also unto his Disciples: there was a certain
rich man which had a Steward, and he was accused unto him, that he wasted his
goods.

2. And he called him and said unto him, how is it that I hear this of thee?
Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.


Our blessed Savior in this place rehearses a Parable of a rich man and his
steward, that, before he was to leave his office, provided for himself whereof
to live afterward. By the example of whose wisdom he teaches al men, that are
stewards to the most rich God all the time of their abiding in this world,
before they leave their office, and deliver up their account, to provide wisely
for the time following, that they may then have whereof to live in another
world.

The parable reaches unto the eight verse, and from thence unto the fourteenth
reaches the application of the parable in the doctrine, that from the parable
our Savior Christ delivers.

In the parable occupying seven verses, we are to consider the persons whereof
report is made, and the report that is made of them: the persons are named to
be a rich man and his steward, in the beginning of the first verse. The report
made of them reaches to the end of the seventh verse.

The report has in it two things: the danger of the steward, and the remedy
which he devised aforehand to help afterward. The stewards danger is in the
two verses of my text. The remedy that he devised is in the next five.

The two verses that report the stewards danger, report also the occasion of
his danger. The occasion of his danger was his wastfulnes. The danger
occasioned by his wastfulnes is set down in diverse degrees thereof. The first
degree was, that he was accused to his master to be a waster in the first
verse. A second degree of his danger was this, that he was called to give
account. A third and last, that he must be put from his office. These two last
degrees are in the second verse.

And he said also unto his disciples: there was a certain rich man which had a
steward. In these words the persons are named, of whom the report is made in
this parable: the one for his wealth is called a rich man ( there was a
certain rich man) the other by his office is called a steward ( which had a
steward) And here we are to consider whom our Savior would have us to
understand by this rich man and his steward, that we may profit our selves by
the parable.

By the rich man we are to understand almighty God, to whom the title of rich
does most properly appertain, because the heavens and the earth are his, and
all that is in them.

Concerning the heavens, who shall contend against him? Among men, the wicked
have no inheritance there, no claim they can make, no title have they unto it.

The godly have, but it is of the gift of God. And they do not seek heaven,
as men desiring to turn God out of the possession that they may hold it to
themselves: as the unbelieving Gentiles fabulously reported of the giants that
made war against their gods, and sought to thrust Jupiter out of heaven. By
which fiction they noted the pride of men, that spoil God of his honor to
deck themselves withal. The Saints do not so claim heaven, as those that
would turn God out of heaven, to hold it themselves: but they desire heaven,
in hope there to dwell with God, he being King and they citizens of that place.
Concerning heaven therefore none will contend against the Lord, but that it is
his. He made it of nothing, and has planted there his habitation and throne,
though the heaven of heavens cannot contain him. The Prophet says, Psalm.
115.16. Psalm. 115.16
The heavens, even the heavens are the Lords.

But concerning the earth, men being in possession of it, will perhaps contend
against God, and say, that it is theirs. And so indeed it is, but of the gift
of God: as in the same Psalm and verse it follows: Psalm. 115.16
But he has given the earth to the sons of men. Which, having granted to
men for a time, he holds the right of it in his own power for ever, taking
it at his pleasure from them to whom he had given it, and constituting new
Lords of it. As he teaches us in Iere. 27.5. saying: Ierem. 27.5.
I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground by my
great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it to whom it pleases
me. But now I have given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar the
King of Babel my servant. But were it so that men held the earth in absolute
right, so that they could not be removed from it, and God had no right at all
in it: yet should they be beggars, compared with God, that is Lord of heaven,
and he only worthy the name of rich. But now the earth also is the Lords,
and all that is in it, and all that dwell upon it: so that rich men among us are
part of the Lords possession: and the riches of the rich among us are his
possession. As it is written in Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, and all
that therein is, the world, and they that dwell therein.

This I could not pass over unobserved, for your sakes, that are pinched daily
with many wants. One wants food, another clothes* a third wa^teth a settled
dwelling place: a fourth peace in his place: a fifth has outward things, but
he wants health and strength. Another has the gifts of the body, but his
dry soul is thirsty, his starned soul is hungry, he wants the knowledge
of the truth, he wants wisdom to direct him in prosperity and adversity:
he wants faith and the comfort of Gods spirit, and is not able to keep peace,
and to quiet the troubles of his conscience: he wants the grace and help of
Gods spirit, to subdue and keep under the lusts of his flesh. And it may be
those things which men have not they know not where to have: and being
themselves beggars, they know not where the rich man dwells, that is able to
minister to their wants.

This rich man, most rich, I show you this day: ask of him and you shall
receive, seek at his hands and you shall find, knock at his door and it
shall be opened unto you.

If food be wanting: he gives food to all flesh, because his mercy
indureth for ever. If clothes be wanting: he made the first garments for our
first parents, and cloatheth the grass of the field. If health: he is the
Physician that kills and makes alive, that wounds and makes whole. If
peace: it is God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, that makes
war to cease in all the world, that breaks the bow, and knappeth the spear
asunder, and burns the chariots in the fire. If knowledge: it is he that
teaches man knowledge, and it is his promise to his Church, they shall be al
taught of God. If wisdom: ask of God (says the Apostle) who gives to all
men liberally and reprocheth no man. If faith: it is not of our selves, it is
the gift of God. Whatsoever thou want, bodily or spiritual, transitory or
eternal, earthly or heavenly; ask it of God, for every good giving and every
perfect gift is from above, from the father of lights. He is most rich and we
most poor: and if our eyes look up unto him, he will open his hand, and fill
us with his blessings. Thus much of this rich man.

Which had a steward. It was an usual thing from the beginning, for Princes,
great men and rich men to have stewards, that did ouersee their households, and
had rule of their goods: not that they themselves in the mean while would be
idle; nor giving absolute power to their stewards, to dispose of their goods at
their pleasure: but that, being eased by their stewards in the ordering of
their household affairs, they might the better attend upon public causes; and
require account of their stewards at their pleasure.

So had Abraham his steward, Eleazer of Damascus, of whom he was afraid, least
he should be his heir, because he was then childlesse. And Potiphar, having
bought Joseph of the Midianites, and finding that the Lord was with him, and
made all that he did to prosper, he made him ruler of his house, and put all that he had into his hand, so making him his steward. And in the parable in the
Gospel, the Lord of the vineyard, when the evening was come, called his
steward, and commanded him to reckon with the laborers, and to begin with the
last. And unto this day, Princes, Noblemen, and rich men have stewards and like
officers, whose service they use in governing their private estate.

And even so almighty God, the rich man in our text, a King of the greatest
dignity, an householder of the greatest family, has his stewards and
officers, whose service he uses, not for need of their help, but for trial
of their fidelity: himself is the mean time most prudently governing hi^
whole kingdom, and most watchfully observing the behavior of his stewards.

Now who this steward is we may easily learn by another parable. Luke 19.12.
A certain noble man went into a far country, to receive for himself a
kingdom, and so to come again. And he called his ten servants, and delivered
them ten pieces of money, and said unto them, occupy till I come. Every man
and every child of man that has received any gift of God, is this steward
betrusted with his masters goods. What have thou (says the Apostle) that thou
have not received? In which words he shows us that no man has any good
thing of his own, and whatsoever he has is the goods of his master, and he a
steward to account for the same.

Such a one is the Magistrate in the Commonwealth. Such a one is the Minister
in the Church. Great things are committed to their charge. Such a one is the
learned man that knows much. The wise man that understands the reasons and
causes of things. Such a one is the politic Captain, the valiant soldier,
the skillful artificer, the father of the family, many great and precious
things are committed to the disposing of these men.

Yea, such a one is every man and child of man, though he be not called to any
public charge, nor betrusted with those things that are esteemed great in the
world. Yet notwithstanding many talents of his masters goods are committed unto
him, and he is made a steward of great trust. He has received of God his
soul, living, understanding, and indeed with many excellent gifts of nature
and grace. He has received his body, strong, comely, and healthful, a house
for his soul, and a temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in: the countenance
whereof is lifted up to heaven, to behold the place of his rest, which he
should aspire unto, and to contemplate and think upon his Creator that
dwells there: having many members serving to honorable uses; the care to
hear, the eye to see, the tongue to speak, the throat to breathe, the feet to
walk, and the hands to handle, with many other members and organes, both inward
and outward, of more excellent price then all the treasures of the earth. Also
he has received of God his precious time, a treasure much to be accounted of,
his hours, his days, his months, his years, in which many excellent works
may be brought forth, honorable to Gods name, profitable to our brethren,
and of great benefit to our selves. These talents and portions of the goods of
our God, every one, even the poorest is betrusted with, and thereby he is made
one of the stewards of God.

Therefore we are al stewards, that must one day give accounts to God for great
things. And what is required of Stewards, but that they be faithful? The
Apostle faith, 1. Cor. 4 verse. 1, 2. Let a man so think of us as of the
ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. And as for the rest,
it is required of the disposers, that every man be found faithful. Whatsoever
he is, to whose disposition God has committed any thing, the same is bound in
duty, to be faithful to him that has trusted him. Give me leave therefore to
put you in mind of this your duty. You are stewards to God, be faithful to
God.

Art thou called to a public office? God in his word teaches thee how thou
should carry thy self in thy office. Follow thy masters rule and be
faithful. If thou be a Judge, judge justly between a man and his brother. If
thou be a Minister of the word, preach the word in season and out of season.
Art thou a father? bring up thy children in the fear of God mildly. Art thou a
master? do unto thy servant that which is just. Whatsoever thy place is,
carry thy self holily. Thou art a steward, therefore be faithful.

Have thou the goods of the world? have thou the graces of Gods spirit? have
thou honor, power, riches, health and strength? have thou wisdom, counsel,
knowledge, utterance, and the like? The word does teach thee, that is, God thy
master does command thee how to use these things. Do so faithfully, for thou
art his steward.

If thou have nothing else, yet thou have an immortal soul, with the faculties
thereof. Thou have an humane body with the members thereof: and thou have as
much time as any other, for the day is as long unto thee, and the year also,
as unto the greatest and richest in the world. God in his word has appointed
us how to use these things. For our time, that we walk circumspectly; not as
fools, Ephesians. 5.15.
but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil. And that
henceforth we live, 1. Pet. 4.2.
as much time as remains in the flesh, not after the lusts of men, but after
the will of God. For it is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past
of the life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drunkenness, in gluttony, drinking^, and in abominable Idolatries. Concerning
our bodies and souls, that for as much as our bodies are the temples of the
holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.20.
which is in us, whom we have of God, and we are not our own, but are bought
with a price, therefore we must glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits,
for they are Gods. Thus Go^ commands how to use things, and they are his
goods, and we are his stewards, and stewards ought to be faithful, therefore
let us be faithful. Thus much of this steward.

Thus have we considered the parties of whom the report is here made. Now let
us come to consider of the report that is made of them.

The report reaching unto the eight verse, has in it two things: the stewards
danger: and the remedy that he devised aforehand to help afterward. His
danger is contained in my text, and therewith only we have to deal at this
time.

Together with his danger is noted the occasion of his danger, which came of
himself: for God is good unto all, and man ever gives the occasion of his
own hurt.

The occasion of his danger was this. He wasted his masters goods. The
danger, that grew unto him by occasion of his wastfulnesse, is set down in
certain degrees thereof. The first degree was, that he was accused in the
first verse. A second, that he was called to give account. A third, that he
must be put out of office. These two are in the second verse.

The occasion of his danger was, that he wasted his masters goods. His place
was good, wherein he lived well; and his master kind unto him, that had preferred
him well. His own default bred his overthrow. And this is a truth generally
holding in all men, that they only give the occasion of their own hurt.

God created man righteous, and placed him in Paradise, and gave him the fruits
of the earth, and the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and dominion
over the works of his hands: and withheld nothing from him, but the fruit of
one tree, for the trial and exercise of his obedience. Then was man an
excellent creature, and truly happy through the goodness of God toward him. And
by no means can man's hurt be imputed unto God.

But you will say, the envious Devil tempted our first parents, Object.
and drew them into the course that bred their undoing, and so the Devil and
not man, guilty of man's hurt.

Not so, man cannot excuse himself by the devil, that he should not be
guilty of his own fall. For he ought to have contented himself with that
that God had allowed him, and not to have aspired unto excellency of knowledge
like God. And he ought to have believed God that said, thou shall dye, and not
to have distrusted God, and credited the Serpent that said contrary to God,
thou shall not dye. He ought to have obeyed his Creator, that had said unto him
as touching the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it,
then either the flattery of an enemy, or the counsel and example of his
wife, or the judgment of his own eye. Thus ought he to have done: and if thus
he had done, the envy of Satan could not have hurt him, and he should still
have stood in his first happiness.

But his ambition that would be like God, his infidelity to distrust God, and
his disobedience rejecting the commandment of God, these brought shame,
misery and death upon man, and upon all his posterity, in his loins, guilty
together with him. And man gave occasion of his own decay in his first and
great decay.

And since the covenant of grace, and promise of the woman's seed, that should
crush the Serpents head, since the restitution of man, and recovery of Gods
favor, by the Mediator, no man falls into destruction, but by his own
voluntary transgression. For even unto lowering Cain when his countenance was
cast down against his brother, and his heart meditated murder, God said Genesis
4.7. Genesis 4.7.
If thou do well* shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at the door. Therefore man is not hurt of God, but of himself, and
perishes not but by his own default. Your iniquities (says Esaias. 59.2.) have
separated between you and your God, Esaias. 59.2.
and your sins hide his face from you, that he will not hear. And in Iere.
9.12. it is thus written: Ierem. 9.12.
Who is wise to understand this? and to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken,
he shall declare. Why does the land perish, and is burnt up like a wilderness
that none passes through? And the Lord says, because they have forsaken my
law, which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked
thereafter, but have walked after the stubbornnes of their own heart, and
after Balims, which their fathers taught them. Therefore thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel, behold I will feed this people with wormwood, and
give them waters of gall to drink. I will scatter them also among the heathen,
whom neither they nor their fathers have known, and I will send a sword after
them, till I have consumed them. So that from whence-so-euer man's destruction
comes, God giving order for it, and Gods creatures doing execution, yet the
occasion ever comes from man himself; without whose offense, neither would
God command, neither should his creatures execute any evil upon man: for when
the ways of a man please the Lord, Prou. 16.^.
he will make his enemies to be at peace with him.

And as for inferior domages, hurts and hindrances received from men, that
either of envy seek our undoing, or of a malicious nature desire to do hurt,
to whom we have given no cause of such evil dealing with us, and in the
testimony of our conscience are not guilty of the despite and hurt they do
us*

As for these things, we are to understand, that as they are done by the
ministry of men, so they are ordered by the providence of God. And though we
have given no occasion to the instrument, yet we have given it to him that
directs the instrument. For though thou have given no occasion to the thief,
that robs thee by the high way, to the drunkard, that raileth upon thee in
the streets, to the false servant, that runs away with thy goods, to the
envious man, that is offended at nothing else, but thy prosperity and well
doing; as David gave no occasion to Absalom to rebel against him, nor to Shemei
to rail upon him: yet thou have given almighty God the director, good
occasion to stir up against thee these instruments of thy hurt: as David had
given God, by his sin in the matter of Vriah, just cause to stir up those
enemies against him: and so thou art the occasion of thine own hurt.

But if thou have walked uprightly with God, and dealt justly and kindly with
men, and neither given heaven nor earth just occasion of offense: but the
devil of envy makes suite, and God for thy trial gives leave, and then
wicked men without cause are set on work, and thou art vexed on every side, in
thy name, in thy goods, in thy children, in thy body, by railings, slanders,
robberies, wounds, and such other indignities. In this case, as thou think
that thou have given no occasion to be thus evil entreated: so know, that all
this evil entreaty shall be no hurt unto thee: as Job in the end, after some
long trial, found himself benefited, not hurt by all his sufferings. For
Peter tells us, 1. Pet. 1.7. that the trial of our faith, 1. Pet. 1.7.
that is more precious then gold that perishes, shall be found unto our praise
and honor and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And that which makes
to thy praise and honor and glory, by the trial of thy pure and precious
faith, as all thy sufferings do, that must not be esteemed hurt, but a benefit
unto thee, especially considering that the end of thy rebukes shall be glory
with God, the end of thy losses treasures in heaven, when, having first suffered
with Christ here, we shall after be glorified with him in his kingdom. No hurt
therefore grows to man, but whereof he gives the occasion himself. As the
steward in this place grew into danger by his own default, wasting his masters
goods.

Thus much of the occasion of his danger. Now let us consider of his danger.
Thereof are diverse degrees. The first degree (in this first verse) was this: he
was accused to his master, that he wasted his goods.

And we also waste our masters goods: Mispending our health in wa^tonnes, our
strength in violence, our wisdom in deceiving, our authority in oppressing,
our riches in riot and much wickedness, our knowledge unto pride, and almost
all the gifts of God unto the satisfying of our own lusts, advancing our own
praise, augmenting our own gain, not seeking the glory of God, nor the good
of our brother. Like to the servant in the Gospel, that did smite his
fellow-seruants, Mat. 24.49.
and did eat and drink with the drunken: And like to the prodigal son,
that wasted his goods with riotous living. Luke 15.3.
And as there were accusers that informed against this steward, so there will
be accusers that will inform against us.

In Commonwealths well governed there have always been allowed informers and
accusers, to bring to light the offenses of the people, that reformation might
be had. In the Commonwealth of the Israelites, this was looked unto, that no
man should accuse falsely; Deuteronomy. 19.16.
for that was punishable in the accuser: Otherwise it was lawful among them to
accuse. So the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day was detected, Numb.
15.33.
and the man that blasphemed the name of the Lord: Leuit. 24.11.
which were stoned in the wilderness. Among us, besides the common liberty,
and charge also given to all men, to reveal, and not to keep secret some
offenses, there are appointed also informers and sworn quest men, to make
inquiry and report. Which offices, if they were religiously performed, were
most profitable to the kingdom.

And even so is it in the kingdom of God, he has his inquisitors and
informers, to give knowledge, and to accuse, if his stewards do waste his
goods.

First Satan will accuse thee, who is called the accuser of the brethren,
Revel. 12.10. Revel. 12.10
When the great Dragon, the old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, was cast
out of heaven, a voice was heard, saying* Now is salvation in heaven, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God, day
and night. The Saints do overcome him by the blood of the lamb, and by the
word of their testimony: Yet is he a most bitter accuser, and he is privy to
the evils that thou have done, by whose suggestion thou have also done them.
And he hates thee, desiring thy condemnation. And being a liar, and the father
of lying, he will rather falsely accuse thee of that thou never did, then
forbear to speak of that that thou have done. As appears in the history of
Job, against whom, when he could bring no evidence of truth, he brought a false
surmise, saying unto God, that if he would stretch out his hand and touch all
that Job had, that is, Job. 1.11.2.5.
take away his goods from him, and would touch his bones and flesh, that is,
afflict him with pain and sores and grievous sicknesses, Job would blaspheme
him to his face. Until the time come, in the end of the world, that the devil
be cast into the bottomless pit, he will not cease to accuse us before God.

But perhaps you make light of this, because God has ordained in his law, that
one witness shall not rise up against a man: Deuteronomy. 17.6.
and that no man be punished upon the testimony of one. And it may be further,
that you think, against the devils accusations, to answer and say for your
selves before God, that the devil is a liar, and therefore in nothing to be
believed: and also a deadly enemy seeking your blood, and speaking of malice,
and therefore not to be heard. These indeed seem good exceptions against him.
Let us therefore see, if there be not more accusers then this one. And also if
there be not such, as against whom no exception can be made.

There are other accusers and those also worthy of credit. Thine own heart,
out of which, as out of a fountain, all thy evil deeds have flowed, and the
unclean lusts whereof have stirred thee up to the same evil deeds: and thine
own conscience, which is greater then a thousand witnesses, because it
inioyneth silence imperiously, and permits no reply. This conscience, this
heart, and the thoughts thereof will accuse thee, and will inform against
thee. As Paul teaches saying, Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles which have not the
law, do by nature the things contained in the law, they having not the law,
are a law unto themselves, which show the effect of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another or excusing. When men have done well according to the law, their
thoughts excuse them. When they have done evil against the law, their thoughts
accuse them. This conscience and these accusing thoughts are that book spoken
of Revel. 20.12. where John says: I saw the dead both great and small stand
before God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is
the book of life, and the dead were judged of those things, which were written
in the books, according to their works. The book of life is the register of
heaven, containing the ^ames of Gods elect. The other books that were opened,
wherein their works were seen, were the registers of their consciences, then
laid open before Gods judgment seat. So that now we have found two witnesses,
and two accusers, to come forth against us, the devil that provoked, and thine
own conscience, privy to thy sin. And against this second accuser no
exception to be taken, when thine own heart speaks in thine own cause.

There are yet more accusers. The very sins which thou have committed shall
accuse thee, yea already long since have accused thee. For so soon as thou
committest them, their cry ascends up into heaven, they appear against thee
before God, and the remembrance of them remains unto judgment, except by
repentance and faith in the blood of Christ they be done away. God says to
Cain, Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
ground. He says unto Abraham, Genesis 18.20. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great, and their sin (...) exceeding grievous. That is, their grievous sins
cry alowd in my ears against them. Esaias. 59. verse. 12. in his complaint the
Prophet has these words: Our transgressions are many before thee, and our sins
testify against us. And James 5.3. the Apostle says: Your gold and silver is
cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire. You have heaped up treasures for the last days.
Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped your fields (which is of you
kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are
entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. Al these places of scripture
testify, that our sins by us committed do accuse us, and they remain
evidence upon record against us, to convince us to have bin wastfull stewards:
And their mouth (accusing us) cannot be stopped, but by speedy conversion unto
God.

And of these witnesses and accusers, a cloud, a tempest, an army, yea a
world is ascended up against us unto God, and has cried out and still does
against us. Infinite prophanations of holy things, the profanation of Gods
holy name, of his holy Sabboths, of his holy word, of his holy Sacraments, of
his holy religion. Infinite wrongs and injuries, while every one defraudeth
another, oppresses another, and spoyleth another. Infinite excesses in
wantonness, uncleanness, and pride, in furfetting, drunkenness and idleness, and
other our infinite sins. Whereof the Prophet says for his part, Psalm. 40.12.
that his sins were more in number then the hairs of his head. And we may
well say for our parts, that our sins are more in number then the stars of
heaven, then the sand on the sea shore. These sins long since have begun, and
cease not still with open cry to accuse us, to be wasters of our masters
goods: and yet we are secure, as if none durst once open his mouth against us.
And what can thou except against these accusers, when it shall appear that
they are thy iniquities?

There is yet another accuser most faithful and most incorrupt, whom no man's
greatness can make to fear, nor any man's gift blind, that shall both accuse and
condemn, doing al things both with truth and with authority, and that is the
word of God, both written and spoken. The word and testimony which we have
heard shall testify against us, that we have been better taught, and would not
amend. And the Prophets, Apostles and messengers of the Lord of hosts, that
have spoken unto us in his name, shall come forth and say: We have showed them
the way wherein they should walk, and they chose rather to walk after the
stubbornnes of their own heart. Jesus says unto the Jews, Ioh. 5.45. Do not
think that I will accuse you unto my Father: there is one that accuses you,
even Moses, in whom ye trust. And Ioh. 12.47. If a man hear my words, and
believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save
the world. He that refuses me and hears not my words, has one that judges
him: the word that I have spoken, it shall judge him at the last day. Thus the
word of God and his ministers accuse and condemn.

Which is not to be understood as if Moses and the other servants of God should
come forth in person to accuse; or as if the word of God written or pronounced
should found out against us: but the remembrance thereof in our consciences
shall cry out against us, and accuse us before God, to whom the secrets of al
hearts shall be manifest. When we shall say in our selves and against our
selves, in such a book, leaf and chapter of the holy Scripture I read it, and
at such a Sermon, in such a place and time, and from the mouth of such a
minister of God I heard it delivered with authority, my conscience even
trembling and quaking at the hearing of it: That I should not lie, nor
blaspheme, nor curse, nor rail, nor speak filthilie; but that I should speak
the truth, and glorify God, and give wholesome and good counsel to my
neighbor. And that I should not steal, nor cousin, nor deceive, nor oppress,
nor use false waights, nor pack wares deceitfully: but give my self to honest
labor, and deal truly in bargaining, and use others, as I would have them use
me. And that I should not delight in chambering and wantonness, in fornication
and uncleanness, but should keep my vessel in holiness and in honor, and my
body chaste as a clean temple for the holy Ghost, and should use the lawful
remedy of honorable marriage, if the gift of continency were wanting unto me.
And that I should not be wrathful, furious, cruel, smiting, wounding and
killing: but should be meek, loving, and merciful, helping by all means to
cherish and maintain life. And that I should not delight in surfeiting, and
drunkenness, consuming wastfully y^ creatures of God, which others want, and
perish for want of them; but that I should feed soberly, that my very eating
and drinking might be to the glory of God: and that I should break my bread
to the hungry, and refresh the thirsty soul. And that I should fear God, and
fly the lusts of the flesh. That I should call upon God, and not trust in my
wealth. And should sanctify his Sabboths, and love the assemblies of his
Saints, and serve God in spirit and truth. And when I read and heard these
things (which I now remember) Gods spirit, working together with his word, told
me, that these were the holy rules of God: that in keeping of them there was
great reward, and the contempt and breaking of them, was death both of body and
soul. And I did believe and acknowledge it to be so: and yet, like a
desperate wretch, rejecting counsel and all warnings, I have committed all
these evils. When we remember, and speak these things in our consciences
before God, to whom the secrets of all hearts be open, then Moses and the
Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists, whose books we have read; then the
ministers of Jesus Christ whose Sermons we have heard, and the word of God
written and pronounced which we have seen and heard, these do accuse us
before God. These will be your accusers, O wastfull co^sumers of your masters
goods, that abuse your souls, your bodies, your time, your faculties, members
and hours, your dignities, goods, offices, and qualities, otherwise then the
Lord, whose stewards you are, has given you in charge. The devil that has
bin a prompter and intiser unto you, hateful and lying, that will add rather
then omit: Your own hearts and consciences, privy to your sins, consenting
to them, and often times also provoking: Your sins and actual transgressions,
that remain witnesses in record of your misled lives: and lastly, the word of
God that has called you unto better ways, and often warned you to take heed,
these will accuse you. In the first step of the stewards danger, that was
accused to his master to have wasted his goods, we are as deep as he, if we
waste as he: For we have many accusers. What shall we say then to these things?
I know that there is nothing that makes men more bold to sin, then spes
celandi, hope to keep hidden their doings. Which hope foolish sinners conceive,
deceiving themselves, imagining that they shall be able to keep their doings
secret both from God and man. Such we read the wicked man's conceit to be,
Psalm. 10.11 He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides away his
face, and will never see. They acknowledge a Judge, and acknowledge a
judgment, yet sin they boldly, supposing the Judge shall not know it, nor they
come to judgment for it. For so we find their words reported to be, Psalm.
73.11. Who does know it? or is there knowledge in the most high? They hope that
their sins, secretly done, can by no means come to the knowledge of God. And
hence do they use much cunning to hide and keep secret their sins. But in
vain is all that cunning, and in vain is all that hope: God will easily come
to the knowledge of al thy doings. He needs no informer to acquaint him, for
he beholds all things. And (silly man) that which thou think is done in
secret, is done in the presence, and before the eyes of God, who sees in
secret, to whom the night is bright day, and the darkness is clear light; to
whom the closet is as the wide fields, and thine heart lies open before him as
a volume spread. Ierem. 23.24. the Lord says: Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and
earth, says the Lord? But if the eye of the Lord could be shadowed with
darkness and cunning dealing, if his knowledge could be deluded by thy
suttleties and sleights; yet can it not be but he must know all thy doings,
there are so many accusers that will not spare to report unto him thy falsehood
and wickedness, if thou waste his goods. The devil, thine own conscience, the
sins thou have committed, and Gods word which thou have seen and heard.
Therefore the safest way for us, is to consider first what goods our master
has committed unto us: then to inquire how he has commanded us to use those
goods: last of all, diligently and faithfully to use them according to his
order, that we may be out of danger of these accusers. Thus much of this first
degree of the Stewards danger. And thus are we now got through the first verse
of our text.

And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee?
give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward. In
the words of this verse there follow two other degrees of the stewards danger:
one that he was called to account: the other, that he must be put out of
office. But before the words noting these steps of his danger, there is
recorded a check that the master gave his steward in these words: He called
him, and said unto him, how is it I hear this of thee? First let us consider a
little of this check, and then of the further degrees of his danger. He called
him, and said unto him, how is it that I hear this of thee? In this manner
masters and Lords are not wont to speak unto their stewards, but when they
hear of some disorder in them, that they have not behaved themselves so
diligently and faithfully as they ought to do, nor answered the expectation of
their Lords. And they are words of rebuking, words of reproof, wherein
appears the displeasure of the master, and wherein he gives a check unto his
false servant. And this check does teach us, in what sort wastfull stewards,
that is wicked men, shall be entertained when they come into their masters
presence. The faithful steward that looks to his masters order, and the good
servant that uses well the talent committed unto him, is entertained with
words of kindness, that give comfort and gladness to the hearers. Mat. 25.21. It
is well done good servant and faithful, thou have bin faithful in little, I
will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy. And in the same
chap. verse. 34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the world. These are words of comfort,
able to raise up even from the gate of hell. And with such words are good
servants and faithful stewards entertained into their masters presence. For
wisdom, dexterity, truth, and fidelity deserve favor, praise and reward.
But when the steward looks not to his masters order, but proves wastful: and
when the servant uses not his masters talent (left with him) well, but proves
riotous, they are worthy to be entertained with rebukes: for negligence,
falsehood, disorder and riot deserve displeasure, anger, rebuke and punishment.
Therefore does God say unto the wicked, that take his covenant in their mouth,
and know well all the orders of his household, and yet hate to be reformed, and
cast his commandments behind them, making themselves fellows to thieves,
and companions with the adulterers, speaking deceitfully, and dealing (even
with their brethren) uncharitably: unto them God says, Psalm. 50.21. These
things thou have done, and I held my tongue, therefore thou thoughtest that I
was like thee: but I will reprove thee, and set them (that is thy sins) in
order before thee. Surely though the evil steward, wasting his masters goods,
be long spared and borne with, in the patience of his master, and inioyeth his
place as if he inioyed al favor, yet let him know, that when his master
intends to look into his doings, at his first appearing he must look to be
entertained with words of heavy reproof. Consider the case of the rude guest,
that came unto the wedding, without a wedding garment: which shadoweth unto us
the case of all those that deal not uprightly and faithfully with God. The
King espied him among the guests, and said unto him, Matthew. 22.12. Friend, how
came thou in hither, and have not on a wedding garment? As if he should say,
thou rude and contemptuous man, how wast thou bold without al reverence to come
thus into my house, and to dishonor me with this thy sordid filthiness? Thus
will God check the unfaithful, as he does here his steward, saying, How is
it that I hear this of thee? And the weight of this check, who is able to
esteem? much less to bear. At thy rebuke O God of Jacob (says the Prophet,
Psalm. 76.6.) both the chariot and the horse are cast asleep: thou, even thou
art to be feared: and who shall stand in thy sight when thou art angry? Yea,
the rebuke of God casts down to hell. And therefore the Archangel, that
strove with the devil about the body of Moses, said unto him, Jude 9.
The Lord rebuke thee: as knowing that would be sufficient. Oh consider this,
you that still are wasting: that in time you may amend things, and be received
of him with words of comfort, and not with rebukes at your appearing. Thus much
of the rebuke given the unjust steward in these words, How is it that I hear
this of thee?

Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward.
Accusation went before the rebuke: examination and condemnation follow after
it. Examination in these words, Give an account of thy stewardship.
Condemnation in the next: For thou may be no longer steward. Which are the
two further degrees of his danger in this verse. But let us consider them apart.

Give an account of thy stewardship. Rebuking him in his anger whom he meant to
deprive of his office, he first requires an account of him, and will not put
him out till he have said and showed what he can for his innocence. Let us (I
pray you) learn the like moderation, to do nothing upon any accusation, till
the party accused has given account of his doings, and said and showed what
he can for his defense. If Potiphar had used this moderation, he had not
wronged Joseph as he did. And if David had used this moderation, he had not
wronged good Mephiboseth so much. Nichodemus says, Ioh. 7.51. Does our law
judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has done? Surely the law of
God, and every law agreeable to the law of God, gives leave to the accused
party to bring in his account, and make his defense.

Give an account of thy stewardship. Men call their servants to account, and so
does God his. Mat. 18.23. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a
certain king which would take account of his servants. In which parable and
diverse others Christ shows us, that surely God will call us to a reckoning
for his gifts and talents committed to us. For when God sends a man into the
world adorned with his gifts, or bestows his gifts when he has sent him, he
does it to this end, that for those gifts he should give account when he
departs out of the world. Therefore is God in his kingdom compared unto a
Noble man, that went into a far country, to receive a kingdom and to come
again, and at his departing called his servants and delivered unto them his
goods, with charge to occupy until his return, that then he might reckon
with them. That departing into a far country, with distribution of his goods
among his servants, is nothing else but the sending of us into the world with
his gifts, where we as strangers are far removed from him. As the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 5.6. Whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord. And his return to take account of his servants, is nothing else but our
appearing before him in death, after which follows judgment, upon the
account given and received. God therefore will call us to a reckoning, and all
men must deliver in their account. Hear this all of you: hearken to it every
one: let no man deceive himself. We must all give account the Apostle says 2.
Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or evil. All must appear, account must be
given, and judgment must follow accordingly. And no age, no sex, no condition
of life shall be exempted. Every age, sex and condition has his proper
privileges: but all and every one is bound to this, to give account unto God.
No age is exempted. Infants and children must account. The infants of Amalech,
and the rude children of Bethel were examined, judged and slain for their
wickedness. Young men and maidens must. For to that age Solomon says,
Ecclesiastes 11.9. Rejoice O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know that for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment. Old men and aged persons must. All are put together in that
speech of Jeremy, saying: I am full of the wrath of the Lord: Ierem. 6.11.
I am weary with holding it: I will power it out upon the children in the
street, and likewise upon the assembly of the young men: for the husband shall
be even taken with the wife, and the aged with him that is full of days. And
Helies age could not excuse him, but he accounted for his negligence.

Neither has the sex more privilege then the years: for the woman with the
man must give account, because the woman with the man is betrusted with the
gifts of God. And unto the woman as well as unto the man has God given rules,
how they should behave themselves in his service. When Paul commands Titus in
his sermons to the people, to speak the things that become wholesome doctrine:
he wills him to exhort old women, Tit. 2.3. that they be in such behavior as
becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, but teachers of
honest things, that they may instruct the young women to be sober minded, that
they love their husbands, that they love their children, that they be
discreet, chaste, keeping at home, good and subject unto their husbands, that
the word of God be not evil spoken of. Thus does God set down rules and
orders in his house unto women. And in examining, judging and punishing such as
be found faulty, he passes not by the^: for the women of Moab, that intised
the sons of Israel to fornication and idolatry, were destroyed every one of
them: the sex therefore in this case has no privilege, and both men and women
must give account.

Neither is there greater immunitie in the condition then in the sex. For the
King together with his subjects, the Noble together with the base, the
honorable Judge together with the people, the Captain together with his
soldiers, the Lord together with his tenants, the master together with his
servants, the rich together with the poor, and the free together with the
bond, must all come to account with God. If any sort and condition should be
freed, the inferior sort of subjects, of common people, of soldiers, of
tenants, of servants, of poor men, and bond men should be freed, rather then
Kings, Nobles, Judges, Captains, Lords, Masters, rich men, and free men. For
Luke 12.48. our Savior says, To whomsoever much is given, of him shall much
be required: and to whom men commit much, of him the more will they ask: As we
do rather urge them to come to account with us, that have in their hands of
ours many pounds, then those that have but a few pence. But it is certain that
al both great and small must give account. For the duties even of Kings, Judges
and great men is set down in the word of God, as well as the duties of
subjects, mean and poor men: and great me^ have bin examined, judged and
punished in the day of Gods visitation, as well as mean men. The Kings of
Sodom and Gomorrah perished with the people: and Pharaoh was drowned with his
servants. And howsoever in this world the difference is great between the
great and the small, yet to God they are all one; his servants and his
stewards, and all people, of whatsoever age, sex or condition they be, must
give account.

Hear this I pray you, and beguile not your selves: you must all give account:
and woe to the faulty. You must give account how you have ruled, and woe unto
tyrants. You must give account how you have obeyed, and woe unto rebels. You
must give account how you have used superior dignity, and woe unto the proud.
And how you have borne your low estate, and woe to the envious. You must give
account how you have used riches, and woe to them that have set their hearts
upon them. And how you have borne your poverty, and woe unto murmurers. You
must give account of your souls, and the faculties thereof, that have corrupted
your understanding with errors, and have refused to be enlightened with the
truth: that have inclined your will unto evil, and have refused, when you were
called, to turn back unto goodness. Here all your delights, pleasures, studies
and thoughts shall be brought to remembrance. You must give account of your
bodies, that have decayed your health with surfets, your strength with
fornication, that have your members maimed through braules and fraies, that
have made more reckoning of the beauty of the face, then of the glorious
comelines of the well attired inward man, that have wantonness and envy in your
eyes; lying, slander, and blasphemy in your tongues; blood and spoils in your
hands. You must give account also of your time, which some of you have lost in
sleeping, some in playing, some in pursuing pleasures, riches and honors, in
the mean while neglecting the work of the Lord: standing idle all day long in
the market place, taking great pains to serve the devil, the world, and the
lusts of your flesh, and wholly idle unto God, never entering into his vineyard,
no not at the eleventh hour, to do any service there. How many spend a summers
day, and do not the good of an hour? How many spend a whole year, and do
not the good of a day? How many spend their whole age, and do not the good of
a year? and grow old in years, remaining young in knowledge, and are come
hoareheaded to the grave, and understand not the mystery of their Baptism.
For all these things all must give account, and woe to wastfull stewards! Hear
this (I pray you) that have the precious riches of God in occupying, and take
heed of wasting, and be careful, both of the stock and of the gain: for the
time will come when it shall be said unto you, as it was here said unto the
steward, Give an account of thy stewardship.

We fools think our selves Lords, and are but servants: and think our selves
freeholders, and are but stewards and bailifes. Whatsoever is in our hands,
we think it to be our own: and have learned without book, and without
understanding also, that text of Scripture, Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for
me to do as I will with mine own? when as we have not a penny of our own, no
not a minute of time, to cast away and waste at our pleasure. But we are the
Lords, and all we have is the Lords, and we must one day give account. Thus
much of this second degree of the stewards danger.

For thou may be no longer steward. In these words is ye last degree of his
danger, to lose his service, and to be turned out of office. Infinite are the
things that God does betrust us withal while we are in this world, wherein he
proves our fidelity. Some are outward things, as kingdoms, offices, riches,
houses, lands, friends, children, servants, and such like. Some in a sort are
proper to the body, as health, strength, beauty, agilitie, long life, with
food and clothes, which we use to sustain those other things in the body
withal. Some things pertain to the soul, as dominion over the body in the
use of all the members thereof, sense, understanding, memory, will,
affections, wisdom, and other virtues, with manifold knowledge of Arts,
tongues, histories and other things, together with the graces of Gods holy
spirit; as knowledge of God in Christ, faith, love, humility, with all the
branches of true regeneration. Of these things many are transitory, and serve
only to transitory uses, as the outward things, and the things of the body:
saving that after the resurrection, unto the body, raised up out of the dust
of the earth, many things shall be restored, better then now they are. In the
mean while, kingdoms, riches, and all outward things decay and come to
nothing. And in the body also, sickness takes away health, much labor spends
strength, age changes beauty into wrinckles, and the grave takes away life
and all.

The things of the soul, are either natural (thereby I mean al those things
that a natural man not regenerate may attain unto) or spiritual (whereby I
mean those things that are given to the spiritual man, and which the natural
man sauoureth not) things natural either fail or are changed. Also some
spiritual things in the regenerate cease: for faith and hope, excellent graces
of Gods sanctifying spirit, do cease, when the promises are performed unto us,
and we possess the things that we hoped for. These things that cease, are
sometime taken away with Gods favor, and without their loss that lose them,
because God otherwise recompenceth them. As sight was taken from Isaac: his
children and all his riches and health (for the time) from Job: and life from
John the Baptist. While God either tries the faith and patience of his
children here, or gathers them unto himself in heaven. Sometime they are
taken away in Gods anger, and to their loss that lose them, while they are
justly spoiled of God for their wickedness and unworthiness. As the land was
taken from the Canaanites, when their sins were grown to ripenes: the
kingdom was taken from Saul, because he obeyed not the voice of God: and the
talent taken from the slothful servant, and he thrown into utter darkness.
And such a taking away in anger, is that removing from his stewardship, that
the wastfull steward is threatened withal in my text. When the Lord, that had
delivered his talents to his servants, was returned home, he called them all
to account. They which had faithfully used their talents, and gained by their
faithfulness, to the honor of their Lord, these for their labor received
reward, and were put in trust with better things, and entered into their masters
joy. This translating into joy, was no deposing from their stewardship, (though
they had no longer the occupying of the first things) but a great enlarging of
their liberty in their Lords house, and an advancement to a kingdom. But the
slothful servant that had hid his talent in the ground, and had gained no
glory unto God by the use of his gifts, he was spoiled of his talent, and
cast empty into outward darkness, and that spoiling was a final deposing from
his stewardship. Here then are we taught, that those that do waste and mispend
the gifts of God, shall be deposed: some sooner, some later, at length al,
whosoever abuse unprofitably and wickedlie, the good things that God has
endued the^ withal. Evil Kings shall be pulled out of their thrones, whither
ambitiously, oftentimes not without peril and blood they have climed. For it
is written, Luke 1.52.
He has put down the mighty from their seat. Evil rich men shall be
spoiled of their riches, which couetously, oftentimes not without sweat of
body and care of mind, they had heaped together. For it is written, Luke 1.53.
He has sent away the rich empty. Wisdom, ingrafted by nature, increased by
learning, made serviceable by experience, shall be taken away, when wicked men
turn it into hurtful fraud: As it is written, Job. 5.13 He takes the wise in
their craftines, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish. So, all the
gifts of the body, so all the powers of the mind. For to him that has (that
is, Mat. 25.29.
uses faithfully that which he has) it shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that has not, (that is, mispendeth that he has) shall
be taken away, even that which he has.

The vineyard that bore wild grapes, spoiled of all defense, was laid wide
open to be wasted, Esa. 5.5. the fig tree that flourished with leaves, and bore
no fruit, was cursed and withered away, Matthew. 21.19. The Husbandmen that sent
not unto the Lord of the vineyard, his fruit in due season, were destroyed,
and the vineyard let forth to others, Matthew. 21.41. Every tree that bears not
good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire, Luke 3.9. And every
field that drinks in the rain that falls upon it, and bears thorns and
briars, is reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned,
Heb. 6.8. In plain words, every one of you, that read and hear these words,
and every child of man whatsoever, that is found upon his or her account, to
have wasted their masters goods, shall be spoiled of all the graces and gifts
of God, and thrust empty, as a rejected servant, out of Gods house. Let us all
then consider this, and let every one think upon it. We are Gods Stewards, and
we have many precious portio^s of his goods in use. Some things in common, some
things in private. We have abundance of peace, we have sufficiency of wealth,
we have the liberty of the Gospel, we have just laws, and prudent Judges,
we have a gracious Queen, and arts and sciences flourish among us. These are
general, wherein every man has his part. And we have also every one our private
preferments. The condition of retayning them, is to be good Stewards. Esa.
1.19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land: and a
sure way of losing al, is to be evil Stewards, Esa. 1.20 But if ye refuse, and
be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. What then is to be done of us? but that, while time yet
permits, and while it is called to day, we examine our accounts: and where
any thing is amiss through our former negligence and riot, that we correct it
and amend it by repentance: and make speed herein, not putting off from day
to day, least his wrath break forth, and the sentence irreuocable come forth:
Thou may be no longer Steward.

And let God have his part set before him in holiness: and let men have their
parts performed to them in justice: and

(...)
