CHRIST'S Prayer Upon the Cross, for his enemies.

FATHER forgive them, for they know not what they do.

By Sir Io. HAYVVARD Knight, Doctor of the Laws.

Nemo beatus est, qui nescit contemnere and contemni.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XXIII.

TO THE HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ANNE CAESAR, WIFE TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE, Ssr JULIUS CAESAR KNIGHT, MASTER OF THE ROLLS, AND ONE OF HIS
MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COVNSAILE.

Casta ad virum. matrona parendo Imperat. Pub. Mim.

TO THE READER.
AS Contemplation in general, is a pure act of the soul; so contemplation of
divine things, is most proper unto it. This is the heavenly Manna, whereon it
feeds; hereby it grows, hereby it is loosened from the knots of flesh and
blood; hereby it mounteth above the narrow confines and limits, above the
sordide things of this world, above either the threats or promises thereof; and
both returns to the original from whence it came, and applies it self to
the end whither with swift celerity it paceth. And this is an invincible
argument of the divine nature of the soul, if it takes delight in matters
divine; if it be busied therein, not as in other men's affairs, but as in the
own. Assuredly, in nothing else man is so much man, as in contemplation of
heavenly things. Oh! how contemptible a thing is man, if he aduanceth not
above humane cogitations?

But conceive here with (gentle Reader) that contemplation is but a fruitless
action of the soul, unless it be thereby enflamed to love. Contemplation is a
work of the understanding, and has no perfection in it self* but is a way
and means to some degree of perfection, by eleuating the will to a divine love
and union with GOD. The understanding gives not food to the soul, but
prepares it only for the taste of the will. Good is the proper object of the
will. And therefore when the will finds an infinite depth of goodness in
GOD, it shall be exceeding icie, if it burn not like a Phoenix, in the fire of
divine love, which by contemplation is therein kindled. Wherefore, if thou will
contemplate sweetly and profitably, erect the forces of thy will, to love that
which thou do understand: for otherwise, thou shall be but a cold and
curious speculator; thou shall never arrive at the true end of contemplation.
For the end of contemplating is not in speculation of the understanding, but in
an ardent love of the will.

Now because of all divine things none is more Noble then the work of our
redemption; none wherein GOD so much manifested his goodness, and
consequently, none so fit to inflame our love: I have addressed my Sabbath
exercises this present year, to this prayer of CHRIST upon the Cross for his
enemies. Hoping notwithstanding, that the residue of the penitential Psalms,
not yet comprised in my David's Tears, shall hereafter be in the like manner
prosecuted; either by my self (if life continue) or by some other more happy
and industrious hand.

Assuredly, man is too mortal, either to handle or to know things immortal:
As we know but in part, so we can express but a part of what we know; and
must have many partners in our labors therein. A man should so endeavor to
live, as he may do good to all: But if that cannot be, yet to many: and if
not that, yet to some: and if not that, at least to himself. My desire hereby
is to do good to all; even to him, whose prefrict malice has much wronged
both me and himself; in case he has either conscience or shame to be wounded
by a lasting memory of his dishonest dealings.

But albeit, I esteem both these to be almost impossible alike; yet I make no
doubt, but hereby I shall do good to many: and the rather, because many have
acknowledged to me great good, which they have received by my former writings
in this kind. But as in the same meddow, the ox seeks grass, the hound a
hare, and the storke a lizard: so I expect that in this work some will hunt
after conceits, some after cauils; but many will find good pasture for their
souls. Of these I expect no other recompense, but their prayers for me; of
which I acknowledge I stand much in need.

HOM. II.
(...)
(...)
TAM grauis ille mihi nigri quam lim inaditis;
Ore aliud qui fert, aliud sub pectore celat.
AS dale of death,
so do I hate that kind;
whose tongue from thought,
whose mouth dissents from mind.
THE PRAYER OF CHRIST UPON THE CROSS for his enemies.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
WHen our Savior CHRIST had traveled up the high hill Golgotha, Christ's
travailing up the Mount.
laden with his ponderous Cross; his body much enfeebled with fasting and
watching all the night before, and with the buffetting and scourging which he
endured: being much exhausted thereby, both of spirit and blood: here the
Jews first unburdened him of his Cross, prepared the holes for fastening him
thereto; brought the hammer and the nails before his face; his enemies
clustering the whilst about him, and not sparing to vex him with many
opprobrious and blasphemous speeches.

Then they hastily pulled off his apparel; His stripping
which cleaving fast to his body, by reason of the congealed blood that issued
from him when he was scourged; tore open his wounds, and rent away some part of
his skin and flesh. So he stood naked and bloody a while; and then they
rudely threw him upon the Altar of the Cross lying upon the ground. His
nailing.
And applying the backeside of one of his hands to a hole which they had
prepared in the Cross, Psalm. 71.
They smote the rock and rivers gushed forth: they nailed his hand to the
Cross, and blood streamed Abundantly from the wound.

One hand being thus fastened, they violently streyned the other, to a hole
that had been prepared on the other arm of the Cross; and there in like sort
fastened it with a nail. Then with great force they stretched his body
downward, until they had drawn his feet to the lower hole: and there in like
manner they were fastened with a nail. How he was strained.
By which strong strayning of his body, that of the Prophet David was
fulfilled: Psalm. 21.
I am powered forth like water. That is, I melt away and dissolve with
extremity of torments: I have no more strength to subsist, then water that is
powered forth. And again, All my bones are out of joint* they pierced my hands
and my feet; they have numbered all my bones. For his calamity was so great,
partly by his own feebleness and ariditie, and partly by the cruel
stretching of his members, that his ioints were loosed, and pulled from their
firm fastnes and seats; by reason whereof, his bones might have been numbered.

Then they took the wooden Altar charged with this bloody sacrifice, The
Cross erected.
and set the lower end to fall with the full weight, into a pit which they had
prepared for erecting thereof; by which fall, and by fasting it afterward, the
body nailed thereto, was grievously shaken. And so was the brazen serpent lift
up in the wilderness; Numb. 21.
so were the sacrifices offered to GOD, Exodus 29.
accustomed to be lift on high. Leuit. 23.
And so was it fit, that he should be lift up, who was appointed to be a
mediator between GOD and man; who was to reconcile heaven and earth together;
who was to cast about his eyes, in seeking his lost sheep; and upon whom we all
should set our eyes.

And they would not crucify him alone, With whom he was crucified.
but between two thieves, whereby their intention was to obscure his Name, to
defile his credit; to make him in stead of Messiah, to be reputed a prince of
thieves: But our Savior turned this to another end; namely, that he died for
sinners, and that he has discharged the price of their sins. Doubtless he
so loves sinners, that he did not only converse with them, during his life,
but died between them, and will be ever present among them; to hear them, to
pray for them, to pardon them when they call upon him: not only during the
time of their lives, but until the last minute of their death. Yea after death
he will be ready to receive them being penitent, into his glory.

THY SAVIOR being thus mounted upon the Cross, Asoliloquie
and fastened hand and foot for sacrificing of his life; consider seriously (O
my soul) what he did, what he said, in what thoughts he was busied. First
consider his unspeakable torments, in that he was deprived of all comforts;
both external from others, and internal within himself. If he stirred any
part of his body, his wounds were thereby made more grievous. If he remained
quiet, besides that immobility is a terrible torment, one of the torments of
hell Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness.
; the very weight of his body did tear his wounds wider. Then consider how in
those extremities, the first time he opened his lips, the first voice which his
tongue did form, was in making intercession for his enemies: Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do. They mocked, reviled, blasphemed; but
he prayed: the more they burned in hate, the more was he enflamed with love.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and from the abundance
of his love did this prayer proceed.

But think not (O my soul) that these were all the words which JESUS spoke,
that this was all his prayer at large; but rather a summary collection thereof.
Heb. 5. 7.
For the Apostle says that he di^ offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears. And therefore when he seemed silent, when his voice
was not heard, when happily his lips did not move; whilst the Jews were
busied, some in tormenting, and some in deriding him: conceive (O my soul)
that thy sweet JESUS, either as senceles, or as regardles hereof, was wholly
attentive in praying to his heavenly Father: for them, for thee, and for all
sinners. And so, his members being strongly streyned upon the Cross, as the
strings were on David's harp, he made such tunable harmony, as never before
had been heard in the world; sounding in this sort to the ear of his Fathers
mercy.

HIS PRAYER EXTENDED.
O Most just, most merciful, His praying.
most holy Father! thou see what a weighty work I have begun: and now I am
entered into two of my great offices. The office of a Priest, as well in
offering my body for a sacrifice, as in making supplications for the people:
and the office of an Advocate; in pleading the cause of sinners before thee. In
both these hear me, I pray thee. Heavenly Father, load this bruised body of
mine with thy stripes; power forth the full measure of thy wrath upon it: I am
ready to endure whatsoever charge it shall please thee to impose. But forgive
them, I beseech thee, for whom I thus suffer. Let me not in this cruel manner
lose my blood, and lose them also for whom I expend it: the price being paid,
suffer me, I pray thee, to enjoy my purchase.

O my eternal Father! In recompense of my obedience to thy will, in recompense
of my coming into the world to reconcile it to thee, in recompense of all my
travails ouer-paced, in recompense of my present torments and death: I entreat
nothing of thee, but that thou will pardon these merciless sinners. I am well
content that thou would not yield to my natural desire when I prayed for
my self, that this cup might pass from me; but deny me not (I pray thee) in
praying for these. For I esteem the benefit greater that they be forgiven,
then that this cup should have passed from me; I regard more the good that they
live eternally, then I regard the hurt that for the present I die. O my good
Father! there is a time to pardon, and a time to punish: but if ever there be a
time to pardon, it is now. Even now, when I ask forgiveness at the very end of
my life; now whilst my blood freshly runs for forgiveness, whilst the
sacrifice is in offering, for which thou should forgive. For now thou do
publikly proclaim thy pardon: mercy and truth, justice and peace, do now
embrace, and kiss kindly together. Thou did once forgive the Israelites, O
my Father! when Moses and Aaron offered a little incense for them; and will thou not forgive these for whom I wholly offer my self? Thou did once grant
victory when Moses held up his hands unto thee; and will thou nothing regard
the stretching forth of my bleeding hands? Father! I am come into the world, I
now suffer death in the world to appease thine anger: but what profit will
ensue of my coming and of my death, if men should be still charged with thy
hate? If my death cannot appease thy wrath, what then can do it? What then can
make atonement between thee and sinners? O my good Father! when I came into
the world by thy appointment, when by thy appointment I undertook to die: thou
did promise that thy wrath should be extinguished by my death; that thy
wrath and my life should determine together. Wherefore to discharge thy
promise, and because my life is more precious to thee then thy wrath; forgive,
I pray thee, and be appeased. Lo here I set my self in the breach; Ezekiel. 22.
lo here I enterpose between sinners and thee.

BUT, O great Mediator! wherefore do thou so earnestly entreat for sinners?
What ease is this to thy torments? what good to thy self? In case thou will
not revenge thy wrongs, yet wherefore do thou not leave them to thy fathers
pleasure? wherefore should not Justice run her course? The Law says, Eye for
eye, hand for hand, life for life* And what avails it thee, that these
offenders must now be forgiven?

O! YES: I am well content O my Father! that thou load me with thine anger, in
what measure thou think fit: but so, as nothing may remain unreconciled to
thee; so as my redemption may not be imperfect and maimed: so as there may
remain in man no fault to be redeemed, and in thee no anger to be appeased.
O good Father! Charge me freely (I say) with thy stripes, set them so surely
and severely as thou will: but suffer not my sufferings to be unfruitful; do
not double my grief, by causing me to lose the benefit of my grief. For it
would be a greater grief to me that these sinners should perish, then are all
the torments where with they tear me: even as a loving mother sorroweth more
at the loss of her child, then she did at her travails for his birth. By
suffering and by pardoning the redemption of the world must be wrought: and
therefore pardon them, O good Father! For whom I suffer; or else no redemption
can follow. And if the death which now I suffer, if the life which now I offer
be not sufficient, I will suffer another death; I will offer another life; I
will do anything, O my good Father! wholly to appease thee.

But if thou will not be absolutely entreated, yet forgive them, His Pleading.
I beseech thee, in regard of their ignorance. And now brethren, I know that
through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers.
For niether this people, nor their Rulers do dir^ctly know, either who I am,
or what work I have in hand. Whereby it follows, that they know not what
they do. Act. 3. 17.
Blessed Father: thou have made me wiser then my enemies. For I know righ^
well what I am about to do; b^^ thou have not suffered the diue^ perfectly to
know it; much more is this unskillful multitude inuolued in ignorance. And
therefore I am so far from desiring revenge, that the more earnestly they
endeavor with many torments to destroy me; the more earnest am I, both in
praying and pleading for their salvation. For alas! they are ignorant; I pity
them with my heart, and from my heart desire thee to be entreated for them.
Give them time and means to be instructed; open their understanding to know
me, and to know themselves: but as the case now stands, forgive them, I pray
thee; for they know not what they do.

And further, seeing I am joyful in receiving these harms, wherefore art thou
displeased with those who do them? Seeing the party offended forgive (...) the
wrong, at whose suit will thy justice prosecute? What has Justice to do when
no man complains? Thou know right well, that nothing can be termed an
injury, which is not done against our will. Seeing therefore I willingly
suffer, and that in obedience to thy will and appointment, to perform a most
necessary work for the world: remain not thou displeased with those, by whose
hands my own will is performed, and this great work accomplished.

BUT happily it may be said, Object.
that as this action in it self is the most heinous sin that ever was
committed; so are these, in regard of themselves, the most unworthy to be
forgiven.

Be it so. Answ.
But O holy Father! Do I die only for small offenders? is not my death
sufficient for all? Do I die for any other end, but that all offenders may be
forgiven? And wilt not thou regard more my sufferings, then any man's sins?
more my charity in dying for my tormentors, then their malice iu putting me
to death? It is true indeed, that if thou will punish them according to their
demerits, all the torments of hell are nothing near sufficient: but therefore
it is better freely to forgive them. For as there was never sin comparable to
this, so shall thou never have the like occasion to manifest thy mercy. O my
Father! seeing my blood is shed by thy will, employ the same to the best
effect: let not any man be depriud of the benefit of that, which is amply
sufficient for all. And favor me also, O father! since I needs must die, to
make the best advantage of my death; to se^ my life so well as I can. And
therefore pardon those, I pray thee, who torment me to death. For the greater
offenders thou pardonest for my sake, the better I shall think my life
employed; and it nothing avails that I die for sinners, if thou deniest to
pardon sinners.

MEDITATIONS UPON THIS Prayer.
O PRECIOVS prayer! fit only to proceed from our All-mercifull Redeemer: who,
as he taught us to love our enemies, to pray for them that curse us; so here,
by his example he confirmed the same. O meek SAVIOVR! what inflamed charity
did sparkle in thy speeches? how truly had the Jews said of thee before:
Never man spoke, as he speaks? For let all the prayers be powered forth that
ever were made, and we shall find none parallel to this. Many have prayed for
themselves, many for their friends: but who ever before in this sort prayed for
his enemies? Many have forgiven offenses after they have been done; when the
pain is past, and the offender happily displeased at what he did: but
whilst the mischief is in action, and before it be accomplished; in the very
height of madness and malice; to see thee not only forbear to hate thy
enemies, but ardently to love them; to hear prayers for them flowing out of
thy mouth, with tears and groans, whilst thy blood was running out of thy
veins; to hear thee plead for them, who would not open thy mouth to speak
for thy self. What shall we say? but that pity and cruelty, injury and mercy,
anger and patience, hate and love, did here meet and contend together.

O mild JESUS! O the glory of my soul! what humane judgment? yea, what
understanding of Angels is able to apprehend, that thou should not only
patiently endure, but thus earnestly pray for thy mortal enemies? Thy smart,
thy fainting, the streams of blood which freshly flowed from thee, might have
put thee in mind both of their malice and of their injustice: and yet were
thou wholly busied in procuring pardon, both for that and for all their other
sins. O everlasting goodness! what a marvelous example have thou given,
both of patience and of love? Thou did release those who fastened thee; plead
for those who did accuse thee; entreat for those who did revile thee; acquit
and discharge those, who are in hand to kill thee: they will not return into
the City, before thou art dead; and thou will not die until thou have obtained
their pardon. O Redeemer of souls! thou did never either do injury to any,
or blame any for doing injury to thee: All thy actions and words tended to
teach us patience, pity, humility, gentleness, and all other goodness. Albeit
thou had many enemies in this world yet did thou never term: any man
enemy; all were esteemed friends, because thou were a true friend to all.

Thou had been formerly presented before the high Priest and Elders, before
Pilate, and before Herod; in whose presence for the most part thou were
silent: but being presented before thy Father on the Cross, thou did first
open thy lips to speak for thy tormentors. O unspeakable charity! How
inestimable was thy love toward miserable man? When thou were accused before
worldly Judges, thou would not spend one word for thy self; but when thou
did address thy self to crave of thy Father, wherefore do thou not
entreat him, either to mitigate or shorten thy pains? Wherefore have thou no
pity upon thy innocent flesh? thy martyred members? Wherefore seem thou so
little to regard thy life? or wherefore seem thou to neglect thy mournful
Mother? thy dispersed Disciples thy heavy followers and friends? and disposest
thy self to pray for thy enemies. Wherefore intreatest thou without entreaty?
Wherefore crauest thou forgiuene^^ without either satisfaction or submission
for their offense?

O sweet and only Savior! How fiery is the force of thy Spirit? how have
thou verified that which before thou did say; that thou were not sent but to
the los^ sheep of the house of Israel what thou came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance? All thy life time thou did converse
with sinners, both by exhortation, and by example to convert them to thee; and
now at thy death thou prayest for them. The condition of Caluary changed.
O Caluarie! how is thy condition suddenly changed? Before this time thou were
a place where Justice was executed upon infamous offenders; but now thou art
consecrated for a place of oblation and intercession for them. It was not meet
that Oblation should go single without Intercession: and therefore, as our
great Priest made here his Oblation for sin, so here also did he make
Intercession for sinners. And O you stiff necked Jews! See how our blessed
Lord has requited your dealings. You turned his house of prayer into a den
of thieves; and he has turned your den of thieves into a house of prayer.
Teaching you, as before he had told, John 4.
that the hour was then come, when neither at your temple in Jerusalem, nor at
the mountain in Samaria the Father should be worshipped; but he should be
worshipped in spirit and truth.

O crucified JESUS! The great mercies of GOD.
O delight of my soul! What shall we say of thy exceeding goodness? with
greater reason may we now demand, Where is thy ancient wrath? then the Prophet
David once demanded, Where are thy ancient mercies? O my souls safety! who can
despair of thy goodness? who dares distrust it? Thou did pardon those who
would not be pardoned, and shall pardon be denied to those who ardently desire
it? Thou did pray for those who tormented and blasphemed thee; and will thou
not pray for those who pray unto thee? O blessed SAVIOVR! when thou were on the
Cross all things forsook thee, The patience and love of CHRIST.
except only thy patience and thy love. By thy patience thou did endure all
extremities of torments; by thy love thou did offer up supplications with
strong cryings and tears. The Jews provoked thy Father to take vengeance upon
them, in saying, His blood be upon us: but thou did pray him to remit that
vengeance, because thy blood was shed for them. They carried thee before the
high Priest, and before Pilate to have thee condemned; but thou did present
them before thy Father, that they might be pardoned. They cried against thee,
Let him be crucified; but thou prayedst for them, Father forgive them.
Certainly, O my SAVIOVR! It is so great a mystery that thou did pray for
those who did blaspheme thee; that thou did pardon those who tormented thee
to death, without sorrow, without entreaty; and that thy prayer, Father forgive
them, should prevail against their prayer, His blood be upon us; that albeit
we must believe it, yet we cannot comprehend it.

And thou, The true Mediator.
O heavenly Father! Ezekiel. 22.
seek no more for a man who should make up the breach, and stand in the gap
between thee and the Land. Lo, this is he; this is the true Mediator
between thee and us: raised between heaven and earth, to reconcile both
together. And because nothing can serve for a fit mean to combine two
contraries, but that which participates of the nature o^ both: Lo, this
Mediatou^ participates of thy nature being perfect GOD; and of our nature,
being perfect man: and therefore is a fit mean to join, to fasten, to unite
both together. A fit mean, I say, upon whom man may discharge all his sins,
and GOD discharge all his anger: who like a strong and impregnable wall, may
keep our sins from approaching to GOD, and GODS vengeance from approaching
to us.

BUT O my soul! do not run over this banquet in haste; take a more exact
haste of every dish; meditate and ruminate upon these things as a clean beast
cheweth the cud. Consider first, the principal circumstances of this prayer;
then exactly weigh every word thereof.

THE PRINCIPAL CIRCVMSTANCES OF This Prayer.
WHo then was it that thus did pray? Who prayed.
The son of GOD, who was most worthy to be heard. To whom did he pray? To
whom.
To GOD the Father, who was most powerful to grant. For whom? For whom.
not only for his tormentors, not only for the people of the Jews; but for
all sinners for whom he died; for all men whose sins were the proper cause of
his death. Eue^ for those who little regarded themselves; yea, for many who
the^ were not, he earnestly prayed: for unless CHRIST first prays for
sinners, they shall never be able to pray for themselves. Where was it? Where.
Upon the Altar of the Cross. When? When.
In time of his extreme torments, and of his drawing near to death. How? How.
His hands stretched (like another Moses) to heaven; and all his body imbrued
with blood. In what manner.
In what manner? O! in a most perfect form. Heb. 5.
For the Apostle says, that he offered up Prayers and supplications with strong
cryings and tears. His Prayers were many, formed in manner of humble
supplications; with cryings, with valide and strong cryings, and with tears.
And therefore the matter of the prayer being of great piety and merit, it is no
marvel that the Apostle added, that he was heard.

By this strong crying thou must understand, His strong crying.
that with a most forcible affection, with deep groans, with a violent
intention of desire and will, he offered up his supplication to GOD. For he
is said to pray aloude, whose soul is fired with fervent devotion and desire;
whose thoughts are neither distracted nor remiss, but both entirely and
earnestly attentive to the business in hand. The cry of sins is exceeding
strong, and yet the ear perceives no noise; but the fervent cry of devotion
is much stronger, albeit no voice be outwardly heard. There is no strong
crying to GOD, but through abundance either of love or of grief: both which
were most forcible in our SAVIOVR upon the Cross. Love, for compasion toward
others; grief, for the passion which he felt in himself. He was enflamed to
love, by his mystical members; his natural members enforced him to grief.
From this love and this grief his cry must needs be exceeding strong. And
besides; it must be a violent voice that was heard for all men; that did
silence and drown the clamor of all sins. For it was not for his tormentors
only, but it was for all men that he then prayed: he who died for all, prayed
for all.

But O good IESV! His tears.
O the solace of my soul! who could be worthy to stand so near thy Cross, as
to see blood stream from thy flesh, and tears from thy eyes; to see thy blood
mixed with tears; to see, that, as with sweat and blood thou begannest thy
passion; so with tears and blood thou did conclude it? What adamant heart
would not break? what leaden eyes would not melt into tears? what earthy
spirit would not be moved, as the whole earth was? to see thy sacrifice
sprinkled, or rather imbrued with blood, and thy prayers watered with tears;
to see thy tears beautified with blood, and thy blood washed with tears? to
see thee at once to smite thy Fathers cares with thy prayers, and to mollify
his heart with thy sighs and groans? O blessed Redeemer! Albeit thou did
pray to thy Father for the greatest matter that ever was demanded of him; yet
if thou had desired a greater, thy blood was so abundant, thy cries so
strong, thy tears so plentiful, and the love from whence they flowed so
ardent; that thy love, thy blood, thy tears and thy cries must have obtained
it.

O sin! How offensive sin is.
How offensive art thou to the heavenly Father? how deeply dangerous to the
state of our souls? seeing this expiation was necessary to abolish thee;
seeing pardon for thee could not be obtained, but by these cruel sufferings,
by these bloody tears of our Reedemer. And thou (o my soul) cry hideously
when thou praiest to the Lord, and weep abundantly for thy sins: sigh,
groan, tear bloody tears from thy soul when thou ask forgiveness;
seeing thy Savior thus cried and wept when he made intercession for thee. For
what reason or justice is it, that thy Savior cry and weep for thee, and not
thou for thy self? Attention in prayer.
Or if thou can not weep in thy prayers, yet be earnest and attentive, let
not thy thoughts be either scattered, or heavy and dull: for if thou be not
atte^tiue to make thy prayers, the Lord will not be attentive to hear them.
Whose sins we must lament
Learn also to lament, not only for thy own offenses, but for the sins and
miseries of others; even as the Prophet Hieremie lamented for the calamity of
his people when he said: Oculi mei defecerunt prae lachrymis.
My eyes fail and are dim with weeping. For albeit true charity begins
always at our selves, yet must it extend unto all: there is no truer token of
true charity, then when it does extend unto all: not only in showing
compassion for their miseries, but especially in craving pardon for their
sins. Joy at the good which happens to other men, and grieve at their
evil: and so shall thou make profit of every man's conversation.

OF THE SVBSTANCE OF THIS Prayer.
BUT proceed, O my soul! to the substance of this prayer, and observe well
every word thereof; for there is not one word therein that is not of weight.

FATHER.
FIRST he began with the sweet word FATHER. He did not term him LORD; for
that was a name of severity and justice; but FATHER, which is a name of pity
and mercy. If he had said, LORD, forgive them, as Saint Stephen prayed
afterward; it might have seemed that he had referred their pardon to the
courtesy and judgment of justice. But FATHER is a name of compassion, a name
of the new Testament. A name which by the blood and merits of our JESUS, we may
challenge to use toward hm. That, as he pleased to be our brother: so he
would thereby make us the sons of his FATHER. And therefore he used the same
word in praying for us, which he did in praying for himself: For as he
prayed for himself; Father into thy hands I commit my spirit: so he prayed for
us; Father forgive them. As if he should have said:

O my Father! acknowledge me now for thy Son, thy only Son, thy Son in
whom thou art well pleased, thy Son to whom thou will deny nothing: for as I
am obedient to thee, as to my Father; so I expect to be heard of thee, as thy
Son. Father, I am therefore come into this world, that sinners also should be
received for thy sons; and therefore hear me now in praying for them. If
ever thou will hear them praying to thee in my Name, hear now my own prayer
for them. So dear a Son as I am to thee; so acceptable let my prayer be to
thee. If thou hear not the prayers of thy Son, whose prayers then will thou hear? If thou reiectest my prayers, thou do more torment me then does
the Cross. The Cross I patiently endure to abolish a greater evil: that is,
to appease thy wrath, and to make sinners accepted for thy sons. But favor
these torments of thy Son, that they be not endured in vain. Favor thy
Son, not to double his terments, by denying him his charitable request. Thou
do amply reward the travails which any man shall perform in thy service:
Now thy Son requires no recompense for himself: for all my travails, for
all my torments in obedience to thy will, I require no other recompense, but
that thou will grant my request for miserable sinners.

FORGIVE
BY this word our Lord discharged the office of a Priest, in praying for the
sins of the people: for which he cried, not only as a Priest, but as a
sacrifice; which never demands free forgiveness, but brings satisfaction
with it. And not only he cried with his mouth; With how many mouths CHRIST
craved forgiveness.
but his wounds cried, his blood cried, his defilements cried, his torments
cried, al his members cried: Forgive. So many wounds as he received, so many
griefs as he endured; so many mouths he opened, with one voice entreating.

Accept these sufferings for the sins of all men, for we do pay thee
whatsoever they owe. We give thee blood and smarte for ransom, life for
satisfaction, body and soul for sacrifice: Let there now be mercy with thee,
Psalm. 130.
for this is a plenteous redemption. It is a hard thing indeed which is
demanded; namely, that a most indulgent Father should forgive and forget the
cruel death of his only Son, his entirely beloved Son. But the son
himself demands it: he demands it with his blood, with his wounds; with all
his sufferings he demands it.

Not under any condition, Not conditionally but absolutely.
as he prayed for himself in the garden; If it be possible, If thou will, If
it may be: but positiuely and absolutely he prays thee to Forgive. His own
passion he left to thy will; but thy pardon he does absolutely entreat. He
put it to thy pleasure whether he should die or no; but he leaves no
consultation, no choice for thy granting of forgiveness: his prayer for
forgiveness is so absolute, as it may not be denied.

Hereby thou may learn (O my soul!) that remission of sins, and all
divine graces are to be desired of GOD without condition; because this prayer
is always referred to the honor of GOD. Also, that whenever thou forgiuest
thy enemies, thou do it absolutely, without reservation. Never account it a
Christian forgiveness, when it is with exception; that thou will not speak to
him, that thou will not converse and be familiar with him. For thy SAVIOVR did
not pray for his enemies upon condition, or in part: he prayed absolutely for
all, and for all offenses of every one. GOD also is so noble in pardoning, that
he cannot forgive one sin, either alone, or in part: he never pardons to
halfes; he cannot but either wholly pardon, or wholly punish: If any one sin
be unpardoned, the sinner must be charged with all. O gentle IESV! thou did
absolutely pray for all sinners, and therewith offer thy blood, as a sufficient
ransom for all sins: For all sins might be numbered, but thy precious
blood could not be valued.

And it was not only absolutely, Presently.
that thou did pray to thy Father, but also that he would presently
forgive: thou would not give day, it must be forthwith: remission must be
granted without intermission. Thou were then near the point of thy death: but
thou would not die until pardon was granted: thou would not make payment
of all thy blood, until thou had thy bargain in hand; until peace were
composed between GOD and Man. Thou art not like many worldly Parents, who
leave small inheritances to their children, entangled many times with debts,
suits, or other encumbrances: but for the heavenly inheritance which thou have
given us, thou have made ready payment, cleared all reckonings, removed all
difficulties and charges, and concluded perfect peace with thy Father before
thy death; saying unto him, FORGIVE! and that presently, O my Father! for even
now is the time arrived to forgive. This is the hour of sacrifice, the day of
satisfaction, the day of remission, I am even now ready to lay down my life,
and I make now my last petition; my last suit to thee shall be this; FATHER
forgive. O heavenly FATHER, as thou love thy Son, so hold him no longer in
torments; for I must not die until thou forgive.

Neither did he pray to the Father to forgive the sins only which then had
been committed, For all sins past, present, and to come.
but simply to forgive; even those sins also which afterward should be
committed. For his persecuters had not then satisfied themselves with
blasphemies and scorns; they had not then offered him a sponge dipped in
vinegar; they had not then opened his side with a spear; they had not then
feasted their eyes with sight of his dead body: and yet he prayed as well for
these as for all the cruelties which before they had done: Yea, for all sins,
not only past and present, but to ensue, he powered forth this prayer; Father
forgive. Teaching us thereby, not only readily to remit all wrongs received,
but to stand resolved nothing to regard whatsoever injuries shall afterward
be offered; and to make diligent search, that no secret desire of revenge, do
secretly rankle and fester in our souls.

But O meek IESV! Wherefore he prayed to his Father to forgive, and did not
forgive them himself,
O the hope of my soul! what is the reason that thou do pray to thy Father
to forgive? Had thou not power in thy self to pardon sins? Could not
thou as easily give as ask? One word from thy self might have served the
turn: wherefore then did thou entreat thy Father to forgive? O my souls
solace! was it to declare thy self to be a perfect Priest, in furnishing thy
sacrifice with prayer? for a Priest did offer, not only sacrifice, but prayer:
he was not only a sacrificer, but an intercessour for the people. Or was it
to show, that thou made greater reckoning of the injury done to thy Fathers
glory, then of the violence used against thine own life? Or lastly was it to
manifest, that thou were so intentive to the redemption of the world, that thou
were not offended with any thing they did? that thou tookest all in good part?
that thou did not esteem them malefactors to thee, but benefactors to all
the world? regarding more the good that the world was redeemed, then the hurt
that thou did die? As if in other words thou had said. FATHER, These men
have broken thy Law, discredited thy truth, violated thy Temple, blasphemed thy
Name; and therefore thou art he who must forgive them. I have no cause to
forgive, because I am nothing grieved; I am well pleased with my death; I
esteem my life well bestowed; seeing by this means the world is redeemed, and
heaven furnished with new glorious guests.

When losephs brethren feared that he would revenge their violence, he said
unto them: When ye thought evil against me, Genesis vlt.
GOD disposed it to good; that he might bring to pass as it is this day, and
save much people alive. Fear not therefore, I will nourish you and your
children. Much more truly may our SAVIOVR say to those who crucified him* You
intended much evil against me; but lo, all is turned to my glory, and to the
good of many. You thought by taking away my life, to extinguish my power: but
lo, I live, and have all power in heaven and upon earth. There never was, nor
can be done a more wicked act, then the taking away of my life; and yet never
did so much good follow any act; namely, the salvation of much people alive.
And now fear not my revenge: I have prayed to the Father for you, I have
obtained your pardon, I have obtained, not only that you be not charged with
the evil, but that you may enjoy the benefit of my death.

Which example if thou will follow (O my soul) If thou will regard more the
good then the evil which ensues every action; if thou will (which is a
property of GOD) draw good out of evil; thou shall never hate any enemy, but
rather love him for the good that he works. A great man's son will well endure
to be taught and reproved by his schoolmaster: But there is no better
schoolmaster then an enemy; who bears an eye over thy actions, and will be
nimble to reprove thy faults. If thou would live warily and in good order,
pray to GOD to send thee an enemy, and thou shall need no schoolmaster; he
will spare thee that stipend. An enemy is the bridle, a friend is the cover of
sin. Friends puff us up; but enemies humble us, and make us vigilant and
wise. He who hates his enemy, strikes one that is sick; kills a dying
man. Triacle is made of poison. Take the malice of thy enemy, temper it with
love to him, and with the works of charity toward him; and thou make an
excellent preservative for thy soul.

THEM.
BUT O gracious Savior! who were they for whom thou did pray? what them
did thou mean? what them would thou have forgiven? were they thy cruel
crucifiers? wherefore then did thou not term them bloodsuckers, paricides,
sacrilegious hangmen, or whatsoever other name either cruelty or impiety could
deserve? For two especial causes. One, to instruct us, that we abstain from
reproachful speeches; The other to declare, that he esteemed no man to be his
enemy. Undoubtedly, the Son of GOD did not account his executioners for his
enemies, but for his friends, for his brethren, for his own flesh and blood:
and therefore he preached unto them during his life, and at his death prayed
for them. They hated him indeed; but in so doing, they hated the most loving
friend they had in the world: one who could not be angry with the^, whose
love could not be, either withdrawn, or abated from working their good. In
case he disliked any thing they did, it was not in regard of himself, but of
his FATHER: and therefore he prayed his FATHER to forgive them. He who was
nothing offended with injuries against himself, as regardlesse both of torment
and scorn; was most sensible of the injuries and despite which reached to his
FATHER: not to have them punished, but forgiven.

Also he used the general word them, not only for them, who were the present
actors of his death; but for all them besides, who by their sins gave cause to
his death. And thou, O my soul, art included in this prayer, whose sins also
are included in the cause of his death. Thou have thy part in his prayer, thy
part in his remission: especially if thou adioyne thy prayer with his. For if
his prayer was profitable to them, who neither prayed with him, nor entreated
him to pray for them; it will be profitable for thee, in case thou do both.
For verily his prayer was profitable to those who desired no pardon, who did
absolutely refuse it. For how could they desire to be pardoned, who would not
acknowledge that they did offend? who cast all the blame upon JESUS? who held
him to have deserved worse then he suffered? Those excommunicate Jews were so
far out of their wits, that they did not only forbear to ask pardon for
their offense, but repelled pardon so much: as they could: being not only not
sorrowful for the mischiefs they did, but grieved because they could do no
more. They were not content to go without pardon, but they demanded vengeance
for that which they did: His blood be upon us, and upon our children.

O sottish Synagogue! wherefore do thou desire that the blood of CHRIST,
appointed to redeem thee, should be turned to condemn thee? O unfortunate
Jews! O cursed people! if the Son of GOD had allowed your demand. But he
appealed from it, he would not consent to your reprobate request: he would in
no case consent, that his blood should be shed against you, but for you. You
called upon you the most cruel curse that could be; his blood be upon us; but
he encountered it with his merciful prayer, Father forgive them. It has been
often seen that a man will not hurt his enemy, that he will pardon him if he
repent; but who but JESUS did pardon them, who would not be pardoned, who
despised pardon? who would not pardon him by whom they were to be pardoned? who
would pardon Barrabbas, a murderer among them; but not JESUS who came to save
them?

O infinite goodness* what wit is able either to acknowledge, or apprehend
such exceeding love? Thou did cleanse those who would be unclean: thou
did set those at liberty, who would be in restraint: thou did unburden
those, who would be ouercharged: thou did save those, who would be damned.
O my souls safety! If thou did pardon those who desired no pardon; will thou not pardon him, who with sorrow and tears entreats thy pardon? Thou
did meet them who came to apprehend thee; meet me then O good IESV! who come
to entreat thee. Thou did defend thy cruel tormentors, who scorned thy
defense; who acknowledged no fault: defend him, I beesech thee, who flies to
thy defense, who is much displeased that ever he did offend. I am not yet
amended, I confess: but it grieueth me that I am not amended; and with tears
I entreat thee that I may amend.

Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me. O great GOD!
the heart which I brought from my mothers womb is so unclean, that I dare not
offer it to thee; it dares not appear in thy presence. It is polluted with
many foul sins, it is laden both with delights and cares of this world. But
create in me a clean heart, fit to receive thee; infuse into it a right
spirit, fit both to love and to praise thee. O gracious GOD! give me a new
spirit, for mine is old and unpleasant: give me a clean heart, for mine is
impure: If thou do not this, if I be not so changed, no prayer of mine
shall ever be heard.

FOR THEY KNOW NOT WHAT THEY do.
But O mighty Redeemer! was it not sufficient, either that thou did pardon
their sins? or that thou did both absolutely and earnestly entreat thy
Father to pardon? but thou must also plead their cause before him? Oh! how
great was the work of the Redemption of the world? far greater then was the
work of creation. The reason is plain: Because there is not so great a
distance between nothing and nature, as between sin and grace. For as grace
is exceedingly above nature, so is sin exceedingly beneath nothing. Nothing
gives no offense: but sin offends infinitely. And therefore GOD produced
all things out of nothing, only by his word: but to reduce sinners to grace,
all these great actions were required. To teach us thereby, no less to abhor
sin, then we would abhor thus cruelly to entreat our SAVIOVR; thus carelessly
to put him to all these performances again.

O fountain of Love! Albeit, Our Savior would not be
all power is given thee both in heaven and upon earth; ye twouldest not thou
here sustain the office of a Judge. Albeit, A judge.
these intolerable both injuries and indignities were heaped upon thee, yet
would not thou bear the part of an accuser: An accuser.
but thou would be a Mediator. But a Mediator. Two offices of a Mediator.
Now, to a Mediator two offices do properly pertain: either to present
supplication, or to make some defense. The one our SAVIOVR did, in saying;
Father forgive them; the other, when he added; for they know not what they do.
By the first he was an Intercessour; by the second a Patron or Advocate; by
both a most perfect Mediator. The Jews before had sought after many
accusations against JESUS, but could find none: and now innocent JESUS seeks
how to excuse them. Noe defense for the jews but ignorance.
And verily this sin was of so high quality and nature, that besides
ignorance, nothing could be brought, either for excuse or for extenuation
thereof. The grossness of their ignorance.
And yet it seemed that their ignorance was not only gross and supine, but
voluntarily affected: even as if a man should willingly cover his eyes, because
he will not see who it is, whom he intends to smite or kill. But assuredly
they knew not, either what good they did to CHRIST, or what evil to
themselves. They knew well enough what evil they did; but they knew not what
evil they did thereby deserve.

But where art thou? Ignorance cannot be alleged for us.
O my soul! In what estate esteemest thou thy self, whenever thou do
voluntarily adventure to sin? what shall thy SAVIOVR say for thy excuse? For it
seems that thou art in worse case, then were the Jews who tormented him to
death. For ignorance was alleged for them; but that cannot possibly be pleaded
for thee, because he is more clearly revealed to thee then he was to them.
Thou know right well, both what thou do, and what is to ensue. Yet some
defenses may.
But O salvation of souls! If in the sharpest sense of thy torments, thou
did extenuate thy tormentors sins, will thou not now in thy seat of glory,
allege something to thy Father for those, who with faith and with grief
implore thy defense? It is true indeed, that ignorance cannot be pretended for
me. But have thou but one blessing, Genesis 27.
O my SAVIOVR! have thou but one defense for all sinners? Defend me, even me
also, O my SAVIOVR! say I was weak, or inconsiderate, or suddenly surprised.
Say what thou will, O my SAVIOVR! so I be not banished from thy defense. And
yet in very truth it may be said, All sinners are ignorant.
that all sinners are blind, that they know not what they do. For if they
knew, with what impiety they violate the goodness, and dis-esteeme the
judgments of GOD; with what defilements they deforme the beauty of their
soul; what loss they incur of eternal glory; what penalty of eternal
torments awaiteth for them: they would rather adventure upon a thousand
deaths, then upon one sordide and slavish sin.

O incomprehensible love! The love of CHRIST.
Thy members (O my SAVIOVR) were racked on the Cross: thy joints opened, thy
nerves cracked, thy hands and thy feet were painefully nailed; on every side
thou were assailed with blasphemies and scorns; all which thou did bear off
with thy love. Thy love did not permit thee either to complain, or to be
angry; thy love made thee senseless of grief; thy love made thee forgetful
of thy self, and mindful of nothing but of mercy for thy enemies; and to
appease thy Fathers wrath against them. O loving IESV! what charity burned in
thy divine breast? that almost at the instant of thy death, thou were more
regardfull of thy enemies, then either of thy self, or of any thy friends.
For thy mother and some other thy friends stood sorrowing and weeping near the
Cross; thy enemies did most bitterly blaspheme; and doubtful it is, whether
the heaviness of the one, or the malice of the other did most exceed: and yet
thou were not so intentive to comfort the first, as to prodcure pardon for the
last.

Assuredly, It is not CHRIST'S will that we forbear to weep.
O my soul! it is not our Lords mind to dry up thy tears, to assuage the
sorrow which thou should express, in regard of his sufferings. It pleases
him well, that his friends should freely spend tears for his torments; but he
cannot endure, that sins by his torments should not be pardoned. As he died
for pardon of sins, so was he most careful to use all means, to obtain
the same. He came not into the world to dry men's eyes from weeping, but to
save men's souls from perishing: as this was his principal work, so his
principal words were directed to this end.

O bottomless depth of charity and goodness! never exceeded, never equalled.
Verily, O good IESV! as thou saidest at thy last Supper, I give you a new
commandment: so might thou have said upon the Cross; I give you a new
example; A new example.
not only to pardon, but to pray for our enemies; and in the best manner that
you can to excuse them. And that at the very instant of offense, before it be
fully accomplished: before either entreaty, or time, has either worn out, or
any deal abated our grief. For whilst their malice was hottest in action,
whilst with many cruelties they tormented thy body, whilst with high blasts
of blasphemy they vexed thy soul, thou, as if thou had been. deprived, both
of sense in thy self, and respect toward thy friends, did wholly bend thy
self to obtain their pardon. Thy grief was greater without comparison, that
thy enemies should perish, then that thy friends did lament; or that thy self
did endure a most sharp and shameful death.

Verily, Prophesies fulfilled.
O meek IESV! now was that verified which had been prophesied of thee long
before: Isa. 53.
He made intercession for the transgressors. And again: Psalm, 109.
For the love that I had unto them, lo, they take against me; but I give my
self to prayer. The charity of CHRIST
For thy charity was so great, that it would not suffer thee to complain of
thy torments: Yea, it enforced thee to pray for thy tormentors; yea, to excuse
them. Even as a man will easily, not only pardon, but excuse him; by whom he is
cut, lanced, seared, or otherwise grieved; either for preventing or curing some
dangerous disease. As before thou had taught us to love our enemies; so here
thou did give example, how far we should love them: How far to love our
enemies.
even to pray earnestly for them; to be sorry for their offenses, and rather
to qualify and cover, then either to aggrauate or display them. He that thus
loves not his enemy, does not bear true love toward thee.

For the love of GOD is so joined with the love of our neighbor, The love of
GOD joined with the love of our neighbor.
that they cannot be separate. They both spring from the same root; they both
flow from the same fountain; they are, as it were, twisted into one thread:
insomuch as with the same habitual love where with we love GOD, we love also
our neighbor. As all the lines of a sphere which touch the Center, touch also
one another; so whosoever loves GOD, loves also his neighbor: and thou can
not separate from thy neighbor, unless thou also separate from GOD. The
Commandment to love, Not so hard to love, as to hate.
seems to be no hard Commandment because it is to do that whereto we are
inclineable by nature. If GOD had commanded us to hate our neighbor; it
seems to have bin more hard; because it is more agreeable to our nature, to
love, then to hate. Albeit thy neighbor be troublesome and hard; A troublesome
neighbor must be loved,
yet love him not the less. If it be hard to love thy neighbor, it is more
hard to be hated of GOD.

THE FATHERS ANSWER.
NOW, albeit the FATHER did not forthwith answer the Son in an audible
voice; albeit a voice did not sound from heaven, at the death of JESUS, as it
did at his baptism: Matthew. 3.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: yet, as the Apostle said,
Heb. 5.
that his prayer was well heard; so there is no doubt, but it was effectually
answered. For as JESUS prayed much more then he was heard to pray; so was his
prayer answered, when no answer was heard. But GOD does not always answer
prayers by words, How GOD often answers.
but for the most part by effects. When the Father denied his Sons prayer in
the garden, he answered by an Angel in words; but when he granted his prayer
upon the Cross, he answered not by words, but by effectual workings; which
is a most powerful answer. The effectual answer of the Father.
First, therefore by virtue of this prayer, one of the thieves crucified with
him, converted to him; and desired to be remembered by him. Then the Centurion,
who was appointed to guard him, did openly confess him to be the Son of GOD:
and others also, who stood by, smote their breasts (their hearts being smote
before) and returned into the city. Afterward at the Feast of Pentecost, three
thousand were converted at one Sermon, and five thousand at another. Also by
merit and power of this prayer, Saint Stephen was called; Saint Paul conuerred;
Saint Matthew elected; and generally, all our prayers are heard, all our sins
remitted, in case we repent. Wherefore conceive, O my soul! that GOD the Father
answered his Son, not by external voice, but by tacit and internal
consent; in manner as follows.

O My Son! I see thy sufferings, and I see the love wherewith thou suffer.
The love wherewith thou so imbracest thy pains, that it will not suffer thee
to be angry for thy pains: the love whereby thou art, both ready and
desirous, to suffer more pains then thou do. Lo now, I accept thy
sacrifice, burning in the bright flames of thy love: lo, thy tears, groans,
sighs and cries, have prevailed with me, and obtained thy desire. Lo, my
Son, I grant thy petition, I here lay down my wrath; I shut the floodgates
of my fury, and open the fountains of mercy to all. I offer grace, justice,
remission of sins, adoption to be children; as well to those who thus rage
against thee, as to all other sinners, in all ages, and of all countries;
whenever they have been, or shall be, or wheresoever they are, or howsoever
they have offended. All this, my son, I freely grant by the merits of thy
passion; but so, as they reject not this mercy offered; so, as they but open
their arms to embrace it: GOD does not absolutely compel.
But I will compel no man against his will. For, as when thou did open the
eyes of the blind, it was their own eyes whereby they did see: so when the
will of sinners is both enlightened and enabled by grace, their proper will must
then fall to work. And therefore let all sinners but resort unto me; let them
with humility in themselves, and faith in thee, sue forth their pardon; let
them take out this my grant under seal of the Sacraments; and we will be all
friends: they shall be my sons, and thy fellow heirs in my kingdom of
Heaven.

MEDITATIONS upon the same.
O HOLY FATHER! how great are thy mercies toward miserable sinners? give me
thy grace both by understanding to know, and by love to admire them. How much
more forcible was this prayer of thy son upon the Cross for sinners, Christ's
prayer more powerful for sinners, then for himself.
then was his prayer in the garden for himself? When he prayed in the garden,
prostrate on the ground, bathed in a bloody sweat, thrice for himself, thou
would not hear him: but when he prayed on the Cross for his mortal
enemies, thou did grant his prayer at the very first word. O infinite
goodness! that had more pity on the miseries of sinners, then on the flesh of
thy only son And because to thy divine eye nothing is past, nothing to come,
All things present to GOD.
but all things are present; because with thee there is neither yesterday nor
to morrow; because thou neither foreseest things to come, nor remembrest things
past, but beholdest all things with one act of thy divine knowledge: because
things which are not only far off in regard of us, but happily are not, are
present to thee: it follows, that thy sweet son still hangs crucified
before thee between heaven and earth; Christ still crucified.
still bleedeth and prays for sinners; Father forgive them. Forgive thou, I
pray thee, by virtue of this prayer, the sins of thy suppliant: which alas! I
have almost forgotten, but are all present before thee, and cry to thee for
justice. For if this powerful prayer was heard for his professed and malicious
enemies, who neither desired nor regarded his prayer; shall it not be heard
for those who join with him, both in prayer for forgiveness, and in tears, to
extinguish thy anger against them? Heavenly Father! I have nothing of my own
which thou can accept: but I here present to thee, An oblation.
the merits and obedience of thy only Son; all the labors and griefs which
in this world he endured for sinners. For this is our stock, this is our
treasure, this is the inheritance which he has given us, and whereof he has
made us heirs by his last will and testament: and this is rightly ours.
Because it is no less ours which is freely given us, then that which we
purchase by our own endeauours.

And, No want if we have Christ.
O blessed SAVIOVR! what can I want if I have thee? If I have thee, I have my
part in thy prayers, in thy tears, in thy blood, in thy death, in all the
merits of thy sufferings, and shall have my part in thy glory. Thou did not
only pray for sinners on the Cross, but continually praiest to thy Father for
them; that he will vouchsafe to forgive the^, to impute their offenses to
thee, and to impute thy righteousness to them. A prayer.
O bowels of mercy! cease not, I beseech thee, often to repeat this paryer to
thy Father for me; Father forgive him. For because by sinning I often become
thy enemy, I often crucify thee: what should become of me, if thou should
not often pray to thy Father to forgive me? And therefore, O my sure Salvation!
so often as either by my own infirmity, or potency of my enemies, I slip
into sin, so often say to thy Father for me, Father forgive this sinner:
Father, for my sake be not displeased with him. The greater our offenses are,
the greater is GODS glory in pardoning. And wherefore.
And the greater my offenses shall be, the greater shall be thy glory in
procuring my pardon.

For because of all attributes to GOD, goodness, after our manner of
understanding, is the most excellent; and that wherein he glories most, and
that for which he is most praised both in heaven and upon earth; it follows,
that the more goodness he expresses in any action, the more glory he
acquireth thereby. And therefore as generally GOD has not manifested so great
goodness in any work, not in all, as in the work of our Redemption; wherein
he both did and suffered so many things to make us good: as thereby in general,
the passion of our SAVIOVR, is so far from being ignominious, that all the
works of GOD laid together, do not beget to him so great glory: so in
particular, the greater the sins are that thereby are remitted; as they
manifest the greater goodness, so the glory which they raise must be the
greater.

IN WHOSE Presence this Prayer was made.
ALL this was done in the presence of his blessed Mother, and of diverse of his
dearest friends: As calling them to be witnesses of this General pardon; as
calling them to be witnesses, that as all were redeemed, so all might be
pardoned by his death. Teaching them also, first, to forgive injuries done
personally to themselves; secondly, that albeit they were permitted to weep
for his death, yet they were not licenced either to seek, or to desire
revenge, Lastly, to enjoin them to join with him in this charitable prayer;
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Our SAVIOVR would not lay
down his life, until he had made a most perfect knot of amity and peace; A
perfect peacemaker
until he had reconciled man with GOD; until he had reconciled his enemies
with his friends. For in that he entreated his Father to forgive, he commanded
his friends never to accuse. For what justice could be required against those
who were pardoned? How should man be offended, when GOD is appeased? As he left
them a passion to weep, so did he enjoin them a compassion to forgive.

O most happy and holyday! A great holy day.
wherein the son prayed, the Father pardoned, and men were reconciled. And
this was the peace, O great Redeemer! which was sweetly published by heavenly
voices (as by thy herehaults) at the time of thy birth. Luke 2. 14.
On earth peace, good will among men. This was the gift which in thy last
Sermon, thou did leave to thy Disciples: Peace I give unto you. Ioh. 12. 27.
And thus at thy death in praying for thy enemies, thou did seem in this
sort to speak to thy friends.

Lo, The great peace of the world concluded.
my friends, I am now concluding the great peace of the world. I have
reconciled you to my Father; I have united you to my self; and do enjoin you
to be at amity with all men. As I die in love with all men, so must all hate
extinguish by my death, among those that are mine. Alas! what should beco0me
of you and all mankind, If I should now die in displeasure or discontent?
Assuredly, you should not then be reconciled to my Father; you should not then
be united with me. And verily so often you fall from this reconcilement, so
often, you break this union, as you be at enmity with you brother. When you
are at mutual contention your enemy the devil in like fashion looks on, How
the Devil eyeth contentious persons.
as an Eagle eyeth a Cock fighting or a Wolf the rude encountering of Rams:
intending to make you all his prey. In case you fall into hatred together, you
thereby strike into variance with me.

O blessed Peace. Maker! who shall dare to take revenge of light injuries,
seeing thou did pray for those who tormented thee to death? Seeing thou
made no reckoning of the nails which pierced thy hands and thy feet, shall
I make account of an angry or disgraceful word? How shall I desperately dare
to esteem any man my enemy, seeing thou would be a friend and brother to
all? Verily, thus much may any man borrow of his own weakest reason; By hating
others, we loose GODS love.
that by hating others, I loose thy love; because I hate those whom thou
love, and for whom thou ceasest not to pray. A short Prayer.
O my souls health! Leave me not, I beseech thee, either out of thy prayer, or
out of the reconcilement which thou have made: seeing I can have no benefit by
the one, but I must be included in the other. And seeing the sins whereof I
desire to be pardoned, are infinitely hateful to thy Father; let me not
esteem the injuries intolerable, which any man shall do unto me; let me be no
less unwilling to revenge the one, then I would be to be punished for the
other. Yea, let me be no less careful to pray for the offenses of others
against my self, then I would be to entreat pardon for my offenses against
thee.

A CONCLVDING Thanksgiving, Payer and oblation.
I Adore, laud, and glorify thee, O LORD IESV CHRIST! I bless thee and give
thee thanks, O Son of the living GOD! for that thou would not only
permit, but submit thy sacred members, to be thus cruelly both tormented and
deformed for me. And now I lowly bless and salute them all, for the love and
honor which I am bound, both to bear and to express toward thee for this
benefit. I salute and kiss thy blessed feet; which had travailed many
iourneys, and at last waded to death for me in thy blood: leaving marks
behind them, in what footstepps I should tread, I salute thy knees, which
were often bowed to the earth in prayer, and often wearied with travail for
me. I salute thy blessed breast; inwardly inflamed with love, and outwardly
deformed with knotty scourges. Hail sacred side which was opened; gentle and
sweet heart which was pierced for me with a spear. Hail battered back of my
Redeemer, plowed and furrowed with grievous lashes. Hail holy arms, spread at
the largest length to embrace all sinners; and most bountiful hands in
distributing the treasure of thy blood among them. I salute thy glorious
countenance defiled with spittings; which thou had neither lust nor leisure
to wipe away. I salute thy mellifluous mouth, and all thy instruments of
speech; which could not be stopped by a sponge filled with vinegar, or by any
othermeanes from praying for me. And you gentle ears, filled for my sake with
blasphemies and reproaches; you amiable eyes, which for me have powered forth
many showers of tears, I reverently salute you. I salute thy royal head, most
cruelly goared and gashed with thorns; to adorn me with the crown of glory.
Most meek JESUS! I salute thy whole body, which was scorned, scourged,
crucified; which died and was buried for my salvation. Hail rosy wounds, and
most precious blood, which was offered to thy Father for me. Hail most noble
soul of my SAVIOVR, which was vilely vexed and crucified to death, to procure
for me eternal life. I confess, O loving LORD! that since I was brought
forth into this sinful world, I have brought forth a world of sin. Therefore I
beseech thee by the sufferings of thy most sacred members, to cleanse all my
members from the corruptions wherewith I have clogged them; and to sanctify
them with the merits of thy passion. I beseech thee (O LORD) favorably to
forgive me what I have done; and liberally to give me what I could not
deserve.

AND O most merciful FATHER! most mighty creator of heaven and of earth!
albeit I am of all sinners the most unworthy; yet do I offer to thee the most
precious death of thy only son, for all the sins that I have done, and for
all the benefits that I desire. Behold, O most pitiful Father, what impieties
were dealt upon thy most pious son for my sake. Behold the torn coat of thy
son Joseph, dropping with blood; and see if thou knowlest it to be his
garment. Verily he is fallen into the power of some wicked beast, which thus
has torn it, and trampled it in his blood; and altogether deformed it with
the filth of our sins. O distributer of grace! cast the eyes of thy majesty
upon the unspeakable work of thy mercy: behold, I pray thee, who it is that
thus has suffered; and favorably regard him for whom he has suffered.

Behold, O glorious FATHER! the members of thy sweet child, cruelly racked
upon the cross; and favorably regard what my substance is. See his bleeding
hands nailed to the cross, and be pleased to remit the bloody sins which my
hands have committed. See his naked side pierced with a spear, and renew me
with the blessed fountain which flowed out of that wound. See his unspotted
feet struck through with rough and rigid nails; and enable me by the fastening
of them to the Cross, to run constantly the way of thy commandments.

Observe, O eternal Father! thy dear Son, in the fairest flourish of his
age; how his neck bowed, his head declined; how his whole countenance was
deformed. Behold, how his starry eyes are sunk and set in his head; how his
nose growth sharp, his lips pale, his eiebrowes hard, his cheeks shrunk and
wane: behold his breast swollen, his side bloody, his bowels dry, his arms and
legs stiff: Behold his whole body resolved into death. Behold my Priest,
who need not be sprinkled or sanctified with other blood, but gloriously
glistereth in his own. Behold, my pleasing and perfect sacrifice; odoriferous
and acceptable to thee. Behold my Advocate whom I have directed to plead my
cause before thee. Hear him, I pray thee, and regard the defense that hourly
he makes for me. Grant, O pitiful FATHER! that I may always have him for my
Advocate, whom by no merit of mine, but by thy pure grace thou have given for
my Redeemer.

O omnipotent FATHER of my LORD! what I could find most precious, most highly
to be esteemed, I have devoutly presented to thee: Compose thy self now, to
dispose thy grace and mercy toward me. And albeit I am unworthy of thy rich
favors, in regard of my merits; yet remember thy mercies, remember thy
promises, remember the inestimable merits of my Redeemer: remember what he
has done, and what he has suffered, even from his Cratch to his Cross; not
for himself, but for me. All which I here offer to thee, most gentle FATHER!
as a sacrifice for my sins, and for all my necessities: for whatsoever I
require of thee, it is in his name, and for his sake; it is for the love thou
bear to him, and for the love that he bears to thee.

Thou have promised to honor fathers in their sons, and sons for their
fathers. O favorable LORD! honor now thy only Son, by doing good to more,
for the love thou bear to him. For he is my FATHER, my second Adam; and I am
his son, albeit undutiful; yet because, in truth, I am his son; for the
love thou bear to him, be favorable to me. For assuredly, he has paid for
me much more then I owe. No offense can be so grievous, for which his
sorrows, his sufferings, his obedience, and above all his profuse love, has
not amply satisfied: which his large rivers of blood cannot wash away; which
may not be drowned and devoured in his death.

O heavenly FATHER! there is nothing in my self, which I dare presume to
present unto thee. For what can proceed from this carrion, which is not noisome?
what fruit can thou expect from this earth, which thou have cursed from the
beginning, but thorns and briers? And therefore I offer this my SAVIOVR and
Redeemer, thy most blessed Son; and the unmeasurable love whereby thou did
send him into the world, apparelled with my flesh, to free me thereby from
eternal death. Beseeching thee, to accept his humble and fervent prayers, for
my dry and dull devotions. Accept his tears, for the torrent of tears which I
should power forth; but by reason of the hardness of my heart, I cannot.
Accept his incomprehensible dolours and torments, which thou only perfectly
know; for the sorrow and contritio^ which I am bound to perform. Lastly,
accept his sharp and penurious life, with all his travails and exercises of
virtue; accept his cruel death, and all his passions, as a sacrifice to thy
glorious Majesty; for all the evil works which I have done, and for all the
good works which I should have done.

Feed me with his flesh, inebriate me with his blood: let his grief enter
into my soul, that I may be resolved wholly into his love. Away all foreign
loves; away with the multitude of worldly fantasies and dreams: let me be
crucified with him to the world; let me so die with him, that my life may be
laid up in thy divine treasury. Thy Apostle compares all worldly things to
dung: and may be likened to the swallows dung, Phil. 3.
which fell upon the eyes of Tobias, and made him blind. For we cannot see
spiritual things, so long as our eyes are daubed with this dung. Diuites
eguerunt, and
The rich have wanted, and suffer hunger; Psalm. 34.
but they who fear the LORD want no good thing. The things of this world do
not fill* but inflate; even as the Prophet said of Ephraim: Hos. 12.
He feeds on wind. They are like sharp liquors, which do not satisfy,
but provoke hunger. They are like salt water, to quench thirst; or oil to
extinguish fire.

O my life! O desire of my soul! hide me from the world; obscure me from the
fawning favors thereof, and take me into the secret retreits of thy bosom to
dwell. One thing is necessary; and that do I desire. My beloved is one. Cant. 6.
My CHRIST JESUS, my GOD, my spouse is one, and my only love. O heavenly
FATHER! let nothing be sweet, nothing sauourie unto me; let nothing affect
me, but only JESUS CHRIST. Let him be wholly mine, and I wholly his. Cant. 6.
Let me neither love, nor know any thing but him, and him crucified. To whom
with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and praise for ever. Amen.

Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Strength, Dominion, Riches and Power, be
unto our GOD, for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XXIII.


