GODS UNIVERSAL right proclaimed. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the 27.
of March 1603. being the next Sunday after her Majesty's departure.

By I. H.

1. PET. 2. 17. Fear God: Honor the King.



Imprinted at London for Cuthburt Burby. 1603.

Gods universal right proclaimed.
PSALM. 24. 1. 2. 1. The earth is the Lords and all that therein is: the world
and they that dwell therein.

2. For he has founded it upon the seas and established it upon the floods.


THis text (for argument of my sermon) not selected by curious choice, but
taken as it was offered by order of my private exercise in mine own place,
serves yet most fitly for these times. For whereas God dwelling in the
heavens, has made a great change among us upon the earth: and having called
our late Sovereign Queen to the possession of his heavenly kingdom, for her
has given unto us a most prudent King to succeed in the government of her
earthly kingdom: this scripture shows, that God herein has done that which
rightly he may: because the earth and the inhabitants thereof are wholly his:
and he may bestow kingdoms, advance gouerners, and commit nations to be ruled
at his pleasure.

Yea if it be lawful for us paruis componere magna, and to observe the
similitudes and agreements that be between an earthly and a spiritual
kingdom, which is not forbidden to Christian modesty: then this whole Psalm
seems unto me, a scripture fit to be handled in this time in public, to
honor, as it were with some divine ceremonies, the kingdom, and expected
coming of this our noble King. For in this Psalm the Prophet entreats of
the spiritual kingdom of Christ. First showing what manner nations and people
he reigns over, in the first six verses. Next proclaming his coming in the
other verses, wherein the nobler sort of his subjects are required to prepare
to receive him. But having chosen a part, I will leave the whole and return to
the part.

In the first six verses I have showed you, that first the Prophet tells us,
what manner nations and people the Lord reigns over. They are all of two
sorts. The first of them that are subject to his government Iure creations, by
right of creation. Of these he speaks in these two verses, and in this rank
may all be comprehended. The second is a number chosen out of these, with whom
he does converse more familiarlie as his domesticals, which are honored among
the rest, and distinguished from the rest, Beneficio redemptionis; by the
benefit of redemption.

For as in an earthly kingdom, the King reigns over all his subjects by
equal right, (and it is Antichristian, and abhorring from religion among us
professed, to say that any subject should be exempt from the rule of his
sovereign) and yet admits some, bound unto him by a private covenant and
oath taken of them, to come near and to do service unto him, whom he does
inritch with rewards, and grace with honorable preferments. Even so in the
kingdom of Christ he reigns with equal authority over all men. For Psalm.
2. 8. God the father gave unto him: Gentes in her editatem, et extremitates
terra in possessionem, the heathen for his inheritance, and the ends of the
earth for his possession. Yet a choice number there is bearing the mark of the
foundation (as the Kings livery) whereof the Apostle speaks. 2. Timoth. 2.
19. the foundation of God abides sure, and has this seal: Dominus nouit qui
sunt sui, the Lord knows who are his. These head mitteth to do him daily
service, these he conuerseth with familiarly as he says. Ioh. 14. 21. Ei
conspiciendum exhibebo meipsum, I will show my own self unto him: these he
inricheth with gifts, graces of his spirit in this world, eternal life and a
crown of righteousness in the next: these he honors with high preferments,
making them by believing, the sons of God in this world, and kings and
Priests unto God both here and in the next. This second sort I have not to
speak of at this time because my Text reaches not unto them.

The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the world and they that
dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon
the floudes, in these words he remembers the first sort of his subjects
which are so by right of creation. Or, if happily this division of subjects
displease, because the second member is included in the first, and they which
are subjects bound by the benefit of redemption, are also bound by the bond of
creation. I will give the sense of my Text in some other words. The Prophet in
these words remembers the first reason and ground of right, by which the Lord
clameth to be king: Namely that he created the world* The ground of right by
which he clameth is in the second verse. How far he clameth by this ground of
right is in the first verse. Even to be Lord of all.

The earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the world and they that dwell
therein. Thus far he clameth, even to be Lord of all. Of the earth and of the
inhabitants: Of the soil and those that occupy it: Of every tenement, and
eeuery tenant dwelling therein, that these are the Lords, we are to inquire in
this verse. That they are his, because he made them, we are to inquire in the
next verse. And the doctrine of these things I will first deliver, and then the
uses.

The earth is the Lords, the world is his. Tremelius reads orbis habitabilis,
the habitable world, that is the pile of the earth in the face whereof we
dwell, with the parts and ornaments thereof, in the bowels of it or upper
countenance, as minerales, mettalles, stones, mountains, valleys, plains,
herbs, plants, fruits and such like, for all these are earth, or of the
earth and adhearing thereto. And all this is the Lords.

For all this was, when there was neither man nor beast, nor any breathing
thing to claim a property in them, or to have any use of them. For in the
first day the earth was: though yet in one mass with the heavens and the
waters, and wanting her form as appears. Genesis. 1. 1. 2. And in the third
day it was brought to her form and received her decking as in the same place
appears. verse, 9. God said again, Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered into one place and let the dry land appear: and it was so. And God
called the dry land earth, and the gathering together of the waters, seas: and
God saw that it was good. Then God said, Let the earth bud forth the bud of
the herb that seedeth seed, the fruitful tree, which bears fruit
according to his kind, which may have his seed in it self: and it was so.
And the earth brought forth the bud of the herb, that seedeth seed according
to his kind, also the tree that yields fruit, which has his seed in it
self according to his kind: and God saw that it was good. So the evening and
morning was the third day. Thus was the earth separated from other parts of the
world, received her form and furniture, when yet there was neither man nor
beast, nor brething thing to live upon it, to claim soueraingty, or to make
use of it.

Which things were created after in the sixth day. As Moses after the fourth
days work in creating the lights in the firmament, and the fifth days work
in creating fowls and fishes, at last reports in the same place. verse. 24.
moreover God said, let the earth bring forth the living thing according to
his kind, cattle, and that which creeps, and the beast of the earth
according to their kind, and it was so. And God made the beast of the earth
according to his kind, and the cattle according to his kind, and every
creeping thing of the earth according to his kind: and God saw that it was
good. Furthermore God said, let us make man in our image according to our
likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of
heaven, and over the beasts and over all the earth, and over every thing that
creeps and moves on the earth. Thus God created the man in his image, in
the image of God created he him, etc. And in the ver. 31. Moses thus
concludes. And God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good. And the
evening and morning were the sixth day. The earth was created in the first day*
was separated and received form and furniture the third day: man and beasts
were not created until the 6. day, the earth in the mean time wanted not a
Lord to whom it belonged and whose it was, his it is, as the prophet here
speaks, the earth is the Lords.

But in hope to hold sovereignty over some thing for our selves, we will
object generally for others also Diverse creatures have invaded diverse parts of
the world, and without disturbance for many thousands of years, have quietly
held, occupied and enjoyed the same as their own. The fishes have the waters,
which run into the Seas and have there their meeting place, Psalm. 104. 25. In
ipso mari magno et spacioso, in the great and wild sea, Illic reptilia sunt
atque innumer a animantia parua cum magnis, there are creeping things and
innumerable living creatures small and great. There go the ships, there is
Liuiathan (Balena says Tremelius, the Whale) whom thou have made to play
therein. The Fowls take their pleasure in the regions of the air, the lower
heavens, and though they descend sometime to the earth to gather food, and sit
sometime on the branches of Trees to rest them and to sing, yet they are called
the fowls of heaven, that is of the air. Diverse creatures occupy the face of
the earth, the Prophet in the forenamed Psalm, verse. 18. Montes excelsissimi
rupicapraru^, petrae montanorum murium perfugium, the high mountains are a
refuge for the Goats, and the Rocks for the mountain Mise, which we read
Conies, and in verse. 20. he remembers the beasts of the Forests. And of the
wild Ass God says. Job. 39. Cui disposui campestria pro domo eius et pro
habitaculis eius salsuginosam terram. I have made the wide champaigne, the
wilderness his house, and the salt places his dwelling, he scorneth the
multitude of the city, and hears not the noise of the driuer, he seeks the
mountains for his pasture, and searches for every green thing, and the most
pleasant places of the earth man chooses for his habitation, there building
houses and cities for his more convenient dwelling. Genesis 9. 18. 19. The sons
of Noah going forth of the Arc were Shem, Ham and Iaphet. These are the three
sons of Noah, and of the^ was the whole earth ouerspred. Thus have diverse
creatures inioyed the* world as their own, many thousands of years.

Shall it not therefore be the Lords because they use it? how did the Lord
loose his old right unto them? in what court and before what Judge was the Lord
euicted? and where are the records thereof to be seen, surely the creatures
hold their habitation of the Lord, and so many as are wise acknowledge the
same. Whether they do or no, God does challenge the right, and plainly
affirms that he has always disposed thereof. Ier. 27. 5. speaking of the
earth which he made, he says, Ideo trado eam cui rectum videtur in oculis
meis. Therefore I give it to whom it pleases me: and now I have given all
these lands into the hands of Nebuchaanezar the King of Babel my servant,
signifying hereby that from time to time he gives and grants the possession
and use of the earth at his pleasure, admitting one and displacing another as
seems good in his sight, putting out Cananites, bringing in the Ifraelites,
assigning to every Tribe their own portion: deposing Saul, setting up David;
dividing one kingdom to many kings, as when he rent ten Tribes from the son
of Solomon, and gave them to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. And giving many
kingdoms to one kingdom, as when bordering nations were subdued unto David.
Which translating and disposing, proves the earth to be his though inhabited
by men, and that they all do hold of him.

Which because proud Nebuchadnezar did not acknowledge, he was taught. Dan. 4.
27. He said; Is not this great Babel, Quam ego edificaui, which I have builded
for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of
my majesty; taking himself to be the chief Lord holding of none. But it
follows in the next verse, while the word was in the Kings mouth, Vox e coelo
accidit, dicens tibi iudicitur Nebuchadnetzar Rex, there came a voice from
heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezar, to thee be it spoken, (to thee whatsoever
if thou were as great as Nabuchadonezar) thy kingdom is departed from thee,
and they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts
of the field, they shall make thee to eat grass as the Oxen, and seven times
shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most high bears rule over
the kindome of men, and gives it unto whom soever he will. The very same
hour was this thing fulfilled upon Nabuchadnezar, and he was driven from men,
and did eat grass as the Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven,
till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds
claws, and at the end of those days (hear now his confession, having
reformend his judgment) I Nabuchadnezar lift up mine eyes unto heaven, and
mine understanding was restored unto me, and I gave thanks unto the most high,
and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose power is an
everlasting power, and his kingdom is from generation to generation. And all
the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and according to his will
he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth: and
none can stay his hand, nor say unto him, what do thou? Thus when men do
not acknowledge the supreme authority of God, he knows how to make the
proudest to recant.

But be it that men and beasts hold nothing in their own right, but all of
favor and at Gods will, as appears also in their short continuance, and
giving place by death. Yet what may be answered unto the Prince of darkness
that challenges much to himself in this world. In Luke 4. 5. in the history
of Christ's temptation, it is thus written of him. That the devil took him up
into an exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the
world, in the twinkling of an eye, and said unto him. Tibi dabo potestatem
hanc vniuersam, et gloriam illorum regnorum, nam mihi tradita est, et cuicunque
voluero, do eam. All this power will I give thee, and the glory of those
kingdoms: for that is delivered unto me: and to whomsoever I will, I give it.
The devil in these words challenges much unto himself: and the scripture
certainly gives much unto him, calling him the prince of this world. John.
14. 30. princeps huius mundi venit, sed in me non habit quicquam, the Prince of
this world comes and has naught in me. And calling him God of this world. 2.
Cor. 4. 4. If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that perish. In quibus deus
huius seculi excecauit mentes, nempe in infidelibus, etc. In whom the God of
this world has blinded their minds, namely in the Infidels. But in the
devils challenge, mark (not his modesty, for he has none, but) his
fearfulness: he dares not say for incensing his judge, that the power of
this world is his, but that he is a commissioner: all this says he, is
committed unto me. And where the Scripture calls him Prince and God of this
world, it is by reason of this commission, by which, power is given him, in the
darkness of this world, to rule in the hearts of the children of
disobedience. And that fearful speech also of his is false: for it is not
committed unto him to have at his pleasure the disposing of the kingdoms of the
earth. In Pro. 8. 15. the wisdom of God says, per mereges regnant et
dominatores decernunt iustitia^, by me kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. And the Prophet of God says, Psa. 75. 6. No^ ab exortu, nec ab
occasu, neque a deserto est exaltatio. Sed deus index hu^c deprimit illu^
exaltat: to come to preferment is neither from the east, nor from the west, nor
from the wilderness (that is South or North, for on both sides Judea was
enclosed with the wilderness) but God is the judge: he makes low, and he
makes high. And the Queen of Sheba tells Solomon 2. Chron 9. 8. that God
did place him In solio suo regem pro Iehoua deo suo, in Gods throne, King in
the steed of the Lord his God. Kings therefore do sit by God, and for God,
in the throne of God, and are not beholding to the prince of darkness, but to
the father of lights, and are therefore called Vncti Iehouae, the anointed of
the Lord.

If therefore neither man nor beast, though they inhabit the earth, hold
otherwise then of favor, and at will, being no chief Lords: nor yet the
Angels, not the good ones, though they often descend to minister unto the^ on
earth that shall inherit eternal salvation: nor the evil ones, though they
compass the earth too and fro, walking abroad in it, be Lords of the same,
we must confess with the Prophet, that the earth is the Lords: the habitable
world is his.

But be it that the soil and habitation is the Lords, yet it may be that the
inhabitants are not his. For often times the ship is one man's and the merchandise
wherewith it is fraited is another man's. Often times the soil belongs to one
man as Lord of the Manor, and the corn growing on the ground belongs to
another as Farmer of the grange. Many times one man is master and owner of the
house, and another owes the goods laid up therein. Let us therefore see if it
be not so in this case, the Lord being Lord of the earth, and men freemen not
bound unto him.

And surely there have not wanted men in all ages of the world, that have
refused to acknowledge God to be their Lord. When Moses spoke to Pharaoh in
the name of the Lord, Pharaoh proudly made answer, Exodus 5. 2. saying; Who is
the Lord, that I should hear his voice and let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. He knew no superior, he belonged unto
none. Let us join with him Nebuchadnezar, who threatening the three Jews that
would not worship his golden Image, said unto them proudly. Da^ 3. 15. Quis est
Deus qui eripere possit vos e manibus meis? who is that God that can deliver
you out of my hands? he was so far from thinking any God his Lord, that he
thought himself a Lord of Gods, and greater then all Gods. To these may be
added the tumultuous and raging people of Jews and Gentiles, with their Kings
and governors, that Psalm. 2. 2. came together, contra Iehouam et contra
Christum eius, against the Lord and against his Christ, against God the father,
against God the son, and against the anointed of the Lord with this
rebellious resolution. Let us break their bonds, and cast away their cords
from us.

If any think, that kings perhaps, may fall into this error, being deceived
by royal majesty, which yielding to no Lord in earth, thinks it should be
subject to no Lord in heaven: but subjects learning to obey earthly Lords,
will much more humble themselves to a heavenly Lord: and it is not to be feared
of them, that they should say unto God, as the citizens by their messenger said
to their noble ruler. Luke 19. 14. Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, we will not
have this man to reign over us.

First in the 2. Psalm, the people conspired with their Princes. In the
Parable in Luke, the multitude of the people subject to God refuse his
government. And further in the 12. Psalm, verse. 3. 4. the Prophet says. The
Lord shall cut off Labia blanda, linguam grandiloquam, flattering lips,
proud speaking tongues, Eos qui dicunt, linguae nostrae ius obtinebimus, labia
nostra penes nos sunt, quis esset dominus nobis? We will stand upon the right
of our tounges, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? These flattering
lips, though joined with proud speaking tongues, yet should bewraye men of
subject estate: for kings use to be flattered, they use not to flatter. And it
is certain, that men, both of high and low degrees deny Gods power over
them. If not inplain words, yet in plain deeds while they contemn his voice.
The Apostle says Titus. 1. 16. There are which profess to know God: Sed
factis negant, in their works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient,
and to every goodworke reprobate.

Concerning this point. That as the earth is the Lords, so all that are in it,
as the habitable world is his, so they that dwell therein. Concerning this: The
Lord says Ezechiel. 18. 4. Omnes animaemeae sunt, all souls are mine, the
soul of the father and the soul of the son is mine. And if the souls of
all both young and old be the Lords, whose are the bodies? which in all
things are ruled by the will of the soul. The Lord further says. Jeremy. 32.
27. Behold I am the Lord God of all flesh, is any thing to hard for me? All
flesh is his. If our bodies be flesh, they also are the Lords: Let flesh and
blood therefore, and every child of man acknowledge to whom he belongs.
Caro et spiritus totus homo, carnalis et spiritualis omnis homo, flesh and
spirit the whole man, fleshly and spiritual every man is wholely the Lords.
David was godly, Saul was wicked: Vterque dei. David of an upright heart, Saul
an hypocrite: Vterque seruus dei. Both the one and other his servants; Paul
speaking of Jesus Christ, that had humbled himself and became obedient until
the death of the Cross, says of him Phil. 2. 9. That therefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of
Jesus. Omne genu se flectat coelestium ac terrestrium et subterra neorum: every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and of things in earth, and of things
under the earth. Omnisque lingua profiteatur Iesum Christum esse dominum, ad
gloriam dei patris, and that every tongue should confess Jesus Christ to be
the Lord, to the glory of God the father. Every one therefore, whatsoever he be
and wheresoever, of all the creatures of God, in heaven, or in earth, or under
the earth, must acknowledge the sovereign authority of this Lord, That the
earth is his and all that are in it, the world and al they that dwell therein.

There have been ample kingdoms in the world, and mighty Kings claming and
conquering far: but none so ample, and so far claming as this. The glorious
kingdom of the golden head of Babell, the rich kingdom of the silver breast
and arms, of the Medes and Persians, the mighty kingdom of the brazen bellies
and thighs of Alexander and the Grecians and the warlike kingdoms of the Iron
legs of the Seleucidae and Lagidae, successors of Alexander in the North, and
South, are able to match this ample kingdom of the Lord. The king saw a stone
cut of without hands, that grew into a great mountain and filled the whole
earth. Which the prophet interprets of the ample and eternal kingdom that
God should set up among men, even the kingdom of his son whose borders
should be the circle of the world. The breadth thereof from the North to the
South. The length thereof, the iourny of the sun. Vbicunque locus est, illic
priest dominus, vbicunque homines sunt, illis praeest dominus. Whersoeuer place
is there God reigns: wheresoever men are over them God reigns, Malach. 1.
11. From the rising of the Sun unto the* going down thereof, my name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my name,
and a pure offering: for my name is great among the Heathen says the Lord of
hosts. Thus much of this verse showing how far the Lord claims, even to be
Lord of all, the earth and the inhabitants, the world and the dwellers therein.

For he has founded it upon the Seas and established it upon the floudes.
This verse contains a reason and ground of his claim, namely, that he made
the world and the inhabitants thereof.

And where as the Prophet says that God did found it and establish it upon the
waters, the meaning is this, that in founding and establishing the earth and
habitable world, he made it to appear high above the waters, as if the waters
lying even in a low level (called aquae, quia aequae) as if these leueled
low waters were the flore, and the earth the building raised up upon them.
Genesis. 1. 9. It is written God said again, let the waters under the heaven
be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear, and it was so. And
God called the dry land earth, and the gathering together of the waters he
called seas: Before, the waters and the earth were so mixed, that the earth was
wholly covered with the waters, as a lute or some instrument in a case; and God
commanded them to retire into one place, and hold an even course. For so
Tremelius interprets the place, recto et aequabili cursu contendant: Let their
motion from hence forth be direct and level, hastening into their assigned
place, where they may have that even course. This work of God is notably set
forth by the Prophet in the Psalm. 104. Tremelius reading giving much light
to our reading, from the 5. ver He set the earth upon her foundatio^s that it
shall never move. Abisso vt indumento operueras eam supramontes stantibus
aquis: Thou had covered it with the deep as with a garment, the waters
standing above the mountains (thus it was until the third day.) Ex
increpatione tua diffugerunt, a voce tui tonitrui accelerarunt fugam. at thy
rebuke they fled, from the voice of thy thunder they hastened their flight
(Gods word was like a thundering check unto them) Conscenderunt per montes,
descenderunt per valles, in locum quem fundaueras eis: they climed over the
mountains, and ran down by the valleys, unto the place assigned to them.
Terminum opposuisti ne transeant, ne reuertuntur ad operiendu^ terram. Thou
have set bonds unto the^, that they shall not pass, that they return not to
cover the earth (thus it was on the third day) and by that word of God as an
eternal decree, the waters hold their rectumet aequabilem cursum, their plain
and level wauing course, and are about the skirtes of the dry land, as a
foundation and strong pinning to hold up the sides of it. And therefore does
the Prophet say. That the Lord has founded it upon the Seas and prepared it
upon the floudes.

Whatsoever his words are, the thing that he affirms is this, that God in the
beginning made the earth and made the inhabitants by the power of his word, and
by the same mighty word of his still vpholdeth the same.

We have the history of the creation delivered in writing unto us by the man to
whom God appeared in the burning bush, to whom God spoke in the mountain
familiarly face to face, that saw the glory of God, so much as mortal eyes
might see and live; even by Moses that was faithful in all the house, and he
does ascribe the creation thereof unto God. In whose books, these are the first
words, graven as it were in the forhead thereof: In principio deus creauit
coelu^ et terram, in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth so
that, as the two disciples, going to Emaus, said unto Jesus, after his
resurrection, not yet known unto them, that he must needs be the only stranger
in Israel, if he knew not the things that had lately happened to Jesus of
Nazareth a Prophet mighty in deed and in word before God and all the people:
so he must needs be a very great stranger in the Scriptures that knows not
that God made the world. Many great Philosophers among the unbelieving
Gentiles, having read the books of other writers, have doubted of the creation
of the world, and some have thought it to have been eternal, never made. And
some more folishly have supposed it to have been accidently made, Ex atomis
conflatum, grown to this form by the falling of small motes together. But
among Christians, which have the books of Scripture Scripturae diuinitus
inspiratae, given by inspiration of God, the child that has but spelled the
first line of the Bible, learneth that the Almighty God did create the heaven
and the earth. In Esa. 40 25. the Lord says; To whom now will you liken me
that I should be like him, says the holy one? lift up your eyes on high, and
behold who has created these things? and brings out their armies by number?
and calls them all by names. After verse. 28. Know thou not? or have thou
not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord has created the ends of the
earth, etc. In Jeremy in his tenth chapter, where he shows the vanity of
idols compared unto the living God, the God of truth: in the 11. verse it is
thus written. Thus shall ye say unto them, the Gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under these
heavens, he has made the earth by his power, and established the world by his
wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion. And in the 27.
Chapter and 5. verse, God says of himself. I have made the earth, the man and
the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched
arm, etc. Yea God manifested in the flesh, Jesus Christ the son of God, and
son of the Virgin Marie, to whom in regard of his human nature, the
judgment of the world is committed, which in regard of his divine nature was
his without commission, he has made the world, and all things therein, and
does now conserve the same. Paul says of him Colos. 1. 16. That by him
althings were created which are in heaven, and which are in earth, things
visible, and things invisible. And the Apostle to the Hebrews 1. 2. speaks
thus; That whereas in former times, God spoke unto our fathers by the Prophets,
in these last days he has spoken unto us by his son, whom he has made
heir of all things, by whom also he made the world: who being the brightness
of the glory, and the ingraued form of his person, and bearing up all things,
Potente verbo suo, by his mighty word, has by himself purged our sins: by
him the world was made, and by his mighty word the world and all things in it
are sustained. So that certainly God did create the earth, the habitable world,
and all that dwell upon it. He did found it and establish it upon the seas,
being now by Gods appointment as a wall at the foot thereof, and a strong
buttrice to shore and uphold the same.

But is this a good reason to claim the sovereignty of the world because he
made it? I surely. When Jacob had made his pottage, and Esau came home hungry
out of the field, he acknowledged that to be Jacobs that Jacob had made, he
challenged no right in it, neither desired to have it but upon composition with
his brother. He is therefore more unreasonable then Esau, that acknowledging
God to have made the world, will deny him to be Lord of the world, of the
work of his own hands. Paul among the Athenians, Acts. 17. 24. speaks thus.
God that made the world and all things that are therein, seeing that he is
Lord of heaven and earth, dweleth not in temples made with hands. Where he has
affirmed that God made the world, and all things therein, he fears not
immediately to annex* as a thing not to be spoken against, that he is lord of
heaven and earth. Concerning man, one part of this earth and habitable world,
for he was made of the dust of the earth, the Prophet says Psalm. 100. 3. Know
ye, that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. Hence he infers
that we are his, and he Lord and owner of us, as any man is of the flocks of
his sheep, because the Lords hands did make us. And if the reason be good in
any part of the world, it is good also in the whole. If the sons of men be
Gods possession, because he made them, then the earth and all that are upon it
are his, for he made them. In Esa. 45. 12. the Lord says: I have made the
earth, and created man upon it: I whose hands have spread out the heavens, I
have even commanded all their army. Because he made and created these things,
and did spread them out, giving both being and form, substance and shape unto
them, therefore he commands them as their Lord. Omni exercitui eorum mandata
Dei: he commands all the armies of them. Which he should not do if they
remained not his. Therefore upon so great reason, let us yield God his right,
and say with the Prophet; The earth is the Lords and all that is in it, the
world and they that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the seas, and
established it upon the floods. Thus have ye heard the doctrine of these
words. Now let us consider what holy and good use we may make thereof.

And let this be the first use, that if God be Lord of all, the earth and also
the inhabitants, that then all, the earth and the inhabitants, do acknowledge
and honor him. And this the holy Ghoast does teach us in the Psalm. 96. from
the verse. 7. Give unto the Lord the families of the people, give unto the
Lord glory and power; give unto the Lord the glory of his name: bring an
offering, and enter into his Courts. Worship the Lord in the glorious
sanctuary: tremble before him all the earth; say among the nations, the Lord
reigns. Surely the world shall be stable, and not move, and he shall judge
the people in righteousness. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be
glad, let the Sea roar, and all that therein is: let the field be joyful,
and all that is in it, let all the Trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord:
for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he will judge the world
with righteousness, and the people in his truth. Thus ought all the earth to
do: thus let all our earth do: for we are his and he comes among us, to judge
us in righteousness by his appointed servant, and to instruct us in the truth by
our defender of the faith. This is one use, to give glory unto God.

Let the next use be this, that we learn to know our selves in humility, and
cease from those proud and importable speeches of some, that think themselves
Lords of the earth, when the earth is the Lords and all that is in it. The
Heathen Poet censureth them saying, Impudentissima eorum est oration, their
speech is most shamlesse that say Quis tu es? quis mihi es? what art thou? what
art thou to me? indeed, what art thou that speak thus unto thy brother? but
one of those poor Grasshoppers, spoke of Esa. 40 22. Deus insidet ambitui
terrae, cui habitatores eius sunt velut locustae. God sits upon the circle
of the earth, to whom the inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers. Is the earth
thine? art thou Lord of the habitable world? yea is there any thing in the
world, that thou can call thine? when the Prophet says, all is the Lords:
thou perhaps wilt say, thou have many fair houses, and some of them thou have
builded thy self. Thou have many fruitful fields, and some of them thou have
purchased thy self. Thou have thy bags well filled, and have got thy wealth
thy self, and have goods laid up in store for many years. I doubt not but
thou have many of these things in thy possession, delivered of trust by the
hand of God. For 1. Cor. 4 7. the apostle says, what have thou that thou have
not received? and as thou have received them from Gods hand, so thou must
deliver them, with an account for the use of them into Gods hand. But if thou
think that they are thine, and that, according to the saying in the gospel,
thou may do what thou will with thine own, thou art much deceived. The
earth is the Lords, and all the fullness of it. Which if thou will not learn
in humility to acknowledge before, shortly; whether thou will or no, thou shall
be compelled to acknowledge it: when that shall be tide thee, that Christ said
befell the proud rich man. Luke. 12. 20. When he had flattered himself,
saying to his soul, Soul thou have goods laid up in store for many years,
live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. The Lord Jesus says, that
God said unto him, Thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee. Quae tu parasti, cuius tum erunt, then whose shall those things be which
thou have provided? heaven does despise them, they are not needful there,
neither can they ad to thine happiness. Hell does not regard them, they are of
no use there, neither can they abate thy pain: the grave has no stowage for
them, there is nothing but darkness. As they were not acquainted with thee
before thou wast borne, so thy goods will not know thee when thou art dead: and
as the Prophet says Psalm. 49. 17. of the glorious rich man dying, he shall
take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his pomp descend after him.
Thus shall vain men be taught that nothing is theirs, but the earth and all
the fullness of it the Lords: Let every one of us therefore, whatsoever his
present portion be, take heed that he be not high minded, that he grow not
proud of uncertain riches: but that in humility he acknowledge himself to
have come naked into the world, and shall go naked out, and in the mean time
is but a steward accomptable, and that the earth and all that is in it as the
Lords, if our hearts were thus framed, we should learn more modestly, more
soberly, more justly, more charitablie, and more holily, to use the goods of
this world, striving as the Apostle advises us. 1. Tim. 6. 18 To be rich in
good works, laying up in store a good foundation, against the time to come,
that we may obtain eternal life. This is a second use of the doctrine to
retain our selves in humility.

A third use that shall be, that the Apostle teaches us 1. Corin. 10. The
Apostle would not have believers, to sit with unbelievers at the tables of
their Idols in their feasts, which he calls the tables of devils, because no
man can be pertaker of the table of the Lord and the table of devils, but if we
be bidden to any man's private house, whether we are willing to go to eat meat
with him, there he gives liberty to eat, though it be meat offered to
idols, whatsoever is set before us except any weak brother say, such meat was
offered to idols, for whose sake, he wills them of better knowledge yet to
abstain, for not offending their consciences also, whatsoever is sold in the
shambles he permits to eat, without making question, and his reason is the
doctrine of this place (as appears. v. 26. and 18.) For the earth is the
Lords and all that therein is, for the Lord himself being most pure, can any
thing that is his, in it own nature be impure? the Lord being most holy, can
any thing that is his in it own nature be unholy? it cannot be. So may we use
the best things, that they may be unclean to us. So may we be, and so may we
use the good gifts of God that they shall be unclean unto us. In the Epistle
to Titus. 1. 15. the Apostle says. Omnia munda mundis, unto the pure are all
things pure: Iis autem qui sunt inquinati et increduli nihil est mundum, but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, etc. If we pollute
not Gods gifts by our uncleanness, they are clean unto us. Christ Math. 15.
11. says unto the multitude called together, That which enters into the mouth
defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the mouth defiles the man.
And the Apostle Paul 1. Tim. 4. 4. says; Every creature of God is good, and
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. This pertains to the liberty of
Gods children in the use of Gods creatures: all is his, and therefore they that
are his, may freely use them with peace of conscience. Yet it excuses not
them, that without cause, and with offense break, with contempt the politic
laws of Princes. This is a third use, teaching that we may use the creatures
with comfort, because they are the Lords.

Let us come to a fourth use, which shall be the last: reserved to the last
place, that it might be best remembered. The earth and the fulness of it, the
habitable world and the inhabitants therein are all the Lords, because he made
them, and conserueth them. Then sure it is lawful for him to dispose of these
things at his pleasure: And here it has place that is said in the Gospel. Mat.
20. 15. An non licet mihi quod volo facere in meis rebus? Is it not lawful for
me to do as I will with mine own? and therefore with reverence we must
approve of the counsel and work of the Lord now fallen out among us in
these days.

We lately had (ah heavy voice that we must say, we had) a most gracious
Queen, by many names most dear unto us, who reigning by God and reigning for
God, most happilye swayed the scepter of this mighty kingdom, four and fortye
years, eighteen weeks and two days. Solomon being anointed to reign over
the twelve Tribes, esteemed it a burden (though an honorable burden) to go in
and out before that people, and said unto God. 1. King. 3. 9. who is able to
judge this thy mighty people? even so, the care of our peace, prosperitye and
welfare was unto our Queen a burden: of which burden God has now eased her
shoulders, and received her to rest and reign with him in heaven.

In whose place, as Solomon succeeding David (unto which two in Israel I
compare these two in England for wisdom, pietye, and love to Gods house) we
have and shall have (ah word of comfort that we may say, as was heartily wished
by most that fear God, that we have and shall have) the heigh and mighty king,
James by the grace of God the sixth of that name, King of Scotland, and by the
same divine grace, the first of that name, King of England France and Ireland,
to reign over us. When Solomon was anointed king in Israel the servants of
David, came in unto him and said. 1. King. 3. 47. God make the name of Solomon
more famous then thy name, and exalt his throne above thy throne. And James
being proclaimed king in England, so we say of him, if it be possible, God make
his name more famous then the name of Elizabeth) whose name was famous to the
ends of the world, and exalt his throne above her throne, (whose throne was
highly and honorably exalted, when she sat therein a true defender of the
faith.)

This work of the Lord, taking from one, and giving unto another, the throne
and scepter of this noble kingdom, let us bear with such mind as becomes
wisemen, because the earth and the inahbitants are the Lords, to dispose at his
pleasure. If the change had been unto us as dangerous, as was feared by our
selves, and hoped by our enemies, we must have borne it with quiet minds,
because the earth is the Lords. Now then, the change being better for us then
we durst expect, we should be worthy of much blame, if we do not carry our
selves, in an even reverence, between contrary affections, in the
consideration hereof.

I say in an even reverence, and reverent euennes between contrary affections,
because I know that in the due contemplation of this change men's minds are
upon diverse points, diversely drawn aside with different affections. While
they consider her that is taken away, they cannot choose but be full of
heaviness, remembering what she was unto them. And when they consider him that
is given unto us, they cannot choose but be full of joy, to think what he is
like to be unto us; and therefore whomsoever I do here behold, with cheerful
countenances and bright apparel, I suppose that they do mourn in wedding
garments, having both sorrow and joy at their hearts, hiding inwardly their
sorrow for her that is departed, and showing outwardly their joy for him that
is coming. Whom otherwise I see with heavy countenances and dark apparel,
I suppose that they rejoice in mourning weeds, having both joy and sorrow at
their hearts, hiding inwardly their joy for him that is coming, and showing
outwardly their sorrow for her that is gone. And surely in this change,
seriously considered, there are just causes of both these affections.

That the death of our Queen could not but bring with it causes of heaviness,
it has been long since examined, and as it were by the subscription of all
men's hands confirmed (and happy England that God did not with his hand so
largely subscribe, for then it must have been so) the Papists have long wished
and expected her death: they have often attempted by bloody hands to hasten
her end: they have solicited with many prayers and vows their He saints and
She saints, and have stirred up enemies against her. Hoping that Christ in
England should again give up the ghost in the day of her death, and that the
Gospel should be buried in the day of her funerals: and they have liberty to
bring in Antichrist, and restore again the traditions of the church of Rome.
On the other side, all that love the Lord Jesus, with fear did think of her
future death, and with fervent prayers often desired God to draw out the length
of her reign with the days of heaven, that she might resign her Scepter into
the hands of Christ at his coming to judgment: least happily, loosing her
before, they might loose with her, whatsoever blessings they received and
enjoyed with her. These men, having before thought of her death, did in their
hope and fear subscribe, that surely her death must be dangerous to England.

Others also were of the same mind. There is lurking among us (and God grant
they never have time to show their heads according to their desire,) a race of
idle people, inordinate walkers, to whom orderly obedience seems to be
servile bondage, and labor in an honest calling is a burden not to be borne:
men living by their wit, in truth by their wickedness, by stealing,
cousening and such unlawful shifts: and as honestly spending their goods as
getting them. The settled government, the confirmed peace was a great let to
their designements. They expected a day in the death of our late Sovereign,
when the state being troubled, they might spoil the subjects: knowing it is
best fishing in troubled streams. On the other side, the good subjects, the
honest Citizens, lovers of peace, men honestlye getting their goods, these
fearing the claws of the former vultures, with grief did fore-thinke the
coming hour of her Majesty's death, and besought God for the continuance of
her life, that the fruit of their just labors, Gods blessing in their honest
walking in their callings, might not be a pray to such spoilers. These men also
in their hope and fear had subscribed, that her death would bring cause of
sorrow. Thus we see how all men long since were of this mind.

And if the most mighty hand of our most merciful God guiding the hearts of
our noble gouerners, had not, by the Proclaiming of our now Sovereign King
James, turned their hope into vanity, and our fear into comfort, surely the
death of our excellent Queen had brought with it ruin and cause of sorrow.
Where-from if God has miraculouslie delivered us (whose name be therefore
eternally praised) yet who can think upon it, what a one she was unto us while
she lived, a watchful keeper, a merciful judge, a Queen of peace, a defender
of the faith, and a very mother in Israel? who can think upon it, that she was
such a one unto us while she lived, and not be touched at the heart with
sorrow, that she lives not still, to be still such a one unto us? Surely in her
that is taken from us, we have, fallen upon us occasions of sorrow.

But God most good has not left us, as desolate plaintiffes, unto a solitary
sorrow, without all comfort: but has given us also many causes of rejoicing,
both in our blessed Queen departed from us, and also in our right noble King
given us.

In her that is departed, God has given unto us occasion of rejoicing in the
manner of her departing, wherein he has honored her memory among the
righteous, and more honored his own name, for his mercy to her. In two great
and notable favors, that her end was peaceable, and that it was godly: that
she ended her days quietly, and dyed in the faith of Christ.

First herein we have cause to rejoice on her behalf, that her end was
peaceable, without the stroke of man, and without any other stroke of God,
then such as is common to all men, that pass by the strait of death. The Bull
of Pius Quintus denounced an other end. The invincible Armada of Spain
threatened an other end. Many bloody traitors justly suffering among us,
attempted an other end. And yet notwithstanding the God of peace gave unto her
a peaceable end, she lived long, our band of peace, and died quietly a child
of peace, as if God had promised her that he promised Abraham, Genesis. 15. 15.
Thou shall go unto thy Fathers Cum pace in peace, and shall be buried In
canitie bona, in a good age, that is, Satura dierum diuitiarum honoris, full of
days, riches, and honor, and all present blessings, as a good age is
expounded. 1. Chron. 29. 28. David dyed in a good age, full of days, riches,
and honor, our Queen matching him for the fullness of the days of her life,
for she was come into the year wherein David dyed, being seauentie year old;
and ouermatching him for the fullness of the days of her reign, for he
reigned but forty years, and she saw the five and fortieth of her reign,
in more peace then David had.

I will not give offense by remembering, how far different from her end, the
end of the last Catholic King of Spain, and most Christian King of France
was, the one dying by a heavy stroke of Gods hand, and the other by a violent
stroke of man's hand, neither of them near to that sweet sleep* whereinto
she fell in her departing.

And as her end was peaceable, so it was pious, godly, christian, she died in
the faith of Christ, giving evidence thereof in her weakest times, and now
inioyeth the end of her faith, the salvation of her soul, the blessing
pronounced from heaven, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest
from their labors.

On the Sundaye last before her death, the reverend father the Lord Bishop of
Chichester, and Doctor Parrie one of her highness Chaplines, going to read
divine service unto her, as the manner was upon the Lords day: her heavy
sadness at this time well removed, she pronounced after them the confession of
sins with prayer for the forgiveness of them, which is usually pronounced by
the congregation, when we come together to seek the face of our God. And
though it was done with a weak voice, yet was it with great evidence of a
fervent spirit, looking up unto God. The next night God gave unto her quiet
sleep in her bed, whereby she was much refreshed the Lord preparing her by
renewed comfort unto a happy end. For as one well says: Veraconsolatio perpetuo
durat in electis, et si languescit, per spiritum sanctum instauratur,
potissimum autem est efficax circa vita finem et mortis articulum. True comfort
indureth perpetually in the elect, if it begins at any time to faint, it is
restored by the holy Ghost, especially it is strong and effectual toward the
end of life, and approach of death, which in her Grace was observed, to the
great rejoicing of her servants. For on the Wednesday, death approaching, which
she desired, that she might be losed and be with Christ, which is best of all:
the right reverend father, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury coming in unto
her at three in the afternoon, he put her in mind of the sufferings of
Christ, the means of her salvation; of remission of sins and eternal life,
and most gladly she harkened unto him, testifying her joy with her hand, which
she could not so well do with her voice. And when the reverend father,
knowing how soon sick parties are wearied, did withdraw himself, giving
sign with her hand, she called him unto her the second time. And when, again
after a second speech, he withdrewe himself, she beckned to have him come unto
her the third time. So pleasing unto her soul was the voice of him, that had
in his mouth the word of reconciliation, so beautiful in her eyes were the
feet of him, that did preach glad tidings and publish salvation, and it was
not affection to the man, but love unto the doctrine and glad tidings of
salvation, that led her listening ear. For the reverend Lord Bishop of
Chichester coming after unto her, rehearsed unto her the grounds of Christian
faith, requiring some testimony of her assenting unto them, which she readily
gave both with hand and eye. And when he proceeded so far, as to say unto her,
that it was not enough, generally to believe that those things were true, but
every Christian man must believe, that they were true unto them, that they were
members of the true Church, truly redeemed by Jesus Christ, that their sins
were forgiven, and that they should live for ever with God, she did with great
show of faith lift up her eyes and hands to heaven, where she knew her life to
be hid with Christ in God* and stayed them long, testifying her particular
faith, and apprehension of Gods mercy to her in Christ. So continuing, unto the
death a professor of the faith, whereof she had bin defender in her life. And
finds now the truth of his promise, that said. Reave. 3. 10. Be faithful
unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life. Thus did she end her
days in the faith: and even in her that is taken from us, we have cause of
rejoicing, when we consider, how God took her away in his great mercy ending
her days in peace and in the faith of Christ.

But notwithstanding her happiness in her death, unhappy had we been after
her death* if God had not given us a good king to succeed her. In whom, when
we cast our eye toward him, we find great causes to lift up our heads and
rejoice. His name hitherto only proclaimed in our streets, has stilled the
ragings of the people, danting the enemies of true religion, and causing the
enemies of peace, that thought now to look out, to hide their heads. What
shall we not hope that the presence of his person will do, when the sound of
his name has done so much already? surely we shall see it, if ever this land
saw it, fulfilled, that Solomon says. Proverbs. 20. 8. A King sitting in the
throne of judgment drives away all evil with his eyes. I speak not these
things in flatterye but in the firm hope of my soul. For propinquity of
blood, he is the next and rightful heir of Henry the seventh of famous
memory, of the house of Lancaster, and of Elizabeth his wife air of the house
of York. His education has bin Godly; of his wisdom for government, and of
his sincerity for religion, he has already given proof, not only in the
government of his kingdom of Scotland, but otherwise also, to the content of
many that could not so fully observe his government, as peruse his writings.
What remains then? but that we rejoice in God and praise him for our present
sovereign, praying that he may safely come vntovs, and long continue with us,
standing in Gods grace, to the good of Gods Church, and safety of the kingdoms
over which he is set. Such is the mercy of God toward us in the king given
unto us, such are the causes of rejoicing that we have in our King. Which
quisquis non videt cecus est, quisquis videt et non laudat ingratus est,
quisquis laudanti reluctatur insanus est. Whosoever sees not is blind,
whosoever sees and praises not is unthankful, whosoever misliketh others
praising is not wise. And therefore seeing God has made so happy a change for
us in the disposing of this kingdom, being Lord of all the earth, let us
bear it with such minds as become wise men, mingling heaviness with our joy,
and joy with our heaviness, and let us lift up the Trumpet of our lowdest
voices, and say, God save King James.

AMEN.

