A VISION OF BALAAMS ASS. WHEREIN HE did perfectly see the present estate of
the Church of ROME.

Written by PETER HAY Gentleman of North-Britaine, for the reformation of his
Countrymen. SPECIALLY OF THAT TRVLY Noble and sincere Lord, FRANCIS Earl of
ERROL, Lord HAY, and great Constable of SCOTLAND.

Joan: 8. 32. The truth shall make you free.

LONDON Printed for JOHN BILL. Cum Priuilegio. 1616.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOst Gracious and most sacred Sovereign, It is not without diverse reasons,
that I have not boldly made a Dedication to your Majesty, of this Treatise put
forth for the good of your Majesty's subjects, and having so much need to be
strongly armed, now, while as (like unto a weak Bark upon a raging sea) it
enters on the Theater of the World, to speak of the peace and union of the
holy Sanctuary, amidst so many furious Giants of contradiction as are now in
the Church of God: This heavenly voice of Christian harmony has never bin
heard, but followed with a malignant Echo of proud and vehement Spirits, qui
pascuntur syllogismo sicut boues feno, who delight to feed upon Disputes as
Oxen on hay, in such a desperate Paroxisme, that they will not lose the
reputation of one crooked syllogism for the peace of whole Christendom, yet
the world does never want some Phaenix, who is content to burn her earthly
fame to ashes, in that pure fire of Christian love, to bring forth some seeds
of peace: So that I do expect no other, but to hear my cries contumeliouslie
re-echoed, that my conceptions of the reconciliation of Rome shall be esteemed
not only Paradoxall but smelling of atheism, and that my proiects for perfect
unity in matter of Ecclesiastical policy and ceremonies within your
Majesty's kingdoms, shall be said to be a crafty and cunning preparation for
superstition to re-enter into the Church, of which unchristian oblatration, the
first alarmes have been sounded in my ears so hardly, while my Copy was newly
delivered to the press, that I would have retired it if I had bin one of
those, who live in the air of popular applause, as in their natural element,
and who (like to Narcissus) will rather die for love of their own image, then
suffer one blow for so noble a common cause. But when I consider how many
odious calumnies our Savior and his Apostles did suffer, for plantation of
this peace of the Gospel, I hold it a man's truest commendation and comfort, if
for the sake of the same he may say with S. Paul to the Corinthians, that he
fought with beasts in the manner of men. Seldom is it indeed that goodness is
made the scope of our actions, and in this corrupt age, this upright virtue of
pacification has never bin seen upon the stage, but waited with an unfortunate
Genius, we may witness those sweet ingines, of Cassander, of Erasme, of
Iunius, of Paraeus, of Causabone, and other Pacificators: And certainly I
think it is a silly virtue, that for so brave an end, cannot in the
conscience of an honest deed, with a stern countenance outface a guilty
Calumniator, for such a Treatise as this can never be altogether fruitless, if
it were but to give air enough for discovering and venting of malicious humors
that lurk in ill affected men. And howsoever the matter shall work, two
things did mightily encourage me, first knowing that under the godly and
gracious Reign of your Majesty, in whose ears Moderation and Wisdom do
constantly dwell, an Aristides will be permitted to breath freely without fear
of Ostracisme or banishment: Next, the private testimonies which I have had of
the presence of Gods holy Spirit, to inform and to confirm my conscience,
whiles I did labor about these, do give me great hope that they shall have
sufficient authority with good men, to purge me from these ugly and odious
aspersions. And therefore, for the first I did rather choose to betake my self
to the candor and nobility of my cause, and to the patience of those benign
and blessed Spirits, who have moved before me this divine argument, de amahili
Ecclesiaconcordia, then presumptuously to thrust in your Majesty's bosom my
hazardous endeauours, the chiesest protection whereof must be, to be acceptable
of God, whiles they are ungracious to men. Alurements to Chatholike
pacification, Inducements to absolute unity within the Church of this I Will,
Defense of the Orthodoxall policy of the Church government, Apology of the
most lawful authority of my sovereign Prince, Persuasions to so worthy and
so dear a Nobleman, to vendicate himself from the bondage of Idolatry, and
such like sacred theames as be treated here, are able to preserve my
reputation from blemish or suspicion, unless that Archiecalumniator the
Jesuit do edge his bloody pen against me, who seeing he does not spare to
bend his murdering tongue against your Majesty, who is the Mirror and Miracle
of the world, his malediction or malscription can procure nothing but glory to
such as I am. The second reason of my non dedication to your Majesty is, that,
although, it be ingens materia, superba inscriptio, a most stately and glorious
subject, to write of Christian harmony, yet it comes in my hands, as an
excellent Lute to unskillful fingers, in which respect I knew my pains to be
unworthy of your Majesty, as also by reason of my base and humble style, which
flies low, inter aues palustres, and is not composed of those Aquiline penns,
which can soar near unto the Sun. Thirdly, I did not wish that any peintured
dedication to your Majesty should hide the true face of my labors, and make
that to be esteened mercenary which is most sincere. Fourthly, the whole
treatise it self is no other then a sacrifice of my devotion to your Majesty's
service, consisting of the most clean and costly pieces, that I could choose to
offer, all tending to persuade your Majesty's people, that the prosperity of
the Church and the felicity of this kingdom have no sure fundament now, but
such a firm conjunction, as does reserve, no sparkle, color, nor pretext of
separation hereafter. If that Great King out of the conscience of his Tyranny
and proud ambition did say in his time, that he was none of his, who did not
favor the Monarch as much as Alexander, how much more need have Princes now
adays, that we should all insinuate, urge, write, preach and cry, that he is
not an upright Subject, who does not love both the Royal person and the Royal
Majesty, in these dangerous times; while as a spiritual ambition has so
poisoned the souls of men by this Chymique Theology of the Jesuit, who
presumes, as it were to Metamorphose nature, and superinduce a new face upon
the World, spiritualising the grounds of State, and temporalising the condition
of Religion, making Popes absolute over Monarchs, and using Kings like to the
Shepherds dogs, who are beaten and chased away, when they are not vigilant and
barking to his pleasure; that it is to be feared, lest in time (if the
oppositions were wanting which are made by your Majesty) the judgments of men
should become Pyrrhonicall and Problematicall, as if there were no truth in
things but all were indifferent, as if it should be as easy for them, having
once subiugat the temporal power to the spiritual, to refine S. Peter and by
a new Alembication to make him Monarchall Priest and Monarchall Prince over the
whole universe: And seeing this discourse contains a discovery of those
abominable maxims, which Hell it self has vomited to prepare the spirits of
men to shake off the divine yoke chiefly of your Majesty, Maxims (alas for
pity) whereof when we consider the deplorable events, that partly have come to
pass, and partly have been shot at, what Clements, what Chastels, what
Rauilliacks, what powder Traitors, they can never be sufficiently charactered,
but with tears of blood: These I hope will suffice without any Dedicatory
intercession to make your Majesty's eyes propitious and favorable over my
faithful sacrifice of peace and unity, that none of these Ravenous fowls
shall have any power to spoil it, or to trouble my oblation; And lastly since
by your Majesty's Gracious permission, I am to publish these, for a trial, of
what true Christianity and true wisdom is in the hearts of your Majesty's
Subjects, I have not neither sent them abroad, but presidiat with the favors
of that worthy and virtuous Prelate whom your Majesty has worthily preferred
to be the chiefest Speculator and Pilate in the ship of the Church. God grant
in his mercy, that they may teach your Majesty's people, to draw their light
from no other Sun but from your Majesty, and that they have nothing before
their eyes, but Gods true worship, the glory of this great and fortunate I Will,
the conservation of your Majesty's person and crown, and the stability of your
most Royal succession.

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most affectionate Subject and
Servant PETER HAY.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, and honorable Lord GEORGE ABBOTS Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
and one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy CO^NSEL.
MY very Reverend Father, and Honorable Lord, when on the one side I do look
upon the splendour of this golden Age, wherein our glorious Kingdom of Great
Britain does shine amidst the powers of the world, like to that fire which
was placed in the cloud that conducted Israel: and when on the other side I do
consider how many be within our own bowels, who cannot discern this great
City upon the mountain, nor see the bright Lantern which God has planted
in it to explore the works of darkness, as if they were burnt with the fire
of Promotheus, that too much light had made them blind, while as one sort
pretending to maintain the Catholic antiquity of the Church, does spoil all
primitive simplicity to establish that most absurd and impious tyranny of the
Pope, tending to the extinction of this divine Lamp which burns so clearly
among us, and to the overthrow of our most Sacred Prince and Country. An other
sort, under color of phantasticke and Ideal purity, strives to supplant the
ancient and approved policy of the Church to the destruction and danger of
the whole State: I think that even as the contagious vapors of corrupted
blood ascending ordinarily into the brain, do breed at length a mortal
epilepsie of the body, even so the mistie exhalations of fearful Ignorance
and presumption mounting continually into the seat of the understanding, they
do obscure the light of temperate wisdom, and piece and piece beget a
spiritual epilepsie of the soul. The contemplation of which pitiful
astonishment of men's wits, as if they were stolen away by the enhantment of
some new Circe, it has opened my mouth, (who profess to be a simple Ass) to
speak of the causes of their disease, and of the means as well of the peace
of Christ's Church in general, as of the intestine harmony which ought to be
in every thing amongst us, who are the members of this national Church in
particular, and for their help to character in some chief circumstances, the
happiness and serenitie of our time within this great and fortunate ISLE,
while as all the Kingdoms which do inviron it be so atteynted with pernicious
errors less or more, that for upright knowledge (like unto that strong
illusion of Ixion) pro Iunone nubem amplectuntur, in place to enjoy the Queen
of Heaven, which is the sincerity of religion and true government, they do
but imbra^e a cloud of deceitful abuses, so has the insidious Clergy, namely
of the Jesuit, betrayed the Christian liberties of both. This I do not
perform by dogmaticall grounds of Theology, but by a brief Empiricall
discourse of such practices as I did observe in the Church of Rome, and in
other Churches during my Peregrination through diverse principal parts of
Christendom, while as (like to that miserable Ass of Apuleius) I did sustain
many changes and disfigurations of mind in matter of my faith, till in the end
the Lord in his mercy brought me to act that last transmigration of Apuleius,
which made him to be called the Golden Ass, that as he was said to recover his
humane shape by snatching his mouth full of Roses that were carried by the
Priest of Ceres, so I smelling really the sweet odor of that deep dyed Rose
of the Canticles, the Lord JESUS CHRIST, our great Priest, called the savor of
life to life, by means thereof I was restored to my lively image, the golden
history whereof, and of the notable things which I did remarke under those
spiritual Metamorphoses, is here set down for the information of such darkened
minds, as be yet captiued with Circe, and clothed in uncouth shapes.

And sithence, my Lord, this Treatise has already found an easy access unto
your GRACE and so benign acceptance, that your Grace have not only set over
it a censorious and skillful Surueyor, but have been content to hear diverse
points of the same agited before your self, notwithstanding of the most
weighty and assiduous business, wherewith I did see you to be pressed. For
this respect amongst many others, I do not see where it can find a surer
pass to go abroad, then in the trust of your protection, nor where it can
more justly demand the same then from your Grace, whose pastoral vigilance
does well approve that Royal wisdom which did prefer you to be the
principal Watchman of this Church, and to carry the touchstone, for trial of
all such pieces as should be offered to the Lords Sanctuary: whose
extraordinary Exaltation in the house of God, to be, from no Prelate Primat of
England ante annum vertentem aut circiter, does testify that the great Spirit
which always rules his Majesty our most Gracious Sovereign, has breathed
upon your Election, that you should be tanquam Sol refulgens in Templo
altissimi, a bright star of his Church, and a conspicuous mark of his
extraordinary grace vouchsafed upon this great Kingdom, I say extraordinary,
for if the Papal Bishops while they do impugn the truth of Gods word
forbidding marriage to authorize the doctrine of their coelibat, they do not
the less contaminate the same with lewd and open pollutions, and your Grace
all in contrary, while you do stand for the Evangelical liberty of
Matrimanie, you do in the mean time by the purity of your life, practice the
perfection of the cloysterrall Caelibat, taking unto you that religious word of
the more innocent and virtuous ages, Si placet licet: I think it is a clear
mirror, wherein the world may see that it is the good spirit of God, who does
freely distribute his extraordinary gifts to such faithful Prelates as
worship him according to the truth of his word: and that no usurped authority
of Popish or humane traditions can do so much. And since there is no better
means to make your GRACES Excellent and spiritual parts tanquam Thus
redolens in Templo Domini, (as was said of that worthy Priest Simon Onia) to
smell as a sweet perfume in the LORDS house, then by continuing your delight
to cherish the study of virtue where it is found in the most remote parts of
the land, which is indeed a sauorie presage of that perfect unity which God
does dispose to be in the whole Church of the same.

Therefore let it please your GRACE to receive these first and tender Seeds of
my public Service to God, to my most Sacred Sovereign PRINCE, and to this
Commonwealth, whereof you are the first vital member, and so to nourish them
by the kindly air of your virtuous spirit, that they may be found to produce
a happy fruit, that is to say, a fruit which has not aborted, nor hurt his
bearer by untimely partting with it, but coming to maturitie proves
wholesome to all those who taste it, and leaves the Tree in full vigor and
reputation.

Your Graces humble and affectionate sermant P. Hay.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian and courteous Reader, this Treatise which I have framed for the glory
of God, the comfort of his Church, and the service of this commonweal,
wherein we live, why it is Entitled, A vision of Balaams Ass, you may
perceive in the entry thereof. It contains in special these three, First the
cause of my voluntary recantation of Popery, Secondly a clear discovery of the
tyranny of Rome, mounted in our time to her Meridian or Altitude; And of the
treacherous trade and doctrine of the Jesuit, who does falsely maintain the
Papal Sovereignty tending to the overthrow of Christian Princes and states:
Thirdly, a discourse of the apparent approach of her reformation or downfall,
and of the probable means, whereby the Lord God does dispose the restitution
of Christian people from the spiritual captivity of this Babel, with a sincere
exhortation to you to honor as well the means, as the instruments, whom God
does pointforth for the advancement of this great work, as you have them here
set down in particular: In the which exhortation if any thing be, that upon
the sudden seems distasteful to you, I do entreat you that you will not
for that rashly reject it, but do taste it again and again, remembering how
oftentimes disgusts do grow rather by the distemper of our sense, then by any
fault which is in our meats: As a diseased person must for the sake of his
health control his natural appetite, and as nature in general (who seldom
does err) by offering violence unto her particular members for her common
benefit, does prove a good Physician to her self: So if we cannot strain
our private humors for a public weal, we are senseless and cauterized
members of the commonweal, and our diseases when they come they shall be
desperate and deadly: It was a worthy saying of him who spoke so, Omnis magna
lex habet aliquid iniquitatis, that every great law had something of iniquity
in it, not that any express injustice was in the law, but because when so many
live within their own Spheres, only to themselves, without respect to the
commonwealth, it is impossible to establish any great law, which shall not
bring displeasure to those particular members, whose actions are not ruled by
common equity, common reason, or common good. If we do grudge against our
laws, or our lawgiuers, because they are not pleasant to our peculiar taste,
we be far inferior in true virtue to the Ethnicks, who thought it the
chiefest mark of their virtuous mind, and their greatest glory, to remit proper
losses, proper grudges, and proper opinions to the common wealth. The precise
Cato Vticensis, who might have brooked the first dignities under Julius Caesar,
because it was not to his mind, he chose rather to die then to live distracted
in opinion from the state: That upright Philosopher Socrates having in his
choice to be banished or to die, he embraced death, saying that a man cast off
from his common wealth, was no more a man. Is it not strange then amongst us,
in whom that obscure light of nature (which only did guide them) is made
celestial, by the divine splendour of Gods revealed word; to see that a
Christian Pastor, before he will quit singularity of opinion, and singularity
of name to our common wealth spiritual, to the peace and credit of our Church,
conforming himself to orthodoxall laws, established by the authority of a
most Christian Prince, a settled Church and well governed state, he will first
choose either to live at home a seditious tribune, In perpetuo obstrepit^, or a
trasfuga, exiled from his native country. Certainly where there is no perfect
unity, there can be no perfect peace nor perfect love, and consequently no
Church, because these are the whole scope of the Euangell and of all true
Religion: Unanimity is the bond which makes the Church strong, Ecce
circumdedi te Eze. chap. 4.
vinculis, says God in Ezechiel: Behold I have hedged you about with bands. It
is the knot and sinnewes which tie the members of Christ together in one body,
and therefore is so diligently recommended by him to his Apostles, and so
oftentimes figured to us in the old Testament by tipes: By the vestiment of the
high Priest, whereof every thing was tied to another, all being but one piece.
By the Tabernacle whereof every thing was iointed in an other, the whole
standing in conjunction: for we be so called in the Apocal. Ecce tabernaculum
Dei cum heminibus and habitabit cu^ijs, The Tabernacle of God Apoc. 2.
which dwells among men, By the vessels whereof so many as were not closed
together, but were open in diverse pieces, they were said by the spirit of God
to be unclean, as we see in the Book of Numbers: We are the vessels who be
made by the hand of our heavenly Potter, Number. 19.
of whom Saint Paul says, Alia quidem in honorem alio vero vasa in
contumeliam. If we be not close and inseparable 2. Tim. 2
among our selves, we shall be found the unclean vessels of dishonor: Unity is
the beauty of the Church now, and it shall be her triunphant song in the end,
to cry as the Prophet had foretold of lattet times, Venite ascendamus in montem
Domini, Come brethren let us go up together to the mount of God: Therefore
these exhortations are to pray the Lord God who has formed us, to make us
united vessels of honor: and to that effect to rectify our judgments, that
we may esteem no names so sacred under heaven, as the holy names of harmony,
peace, and unanimity within the Church in one thing, and in all things, that we
may think no opinion more Christian in this age wherein we live, then that of
the venerable Zanchius, one of the brightest stars of our own Hemispheare, in
his treatise, De verareformandarum Ecclesiarum ratione, written (for that part)
as follows. Whatsoever is in the Church of Rome, or in any other Church, it
is either agreeable to the written word, or contrary, or adiaphoron,
indifferent: Whatsoever is besides the written word, either in the Fathers, in
the Councels, or in the Papal decrees: they are in like sort under the same
distinction, Pro contra, or indifferent. For the first, that which is agreeable
with the word, is to be retained, or if it be rejected, it is again to be
received: for the second, that which is contrary, is to be refused, or if it
has been followed, is again to be forsaken: for the third, that which is
indifferent, we must not think that it does of it self belong unto salvation,
but in such a case we must follow the rule of the Apostle, That nothing be
brought into the Church, but that which does tend to edification, order, or
unity: All indifferent ceremonies therefore, may be securely followed for any
of those respects; but so to be followed as that we still prefer things which
be more ancient, unto those which be more late, as well for the honor of
antiquity, as because that which is most ancient in the Church is most true,
for albeit nothing can bind the conscience but canonical Scripture, yet to
introduce novelties, or to banish out of the Church any of those things, which
from the primitive time has been allowed by common and Catholic consent, and
confirmed by the writtes of the ancient Fathers. To reject such things, with
out authority of general Council, it is not lawful for any Christian man who
fears God, says he, Can we maintain more sound opinions, either as good
Christians, or as good subjects, then those of Zanchius for unity, tending to
the strengthening both of Church and State: we especially of this Isle, the
condition whereof, if we consider truly, when it lay thousands of years of our
ancestors, divided in weak and dismembered Kingdoms, and as our own eyes
have seen it subject to the ambition of so many foreign Pharaohs, as have
pressed to bring it under their servitude, by practices now from France, now
from Spain, now from Rome: we shall think this age wherein we are, to be like
to that fourth generation, wherein God did predestinate (as he foretold
Abraham) to bring his posterity out of Egypt, for that same God, called
Mirabilis Deus in sanctis suis, miraculous in his Saints, who raised that
excellent Moses, to lead his people through the troublesome deserts, to a
glorious state in the Land of Canaan, he has also sent to us a mighty and
extraordinary instrument, to lead us through those perilous perplexities now
past, unto the joyful Iubile of these conjoined Kingdoms, making this Isle
great and fortunate in his royal person, as he made his people of Israel most
blessed for the time, by the like conjunction of the tree of Joseph, with the
tree of Judah, saying by the Prophet Ezechiel, That they should be all under
one King, and no more a divided people: So that they who delight in
disjunction, be they Aaron, be they Miriam, be they Core, Da^han, or Abira^,
who rebels against Moses, especially: be they Iesuited Papists, or heteroclite
Puritans, I speak not of any good men who obey God, and the Prince, but of
those who carry armed hart^, factious and vehement spirits against the State,
spirits contrary to God because (as the Scripture says) Non in commotions
Dom^us: The Lord is not in commotion, spirits not of peace nor edification, but
of destruction, In spiritu veh^ti c^nteres na^es Tharsis, says David: Be who
they will who grudge against Moses, every well disposed member of the
commonwealth, has great cause to grudge against them, least they cut the
thread of our felicity, and bring upon us (which God of his infinite mercy
forbid) by our constant murmurings, that evil which befell the obstinate
Israelites, at the waters of contradiction, whose wicked rebellions made Moses
to offend the Lord grievously, even that good Moses of whom it is said,
Delectus Deo and hominibus, Moses cuius memoria in benedictione est: Though he
was dearly beloved of God and men, and though he was the most meek of all
living flesh, yet they brought the Lords indignation upon themselves, and upon
him, who both were prevented by death, and were not suffered to enter into the
Land, nor to taste the fruits of their long and painful voyage in the
Wilderness: God of his goodness grant you to loath these waters of strife, and
chiefly these waters which be poisoned with Jesuitical wormwood and gaul,
whereof so many millions of people have died within these threescore years, that
you may cry in time with that Prophet, Saluum me fac Domine quoniam intrauerunt
aquae vsque ad animam meam, Deliver me, O Lord, because those waters have gone
unto my Soul. God grant (that like unto the holy Dove) you find no resting
place among them until you enter into the Arc and unity of the Church, that
we may live together in one hope, to see the further mysteries of this happy
time, the seal whereof is already opened to the great admiration of all the
world. It was forbidden anciently to sacrifice a Swan, because her plumes are
white and her heart black, so would I wish that from this peace offering might
be debarred all such, whose hearts are incurably blacked with pride of
stricktnesse and singularity, and that it should be only handled of those
meek and ingenuous spirits who will be contented to found their judgment
thereof, upon those three grounds without the which our knowledge cannot be
sure, as S. Augustine faith, Contrarationem nemo sobrius, contra scriptur^s
Aug. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 6.
nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pascificus, That no sober man should
make opposition to reason, nor no Christian man to the Scriptures, nor no
peaceable man to the Church. And so hoping that the modest Reader will observe
these grounds, I do submit my self to his discretion, beseeching him that he
would not look vpmy pains with his sinistrous eye, nor receive with the wrong
hand that which I do present unto him with the right.

Epigramma ad Regem.
CVI decus immortale triplex, cuique aurea cingit
Gloria conspicuum Rex Iacobe caput.
Prima tibi antiquae fidei quum cura tuendae,
Proxima sit populi paxque salusque tui:
Procur at quod vtrumque lubens, quod promouet vltro,
Quid tibi Seruitio gratius esse queat:
Tale ministerium libro hoc tibi praestat and offert
Hayus, ab antiquis nobile germen auis:
Quemque suo Regem populo caput, and caput vnum
Dum Christum omnigenis gentibus esse probat:
Parendum his Solum, invictis rationibus vrget,
Quas monumenta Patrum, sacraque scripta ferunt:
Et fugienda Lupae Babilonis pocula suadet,
Et quae seditio turbida monstra parit:
Palantesque reducit oues ad ouile, Rebels
Et populos Regum flectit ad obsequium:
Dignum opus ingenio Domini, quo munere verum
Christigenam, and ciuem se probat esse bonum:
Dignum opus aeterno Genio quoque, quem dabit, O Rex,
Aspirans sacri Numinis aura tui.
Haec M. E. D.

The Contents of the several Chapters wherein this Treatise is divided.
CHAP. I. Folio 1. Contains the occasion of the Treatise: Some cl^ere
testimonies of the perfection and plainness of the Scripture: The Apology of
the Ass to show the reason of the Title. CHAP. II. fol. 17. Contains two
infallible grounds set down for the better trial of idolatrous worship and
preuarication in Gods service: The first is the force of our natural light and
divine instict of our conscience: The second is a true definition of Idolatry.
CHAP. III. 37. Contains a faithful relation of the lewd and open
superstitions, and of the ridiculous Jests of pretended Miracles which the
author did contemplate in the Church of Rome. CHAP. IV. 51. Contains a
rehearsal of the impiety of Papal Indulgences, that is to say, Pardons and
dispensasitions: Of the auowed pollution of the celibate and monasticke life,
and of other capital vices which be pregnant in the Court, in the Cloisters
and in the city of Rome, to the manifest discredit of all Christian doctrine
and profession. CHAP. V. 65. Contains a perfect discourse of the Orthodoxall
authority of Christian Princes over the state Ecclesiastical in the primative
Church: Of the pernicious Doctrine of the Jesuits, which do impugn the same
contrary to the opinion of the French Church and of that famous Palladium of
the Sorbon: A discovery of the ambitious design of this wicked and treacherous
Clergy. CHAP. VI. 114. Contains the particular means whereby it pleased God
to reclaim the Author from that idolatrous religion, together with his
Counsel against superstitious and popish obduration. CHAP. VII. 124.
Contains a parallel or comparison betwixt Jerusalem and Rome, that as Rome
fell away with Jerusalem, so must she be with her subject to reformation and
restitution. The order and means of Christian Reformation after the Example of
Jerusalem: Aiust expostulation against the desperate paroxisme and implacable
contentions of the religious Clergy on both sides, with a most Christian
admonition to them, to carry simple and upright minds of pacification. The
occasion of the evil carriage which has be^e in Christian reformations: The
reformation of the Church of England most perfect and most happy. CHAP. VIII.
148. Contains a limitation of the Primitive Church, whereunto, and to no
other, all Christian People are to appeal for true reformation. The infallible
auctority thereof: The judgment as well of the ancients as of our
Archi-reformatours touching the retaining in reformed Churches, of the
Primitive and Catholic policy of Episcopal government, and of in different
Ceremonies received from antiquity not contrary to Gods word. CHAP. IX. 159.
Contains a search of the best and surest policies which be in nature, in the
civil state in Economy, in morality, showing that the Monarchical authority
is most agreeable with Gods will expressed in Nature. CHAP. X. 171. Contains
a discourse in favor of Episcopal Jurisdiction by some chief and ingenuous
Reasons which do approve the same. CHAP. XI. 191. Contains the opinion of all
the famous reformatours, who have been since Luther hitherto: of the Church
Policy: an excellent and necessary point for our information: some grave and
pithy speeches touching the weight of Episcopal function. CHAP. XII. 205.
Contains the reasons why we should receive again into the Church Organs and
Music, for honor of antiquity for our domestic union with our more then
half arch the Church of England, and for the holy and deuote importance which
is shown to be in Music: together with the like discourse for reception of
the clerical garments which be in the same Church. CHAP. XIII. 233. Contains
briefly a survey of the Princes and States which are Catholic Romans, and out
of that a consideration of the possibilities to practice an universal
Reformation of Christendom. CHAP. XIV. 259. In the last chapter from the
present condition of this Kingdom of Great Britain is drawn a principal
argument of the falling of Babel, and of the approach of the Iubile of
Catholic reformation, the contemplation whereof is here set down in sundry
weighty circumstances and worthy of consideration, to rectify the judgment
of every well disposed subject, that they may truly understand the mystery of
this time, the rare blessings of God so long reserved for our age, and rightly
discover the clandestine and pretended grudges of those who carry seditious and
distractedmindes from the State.
A VISION OF BALAAMS ASS. Wherein he did perfectly see the present estate of
the Church of ROME.
CHAP. I.
The occasion of the Treatise: The perfection and plainness of holy
Scripture: The Apology of the Ass, and reason of the Title.

MY very NOBLE LORD, it is certain that Christian faith and Christian virtue
go inseparable together, that is the tree, and these are the fruit, and where
we see not plenty of these, it is an argument of the Tree decaying: So that
our greatest happiness in this world, consists in our constant action of
Christian works: howsoever our eternal felicity is chiefly contemplation,
yet our contemplative life here upon earth (even where it is most sincere) does
but resemble. Alpestre and mountanous grounds, which be stately but barren,
compared with the fruitful Valleys of the virtuous active life, properly
observed by that famous Doctor, Greg. Mag: in his Allegory upon the double
wives of Jacob, Rachael videns and pulchra, sed sterilis, Lea lippa sed
faecunda. Among virtues it has ever carried a great reputation to travel
abroad, for increase of knowledge to enter upon the chiefest stages of the
world, to see above the vulgar reach; and as the good Merchants ship, to bring
precious wares from far Countries, or like the industrious Be, to suck the
honey of true wisdom from the rarest herbs of experience, the varieties
whereof are best found in Traveling. As the Scripture says in Eccles. He who
would apply his mind to the meditation of Gods Law, he shall travel through
strange Countries, where he may try the good and evil among men, and when the
great God will, he shall be filled with the spirit of understanding, that he
may pour out wise sententences, which is the reason why in men who have
traveled, we do look commonly for some accession of knowledge: for that
cause it is, that I, who also among others, have brought the eyes of people
upon me in this kind of expectation, do find my self bound by some virtuous
discharge, to justify my peregrination beyond Seas, esteemed by many in that
season of my age, and in so mean a state as I do possess, to have been
vntimemous, temerary, perilous, and unprofitable. And which has been most
vildely calumniated by diverse of your Lordships profession, among whom, a
certain one of good worth did, as I was informed, give this judgment of me,
that I had gone abroad the voyage of King Saul, to bring home my Fathers Asses,
which bitter insectation, with many such like tempests of men's tongues, I have
sithence (like a true and upright Ass) borne forth with no other armor, then
patience, until now being curious in what sort I might best pay this
expectation of good men, and best emancipate my self from this persecution of
malignant mouths, I have chosen, to assay if I can inspire into erroneous
minds, specially into your Lordship, some disposition to better opinions in
this time of your so great exigence, and necessity you stand in to resolve.
First, the universal and seruent desires of our Country, even from his
Majesty, our most gracious Sovereign, to the beggar, to see your Lo: reduced
to a saithfull sympathy and communion with the rest, being otherways so noble
a member of this kingdom, as you are, tam grauis, and constans, tamque bonarum
partium in Rempublicam, this does make it a good service to God and to the
common wealth: secondly, the great honor and duty which I owe to your
Lordship, for the great honor which I have by you, to be sprung from that
ancient and famous blood of your house, does infinitely tie me to this
endeavor, who (if I were a mere stranger to your Lordship) must yet think it
my honor to be sufficient for your service: thirdly, the opportunity which I
have by this public discharge to render unto the world an ingenious account of
my self, it does conioyne with these a private respect of mine own

So it is that the Prelates and Preachers of Gods word who bring in their
mouths the medicine of Christian souls, they cannot move your Lo: nor enter
upon your mind, so have you entrenched the same within the common subterfuges
of universality, Antiquity, and succession of the Church: of insufficiency of
the holy Scripture, of authority of humane supplement and traditions, and while
you are brought to the Fathers, now quarelling the edition of books, and now
again, betaking your self to your Implieita fides, like unto that Mariner
who having lost his loadestarre in a dark night, he wandereth, but knows not
his course. The Israelites had no other guide through the deserts then the
pillar of fire which was in the cloud, who once loses the clear light of
the Euangel, which is a bright star placed to conduct us, through the
wilderness of humane wisdom, he shall never find out his right course into
the land of holiness: And whiles your Lordship remains thus inflexible
against so many learned and grave Divines, It would (like enough) be thought
presumption, and arrogancy in me to deal with you, if the spirit of God did
not testify that in great works the help of weak instruments is not to be
despised. When Mosci builded the Tabernacle of God, there came unto him not
only all the wise men, to whom the Lord gave wisdom says the text, Sed
quemcunque etiam extulerat animus vt adid opus accederet, but even every man
whose heart did encourage him to further that business. The voice of a goose
did once preserve the Capitol of Rome, I confess I have gotten no more of
Theology, then serves for my own provision, yet who knows, but by my
dealing it may fall forth to your Lordship which has happened to numbers of
diseased persons, who having spent much time and much money among the
Physicians, and never a whit recovered, they have in end by good fortune
attained unto their health, by hearing some traveling beggar relate, that
which has been done to himself, or to some other man in such a case; even so,
I being no Physician, but bringing some Empiricall, medicine to your Lordship,
who have renounced your physicians; I may possibly, (as God grant it prove so)
do some good to you, by a faithful narration of that, which in the like
disease has befallen unto my self and of the chief things which has bread
to me distaste of the Church of Rome, after I had so diligently and painefully
considered the same.

But before I will enter into this discourse Empiricall, or of exeperience, my
conscience does move me to say, this by the way, of the authority and power of
Gods blessed word, that as it would be reputed a strange dullness, and
ignorance in nature, not to prefer those physicians who knowing the right
simples, use no medicaments, unto those others who flying the simples, and
practicing by filthy and composed drugges do more often prove murderers then
Physicians: Even so in spiritual eures, what a pity is it, that your Lo:
should think the Preachers of Gods word (who minister no other food of the
soul, but the pure and simple Scripture) to be insufficient to help you: that
this lively and incorruptible Word should be rejected of you, to embrace in
place thereof a word composed, and mixed with humane inventions, that
nourishing word whereof it is said, Nor in solo pane vinit home sed in omni
verb quod procedit Math. 4.
de ore Dei: And which in effect did feed Moses forty days in the mountain,
That pure and simple word whereof it is said, Comedetis panes azymos and non
firm^tes, You shall eat simple bread and not that which is leauened, to show
that it cannot endure the dross and mixture of humane wisdom, That word of
true life, Verba qu^ ^go loquor spiritus and vita sunt: the words which I
speak are Spirit and life, says our Savior in Saint John. John 6.
That word of healing and curing, whereof David says, Psam: 106.
Mi^ verbum suum and s^it (...): That word which restores to life again those
who be already dead, Ossa arida, ossa arida, audite verbum Domini, and
presently life entered into them as the Prophet does testify. That word of
final safety whereof Saint James says, Suspic^ (...) quod potest sa^re animas
vestras. That word which is so entire, so plain and like unto it self in old
and new Testament, that they be no other then a perfect harmony of spiritual
music, The former the prophecy of our Savior; and the latter his exhibition,
the one his portract, the other his person, the one the cloud which contained
the light of Gods Church, the other the fire which shined into the cloud, or
to speak it more familiarlie, as it were to draw this new wine out of these
old vessels, this oil out of that Olive, this honey cut of that comb, this
corn out of that chafe, this marrow out of that bone, this manna out of that
pitcher, this law of grace out of those Tables of damnation. This word which is
intellectual and not imaginary, necessary and not superfluous, divine and
not humane certain and not doubtful, in points necessary plain and not
obscure, that from the beginning of (...) to the Revelation there is no other
difference but of the figure, and the things figured: That like unto that
golden propitiatory from the which God spoke, described by Moses to have two
Cherubins one of every side, looking directly each upon other; And in manner of
these Seraphins Exodus 25.
seen by Isai, which by alternatiue voices did continually sing, holy, holy.
Even so do those Cherubines of the old and new Testament, mutually breathe out
the testimony of our great propitiation of the which David says, Quia apudte
Domine propitiatio est, And these two Seraphins in like manner, do^ render
alternatiue echoes in both these Testaments; of that holy, holy Savior. In
such manner that it does breed incredible joy to a Christian heart to remarke
the uniformity, and correspondence of the Spirit of God throughout the word:
The Scripture (for Example) makes frequent mention of the waters of life, to
understand what is meant by the waters of life in the old Testament, God
himself said to to Moses and Aaron: Loquimini ad Petram istam, and ipsa Nomb.
20.
dabit vobis aquam, in the new Testament Saint Paul does expound the mystery
bibebant Patres nostri de spirituali consequente illos Petra, Petra autem erat
Christus: was there 1. Cor. 10.
ever any more cleerenesse or correspondency? Again it is said in Ezechiel:
Effundam super vos aquam mundam, Eze. 36.
and mundabimini ab omnibus iniquitatibus vestris: And in Esai: Effundam aquam
supersitientem, and fluentia super aridam: Isai 24.
And in Zachary: Erit font patens Domui Jacob in ablutionem peccatoris and
menstruatae, Is not that as plain as Christ himself did speak it to the
Samaritane woman, at the same well of Jacob, thereafter I give you water to
drink, after the which you shall thirst no more: was there ever prophecy or
exhibition more correspondent? then to hear Esaias crying, Omnes sitientes
venite ad Isai 55.
aquas, and to hear Christ himself answering by St. John, Si quis fitiat
veniat ad me. The law of Moses was written John 35.
in Tables of stone, and delivered with horror per ^mpadas and seni^ Buccinae
montemque fumantem says the Text, to show the austeritie thereof, and our
impossibility to fulfill it, and does not the Gospel accord most clearly
with the same, Hoc iugum neque nos neque Patres nostri pertare potui^us: The
law Evangelical and of Grace, was written in the flesh of the incarnate
deity, to declare the softness and facility thereof, according to that which
was prophesied as our Savior himself does testify, Iugum meum sua^e est, and
^us meum leave: All which things do show the correspondencie and plainness of
the holy Scriptures. Lastly, it is that omnipotent word where of the Apostle
says, It is inspired from God, and is able to make the man of God perfect in
every good work. Then seeing it is such a powerful and perfect word, shall we
turn back to Iudaisme and blind our selves in obduration against the
splendour thereof, boldly affirming that it is obscure, imperfect and has need
of humane help, how shall we be confounded in that great day, being confronted
with that learned Jewish Rabbin Barachia, who out of consideration of this
harmony, and correspondence of Gods word was forced to say in his book
entitled Medras Cobel-eth, Redemptor primus Moses, Redemptor vltimus Messiah,
and sicut Redemptor primus fecit ascendere pute^m, ita Redemptor secundus fecit
ascendere aquas ad salutem. And with that other Rabbin Iosue, who does directly
call them the waters of Baptism, which (says he) succeeds to circumcision,
Qui baptizatur and non circumciditur ipse erit Gher, id est, Gentilis conuersus
ad rectam fidem: So that I say for your Loto hold that this word is not
sufficient to instruct you, and why? because it is not panis fermentatus it is
not corrupted with pharisaicall traditions, nor flows not from a Church whose
Prelates and members pretend that they cannot err. O but it flows from the
three persons of the Godhead, and is inspired from above, as the holy Spirit
does testify, This is a sorrow never to be repented, to maintain that any
thing other then Gods infallible incorruptible word, can be without error or
fault: Man not to err? seeing the Prophet David has said, omnis homo mendax:
seeing God himself has said, It repents me to have made man, all the
cogitations of his heart are wicked, there is nothing true but God, and his
word as the Apostle says Deus autem verax est, and sermo eius veritas: Romans 3.
What shall we speak of men? no not his very Angels be clear in his eyes, Et
reperit prauitatem in Angelis suis says Job: unto the great spirit of God, is
only given to be Custos Tabularum Verbi Dei Guardian of Gods truth, it is too
precious a jewel to be trusted to flesh and blood, for if it had bin Gods will
to tie his truth to men; why not to his known Saints? Adam whose body was
formed by the finger of God, whose soul was breathed in his nostrils from the
mouth of God, he had this spirit of truth once given him, but it left him by
the suggestions of Eua: Noah, the first Preacher of the second World, he had
this spirit, but was neglected of him in his drunkenness. The excellent Moses
of whom it is said, dilectus Deo and hominibus, Moses cuius mememoria in
benedictione est, he had that great spirit in such measure, that he overcame
nature by Sea, and Land, he commanded the Angels, and in a manner wrested the
will of God, but he was neglected of this great spirit, in his distrustful
percussion of the Rock, Aaron had this spirit, but was forgotten of him in the
erection of the calfe, Miriam also, was forgotten in her grudging against
Moses: David, a man to Gods own heart, was fearfully neglected of this great
spirit to follow adultery and homicide: Solomon, whose breast the Lord filled
with wisdom, was likewise left of this great spirit, when he fell in impious
Idolatry: The Arch-Apostle Peter, did not obey this spirit in the denial of
his master, yea after the Ascension and coming of the holy Ghost, there was
contradictions among the Apostles. It is more then madness, to affirm that
the wisdom of any man has been, or can be without error, other then Jesus
Christ the Just, or that any cannons, traditions, books, other then that one
indicted from the heart of God, and penned by his Spirit, to remain for ever:
The unchangeable rule of our faith in Christ, the only sustance thereof and our
only infallible example that we are to follow, she^ first in the old Testament
darkely to Moses in the mountain, when it was said to him, fac secundum
exemplar quod tibi in monte monstratum est (...) secondly in the new Testament
more clearly in mount Tabor, and now most clearly in the true mount of God.
That great spirit is the only inditer who cannot lie; That Scripture the only
book which will not be wrested, that Jesus the only man who cannot err.
Therefore this word as it is said must be sufficient to make the man of God
perfect. Christian perfection stands in knowledge and in action, referring
knowledge to our faith, and action, to our practice of faithful works, to
hold that the ^ly Scripture is not accomplished for knowledge, as the Euangel
says, sapientia est per fidem Jesus Christ; or to hold that Christ was not a
perfect Architype and Schoolmaster of all virtues, who has himself said,
discite (...), I think it is blasphemy, so that talk what we will, it must
be blind ignorance, to affirm, that the original fountains of Gods word, as
they are comprehended in the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, are
not more sincere and wholesome then the rivers flowing from the same through
the channels of humane brains, which can no more remain unspotted by man's
weakness, then natural waters running from clear fountains can be without
alteration of color or taste, according to the quality of ground, through
which they pass.

The universal Clergy of the Church of Rome does damn this opinion of the
sufficiency of holy Scripture: what then? it is more strong, the multitude
does abhor the ways of God, to walk in the broad way. If the Gibeonites
had securely depended upon the multitude of their neighbors of Canaan they had
perished in that common naufrage, certain they are few who truly believe this
word: some poor Gibeonites do here the voice of God and are mocked of the
world, the multitude like unto the Crow, for love of the sensual carrions
which flote among the waters of the earth, refuses to remain within the Arc.
This holy Arc of Gods word is builded for a small number of his Saints, who
find no rest without it. The multitude leaves the sincerity of this word, to
follow the wisdom of men: as the sons of Adam departed from the Orient to
build the Tower in the land of Senaar, which is interpreted stincke, how many
were saved in Jericho by that red mark which was upon the house of Ra^ab? how
many doors were marked in Egypt to be spared by the holy Angel? within this
small Arc, there was safety, but not without.

Now to come to my intended purpose, which is not to play the Theologue with
your Lo: there be certain years gone, since I went forth of the Country
poussed thereto from a scruple of my conscience, having from my childhood
drunken in, some preiudicate and forestalled opinions, which did ever trouble
and disquiet my mind so often as I called to memory, how Plato and other
Philosophers had travailed over the world to acquire natural knowledge; I
thought it both ignominious and dangerous for me, i^ I should not pain my
self to understand the truth of Gods worship, whereupon transported with the
fury of this prejudice, and closing my eyes against the splendour of the word,
which does shine at home, I resolved once to fine my self intra l^mina
Apostolorum, within the town of Rome, that pretended mother Church, without
the which, there was no means of Salvation, as then I did imagine; And this (I
do protest before the heavens, and before him who did creat them) was the true
cause of my voyage, enterprised to seek my fathers Ass (as he said) which was
so truly spoken of him, that like unto that high Priest Annas he has uttered
a notable verity unknown to himself as I will shortly set down from such
grave theological reasons, as shall both free me from passion and idleness in
this point, and serve for the Christian edification of others: we see how it is
familiar with the spirit of God in the Scripture, to use the names of beasts,
to make our gross understanding more capable by that kind of sensible
instruction: there is mention of good and evil beasts, and in the legal
sacrifices of clean and unclean beasts. By evil beasts generally are
meant, the Devil and his Angels, and the dominion of sin into us, it is said
by the Prophet, erit se^ita recta, and via sancta vocabitur, and mala bestia
non ascendet per eam: And David, Ne trada^ bestijs animas confitentes^bi: And
Isa. 35. Psalm. 73.
in the Revelation, and vidi de mari Bestiam asce^ habentem capita septem and
cornua dec^, which beside that true interpretation to be the Antichrist, some
do also allegorize to be the seven deadly sins, and ten several
transgressions of the commandments, whereby Satan does make himself Prince of
the world, confringam Psalm. 74.
cor^ peccatorum says the Lord, And the Prophet Zach. hac sunt* (...) (...)
(...) Israel: So the tyranie Zach. 1.
of sin into man, makes him to get the names of beasts, as the holy man
gets the style to be called God, or the son of God, as in the Psalms, God
judged in the assembly of the Gods: and in St. John, Dedit ijs potestatem John
2. Galat 2.
fil^s D^ifieri: And St. Paul of himself, vi^ ego, iam non ego, viuit vero in
me Christus: So are beasts said to live in the wicked man, as the Prophet
David says in 48. Psalms. The cruel man is said to be like the Ostrige,
Filia populi (...) crud^ quasi (...) i^ deserto. Psalm. 57.
The crafty insidious man as a Bear, Ursus insidians factus Deuteronomy. 32.
est mihi: the proud man like a Lion, ^sse quasi Leo in do^: the obstinate and
wilful man like unto the Adder which desperately closes her ears, sicut a^is
sur (...) obt^rantis aures (...): the wrathful man as a Dragon, fold (...)
(...) (...): the fraud^lent man as a Ezech 13.
Fox, quasi (...) (...) prophe^ae tui Israel: the oppressor Deu. 32.
as a woolfe, Benjamin lupus rapa^: the lustful man Eze. 13. Gen 49. Zach. 10.
as a Goat, ir^tus est furor (...) and super capr^s visi^abo: the lascivious
man as a horse, equi am^tores in faeminas, and emissarij facti sant: the
murderer as a serpent, (...) Dan Ierem. 5 Gen 49. Eccles. 28. Ierem. 49. Rhen.
16. 1. Peter 2.
ooluber in via: the tyrant as a Pard, quasi Pardus laedet eos: the ambitious
man as an Eagle, si exaltatus fueris fieut aquila trahant te dicit Dominus: the
backbiter as a dog, quare maledicit canis hic Domino meo Regi: the filthy
man as a sow, quasi sus lot^ in volutabro luti. These are noted under the names
of Beasts, which make us the sons of that king of beasts the Devil,
aduersarius vester tanquum 1. Peter 5.
Leo rugie^s, and ipse est Rex super omnes filios superbiae, says Job: The
Devil again is noted by the name of the Serpent, Serpens erat callidior
cunctis animalibu^. He is compared to the tortuous serpent full of crookes, qui
dissipat sepe^ mord bit eu^ C^luber, It is said in Ecclesiasticus and again,
Non est caput nequeus super caput col^bri.

There be also goodness and piety signified by beasts in the holy Scripture.
The Church of God is said to be a flock of sheep: (...) (...) audit vocem
(...), pasc^ (...) me as: Non sum missus nisi ad (...) qu^ per^erunt Domus
Israel. Christ himself has taken the name of a Lion, vicit Leo de tribu Judah,
to note the difference from that devouring Lion whom he has overthrown,
figured by that Lion which ^s rent by Sampson, who was a typical Savior as we
know. Again, he takes the name of a Lamb, Agnus Dei qui toll^ peccata mundi:
The third person of the Trinity is figured also by a beast, the holy Ghost
came down in Jordan in form of a Dove, and we are commanded to be simple as
Doves, because otherwise the holy ghostcannot lodge with us, albeit God the
Father in the fullness and Majesty of his godhead, he who has said, thou
shall make no graven image, etc. has not vouchsafed to figure himself by the
shape or name of any beast, as he would not name himself to Moses in other
terms then, ego sum qui sum, to show how he does (...) (...), where (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) to show that he is indefinit, infinite, (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) would allege that he spoke in person to M^ses; and did
appear in a fiery bush to him; no these (...) (...) by his holy Angels; the
Apostle testifies that the Tables of the Law were given to Moses by an Angel,
(...) pr^pter Gal. 3.
transgression^ (...) est, and (...) (...) (...) (...) mediatoris: And St.
Steven in the Acts does witness, that an Angel, under the name of God spoke to
Moses in the bush. There appears to him (says he) in the wilderness of
mount (...), an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush: That glorious
(...) (...) (...) to Mose^ Acts 7.
that no mortal flesh should see his face and live: That great spirit whereof
it is said, spirit^ Domini (...) (...) Sap. 1.
terrarum; who is in all things and al things in him at very (...) have
acknowledged it: (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) vides: A (...) is a (...)
(...), and a ^cle is a center dilate are or spread out: God is all things that
ever have been or shall be to the end, com pleate in that infinite Majesty
and power and his glory dilated and displayed in so many noble creatures, how
is it than possible to (...) the (...) or (...) of so great a thing when
Solomon could (...) his glorious Temple sufficient to (...) it, si (...) and
(...) (...) (...) capi^nt quanto (...) (...) ista (...) (...) (...) And (...)
Saint (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) habit (...) (...). The person of
(...) (...) (...) (...) the proper temple wherein he (...), whereupon he said,
(...) templum hoc and (...) (...) (...) (...) illud, John 2.
which also is a manifest argument against the erection of whatsoever images to
Christ, because that God the Father in the fullness of his Deity dwells in
him as the Apostle affirms, in quo habitat corporaliter omnis plenitudo
Ephesians. 1.
diuinitatis. Always speaking generally of beasts that he mentioned in the
Scripture, I say that the spirit of God has never (as appears to me) used
any beast so familiarly as the Ass, to be significant of the high The Apology
of the Ass.
mysteries of our faith, and to be a type of that piety and goodness which
should be in Christian people. And first, I show it from this argument a
Contrarijs, In the Scripture we find mention only of two beasts to whom
God did allotte the faculty of speaking, the Serpent, and the Ass, the Serpent
opened his mouth to suborne impiety and rebellion against God, the Ass opened
his mouth, to reprehend sin in the Prophet. Therefore seeing it was said that
the Serpent was the worst of the beasts, neque erat caput nequius super caput
Calubri, it must be a just consequence, that the Ass is the best, and most
simple of beasts, and most excellent for natural goodness. That by the Ass
was signified Gods people appears by sundry places in holy Scriptures; when
Saul was diverse times commanded by Samuel to return home and receive the
kingdom, he answered him still that he did seek his fathers Asses, till at
length the Prophet told him the Asses were found, mystically meaning (as diverse
learned authors do intepret) the people, who as Asses) were to vnderlie the
yoke of his obedience, as they have also expounded that other place of the
Ass, when our Savior going up to Jerusalem commanded his Disciples saying,
Inueniet is afinam alligatam and pullum cum ea soluite Math: ^1.
and addueite mihi: whereby they understood the two people Gentiles and Jews,
who were fettered and bound to blindness, the one to Ethnicke Idolatry, the
other to vain legal Ceremonies, and were both to be loosed, and by the
liberty and grace of the Gospel, to be reduced to the obedience of Christ, that
he might reign over them, as it is said, An Iudaeorum tantum Deus nonne etiam
and Gentium. The great Samson who was a figure of Christ Rom: 3.
as the spirit of God testifies by the history of his birth (being like unto
that of our Saviors) annunciat to his mother by the Angel; Thou wast barren
but shall now bear a son which shall be a Nazeret to the Lord and a
deliverer to the people, he shall be called Samson, Sol little, according to the
Hebrew Lit^ at his death again he pulled down the house replenished with the
Philistines his enemies, destroying great numbers of them there, then in his
life, as Clarity did perfectly tryumphe (...) on the Cross o^ that spiritual
Philistine, S^, and o^ all the hosts of ^ll. The Scripture records of that
figuratic savior Samson that with the cheek bone of an Ass he ouerth^
m^litudes of his enemies, and that being almost stifled in the battle through
excess of heat and thirst, fourth of the cheek tooth of an A^ law-^ne ^spring
water to refresh him, mystically signifying the Christian virtues of
simplicity, humility, patience, painfulness, obedience flowing from
Regeneration, and the waters of Baptism (and which in nature be a^nine
qualities) should by the Gospel conquess, multitudes to Christ, to the ruin of
Satan's Kingdom. The Ass has knowledge above the common imaginatiue sense of
beasts. There be certain current eraditions that Aristophance affirmed, that
an Ass was his condisciple in the schools of Philosophy, and that other of
Apuleius Maga^ who told that be could not be admitted to the sacred mysteries
of his goddess I^, if he had not changed himself out of a Philosopher into an
humble Ass: further to let these fine fellows know how in this a sinn^ ^ge of
mine. I have been ^urious (...) ^orneelie (...) with pertains to the Ass.
The People D^d says, Nolita fieri sicus Equus and Mulus q^bus none (...)
(...), but Psalm. 51.
of the Ass the Prophet Esaias wonderfully noting perhaps, the particular
circumstances of our Savior (as somethinke) in a Prophetica^ision has said,
Cog^nit B^ p^rem suunt, and (...) pr^sepe D^. It Isay 1.
is manifestly seen that by natural goodness the Ass has those properties,
which every Christian is commanded to follow, so patient of iniuties that
being ^ten of any other beast, it takes no offense, so painful and obedient,
that the greater burden makes it to travel more willingly so simple that it
requires no attendance, as horses and other serviceable beasts, so temperate,
and soberat food; that while it ^eth the most percious fruits, oils, coins,
spices, it puts down the mouth to p^re upon th^les as it were a figure of
that simplicity and a^ty which ^ght to be under the Cross, and as some ^o
imagine it has the mark of a Cross^pon the back. Tertullian in his days did
glory in this. That in the Pri^e Church the Pagans, and profane (...) his
(...), did all the Christians. Asina^ (...) holding in the^ those A^e
qualities? Finally, that ass whospake to Bal^m as he carried him to curse
Gods people (...) and to impugnents Will, So went I beyond Seas ^ying my
head^ll of false and error ^pinione, and (...) fraughted with desires to sed
and (...) super (...) (...) pleased God of his mercy to open my eyes, (...) old
to that beast, that I did see such odious (...) of his worship, and the
judgments which (...) the ^tned against it, it pleases him whole ^ded (...)
the (...), to loose me from the bands of ignorante. The Prophet D^d says,
D^mint ^iamea ap^es, and (...) (...) anna^ laude^ ^uam, do^ i^iquos vi^ (...)
and imp^ ad to connuertentur.

Since he who opened the mouth of the Ass, has also for his glory opened my
mouth, I must not; neither be silent, although I ^o Doctor, nor do not presume
to instruct your L^: conscience, yet must I remember that commandment of our
Savior given to one whom he dis^ssed of many Devils, ^euertere in domum tuam
(...) (...) quanta tib^ fecer at Dominus. Return homeward, and now become a
simple Ass in Christian knowledge; That which the Lord has done to me, I
shall preach it to others, for his glory and their edification, and so I
preceede to tell your L^ how I was tranformed into ^his Ass of Balaam.

CHAP. II.
A Discourse of our natural light and divine instinct of our Conscience. A
true definition of Idolatry for the better trial of superstitious worship, and
preuarication in Gods service.

THe Scripture records that the Ass of Balaam went on a pace before he did see
the Angel, and that the Angel was diverse times seen before obedience was done
unto him: so was it with me all the while of my being in France, I did
profess the Popish Religion, and as sincerely obey the discipline of that
Church, as any man could do of my weakness, and that from upright zeal, and
not from design, whereof I could my self give many great proofs, which be
not pertment here, only this far I say, That many times I have heard in one
week more then twenty Masses, and that for the greatest part there, where I
knew no man, nor yet was known my self of any: Whereof also your Lo; self
may bear witness by diverse of my Letters written to you in those times,
chiefly by one, (if it please you to remember) from Paris immediately before my
going into Italy, in the which I did play the Paranymphe to my self, by
praising the resolution of my coming forth, from the example of Abraham's
calling, who was commanded by God to go forth of his own Country that he might
worship the Lord truly, and he blessed of him in a strange land: In such sort,
that for the time, I could have been content to remain a Transfuga to my lives
end. In this Letter I did allude to the greater light of the Southern Sun,
and to the Aquilonar darkness founded upon that Thalmudicall fable which we
read in the writs of Rabbi Eleazer, in his book called Zoar, that in the
creation of the heavens, God did leave a hole in the Northern parts thereof,
that in the beginning the Sun had his first point of motion in the Southeast,
that about Damascus in the Southeast, God took that Terra virgo, that most
perfect Earth, whereof he formed Adam, that the garden of Eden and mount Sion,
were planted in the South-east, that God chose the Patriarckes and his peculiar
people in the South-east, remote significations of Gods truth to remain for
ever in the Climats of the Southeast, according to that in the Canticles Vbi
habitabit dilectus (...)? in meridie: vbicubabit? in meridie. And that the
Northern parts of the earth were the seat, naturally, of darkness and
iniquity, as being subject to the imperfect parts of the heaven, and to the
aforesaid hole whereout Lucifer and his companions did fall, according to that
vision of the Prophet, who heard him saying, Sedebo in montibus Aquilonis, and
fimilis ero altissimo: alleging this Scripture, Omne malum pandetur ab
Aquilone, Ierem. 10.
and the text of Moses of the seven Candlestickes of the Arc looking from the
North toward the South: as if the North were, sinistra Mundi, and the proper
habitation of unclean spirits, like as we see the Aquilo to be a tempesteous
and destroying wind, whereas by the wholesome and nourishing Auster, is meant,
the sweet and peaceable spirit of God, incalled in the Canticles, Ueni Auster
and perfla hortum meum: And whereof Abacuc Cant. 4.
says, Deus ab Austro veniet. So that the seven Candlestickes looking to the
South, were signs of the perpetuity of the spiritual light there, never to
be extinguished by any tempest of Northern heresies. These and such like fond
fantasies which were then infused into me, and which have been invented by
curious brains to poison simple wits, did I introduce in that Letter.

And they were arguments good enough, both of my zeal, and of my ignorance, as
if the garden of Eden, were not many thousands of years ago deprived of true
light, and consumed with the fire of Gods wrath, as if that holy mount Sion,
and that mother City Jerusalem, who had fairer promises of perpetultie made by
God, then Rome, and all the Cities in the world, because she was (like unto
Na^h who preached to two worlds) the mother not only of Jewish, but of
Christian Religion, as the Apostle says; The law went out of Sion, even the
law Evangelical, the perfection of all laws, the Lord Jesus Christ, declared
to Moses obscurely in Sinai but manifestly published to the world in Mount
Caluerie, as if that great and matchless City, were not long ago abandoned
of God: ruined, accursed, and prostrate to the profane yoke of godless
Turcisme: As if Rome it self were not become like to the Cities of the Plain
smoking in the abominable pollutions of Sodom: as if Scotland had not been
Christian, perhaps, as soon as Rome, as Tertullian writes in his seventh
book contra Iud^os, Britannorum loca Romany inaccessa Christo subdit fuere:
which diverse others learned Authors have affirmed; and as if the Northern parts
were not now become the seat of the Candlestick purged from their
fornications, while as Rome it self lies try fling in Types, and Pharisaicall
Ceremonies, in place of true Religion, defiled with her own blood, refusing to
be cleansed, abhorring the voice of reformation, crying with the blinded Jews,
Templum Domini, Templum Domini. And that I did so long lie in this ignorance,
what shall I say? Spiritus spirat vbi vult, and quando vult: yet this far
must I say for my self, it was not neither strange in me, who since my youth
had been possessed with false opinions: for certainly, there be so many
specious vailes which cover from a man's eyes the truth of things; to wit, the
gravity of their subtle Prelates, the exterior zeal and devotion of the
people, the splendour and the richnes of their Temples, the majesty and
reverence of their Services, the glory of the precessions, their exorbitant
works of superstitious Charity, multitudes of Hospitals; and conuentuall
houses, rented by voluntary Contributions, the stoicall and stupid austeritie
of the Proselites, the voluntary misery of the Capuchins, the profound
Preachers of the Dominicall and Iacobin Orders, the admirable policy of the
Iesuitical trade; and withal their proud and perilous vaunting of Antiquity,
Succession, and Universality; these are sufficient at the first to surprise a
judicious mind, and to astonish a man, as if he looked on Medusas head, who
drinks of Mandragora he is in danger of a long sleep, but who tastes the
cup of Superstition, he is in danger of deadly sleep: That old Circe knows
all the secrets of enchantment; and albeit she has amazed Kithing mountains
of dead men's bones, yet of those who arrive in her Island and come within the
hearing of her voice, they be few who escape her incantations; few who with
Ulysses can tie themselves, unto the maine Mastes, to the end they be not
ravished with her Sirens songs, which can keep fast the sacred, Anchor of the
pure word of God. Many through ignorance and natural inclination to
superstition, many again through avarice and ambition are contented to be
tranformed into beasts by the charms of Circe. This evil of superstition
among spiriruall dangers, it is the great rock of our common shipwreck, it is
dangerous first, and especially because of the fearful judgment which God
does inflict against it: For what is superstition, but a false worship of God.
Of all the plagues and punishments under heaven, most fearful is that which
follows superstition, the Prophet has pronounced it against the obstinate
follies of the Jews, Audite audientes and nolite intelligere, videte visione^
and nolite cogitare nec cognoscere, occoeca cor populi huius, oculos (...)
Isai. 6.
claude, aggraua aures eius ne fortevideat oculis, auribus audiat cord
intellgat, and co^uertatur, and sane^ eu^: which is to be given over by God,
absolutely to follow lies and falsehood in place of verity at the Apostle says,
vt credant m^ndacio qui non crediderunt v^ritati; great is the honor which is
1. These. 2.
bestowed on us while we stand in Gods true worship. A certain great Divine
has made this the difference betwixt God and good men, Deus homo coelestis,
homo autem Deus terrestris, but when we be spoiled with wicked idolatry, it
makes the Lord to say of us, homo cum in honor esset and non intellexit,
comparatus est inmentis insipientibus, and factus est similis illis, and was
not indeed that mighty Nabuchodonozor for his wrong opinion of God changed
into a beast? our other sins for the greatest part proceed of humane
weakness, but this of wicked presumption, and therefore it is commonly
punished with desperate ob^uration.

Secondly, idolatry is dangerous because it is ordinary and quotidian in the
world, as every body has his own shadow, so there was never Religion which
had not his own superstition: And as the shadow is longer then the body,
except when the Sun approaches near the Zenith, and sends his beams down
either perpendiculer, or toward a direct aspect upon the earth as we say: Even
so when the light of the Euangell makes not a direct reflection upon our souls
and minds to certify our knowledge, but comes upon us by obliquity, not in
purity but mixed with humane traditions, then grows superstition to be long.
An extraordinary and impious excess of Religion dissoluing the true order of
Gods worship into numbers of forbidden and pharifaicall ceremonies, it is the
companion of true Religion: for truth and falsehood are twins borne almost both
in one day; God spoke to day in Paradise, the Serpent spoke next morrow: Simon
Peter in the Euangell spoke to day, and Simon Magus spoke to morrow: There was
never Church free from corruption to the end, chiefly from idolatrous worship.
Adam who was the first man created by God himself, in whose person was the
whole Church of God, he fell away to believe the Devil: Aaron who was the
first Priest ordained by God himself, by a legal warrant, he fell away to
idolatry: Solomon who was the first king, and first man commanded by God to
build him a Temple for his service, he also fell away to idolatry. These no
doubt be great arguments of the force of superstition. Thirdly, idolatry is
dangerous because it is a popular disease, and so is the more contagious: The
Israelites were once become so universally Baalists, that the Prophet cried,
there was not one who had not bowed his knee to Baal. The Ecclesiastical
histories do record that the Catholic Church was so once generally infected
with Arianisme, that there was not a sincere Pastor, who durst minister the
sacraments of Baptism in a public Temple. Such is the disposition of our
corrupt natures to heresy and preuarication in Gods worship: Nature is moved
and led by the sense, and in idolatry there be so many gracious and pleasant
shows of piety as do bewitch the senses.

Lastly, superstition is dangerous because the multitude who are chiefly given
unto it, can hardly discover it, they be but pecora campi, as the wiseman says
in the Scripture: I looked out upon the earth, and I saw many beasts but few
men: Superstition while it is masked it is a most plausible thing, Satan has
given to it a fair face, and oftentimes fairer then that of true Religion,
after the sort of impudent whores, who be more curiously decked then the chaste
Ladies, but when the mask is pulled off, there is nothing more ugly and
despisefull for even as it is a monstrous deformity, that an Ape being a
beast, should resemble a man's face: so superstition well considered, the more
it is like to true Religion, the more it is deformed, and because the sum of
this discourse shall stand into a consideration of such superstitious abuses
and impiety as by experience I did remarke in the Church of Rome. Therefore
that your Lo: mind may be the better prepared to ponder justly my relation,
and to discern what is superstitious and what is not so, I would first lay
down two grounds, which if you find reason to admit, they may possibly help
greatly to clear your Lo: judgment.

The first whereof shall be this: As the World was The Light of nature.
never in any time without a God to govern it, so never was it in any age
without some divine law felt by the conscience of man, to render him
inexcusable as a great Divine says, cum sit Deus ab humana intelligentia
procul absconditus, 1. Institu. cap. 1.
tamen suae Maiestatis not as adeo claras and illustres singulis suis operibus
impressit, vt sublata sit quamlibet coecis and stupidis, omnis ignorantiae
excusatio, for if man had been confirmed in that grace wherein he was created,
he needed no law, iusto non est lex posita, says the Apostle; But because as
God himself does testify proni sunt sensus hominum ad malum ab adolescentia,
therefore has God bridled us by a law, and first by the law of nature which he
has so surely stamped in our souls that it is enough to convict us before
God: whereof Saint Iohu says in his Gospel, haec est lux vera illuminans
omnem hominem venientem Romans 1.
in mundum: The Apostle does stand for this light, saying the invisible things
of him that is his eternal power and godhead are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his worker to the intent they should be without
excuse says he. Of this Light the Prophet David has said, multi dicunt quis
ostendet nobis bona, signatum Psol 4.
est super nos lumen vultus tui Domin^, which ground being conferd with that
other of ignorance, maintained in the Popes Church to be the mother of piety,
and of implicita fides sufficient for a man's salvation, I know not what
harmony they make. And Bellarmine in his book of controversies, speaking of
justification and free will, does reason farthest of any man for this force and
light of our conscience: neither has any wise Ethnicke ever A discourse of
three Laws.
refused it: Cicero in his book De natura Deorum, nulla est etiam tam barbara
natio nulla ge^tam efferata, cui non in^idate haec persuasio Deum Esse: But to
the purpose, because of the fall of Adam, the Devil did weaken the power of
this light, and law natural, that the old world by evil custom, and by the
stream of iniquity became blind, esteeming things good and lawful in nature
which were notso, therefore God in his mercy made it more clear the second
time, by giving unto Moses the written Law, that our knowledge might be again
made more inexcuseable, as Saint Paul says, peccatum non cognouinisipor legem,
peccatum sine lege mortuum erat, delitescebat. And to the end that the world
might know what a fearful thing it Romans 1. 10.
was to transgress this law, it was pronounced in a terrible sort, as I have
said, till the astonished people were forced to cry, Ne loquatur Dominus, ne
forte mori^, which was done to breed unto your hearts a horror of sin and
faith in Gods promises of the Messiah, as Moses testifies, vt terror esset in
vobis and non peccetis: The Exodus 10.
yoke of this law, was so heavy on the one part, and the corruption of our
rebellious nature, so violent on the other part, that even as great
inundations, by their impetuous force, carry away the ramparts and bulwarks
which men have dug to restrain them, and over flows their ordinary banks,
even so those obstinate Jews by the vehement course of their wicked nature did
transgress and dooborde over all the limits of this law, that it had no use
among them but for their conviction which has made the Apostle to say, Lex
propter transgressionem posita est: till, God out of his pity did provide a
third law and doctrine, which was the help again of this, and the final
fulfilling of all Laws, the law Evangelical and of Grace: The Lord Jesus
Christ, beside whom no mortal man has been or shall be able to fulsill a law
or to please God. So that we see these three laws, every one of them written
and as it were indented one in the other, the natural first written in the
heart of Adam, but written over again by fairer letters in the Mosaicall
Tables: And that again more clearly written in the Euangell by exhibition of
him who was the perfection of all Laws. The second does expound the first, and
the third does both expound and accomplish, the other two like unto these
wheels seen by Ezechiell in a vision, having the one incorporate in the
other, every sin committed against the law of Nature is also against the
Mosaicall law, because the Mosaicall is included in the Natural, and what is
against the Mosaical, is also against the law of the Euangel, which is the
perfection of both the former. It is this way and reciprocally, there is no
excuse, the Jew says, he will follow the Mosaicall, and not be a Christian,
the Turk says he will do neither, but obey the law of nature. They are
deceived, for they differ only in this, that the first two serves to show us
our sins, and make us inexcusable, the last saues us from our sins and
makes us righteous before God, they be all but one law, proceeding from less
perfect, to more and most perfect, here it is said Creed and viues, there it
was said fac and viues. The seed sown in the ground, it grows first into the
blade, next it shootes up into the stalk, and thirdly it comes up into the
grain of corn: the seed of God, which is his word, it was sown in the heart
of Adam, where it grew to the blade, and then being in danger to wither, the
Lord did refresh it by the Mosaicall law, where it brought out the stalk, and
again into the Gospel it produced the perfect corn and fruit of life: so
that he who is not a good Christian, he is neither a perfect Jew, nor a perfect
Philosopher: and by the contrary, he who is a right Jew he must become a right
Christian, they are necessarily complicat. The Jew was bound to fulfill the
Law, but he could not, and we perform it in and by Christ, so that he can
never perform a Jewish obligation, unless he be a follower of Christ, omnia
possum in Christo, says the Apostle. This is no paradox, if God be (as he is
which none do deny) creator of all men, master and monarke of all the World,
the World then must be one family, one City, one kingdom of God, no earthly
Prince will willingly have diverse Laws in one kingdom, then shall we think
that God, who is wiser then men, and wisdom it self would give several
laws for the word? no, sure enough all those three be but one Law, the light
whereof does shine into the conscience of the Jew and Gentile, Turk and Pagan,
Philosopher, and of the stupide multitude, signatum est super omnes lumen
vultus Domini: whereupon it must follow, that this light is inextinguishable,
it is that which we call our never dying conscience: when a man does apprehend
the knowledge of any thing by the virtue of his intellectual mind it is
science, and he is said Scire, to have knowledge, the conscience again is the
right application and employment of this knowledge, it is a medium a midst
betwixt God and man, and the rule whereby we know if any thing be in the
counsels of our mind, or actions of our will, contrary to this natural light,
and divine instinct of reason, which God has placed in our hearts like a
clear lamp to illuminate our intellectual spirit, that it might see and
discern right from wrong, and truth from falsehood, which is a thing so
manifest that the Ethnicke Philosophers, and the word of God do iump upon it:
The naturallitie of Cicero, and the Theology of Saint Paul concur to prove
it almost in the same terms: Cicero in the third Tusculan Question writing to
Brutus, sunt enim ingenijs nostris semina innata virtutum, quae si adolescere
liceret, neque illa celeriter malis moribus opinionibusque deprauatis
extingueremus, ipsa nos natura ad beatam vitam perduceret: And the Apostle Paul
writing also to the Romans; Quu^ Gentes quae legem non habent, naturaliter ca
quae legis sunt faciunt, eiusmodi legem non habentes, ipsi sibi sunt Lex, qui
ostendunt opus legis scriptum in cordibus suis: It is so plain for the light
of nature (excepting always the last clause of Cicero concerning beatitude) as
if Paul and Cicero had conferred upon it, which ground for the first, being set
down in truth as your Lo: sees, I crave that you will be content to examine all
the points of this Treatise by the touchstone of the divine light and instinct
of your conscience: and where your Lo: find those, (which as is said are
inspirations from heaven) contradictory to your opinions, that in that case you
will suffer your conscience to be directed by this light, which God has given
you to guide it by, and that your Lo: will forbear your pretense of deuote
ignorance and implicita fides, things that do merely extinguish this light of
nature, if it please you to do so, and not to smother under a bushel this
clear candle, which God has illuminate in your heart, there is no doubt but
as Cicero says, that same Natura Dux, the very light of Nature which has a
Divine stamp in your conscience, shall show you an outgate from the childish
Labyrinths of superstition that do inuolue your Lo: for if any should say to
me, seeing there is such power in the instinct of natural reason, flowing from
this divine light, how is it that so many millions of those who be endued with
the same are induced to idolatry, I can give no other answer then the wise
man has given stultorum infinitus numerus est: the number of fools and those
who are mistaken in their own light, is infinite.

Now I will take my first advantage of this ground to appeal to the divine
light of your Lo: conscience, how you do judge of that which already from so
many Texts of Scripture, I have spoken touching the plainness and perfection
of Gods word, since on the one part the spirit of God does testify, that it is
eternal, incorruptible, and inspired from Heaven, able to make the man of God
perfect, and on the other part this intellectual light of nature serving as
eyes to receive in our conscience, the brightness of this word, it is so
powerful, that very Gentiles have clearly known it: and seeing it is
sufficient to convict the conscience of Turks, and Pagans of contempt and
ignorance of this word, I ask your Lo: how shall it be with us who beside the
having of this light, have been brought up in Christian Religion, have been
taught Gods word, can read it in several languages, and understand it, when
we shall refuse to believe for our faith, this word preached in purity when we
shall hold it insufficient for our Salvation, embracing in place thereof, what?
an implicita fides an implicit faith, the colliers belief, and what is that?
I believe with the Church, and how believes she? she does believe with the
collier: is not this ambulare in circuitu impij as the Scripture says, to
walk in the about-gates of the wicked; well let us remember how it shall be
worse in that day with Corazim and Bethsaida then with Sodom, because they had
greater light and did despice it; They say ignorance is the mother of Devotion:
And the Apostle says: Qui ignorant ignorabitur, if ignorance cannot excuse a
Turk, because of that light of Gods face which is stamped in his heart, let
any man tell me what it can avail a Christian to brag of his devout
ignorance, affected ignorance is never a whit better then knowledge without
belief or well doing. Let us here the Prophet Isay, my people is carried
captive, because Isai 5.
they had no knowledge, neither is now a days any other reason of idolatrous
captivity, then this pretended holy ignorance, so that for a Christian man to
glory in it, it is to become sicut equus and mulus quibus non est intellectus.
Therefore let your Lo: remember you are sealed with this Lumen vultus Dei, and
that he has blessed you with knowledge to understand, that the holy Scriptures
are a perfect and never perishing word.

The second ground I would have your Lo: to condescend Definition of Idolatry.
upon with me for preparation of your more indifferent judgment, is a certain
definition of idolatry which may content your Lo: and me both, to the end we
may the better reason of idolatrous worship: For as concerning abuse in
religion, and impiety in manners, they be triuiall points that there can be no
mystery in a survey of the same.

Idolon is a Greek word which literally signifies, as much as a little Form,
or Figure, formed or figured, but taken as it is spoken in Christian Shooles,
and according to the best Doctors it is a representation of a false God, and a
false Deity, or a Creature taken and honored for God. As to say the Statue of
Moloch, of Jupiter, the Sun, or Moon, the Hebrew word Elil, as I read, have
very right this same signification of Idol, and is used in holy Scripture to
signify the Pagan gods, which were things false, and so nothing. Esaias says of
Isai. 41.
the gods of the Gentiles, Behold you are nothing and your works are of no
worth. Unto the which, Saint Paul alluding, We know, said he, that an Idol is
nothing in the world: because howsoever it be made of metal, timber, or
stone, yet because the falsehood which it represents is nothing, it is said to
be nothing. Now so ielous is God of his honor and worship; That he has not
only forbidden material images to bow down to them, but there is also
spiritual Idolatry forbidden: whereof there is two sorts; The first is of
these, who directly, or indirectly, have society and company with the Devil,
and trust in him, as Sorterers, Magitians, Witches, Consulters. The second is
of those, who mainetaine any erroneous opinion, concerning the worship of God,
or against the word of God, or who do cherish and defend, any great and odious
vice, by a displayed banner against God, as the Prophet Samuel 1 Samuel 15.
speaking of the disobedience of Saul: Your rebellion says he, is the sin of
Witchcraft, and your trangression, Idolatry, the reason is because he who does
obey God after his own fantacie, and not after Gods express Commandment, he
does prefer his own conceit, and make an Idol thereof, as Saint Jerome in this
same sense shows, how there was oftentimes Idolatry among the Jews when they
had no material Idols, as the Gentiles, says he, worship corporal Idols;
so the Jews hold for gods, those Idols which they have forged in their
souls, and therefore they are Pagans and Idolaters. Saint Austen expounding
the meaning of Joshua when he exhorted the Jews newly entered in Palestina to
put away their strange gods. It is not to be thought that in this time the
Jews had any Pagan god, said he, because immediately before he did praise
their obedience, neither is it to be thought that he spoke these words
without cause; so it was, said he, that the holy Prophet understanding them to
have in their hearts erroneous opinions of God, contrary to his honor, he
desired them to leave them. Saint Paul does clearly testify, that the
auaricious man, and the glutton, be Idolaters: the one of his gold, the other
of his belly, Quorum Deus Coloss: 3.
venture est. Many were among the Philosophers, whose wisdom did never suffer
them to worship Creatures as Idols, yet were they spiritual Idolaters, by
denying of the Resurrection, and of the immortality of the Soul, in that true
eternity which God has appointed for it. The Jews and Turks this day do not
worship any material Idol, yea they worship the same God whom we do, yet they
are Idolaters, because they do not acknowledge him as he is a Divine Essence,
distinguished in three persons, but after a fantasy, devised by Mahomet here,
and there be the Cabbalists, of whom and of of all such, Saint Basil says,
Cursed be the men who forge false imaginatione in their own brains, and Isa.
2.
carry spiritual Idolatry in their hearts. And Gregory Nazianzene more
plainly; How is it come, says he, even to this, that every wicked man does
make a God of his wickedness, his filthy passions, his wrath, his murders,
his lust, and drunkenness, and other abominable excess. And Saint Jerome
writing upon Isay and Orat. 2. de Theol^.
Hosea, in diverse places, and Augustine in the City of God does reckon
monstrons numbers of false gods whom poor Gentility had forged to themselves,
as well in their fantasies as in their Temples: both which sorts of Iolatrie God
has very well forseene, and very strictly forbidden, by his precept of no
graven image in heaven above nor in the earth beneath, wherein, no doubt, by
the heaven are meant not only the Planeticall bodies, but imaginations of
Angelical figures to be counted of us for gods: and all intellectual
fantasies and falsehoods, contrived by humane brain in matters of Gods
worship, that they shall have no place in our minds: which point your Lo: sees
how clear it is. It being so then that the poor blinded Pagans, who are
strangers to doctrine of holy Scripture, and kept back from it by the laws of
Tyrants, they are thus convicted by the Doctors of the Church, not only for
material Idolatry, but even for spiritual, through the excess of every
predominant vice, or erroneous fantasy which did transport them, and that
Saint Augustine introduces Joshua as we have heard, exhorting the Jews to quit
their Idolatry of wrongful opinions, I will in like manner appeal to the
divine light of your Lo: conscience, how vigilant you think a good Christian
must be about the points of Gods worship, or what warrant there is (this
description of Idolatry admitted) first, to erect and maintain such number of
images in the Popish Church. Secondly, what warrant to equal with God the
power of the blessed Virgin. And lastly, and above all, what warrant
presumptuously to affirm, that any elementarie thing is really the person of
God himself. I understand that from such grounds as be in the Roman Church,
your Lo: will give pretended reason enough, but that is contrary to my
protestation, whereby I have tied your Lo. to that which the Divine instinct of
your conscience does say to you, in favors of the meanest of those
superstitions; as for the last two of them, I need not insist much, because I
think they be extra controuersiam Idolatries; But understanding well, how
your Lordshippe will hold for the Images, by reason of the good meaning and
use which is had of them, and from the common ground, ab abusu ad non vsum non
est argumentum; Certainly, such fearful abuses have I seen, which make me
to say, alas, we do not remember what a peremptory, terrible and Jealous God
he is, in the whole order, and in the smallest circumstances of his worship,
he has said he is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, and no other
will content him; Let us exhauste our whole means, let us distill our brains
from never so good a meaning, to worship him, if our doing go not with his
own rule, it is hateful abomination in his eyes, and chiefly where any thing
is added, or altered to the substance and Essence of Gods word, given out by
himself, it is Idolatry, (and which is more) in the highest degree, whereof
that one instance of King Saul his disobedience might suffice for a thousand
examples, who could have doubted of his extraordinary good meaning, in sparing
the fat beasts to sacrifice unto the Lord: more, who would not have imagined
it should approve his thankfulness toward God, and yet the Prophet Samuel
called it the sin of Witchcrafte, which is Idolatry in the Superlatiue
degree, and for it, had denounced the renting and transferring of his kingdom:
why? because the Lord who knows the heart of man, he did see that Saul by his
addition to his Commandment did prefer his own invention thereunto, hunting
thereby after a reputation of zeal in Gods service, and so honor to himself;
God looks to the sincerity of our spirit, to see that no arrogancy be there,
nor no discrepance from his holy will in matters of his worship, how many times
did he cast off his people Israel, because of their presumptuous confidence in
religious Ceremonies, in false and Pharisaicall works, because of their
lippe-labour, and external show of piety, saying, their heart was far from
him, and that he was carried with their tedious and loathsome sacrifices.
Sisteterint Moses and Samuel coram me non est anima mea ad populum istum. Even
the best earthly Princes are jealous of their Majesty, but this God of
Majesty he is a consuming fire of jelousie in points of his worship, he
pronounced Saul's reprobation and overthrow by Samuel, for that which appeared
to man a light transgression, because it was a point of his Majesty and
honor, but by the Prophet Nathan he easily pardoned David for his adultery
and murder, which seemed in humane eyes most heinous wickedness, because they
were not points of his worship, but sins of weakness: next he looked to
both their hearts, in the heart of David, it was fleshly corruption which made
him to fall, in the heart of Saul it was the pride of spiritual Idolatry,
adding to Gods worship, thinking himself wiser then God, and saying to the
Prophet, he had obeyed God, as it is said in the Church of Rome, that
worshipping of Images is a point of Gods honor, while as it is directly
contrary to his Commandment. Let all the world tremble at that strict dealing
of the Lord with his good servant Moses, in a point of his Commandment at the
waters of Contradiction, were the Israelites did grudge: God said to Moses and
Aaron that they should take up the Rod, and speak to the Rock of Rephidim
and it should yield waters, loquimini ad Petra^, because he did strike the
Rock and did not utter his speeches confidently to Gods meaning, saying
distrustfully, behold rebellious, if we may bring water out of this rock; man
would imagine that there was but a Peccadiglio, a small fault, or none at all,
yet the Lord did not only impute it for disobedience, because thou have not
honored me before my people (said he) but he did punish it in most rigorous
manner in man's eyes, yet justly, he let him not enjoy the fruits of his long
pains in the wilderness, preventing him by death; saying, for this thou shall
never enter into the land: considering then that precise Commandment in
special; Thou shall make no kind of Image in heaven nor earth, nor in the
waters: considering secondly the stricktnesse of Gods word and will in
general, wherein Qui cadit in syllaba cadit in t^to; And considering thirdly
the greatness of his Jealousy, what a furious audacity is it, that we should
sport with God so manifestly to preuaricate in his worship, by so many Idols
and strange inuocations, by twenty Aue Mary's for one Pater noster, auowedly
repugnant to his precept, presuming to excuse it, with a good meaning, and with
I know not what distinctions of Dulia and Latria, as if God himself could not
have put down the distinction. Certainly I think not only Moses, but even
Saul had better excuses for his fault, it is no distinction will serve the
turn, The Lord he is a jelous God and strict in the point of his worship;
They are not founded upon the Chimeraes of our head, but upon his holy will,
and who so pleases to be homely with it, shall receive the same doom of
Samuel pronounced against Saul that his sin is a sin of Witchcraft. The
most profound Doctor and best versed thac ever has been in Gods Law was the
Prophet David, who speaking in his first Psalm of the just man, sed in lege
Domini est voluntas eius, whose delight (says he) and will is the Law of God:
which words are observed to have a good importance of knowledge, noting this
much, that we must not wry Gods Law to our fancies, though it seem never so
holy and devout, nor to our interpretation, our will, or our delight; no, but
we must conform our will and delight to be in it. The Law says, sit
irreprehensibilis Episcopus: And must we make our own gloss to say it is a
Counsel and not a Command. The Law says, Qui viderit mulierem ad
concupiscendam eam iam maechatus est in cord, shall we interpret that it is
spoken to Married persons: The Law says, Omnis anima subdita sit superioribus
potestatibus: shall we gloss it to be so long, as they govern virtuously? The
Law says absolutely thou shall have no kind of image to bow down to it:
Shall we forge an exposition with our frivolous distinctions, as if God did
sophisticate with us in the directions of his own worship: truly by this sort
of doing, Lex est in tua voluntate, non autem tua voluntas in Lege, The Law of
of God is in your will and not your will in the Law: therefore David himself
did not only press to keep the Law, but kept in his heart also Gods own pure
meaning in the Law, In cord meo absc^ndi eloquia tua: He not only obeyed the
Law, but he obeyed it by the right way of obedience, Uiam mandatorum tuoru^
cucurri. For who knows not this to be true, quod iniustus potest facere iusta,
sed non just, that an unjust man may do a just act but not justly. Therefore
we must not only observe Gods precepts according to his own word precisely,
but which is more, we must do it as Saint Paul says, Ex cord puro and
conscientia non ficta, for this is to do just things justly, facere secundum
substantiam ^erum and secundum intentionem Legis latoris, to do the substance
expressly of that which is commanded, and to do it after the manner and
meaning of him who did command it. Out of these it did appear by the divine
light of reason, that the worshipping of images in ^e Popish Church, must be
indeed Idolatry, regar^ed chiefelie as they are, which I will shortly tell
your Lordshippe.

All the while I was in France, my mind was busied in taking pleasure in those
exterior shows so gracious to my senses, and never seen of me before, that I
took no leisure to lift up the veil which was so delicatly painted, that I
might see what poisoned and deadly hooks lay hidden under such pleasant
baits, reserving my chief curiosity to have her contentment in the famous
City of Rome, a place most proper for true discovery, and chiefest Theater of
the world for knowledge of things, from the which no mystery can remain
unseen, of one who has ingine and dexterity to explore it. For agitation of
great Counsels, it is like the Primum Mobile, which in his Motu rapto, carries
with him the inferior orbs, so it is the maine sphere that ^es many States
in Christendom, that beside their own natural course, they are shaken by a
violent and contrary motion thereof, as miserable experience does daily
declare'; thither went I about this kind of exploration, to know truth by
falsehood; But I protest so free yet from prejudice against Rome, that, all in
contrary, so desirous I was to see that truth in Religion, that piety in
manners, that upright holiness every way which has been reported to me, that
I might say with the Prophet, Sicut Cernus ad fontes aquarum, ita anima mea
sicut terra sine aqua, my heart did boil in these desires, as dry grounds
thirsting for rain, and the Dear after fresh fountains; and while it was so
yet, I must speak to the truth of Gods glory, which is the scope of all this
Treatise: I did no sooner feel the air of Italy, then I begun to smell
there, with an apprehension of tyrannous Idolatry, in such manner that the
practices which I did see there, compared with that which I had seen in
France, by the Professors of that same Religion, they represented to my mind
the fashions of ancient Gentilisme; the things I was earnestly bent to search,
were chiefly these: The power of their Miracles, whether they were true
things, or impostu^es and deceipts, as their enemies did affirm. Secondly, the
weight of the Pope his dispensations, and indulgences, whether they were such
impious traficke thereabout, as was also alleged. Thirdly, the condition of
their Cloisterall life, and whether it were polluted with such abominable
filthiness, as is pretended by others, who call Rome a Sodom, a Babylon.
Lastly, the strength of the Pope his Soueraignetie as it is now usurped over
temporal Princes and States, and from what warrant they could depend.

CHAP. III.
A relation of the lewd and impudent superstitions of Rome, and of the
ridiculous miracles which be pretended thereinto.

AS for the working of miracles, together and at once shall a man see the
falsehood of that, and the truth of idolatrous worship, and both in such lewd
open and impudent manner, that it seems to me the first miracle in the World,
how such trumperies should be so long believed: For as true Religion has the
own corruption by reason of our corruption, so every superstition has the
own periods, as experience from time to time has taught. So soon as I
entered in Lumbardy at Turine the seat of the Sauoiard, it was told me there,
that the Duke had lately arrived from a Pilgrimage of Loret, and that the
Prince his son, was at the Pilgremage of nostra donna de mondenie.

And were to be seen from that toward Rome great multitudes of people, going
to diverse Churches of the Saints in diverse parts of the Country, chiefly in
Loret and with such familiar, and affronted idolatry, that if that one did see
the Chapel of our Lady in his horyson, presently he went to his knees
although in the midst of a puddle, to pray to that image namely of that place,
auowing that same image to be lately become a great worker of miracles and that
he himself had frequent revelations and comforts from the same: this sort of
discourse with such like fabulous traditions of Saints, received from their
predecessors, was only to be heard in those voyages, except it should be (for
recreation) some rare act of Ribaldrie, out of Pogius or Arretine, and perhaps
two imitated in that holy journey of devotion, where it was not strange to see
both the Priest and the whore lodge together all night: I speak the truth,
such pains did I endure about these matters, out of a curiosity to see some
myraculous sight, as I may be ashamed to relate, going many miles on foot (for
observation of the rite) to the danger of my health and perpetual hurt of my
complexion, visiting the most famous Chapels and Churches for miracles, on
their own holie-daies, where great concurse of people was, many stigmaticke
and diseased persons, priests, exorcists, devotion, alms, with great promises
of wounders to be seen: but O how I did pity to see the ridiculous birth of
those swelling mountains, to see how far, minuit praesentia famam. I did in
particular see in Saint Peter's Church at Rome, that Cathedra Petri pretended to
ease women in the time of their birth, by applying to them a girdle which has
touched this chair, I did see in that same Church, that Pillar of marble said
to be the same unto the which our Savior was tied to be scourged, and now used
to dispossess Demoniacke persons: I did see the practicke of that Chapel in
Rome called nostra donna de monte, renouned lately for her emulation with
Loret. I did see at Venice upon the owen day, that blood pretended to be of our
Savior, in the Church called the Friery, which no Demoniacke person can endure
to look upon as they say. I did see another like to that in Naples, and in the
Regno nostra Donna de gli angeoli, where lies the body of Saint Francis the
elder: I did see in Lombardie Nostra Donna de Regge highly esteemed for
miracles, diverse in Millane. That of Piamont, de mondeuie, That Nostra Donna
betwixt Genoua and Marsilia said to deliver many from rapine and Turkish
Pirates, I did see in Prouence at Saint Maximo the body of Mary Magdalene: I did
see in the Land of Iais in Sweezerland that called St. Clowes talked of for
miracles also; And lastly I did see that arch pilgrimage of Loret it self. To
all those I did repair in solemn times, but what did I see? two things as I
have said, fearful idolatry, and a base contemptible trade of forged miracles
maintained by incredible stupidity, and blindness of besotted people, as it
were with the drink of some new Circe, in such sort that I cannot tell how
often I called to mind that ground of Machauell in his politics de Repub.
whereby, in settling of great states, he does ascribe more to popular ignorance
and simplicity and to the power of Superstition, then to whatsoever laws or
stately policies besides, preferring Numa, and his contrived Religion, with his
fained Goddess Aegeria, unto the arms and painfullnesse of Romulus, which
opinion it seemed to me he did conceive by his contemplation of the Christian
superstitions of his time: For certainly there is nothing in antiquity which
has been better followed by these of succeeding ages, then the ancient
gentilisme of Rome appears to be renewed by the folish idolatry of these days:
it is so notorious that I need not to be tedious in bringing forth examples,
only this, the Roman History does tell us that the Statesmen of old were able
to lead the popular to what they would by an augure, divination, or presages
in Religion, which it pleased them to devise, and I say that now a days a
forged revelation of our Lady, a pretended miracle accompanied with a Bull from
the Pope, is able to effectuate as much: In Ethnic Rome in her beginning, her
chief Senators grudging against the virtuous and watchful reign of Romulus
their King, they did secretly murder him, making the people to believe that he
was ravished to the Heavens, and relatus inter Diu^s, and the Jesuits this
day, who be the first Senators and Counselors of the Court of Rome, fearing
the superintendencie of Christian Princes over her pride, who are deputed by
God to be Fathers of his Church; they have vented a pernicious Doctrine through
out the World, authorizing the slaughter of Kings, making people believe that
it is a Doctrine from Heaven, and an act meritorious before God. In Ethnic
Rome Numa by his pretended secrecy with the goddess Aegoria, procured the
popular acceptance of his fond and foolish superstitions, and the Jesuits
this day by their pretended priuity with the blessed Virgin, they have
bewitched multitudes of people with false belief in points of Doctrine never
heard of before. Ethnicke Rome in her beginning, being resolved for her
grandeur and increase, to transplant the Town of Alba, to be incorporated with
her self, because the fortune had fallen so in the combat betwixt the brethren
Horatij and Curiatij. The Albans did withstand it from a religious reverence
unto their Gods, until a crafty Roman demanding their chief Idol, vis
venire Romam, 'did answer, quod annuit Dea, that she did becken with her head
in token of her consent: And the honest Albans did believe it, holding it for a
Divine oracle for their conjunction with Rome. And I did see at nostra Donna de
Regge in Lumbardie, where there is a portract of our Lady lately found, old
and defaced, but esteemed myraculous: a gentleman, who in my presence did
affirm, that in time of the Mass the image did move her countenance, albeit I
who also looked on, could perceive no such thing: and many Images in Italy,
are said to have spoken at diverse times. Ethnicke Rome in their conquests, they
did still observe this trick, to transport to their Pantheon, the Gods of every
conquered Country, and what else does Rome now, neither altering the form of
that Temple Pantheon, nor in effect the name, calling it Omnium Sanctorum, of
all Saints; of old the receptacle of all Gentile Gods, and now the station of
all forged Gods in Christianity: Briefly it semes to me the Gentiles did no
other then they do, to take Idols in Gods place, will we say the Gentiles
embraced many Gods, for the true God; all is one, if it were so, but contrarily
there was never Philosopher nor wise man among the Gentiles, who did not
acknowledge, that one only great God, and the immortallity of Souls (suppose
he knew not how) were for opinions of state, the arch-pillers of good policy,
and good manners: That plurality of Gods, was but craftily obtruded upon the
popular, to illude them for mysteries of government. Let any man read Cicero,
in that which he writes de natura Deorum. Let us consider how Socrates gave his
life for that opinion, that there was but one God: How Plato does establish the
unity of one God with admirable conceptions of the blessed Trinity, how the
Poet Iunenal does mock that base and senseless ignorance of the plurality of
Gods among the Egyptians, and how the young Lucan speaks Divinely of the
^mortalitie of the soul in the death of Pomp^y: In all which things one shall
see preferment of happiness after this life granted to good and virtuous
souls, by those Poets and Philosophers: So that in the point of Images, we are
as guilty at the Gentiles, and equally idolatrous, they did acknowledge as we
do, one omnipotent God: And for the like good ends as be propounded in the
Popish Church for Images, had they the plurality of Gods, that is to say to be
the Books of the people, to be the instruments of devotion, order, and
obedience, if we will say the common people among the Gentiles esteemed a
Deity in the Idol, I reply that Christians now a days do it much more,
because I have proved it to be so, a hundred times, first how can we say it is
abuse or ignorance popular, that causes Idolatry, for it is not only the
multitude that holds the real presence in the Sacrament of the Alter, and
whether it be idolatrous to do so, and to affirm that a piece of bread is
that blessed body of whom the holy Scripture says in quo habit at corporaliter
omnis plenitudo Dictatis.

Secondly we cannot say, that by vulgar abuse but by express authority, the
Virgin is in all their prayers encalled in the proper terms of God,
Sauiouresso, Goddess: fons misericordiae, sons salutis and gratia, salus
omnium in Te sperantium, which no doubt is to wrong that holy virgin to usurp
her name, to derogate from the worship of God: thirdly, touching Images, I know
your Lo: will say howsoever there be abuses in them, yet the Popish Church does
not approve it: and if it were so, the strong abuses which be, are reason
enough, why to condemn them: but it is other ways and the Doctrine of Rome
does authorize in matter of Images, both falsehood and abuse, and I show it
thus: Our prayers are heard and regarded of God, not for the quality of our
words which are but a sounding, and as imbassadors to carry our suplications,
but they are heard for the disposition of our heart, as God himself has said
this people is full of babbling but their heart is far from me, therefore I
will not hear them. Now God himself has said of himself, that he is only
Cardiognostes, only searcher of the raines, and understander of the heart:
whereupon I ground my argument, That which may lawfully be prayed unto, does
know the secrets of the heart,

But the Church of Rome teaches, I may pray to the Image of our Lady in
Loretto,

Ergo, The Church of Rome teaches, that an Image knows the secrets of the
heart.



And that again is mere falsehood, because it is only propper to God to know
the heart; here again, I know it will be answered that it is not the image,
sed quod numen ibi est praesentius, and I reply if it were so, is not that
truly to put a Deity into the person of our Lady, to make her know the secret
hearts of milions of people, who at one time be prostrate before her in diverse
clymats of the world and for diverse causes, which in like manner is both false
and impossible: But I say that the people holds that the image it self in
Loret, does hear more, grant more, work more then any other whatsoever, and
than the operative virtue is in the image, because the person of our Lady is
but one thing like to it self at all times, and not diverse, I tell this to
your Lo: out of experience, which is most sure of any thing, and I appeal to
the Divine light of your Lo: conscience, whether you do not think that Plato,
Socrates, Cicero, Iunenal, Lucan, would not have esteemed this to be idolatry?
which is ordinarily practiced there, with such strange and strong confidence,
of bewitched people, that, (to speak of miracles, and their ridiculous
falsehood) God knows there is no sort of common disease of men's persons, no
sort of common dangers that be both universal and quotidian through the whole
world, which this brutish blindness does not ascribe to a miracle of one image
or other, to the staining of Gods good Saints in Heaven, whose names are by
these means abused, to color the false and idolatrous worship of the
Creator. If a woman escape the danger of childbirth, if a man a burning ague,
or a tempest upon the Sea, or the hands of Brigandes, if his horse fall to the
earth with him, and numbers of such events as come to pass sometimes by a man's
own skill, and foresight, sometimes by Physicians, sometimes by natural
alterations, and still by Gods ordinary providence, they are all reputed for
miracles, and their badges set up in the Chapels of those images, whom these
fond fools imagine to to have done it, so that hardly can one find an
empty place in such Chapels to receive the vowed gifts, and donations of so
many as come daily to offer tokens of such miracles done to them: Of which sort
I have seen vsque ad nauseam, even to make a man distaste them: but I affirm,
that God never vouchsafed me the honor to see a true working of a miracle
within the Church of Rome, but by the contrary, I was astonished to behold
such frenzy of superstition, blinding the wits of the most understanding
people in Christendom, oftentimes repeating to my self the words of the
Apostle: Insensati, quis vos fascinauit, O nimium faciles ad illudendum! For
howsoever we be of corrupted nature inclined to superstitious vanities, yet to
see the best spirits of men so captiuate, and of those who know the Histories
of Gentilisme and Ethnicke Idolatry, who can put difference betwixt rude and
ignorant times, and times of light and knowledge: what shall I say? as men grow
to age, we say they grow to wisdom, that the very age and experience of the
world, and this greater light then Gentiles had, should not suffice to save men
from the like superstitions to gentiliseme, it seems very strange, the like I
say, for change but on Idol, and what difference is betwixt Loret and Delphos,
change more Idols and what betwixt Pantheon and Omnium Sanctorum: For as for
the substance of Idolatry, which is a people credulous, blind, superstitious,
above measure, sicut equus and mulus quibus non est intellectus, usurping
numbers of creatures in place of the Creator, if we shall parallel those
ancient Times of Gentilisme with the superstitions of Italy now, even as old
men become twice Children, so one would judge, that by the like dotage, the
world is fallen into her second Childehood, which is more childish then the
first: for to avouch for miracles, the ordinary and quotidian chances of the
world, it is worse then to believe that famous Rapsodie of the Legendaries,
whereof it is wonderful that they should find a reporter setting a side the
believer. Always touching this point I will ingeniously confess to your Lo: how
it was vpbraided to my self at Rome, that I was ^dice fidei in the behalf of
miracles. One day brought to look upon some exorcisme, to be done at the
aforesaid Pillar in Saint Peter's, and in the end being demanded by a learned
man, what was my judgment of that which I had seen, I said I was satisfied
but that no heretic would have been much moved with that matter as it went:
he did reply with some pickquant and sharp words, Aristotle shows, said he,
that every man is not Idoneus Auditor Philosophiae, Fools, idiots, base and
mechanike minds; those who be subject to pregnant vices, and such are
debarred, so said he your heretics are not Idonei spectatores of holy acts,
because they are unfaithful. It is written of our Savior said he in Matthew,
that he might not do miracles in Nazareth Non potuit, because in the justice
of God, that cannot be done, which ought not to be done: but to do miracles in
Nazareth by reason of their contempt and unbelief, it was dare sanctum
canibus, to cast pearls before Swine; He told me that text of Isai, nisi
eredider it is nou intelligetis, Isai 9.
Saying, the punishment of Heretics was like unto that of the Pharisees, who
came to Christ demanding miracles, they did misbeleeue and were scandalized in
the holy actions of Christ: Scandalizabantur in eo, says the Apostle, and so
be all those who have no faith, as the Prophet writes of him, Erit in Petram
scandali and in Isai. (...).
lapidem offensionis: and as he himself has said in the Gospel, Beatus qui
non fuerit scandalizatus in me, so said he, if you will be a true spectator of
holy mysteries, you must take heed that you be not modicae fidei, for that is
to be scandalized in Christ, which pithy speeches I confess did sincke so
far in my heart, that they moved me many times after, to search with my self
how far I might, or ought to be tied to the belief of miracles, wherein,
what I have concluded to think by the information of the more learned, I will
shortly tell it to your Lo: to the effect that out of the abuse we may make our
good and right use.

First, I think it is no error to hold that only God, The true end of
Miracles.
and no man can work true miracles, Christ because he is both God and man, had
the inherent power to do whatsoever miracles he pleased, and whenever he
pleased, but none other, either Man or Angel had the l^e. The Prophet David
says, Tues Dous qui facis mirabilia magna solus: And there is nothing more
true, Qui Psalm. 17.
solus legem naturalis cursus instituit, ille solus potest illa^ tollere: God
only may change the course of nature, because God only did institute the same.
Moses, Elias, Elizeus Saint Peter, Saint Paul, did all true miracles, but not
they, but God in them, as Saint Peter testifies in the Acts, speaking of the
Jews who were astonished at his miracles, why, said he, marvel ye at us, as
though by our power we had made this Criple to walk; The God of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and the name of Jesus, Acts 3.
whom you have killed, has made him sound. Always to reason a little of it,
it appears that either by their faithful prayers God was moved to work
those miracles, or there was in them so me operative virtue of that kind
subordinate to the Divine power, as into the works of nature all second causes
depend upon the first and supreme cause: if we say that such virtue was in
them, it seems contrary to the words of David, Qui solus facis, if we say
they had not this power, it seems against the common phrase of the holy
Scripture: Peter or Paul did raise the dead, restore sight to the blind, and
such other miracles: therefore I say, that to do miracles, it is gratia gratis
data: a grace freely granted of God, as is the gift of Prophecy, according to
Saint 1 Cor. 12.
Paul, and as the Saints by their prayers have entreated God to grant them the
real gift of Prophecy; so no doubt, the faith and prayers of the Saints have
obtained from God, for the good of his own people, to be instruments and
workers of Miracles: and as the gift of Prophecy was not a constant and
habitual virtue resident in their persons, by the which they might Prophecy
when they would: As we see in Elizeus, who being once demanded of the king
upon a secret, Dominus inquit, celauit a me: the Lord has hidden it from me,
Regum 4.
when King David was bidden by the Prophet to build the Lords Temple, because
God was with him in every thing, the same Prophet did forbid him the morrow
after, confessing that he had spoken without Gods priuity, and therefore
falsely: so that the gift of Prophecy is a transient passion, as is the power
of miracles, which is not neither permanent, but as the Saw has a virtue to
cut a sunder, not at all times, but when the Craftesman puts his hand to it.
This extraordinary gift was not only not granted habitually, but it was
granted to a few in number, and that in the beginning chiefly of Jewish and
Christian religion, for establishment of faith in the world, which was then
bewitched with Ethnicke Idolatry, strenghthned with Diabolical miracles, so
that God well knew, Quod contraria contrarijs curantur, by the true miracles of
his holy spirit, wrought by diverse of his good Saints to the astonishment of
people, he did discredit the spirit of Satan, and that was done in the
beginning to purchase authority to the faith, as our Savior says, Si mihi non
vultis credere, operibus credit, John 15. 10.
si opera non fecissem quae nemo alius vnquam fecit peccatum non baberent. But
after the word of God and his Law has been once established and received, as
it was answered to the Rich man in the Gospel, Mosen habent and Prophetas: and
therefore they might not look for one to come from the dead, who had the holy
Scripture to look upon: even so we, after so many miraculous works done by our
Savior and his Apostles, for confirmation of our faith, and after the Gospel
left in perfection by the Spirit of God, and embraced of the Gentiles for
eternal verity; we are no more to depend upon miracles, as Christ himself
testified after the doing of all these; Scrutamini Scripturas quia illa
testimonium perhibent John 5.
de me. There is no doctrine more true then this, that miracles have been
only appointed of God, for the aforesaid use, for of themselves they are
neither necessary nor sufficient for salvation; The Canancan and the Thief
upon the Cross they did believe without miracles, and he himself has said,
Blessed are they who believe and have not seen: so as they are not necessary.
Again, Pharoh did see a number of miracles, and was ever the more hardened,
which makes that they are not sufficient. Is it not then a great vanity that
the Church of Rome should arrogate unto her, that power, which God thought not
necessary to leave to his Church, Yea, and which he foresaw to be dangerous by
reason of the weakness of humane wisdom, to discern betwixt true and false
miracles; what was it that did endure the heart of Pharoh? want of belief
in God no doubt, but herewith also, want of knowledge to discern betwixt
Mosaicall and Magical miracles, so that the leaving of this to the Church had
been an ambush to catch men, and lead them to Idolatry and the service of
Satan, testified plainly by the Scipture; The Prophet says* Seduxerunt Populum
meum in miraculis mendasibus. And in the Apostle, Surgent Pseudo Christi and
pseudo Prophetae: Ierem. 23.
Dabunt signa magna and prodigia in populum, ita vt in Matthew. 24.
errorem inducantur etiam Electi si fieri potest. How many shall say of those
Prophets, in Nomine tu^ prophetanimus, Demonia eijcimus. How mightily did Simon
Magus deeeiue the multitude so desirous of miracles, and so ignorant of them:
Uir quidam Simon Magus seducebat Ciuitatem Matthew. 7.
Samariae quem auscultabuntur omnes a minimo ad Summum, dicentes haec est
virtus Dei qui vocatur magna co Acts 8.
quod multo tempore magicis suis signis dementasset cos. The looking for
miracles is a token of Jewish and unbelieving hearts, Signa non sunt data
fidelibus sed infidelibus, says the Apostle. Therefore they are most proper to
the incredulous Synagogue of the Jews, for the which 1 Cor. 14.
cause above all the other Apostles, so great power of miracles was given to
Saint Peter, the Apostle of the Acts 5.
Jews, that he did heal the strongest diseases with his shadow, which not
only was never done by none of his fellow Apostles, but we do not read the
like of Christ himself, Iudaei signa petunt, Gentes sapientiam quaerunt, says
1 Cor. 1.
Paul. Secondly, is it not more then madness in the Church of Rome, by
arrogating unto her this perpetuity of miracles which God has made only
temporary and personal in the beginnings, she does manifestly cloth her
self with those marks whereby the Spirit of God does point forth the
Antichrist. Let us hear Saint Paul, Reuelabitur iniquus ille cuius aduentus
erit secundum operationem Satanae in omni virtute signis and prodigijs
mendacibus: 2 These. 2.
and omni seductione iniquitatis his qui pereunt: And the Spirit of God in the
Apocal: speaking of that second Beast which had two horns like to a Lamb, and
spoke like a Dragon: Edetquo Signa magna adeo vt faciat ignem c Coelo
discendere in conspectu hominum, and seducet Incolas Apoc. 13.
Terrae propter signa quae datum est ei vt faciat in conspectu Bestiae: In
which places as we see this Traffic of Miracles is plainly called, Operatio
Satanae, and a seduction of those who must perish. By these I do appeal unto
the divine light of your Lordships conscience, whither you do not think that
we ought to content our selves with Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, following
Christ's own precept Sorutamini Scripturas, to search the Scriptures, for the
doctrine of Salvation, and to contemn this ridiculous and impious profession
of pretended Miracles: I appeal to your Lordship, as you will be answerable to
him who has said of that light which he has given you: Est lux vera quae
illuminat vm^m hominem venientem in mundum, Whether you do not think that
those who in this Sunshine of Gods word, would ground their belief upon
Miracles, do not justly merit that answer of Christ to the Scribes and
Pharisees, demanding miracles, Generatio mala and adultera signum quaerit, and
whither you Lordship do not hold all those who believe such poor and childish
conceits be not justly given over to themselves as the Apostle says; vt
credant mendacio qui non crediderunt veritati.

So I will conclude this point of Miracles and Idolatrous worship with two
short observations, first for that exterior splendour and show of Religion by
so many pilgrimages, holy days and festival euenings and others devout like
exercises which do blind simple people, I say it is the common mark and mask
both of Idolatrous service; the very pretended zeal and holy pretext of Balaam
when he came to sacrifice upon the mount of Balaac, did bewray his Treachery,
he cried to build him seven altars, while as Abraham who was so faithful and
sincere a sacrificer, that the Spirit of God does honor him with this
Testimony, Abraham believed the Lord, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness: the first father of all the faithful when he went unto the
mount to offer his son Isaac, he did content himself with one Altar,
knowing how it is one Altar only that does please God, and what is that? and
what is the sacrifice? the Altar of our heart providing it be in
vprightesnesse and faith, the immolation of contrite and faithful prayers, as
the Prophet David says (contrary to Balaam, who would have no less then seven
Altars) Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium dedissem, vtique holocaustis non
delectaberis, Sacrificium Deo est spiritus contribulatus: So that it is
ordinary to false worship to cloak and cover their devotion with more specious
shows then are commanded by the word, or used by simple or true Professors,
because as the Italian says, Per coprir un gran mal bisognia un gran mantello,
there is need of a side cloak to hide a great evil. Secondly I say, of such
opinion maintained of miracles and popular credulity, as it was in Gentilisme
said by Numa Pompillius, Patres consilio valere decet, populo superuacanea est
calliditas: The fathers of states should be wise, and subtle, but the people
simple: so it is now said in Christian superstitions, that ignorance is the
mother of Devotion, and that Apocrypha speech of Esdra, Haec narrabis Populo,
and haec abscondes, holden for good Scripture, it is the special Stratagem
whereby the devil does lead men into the snares of idolatry to cry for
miracles, and to depend upon them: They have been only ordained by God to beat
and break down the hardness of infidelity in the first plantation of the
faith, Moses and Aaron were strong in miracles, but the Israelites did no
sooner come to the borders of Canaan, then they lost the light of their fiery
pillar which conveyed them to it; they had no sooner passed Jordan, then the
Manna ceased to rain down food upon them. These extraordinary things were
to comfort and confirm them in the wilderness, the unspeakable wisdom of
God knows that a custom of miracles working, were to make us vilipend his
most glorious miracles: So as we must say that as he had been a senseless
Jew, who would have refused to go forward into Canaan, because he wanted the
pillar to convey him, and the Manna to feed him, even so must we esteem him
a foolish Christian, who being entered into the clear light of Christ's Gospel,
because he sees not the power of miracles which in the beginning of that
Christian Progress was granted to Saint Peter and Paul, for conducting of the
first believers through the wilderness of Gentilisme, or of Pharisaicall pride,
and for comforting them to reject stoutly the yoke of their spiritual
Pharaoh, because of this he will refuse to be guided by the Arc of Gods word,
wherein are comprehended the whole mysteries of his law; and without the which
there is no way to the heavenly Canaan, certain he must be counted more then
mad.

CHAP. IIII.
The impeietie of Papal Indulgences, the open Pollution of the caelibate, and
other pregnant vices of Rome, against the credit of all Christian profession.

I Come next to speak of that which I did observe touching Indulgence, and
dispensation, wherein I need not to be tedious and longsome, the case being so
notorious, only summarily and truly relate to your Lordship, of things which
I did see, three or four, that did most specially offend me. There can be no
more said concerning this abuse now adays, then our fore beeres have said many
years ago, Omnia venalia Romae: and certainly no less; if we should speak
uprightly: That is to say Rome is a common staple of Pardons for all the sins
and crimes that can be committed, and those sold at so high a rate, which is
the reason why one should think the Camera de Componendis, within Saint Peter
Palace one of the richest houses in Christendom. This moved a fine jest in a
certain German, who having some dispensation to purchase at Rome, which he
looked to have granted to him gratis, but finding an ordinance on the back of
it for payment of one hundred Ducats, took a pen and blotted out the date
wherein was said Datum Romae, putting in the place of it Empru^ Romae swearing,
that because they had liberty of Conscience in Germany, that he would rather
take it upon his liberty, then buy it so dearly. I did see their diverse
Monasteries or Conuentuall houses of religious persons, wherein live great
numbers, which houses be no way endued with rents nor provided, but only
referred to voluntary charity: for help whereof, the Pope does grant them
some privileged Altars, with extraordinary Indulgences, and a peculiar
Festival day, upon the which, thither the whole people resorteth, but chiefly
profligat and debaushed persons: as, Whoores, Bawdes, idle Rascals,
Charlatanes Coosoners, who for the offer of some gross alms, bring back with
them so many Pardons of sins, so many soul Masses by redemption from
Purgatory: enduring which time of the Visitation of this Altar, the people
entering at one door, and issuing out at an other, all the day long, without
intermission, there is no other voice to be heard at the first port, but
calling out aloud, Fate vna bellissima diuotione: Make, Sirs, a brave devotion;
by the which is meant, to give a fat Offering Conferring this ^oyce with that
which is to be heard in their Camera de* componendis, it resembles in my
ears that cry of the two Daughters of the Horse-leech, mentioned in the
Proverbs of Solomon, Dua sunt sanquisugae filiae quae semper clamant affer,
affer: all which devotion consists in the multitude of those who bought the
Pardons, being so under the name of Religious exercise, a Trade of abominable
impiety: for while I was curious to ask the Priests of those Altars, upon the
importance of their privileges; I did receive no other answer, but what was
once granted by the Pope was absolutely good and effectual for all. Again, I
saw this, which fell forth during my being there: The Duke of Neuers came
there in great and glorious state, extraordinar Ambassador from the French King
to the Pope, who, according to the custom of that Seat, with such personages,
did grauut him Indulgences very large and bountiful, that one would have
thought the ports of hell was not able to prevail against them: and when the
Dukes Medalls and Beads came to be blessed upon the Popes Altar, according to
the form, there was no famous Whore in Rome who had not also numbers put in
for her, saying, (which I have heard with mine ears) The French Indulgences
should procure them both English and Spanish money. This kind of Merchandise
and public sale of sins is used in so lewd and vile a manner, that the most
simple man in the world would count it to be a scuruie ridiculous invention of
insatiable avarice. During my being at Rome, there happened to dye there a rich
Venetian Merchant, who left in Legacy a good sum of money to that Church,
standing upon the Monte di Trinita, for celebration of his Funerals, and
services for his soul, the same day which was appointed for those Funeral
Offices, I did find my self soon in the morning upon that Mount, because it
is a fresh and delectable walk, when a number of Friars, with great Torches,
coming to enter into the Church, was demanded of a Gentleman of Rome, who was
beside me, whither they did go? to whom one of them did answer, Andiamo
cauare del purgatorio La^ima di quel mercadante Venetiano chi morse laltro
iorno: which is to say, translated sincerely we go to hale out of Purgatory the
soul of that Venecian Merchant, who died the last day. The Gentleman replied
in bitter speech against the Pope, calling him Cuillione, and Morbidotto, which
be ignominious and conte^ptible words, because (says he) he does not keep
in Purgatory to the worlds end all those wretched souls of Uenice, who do so
disturb the Apostolic Seat: for it was in the mean time of those late
broils betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. Can any jest in the world be more
worthy of derision? then this or any thing more like the pitiful Idolatry of
the Gentiles, where the Priests made the sensles people to think there was no
way to make their gods propitious, but by their rich Offerings. This sort of
doing is so frequent there, that we see no other business: and if it be true
which they hold, Quel che fa sua santita e fatto, that which the Popes
Holiness does, is done, certain all those of those Countries must be in
heaven before their feet be cold, as we say, because the most wicked and
godless among them never departeh this life, but laden with Pardons. And this
far I think is enough to prove, that the abuse is not only authorized, but
as it were married with Religion, seeing upon the means thereof they do found
Cloystrall societies. And this only speaking de facto, for to reason Quo iure,
these are practiced, it is Theological, always the most learned among them
have said to me touching the Popes power, Ilnostro signore e dio sopta la
terra, Our Lord the Pope he is God upon earth, he may dispense what he will:
Yea (say they) if the question were to marry the King of Spain to an
heretical Princess, the Pope will first dispense him to marry his own
Sister. Is not this to go above the power of God, who has said of his holy
Law, that a jot thereof shall not perish not be changed? Well, to urge
Theological Arguments I will not, but I remit your Lordship to search-the
Scriptures, to see who it is there that does sit in the Church of God, and
exalt Dan. 11. 2. These. 2.
himself above all that is called God. And now I appeal to the divine light
of your Lordships conscience, whether you do not think that the contemplation
of so gross things; first, such Ethnicke Idolatry, that while Paul and
Barnabas being alive, did tear their clothes, and run upon the people,
because they would have adored them, saying, they were but men like unto
themselves. Now so much adoration must- be done to the Statues of their dead
bodies, that one shall not enter within Saint Peter's Church at Rome, but we
must kneel to salute him where he sits in brass, we must lay our head under
his feet, and kiss every one of his toes severally. Then such impious and
base avarice in this trade of Purgatory and Indulgences, that in their Camera
de Componendis there sits Simon Magus, under the name of Simon Peter, making
sale of the Spirit of God for money, of the mercies of God, of remission of
sins, and the Kingdom of heaven, and that with such insatiable hands, that
if ever I, who came from a remote Country to honor the Apostolical Seat,
would give him largely for dispensation, he would willingly embrace it, as who
knows what I did pretend: to be the more assured, I appeal to your Lordships
conscience, whether you think those were not sufficient to breed doubts of
Religion in any man, in whom God has left a spark of his fear, or one grain
of right knowledge. Assuredly they moved me to great jealousy, and they were
to me (as the first sight of the Angel was to the poor Ass of Balaam) terror
albeit (I confess sincerely) the strong opinion which I had drunken so long
before, and the plausible show of things, did for a while violently hold me
into the same way, as Balaam did force his Ass to go on, after the first
sight of the Angel.

But when I begun to look upon the manners of the The Manners of Rome.
people, and to consider what were the faults which were so ordinarily and
easily pardoned (which is the third thing in number of those which I most
narrowly observed) what shall I say? I know not how to speak the truth, and
therewith to provide that my pen be not slandered for contumelies and
Philippicke passions, always I shall so limitate my self, that I shall not
blot so grave a purpose with an humor of railing or shamelessness: In the day
of visitation and punishment, I shall begin at my sanctuary, says the Lord,
and wherefore is this? because Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, as the
Prelates be, so are the people, the example of the Rulers makes the manners of
the multitude, as the Spirit of God does testify by the Prophet Daniel,
Egressa est Dan. 11.
iniquitas a Senioribus and ab ijs qui videbantur regere populum: Iniquity
has gone out from the Elders and those who seemed to govern the people: For
this cause in a just censure of the manners of Rome, it cannot be avoided,
first to look upon the Court, wherein is to be seen such fastuous and
intolerable pomp, and such a degree of glory as has never been usurped by
any earthly Monarch, to behold the majesty of the Papal carriage, borne one
men's shoulders, auro fulgens and smaragdis, shining amidst gold and Jewels,
those who bear him treading upon fine cloth, wherewith the Church pauement is
covered, accompanied with a fearful guard, the thundering of Canons, the
sound of trumpets, and all sorts of musical instruments: at whose presence,
numbers of Princes, stately Ambassadors, great parsonages, and multitudes of
people do fall to the ground, saluting him holy; holy, as if he would not
only be Christ's Vicar upon earth, but also emulator of his divine glory in the
Heavens, and be worshipped like that glorious Lamb, before whom numbers do
fall down to cry holy, holy, holy, that upon the sight thereof I was indeed
amassed, as if it had been a vision, and demanding a French Gentleman (who had
newly also arrived with me, and was a zealous Papist) how he did esteem of
that which he had seen; he answered me in the terms of (be God) that he
thought it far different from the carriage of him who said, Regnum meum non
est de hoc mundo, and who said to his Disciples, Exemplum de di vobis vt
quemadmodum ego feci ita and vos faciatis, which answer I have many times since
thought to be as pertinent, as if the holy Spirit had inspired it into him: For
if the kingdom of the world be called the kingdom of sin and of darkness,
then it is likely that the kingdom of Satan is at Rome, and not the kingdom of
Christ: but that the kingdom of the world is called the kingdom of sin, the
Scripture does show, The Spirit of God in the Euangell, compriseth the world
under the name of sin, and has divided it in three. Whatsoever says John is
in this world, John 1. 2.
it is either concupiscence of the eye, concupiscence of the flesh, or pride of
life: we may behold the wonderful harmony and correspondence of the same
spirit of God throughout the whole Scriptures, in old and new Testament, as I
said before, he has made this division of the world and of sin here, equal
with that diversity of sin which did enter into the world with Eua, in the
beginning of the book of God, The text of Moses says, and the woman saw that
the Tree was pleasant to the eye, (there is concupiscence of the eye) that it
was good for meat, (concupiscence of the flesh) and that it was to be desired
for knowledge, (pride of life, emulation with God) so that the enjoying of
these three concupiscences, is the enjoying of the kingdom of the world, as
John says, and that again to be contrary to the kingdom of Christ, no man
can deny. For Christ had the offer made unto him of the kingdoms of the world
from Satan, as we know, and did refuse it: Haec omnia tibi dabo si cadens
adoraneris me. Now whither or not the Popes have taken this dominion of Rome
from Christ, who said to their predecessor S. Peter: Exemplum tibi dedi vt
quemadmodum ego feci ita and faciastu, or from the devil, Ezech. 16.
who is prince of the world, it must be tried from those concupiscences; The
Spirit of God bath said in the Scripture, Haec fuit iniquit as Sodomae
abundautia and otium, I will not rashly say, that Rome is Sodom, unless I show
reason, but I will ask if ever any town, state or people had more abundance,
and idleness then have the Pope, Cardinals, and Consistory of Rome, and all
their togall Clergy, who do more truly proclaim Cedant arma Togae, then
ever did their predecessor Cicero. For he was overthrown by arms, and the
seat of Rome amidst neighbor combustions what does she, Circundata Mart
quiescit. For concupiscence of the eye, I would know who they be in the world
that may match with Rome, of whose magnificent Palaces, sumptuous vineyards
with their royal fountains, volaries, picsaries, walks, vmbrages, and all
sort of most princely pleasures, one may make such a description as Ovid did of
Regia solis, after he had made the materials to be most rare and precious,
then he says, Materiam superabat opus. Which is a sure argument that they have
store of that eye concupiscence, which stands in infinite Treasures of gold
and silver, most easily gotten by them, for they lie in the center of the
richest countries in the world, of those a great part be under their
subjection, and then they sit above the necks of their people, as the sun is
above the inhabitants of the burnt clymate, they do exhaust their fogges, and
that with such dexterity, that they can move them to quite their very
earerings for making of the golden Calse. There is no trauaylour who does not
know, that for beauty of buildings for gold and silver, either in money, or in
plate, for store of Jewels they go beyond the greatest Kings that are, or ever
have been. As for concupiscence of the flesh, speaking generally, either of
the Court, or of the Cloister, of the Priests, or of the people: Eloquar an
siliam: But what is spoken to the glory of God, ought not to be blamed of any
man, I do think that as they have more abundance and more idleness then ever
was in Sodom, so there be among them villainous lusts never known in Sodom,
as for that sin which we call Sodomie, God help us, it is indeed thought a
venial transgression, yea, a man shall hear it maintained in reasoning by
persons carrying religious dignities, that as they have followed the Idolatry
of the Gentiles, they have also followed their pollution and filthiness.

And to justify by speeches and admonitions against such things it is thought
an idle curiosity there, and such also as a stanger would find dangerous,
while as it is a familiarthing there to know that the Cardinals Illustrissima
Signoria has in the retired place of his Vignia, his Suirginata, that is to
say, his gallant wench of brave and fresh blood brought perhaps from the
farthest part of Germany to be defloured by him, and has his Ganimedes at
home to show that his monstrous Religion has made a monster of himself, one
day to obey nature in the actions of his lust, an other day to be contrary to
heue. And whither their Cur^isanes have learned this M^ngiar in tondo as they
call it, it is well enough understood of those who have been any while among
them:

While those be the practices of the Court, and of the Cloister, to ask what
is among the popular it is not necessary, nor to defile oliaste and vertnou^
cares with unclean speeches of Bordels, and Bardasches, which be there as
ordinarily frequented as the Church, but for the manners of their multitude,
otherwise, they are fearful to a heart which fears God, to hear their more
then blasphemous oaths, that one cannot say whither they smell more of
i^pletie, or of Atheism, their secret practices of mutual deceipts, their
devilish arts to execute their malice, not forbearing clan destine murders
amongst nearest kinsfolks, and their filthy trade of Purgatory founded upon
Indulgences of these abominable vilanies.

To come to the third concupiscence, which is pride of life. Was there ever a
pride like unto this pride? a company of pretended Priests to sit at Rome, and
presume to subject to them, not only the souls of men, but their bodies and
goods: yea, the sacred D^adems of anointed Kings? Was there ever a pride
equal to this, that a Priest shall think it his due, that Kings and Monarks
shall kiss his foot? that he shall say to himself, Sup^ basiliscum ^labo and
conoulc^ ^nem? that he shall: arrogate power to sell the Kingdom of heaven,
and count himself God upon the earth, saying with Augustus, Diuisum imperium
cum Jove Caesan habet, still following Gentiselime striving as the Ethnicke
Emperors did, tomake it again Roma caput Mundi. Such perpetual toil and
business does that Consistory keep about this my stery, that it may be said of
the^, as Lucianus, mocking the plurality and idleness of the Poetical gods,
said of Jupiter, while some other god one day would have talked with him, it was
told him, that he was busy, quid facit? parturit said one, he is a trauayling
of the birth of Minerua (whom the Poets feign to be bred in the brain of
Jupiter.) Sowee may affirm of them, Quod semper parturiant, they be ever
bringing forth their birth: but what birth? is it Minerua, counsels, books or
precepts of wisdom? no, they do not imitate Jupiter to bring forth Minerua,
true wisdom of piety and peace: they imitate that Goddess of wrath,
Nemesis, who did send through the world, with her Pandora, the books of
curiosity, contention, malignitie, and dissension: the books of vengeance and
endless discord, witness their Archipandora, Bellarmine in his Treatise of
the Papal Supremacy, whereof I shall speak hereafter: witness their Pandora
Mariana the Jesuit: here you shall see what is the birth of their travailing,
murder of Princes, rebellion of Subjects, blood of legions, desolation of
Countries, setting on fire the whole world, for building again that Tower of
Babell, which does keep Christian people in such desperate pacoxisme and
division of tongues, that, alas, we are never like to speak one language, so
has the Lord punished their pride, their unspeakable pride, which is like unto
the pride of him who said, Ascendam super altudinem nubium, super moxtes
Aquilonis, and fimilie ero altissimo. They be in effect, Clouds, high with
proud ambition, moist and humide with letcherie, bright and shining with
glorious ostentation, thundering with arrogance and tumults which they contriue:
Hi sunt nubes Iud.
sine aqua, quae a ventis circumferuntur, says Thaddeus: this is that fatal
Tower builded by that mighty Nimrod the Devil, whereof God has concluded
Tollatur in altum vt lapsu grauiore cadat: It must be mounted to great height,
that it may also have a great fall: it may be justly called fatal, the very
Church does not escape this blot, but even her first plants have been annoyed
with these pernicious weeds of pride and ambition: Aaron and Number. 12.
Miriam grudged against Moses, and did strive for authority. The first sacred
College of our Christian Religion, the twelve Apostles, were not free of this
contagion. James and John, called of Saint Paul the Arch-pillers Mat. 20.
Galat. 2.
which did sustain Christ's Church, they contended for the right hand of
Christ. It is strange, that Divines and Prelates should not learn the wisdom
of humility from the very style of the Spirit of God, speaking in these
particulars: When this Tower of Babel (unto the which I compare the pride of
Rome) was builded in the Land of Senair (which is interpreted to stink, as is
said) by the posterity of Noe, the text says, they parted from the Orient,
which is interpreted, Christ, as Zachary testifies, Ecce vir, Oriens nomen eius
subter eum orietur lux. Genesis 11. Zach. 6. Luke 1.
And Luke, Perviscera misericordiae Dei nostri in quibus visitauit nos Oriens
ex alto: they were the sons of Noe who went from this Orient to Sanair: but
from that forward the holy Spirit does no more call them the Sons of Noah,
but the Sons of Adam, Descendit Dominus and vidit vrbem quam edificanerunt
filij Adam. Even so, speaking of this pride of James and John, he does not
vouchsafe them the names of Apostles, nor their own names; but the sons of
Zebedoeus, Accessit ad Iesum matter filiorum Zebedei which is a notable Art of
the Spirit of God to reproach pride. O you blind Prelates of Rome, you sons
of Adam, and not of Noe, you sons of Zebedeus, and not Apostles, why have ye
through your pride lost your names, and parted from your Orient! if your Tower
were firmly established, as that of David upon Sion, no tempest were able to
shake it: it is but of stones, taken out of the slime of the earth, forged out
of earthly avarice and ambition. That of David was founded upon a sure rock,
fundata super firmam Petram, as it is said in the Gospel, Ipso summo angulari
Lapide Christo: having Christ himself for the chief corner Stone: therefore
shall that of yours fall to the ground, after the example of him who was the
first author of such fabrics. While I did behold at leisure in Rome this
fullness and ouerflowing of concupiscence in men's manners, one may easily
guess, that it was to me like unto the second appearing of the Angel of God
to the Ass of Balaam. In that Town which was one of the first Mother
Churches, where poverty, contempt, misery, and glorious martyrdom had been
endured for plantation of the faith, where Pastors were merely spiritual,
without regard to the world, after the commandment of their Master, where so
many Cloystorall and Monastical deserts of true solitude and holiness were to
be seen of old, that now adays no vestigium does remain, no mark of that
sanctity, yea, not a cloak sufficient to cover their nakedness: nothing but
an Ocean of abuses, the Rulers swelling in pride and riches, polluted with
filthiness and lust, defiled with Idolatry, seeking the world and dominion
over Princes, contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles: Non quaerimus quae
vestra sunt sed vos: Contrary to the doctrine of the Prophets, 2 Cor. 12.
mittam vobis venatores multos qui venabuntur vos says Jeremy Vos non vestra:
contrary, the doctrine of Christ himself faciam vos piscatores hominum, he
says not piscium nor yet pecuniarum. The people tied to superstition, religion
turned to pharisaicall ceremonies, the Euangel neglected, the law became
Mosaicall, daily impiety of all sorts, daily sacrifices and pardons for all
abominatio^s, the holy deserts opened again to the world, and defiled with
pride and vilanons lechery, the Town smoking in the stincke of Sodom, that if
those faithful fathers their first foundatours might again look upon their
Successores they would cry nec nos Patres, nec vos fily.

The first Bishops of Rome who sustained Martyrdom being in number two and
thirty before Constantine the great, what would they say to the Pope who
walks upon the necks of Monarkes, while they succeeded only to Christ his
Cross, what would that austere Saint Francis say unto these Idle Bellies who
have abused his simple hoode to cover their hypocrisy, or what Saint Dominicke
against the beastly pride of his successors; and what holy Saint Augustine
against idle pretenders of his profession, which was to be Flagellum
hareticorum and infidelitatis to plague heresy and infidelity, Now to find
among them one of the true succession of those noble Macharij, Hillarij,
Antonij, Pauli, Ignatij, Tertulliani, Hieronimij, Cyprianij, Augustini or such
like of that true christian race it is a dream; for nothing is to be seen
there, but those sometime sacred mountains, and those holy solitudes of
retired sanctity, become the deserts of Jericho, the darkness of Egypt, the
tower of Gyantes, Judge. 4. 2 Reg. 21. Genesis 27. Luke 10.
the Furnace of Babylon the ship of Tarsus, that believe me it did almost
move me to tears and make me to say with the Prophet Super montes assumpsi and
fletum, lamentum and super speciosa deserti Planctum: Aim Domine clamabo
speciosa deserti consunipsit ignis, The fire, alas Jerome: 96. Joel, 1,
has consumed the beauty of the deserts, those profane fires of Nadab and
Abihu which burn at the daily Sacrifice, that destroying fire of ambition,
avarice, and Lechery which is never furnished with fuel sufficient, that fire
of the love of the flesh whereat while S. Peter stood to warm him, he denied
his master, It does still burn in the hal of Calphas, O oursed fire which is
not on ly content to burn in the country, in the city, in the court, in the
Palaces of Prelates and rulers of the Church, but it has also spoiled the holy
deserts, and destroyed the beauty of the Cloister speciosa deserti consumpsit
ignis, making our christian religion the opprobrie and scandal of Turkish
impiety as if there were no verity in Gods word: Corruit in plat^is veritas
says the prophet, Equitas non potuit ingredi, and facta est vdritas in
obliuionem, O poor and neglected verity, now are come to pass (thought I)
the visions of leremie, Quid vides Ieremia? ficus bonas bonas valde, quid vides
Ieremia? ficus malas malas valde, quae comedi non possunt. So to close also
this point of fleshly concupiscence or kingdom of the world, I do appeal to
the divine light of your Lordships conscience whether you do not think things
being as I have related, That the Pope has holden the bargain which our
Savior did refuse, in accepting from Satan this worldly kingdom, whether
your Lo*: do not think that the Rulers of Rome be of such as the Lord God
spoke of to his people Israel, by his prophet Esai: My people the Rulers have
corrupted the way of thy footesteps: It is they who have burnt up my vineyard,
saying again thereafter, Isa 3,
I shall enter in judgment with you Rulers: whether your Lord do not think
that God is entered in judgment already with them and as it was pronounced
against the Scribes and Pharisees, auferetur a vobis Regnum Matthew, 12,
Dei and dabitur Genti facienti fructum: Has he not taken from them his
kingdom by remoouing the candlestick which keeps the true light the Lamp which
keeps the lively oil, the liberty of the Gospel, and has given them over
to induration (which of all chastisments is the most fearful) vt credant
mendacio qui non crediderunt veritati, as he also no question some day shall
dissipat and destroy their worldly kingdom according as he has done to the
Jews if they do not repent. Now for the last of abuses whereof I will speak
I go to treat of the papal Soueraignitie, as it is wickedlie and iniustlie
usurped over temporal kingdoms,

CHAP. V.
The Orthodoxall authority of Christian Princes in the Primative Church: The
Papal Soueraignetie; The Jesuitical trade; The opinion of the French Church
concerning Princely authority: Detection of the Jesuitical ambition.

THe pernicious Doctrine of this Tyrannical Supremacy unknown to antiquity,
lately conceived in the bosom of the treacherous Jesuit, tending to a
monstrous ambition as we shall see, to the overthrow of good Princes and people,
and dissolution of all Christian discipline and obedience, it does enuenome the
minds of men with devilish errors, and armeth their hearts with odious and
treasonable attempts. It is that wormwood whereof the Prophet of the Gospel,
Saint John makes mention in his visions of the Apocalips: Cecidit de coelo
stella magna ardens tanquam fauilla and nomen stellae dicitur absinthium, and
facta est tertia pars aquarum in absinthium, plarimi mortui sunt de acquis,
quia amarae factae sunt, says he, there fell from the heaven a great star,
burning like a flame, and the name of the star was Wormwood: and multitudes
died by the waters, because they were become bitter. It was no true star
which the Prophet did see, because the true stars be fixed and do not fall:
Stell^ manentes in ordine suo, and cursu aduersus Siseram pugnauerunt, says
the Scripture, the holy Spirit Judge. 5.
in the word of God does compare Prelates, Pastors and Rulers of Gods people to
stars, Qui ad iustitiam erudiunt multos quasi stellae ad perpetuas
aternitates: says Daniel, Dan. 12.
They who instruct and teach many righteousness and godliness, be like unto
stars fixed to perpetuity. As for those which appear to be falling stars,
as this vision of Saint John, they are but gross vapors lightened by agitation
of the air, which do quickly vanish and keep no true light. So the Jesuits
lately bred in the distemperate and tempestuous air of the Papal tyranny,
they appear to be, but are not true stars in Gods Church, they be but
filthy vapors which shall disappeare within short time, as the whole Clergy
almost of the Roman Church it self does hold, after the example and fortune
of the famous order of the Knights Templarij, whose insolency and pride was
abhorred of Christian Princes and Prelates: But in the mean time they have
poisoned by the wormwood of this diabolical doctrine the purity of our
waters, even the waters of life, the word of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus Christ
who calls himself so, of which poison, who would know how many millions have
died, let him read the Histories of the holy League, and the Histories of
France and the Netherlands for these years passed, and because it is so
pregnant and perilous an error, I will insist in it at greater length to deduce
it from the fountains of sacred and primitive verity. For your Lordships
information and many others of your profession, who if you will not quit this
ground to believe as the Church of Rome does command, you cannot want a scruple
in your conscience for having so absolutely taken the oath of obedience, seeing
the contrary is strongly maintained in Rome in meeretermes of a point
Doctrinall, which albeit your Lo: would not credit upon my reletion after my
coming from thence, where I was both care and eye witness, and brought with me
a true transcript of the ordinance it self, yet now all the world does know it
since the high Court of Parliament at Paris has been perturbed with the
agitation thereof sithence. This I think is the best service which I can yield
to God, my Sovereign prince and to the common weal, seeing it does concern
every good subject both Theologically and ciuilly to understand what he does
owe to his King in his conscience for Religion, and ciuilly it concerns him
for the security of his state: The Jesuits indeed have most subtly gone about
to make an Antithesis or contradiction betwixt the Principautie and Priesthood,
holding this to be only divine, and that only humane; and therefore that to
be subject unto this: upon which Antithesis they build this usurpation over
Princes and states, but if your Lo: do not stop your ears against the
following discourse, I hope your Lordship shall find that in my peregrination
beyond seas, I did furnish my self with as much concerning the substance of
this question from the most learned, both writers and speakers, as is
sufficient to rid any man whatsoever of this dangerous doubt, unless it be
those whose hearts and best spirits are already overcome by the poison of this
deadly Absinthium.

And first I lay down this general Thesis, that all such authority and power
in the Church, which does disprove Christian and orthodoxal Magistrates,
erecting violent usurpations, in their place is manifestly contrary to the
voice of Christ in the Euangell, the practice of the primitive Church, approved
by the great doctors thereof in all following ages: yea and contrary the first
ordinance of God in the typical government of Moses, and consequently all such
doctrine which do mainetaine the same, must be heretical and impious: To
clear this general Thesis in the fountain, let us look upon the first
plantation of Christ's Church, and the condition wherein it was settled, which by
the Spirit of God is compared to a vineyard: Homo quidem paterfamilias
plantauit vineam and circundedit eam sepibus: and so forth; as we read in the
Text, A certain husbandman planted a vineyard, and hedged it about: This is
the vineyard of Christianity watered and made fertile by the four floods of
the four Evangelists, as is mystically figured in Genesis: A flood went out of
Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was divided into four heads,
Christ who is the planter of this vineyard, has fortified it in the Gospel,
with three several walls, as so many diches and rampards to compass it: The
first fortification and wall is the word of God and holy Scripture against
heresies and heretics; Vt potens sit exhortari in doctrinasana and eos qui
contradicu^t arguere, to be able to reach Timoth. 1.
wholesome doctrine, and to improve them who speak against it. The second
Fortification is of spiritual Jurisdiction against those who be rebellious,
Qui Ecclesiam non audinerit sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus: who is to
be excommunicate from the company of the Saints. The Math. 18.
third Fortification is of Temporal power against humane invasions, Duo
gladij. Upon the first of which three Ramparts he has placed learned Doctors
in the Luke 22.
Church, who are furnished with spiritual wisdom to convict herefie. Upon
the second, Prelates, with authority to excommunicate those who be disobedient
to the voice of Christ. Upon the third, Brachium seculare: Civil power of
Princes to guard his Church from the persecution and invasion of ravening
Wolves, from without, and from intestine disorders, without any of which three
this Vineyard of Christ is never sufficiently fortified. The erroneous dreams
of Anabaptists, too much imitated by some pure and foolish Puritanes, would
deprive the Church of the use of one of those strengths, to wit, of the secular
Arm: But specially this Jesuitical Clergy has prevailed mightly to breed a
disjunction of the Ramparts, which God, we see, has conjoined* to rend
asunder the Church and civil authority, the Prince and the Priest, which
although they were contrary in themselves, as they be several, yet the Lord
has knit them together: As of contrary Elements he has formed the unity of
man's body, and has united a man's own constitution of things, merely
contrary, soul and body, heaven and earth, Caro aduersus spiritum, spiritus
autem aduersus carnem, says the Apostle: for even as the soul of man, which
receives that divine inspiration of wisdom and knowledge to rule our life,
is in it self a thing contemplative and abstract, never able to subject the
members of our body to this Rule, if it were not that the power of our active
spirit, sitting in the chair of our conscience, does frame and force our will,
and the faculties of our mind, to make our body obedient, otherwise it should
never obey unto the soul, by reason of the corruption thereof. Our soul is as
the Alte of this Music, our flesh as the Counterbase, our active spirit as
the Tenor and midcuple that joins them. This difference of our soul and
spirit is clear once by Saint Paul, Ut seruetur and corpus, and anima, and
spiritus integor in die Domini nostri. Our great Philosopher Christ again did
use to say, Tristis est anima meavsque ad mortem Matthew. 26. Dan.
Spiritus quidem promptus, caro autem infirma. And Daniel, Laudate Spiritus and
Animae Iustorum. Even so in Gods Church, the Priests and Pastors are the soul
which receive the inspiration of Gods will in his law, as the Scripture says
of them, In quoru^ pectora condu^tur Oracula Dei, and ex ore illorum promanant
Eloquia diuina: to be taught and communicate to the people, who be the body
of this Church, if it were not by the power which God gives unto the Prince,
who sits in the Throne of authority and active wisdom, like armed Pallas,
this body of ours would oftener refuse obedience to the soul, as daily
experience does prove. That Christian Princes, to whose charge is committed
the government of States, the rule of the people in piety and justice, the
protection of the Widow, the Orphans, the Innocent, the Stranger, the
punishment of Malefactors, and advancement of the virtuous to Gods glory, that
those be not most divine Offices; and that therefore Ethnicke Princes have had,
granted by God himself, the title to be his servants, who may deny it, the
Lords Anointed independent of any but of him alone, and holding of him
imediately the Charter of their authority. Into the Jewish policy whereof God
was the founder himself, for an example to all virtuous and godly States, we
see in the person of Moses a conjunction of spiritual and temporal power, not
only did God esteem his Vocation Authority of Princes among the Jews.
divine, but he gives him the style of a God, Ego te constituam Deum
Pharaonis: I shall make thee the God of Pharaoh. Moses did thereafter indeed
by the direction of God, separate those functions, but always in these terms,
that they should remain in one united concurrence in the government of Gods
people, like unto the fingers of a man's hand, which albeit they be severally
distinguished by nature, yet can we make no use of them but when they are
conjoined. The civil Magistrate among the Jews, certain it is, he might not
offer sacrifice, or perform religious Ceremonies, things proper unto the
Priest: as again, military discipline matters of the fisk, and such like,
went peculiarly under the name of the Prince: but in points of piety and
justice, the rule of the people, Iudicatura ^orum, their obedience to Gods Law,
they were not only conjoined, but in the hand of that government, the civil
Magistrate had that place of the finger, which is called the key of the hand.
Into Jerusalem there was two Sanedrim (for so was their great Council called)
one su^reme in Jerusalem, consisting of 70. together, with the Prince and
Priesthood: another small Sanedrim in every City of reasonable importance,
containing 23. wise men, together with a number of the Priesthood, which was
done by a general ordinance of God himself, Populo mandauit vt Iudices
constitueret secundum tribus suas in omni Ciuitate: That Deu. 16.
they should in every City appoint Judges according to their Tribes: and
again, in the next chapter he made a Law of Appellation, commanding, In omni
re d^fficili constituere Sacerdotes Leuitici generis and Iudices: Deu. 17.
To appoint over all difficile causes some of the Priests, and some of the
Judges: he has not said, only the Priest, nor only the Judge: as neither
did Moses when he went into the Mountain make any separation, but left the
spiritual and civil Magistrate coniunct, Ecce Aaron and Hur. That the civil
Magistrate has a divine charge, and was so counted among the Jews, there it
is seent, where after Judges were constitute in every town: the King said to
them, Uidet^ quid agatis non enim pro Homine sed pro Deo iudicia (...). 2
Paral. 19.
Behold said Joshua, what you do, because you do not judge for men but for
God, Again to show this conjunction he does subioyne, omnis causa qua venerit
ad v^s de fratribus. Every cause which comes from your brethren unto you
dwelling in the country, where he makes no separation of spiritual from
civil causes, even as Moses has done before where he or daines the people to
go to the Levites and the Judges, si aliqua difficilis causa natafuerit if any
difficile question (...), in the government of King David those conjunctions
are cleerelie expressed for he did absolutely distribute the peculia^ charges
of the Levites, and Hebroni^s vltra I^rdanem pr^cit in omni neg^tio diuino and
ministeri^ R^gis, he did promoue the Hebronites beyond lorde^ to all Deu. 19.
the functions appertayning to Gods house, and to the service of the king, and
^ine in the la^t verse of the same h^s prefecit David s^per (...) and Gad^ in
omni neg^tio Dei and omni negotio Regis, which power of constitution in David,
is sufficient to prove that the regal function is negotium diuinum, chiefly
where it is Christian and orthodoxall, may not Moses and David 1 Par. 26.
serve us for matter of light in government, to qualify this conjunction of
religion and empire which made the Judicial law to be accounted a part of
Theology So that we may with great reason conclude that he is not Orthodo^s
Theologus no right meaning Theologue, who would refuse unto christian Kings
that authority in Ecclesiastical affairs, which was not only granted but
commanded unto the Kings of Israel, and which godly David upon his death bed
did render into the hands of Solomon, from the warrant (who made doubt of it)
1 Par. 28.
of the holy Scripture, saying, Ecc^ autem distributiones Leuit^um, ad v^
q^odque ministeriu^ ^omus. Deipenes te sunt, ad o^ne opus voluntary? denique
omnes Principes and totus populus parati ad verba tua: Behold said he the
distributions of all Leuiticall offices in the house of God, is in thy power,
and they be ready to obey thee, as also the princs and people; where in that
example we see no exemption of the Leuite more then laitiefrom the kingly
authority, howsoever princes may not use priestlie function, yet are they
bound to superintend Christ's vineyard and to guard it not only from
foreign invasions but from intestine perrill and corruption, which is more
frequent and more pernicious of the two, to stop ambition, avarice and
dissension from coming among the prelates, who were never in any time able to
rule nor shall not be to theend, without their Pallas be armed with authority
of good and lawful kings, who does not see that of divine functions upon earth
the preistlie office is the contemplative part and the princely office
practical acting the honor and worship of God, by making people to obey his
Law. Who was the first instrument of God for redeeming the Church from
persecution and the cross, to establish her prosperity, was it kings or
priests? was it not Constantine the great, by what means again was the Church
redeemed from the flood of the Arrian heresy? was it not by the seculararme of
Carolus Magnus and his predecessors Pipino and Carolo Martello, so that to go
about to separate things which God has knit together as the soul and body,
it is to make a sacriledgious diuorcement; and specially to take from the
prince that which is his due, to give it unto the priests, it is just as the
serpent did in Paradizeto seduce the weaker party of the two in that
conjunction, it is even as if we would send Aaron unto the mount of God to
learn the wisdom of active government, and leave Moses with the people to
his returning. And since such is the impudent and arrogant malignitie of the
Jesuitical ambition in their doctrine about this point, what if (to meet them
in their own language, and pay them home with their own Coin) I should go
yet one degree higher in that particular, to say that appearantlie God himself
does prefer the regal function, when by his Prophet, setting aside all
sacrifices and ceremonies (which was the Priests part) he did require the
Office of the civil Magistrate^, Quid affertis tanta sacrificia, discite vos
reges and Principes qui Isa. 1.
populum regit is benefacere; quaerite iudicium dirigite oppressum: What shall
I do with so many sacrifices, would God say, that is not the substance of my
worship, being but religious ceremonies learn ye Kings and Princes to do
well, ask judgment to govern the people, and to relceue the oppressed, which
(would the Lord say) is the matter of my true worship, to practice my law, and
make it to be obeyed.

The Deutr. does show, that the office of a Prince was not to frame his own
life after the deuteronomicall, but to provide that both Priests and people
should keep the same inviolable. If Priests debord and transgress Gods law,
must not the Prince corect them? yea, if they should sow haeretical doctrins,
who could stop the growth of them other then the Prince? Of which things, it
is most manifest, that God has laid the whole burden of earthly government
upon these two Jurisdictions of the Civil authority and Priesthood, as the
two divine Arches upon the which the policy of the world is sustained: they
are as the two Poles which fix the Axletree of the celestial Spheres,
directly looking one upon the other: which two, if they should never so little
incline to obliquitie, fall to jar, or press to draw the one the other, it
were to disturb and endanger the whole frame of the world, which is carried
upon their conjunction: even so the variance of the Temporal and Spiritual
Magistrate is to cut the Axletree, whereupon, as on a mighty Atlas, the Sphere
of Christian government does rely. And this far I add: In the beginning all
the Patriarks had the Priesthood coupled with their Kingly office, even from
the day of Adam: And in aftertimes, whenever any constraint or corruption of
time bred a necessity to confound them in one person, it has ever been so,
that the civil authority did carry the Priesthood: which conjunction we find
to have been twice in the person of one: first in Moses, who was so far
preferred to Aaron, or to his particular office, that God said, Aaron shall
speak for thee those words which thou shall put into his mouth, and thou shall
be as his God. And thereafter again, by reason of corruption in latter times,
God did suffer the Princes of the Machabes and Almonei to possess the
Priesthood also, as, Simon, Ioannes, Alexander, Hircanus, and Aristobulus, of
whom some are witnessed in the Book of Machabes to have been rare and
excellent men: as, Simon Onia, of whom it is said, Erat tanquam astrum
matutinum inter nubes and tanquam Solrefulgens intemplo altissimi: He was like
the day Star among the clouds, and as a shining Sun in the Temple of the
most High. Which confusion Eccle. 52.
of several powers, our Savior again in his time did clearly distinguish,
commanding to give to God, that which was his; and to Caesar that which was
due to him: after which Christian Princes and Prelates did long live, every one
contented to attend their own function: Prelates to pray for Princes to teach
their people, and watch over their souls; Princes again to nourish them, to
protect the Church, and minister Justice, until the poles of this government
began to shake through vanity of the Priesthood, striving so much to invade
the Temporal puissance, and to confound the two functions in their own
person whereof I will relate what has been the judgment and practice of the
Fathers, of most simple and unsuspected antiquity of the primitive Church:
Saint Ambrose says of these two Jurisdictions, that the one does assist the
other mutually. Saint Augustine says the same in his Epistleto Macedonius.
Boniface, in his Letter to the Emperor Honorius says, it were too great
burden for the Church to ouerwatch spiritual things, if she were tied to any
temporal care. Saint Cyprian in his Epistle says, to inuolue the Church in
worldly affairs, were to estrange her from God. Saint John Chrysostom. as also
Augustine, against the Manichees, do affirm, there is no power but from God,
either that he does establish it, or permit it, for the execution of his will
in mercy, or in justice: for the which reasons, say they, a Christian subject
may serve under the commandment of an Infidel or sacriledgious King: and as
the iniquity of the commandment does render the Prince culpable, so does the
band of obedience keep the subject innocent. All Antiquity does conclude with
Saint Augustine in the City of God thus: God only does ordinate Kings after
his secret pleasure, good or bad, according to our merits or demerits:
therefore, says he, it is our part only to obey, unless we will repine
against God; for, says he, the great God, who gave Empire to the Assyrians and
Persians, he granted it unto the Romans when he pleased, and as great as he
pleased: he raised the power of Marius, he yielded authority to Caesar, to
Augustus, yea, to Nero, to Vespasian, and to his gracious son Titus, and to
his tyrannous brother Domitian. And finally, says this holy Father, he who
placed into the Empire the most Christian Constantine, he did also honor with
the same power the filthy Apostat Julian: and howsoever the causes of this
proceeding in God be hidden, and mystical, says he, yet they are undoubtedly
just and holy.

This is the doctrine of Antiquity, whereupon the Primitive Church did in
every thing of exterior government depend upon the temporal Soueraintie,
whether in civil or criminal cases, if any man did invade Ecclesiastical
patrimony or goods, they did remit it to the imperial Iudicatorie, if any man
did offer violence, or kill a Bishop, they did the same, as Augustine testifies
upon the Epistle to the Romans, these, and such like, be the Precepts which
are left to us from Antiquity for Christian policy or government. The
practice of the Primitive Church has been agreeable to this doctrine, for in
their government we do observe three things, which have been inuiolably
kept of them. First not only did the Church serve and obey Pagans, Tyrants,
and abominable monsters in the Empire, who refused her for their mother, who
did afflict, and persecute her, but she did make ordinary prayers to God for
their happiness, so far, that (as Tertullian writes) diverse Ethnickes did
ascribe it as a peculiar glory to Primitive Christians, that their exercise was
to pray for their enemies, showing how far Christian profession does surmount
the doctrine of Philosophy.

Secondly, where the Emperors begun to range themselves under the holy ensigns
of the Church, becoming her Alumni, and children, she did obey unto the most
cruel heretics as to Constantius, Valens, and others, and to the greatest
Apostates and mockers of Christianity, as unto Julian, notwithstanding of whose
bloody persecutions, she never left her obedience, as the Records of her
ancient Counsels bear witness: wherein any man may read the process of the
Council of Arimini, that worthy Bishop Melitus, the light of Asia in his
time, did write unto the Emperor Antonius those words, according to a true
version. Ye have sent, says he, such rigorous edicts against us, for
tormenting of us unto death, thinking thereby to extinguish the name of
Christians, we know not if these have proceeded from your own will, which if
it be, in that case we shall obey you, for nothing can come from you but good:
but we do most humbly beseech you to consider, that their are many
Calumniators about your person, that seek how to destroy us, that they may
possess our goods. In the Histories of France and Spain, we read that the
Church did carry the same reverence unto a great number of Princes Visigotti,
Arians heretics, yea, and (which should more move us) the Popes themselves
who have possessed the seat of Rome have left unto their successors, notable
examples of their faithful obedience unto all the Ostrogotti, who did reign
in Italy, among the which Theodoricke was so respected of the Sea of Rome,
chiefly of Pope S. Hormisda, that they had almost canonized him as is written,
There was no service whereinto they did not obey those princes, if they had any
occasion to send any Ambassadors they did undergo it, as Pope Innocent the
first, took a legation from Alarico to the Emperor Honorius, to negotiat his
peace, and to obtain a dignity to that Arrian King, And further to declare
how sacred they did hold their obedience to whatsoever King God did place over
them, they did undertake Embassages from Arrian Princes in favor of Artian
Churches, for conservation of Arrians, and in case of excommunication, as Iean
the second, and Pope Agapet were employed by Theodoric and Theodotus. Now to
him who will answer to this, that these Princes were not excommunicate,
therefore the Church did serve them, I reply that there was greater cause to
excommunicate them then, nor nowadayes is taken against Christian Princes, and
which is more, we find the letters of Hormisda and others to Anastase as full
of honor and respect as if he had been free from the sentence of
excommunication, and of Gregory the second to the Emperor Leon Iconomachus,
albeit he was excommunicate by that same Pope himself, which things we must
not imagine to have bin done at random, or pro tempore, but from good warrant
appearantly, since the jurisdiction spiritual is only over the souls of men,
Church gou^rnours ought not to transcend their ordinary bounds to meddle with
the bodies or temporal states of Kings, but their Fulmen Ecclesiasticum, the
thunder of excommunication should be only spiritual: and like unto the
natural thunder, which can strike a man to the death without the meanest
offense done unto the apparel of his body. For I would ask the Jesuit,
albeit the Church have power over the Kings soul, if it be so, that they might
rashly excommunicate him, what right have they for this over his kingdom and
people? If they have, why did Saint Paul in his time cry, Querimus vos non
vestra? And why has Saint Ambrose and Optatus Mileuitanus in his third book
Aduersus Parmenianum said, That Emperors and Kings be within the Church, but
that the Empire is without it, yea say they the Church is within the Empire,
and in token that Antiquity did exempt things temporal from the dint of
excommunication, when Pope Marcelline did sacrifice to Idols, and Pope Honorio
became a Monothelet Heretic, they were excommunicate, but did not loose their
Bishopprickes, Pope Formose Bishop of Port was chosen successor to the same
Pope, who had excommunicate him. And in the Counsel holden at Lions under Pope
Gregory the tenth, it was concluded that Cardinals albeit excommunicate, might
assist the Pope his election by their vote and presence; So modest were the
Fathers in the point of Princely authority, that Paulus Samosetanus, against
whom the Council of Carthage was conuocate, being deposed from Episcopal
charge, he did yet possess a certain territory belonging to the Church, but
these Bishops demanded justice thereof of the Emperor Aurelian, albeit an
Ethnicke, because all that was civil and worldly, did belong unto the Empire,
The Church (says Augustine upon Saint John) does possess no patrimony nor
goods, but Iure humano; Iure diuino, she has nothing. This Iure humano is the
Right Imperial of Princes, which being usurped of any other, it has no more
Title nor right upon earth, says he: So was it the constant meaning and doing
of the ancient Fathers to think that they had nothing which they might refuse
unto the Emperors, but the only house of God. Nor yet that says Ambrose, if
I were assured that the Emperor In oratione contr. an.
(speaking of Valens) would not plant Arrians into it, in which case only I
would press to retain it: O, what difference betwixt that and this blind
ambitious and impudent age, wherein Church rulers make open doctrine and
profession to Master Princes lawful and orthodoxall, and to ^reade upon their
necks, holy antiquity would not adventure to take from an excommunicate
Bishop an house belonging to the Church, but by the authority of the Emperor
nor would not resist the Emperoer by violence for the Temple of God to ane
heretic king, although it were to give it to heriticall pastoures: whereas
the plain guyse of this time is to be Piscatores piscium non hominum and to
abuse excommunication and the papal Thunder to spoil a king of his clothes,
to dethrone him of his kingdoms, and to make him naked of his subjects.

Thirdly we do observe of the primitive Church that whenever she did enjoy
good and godly Emperors, they did not only not repute them as private
members of the Church, iudicable by the power Ecclesiastical, but contrary
they hold them chief members of their general counsels under their mystical
head Jesus Christ, yielding to them the authority of convocation, and whole
exterior Jurisdiction, giving them the tittle of common and external
Bishopes; For we read in Eusebius that Constantine the great was called so of
the Church and said to be brother unto the fathers, in which quality of a
common Bishop he did exercise his power over the Church exteriorlie, and over
Bishops: In like manner we find that in the Calcedonian council the Emperor was
called universal Bishops, yea Antiquity did esteem no counsel supreme,
wherein an Emperor did not sit and praesidiat. In all the appellationes of the
primitive Church (which form of Iudicatore is fittest to try where the maine
sway of authority does lie, because it was absolute sovereign and without
declinatour, having power against the Tyrannous government of Popes, against
discords of other Prelates, against unjust decrees of counsels themselves. In
all these appellations I say we find that none was esteemed supreme but that
wherein the Emperor did over rule, as the only power upon earth which is in
dependant, The first appellation we read of in the Church was by Cyrillus
Bishop of Jerusalem from the condemnatorie of one Counsel to another more
general assisted (says he) with Seculare brachium with seculare power which he
called a provocation unto a greater Iudgemement, And so his cause was examined
in the counsel of Seleucia: As for the cause of Athanasius which did preceed
that, it was rather a remission of the process to the counsel of Sardi^ then
an appeal, and went always by the direction and will of the Emperor
Constantine, to whom Saint Anthony write diverse letters directly praying him
for the restitution of Athanasius. Saint John Chrisost. in a second appellation
did provoke in the same terms with Cyrill to a higher judge a more general
counsel assisted with imperial authority, as it clear by a third
appellation of Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria the time of the counsel of
Calcedon, in which appeal he does expresselie protest that the conjunction of
the imperial authority does make the highest jurisdiction which cannot be
denied, when all the authorities on earth are conjoined, there can be nothing
above that; So we read that Constantius did determine the process of Saint
Athanasius, as his father Constantine had designed to do before, for he sent
his will touching it unto the Bishops assembled in the counsel of Tire, with
the governor Archilaus, who did sit and preside in the counsel, yet in the
end the Empreour would needs banish that good father into Tr^ues; After that
again, Honoratus the governor with some other senators assisted the counsel
conueened in the cause of Aetius, and in the counsel of Calcedon the Senators
brought thither by Ualentinian the third, and Marcian, did coniunctlie with the
fathers judge a great number of Bishops, whose requests presented to the
Empreour for that effect are yet to be read in the histories, and if any man
will say that these were but private Bishopes, who were censured of the
Emperors, let him remember that Constantius did judge and condemn to exile
Pope Liberius, at least he gave Commission to do the same unto Bishop Ursatius,
that Sextus the third, did underly a criminal judgment of Valentinian the
third, assisted with numbers of Civil Magistrates, forty eight Priests, six
Deacons. That Justinian made the process of Pope Siluerius, and banished him,
and of his successor, Pope Vigilius, accused of treason, that Theodoricke King
of Goths did erercise the same justice against Pope Symmachus, assembling a
Counsel where the whole Bishops did remit themselves unto the wisdom of the
Emperor: And Gregory the great, behooued he not to purge himself to
Mauricius the Emperor, of a disorder fallen out at Rome, and of the death of
Bishop Malcus, did he not in his ordinary letters to the Emperors, style them
his Signiors and Masters, how like to that is it that Rome is now become
Naufragium Principum, the rock upon the which Kings make shipwreck, and the
bloody stage whereupon they act their Tragedies. And this touching the form
of Ecclesiastical iudicatorie in the Primative Church.

As for the power of Convocation, that it was granted to Princes, as Soueraigns
in the exterior policy of the Church, it is as manifest; we have the
testimony of Ruffinus upon the first Counsel of Nice, he says it was
assembled by Constantine the great, with the advice of the Fathers; And
Eusebius in the life of this Emperor, for calling of this Counsel, he does
not so much as mention any letter of the Pope Siluester soliciting the same,
contenting himself to say this Counsel was assembled by the honorable
letters of the Emperor as a puissant army of Christ Jesus in the which he did
praeside, glorying to call himself a common Bishop among them. As for the
Counsel of La^dicea Sard: Sel^: Arimini, Millane and Rome which were not
universal, Socrates and Sozemen do testify that they were conuocate by the
only commandment of the Emperor Constant: heretic Arrian, the same
Authors bear witness that the second Counsel of Constantinople general was
assembled by the authority of Theodose the great, and that of Ephesus by
Theodose the younger, and that of Calcedon consisting of 630. Fathers by
Valentinian the third, and Martian; of the fifth Counsel was not the honor due
to Justinian? and of the sixth to Constantine? Wherein were excommunicate Pope
Honorio, Theodore Bishop of Phare, Syrus Bishop of Alexandria, heretics,
monothelites; these two preceding Counsels are only comprehended in one
called Quinta Sexta Synodus, because their decrees were not ample and severally
particularised; Always we read that the Emperor Constantine sent his letters
to Pope Donus, requiring him to direct his Legates unto this Counsel, and
after his death, Pope Agath^ his successor when he sent to have the
confirmation of his pontificat from him, he promised that his Legate should
come to that Counsel conuocate by the Emperor. As for the sixth Counsel
Oecumenicke holden at Constantinople in Trullo, was it not assembled by
Justinian the second? The seventh concerning the impugnation of images, was
conuocate by the authority of Constantine, the son of Irene, and so forth
through all the rest, until the Empire became feeble and dismembered: which
power those Emperors did so absolutely keep and use, over the external
policy of the Church, that Theodose the great had once intended to conuocate
an universal Counsel of all nations, and all sects of Religion, to purge the
Church from all sorts of schisms and heresies, And this is the reason why
Socrates in the entry of the fifth book of his History says; he is
constrained to introduce the Emperors, because after their being Christians,
they did conuocate the general Counsels, and carry the sway of
Ecclesiastical government: And this is the cause why Augustine in his ninth
Epistle De correctione Donatistarum says, when it begun to be fulfilled which
is written, Et adorabunt eum omnes Reges Terr^, when Emperors and Kings became
Christians, then says he, what man can be so absurd as to say unto Kings, have
no rule of Gods Church within your kingdoms. This it is which made Pope Leo to
write to Leo Augustus, wishing him deeply to consider that Royal power was
not only given to him, Ad mundi Regimen, sed praecipue ad Ecclesia, not only
for the rule of the world, but more of the Church: as Isod^re says, That
whither the policy or peace of the Church be diminished or advanced under
Princes they are to render count unto the Lord, Qui ab ijs exiget rationem
Ecclesiae sua quam little potestati tradiderat, who shall demand from them an
account of his Church which he has committed to their power, In Nouellis
Constitutionibus 124. The truth thereof is so clearly verified in the whole
practice of this Primitive Church, that the Epistles Synodals of the first
Counsel of Nice, those holy Bishops did write them in this style. For as much,
say they, as by the grace of God and by the commandment of the most sacred
Emperor Constantine the great, this holy Counsel has been assembled,
without any mention at all of Pope Siluester his letters, the same tenor is
observed in the Synodall Epistle of the Counsel of Trullo, where the Fathers
did praise Justinian the second, because he had assembled them forth of diverse
nations, to the imitation of Christ, who sought so carefully the straying
sheep in the mountain.

This authority Temporal over the Church, was exercised even by Constantine
the great himself, who was the greatest zealator of the Church of any
Emperor, and who called them Gods in the Church, so long as they did minister
the Sacraments and holy things, yet when he comes after that, to speak of
the subjection and duty of every Bishop to him, in that letter which he wrote
for the assembly of the Counsel of Tire, he says that they should conueine
under the pain of exile, and that he should teach all disobedient Bishops to
know that they must live under the authority of a sacred Emperor, declaring
thereby, that in the points of external policy, he did esteem them as men and
ordinary subjects, who^ in their spiritual functions he had counted as Gods.
The same authority was practiced by Charlemaine, who in his time did conuocate
eight Councels, and by his son Lewis Debonnaire, who did assemble one. And to
show it more plainly, that this power to conuocate was Imperial, and not
Episcopal, we read how all the Popes of those days did write to Emperors for
that effect: Pope Innocent sent to Honorius five Bishops and two Priests to
obtain a Council for the restitution of Saint John Chrysostom, as we read in
Euagrius. Pope Leo does beseech Valentine the third, to obtain of Theodose the
younger a Council against Eutiches: and in token that the Popes did not so much
as pretend this power to assemble, we find in Sozemene, that Pope Julius
complains only that the Bishops of the Orient did not inuit him to the
Council of Antioch, saying, that a law of the Church provided that no Decree
should pass without the opinion asked of the Bishop of Rome. And in Theoderet
Pope Damasus makes the same complaint, and in the same terms against the
council of Arimini, in which such honor was done to the Emperor Constantius,
and such reverence to his authority, that the Fathers conuened there, being
detayned too long, and being pressed to put down some Decrees, which were not
orthodoxall, they durst not for all that depart until they had the Emperors
leave and permission. Further now will we observe the very internal
Jurisdiction of the Church, and that which is merely spiritual, to wit, the
sentence of Excommunication, and how it was exercised: we do find two things
in that, one is, we shall not see that the primitive Church did excommunicate
any Emperor or King, albeit there were more occasion against them, nor is now
contained in the great Bull of the holy Thursday, which is yearly published at
Rome against Christian Kings and States. Constantius and Valeus persecuting
heretics. Trinitaries, who would have forced the Fathers to confessions
against the Catholic faith, were not excommunicate. Theodose the second, and
Valentinian the third, Eutichean heretics, were not excomunicate. Basilieius,
enemy to the Council of Calcedon, Justinian, and of Kings, Chilpericke King
of France, infected with Arrianisme: Theodoricke King of Goths: Atalarichus,
Theodotus, Vittiges, and many others, of whom none was excommunicate, no not
Julian the Apostata, nor Valentinian the second, who fell in an heresy three
several times, nor Justinian, who fell twice, no, when they had banished Popes
themselves: for we read in an Epistle of Pope Siluerius, that beng banished by
Belizarius, at the command of Justinian his Master, he assembled certain
Bishops to excommunicate Belizarius, but did not so much as murmurre against
Justinian, by whose direction he was persecuted. Neither yet, if they did kill
a Bishop, a^ Valens, who caused some of them to be drowned. Secondly, we
observe on this point of Excommunication, that Bishops in the primitive Church
did excommunicate by the consent and permission Imperial: for Princes, fearing
that Church Rulers should abuse the spiritual sword, made an ordinance,
repeated afterward Justin. Novel. Constit. 123.
by Justinian, that no person should be excommunicate, unless the cause of
their sentence were before the Emperor, clearly proved to be agreeable to
the will and meaning of the holy Spirit: which Saint Augustine does expressly
acknowledge in an Epistle to Boniface, saying that the Church does exercise her
power against heretics under the permission and power of Kings. Some Bishops
have questioned hardly with Emperors: as a Bishop did command Phillip the
Emperor, that he should not enter into the Church, but remain without in the
place of the Penitentiaries. Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Milane, dealt right so
with Theodosius the great: but they did not pronounce any Excommunication mayor
against them; for then they would not have enjoined them penance, if they had
been without the bosom of the Church. As for Anastatius, albeit some
Churches, as that, and the Church of Jerusalem, did excommunicate him, yet he
was ever in peace and union with numbers of Catholic Churches in the Orient,
which did declare that it was not magnum anathema, but rather a t^merarious
Act, howsoever this be, such two or three exceptions will not serve against one
ordinary rule: for then to meet these, we find in like manner three
extraordinary acts of Imperial authority, which caused excommunicate or
eiect the Popes. Xistus, the third of that name, suspected for adultery, was
excommunicate by commandment of Valens the third. Theodoricke King of Goths
did eiect from the Church Pope Symmachus. And the people of Rome, under the
Magistrates, did forbid Pope Pelagius the assembly of the Church: besides,
Saint John Chrysostom deposed and expelled from his Church by Arcadius. As for
the excommunication of Arcadius, done by Pope Gelasius, it is doubted of in the
Ecclesiastical histories: but I do not speak of such extrauagant acts, but
of that which was ordinarily followed, whereby it is still verified, that the
whole sway of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical was in the Emperors. The Convocation
was due to them: the process went by their permission and consent, their
persons were exempted from excommunication, as we have heard, which be three
maine points of sovereign Commandment.

For the fourth, which is the confirmation of the Popes, it was also due to the
Emperors, Constantius the son of Constantine, he banished Liberius, and
erected Pope Felix in his place: yea, farther, he recalled that good Prelate,
and did establish him with the other. Theodosius the great, a great pillar of
the Church, by the right Imperial he settled at Rome together with a Pope, a
Bishop of a diverse religion, (I think) for satisfaction of a mutinous people
Laeonius in his time was Bishop of Rome for the Church of the Nouatianes,
Honorius his son again coming into Italy while Boniface and Eulalius did
contend for the Pontificat, he chased them both away, and after placed Boniface
making laws against such ambicious competences: Julius Nepos the tyrant
ouercomming Glicerius the Emperor, he made him Pope as Euagrius does record;
for some hold that he made him only Bishop of Milane, because he is not found
in the catalogue of the Popes, Odoacre king of the Horoli being master of Rome,
he made an ordinance at the solistation of Pope Simplicius, and to the
imitation of proceeding Emperors, That no Pope should be exalted without the
consent of Imperial authority. When the Emperors had recovered Rome from the
Goths Justinian did not only eiect Vigilius but made him come to Constantinople
to be judged, offering to the people of Rome his Archdeacon Pelagius whereupon
they thanked the Emperor, willing him to suffer Vigilius, and after his death
to establish whom he pleased, which right did so continue with the seat
imperial, that Saint Gregory the great durst not honor himself with his
titles before he had received the imperial confirmation of his pontificate.

Finally if we come to speak of the confirmations of councels and canons,
which is the last point of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, we also find that
nothing was solid until the imperial approbation was conjoined to the
spiritual. The Rolls of the decrees of the counsel of Nice and
Constantinople were presented to Constantine and Theodosius to be subscribed
and authorized by them; against which foresaid policy of the primitive Church
so far depending upon the Emperor, I know not what we can pretend, unless
we will be like those ignorant Gnostickes of whom Irenaeus does make mention in
the fourth Chapter of his third book, who held this opinion that while God did
command us to obey superior powers he did accommodat that command to the
condition of persons and times: and that the Church is not now in minoribus as
she was then; but out of Pagerie, and able to command, her self. Certain the
law of God is immutable and eternal and does not suffer eclipse, nor is
subject to the measure of our fantasies. If one will say the dealing of Arrian
Kings with the church under the cross, is not to be drawn in example, what
shall we say to the Jurisdiction of Constantine the great the first patron of
the Church, who took upon him in his time to establish Bishops and had at his
death Athanasius under his Judicature: and what shall we answer to Charlemaine
a great favorer of the Church and to his son Lues Debonaire who sent to Rome
to judge a Pope for the murder of Theodore a Roman Senator of the French
devotion, wherein the Pope was forced to clear himself by the kings own
appointment as the letters of Pope Leon to Lues to that effect does import;
Thus, if we have done any thing out of purposse in that process we are ready
to amend it by your own officers, whom we^treate you to send outwell disposed
men to take trial of that matter. The ecclesiastical histories, and the lives
of Popes where they are written besoful of such testimonies and so plain into
them, I thought it not necessary to quote them particularly.

So concluding this general Theme in favors of the lawful authority of
Kings, I say the primitive Church had never a Bishop nor Pope who did refuse to
submit himself to the imperial Jurisdiction, after the example and doctrine
of Christ, in such manner that we are to esteem all this contrary clergy of
Papal parasites, to be a false and bastard Theology of ambitious monsters who
strive to usurp that power which God has reserved to himself, of disposing
of Kings and Diadems of the world, after the way of his secret and divine
providence: which power is so alone to him that no mortal flesh may
participate of it, as Daniel does approve in the Dream of Nebuccadnezar:
Altissimus habet Potestatem super Regna hominum and dat illa cuivult, and
constituit super illa homines vilissimos: The most High has power over the
Kingdoms of men, he gives them to whom he will, and places in them most
vile men. And the Prophet Esaias in this point, in the person of the Ethnicke
Cyrus, he does prophecy his victories, he calls him the Lords Anointed; of
whom God did say, Whose right hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him:
he ordained him to be obeyed, saying, Uae ei qui Esa. 45.
litigauerit contra factorem suum: Woe be to him who does question with his
Maker. Numquid lutum dicet factori suo quid facis? Shall the Clay say to the
Potter, What do thou make? Then he concludes, saying, I have raised him,
and he shall let my people go, not for money, but freely. When God commanded,
Nolite tangere vn^s meos, he did not except Saul more then David; Balthazar,
more then good King Josias: what then, shall these miserable and wretched
potshrads of these times reason with their Maker, when he says, Dedi eis Regem
in furore meo and regnare facit hypocritam propter peccata Populi? What, shall
they have a count of him? or how do they not hear the voice of the Prophets,
of Christ himself, of the Apostles, of the Fathers, of the primitive Church?
all consentient, and contrary to that poisoned doctrine of Rome, invented and
maintained by the Jesuits, where (in place of these sacred privileges yielded
unto Christian Princes, as is said, consisting in four or five points of
Soueraignity in the Ecclesiastical government) we shall hear four or five
such Maxims as these. To Christ is given all power in Heaven and Earth: and
Christ has given the keys of all to Saint Peter: therefore the Pope his
successor has all power also of Heaven and Earth: he is above Kings, and may
translate and destroy their authority: he is above general Counsels, and may
inhibit them, having all power in his own person. In place of Christian
Apostolic and reverent speeches of Monarchs and Kings, there is to be heard
fastuous and contemptible inuectiues against them, serpentine insinuations to
cut the throat of their Royal power, to depose them, spoil their estates, and
invade their lives, and these by exoterick or public writtes: and who will be
curious of their acroamaticke, or hidden and cloysterall doctrine, shall be
taught to understand this ground for all, that after the reign of the
Antichrist, all Nations are to be collected under one Pastor, and to obey him:
and to that effect God does establish and raise some puissant Christian
authority, which should be in the occident, as some Rabbis and Jewish
Doctors, who became thereafter Christians, have observed by these mystical
words of our Savior upon the Cross, Vouch chi hammassiah chesche uitlash
bannesthimneth hu daieth roscho daiphen nalt sarphat dares rachen nalcha: That
is to say, Et erit postquam Messiah suspensus fuerit in ligno, ecce ipse
inclinabit caput suum, and prespiciens ad occidentem dixit miserebor tui. The
French, say they, does expound this mystery of the Grandor of the French
Crown, because their Princes were myraculously brought unto the Christian
faith, receiving the Flower-de-Luce sent from heaven, as their Stories record,
with a supernatural power to heal the Ecruelles by touching, which Flower is
holden sacred, and in holy Scripture is recommended above all other Flowers,
being employed in the work of the great Candlestick made by Moses, and after
used by Solomon, who built the Temple; whereof Moses drew the figure: so that
they esteem this Flower to be the true hyerogliphicke of their faith, and hold
it yet for their Armories: they have been mighty promoters of Gods Church by
destroying floods of Arrians, Gots, and Visigotti in Spain, in the days of
Carollo Martello, and Pipino his son, by their expulsion of Longobards, and
succouring of the seat Apostolical, under Carolus Magnus, by their exploits in
the Orient, about the conquest of Jerusalem, under the Arms of Godfred de
Bullion, and his partners; and by their Christian enterprises against the
Saracenes, under Lodouicus sanctus, their King. All these do comfort the
French (say they) to presume that this mystery upon the Cross was in favors
of them.

Again, the Spaniard does take it unto him, because he has done so many
things for extension and securing of the Catholic faith, affronting the Turk
in all quarters, and planting Christian Religion among the barbarous Indians:
but the secret of the mystery (say they) is, that the power which is prophesied
in the Apocalypse, does pertain to the sea Apostolical, and to the person of
the Pope: To him who keeps my works to the end will I give power over al
Nations, he shall rule them with a rod, Apoc. 2.
of Iron, and as the vessel of a Potter shall they be broken, says the
Spirit of God in that place: whereby is meant the Pope, who only of all men
cannot err. I have always sufficiently cleared to your Lordship the minds
and practices of the Fathers of the Primitive Church in this point of Princes.
Now that I may not seem to caluminate the Jesuit, I will summarily show how
he has perverted this doctrine, and poisoned it with his Absynthium. Next, I
will relate how his preuarication and falsehood is impugned by Catholic Romans
themselves, the French Church, and that famous Palladium of Sorbon. And lastly,
I will discourse a little of the dessigne of this pernicious doctrine, which is
a devilish plot of fearful ambition, by length of time, to draw the whole
world under the superstitious hyerarchy of Rome, both in temporality and
spirituality, if it be not prevented.

There be three grounds of this doctrine tied together in one chain, which in
effect be but one thing teaching the Sovereign power of the Pope over Princes,
which power is extended by three Arms, power over their soul to
excommunicate, power over their states and crowns to deprive, and power over
their bodies to give warrant to kill them: which indeed is all the power the
Pope does claim on earth. For as touching his being above general Counsels,
it is but all one with his being above Christian Princes, to whom belongs the
authority to conuocate, and rule Counsels: I will omit for breuities sake to
speak of any other writer among the Jesuits, but only of Bellar:, who is
their predominant plannet. Touching the persons of Kings (says he upon this
point) the Pope may not albeit there be just cause, depose them, in the same
sort as he does Bishops, that is to say, as a civil ordinary judge.
Nevertheless, says he, he may as a Sovereign Prince spiritual, if it be
necessary for men's souls, change kingdoms, taking from one, giving them to
another; the first possessor being excommunicate ^st contre. 3. lib. 5. cap. 6.
(as we shall prove) says he, page 1081. of that book imprinted, Anno 1601.
Then for proof he does introduce all the treasonable enterprises of Christian
people, which are not only contrary to Gods will in his holy word, but are
detestably abhorred by the relation made of them in civil histories, Cap. 7.
of the same, whereby one may manifestly note that the intestine calamities of
Christendom these many years past, rising from this wicked usurpation over
lawful Christian Princes, has been the truest cause of the increase of the
Mohammedan Empire. And it is marvelous to see how Bellarmine does there so
impudently strive to confirm that extrauagant of Vnam sanctam de maiorit. and
obedient. so solemnly condemned by the greatest part of the Roman Clergy,
chiefly by the French Church. Like as the whole body of the Jesuits under one
generallitie maintain the same in an Apology of theirs set forth to the same
end, under the Title of the Verity defended, and in the last impression of the
same, page 42. for by that Extrauagant, if the Pope should transgress to
thunder excommunication unjustly against the best Princes, yet no mortal man
might take notice of it, nor crave it to be reformed: but not content to deal
this way with pretended heretical Princes, he lays an ambush before the best
and most virtuous Kings, he keeps over their heads Virgam vigilantem. In this
manner, he does exempt generally from Regal Jurisdiction whatsoever
Ecclesiastical persons contending by many instances and iterations of words to
confuse that Text of Saint Paul, Omnis anima subdita sit superio: potestat: Let
every soul be subject to superior powers, for there is no power but of God,
and the puissances which be, are ordained of him: which he does repeat in this
sort, whosoever does resist power, does resist the ordinance of God, and shall
receive Judgment of God, says he, reserving the Equiuocating of the Text,
because he would have us to think that all Supreme power is in the Pope, upon
this Text Chrysostom does observe, that these are not only spoken of the
Laicke, but for the Religious, yea and for the Apostles themselves (says he)
But Bellarmine says in the same Treatise, page 255. that the Pope has taken
all Ecclesiastical persons, from the power of Princes secular: So that they
are no more their subjects (says he) which in effect is no other then to build
a foreign state within a Kings Realm, and so does he himself affirm in the
same place; It is, says he, as if a Prince should set over a part of his
Dominion unto a stranger: for then he behooved to loose it. Thereafter he says
the laws of Princes, albeit they be not contrary to Gods word, yet can they
not bind a Religious person except it be ad directionem, non autem ad
coactionem, page 269. of the said clericall exemption, concluding page 271.
that the Prince does lose the Clergy, and is no more their Sovereign,
maintaining it so obstinately, that he does obuiat such things as might be
objected in the contrary. If, says he, ye hold it an injury done to Kings, to
spoil them of their authority, which they had over those men before they
entered into the Clergy, I answer that he that inioyeth his own right does
wrong to no man: one may choose such a calling as he thinks meetest for
himself, therefore he who enters into the order Ecclesiast: does no injury
to Kings, albeit the King lose a subject per accidens, by that act, (says he.)

This Clericall exemption has a strange consequence, that the attemps of
Religious men against their native Princes, shall be no Treason because they
are not their Subjects. The assassinate of Iaco Clement no treasonable murder.
And the Jesuit- Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms of confession does plainly hold
it, treating of this word Clericus, saying, Clerici Rebellio non est crimen
laesae maiestat is quia non est subditus Regi: The Rebellion of a religious man
is no act of Treason whatsoever he do, because he is not a Kings subject. And
again, glosing upon the word Princeps and Rex. Potest Rex priuari per
Rempublicam ob Tyrannidem, and cum est causa aliqua just a elegi alius a maiore
part populi: The King for Tyranny may be deprived by the Common weal, and
when there is cause, an other chosen in his stead by the greatest part of the
people: but then to let you see, that all that process must depend from the
Pope: upon the word Tyrannus, they do reason thus, Tyrannice gubernans non
potest spoliari sine publico Indicio, lata vero sententia potest quisque fieri
Executor, potestque deponi a populo qui iurauerit ei obedientiam perpetuam: He
who raigns Tyrannously cannot be spoiled of his dominion until the public
sentence be pronounced, which once done, he may be deprived by any: yea by the
same subjects who did swear to him perpetual obedience. This public sentence
we must understand is Excommunicatio Mayor, proceeding from the Pope. How these
Aphorisms do agree with the doings of the Primitive Church, let the most
ignorant judge whither they be not seasoned with their wormwood.

Upon these two foundations of excommunication and deprivation does of
necessity follow the third, to wit murder of Kings, first thundered, next
eiected, thirdly, slain, and doctrinall grounds set down to authorize the
same, Gean Guignart in his treatise upon the murder of Henry the third a good
Prince and a catholic Roman, he does stablish two propositions, one, that the
cruel Nero was murdered by a delivering Clement, whose heroical act inspired
by the holy spirit was to be reputed just and lawful, yea and most laudable,
next, that the crown of France ought to be transposed to another Race, and the
Biarnois (so does he disdainfully call the french king) he ought to have a
monastical crown, that is to say, to be shaven and condemned to the cloister
(albeit he was become a catholic Roman) which if he would not accept, they
should by force of arms eiect him, or deprive him of his life. Ambrose Varades
principal of the Jesuits College at Paris, was found the instigatour of
Barrier against the late king immediately after his conversion to the Church of
Rome, Chastell who struck him in the mouth confessed that he was taught by
Jesuits that it was an act of extraordinary great godliness to kill him
because he was no lawful king although he was converted, until he was
received by the Pope, A letter was found of father Commelet a man most famous
among them for prudence, and gravity, bearing these words, we must have an
Aeod, let him be a monk, a soldier or a shepherd it is no matter, we must
have an Aeod, for the assassinat or slaughter of King Henry the third so did
their absynthiu^ universally poison all, that even in the Serbon it was
concluded in favor of the Pope, that his excommunication and murder was both
lawful and well acted, William Parry confessed at his death that Benidicto
Paulio and Aniball Codreto Jesuits did persuade him that it was a most
religious act to surprise the life of the late Queen of England a good
Princess replenished with Piety and virtue And who should hear the true
relation of the state of Polonia since the entry of the Jesuits there, he
should hear of more wicked and secret practices during that time, then for
hundreths of years before, This is the doctrine and these are the practices of
Papal pride with the Christian Kings of this age: which being paralelled with
these of the primitive fathers, it is easy to mark the antithesis.

So to end this particular touching the Maxims of the Iesuisticke schools, it
is the glory which they do carry as a bright star in the front of all their
renoune, that they be daunters of puissant kings and it is found in their own
books in that treatise called Summa constitutionum imprinted at Lions Anno
1859. containing the government of that society, it is said Tyrannos
aggrediuntur and lolium ab agro Domini euellunt: They invade tyrants and root
out the cockle and filth from the Lords field. And so invincible they be in
this mischeuous doctrine, that albeit they understood Tanquerall was condemned
to undergo a great punishment and hardly did escape his life Anno. 1561. for
suffering this Theme touching the authority of kings to be called in question
of the Sorbon, and to be disputed there, yet, so bold are they that ever since
that time they did practice the court of parliament at Paris to favor the same
motion, albeit oftentimes it was despightfully rejected upon suspicion of that
which in effect was found true, that they had covertly corrupted the Sorbon by
sliding in among them some of their own scolers, neither is there any thing
in all this more strange then to hear Cardinal Bellarmine his answer for
that holy carriage of the fathers of the primitive Church with Emperors and
Kings of their Time, it was, says he, more necessary in that time of the
primitive Church, to admonish Christian people to obey temporal powers least
otherwise the preaching of the Gospel had been hindered, The case being
altered now when the Church is inful authority and power her self which
(fiefor shame) is no other then to make the word of God to be a religion of
Foxes, a doctrine of sophistry, a profession of Equivocation and consequently
of P^rle quia qui dubi^r at his me^itur and bis peiur at as Cicero says, as if
upon these words Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo, Christ would say to his
Apostles and successors, that they should obey Princes so long as they were
under the Cross, and could do no otherwise, but when they should begin to
floorish and get the wind upon them, that then they should change the style of
the Euangell, and teach a contrary doctrine, a doctrine not of Christ but of
the ambitious school of Machauel, to the stayne of Gods glory who has made
no law but on for kings of Israel for kings of the primitive Church, and for
all who have followed; upon which point, and upon these words of our Savior
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo we may hear S. August as it were upon the
Theater of the world making a procliamation, to secure all authorities from
such fear and Jealousy, Audite (says he) Iudaei and gentes, audi preputium,
audite omnia Regna terrena non i^podis domination^ ve^am in hoc mundo, O here
ye Jews and gentiles, ye circumcised and uncircumcised, here ye all the
kingdoms of the earth; Christ makes no stop nor opposition to your
authorities temporal, and we read S. Bernard upon this text in the 12, of
Saint Luke, where one said to Christ master tell my brother vt mecum diuidat
here ditatem that he may divide our heritage, he answered homo quis me
constituit Di^isorem aut Iudic^m super vos: who appointed me a judge over you
or diuider of your lands, whereupon Saint Bernard says stetisse lego Apostolos
iudicandos Bernard lib. 1. de conse.
sedisse iudicantes non lego: I read (says he) that that the Apostles stood
to be judged: but that they did sit ^o Judge, I read not. Their successors
indeed, the Bishops of the primitive Church, at the command of their Sovereign
Emperors, did take upon them to be Judges, Counselors, Ambassadors, as I have
related: and that because being Subjects of the Empire, they were bound to
obey, as Constantine the great wrote unto them: but these c^ill employments were
not due to their Episcopal function. Mercy God what wonderful difference
(...) here? Christ would not usurp so much of temporal power, as to march a
small piece of heritage for pacifying of two brethren, being pressed unto it
the Pope does affirm that he has right of marching; and where? betwixt Cancer
and Capricorn, betwixt the Arctique and Antarctique circles, nay, betwixt the
North and South Poles, betwixt the Occident and the Orient: he has the right
of division over all the earthly Globe ^he has by his ^lls divided the East
from the West Indies, and has distributed them betwixt the Spaniard and the
Portugalls first: and now again has given all unto the Spaniard.

Next I come to tell your Lordship how this doctrine of Papal Soueraignitie is
^pugned by the catholic Doctrine of the Roman Churches for Princes. l. b. 2.
cap. 8.
Romans; Panormitanus that learned Bishop has written against that opinion of
the Popes being above general counsels. And therefore by Baronius and
Bellarmin is counted a schismaticke, one Nicholas de Ch^sa in a treatise de
concordia Cathol: has done the same perfectly, saying, vniuer sale consi^um
maioris esse author it at is and minoris fallibilitatis quam Papae tantum: The
Counsels have more authority and less fall abillity then the Pope alone.
Paulus Venetus upon these late distractions of Venice from the Pope, has made
it plain by many Treatises, but the fountain of that truth has been in
France, kept pure and incorruptible, with many disputes at several times, for
the liberty of their Princes, as their stories bear: namely in the time of
Phillip the fair; So that this question is clearly handled of Gerson, who for
his excellent learning was Chauncellor of the Sorbon, He has expressly
written (forbearing to speak of particular points of the Papal authority) De
Auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia, of certain cases and possibilities wherein
the Church of Rome ought to want a Pope, and has put it down in twenty
several considerations (as he terms them) from which the general Counsels
have lawful power to pronounce a N^ of the Pope. All which as any man may
perceive who does (...) them, are founded upon the solid conclusion of S.
August, Cia^ Regnicael^ dat^ sunt (says he) P^ (...) (...) The keys of heaven
were given to Peter in type of ^tie of the whole Church. Whereon Gerson in his
second consideration does establish the same gro^; saying, they were given Non
^sed (...), not to one man, but to the (...) of one Church. And in his (...)
consideration what Christ gave to Saint Peter, (says he) It was not given unto
him, but unto the Church, because it was given (...). Therefore says he, the
whole Church may (the Pope being absent) (...) authori^ (...), ese the (...)
(...) of then (...) (...). In that twelfth consideration, he does induce the
Apostolical example, when Paul Galat. 2. did reprehend Saint P^, that he
brought novelties (...) the Church. A murmuration grew, Act 10. so that (...)
(...) compelled according to his own Doctrine, Para^ esse, as Gerson says,
(...) Ecclesia (...) (...), (...) Ecclesia es non (...), To prepare himself to
render an acount before the whole Church, otherwise she had not believed him,
in the same consideration, again he reasons thuus; The Papal power is given
to the Church for her (...), and not for her destruction; and therefore such a
power may be suspended or taken away from one who would abuse it to her peril;
And what else is this then to say that the Pope has the place of a moderator
so long as he is modest, or that he thinks the Church could well enough want
the Papal authority; Then does he pass from the theorick of the question to
the practice, by supposing what disorder or insufficiency might fall into the
person of a Pope; If (says he) that the Pope will teach, that the holy Ghost
does not proceed from the Father and the Son; must not the Church resist it?
if, said he, an other Pope would or^n the Kingdom of France to be sacked with
fire and sword, r^sistere debet Rex, the King ought to resist. And so in his
tenth consideration, issobe, said he, the Pope should invade a man per^ce,
and this man in his own defense, Si Pap^ M^ proi^ it, if he should fling the
Pope into the Sea, he does it lawfully: then should it much more be permitted
and lawful (says he) for the whole Church to cast out a Pope for her own
preservation, by these twenty Considerations of the occasions of the Papal
Nullitie one may well see how he thought that Popery was a foolish and
dangerous humane institution, as it is indeed.

Lastly, I will in few words open the mystery and design of this Jesuitical
doctrine, that every one may know how to pull down his mask, and see the
leaprous face of his ambition. How this Papal Tower has been builded,
Histories be so full of it, and it is so triniall, that I need not to insist
in it, by the weakness of the Empire, by the remoteness of Emperors, their
naughtiness, by the sub^ditie of Popes, (...) studying to keep some dangerous
enemies upon the shoulders of the Empire, till they might get some advantage,
by their fostering of perpetual discords among Christian Princes and neighbor
States, for the like end, that they might have the better means to overthrow
one of the sides, and to increase themselves upon their ruins, Crescit (...)
Roma Alba ruiuis, by the crafty practicing of ignorant Bishops, first, to
repair to Rome, as for the commodity of the place: next, to do nothing
without their consent: thirdly, to make appellation there, still keeping the
seeds of dissension among Prelates for that purpose, till they contrived that
invention of the Universal Bishop. Always the Jesuits, who have lately
cropen in, that the Cup of iniquity may be the sooner full, and that the world
may the sooner see the revelation of the Beast, who seeks to be adored of
all Princes and people. They have a desperate profession not to obey God, nor
to obey the Pope, nor the Church of Rome, but to obey their general; per
Omnia, and in Omnibus tanquam Christo presenti, as we read in their Summa
Constitution^, page 307. The glory of their obedience does stand in undergoing
travails and dangers for propagation of the Church of Rome* and to that end
they have gone through the World, as I have said, like unto Pandora, that
wretched and fatal Ambassatrix of fierce Nemesis carrying their boxes full of
all sorts of profound and curious learning: but, alas, rearefully infected with
Absynthium, to poison the waters of true knowledge, and corrupt our
understanding, they have brave spirits, astonishing tongues, and eloquent
words, with all kind of serpentine insinuation that may serve to steal away
our minds from the purity of Gods worship, and from our dutiful obedience to
our Sovereign Princes: Ve^ Psalm. 13.
aspidum sub labijs little: under their lips is hidden the venom of Aspes: De
laquijs (...) libera nos Domine: Psalm. 90.
Deliuervs, O Lord, from the snares of the Hunters: Facti sunt quasi arcus
dolosus: They are made like a deceitful Hose. 7.
bow: Sicut deci^la plena auibus it a Domus eorum Ierem., 5.
Plen^ dol^: As the Fowlers Cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of
fraud.

To speak briefly of the Cabbal or secret Art of this Iesuistique trade, it
stands in their constant observation of certain, sure, and infallible
policies, for the exaltation of the Papal Chair, which is the mainescope of
all their studies, because one day they think to possess it themselves (as it
has already well near fallen out to be so, when in the election of the late
Pope, the conclaue did hang six days upon Cardinal Bellarmine) which,
whenever it comes to pass, then they will prefer so many of their
society to the Cardinaltie, that we shall be sure never to see any more a
Pope but Iesuistique. The Maxims whereupon they do build this fabrique, be
specially these.

First they know that obedience and secrecy are the strongest means to
maintain a Sect, and to compass great plots: therefore they have sworn their
obedience absolute, not to the Pope nor to the Church, but to their general,
in omnibus and per omnia tanquam Christo presenti, as is said: and therefore
their arcana imperij, the mysteries of their policies are most close, and
reserved from the world.

Secondly, they know this to be a true Maxim in government, that no great
power can longer floorish then it does make it self useful, necessary, and
formidable to neighbor States: and finding that those things whereby the Popes
were steadable and necessary to people and Countries, such as their
Dispensations, Purgatoriall Indulgences, force of excommunication, Universal
title of Benefices ecclesiastique, were become distasteful and hated of most
men, because of their open abuses and impieties, and that wise Kings were
begun to prye into them, chiefly those of England, therefore the Jesuits,
to repair this breach, did invent this pernicious doctrine of the Popes
Supremacy over the temporalitie of Princes, to the end that no King should
find himself secure but in the favor and trust of Rome.

Thirdly, they see, that besides the aforesaid abuses, two things did
specially parrell the Papal Seat, one was the Immundities and ignorance of the
Cloister, religious men being given to their pleasures, and not to piety and
learning, which was the first occasion of the Lutherian separation, as we know:
another was, that light and reformation did come into the Church by pastoral
vigilance expressed by all means of most powerful preaching, disputing, and
writing in that age, which has followed since Luther: for help of the first
of these two, the Jesuits do profess such a purity in their Celibate, as
(to give them their due) is admirable: Sieve fuerit cast, sieve fuerit caute: if
it were not that the flames of raging ambition do ordinarily extinguish these
humide and beastiall passions in any man almost. For help of the second we
see what a glory and pride of learning in all Sciences is in them: as one said,
Imper^ um literarum est penes Iesuitas: as if they had resolved to ouershoote
our reformators in their own bow, and to bannish light out of the Church by
the same arms that brought it in, for this cause it i^, why they do attackt
themselves to the confessions of great and chief personages, and to the
education of the most Noble youth, wheresoever they are, which they do
perform with a sort of myraculous dexterity, gathering out among them unto
their own society, the most quick, subtle, and vehement Spirits, by whom
(tanquam per maxi^s damones) they do the more easily, surely, and secretly
infect all the corners of the earth with their perstiferous traditions.

Fourthly, they hold this maxim, which is like enough to be true that
religion must shute out and floorish with a growing state, and therefore
presuming that of Spain to be most disposed to monarchy they have devoted
them selves to the service of that Crown, for two respects, one that with the
dilatation thereof they also may prosper and increase, as they have already by
his means planted themselves into the Indes, an other, that having abused him
to the overthrow of other christian princes, he may in end be the more weke
himself, and obnoxious to their tyrranie, knowing how easy it will be for so
skillful craftesmen as they are, to suggest rebellion and revolt in his own
dominions which are not coniunct and united, but mightily dispersed, so that
finally they hope to conclude in their own persons that scripture, Homo
spiraualis omnia indicat and ipse a nemine iudicatur, In such manner that we
do now clearly see in them that which the great politic Matchivell said in
his time, that if the poverty of the Capuchines and clergy of the Jesuits,
had not come tymously in the Church of Rome, to uphold the papal dignity and
credit, they had even then fallen to the ground, thus is it no calumny, but a
most true and prudent observation of this time to affirm; that no age has
ever seen such fearful fyrebrandes and terrors, such errant stars so
malignant and contrarious to christian felicity, as is that society of
pretended Jesuits.

They do obtrude upon the world that pernicious doctrine of the papal power to
excommunicate to deprive, to warrant murders of kings, to the effect that by
length of time Popes being cunning to quarrel with neighbor Princes and to
draw their subjects from them, their states may fall into the Ocean of this
ambition, which doing is so open and manifest that in the histories of Spain
we find it acknowledged that they hold Portugal of the society of the
Jesuits, in the union of Portugal printed at Genua. sol: 197. and 214. the
chief drist of this doctrine has been against the kingdom of great Britan
and against the French kings these many year since, as we have perceived,
because in their designed monarchy they find much more difficulty to pass by
these two, then to have over passed the pillars of Hercules, whereupon does
stand that great word of their glory, plus vltra: because they went with the
spaineyard to the Indies. Brittane and France these be the two pillars which
do limitate this Iesuistick pride, and whereon they still do read this
contrary Mott^, vsque ad metas, which has been the cause why so many
treacherous attempts have partly been executed against King Henry the third of
France, and against that most heroical Prince Henry the fourth, whom I think
the Lord has suffered to fall into their bloody hands, because he did
contemn the monitions which were made to him before, for after his person had
been invaded, and he stricken in the mouth with a knife, whereupon the high
parliament of Paris did pronounce the edict of their banishment, and erected a
pyramide to remain the perpetual testimony of their villainous perfidie, he
did pardon them, restore them, and trust them, and partly I say, these
attempts have been in the great mercy of God prevented when they have been
plotted against the life of our most gracious Soueraign, as the whole world
does know, namely by that diabolioal machination of thundering massacre, bred
in the tempestuous air of these infernal spirits, the Lord God by a
miraculous inspiration made his majesty to foresee that hellish cloud of
powder, before the fire was yet broken out; The memory whereof should make
this whole kingdom to shake for fear, and to cry to God that it would please
him to preserve his sacred person from these cruel Hunters, because he is now
the principal object of their malignitie and that prince of all the earth whom
they do most fear and hate, Seeing how God who has raised his horn, has
also iust^fied his exaltation by marks more like to Moses and Solomon then
unto Cyrus, he has not only holden his right hand, and possessed it with
monarchiall state, strong and fearful to his enemies as he has done to Cyrus
and made numbers of strange nations who did before strive to depresse him, come
to honor and admire his regal throne: come to ask of him the peace of their
people which he has done also unto Cyrus, saying, The labor of Egypt, the
merchandice of Ethiopia and of the Sabines shall come to thee, men of stature
shall come to thee and fall down before thy face, saying, God is surely in
thee, which we have seen come to pass, by ouerflowing of his majesty's court
with foreign people, with foreign riches, and foreign presents, and by the
glorious Spainyard his solicitation of his majesty's wisdom to further his
peace with the Netherlands: But the lord also has granted unto his majesty
the understanding of Moses to build his tabernacle to restore unto his people
the primitive Government of the Church, approved by catholic antiquytie, for
a prognosticat that he intends to make him the instrument of farther
reformation in Christendom; And he has granted unto him Solomon like,
knowledge and learning to maintain by public wryts, the riches of his royal
Soueraignitie against all those insidious grounds of the crafty Jesuit, which
is the reason why I must boldly affirm it, that there is none of that society
in the world who does love his person in other terms then Cicero loved
Octanius when he called him bonum puerum and colendum. To proceed, there is
neither Prince prelate nor priest within the Church of Rome who has not his
displeasure, against this doctrine derogatiue to kings, except Italians
Spainiards and Jesuits, be cause that Papal supremacy does challenge to be
above the general counsels, taking from Catholic princes that liberty to
conuocate them, which was due to their predecessors in the primitive church,
because it does debar all Cardinals except Italians from the papal
dignity, because it is only granted to the Jesuits to go through and plant
religion, having infinite privileges granted unto them for that cause which
be hurtful to all other order of secular and cloysterall priests; This is the
reason why of these three Italians, Spaniards, Jesuits, there is not on who
does not eschew as a pest the meeting of general counsels, for howsoever they
do pretend this quod nunquam acquiescunt heritici they must be unnecessary
say they, because heretics will never rest to the voice of counsels: yet this
is the mystery and truth, no cardinal must presume to sit in Saint Peter's
chair, but an Italian, no king must ouerrule the consistory in his election
but the Spanyard whom also they think to devour in the end, albeit now he
thinks himself their Dictatour in perpetuum, and no prince but he may aspire
to brook an heriticall kingdom confiscat by the fulmination of Rome, by which
kind of tittles he does enjoy the Indies and Nauar as the like has been
granted to his father Phillip the second, by Pope Pius Quintus, who did
excommunicate the late Queen of England, nor no orders of Religion other then
the Jesuits may be negotiatours in them, or know the secrets of this
government whereof this is a main point to decline general Counsels, least
these abuses should be urged to be reformed: least the King of Great
Britain should urge the restitution of Patriarchall liberty, for the weal
of the Catholic Church, least a French King urge the residence again of a
Pope in Auignion, least both should concur to control this usurped fiske of
Rome, and so leasl the fruits of this forbidden. Tree of their domination
should be made common to all Princes alike, and to all Cardinals alike, the
which mystery most clearly did appear in the Sessions and circumstances of
the Counsel of Trent, for the Emperor Charles the fifth, being a wise and
religious Prince, and most studious by all means to pacify the broils of his
Countries of Germany, moved by the Lutheran reformation, he did by
obstinate instance, hardly obtain from the Pope the Convocation of that
Counsel, which as the History says so soon as it was granted him, Tam cit^
compedes Pontifici iniectos existima^, he thought that he had put the Pope
into chains, having his whole design to reform the Church of Rome in matters
of government, of manners, and of grosser points of worship, by advise and
concurrence of the whole Christian Ambassadors and Commissioners there;
without respect to the Cardinals of Rome, who for all that did so Italini^e and
circumuent the Ambassadors Tramontani (as they call them) making the French
Ambassadors to believe that the Emperor did urge some secret course for
himself with the Pope: enforming as much again to the Ambassador of the
Emperor against the French, they procured in private both their warrants in
writ, without knowledge the one of the other, that nothing should be moved in
that Counsel but from the mouth of the Nuncio of Rome, whereupon did follow
that nothing was disputed there, but points of mere doctrine; and these most
rigorously concluded, while as that good Emperor had resolved to heal the
Scandalized world, as is well understood by that conference in Germany which
is called the Emperors Interim, where he himself did condescend to the
Matrimony of Churchmen, to the administration of the Sacrament both in bread
and wine, and other points which be holden heretical in Rome: and during all
his life time, he did mightily lament the deceit of that Counsel, which is to
be verified by diverse Autographicall letters, that is to say, written with his
own hand, and yet extant in the custody of a Nephew of him who was French
Ambassador at Trent in the foresaid Counsel, called Pibracke, dwelling at
Paris as I take it: But they did more surely school the son of that
Emperor, Phillip the second, and this Phillip now of Spain, whom they have
really incorporate into the seat of Rome, making him to think, that he is
perpetual Dictator, as is said: and the Popes only son and heir.

And because all this discourse is of experience, I will tell your Lordship how
this was very quickly noted to me by a certain intercourse which did happen
to me Being at Millaine in Lombardie, I did behold upon the Gates of that City
the Arms of Charlequint, gloriously planted, with many stately inscriptions,
among the which this was to be read, Ad plantandam fidem and ad colligenda
Regna dispersa a Deo destinatus: Destinate by God for the plantation of the
faith, and for the union of dispersed Kingdoms of the world: when I did object
to one of my acquaintance of good understanding, that Destinatus ad plantandam
fidem was rather a title Apostolical then Imperial: He replied to me, that
it was Apostolical: for (said he) that Trinity of the Godhead which is in
heaven, of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, has deputed here below another
Trinity for earthly government, under whose obedience all power must be
ranged: the Pope the Father, the King of Spain the Son, and the Society of
the Jesuits the holy Ghost: so that the Inscription is thus to be construed,
said he: The Jesuit, who takes upon him to be the only Plantator of the
faith, being (as the holy Ghost of this Trinity) sent forth among stranger
Princes to seduce their people to rebellion, by sowing into their hearts the
seeds of superstition and sedition, which so soon as that Prince or King does
offer to punish, the Pope, who has the place of the Father, he does
excommunicate him: and lastly, give commission to the King of Spain to invade
his Dominions, who has the place of his only Son and heir, who only of all
Princes does understand the right Cabbal of the Court of Rome, and is only
destined to execute that which is appointed in the Council of his Father: so
that he also is Apostolical, said this Gentleman, who was a Frenchman, and a
true enemy to the Spaniard, as may be seen by this ingenious and pretty
conceit. Thus it is no more a mystery, but revealed to all the world which way
the ambition of this Beast does tend: first, debarring from the benefit of
general Councels, Lutherans, of whom some were cruelly burnt against their
safe conduct and public faith of the world: secondly, debarring Protestants,
which ought not to be, because they have still called for reformation:
thirdly, debarring the Catholic Roman Clergy it self, giving out for
doctrine, that the Pope is above all general Councels, which is done so
impudently, that the Cardinals, Barronio and Bellarmino have not been ashamed
to condemn that great Panormitan Bishop, because from this text, Omnis anima
subdita sit Superioribus potestatibus: he proves the Pope to be subject to
general Counsels: and finally, not only spoiling Christian Princes their
powers to conuocate Counsels, debarring them also, but usurping over their
authorities temporal, and inuading their States and lives.

I have detained your Lordship so long upon this point of the Papal
Soueraignity, and of the Jesuitical trade, quia plurimi interest, because it
concerns your Lordship, you, I say, and all those who be of your profession,
chiefly who be of your Lordships Noble rank, it concerns you nearly to be
well informed here: this is the very place of danger, it is the insatiable
mouth of the devouring Monster of our Age: it is the gulf which has swallowed
puissant Kings and flourishing Kingdoms. This venomous doctrine is like unto
that Lady, of whom Tacitus writes, called Locusta, whose singular skill to
temper Poison so, that when it was most deadly, it wrought most vnperceiuedly,
made her to be called, Maximum instrumentum imperij: A great and necessary
Instrument of the Empire, and much made of under Nero. This doctrine does
attrappe and snare the lives of greatest Monarkes before they can be aware. It
is a drink of some new Cyrce, changing men into brutall Beasts, that they have
no more sense of humanity, or respect (what shall say?) to themselves, their
wives and children: no, that is small, but not to their sacred Princes, nor to
our common Mother, their Native Countreye, not caring to cast into the mouth of
this Monster millions of innocent souls, nor making no account to sprinckle
the Altars of their Cyrce with the anointed blood of their Sovereign Kings:
yea, before she should want her nefand and barbarous sacrifice, they will offer
unto her the blood of their own hearts: let us remember Clement Rauiliacke,
Persie, and his wretched accomplices: So pitifully are they enchaunted with
constant and desperate madness. We must be afraid of the Jesuit, and of his
potion: he will tell us, that constancy in faith is able to overcome all
things, as it is indeed when it is inspyred by the good Spirit of God: but
(alas) he will tell us that constancy to prosecute great actions or enterprises
is like to an hecticke fever, which scarcely is felt at the first assault, but
by continuance it overthrows the strongest bodies. He will tell us, that
oftentimes God does compassion their tears shed for their brethren, Martyred
under tyrannous heretical Kings, even by stirring up within their Courts and
Cabinets, a Brutus an Aeod, inspired with courage and constancy to revenge his
own cause: God of his mercy preserve Christian Princes from these brutish
spirits. That Brutus is a dangerous fellow, be where he will, we read of
Brutus, that he did glory in the murder of Caesar in these terms, Non solum
non Caesari, sed ne patri quide^ meo si reuiuiscat concesserim, ego totius
orbis terraru^ liberator, vt me patiente plus legibus ac Senato possit. I the
deliverer of the whole world, would not on only not suffer Caesar, but not my
own Father to do these things, yet this was but a cause of state, and he was
only an heretic in policy: if he then would have murdered his Father, as
he did in effect, for he was thought the natural son of Caesar, albeit not
lawful, what shall we then look for, from these brutish beasts of our age,
who have a cause of conscience, and an error in their soul, which once being
infected with that devilish pride, to be called delivering Aeods of Gods
people, what is so heinous that they will not perpetrat? Brutus was much
beloved and bound to Caesar, yet that would not keep up his hand from impious
paricide, he was among the first of his percussors, that Caesar said to him,
Tu etiam fili Brute: This mental reservation of men's minds, this wicked
equivocation of their manners, it makes that complaint of Momus against
Jupiter, to seem more just now then ever before, why he did not make an open
window into the breast of man, that the deep of his heart might be seen, and
God grant it do not betray the foresight of the most witty Princes; but that
they in time discern these beasts, and look upon them with the eyes of that
king of beasts the Lion, whom nature has made so vigilant over his own
safety, that he does never sleep but with open eyes; as we have two eyes in
our head, and none in the members of our body, so Princes who are heads of the
people, they must not only have eyes for themselves, but eyes for the body of
their estates to penetrate most hidden things, like unto that Royal foul the
Eagle, who being in the high air above, does see small fishes in the bottom
of the waters; and as our head has a Nose to savor and a Mouth to taste, for
the necessary use of our bodies, so they who be our heads, must have,
specially in these treacherous and untrusty times, Sagacissimum olfactum, most
quick senses able to smell the most secret disposition of their subjects:
namely of these who live about their persons, what shall we say then, of these
holy Fathers, the Jesuits, who have laid so dangerous nets in the high ways
of Christian Kings? and what shall we say of these their holy Disciples, who
will not spare to murmur against their punishment, as to calumniate that
sentence worthily lead by the Arch Bishop now of S. Androes against John Ogiluy
the Jesuit at Glasgow, whose traffic auowedly: was to move his Majesty's
subjects after his own example, to disclaim the authority of their most
natural and lawful King. Of the Jesuits your Lo: has my opinion, of those,
be who they will, who have commerce with them, or favor them, (because I know
your Lordship to be far from being such) I say they are hosts Patriae, and
hostis Principis, they are no loyal subjects of the Prince; nor upright
members of this kingdom. I speak not rashly, I know as much as any of the
Papists, who be of that profession, and more then many of them, and of that
Act, at Glasgow, I say that many such services should make a man worthy to
watch the Lions tent, to have his nest next the Eagle, and to sit near the
Rudder in the ship of the state.

Now to conclude this point, I appeal to the divine light of your Lordships
conscience, whether you do not think in your heart (things being as I have
related) that this practicing of the Court of Rome, is to play the beast of the
Apocalips, who strives to be worshipped of all the world, whither you do not
think that unto her members does belong the judgment pronounced by Ezekiel. 39.
Ezekiel, against those who courtise the world, and the flesh: Dic omni volucri
coeli, and omnibus auibus cunctisque bestijs, concurrite vndique, etc. Thus
says the Lord, speak to every feathered foul, and every beast of the field,
assemble your selves, and come gather on every side to my sacrifice, for I
prepare a great sacrifice for you upon the mountains of Israel; that ye may
eat flesh, and drink blood; ye shall eat the flesh of the valiant, and
drink the blood of Princes of the earth, of the Weathers, and the Rams of
the Goats of the Bullockes, even of the fat beasts of Basan: Thus ye shall be
filled at my Table, with horses and chariots, with valiant men, and with all
men of war, says the Lord God. Here is a fearful Proclamation prepared for
the feinds of hell, who are meant by these feathered fowls, as the Prophet in
one place says, Malis auibus dedit ad deuourandum, he gave them to be
devoured of the evil fowls, of which kind of infernal fowls, Christ
speaking in the Parable of the grain of corn, Et volucres coeli comederunt
illud, and the fowls of the air did eat it up. But who is meant by these
Bellators against God, and these fat Bulls of Basan? will one say the
Israelites? or the nations about them? O but the word of God is eternal, and
the doctrine of the Prophets is perpetual, and Symbolicall as that Church was
Symbolicall, that to the worlds end, and in all ages the like sins shall
procure the like vengeance: who be they who carry horns of ambition like unto
the Ram? was there ever any pride comparable unto that of Rome, where under
color of spiritual care, there is nothing but contriuing of monarchical
Tyranny, by most wicked means, as if Christ had left that commission to Saint
Peter which Anchises left unto Aeneas the Grandfather of the Romans. Tu re
gere imperio populos Roman memento,
Ha tibi erunt arts.


Who be these who carry hearts polluted with filthy and abominable lusts,
like unto the goats, minds puffed up with undaunted arrogance like unto the
bulls: who be laden with sordiditie, and riches like unto fat kine; who be
like unto Sodom, ouerflowing with idleness, and wealth.

CHAP. VI.
The means by which it pleased God to reduce this Ass of Balaam, with his
Counsel against Papisticall, and superstitious Induration.

IT were now a great happiness for your Lo: if you could weigh with sound
Judgment, and out of the divine light, which is in your soul the points of
this discourse, in so many impious and superstitious transgressions, but your
Lo: does shut your eyes, and ears; I will yet tell you one jest of my
experience. Being at Rome, I did often hear the chiefest Cardinals deplore,
Tanquam mortem dilectissimae filiae, as the death of their most tender
daughter, the falling away of this kingdom of Great Britain from the seat
of Rome, affirming that in former ages we were the most upright Catholic
Romans, and most zealous of Christendom, and being most curious to demand a
certain understanding man, the reason of that speech, he gave me this answer,
Per che crano simplichotti, lontani, may intendeuano la cuilloneria di questa
sedia: Because said he, your predecessors were simple people, far distant
from this, who never did truly understand the trumperie of this seat; because
I speak in foro conscientiae, your Lordship ought to believe me. Even so, I
say of your Lordship, you are remote from these places, and do not see the
truth of things, and when they are brought before you, you do not look upon
them with your right eye, but with your sinistrous eye, not with whole eyes,
but with sore eyes; For like as those whose eyes are weak or diseased, do see
better in shadie and dark places, then in presence of the sun, so they who
have the eyes of their soul blinded with the shadows of Pharisaicall
coremonies of superstition, they cannot willingly abide to have their sight
tried before the brightness of Gods word: As there were among the Babylonians
to be found numbers of holy vessels that were brought forth of the Temple of
Jerusalem, when the people were captiued, so in the Church of Rome there be
indeed; many good and Christian customs and ordinances, and sundry pure and
sincere grounds of Doctrine mixed with these iniquities and idolatry, that we
may call it like unto that monstrous Minotaure kept in the Labyrinth of
Daedalus, Alter a part hominem, alter a part bouem, when the mother of this
monster went in to see it, her natural affection did never suffer her to
behold the beastly part of it. It is just so with many men, when they are
brought where they may have a perfect discovery of this forged and monstrous
worship, their natural inclination to superstition will never permit them to
behold the wicked and impious parts of it: and therefore, as multitudes who
entered within that Labyrinth, were devoured of that monster, because they knew
not the way to return, till Theseus did devise a means of retreat, by tying a
thread to the entire by the one end, and carrying the other with him, he did
come back by the same. Even so who does eter within the mystical Labyrinth of
these cunning and crafty superstitions, devised by many Dedalean artificers,
he is never able to make recourse, nor to save himself vndeuoured of that
monster, without he be tied to the thread of Gods word. And he who is so, shall
not only pass most securely through the most secret places thereof, but (as
David got out of the hands of Goliath that spear wherewith he slew him) so shall
he bring as many arguments from that which he shall see among them, as shall
suffice to confound themselves, we slide into errors piece, and piece, and
piece and piece we must recoile from them, we are not to look for sudden and
miraculous conuersions, for that blow coming from heaven which struck S. Paul
to the ground, suddenly drove the devil out of him; for that divine light
which in an instant removed the darkness of his soul, and made him cry,
Lord, what will thou, I am here. The days of miracles are past, we have
Moses, the Prophets and Apostles: we must follow the rule of Christ, Scrutamini
Scripturas; search the Scriprures, because they give testimony of me. The way
of conversion to Gods truth is by diligent Reading of his word, by diligent
hearing of the preachers of the same, by diligent prayer, who does hold the
books of holy Scripture insufficient he reads in vain, who prays with
the Church of Rome, which thinks she cannot err, she has no need of
reformation, such Pharisaicall prayers are also in vain.

And therefore I mean now to give your Lordship a Christian advise, first by
telling your Lordship, by what natural defects many men lie over in this
blindness, Secondly by showing unto your Lo: that which happened unto my
self, and by what means and degrees I was freed from those errors wherein you
are. And thirdly by pointing unto your Lordship out of these, a way which I
would wish you to follow in particular for your help: for the first, I say
that the devil seeks craftily to overthrow us with our own weapons also, he
works upon the infirmities of our nature, he makes advantage of our natural
weakness; he assalteth the walls of our minds there, where the breach is
likeliest, as he will sooner tempt a man of a fierce and tygrish disposition to
commit murder, then him who is naturally mild, modest, and meek: so I hold
this ignorance of men given over to Idolatry, to proceed from one of those
two faults in themselves; either it is a natural inclination to superstion,
that while they will not believe the holy Scriptures to be sufficient, they
will give faith enough to the most ridiculous Aniles fabulae, of the
legendaries, to the relation of a Straw miracle pretended to be done here, or
there: in which kind of foolishness I must say, some of our Catholic
Romans within this kingdom be the poorest men under the heaven. Well,
Pharaoh did see in the miracles of Moses the finger of God working, Ego te
constituam Deum Pharaonis: but he gave more credit to the Magical miracles of
his Sorcerers: and why? because his heart was hardened. Let us beware of this
fearful Judgment therefore, which I have told your Lordship, does follow
upon Idolatry, to be abandoned of the Lord, vt credant mendacio qui non
crediderunt veritati: that they may believe lies and follies, who would not
believe the truth: Indura cor populi huius, occoeca occulos, claude aures, etc.
Obdurate the heart of this people, close their cares, blind their eyes, that
they do not hear, see, nor understand, lest they turn to me, and I heal
them, says God to the Prophet. Or, next this obstinate and wilful ignorance,
wherein men cannot be broken, no, not from one point of most gross things, it
proceeds (as we have observed in many, forbearing to judge so of your
Lordship) from a secret selfeloue, glorying to be called constant and
inflexible. Surely constancy and good resolution, it is a Cardinal virtue,
and perseverance in faith is the height of all Christian virtues: but believe
me, this sort of constancy is a despightfull pride, it is to have that which
all the herefiarches have had hereticum ingenium, an heretical, inflexible,
and rebellious ingenie of Nature: such were Manicheus, Marcion, Arrius,
Pelagius, etc. Such an heretic was not the good Father Augustine, who fell but
Timide and Languide into the Manichean opinion, and was easily again reformed
by his good and toward nature, by the inspiration of Gods Spirit, willingly to
hear the Sermons, disputes, and conferences of the holy Saint Ambrose.
Secondly, I will tell your Lordship syncerely by what steps it pleased God to
grant me retreait forth of this fearful Labyrinth of Idolatry: your
Lordship has heard how I already did distaste these things, which I did see in
Italy; but that did not serve the turn, it was indeed a good beginning: upon
my back coming to France, and new conference with that famous Protestant
Mounsieur Causabon resident then at Paris in the service of the late King, with
whom I was familiar before, who now finding me somewhat better disposed, he
did far second those beginnings of mine, saying to me, that howseeuer it was
the trick of the Consistory of Rome to deny any cause of reformation on their
side, and to disclaim general Counsels: yet, if it pleased God to inspire
the hearts of Princes to challenge that auhoritie over Ecclesiastical
government, which was due to their Predecessors in the primitive Church, that
the body of the Catholic Church might be easily reformed, he told me that
design of Charl. 5. as I have relared it unto your Lordship, he told me, that
two Emperors, his successors, Ferdinand and Maximilian did much labor for the
same. In token whereof, there be yet extant numbers of their letters
sollicitatory, to that most grave and profound Doctor of the Roman Church:
George Cassander, most zealously entreating him, touching his opinion of the
deciding of Christian Controversies, which Book, with diverse other learned
Treatises of other pacificators, he gave me to read, as also these Theames
written, De auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia, as I have shown your Lordship
already. He told me, that the seat of Rome was like unto one, who having made
unlawful purchase of many neighbor Lands, do so curiously maintain their
march stones, that they will not have them to be removed half a foot, quia
vno dato incommodo multa sequuntur, because, that one granted, with the like
equity, much more were to be demanded. They do well remember (says he)
that Emblem of Sylurus the Scythian unto his eyghtie sons, for the knot of
their unity. A sheafe of Arrows hardly bound, out of the which if one could
be taken out, it would quickly make the rest to scatter. The reformation of
any one point might possibly (they fear) dissolve the whole Mass of that
superstitibus trade. These speeches did in like sort further my better
judgment. Next again, upon my arrival at the Court of England, unto the
which I brought the Commission of some aduertisements of this kind from the
same Mounsieur Causabon, and others, to the Kings Majesty, where, my hearing
his Majesty's learned discourses sometimes at his Majesty's Table, I confess
did also much shorten my way, seeing all the world do talk of his rare and
singular wit, and of the sanctified knowledge which God has given him in the
holy Scriptures: I hope I may, without suspicion of flattery, say of his
Majesty, that which one of the first Order of wise men in the Land spoke to my
self while he lived, the late Earl of Salisbury, that his Majesty's
knowledge was supernatural: that he was the highest Sphere, and nearest to
God, which did receive the first influence of wisdom: that he was like to
Solomon, of whom it was said, Beatiserui tui qui coram testant, and audiu^t
sapientiam tuam: Happy are thy servants who stand before thee, and hear thy
wisdom. That his Majesty did bestow upon his servants riches and knowledge,
and that himself did profess to have gotten more increase of good knowledge,
then of Estate, since his Majesty's exaltation to the Crown. Thereafter
coming to Scotland, upon the occasion of your Lordships transportation from
the Castle of Edingburgh, unto Saint John's town, where you was confined, I did
oftentimes hear, as your Lordship did, that great and divine Preacher, now the
Bishop of Galoway, who, for your instruction, did expressly choose his Thesis
against those fallacious and false grounds of the antiquity, universality,
and succession of the Roman Church, which be the points that most entangle
your Lordships wit, and which he did so learnedly clear, that for my part,
I do acknowledge, they helped greatly to disintangle my self. After this I
went to dwell in Dundie for the space of two whole years, where I did most
diligently hear that excellent Preacher Master David Lyndesay and his fellow
laborers in the Church of that city, in whose worth I think does consiste no
small part of the happiness thereof, I had my private conference with him to
my great comfort as he can bear me record. I had my solitary exersices in
diverse subjects of Theology, whereof I praise the Lord I have extant as many
testimonies as will suffice to show my painfulnes to study the truth of his
worship, till now in the end it has pleased him of his mercy to give me by
faith a sure hold of the thread of his word, which is our only guide through
this mystical pilgrimage of humane follies: of which threade our great Theseus
Lord Jesus Christ has left thee on end here with us upon earth in his word
and has tied the other upon the gate of heaven which he did first open, called
for that by the spirit of God, the first borne among the dead, So that there is
no means to ariue safely unto that port but to keep our eyes fixed upon the
course of this thread as our undoubted Loadstarre, Thus I do ingenuously
confess my own weakness, to the glory of God, yea if it should be to my
shame. my uncertain wandering in the wilderness of my own ignorance, brought
up in my infancy in the simple profession of Gods word at home, and then
contemning it, to go a whooring after strange Gods beyond seas, like in that
wise to the swyne in the Gospel before whom the precious pearl should not
have been cast. And returning homeward to much a Cassandrist halting betwixt
two, that at my being at court, the kings May, in perceauing me thus to
wander in matters of religion, told me, that I should take heed least I did
imitate a certain English gentleman, who in his youth was a protestant, in his
trauayling beyond seas a papist, and in his returning a Cassandrist, and now
finally a most obdured Papist, which word did wound my heart and spur me to
crave of God a happy Resolution, which of his grace he has so far granted
me, as I have sound it by experience, that these who be of the number of his
Saints, and of the household of faith, they are chosen of him in the same manner
that he called their father Abraham, to whom he spakesaying, thou shall get
thee out of thy own country, that I may blessetheo in an other, which words
besides the litterall sense, has also this interpretation by remote theology,
that he should not only leave his native country: which was an Idolatrous
land, but that he should leave his own Idolatrous disposition, he should quit
the wisdom of the flesh, and doctrine of humanity, and so go out of himself
to believe Gods word absolutely. which he did not upon an instant, for the
spirit of God tells us that when the Lord did first promise to him the coming
of Isaac, that the knowledge of the flesh told him that it had ceased to be
with Sara after the manner of women: Therefore he in his distrust laid
himself upon his face and laughed at God saying would to God that Ismael may
live, but in the end he did abjure humane wisdom and himself to believe
Gods word so far, that when he had gotten Isaacs he went to sacrifice him
willingly, notwithstanding so many promises given him of his succession,
whereupon it was said of him by the holy spirit, That Abraham believed God and
it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Even so the Lord has made me to
quite the Idolatrous land the doctrine of Idolatry piece and piece, the
traditiones of humanity, to quite my own weak and dark understanding, and
abiuring all other things whatsoever, to betake my self to the incorruptible
truth of his eternal word, which does so shine in my conscience (praised be
his holy name) that I confess it joyfully, the more I fled it to follow
superstition, and the more I did practice these damones meridionales, the more
I lost out of sight the polestarre of the right course to the kingdom of
heaven.

Now thirdly I come to give your Lordship my counsel how to extricat^ your
self forth of this labirinth wherein you are, and it shall consist of three
several points, the first whereof shall be common to your Lordship and all
other men, that you will seek rectified knowledge, of God, in such terms as
the wise man commands in the beginning of his book of wisdom, seek the Lord
in simplicity of heart, for he appears not unto those that be unfaithful
says he, to seek the Lord in the darkness of an implicit faith, and to
rely your Lo: faith upon humane traditions, as far as upon the written word
of God, it is no simplicity of heart, nor no faythfulnesse, it is to mix the
dross with gold, and to corrupt the simple food of Gods word with
pharisaicall leven and so to be unfaithful believing men more then God, seek
the Lord with simplicity of heart, for he will not be found of those who tempt
him with infidelity says Solomon.

The second shall be the wishing your Lordship to acknowledge what peculiar and
self imperfections possibly in your Lordships self may occasion this
weakness of faith, to doubt of the suff^ciencie of Gods word, which commonly
in other men (as I have alleged) are a superstitious mind of nature, a fault
proper even to diverse good men, therefore the more perilous, and again to be
na turally of obstinate and inflexible resolution, a fault which has
overthrown many brave and worthy spirits in special, which two several
inconveniences unhappily met together in one who lives in fide implicita,
they make him altogether incapable of reformation and senseless of any
reasonable persuasions as if he were changed into an image of hardest propheir;
it is no shame to confess our faults but it is the first step to grace, the
holy prophet David said omnis homo mendax, and in an other place, dixi
confitebor aduersum ^e in iustitiam mea^ domin^ and tu remisisti impietatem
peccati mei, I said I would confess my iniquity before God, and thou O God
did remitte my iniquity.

Therefore the last part of my Counsel shall be that you begin in this sort
to mend those: Dimidiu^ facti qui been caepit habet: A thing well begun, that
is to say, in the fear of God is half finished, if you cannot upon the
sudden absolutely depart from the Church of Rome, yet (since not only Gods
word and the light of your conscience do convict your Lo: but that her own
doctrine for this wicked vsurpatio^ over Princes, has pulled down the mask
that covered her whorish face: revealing thereby to theworldeuen in our time,
that mystery of iniquity) do at last compassion her, as a kindly child the
miseries of his mother: and once becontent to wish her to be reformed, for that
she has need of reformation, you have in facto confessed, by taking the oath
of fidelity, especially expressed to be against a doctrinall ground of Rome.
Yea, which is so far urged for mere doctrine, that I have heard it
pronounced with my ears, by a sentence of their Consistory, that he who
takes that oath is no Catholic Roman: and therefore to be debarred from any
spiritual benefit of their Church, which is as much as to say, he is no
Catholic Roman: but he, who is a Traitor to his King and Country, and their
impious Bulls and Emissarij, secretly sent through the world for that effect,
to poison the waters of men's knowledge, with that Absynthium as I have recyted:
I speak with warrant, for I did not forbear to practice any thing which might
purchase unto me the true understanding of things; because I was not to return
there again for better information. The chiefest Alumni of the Roman Church
and her greatest Zealotors Charles the fifth, and his successors in the Empire,
the chiefest of her Clergy that has been, or are, have consulted,
negotiated, debated, disputed, written and plotted her reformation. Howsoever
God for our sins has illuded their intention, and our poor Papists of this
kingdom cannot have any other thought, but to lie ever in beastiall forms
under the charms of Circe: never so much as wishing to be restored to the
shapes of men: for what can I esteem it but a brutish ignorance, so to
Idolatrize open impieties, as to hold that Christian Princes ought not to
reform the Church of Rome, and purge her from her abominations, or to hold
that it is not a most Christian discharge of every one of Gods Saints in
particular, Spirare vnitatem Ecclesiae, to importune God by our daily prayers,
for the great Iubile of this reformation, the reduction of his people from
captivity, the resta^ration of his holy sanctuary, and the destruction of
Babel, which has so long detained them in spiritual chains and servitude:
Therefore to dispose your Lo: heart for those wishes, and to prepare for you
the easier way of recoile from your wilful errors: I will tell you of the
means of this reformation: that you, in your own judgment conforming that
which ought to be, with the thing which is very possible to be (if the cup were
full, or the period of Gods hidden providence were at hand) you may first
reform your self, and then call incessantly to God for this general
reformation of Christian people.

CHAP. VII.
Comparison of Rome and Jerusalem: the order and truest means of Christian
reformation: expostulation against the implacable debates of the Christian
Clergy: an exhortation to the upright study of Pacification.

WE can never more rightly ponder the condition of the Church of Rome, then to
balance her with Jerusalem: howbeit this was typical in regard of their
external worship, and that substantial, this a limited Synagogue, and that
Catholicall and universal, in respect before specified of their profession and
faith common to all both circumcised and uncircumcised. The chief cause why
the Christian is called Catholic, as by that mark distinguished from the
Jewish Congregation: yet, I say, the Policy does in effect remain alike in
both, the dealing of God with both is so like, and the sins of men in all
ages be so like: the corruption of Religion by the length of time so like: and
Gods Judgments, threatened by his Prophets, do fall out so like upon all, then
and now, that makes the comparison pertinent, clear, and true: for concerning
the chief point, which Rome usurps, as Sovereign to her, to be the
perpetual Sanctuary, it is altogether idle, to reason that Rome, or any
Christian Church, had so ample promises as Jerusalem by their names or places.
The Roman faith is indeed as I have said, if we please to call it so, being
universal to all, I mean that faith of Saint Peter, whereupon the Church of
Rome does build her pretended Supremacy, Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram
fundabo Ecclesiam: that is, upon his preceding confession, that Jesus was the
Son of God, did Christ found his Church. That faith, I say, has the infallible
promise of the perpetuity of Gods Spirit, that is, the Candlestick which
never shall be void of light, the Lamp which shall never want Oil, the great
City upon the Mountain which shall never disappeare, so lively seen by that
Prophet of the old Law, and that other of the New, Ezechiel and Saint John,
being both in one ecstasy, whereof Saint John said in his vision in the
Apocolyps, Sustulit me Angelus Apo. 21.
in montem altissimum, etc. The Angel of God took me up into a high
Mountain, and showed me the holy City of Jerusalem coming down from heaven,
covered with the beauty of God: and whereof Esaias says, Esa. 62.
Tu vocaberis quaesita Ciuitas and non derelicta: Thou shall be called a City
sought for, and not abandoned: And whereof the Prophet David makes a glorious
description, Gloriosa dicta sunt de te Ciuitas Dei, etc. But speaking Psalm. 36.
of places, what Christian Church or Town may compare to Jerusalem, who was
the Mother City, not only of Jewish, but of Christian Religion. The Law went
out from Sion, says the Apostle: Et non peribit lex a Sacerdote, says the
Prophet: She was like unto Noah, who preached unto two Worlds, as I have said.
And if Rome may brag of Gods promise above Jerusalem, why has David said in
his Psalm, to the derogation, not only to the Mountains of Rome, but of all
others, Why brag ye thus, ye Hills most hie,
And leap for pride together? Psalm. 68.

This Hill of Sion God does love,
And there will dwell for ever.


Always it is enough by way of comparison: for the first they did both boast
of Templum Domini: for the second, as it was long before prophesied, that
Jerusalem should fall away, and become an Adultresse, as the Lord said to
Hosea, Go, take unto thee a Wife of Fornication, Hos. 1.
and Children of Fornication, Quia fornicando fornicabitur terra ne eat post
Iehouam: Because the whole Land shall be defiled, that it should not follow the
Lord. So do we find in the Evangelical prophesies of the Apoc: a prediction
of the falling away of Rome clear enough: thirdly, as Jerusalem, now fallen in
her filthiness, was said of the Prophets, to have a Whores forehead, who would
not be ashamed. And again, the faithful City was become a Harlot: she who
was full of Justice, was now full of Murders, her silver was become dross,
Esa. 1.
her wine mixed with water, her Princes companions of Thieves: even so, during
all this fall of the Church of Rome, there has never been wanting singular
men, whom God did stir up to rebuke her for her pollution. And as Jerusalem
did persecute her Prophets: so has Rome long since persecuted these, even with
cruel martyrdom; as, Ierom Sauanarola and John Husse, in special, with
numbers more thereafter in diverse Countries: Fourthly, Rome is now in that same
condition which Jerusalem was in when the Prophet Ezechiel was carried of Ezekiel.
8:
the Angel by the hair from Babylon, and placed in the inner part of the
Church of Jerusalem, where (says he) I was commanded to look upon the great
Idol of indignation, which was in the entry, whose abomination, says the
Lord, causes me to depart from my Sanctuary. What other thing, I pray your
Lordship, is that Idolatrous worship of Rome, which I have related, then a
great Idol of Gods indignation, as it is conjoined with that scandalous
impiety of manners. Then further it was said to Ezechiel, Turn thee, and
thou shall see greater abominations, enter at the gate of the inner Court, and
dig a hole through the wall where thou shall behold similitudes of all
abominable things, and all the Idols of the house of Israel painted upon the
walls, and thou shall see the seventy Ancients of the house of Israel
standing with Censours in their hands, and the vapors of their incense going
up like a Cloud: and yet do thou not see what they do in the dark? every
one in the chalmer of his images, saying to himself, The Lord has left the
earth, and does not see any more: And I did see one (says the Prophet) who
stood mourning for Jerusalem: Can any thing be more like to the College of
their seventy Cardinals, who have their Palaces thoroughly adorned with
idolatrous images of all sores, and the Altars within them smoking, with daily
incense of ascending vapors: and who can dig a hole through the wall, that
is to say, who can see through the cloud of these external shows of piety,
to behold the secret practices of their Consistorian Council, or to behold the
works of darkness which be in their secret Cabinets and sensual solitudes,
he would assuredly say, that they did also think the Lord had left the earth,
and did no more see their actions.

But specially one shall perceive and consider the likeness of Jerusalem and
Rome, by four points, rehearsed by the Prophet in his sixteen Chapter. First
he does introduce God, obiecting to her, the weakness and misery of her
youth, saying, O Jerusalem, when thou wast Ezech. 16.
borne, thy navel was not cut, thou wast not washed in water to soften thee,
and when I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I had pity on thee, and
said, thou should live: I did swear unto thee, and thou becamest mine. A
viue portract of the first age of the Church of Rome, the first 300. years of
her being under the cross from Christ to Constantine the great, during all
which time, the city of Rome did lie pitifully defiled with the blood of the
Apostles, Saints and Martyrs under the persecuting Emperors: Secondly, God
does object unto her the Grandeur and beauty whereunto he had exalted her,
and made her the most conspicuous city in the world, saying, Jerusalem I
entered a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine: I washed the blood from
thee, I clothed thee with broydered work, I covered thee with silk, I gave
unto thee bracelets, chains, and all kind of ornaments: I put upon thy head a
beautiful crown, I made thee eat of fine flower, honey and oil, and thou
grewest up unto a kingdom, and thy name was spread: Which does most
competently figure the second age of the Church of Rome, now washed from her
blood, and put in prosperity from the days of Constantine, to Pope Boniface
the third, who did usurp the universal Popedom, and began to erect in it a
kingdom, as no man can take exception against it. Thirdly the Lord does object
against her by his Prophet, her pride and declination, saying, Jerusalem, thou
did trust in thy beauty, and play the harlot: because of thy renown, thou
have taken the fair Jewels of gold and silver, which I gave thee, and made
Images of them unto thy self: and did commit whoredom with them: thou
have taken thy sons and daughters which were borne unto me, and sacrificed them
to be devoured of those, thou have not remembered the days of thy youth when
thou wast naked and bare, Thou have builded thy high places upon mounts, and at
every corner of the way thou have made thy beauty to be abhorred. The
application whereof to the present condition of Rome is so convenient, Quod
etiam ipsares loquitur, One would swear it had been a Type of the future
estate of Rome, as the Religion was typical, there was never Diadem nor
Crown like unto this which she has arrogated to her self, to be mistress
and Queen over Christian Princes: do not all the corners of that spacious
city of Rome, and all her seven mountains look out like that glorious palace
of Pryamus, whereof it was said, Regia finitimis inuidiosa locis, There was
never any artifice comparable with the curiosity of her three sorts of Images
in plate pictures, in imbroyderie on silk and gold, in grauing upon all sorts
of metals, and upon fine stones, such as Porphyre, Agat, Diasper, Lapis
Laznli, Cornioll, Alablaster Oriental, Marble, Crystal: whereof they have
more store then all the world, did any city ever more forget her obnoxious and
distressed youth, oppressing Princes, whose predecessors the Lord made the
instrument of her strength and beauty. Fourthly God by his Prophet does
pronounce the punishment of Jerusalem, saying, I will stretch out my hand to
diminish thy ordinary. I will gather all these whom thou have loved, and those
whom thou have hated round about against thee: and will discover thy
filthiness unto them, that they may destroy thee, and burn up thy houses with
fire, because as I live neither thy sister Sodom, nor her daughters have done
as thou and thy daughters have done; which does no less agree with the Church
of Rome: The Lord has stretched forth his hand for her abominations, and has
begun to diminish her ordinary, the purity of his word which is the only
bread of life, he has withdrawn from numbers of Christian people, the mutual
love, concord, and harmony of the Catholic faith, which should be their
spiritual food; Has not Rome seen these two ages bypast, her lovers and her
enemies gathered against her, to destroy and burn her up, that is to say; they
who were once knit with her, in a perfect unity of the Catholic faith, did
she not see her own bowels rent, and Christian states and cities persecuted
with fire and sword by Christian armies: has she not seen the Turks whom
she does deadly hate, come round about against her in Germany, Hungary,
Greece, Italy, and with barbarous cruelty overthrow both towns and floods of
Christian people, and purchase to themselves our fairest Countries. Is not this
to diminish our ordinary in a fearful sort for the pride of Rome: while I
call it our ordinary, I mean that through the impiety of Rome all these are
taken away from the ancient splendour, authority and strength of the Catholic
Church, whereby she is become more weak.

Now since Rome and Jerusalem do iumpe in all these points, we will consider a
little, whether they may also meet in that which follows in the Text of
Ezekiel. For fifthly God did limitate his judgment against Jerusalem, saying,
This will I still do till thou cease to play the harlot, and then my jealousy
shall depart from thee: I shall confirm to thee for ever the Covenant which I
made in thy youth, that thou may know that I am God and be ashamed to open
thy mouth any more when I am pacified toward thee, says the Lord; whereby
wesee, that whosoever God did chastise his Church of Jerusalem with long and
hard captiuities, yet he did not altogether abandon her: she was his Church
still (albeit now and then a fornicatrix) that even our Savior himself in his
time commanded to obey them so long as they kept the Chair of Moses, that is,
so long as they did speak the truth: what reason have we then to despair,
nor it may please the Lord to reform the Church of Rome: (so I do call all
these Churches throughout Europe that have received the mark of the beast, and
are drunk with the cup of her fornication to the great derogation of the
holy sanctuary of God.) And what know we but it may please God to restore the
ancient candor and integrity thereof? the times of secret providence are
unknown we read in the last chapter of Barucke, that it was said to the
people of Israel because of your sins you shall be captive to Babell, and ye
shall remain there many years, even seven generations, And after that I
will bring you away peaceably from thence, And in the chapter preceding it is
said O Jerusalem be of good comfort, and look toward the East to see thy joy
which comes from thy God. The Lord he incensed some Babilonian Princes to
carry them away he inspired others to dismiss them freely* to understand then
whither apparrantly it will please God to work so in the hearts of Christian
Kings that Rome (who for many ages has been spiritually captiued in Babell)
may open her eyes to see the joys of God coming from the west, we must try
how this reformation of Israel was, whereupon proceeded their restitution to
Gods favor, and upon that are we to settle our judgment of reformation which
has been or may be in the catholic Church.

As there was in Israel frequent Apostasies, so was there frequeat
reformations, first as both princes and prelates did err so are they convicted
by the prophets for transgressors, as well as the people, as we see in the
ninth chapter of Daniel. O Lord (says he) open shame belongs unto us, our
kings our princes our people our selves, unto us all, because we have sinned.
Secondly the Reformations which have been in Judah were performed by the
ordinary magistrates, Princes, governors and Prelates did err, and princes
prelates and governors did reform; The text of Daniell says. After the going
out of the commandedement for taking back the people and reedification of
Jerusalem, there were so many weeks as he does reckon there, whereby we note
that it was not done by any extraordinary means, but flowed from a
commandment given out. Thirdly we observe that these reformations were by
reducing the church of Jerusalem to the prmetiue institutions of Moses, and
Gods word: banishing things which had contrary course, so that for Daniel when
he prays for reformation and restitution of Jerusalem, because (said he) we
have transgressed thy law, we have sinned against thy servant Moses: therefore
all these plagues are come upon us: he does not appeal unto the church, under
Solomon, under David, under Samuel, under Joseph, or under Joshua, albeit all
these were upright Rulers of the Church: no, but under the primitive Architype
and institution of Moses.

But while we come to this point of reformation, here it is where the
comparison betwixt the Jewish Church, and the Church of Rome does fail; here
it is, Vbi insaniuimus Expostu^t: for Christian discords.
omnes: where, for the greatest part, we are all gone astray. The Prophet
Ezechiel did see one standing mourning for Jerusalem: but (alas) how few do
this day mourn for the Sanctuary? that is to say, for the desperate discords
of Christian Churches, who does out of Christian compassion utter unto the
Church of Rome these kindly speeches of the Prophet to the Israelites during
their captivity: My children, as it came into your mind to go astray from
your God, so endeavor your self ten times more to seek him (says the
Prophet.) We have all here forgotten our exemplar, for the Church of Rome on
the one side (contrary to Daniel and the Jewish reformation) she cries, that
neither she: nor her Prelates, nor her Priests have transgressed, and that they
cannot etre; and therefore they have no need of reformation. Upon the other
side again, we, who do see her abominations, wherewith she has defiled the
Sanctuary, and corrupted Christian Religion, in place to say with Daniel, Lord,
turn thy wrath from Jerusalem, thy holy Mountain, have pity on thy holy
City wherethy name was once truly called on. Jerusalem is a reproach to all
that are about her, we do cry, because the Church, who was sometimes chaste
unto thee, O Lord, is now become Fornicatrix: therefore destroy her, because
she has polluted the Catholic says: therefore divorce us from her, O Lord,
thus lying over into implacable paroxisme, and strife, while one says, he
ought not to be reformed, because he cannot err, and his adversaries
exclaim, that he is so contagious, as he is not capable of reformation, one
cries for a sole and sovereign Bishop to command both Church and State,
both Prelates and Princes: an other cries, that he will have no Bishop at all,
ctc. There is a sort of enchaunted Papists, whom the waters of the Jesuitical
absynthyum have so venummed, that they will not remit one dram weight of the
superstitious worship of their great Idol, if it were for the peace of the
whole Sanctuary, There be again a Sect of extrauagant and heteroclite
Puritans of the late stamp, I speak not of any judicious good man who does
discharge his function in Gods fear, and the obedience of his Prince, to
Christian education: but of these Anabaptisticall Clerks, Quiout labouche sans
bride, as the French says, who carry no bridle in their mouths, being in
opinion of Governments whatsoever, merely Republicanes against the Architype
and order of God, not only despising Princely authority, with the Jesuit,
but vilipending all Prelates in the Church, in favors of a fantastical
Anarchie, or a seditious popular tribunat, forged in their own brains,
obstinately refusing to accept for doctrine, for manners, for policy,
whatsoever almost have been in the Church of Rome, if it were never so good:
these be most wretched and pernicious humors of men, carrying factious and
vehement spirits, blown up with the vapors of Pandoras box, and abhorring
the peace of Israel: with both which I must expostulate in this place, and say
unto them as the Prophet commanded to cry in the ears of the rebellious Jews
of his time, Confregistis iugum, rupistis vincula: you have disolued the bands
of Catholic love and unity, you have broken the yoke of Christian society,
you are obstinate against desires of reformation: you do Iudaise, but Moses
did Christianize, who for the sake of that Idolatrous people would have been
rased out of the Book of life. Saint Paul did the same, who would have been
anathema for the love of his Christian folk: but all your meditations, your
writtes, your sermons, be like unto these inuolued Rolls brought by the Angel
unto Ezechiel, wherein was written nothing within nor without, but
lamentations, mournings, and woe: you have no spark of Christian charity left,
without which it is impossible to please God: know you not, that in the
Scripture this charity is properly said to be a fire: we read in Leuiticus; Vt
ignis in altari semper ardeat, That the fire should never go out upon the
Altar, which is a true mystery and type of that Christian love which should be
under the Euangell: for now there is no Altar leftvs, but the Altars of pure
hearts before the Lord: nor no Sacrifice, bur of contrition, faithful prayers,
and love: The law Evangelical (as I said before) is the perfection of the
natural and Mosaicall; and love again (as the Spirit of God does testify) is
the end of this law, finis legis est charitas: 1. Timoth. 1.
in which words the Apostle does attribute, as much to love, in Theology, as
in Philosophy is given to Justice, speaking of Cardinal virtues, Iustitia in
se virtutes continet omnes, That Justice has in it all virtues: even so, says
the Apostle, if we have as much faith to cause Mountains remove, and want
love, it is all nothing. This love is ever commanded, de proximo, of our
neighbor. Thou blind Papist, can thou have a nearer brother then the
Protestant? And you precise Puritans, can you but esteem them your pitiful
brethren, who live in Papal ignorance: Dilige pro quo mortuus est Christus, 1. Corinthians 8.
says Paul, Will you follow the example of Christ? did he not both pardon, and
pray to God for those who slew him, whose ignorance was above all ignorance,
their unbelief above all unbelief, and fault above all faults, without unity
and love there can be no perfect Church; because that is the whole scope of the
Euangel, as I have said, and of all true Religion: unanimity is the bond
which makes the Church strong, Ecce circundedi te vinculis, says God, in Eze.
Behold, I have hedged you about with bands. This love is the knot which binds
together the members of Christ in one body: and therefore is so diligently
recommended by him to his Apostles that they should remain fast and conjoined
among themselves, and by so many types in the old Testament is figured unto us
this Christian concord and unity, by the vestiments of the high Priest,
whereof every portion was joined to another the wholebeing one piece. By the
Tabernacle, whereof every thing was joined into another the whole standing in
conjunction, for are we not so called in the Apocalips: Ecce Tabernaculum Dei
cum hominibus, and habitat Apoc. 21.
cum ijs, The Tabernacle of God which dwells among men. By the vessels,
whereof so many as were not closed together, but were opened and in diverse
pieces, they were said by the spirit of God to be unclean, as we see in the
Book of Numbers: we are the vessels who be made by the hand of our heavenly
potter, of whom S. Paul says, Alia quidem in honorem, alia vero vasa in
contumeliam, Numh. 19.
some be vessels of honor, and some of reproach, you have your mouth open to
spewe out contumelies and malignitie one against another; and therefore take
heed you show not your selves vessels of dishonor: you have not this Christian
fire of charity whereof the spirit of God says, Quod operit multitudinem
peccatorum, That it covers multitude of sins. The Altars of your hearts are
kindled with the profane fires of Nadab and Leuit. 10.
Abihu: the fires of pride, arrogancy, and contradiction; fires of mutual
railing and Philippicke. Inuectiues, where Pastors, in place to persuade
Christian love, unity and mutual compassion, after the example of our Savior,
they feed us with contentious Sillogismes, Pascuntur Sillogismo sicut Boues
foeno, as Oxen are fed upon hay. O you who call your self a Christian Pastor,
how do you forget that precept of Saint Paul? Vt orationes fiant, 1. Tim. 2.
postulationes, and gratiarum actiones pro omnibus hominibus. That prayers,
supplications and thanks giving may be made for ^ll men in general: how do
you not remember that he has commanded your corrections and admonitions to be
brotherly, Noniactantiae studio nec contumeliosa obiurgatio, sed in spiritu
lenitat is, Not in ostentation or co^tumelious reproach, but in the spirit of
lenity: there is no other reason for this, but because Confregitis Iugum,
rupistis vincula, you have broken the bonds of Christian fraternity and love.
This fire of charity in the soul of a good man, is like to the abundance of
heat in the stomach of a strong body, which draws good nourishment, out of
gross and evil matters; the want whereof again does turn the most delicate
substance into phlegm, and noisome humors, if you had abundance of this love
you would do through the heat thereof, as the Apostle commands you, Alter
alterius onera portare, you would digest the ignorance and weakness of your
brethren: by seeking their reformation by all brotherly means: and the want of
this again, undoubtedly makes you to distaste and loath even the good things
which be among them. The want of it makes you to detest the name of a
pacificatour, to fly the voice of peace, to cry Crucifige, to carry one
against an other murdering tongues, poisoned pens, and vehement spirits of
destruction, spirits contrary to God, Inspiritu vehementi Psalm. 48.
conteres naues Tharsus says David, in a vehement spirit shall thou break the
ships of Tharsus. We read in the second of the Kings, while Eliab was
commanded to attend the coming of God upon the Mountain, the holy Spirit
says, Behold, there was a wind which did rent the rocks, but the Lord was
not therein, therewas a great commotion and earthquake, but neither was he
there, and thereafter a huge fire, but he was not yet in it: In the end there
came Sibilus aura tenuis, the whispering of a sweet and temperate air, and
therein was the Lord: Even so the Christian Clergy who go into the mountain
of God to understand the secrets of his will, so long as they thunder out such
tempestuous winds of mutual despite, God will never be there to pity our
Christian distractions: So long as they raise such vehement commotions and
fearful earthquakes to rent the states and lives of Christian Princes, God
will not be there neither to restore Jerusalem, and to purge his holy
Sanctuary of the Catholic Church, so long as you burn your selves with fire
of mutual acerbity and wrath, you shall not yet see the Lord there to pity
our Christian discordes, that our Christian Religion be no longer a reproach
to the dangerous multitudes of infidel nations, who watch their opportunity
to assault us, because as the holy spirit does testify in that same place, Non
in commotione Dominus, the Lord in his mercy cannot be in a commotion, but if
you should whisper out this Sibulus aurae tennis, ibi Dominus: this gentle and
soft air of meekness and brotherly admonition, there possibly you might find
the Lord.

Now to the effect that this brief exhortation, to dispose our selves to
Christian peace should not be mistaken, and neglected as an indigested
fantasy of my brain, I send you all to read that treatise called Eirenicon
sine de pace Ecclesiae, of the peace of the Church done by that famous Iunius,
one of the chiefest lights of the Church while he lived, In which treatise he
does call all these of your humor wicked, and seditious Tribunes, and of which
he did upon his deathbed protest (as I was informed of those who were present)
to have more comfort, having written it immediately before, Tanquam cantum
Cygneum, as the spiritual song of his farewell: then of all the religious
exercises of his life time, which were many and most laborious: So that to
imitate for Reformation the practice of our architype Jerusalem, this is the
first point which we must observe with Daniel, to make general confession of
our transgressions, as well Pope and Jesuit, as Puritan: and again to make
orations and suppications for all, which as it is a thing we ought to do, so
it is strange how we should refuse to do it: while Daniel has said, Lord to
us belongs open shame, our Kings, our people, our selves. It Is strange of the
Papist, that you should affirm, thy Pope and thy Priests are holy and cannot
err, that they have no need of general Counsels, nor of general
Reformation, as if God had taken corruption and mutabilitie from the earth, and
granted us here a general beatitude for the sake of Rome. In Gods name let it
please you to esteem your Pope no more holy then Daniel was: and if you wish
him to be cleansed from his Idolatry and unjust usurpations, to be restored
again to the unity of the Catholic faith, and that dignity which he did once
lawfully brook to be a chief Bishop of the occidentall Church: Then must you
cry with Daniel, O God, to our Pope, our Cardinals, and Priests, and to us
belongs open shame, because we have transgressed against thy servant Moses,
even our great Moses, Jesus Christ, who redeemed us from the bondage of that
fearful Pharaoh, Satan. We have turned his faith, and all Religion to
superstitious worship: we have turned his spiritual government into a
Tyranous Monarchy, and we have turned the piety of Christian manners into
iniquity and abhominion: This must be the voice of thy confession: And thou
protestant if thou will wish the increase and restitution of Christ's Church,
thou must pray for Rome, as Daniel did for Jerusalem. Lord be merciful unto
the holy City, where thy name was once so truly worshipped, thou must teach
and admonish them, preach, and write to them, as the Prophets did to the
Israelites in captivity; Brethren as it came in your mind to depart from the
Lord your God, so we beseech you to endeavor your selves ten times more to
turn to him again. If you will deny that Rome is your mother Church, that is
nothing, either it is lerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Rome, or some other, you
cannot deny that she is your sister Church, who once had a concord, and unity
of faith with you, and that by her defection the Catholic Church is greatly
weakened: You cannot deny that whiles she is fornicatrix, the Lord does beget
in her sons and daughters, who daily turn unto him as he did in Jerusalem,
when he said to his Prophet Hosea, Go yet and love a woman that was an harlot
according to the love of God toward Jerusalem, for she looked after strange
Gods, and I bought her with silver, etc. You cannot deny but those who did
possess the chiefest functions in our Church the times of reformation, that
they had their calling derived from the Church of Rome, and those who received
calling from them; By the Church of Rome, I mean as before, those Churches
that received not the true faith so much at first, as at last corruption and
Idolatry from her, who consenting therein with her may be called after her
name: You cannot deny that our Ancestors who now live, in whose faith we were
baptized, that they had their Baptism from the Church of Rome, and that
Sacrament truly administered there, not in the name of the Church of Rome, but
in the name of the Father Son and holy Ghost, therefore our fathers were
never pressed by any reformed Church to be rebaptised, That confession of S.
Peter that Jesus was the son of God, no man can deny that it is the faith of
Rome, corrupted indeed with Idolatrous worship, and she has fallen from her
spouse Christ to play the harlot. Shall ye not therefore as a member of one
body with her, as a kind brother or sister pity her disease? will ye answer
me to this, that she is obstinate, reprobate, has stopped her ears with the
serpent so that she cannot hear, but how do you know when God has appointed
her to hear? consider the calling of Ezekiel, and in what terms that spirit
which entered into him did send him to the house of Israel, and in his 2. and
3. Chap: you shall find above six several commissions given him in these
words, Son of man thou shall go to them but surely they shall never hear thee,
but lay thee in bonds. And how many Prophets were sent unto them whom they did
never hear? yet after seven generations captivity, it was said to Jerusalem,
Lift up thine eyes and Behold thy joys coming Baru^ ^lt.
from the east, thy people who were carried in captivity for their Idolatry,
turning back rejoicing in the word of the holy one to the honor of their God
says the Text. Jerusalem was but our Type and shadow, she fell from God so
absolutely, that Hosea says Jerusalem for many years, shall neither have
Prince, priest, sacrifice nor Prophet, because in her captivity she durst not
practice her own Idolatries, So that never Church was in more fearful and
desperate condition, yet the Lord did restore her; whereupon we have reason to
hope that he will in his mercy more favor the body, unless our ingratitude
and transgressions do close the door of his mercy.

The second point which we note in the Reformation of Jerusalem is, that they
were performed by ordinary The reformation of Jerusalem done by ordinary
Magistrates.
means of lawful Princes and Prelates; The Prophets indeed whom God appointed
to be watchmen over the house of Israel, they were extraordinarily called. but
the work was wrought by ordinary Governors, for in that place of Daniel we
read, that after his prayers for all, the Angel Gabriel appeared unto him,
revealing unto him the designed time of their restitution, by certain
circumstances, saying, betwixt the going out of the commandment for taking
back of the people, and reedifying of Jerusalem, and betwixt the coming of
Messiah the Prince, there shall be seven weeks, and threescore and ten
weeks, etc. where he shows how that restitution and reformation of Jerusalem,
proceeded from one ordinance given to Princes and Prelates, who did enterprise
it, as we see testified by the Spirit of God in that restitution made by Cyrus
King of Persia, who did proclaim it in these words, The Lord God of heaven
has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and has commanded me to build
him a house in Jerusalem, who is among you, with whom his God is, let him go
up to Jerusalem and build the house of the Lord. Where he himself professed to
have a warrant from God as supreme King, who had power to perform it. And
again that he did not depute to that discharge every man, or any man
indifferently, no, but he with whom God is, and who were such it is subioyned
in the Text: Then the chief Fathers, and the Priests and Levites rose up to
go to the work. And Cyrus King of Persia brought forth by the hand of
Mithridate his Thesaurour, the vessels of the house of the Lord, and counted
them on to Zorobabel Prince of Judea, and made the people to be furthered and
strengthened by silver, gold, cattle and substance of his own subjects. It Is
clear that the commission was given to the Princes and to the Prelates; it was
not done by private pretenders, nor by sedition, nor insurrection; the people
did endure the yoke of bondage till it pleased the Lord to reform Jerusalem
by ordinary Magistrates and means, a point that howsoever is is expressly to
beimitated and followed in Christian reformations, yet such has been the
times fore-past, that diverse have been forced to do contrary to the same,
partly for want of patience to attend Gods secret appointments, or through the
feruours of zeal, and partly through the intolerable pride of Rome who would
never hearken to any voice of Reformation, touching the which, and the
pretenders of extraordinary vocation I will not meddle to speak, because I am
no extraordinary Divine, only this by the way. Two Of extraordinary
Pretenders in the Church.
things do appear to me, one, that such pretexts have ever been the
fountain of all disorder and novelties in the Church. For whence have
Arrianisme, Pelagianisme, and those other flowed of old; and whence of late
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, and besides those so many concussions and afflictions
as we have seen moved within this kingdom, by those who urged the Geneua
discipline to be accepted for a third essential note of the Church. From
whence came all these? but from singularity of opinion, and from holy
pretenders, whereof the meanest would take upon him to affirm that A Christian
true albeit a country clown,
May teach a King to wear a Scepter and a Crown:


So that so long as extraordinary calling shall be pretended or permitted,
that spring of curious and Libertine impieties shall never be stopped, as may
be seen in Holland, which is become a Prostibulum of damnable sectaries
pretending the holy spirit for their dreams. Again for another, it appears
looking upon the Scriptures of God, that there is no back door left for such
dangerous Reformatours; God does indeed frequently illuminate the hearts of men
with uprightness and true knowledge amidst universal ignorance, that such may
persuade, write and insinuate, why not? but to intrude themselves into the
Church, or to attempt Reformation, I know not how, even the Prophets of the old
Law who had the extraordinary spirit, they would not go to declaime publicly
against manifest Idolaters, but when the Angel of God did specially send them.
There be times when God will not vouchsafe his light to men as S. Matthew
says, Ne Sancta dentur canibus, and Margaritae porcis proijciantur: that holy
things should not be given Matthew. 7.
to Dogs, nor pearls cast before swine. And speaking of the Apostolical
times, I think they are deceived who say, that Titus or Timothy had an
extraordinary vocation; for they were chosen by the Apostle, and were the
Scholars of S. Paul, Quae accepi a Domino (says he) catradidivobis, The
things which were taught to me by our Master Christ, these have I teached you.
Yea, do we not see how in the very time of the Apostles themselves when the
extraordinary spirit was given to many, there was jealous warnings among them
against extraordinary Pretenders: Audiuimus quosdam ex nobis etc. we hear
(says the Apostle) that some have gone out from among us, who have troubled
you bidding you to be circumcised quibus mandat a nulla dederamus: to whom no
commandment was given: An evident Argument that no man might enter into the
Church without Apostolical ordination, notwithstanding the holy Ghost was
frequently given, and extraordinarily to many by God himself immediately.
Briefly this extraordinary Vocation has never in no time been seen, but
accompanied with such miraculous graces as did sufficiently warrant it from
doubt or calumny: which makes me think, that he who is in this Libertine
and corrupted age will pretend extraordinary calling, he had need to qualify
the same by extraordinary marks: The Lord God indeed who Master of all
creation, of all redemption, and of all Reformation, and for common does work
by natural and ordinary means in all these three, when he will to show his
power and glory, he will work above and contrary to Nature, and to her order,
as he made the Red Sea to divide for Moses, and the Sun to be fixed for his
successor Joshua, as he suffered by way of reformation the Asmoner to be for
the time both Kings and Priests in one person, as nature it self following the
same doing of God her Sovereign Lord, albeit for the ordinary she works to
procreation and generation of things, yet sometimes she works devouring
inundations and pestilent plagues, which although they seem to destroy, yet
they are necessary purgers of nature for the time, even so there has been in
the beginnings of Christian reformation extraordinary things done, by
Reformation of Christian Churches.
good men in case of so great exigence and necessity as was; but these
extrauagant interims are never to be drawn in rule: The tyranny of Rome has
enforced that kind of doing, the cruel martyrdom first of Sauouarola and
then of Hus, for their cries of Reformation: their deceiving of Caroliu 5. and
two succeeding Emperors in their designs of reformation; their barbarous
persecution of the Protestants of France and Germany, by bringing upon their
necks the Arms of the holy league for their protestation to have the Catholic
Church reformed: These mad Christian people despairing of general reformation
by ordinary means and authority of Princes and Prelates, to attempt it with
some disorder and violence, wherein some have been better, some worse accoding
to the diverse minds and means of Reformatours in diverse places: all
tolerable for the time, none perfect, but that which has been done after
these Jewish reformations, whereof we speak: and to speak ingenuously of all
these which have been, it seems that no worse carriage has been in any,
then in those of Scotland and France, albeit moved by godly and reverend men:
yet because they were attempted against the authority Royal for the time,
which was the reason why they fell forth as a furious Northern tempest
threatening a common otherthrow, in place to reform Policy and Prelates, they
did destroy both; enrage the people, eiect the Prince, shake the whole state,
and make their native Countries a bloody stage of domestic and foreign
ambition, that it may be justly said thereof as Cicero did reproach to the
unhappy Brut us, Bona in^o optima causa, sed mihi creed foedissime per acta: a
good cause yea a most good cause, but believe it most miscreantly governed.

A much better act was that of George Prince of Henault, who being but a civil
man did reform the Pontificate of Meresburgh. For albeit he was not ordained
by Pontificiall authority, yet as he affirms in his Apology for that act, he
did procure unto himself an ordinary vocation and canonical Election by the
whole Chapter of that Cathedral Church, who had their calling in the Church of
Rome, and did ordain him a pastor with power by their advise to reform that
seat: for there be diverse of the Catholic Roman Clergy, who do not hold
every ordination unlawful which is not approved of the Pope, witness the
late controversy betwixt him and the Venetians for the Abbey of Policena,
where he did ordinate his Nephew Cardinal Burghesio, and they one of their own
Citizens who did enjoy it. Better yet were these Reformations of Germany
performed by Wicliffe, Luther, Bucer, Farellu^, Viretus and others; whereof
some being questioned before the Emperor, were never demanded upon their
calling, because they had gotten order within the Church of Rome, yet perfectly
good were none of these Germane reformations neither, because the greatest part
of them were only Presbyters, and had no Episcopal authority to reform: But
of all these Reformations which have been lately in the Catholic Church: that
of England, has been most upright, perfect, and agreeable to the Architype of
Jerusalem, as you shall hereafter more clearly perceive, where Prelates and
Princes do err, and Princes and Prelates again (to whom only the authority
did belong) did reform both themselves and the people, retaining always in
their Church the Primitive Ecclesiasticke government, with so many of their
religious Rites and Ceremonies, as were agreeable with Catholic Antiquity,
and not contrary to Gods word; resolved to part no further from Rome, then she
has parted from the verity, which was the reason why this Reformation came
not as a storm into the air, nor in a Commotion, but like unto that Sibilus
aurae ten^is, wherein the Lord was, so that amidst the fearful thundere and
coruscations of Europe, it did confirm the tranquillity of that kingdom in a
miraculous sort, and did truly procure unto the late Queen of blessed memory
that brave word, Circundita Mart quiesco. So that it might have been said of
her feminine Reign, as it was said of the gown of that great Orator, -- Cuius
sub iure togaque
Pacificas sauus tremuit Catilina secures:
How many foreign machinations did she illude? How many intestine Catelines
did she surpresse? how did she cut the crust of the Spanish ambition, with
such dexterity, as a second Judith cutting off the head of Olophernes. Cranmer
Bishop of Canterbury Primat of the English Church; Latymer Bishop of Wighorne;
Hooper Bishop of Glocestre; Rialey By: of London: these were lawfully ordinate
Bishops in the Church of Rome: King Henry the eight and his Successors, Edward
the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth were lawful Princes, to both which, according
to the exemplar of Jerusalem, and unto that which was due to their Predecessors
in the Primative Church did belong the power to reform themselves and their
kingdoms and Jurisdictions, to the which reformed Church of England, the grave
and learned Beza Beza de minist. Euang. 18. and 21.
gives this virtuous testimony: If (says he) the reformed Church of England
do persist as they are ruled by authority of Bishops, whereof some of our age
have bin famous Martyrs and most worthy Pastors and Doctors, let England enjoy
that singular blessing of God, which I pray the Lord to continue with them,
said he; Always for this point we may conclude thus, that in case Prelates
should become Papal and Idolatrous, that Presbyters might reform with their
tongues, but not with hands, preach reformation, but not pull down Churches,
persuade and illuminate men's consciences, but not concitate popular tumults.

The third thing which we mark in these reformations of Jerusalem is, that
things were reduced not to the times immediately preceding, nor other then unto
Primitive Institutions: for says Daniel, We have sinned O Lord (not against
David nor Samuel) but against the law of thy servant Moses; who was their
lawgiuer. And here is the maine point wherein does stand the perfection of all
Christian reformation, that the doctrine and government of the Catholic Church
should be conformed with every thing, which was in the Primative Church,
whereabout there be some little diversities in opinions, but no man yet has
bounded it more narrowly, then the first 300. years, except this heteroclite
Clergy of the late Presbyterians, who will precisely limitate it unto the
days of Christ and his Apostles: taking advantage that way as they think, to
discredit Episcopal Regiment, because forsooth there was no mention then of
Diocesan, Metropolitan and Partriarchall Bishops: And so fantasing to reduce
the Church policy to the termer, wherein it was immediately after Christ's
ascension, at which time there was no need, but of Presbyters, before Cities,
Sheriffedomes, Provinces, Nations were converted: who does not know that the
policy of the Church behooued to increase with the increase of faith? it
behooued to have a Bishop before a Diocesan Bishop, and him again before a
Metropolitan Bishop, and the Metropolitan before the Patriarchall authority.
But these be headdy inventions of poor and clandestine Synagogues who cannot
pretend for themselves any learned Patron, except it be falsely; Not Luther,
not Melancton, not Bucer, not Zuinglius, not Zanchius, nor Calvin: These were
no dreamers, they were grave and sage Divines; far of (as you shall hear by
their own testimonies) from bringing into the Church of God such Anarchies and
popular Tribunates, yea, they cannot betake themselves to any of our own
Protoreformatours, not to John Knox, who howsoever in the point of the Civil
Magistrate (to speak ingenuously) he was somewhat extrauagant, yet he was a
great and good instrument of God, and in this point of Bishops, wise and
conform, the time being considered as you shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. VIII.
A limitation of the Primitive Church: whereunto we are to appeal for
Reformation, which the judgment of the best Reformators touching the means
thereof.

But to proceed touching the Primitive Church, I say that whatsoever is in the
Church, it is either Doctrine, Policy, or Ceremonies: what concerns doctrine
does limitate the Primative Church to the days of Christ, the Apostles and
Evangelists, that nothing is to be admitted for doctrine but that, which the
Spirit of God did pen by their hands; what concerns every particular Act in
policy or custom in Ceremonies, it is not to be reckoned so. To make this
Distinct: of divine Institut:
clear, we are to understand a distinction in divine institution, some being
more directly divine then others, as the doctrinal points of Salvation treated
by the Apostles, are more divine, then that which the same Apostles did,
concerning the policy. The first is the bread of life it self, the second is
but the order how it shall be kept and dispensed, so that these things which
our Savior spoke out of his own mouth are immediately divine. The Acts again
of the Apostles in establishing the Church after the ascension, no man will
refuse them to be divine institutions, so far, that the Apostles might say
they did proceed from the holy Ghost, and from themselves, yet no man either
must hold them equally divine with the personal doctrine of Christ, in regard
whereof, they hold a second degree, and are called Apostolic Traditions:
Therefore such as be strict about this distinction, say, that which did
immediately flow from Christ himself, is a divine ordinance, and the other
only diuini Iuris, that is to say, has a divine right. Now say they, in
regard of the first institution, the difference is but small betwi^t a divine
ordinance, and an Apostolical ordinance, but in respect of continuation or
perpetuity, there is a great discrepance, that which is immediately divine,
being absolutely and unchangeably necessary to be kept in the Church, from
Christ's mouth to the consummation of the world. The other again not so, but as
it did not flow directly from Christ's own mouth, nor from the Apostles,
immediately after the ascension, but being traditions political for the
Church, they were piece and piece delivered and practiced according to the
increase of the faith; even so they do not imply a necessary perpetuity in the
Church in that sort as some do fondly reason, saying, if such Policy, or such
Ceremonies be Apostolical, then they must be perpetual in the Church,
whereupon (by way of advantage) they infer the nullitie of many reformed
Churches in France, Scotland, Geneua, and others, which is an absurd
inconvenient. O, but it is not so: The word of God, and the Apostolical
traditions be of like ve^itie, but not of like authority, nor like
perpetuity, nor a like necessity; for that is to be retained in the Church,
which is expedient and convenient, as well as that which is absolutely
necessary, but the difference is, that of Christ's word one Jot shall not
perish, it is unchangeable, incorruptible and eternal. Whereas these other
Apostolical institutions, which were the fountains and beginnings, from
whence did flow the growth of the Churches policy, with the growing of the
faith under the successors of the holy Fathers of the primitive Church, these I
say, albeit they be from the spirit of verity, yet having but a second place,
and being but diuini Iuris, they are not so absolute incorruptible and
unchangeable as the first: they are like unto upright gold into which an
excellent Jewel is mounted, there to be kept, which gold, if it were most
fine, it is with time worn, diminished, altered, and perhaps broken, but still
again renewed: even so as the Rivers, which after long running do willingly
fall again into the bosom of their great fountain, the Ocean, from whence
they come and which is their natural seat; so all disordered and strange
courses of pretended policies and novelties of the Church government, do by
length of time return again into the fountain of the Apostolical
institutions (as experience does show) which are not to be limited to the
days of Christ, or to the beginnings of the Apostles, as the word is, but unto
the primitive Church under the Apostles, and their Successors, during the first
three or four hundred years of her purity, so that from the estate of the
Church in that time, are all our Reformations to be sought apparently; and what
we have transgressed against that, is to be referred again, and ruled by
that, and by no later times.

Albeit general Counsels and great numbers of learned men were more frequent
thereafter, for all the world does know, that as learning grew, so grew
corruption, and so grew curiosity to cover the same, so grew contention,
ambition, and heresy. To prove by many arguments the sincerity of the
Primitive Church, or the reasons why we should appeal to her for reformation,
it is not necessary: The holy and great Doctor S. Augustine gives such a
testimony, as leaves no suspicion; that, says he, which the holy primitive
Church observed, although it was not concluded by Counsels, but always
retained, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum August. de bap: contra
Donat: lib. 4. cap. 24.
rectissime creditur, it is most rightly believed to have been no other then an
Apostolical institution. Again, says he, to dispute whether that which the
holy primitive Church through the world did observe, should be now received,
or not received, insolentissimae est insaniae, it is a most mad insolence. In
which we mark these two: First, that he does not limitate the primitue
Church to the days of Christ and his Apostles, but he speaks of a primitive
Church flourishing throw the world: Secondly, that he does not tie the credit
of the primitive Church, to the authority neither of Councels, although he
says, it was not concluded in Counsels. Yea farther, all the Counsels
themselves which followed the primitive Church, did cloth them with the
authority thereof, their Meetings, Registers, Decrees, Canonical letters, and
whatsoever was, were founded upon this, secundum veterem consuetudinem Patrum
nostrorum, Council. Ni^. cap. 6.
according to the ancient custom of our Fathers. For example, long before the
Council of Nice, the patriarchall Bishops were in authority, albeit there was
no such thing in the days of the Apostles, because there was then no
combination of Provinces converted to the faith; and in that Council it was
called an ancient custom. And in the Council of Ephesus there was a question
decided betwixt a patriarchall Bishop, and the Bishop of Cyprus, where any man
may see if it was not said, Secundum vetus decretum Patrum nostrorum. Council.
Ephesians. post aduent. Episcopi Cypri.


And certainly it is an infallible argument of the integrity and upright
meaning which has been in the proto-reformators of Germany, to hear their
willingness to follow antiquity, where it was not contrary to Gods word.
These are the speeches of Luthor, and Bucer, touching the retentions of
indifferent ceremonies of the Church of Rome, Sciant publica pacis causa non
detracturos etc. we will not (say they) be against the brooking of ceremonies
and traditions received in the Popes Church from antiquity upon these
conditions, that the consciences of men be not thereby bound, as by
fundamental grounds of faith: but that the doctrine Evangelical, of free
justification by faith in Christ, remain inuiolate: and that, say they, not
only speaking of festival days, music, organs, clericall vestiments, which
be things indifferent, sed etiam de ieiunio and ciborum delectu qua magis
pungunt, but also touching fasting and choice of meats, which be more
controuerted points. O what a holy and Christian disposition was that! what a
zeal to the unity of the Catholic Church, and how contrary to many
malignant, and seditious spirits, which be now in Christ's Church? who have no
voices, as I have said, but of debate and contradiction, contending for
Scholasticke triumph and victory, in place to cry to Gods people, that which
the Prophets were commanded, to cry, Ann^cia populo meo scelera little, and
domui Jacob Isa: 8.
peccata ill^rum, Threaten my people for their sins, and the house of Jacob
for their iniquities; they cry that we should learn subtle and curious
controversies of Religion, many of them be as profound as profane they teach
Christians to be obstinate and stubborn, in trifling points, they teach them
to heat one another, and to abhor all means of pacification, their voice is
like unto the voice of the Eagle in the Apocalypse, who tripled her cry, vae,
vae, vae habitantibus in terra: woe be to the inhabitants of the earth,
because they have broken the bonds of Christian peace and harmony.

The fire of our Christian charity is quite extinguished, it is become like
unto that fire mentioned in the book entitled Esdras, which before the
captivity of Persia, was hidden in a pit by some devout Priest of Jerusalem,
that it should not dye out, and being again sought upon the return of
Nehemiah, the Text says, non invenerunt ignem, sed aquam crassam, they found
no fire, but a gross water. In place, that through the fire of mutual love we
should seek with the Dove, to remain together in the Arc of the Catholic
faith; Religious men are gone out with the Raven to hunt carrions among the
waters of this world, following the sent of honor, ambition, and wealth:
Priests seeking to be Monarchs, the Clergy becoming factious and
irreconciliable, hunting after the vain glory of learning, Ephraim pascit
ventum and sequitur aestum, Ephraim feeds Hos: 12.
upon the wind, that I think be pastoral follies and neglect: the world was
never so pregnant and raging with the twelve abuses of the earth, A wise man
without works, an old man without religion, a youth without obedience, a rich
man without alms, a woman without shamefastness, a Master of a house without
virtue, a poor man proud, a King unjust, a Bishop negligent, a people without
discipline, a Preacher without humility, and finally, a Christian contentious.

These be the waters wherein we are drowned; waters whereof the Prophet David
has said, Saluum Domine me fac quoniam intrauerunt aquae vsque ad animam,
mea^: Preserve me o Lord, because the waters have entered into my soul; and all
these for our proud contempt of Christian simpathie and love, whereof if our
spiritual Rulers of Gods people did retain some true sparkles, aquae multae
non poterunt extinguere charitatem, many waters could not extinguish the heat
of charity. Miserable are those Pastors, who altogether want this divine
inspiration of Christian concord, which was in Luther and Bucer, Uaeijs qui
sequuntur spiritum suum and non videt, woe shall be to them, who follow their
own spirit, and do not see. Let them remember how the Wiseman says,
durissimum erit iudicium his qui praesunt, most hard shall be the judgment of
those, who are placed to ouer-watch people: whereof the Prophet Daniel gives
the reason, Egressa est iniquitas a senioribus and ab ijs qui videbantur regere
populum, says he, Iniquity is gone out from the Elders, and from those who
seemed to be leaders of the people: and how the Prophet Ezechiel does in his
ninth Chapter practice that hard judgment, where God did command the
destroying Angel saying, Incipite a sanctuario meo, Go through, destroy both
young and old, and all sex, but begin at my sanctuary, and in that same place
commandment was given to him who was clad in linen to mark them with the
letter Tau, whom he should find mourning for the abomination of Jerusalem.
Most blessed are these Pastors, whose delight is with the renowned Iunius,
Spirare vnitatem Ecclesiae, to sing as he has done the sweet harmony, O quam
bonum and quam incundum est habit are fratres vna, Oh how good a thing it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity; and blessed are those Preachers who
mourn for Jerusalem, with those who were saved in Ezechiel, for if they
mourn, many shall mourn with them, if they shall carry that happy letter in
their front, multitudes shall carry it with them, Secundum iudicem populi sic
and populus says Solomon, as the Rulers be in heart affected to peace, or
distracted, even so are the people, God of his mercy so grant it, that they may
still hear in their ears that sound of the great S. Paul, Si distribuero
omnes meas facultates pauperibus, si corpus meum ita vt ardeam, charitatem
aute^, non habuero nihil mihi prodest. If I should, says he, spend all my
riches on the poor, if I should burn my body for zeal and have no charity,
it does avail me nothing.

But now to follow our purpose speaking of Christian reformation, a more sure
president and exemplar then Luther and Bucer, have we for the peace of the
Church, to follow all that which has been observed by antiquity not contrary
to Gods word. Let us consider the graueiudgement of the worthy and learned
Zanchius, chief planet of our own sphere, as you shall read it here sincerely
translated from his own Text, De vera reformandaru^ Ecclesiarum ratione, of
the true way of the reformation of Christian Churches. Whatsoever says he, is
in the Church of Rome, it is either agreeable to the written word, contrary to
it, or indifferent. For the first, that which is agreeable is to be retained,
or if it was rejected, its again to be received. For the second, that which is
contrary is to be refused, or if it has bin followed, it is again to be
forsaken: For the third, that which is (...), or indifferent. First, we must
not account of it, as if it did belong unto salvation, next we must follow the
rule of the Apostle, that nothing be brought into the Church, but that which
does tend to edification, order, or unity: all indifferent ceremonies and
rites therefore may be followed says he, for one of these respects, but so
followed, as that we do still prefer things more ancient to those which are
more late; as well for the honor of antiquity, as because of the true saying
of Tertullian, Quo quid in Ecclesia antiquius eo etiam verius, That which is
the more ancient in the Church is the more true: Whatsoever (says Zanchius) is
besides the written word either in the general Counsels in the Fathers, or in
the papal Decrees, they be under the aforesaid distinction, so that albeit
nothing can bind the conscience but canonical Scripture, yet to introduce
novelties in the Church, or to banish any thing which from primitive times have
been allowed by Catholic consent, to do such things without the authority
of general Counsels, it is not lawful for any man who fears God, says
Zanchius. Seeing this profound and truly reformed Divine, who was in his time,
Lucidum sidus, a bright star in the Church, does so reverence antiquity: is
it not wonderful that we, I know not who, we who have scarcely been twice
or thrice in a pulpit, we Job. 9.
who ought to say much more then Job did, hesterni sum^ and ig^, that we should
contemn antiquity, and mock the primitive policy and ceremonies of the
Church, seeing Ierem. 9.
the Prophet Jeremy has so reco^mended the credit of antiquity in his time as
to say, State super vias antiquas and videte qua sit via antiqua bona; and
ambulate in ea and inuenietis refrigerinu^ animabus vestris: Stand upon the
way, says he, and behold and ask which is the ancient good way, and walk in
it, and ye shall find refreshment to your souls, Esa. 1.
seeing the Prophet Esaias foretelling the reformation of the Church, does
altogether ground it upon antiquity, saying: I will restore unto you your
Judges as they were before; and your Elders as they were anciently, that then
you may be called a City of righteousness, and a faithful City. And Job a man
of God, full of wisdom, ask says he, the former ages, and enquire
diligently of their Fathers: and Christ himself did so honor antiquity Matthew.
19.
for reformation, that he did reduce them thereunto, saying in the case of
matrimony, Non sic fuit ab initio, It was not so from the beginning.

In that speech of Zanchius we do mark this, that the rejecting of any ancient
Tradition which is not contrary to Gods word, it is not only to depart from
the Church of Rome (which also is a fault) to break any bond of unity where it
may be kept with a good conscience, but it is also a departing from the
primitive Church, from the which, these were derived in the Church of Rome, and
I do appeal unto the divine light of your conscience (whither you be Papist
or Puritan) if you do not think this ground of Zanchius to be a most sure
and Christian means to reform the Church of God: for certainly it is not
only at Rome, nor only at Geneua where good Christians are made, nor they
only who have had the right government of Christ's Church, Ambition and
Tyranny, has spoiled the Ecclesiastical policy there, and nakedness and
pretended purity has made it contemptible here, and both have the like ends
to make the world to cry, Great it Diana among the Ephesians, and there is none
but she.

Always this opinion of Zanchius iumpe with that of S. Augustine which I have
rehearsed, and with all antiquity for acceptance in the Church of the ancient
government, and indifferent ceremonies tending to edification or unity,
because it does concern us who be subjects of Noth-britanne, not only for the
hope of Catholic or universal reformation which was the thing meant by those
Divines, but it concerns us more nearly for intestine unity, and conjunction
with our half-arch the Church of England, whose reformation, because it has
been blessed of God and most perfect of all those of later times, we are the
more specially bound to embrace it seeing our opposition thereto is not only
to be against Gods glory by maintaining distraction within the Church, but it
is apparently aschismatike alienation from the state, for Religion is the soul
of the civil state; And consequently dissension in religion dissension in the
state, therefore out of that spirit of Christian love which God wills to rule
us, I wish all men to dispose themselves to this happy Union, and to reverence
this time wherein we are, and whereof the chiefest mystery is not yet seen:
albeit the seal thereof be already opened and we have already seen
miraculous things; If we do Christianly simpathize with the time to honor
these glorious preambles of a general reformation, which God does set a work
by the erection of the Monarchy of great Britain in the Royal Person of our
most gracious Sovereign, and if we can turn the ambitious craft of the
Jesuit into a Christian wisdom against himself, that as he strives to reduce
the whole world under the Tyranny of his High Priest; So we may with the force
of united minds assist the rising and increase of this great Kingdom, in the
hope of a general restoration of Christ's Church, what know we what God
intends yet to bring about by this mighty Prince, whose exaltation, in the
providence of the Almighty, has already brought the whole world in
admiration: what know we what he who did so long Prophecy by the mouth of
Jeremy, the coming of Cyrus to restore Jerusalem, he who made Cyrus at his
coming to cry, the Lord God of heaven has given me the kingdoms of the
earth, that I should build a house to him in Jerusalem, what know we what he
has propounded to do by this virtuous Monarch, whom he has so
extraordinarily raised, and made him Master of puissant Kingdoms, what can we
judge of those current prophesies of our fore fathers for his being Emperor,
and for his ransacking of the walls of Rome, do not we see how he has already
begun to shake those walls, and to break the horns of that Beast; Let no man
be so simple as to doubt, but one day God has predestinate by some Christian
Cyrus to reform that city, and to restore his people from that spiritual
captivity; Yea, let no man doubt but that the time of that great Iubile does
approach, (as I will show hereafter) If we by our obstinate distractions and
division do not prevent it, and therefore thou who abhorrest any law or
ordinance which may tend to a firm conjunction of this Isle, or who do
repine in any sort against that great instrument whom God has sent to reform
his Church, thou shall be infinitely blessed of God, if by thy conformity thou
can once take away that grievous imputation of the Papist, who to the reproach
of the Gospel does affirm thus; That after Luther who was that Nimrod (as he
says) that enterprized the tower of heresy against the Apostolical seat of
Rome; all those who did concur to that building were (like unto those sons of
Adam who builded Babylon) punished of God with confusion of tongues, that one
did not understand another; All the followers of Luther Lutherians, Semi Luth.
Contrr Luth. Hussists, Zwinglians, Semizwing: Melancthonists, Brownists,
Anabaptists, Caluinists, Bezaists and many more whom he does numerate, to all
which says he, Dominus confudit labium, the Lord has confounded their
language, that of all the reformed Churches of Germany, France, Holland,
Geneua, Britain, not one does altogether agree with another, and diverse of
them disagreeing within themselves, either in doctrine, in ceremonies, in
government, or somewhat else; of which fearful and scandalous oblatration,
seeing you who are the Puritan cannot deny for your part to be Author, I
think it should make the most impudent and affronted face among you to blush,
in case their rest in it any drops of good and ingenuous blood; Being in this
contemplation of the means of Christian concord, before I speak of the
reformation of the Church of Rome, I will discourse some what of the means of
our domesticke conjunction with the Church of England, because it is more near
unto us, and brings us also mor near to the possibilities of universal
Reformation.

CHAP. IX.
A Trial of the best and surest Policies which be in Nature, in Ciuility, in
Economy, in Morality.

IN matter of Doctrine we make one ptofession with the Church of England
founded upon the purity of Gods word. The odds be either in the Church policy
or in some indifferent ceremonies, I speak of odds in polilicie, by reason of
you, who be opponents in your hearts to the State of Bishops: So before I will
touch the Ceremonies, I will deal with you upon that head: As for the
Theological and more subtle disputarion of the Theme of Episcopal Regiment,
it is so exactly done by diverse reverend and learned Divines, that it has not
much need of my contribution, only I will select some clear, sincere and most
disiestable arguments for your information, and because many of you who be
thus distracted, have never tasted the pure fountains of true and natural
knowledge, which is not the least cause of your Error, therefore I will show
you into this chapter, what is the government which God did plant in the
creation of nature, and what affinity it has with such policies as have since
followed and fallen out through the world in Church or in state, whereinto, if
I do a little insist to express the lawfulnes and virtue of the Monarchall
Rule, it is not to induce a Monarchall government in the Church which is a
Popish invention, and here also sufficiently answered. But first it is to
point forth the power of God in anointed Kings, against the pernicious
doctrine of those, who teach the contempt and violation of Kingly authority:
And secondly it is to show, that as God did frame the government of his first
Church of the Jews, not much unlike to that of nature, even so if we seek the
original Idaea of true ecclesiastical policy, in the right Horoschope, and if
we pronounce it with a right air, we shall find, and we may say it without
offense, that the first image of whatsoever government agreeable to Gods will,
has been conceived into nature, in the order whereof God has avoided two
things, and has reserved one peculiar to himself, absolute sovereignty or a
power merely vnicall: and an Anarchie or popular confusion, neither of these
two has he willed, that as on the one part no creature should have a
Monarchall Supremacy, exempted from necessary correspondence, and simpathie
with dependent members, so on the other side no individual parts of one kind,
might subsist without a head, through whom they must receive the order and
direction of their motions: The unity again of absolute Supremacy in heaven
and earth, God has concluded within the Center of his divine throne proper to
himself, that no particular Creature in nature can be capable thereof, so that
it is equally ridiculous to say, the Lion cannot be chief of beasts, unless
the Indian, Libian and Barbarian Lions, be all subject to one Monarchall Lion:
The Kings of the earth cannot be lawful Kings, unless there be one supreme
Monarch over them all, which cannot be in any but in God, the Primates of
national Churches cannot be lawful Bishops, unless they be united under
one Hierarchy, which cannot be in any one person but in Jesus Christ the
second person of the Trinity. And as we see in nature the more excellent
creatures tied by a wonderful simpathie to their inferiors, that they are
rather fathers to them, then Dominatours over them, as the supernall spheres
make perpetual influctions in the body of the Moon, to maintain her
operation, and as the Element of the fire does purge the air below it, and
nourish the earth with continual heat. So we see a virtuous Prince under the
name of a Monarch, he does infuse his power into the chiefest of his members,
and makes his Rule in effect Aristocraticke, even so in the Church under
predominate names of Bishop, Archbishop Metropolitan, the government is
Monarchall in Christ the head, Aristocraticke in the Bishops, and Democraticke,
in the Presbyters and lay Elders, by their mutual harmony, as is hereafter
more a^ply declared: Thus is nature the Fountain of knowledge under God, and
the fittest school to rectify our judgments, chiefly in matter of Policy,
because the Lord has manifested himself in his works, letting us see how one
miraculous hand, and not two, has framed them by one miraculous Artifice, and
not two; to one end, and not to two, breathing motion in them from one spirit,
and not from two, subiecting them to one law, and not to two, and to one sort
of government, and not to two: as he is God One, and united in himself; so
has he united them Symbolically among themselves, and all conjoined to be the
Symbal of his glory, power, and wisdom: So that what natural instinction we
find among brute beasts for order, or for subjection and commandment: it is a
type to us of that rule which is among the Elements, the Elementall government
is a figure of that which is among the Celestial Spheres, and that again
does represent the Angelical policy, and all those considered coniunctly are
a shadow of that rule which God has over the universe. Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur orbis.

To proceed for the virtue of the Monarchy, I found my first argument for it
in this sort; These Creatures which are nearest to God, are of most noble and
perfect of nature, for example: That Sphere which is next unto the throne of
God, called by the Cabbalists the great Metatron, which receives the ten
several emanations of God to be distributed among the ten Spheres, called
of them, December Zephiroth, to make from them several influences into the
inferior world, who does doubt but that Sphere and the great Archangel, who
moves it, are more excellent creatures then the Sphere of the Moon, or the
manner thereof, which is called of the Philosophers, Coelum terrestre and terra
coelestis, a heavenly earth, and a terrestrial heaven; because it is a mediate
Creature betwixt celestial and Elementar things, for as the fire is the
Masculine Element or the Agent which gives life to inferior things: and the
earth Feminine or patient who does receive this life, so the globe of the Moon
is the Feminine of that high Sphere, who receives in her belly these
celestial influxions, and (as pregnant of them) does deliver them monthly as
we see, being in that sort far inferior to the excellence of the other: and
as it is in Creatures, that the nearest to God is most excellent, so it is in
the order of Creatures, that action which does resemble the action of God is
most perfect: Now for the Hypothesis I subsume, that there is not so noble a
Creature of God, as is the holy universe; and therefore no government is more
excellent then that whereby the world is governed, which is the Monarchiall
power of God himself, who is Lord over all, for to those who will hold that
the rule of God is Aristocraticke, by reason of the Trinity: I answer, that
the works of God which be Ad extra, as the Theologes speak: They proceed, a
Deo tanquam vno, and non tanquam Trino.

Under this supreme rule of God, we do observe Monarchiall government, both in
the constitutions several of the universe, and in the administrations several
of the universe: In the constitutions this way, all the several Creatures of
the world are under the unity, and common instinction of general nature one
mother of all: All the accidents of one subject under one unity thereof,
things many in number be under the unity of vna species. All men under the
Species of mankind, all horses under the Species of that kind, and so forth:
Things that be many in kind again, be all under one gender; Man, Beast and
Plant are Animalia, and feel a common instinct of that Genus: In the several
administrations we do observe it thus, The several persons of the glorious
Trinity be in one Godhead. All these ten Zephiroth, receive their virtues
from the supreme Metatron, and all the Spheres do obey the motion of one
Primum mobile: so that we have the supreme Archangel Michael, over the powers
and orders Angelical, who is Christ, because he is called the Angel of the
Great Counsel, Et vocabitur m^gni Consilij Angelus: And he is called the
Angel of the Testament: Statim veniet ad Templum Angelus Esaias 9.
Testamenti quem vos vultis, says Malachie: We have the sun among the
Planets, the fire among the Elements, Man over living Creatures, the Lion over
fourefooted beasts, the Eagle over fowls, the Whale over fishes, the Diamond
among the Jewels, the Gold among the metals, the Balm among the Gummes, the
Cedar among the Plants, the Rose among the flowers, the Wheat among corns,
the Bees have their King, the Cranes have their leader, the Herring of the sea,
and the creeping Ants have the same, among the Vines one is Masculine, and one
Feminine; so it is among the Trees, Herbs, Jewels, metals, one Archidiable is
over unclean spirits, one head being the seat of all the senses, rules all the
members of the body, one reason sits as a king over all the sensual
affections, In Sciences Ethicall Architectonica is above the rest, in these
which beco^templatiue, the metaphisicke has the place of Mistress, and
Theology, as Queen rules over all, Reliquae tanquam ancillae famulantur: the
rest be as her serving mayds: There you see a short Anatomy of the universal
and particular rule of nature; in all which we mark nothing but Monarcall and
harmonicall soueraignity, without any type or Symball of these Democraticall,
Consistorian, Presbyterian or other sorts of popular and confused governments
whatsoever, which corruption of time, and the ambition of men have introduced
in the world; as all light is derived from one Sun, all humors from one
Moon, all waters from one Ocean, so do all lawful and solid governments,
flow from God in one Nature, and in one Architype.

It rests to consider these gouernements which be among men, and they are
either Spiritual or Temporal, Temporal is either private or public, private
is it which we call moral, or a man's rule over himself, and to speak first
of that, it is merely Monarchiall, because it is done by reason as a King. The
Philosophers do esteem every wise man to be a Monarch; and the first among
Kings, Sapiens vno minor est Jove, Rex denique Regum: That no King was greater
then a wise man but Jupiter: Multoties reges siratio te rexerit: says Seneca,
You shall be many ways a king, if you can be king over your self: yea, the
Spirit of God in the Apocalips says, as much as these Philosophers, Fecisti
nos Deo nostro reges and Sacerdotes, Apoc. 5.
You have made us Kings and Priests unto God: certain there cannot be a more
princely rule, nor more difficill, then to daunt the dissordered passions of
our spirits, which as a seditious popular do still perturbe the tranquillity
of the mind, if reason do not sit in his throne above their necks to punish
those. Bestias animae called by Plato: The temporal government public; of men,
it is either Oeconomicall or Political: Oeconomicall is the rule of a family,
and it is merely sovereign: one man is master over the company of one house:
political is a rule of many families which make Cities, Countries, Kingdoms,
of all the sorts whreof, the Monarchy (I say for the first) is most perfect,
because it comes nearest unto the rule of God in the constitution of nature.
For the next I reason thus; There be in nature three kinds of Creatures; some
with few means do compass small good, as the vermin of the earth which be
imperfect Creatures, some more perfect by many means do attain greater good,
as man: some lastly most perfect with few means do attain greatest
happiness as Angels: these that have the most excellent and supreme dignity
do the same, as that Archangell that turns the Sphere of the first Mobile,
is said to move it in every minute of the hour of four and twenty hours,
while as there be 60. minutes in every hour 500000. leagues, which is the
reason why we must count him a more perfect creature then that Angel who
rules the globe of the Sun; much narrower then the other, and takes no
less then a whole year for his course. Summarily of diverse things which aim
at one mark, that is most excellent which does most easily and most swiftly
attain the same; I subsume that of all forms of government, the Monarchy
does most prevail that way, and I prove it thus:

Government does show it self in three things: first, in the power and
authority of those who command. secondly, in the diuturnitie of estate:
thirdly, in the largeness of dominion. For the first, I say that authority
has greater force where it is absolute and unite, then where it is dispersed
and limited. Natural reason does stand for it, vis vnita fortior, experience
does approve it. That stately popular Commonweal of Rome in case of any
notable danger was constrained to distrust her ordinary Magistrates, and to
betake her self to the absolute and unite power of the Dictator, as Liuie
says, Videat Dictator ne quid Respub: detrimenti capiat, let the Dictator
provide, that the Commonweal incur no evil. which Dictatorship was a most
sovereign and powerful authority for the time, and when at length that
flourishing Commonwealth became mighty and great, there was no form of
government could suffice to keep it in good estate, until it did again piece
and piece turn to a Monarchy, first creating Dictators upon occasions, and by
intermission of time, next creating Pompey only Consul. thirdly, Caesar
Dictator in perpetuum. And Augustus was received in the state absolute Monarch.
And the greatest part of the Commonwealths of the earth this day, which be
either Aristocraticall (that is to say, where a selected number of the most
worthy do govern) as at Venice, or which be Democraticall, (that is to say,
merely popular) as at Genua, they are forced to acknowledge a certain
sovereignty by establishing of a Duke. For the second, touching diuturnitie of
States, Sparta was of the longest continuance eight hundred years; as for
Venice, which does reckon eleven or twelve hundred years, that is true, for
the part of their City, by reason of the strength thereof by sea, but their
State has been oftentimes altered, as their Stories do record, and the
government it self frequently changed, being for the first Tribunitiall or
popular, next under a Duke more absolute then he is now, then by little and
little it became Aristocraticall, until in the year 1217. it came to this
present condition wherein the great Council was closed, and does since admit
no increase of their number. Sparta howsoever it seem to be Respub: by
limitation of their Kings to the Council of the Ephori, yet in actions of
warfare and danger his authority was absolute: so that even the Republics in
matters of weight and importance, they were forced to rely upon Sovereignty.
In the mean time in place of one City which has stood three or four
hundred years, there be numbers of Monarchies which have endured a thousand or
twelve hundred years. The Assyrians more then 1300. years. Prester John had
his beginning before the incarnation, and does yet remain flourishing. The
Roman Empire which I count Monarchical, 1600. The kingdom of China is said
to be 2300. And of all those of Europe the Royal Crown of the house of
Scotland known to be infallible of greatest antiquity.

For the third concerning largeness of domination, the Monarchy has that way
the greatest advantage. Diverse kingdoms have been of more large and spacious
Territories then the dominions of the Roman Empire, and many have been equal.
More large were the dominions of the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Greeks, and
of the Scythians, yea forbearing to talk of antiquity, the Ottomanicall
Empire is more extended then was that of Rome. Rome was dilated from Atlant to
England, 1200. miles, from the straight of Gibalter to Euphrates 3000 miles,
whereas the Turkish does lie 4000. in length, and in breadth 3500. from Asna to
Asaph, from Tauris to Buda, from Balsara to Algar. Moreover the Roman
territories were yet more ample under the Emperor then before Augustus, there
do this day bear rule in Asia, great Came and the great Mogor, whereof every
one may put into the fields three hundred thousand horse. The great Duke of
Muscouia whose bounds do reach in length 1800. and in breadth 1600. And in the
Spanish domination we have a great example of Monarchical virtue, which does
in largeness equal many Empires that has been, except that it is weak by
disjunction always to brook dispersed states among diversities of people,
languages, and manners, in the ancient and new found world under both poles,
possessing the most rich Provinces of Europe in the eyes of strong and
dangerous emulators, it proves the Monarchiall rule to be matchles and most
solid. Briefly for one Repub: there be great numbers of principalities
throughout Europe, Venice, Genua, Raguzia, Luca, Geneua, with the Cantons of
the Swissers and Grisons, and 60. Towns in Almanie which be free, all the
Remanant being possessed in Monarchy. In Asia and Africa, we hear of no
government but sovereign, so that Monarchy does in effect draw under it the
whole world after the instinct of nature, which is the reason why the greatest
Clerks and Statesmen both, do hold that God and nature do favor the increase of
Monarchy, more then of any other state, and we mark it ordinarily, and it
comes also to pass sometimes, by means which can never be incident in
Republics, as many Principalities falling in one by the lot of Succession and
heirs of one house, which has within these few years wonderfully enlarged
the Crown of Spain, by the confluence of diverse Kingdoms and Seigniories
into it, as Rivers into one Ocean, and as our most fortunate Isle of Great
Britain has been lately erected into a puissant Monarchy, by the like
conjunction of diverse kingdoms, aspiring in the strength of these to greater
height, which things could never arrive into a Repub: quia non moritur Respub:
nec habet heredes, the Commonwealth dies not, nor has any heirs as Kings
do. Moreover we collect by the holy Scripture, that the dilatation of Empires
is a benediction of God, which since it falls out by monarchy, therefore
unto it must also appertain the blessing. The reason of this is, because the
plurality of petty Princes and Estates, do make them commonly to live in
aemulation and strife, and make great subjects to be insolent and contentious,
which breeds civil discord, and often times distraction in religion,
grieuances and annoyances of people, so far that we read how multitude of
Princes is permitted by God for the punishment of our sins.

As this point now is true, that the virtuous effects of Monarchical
government do approve the lawfulness of it, so does the holy Scripture
confirm the same. Christ himself commanded to obey Caesar, the two
Archiapostles Peter, and Paul from his inspiration did teach the same. Paul
has shown himself a patron of supreme authority, Let every soul be subject
to superior powers, which in his time were only but Ethnic Kings. Peter has
commanded us to submit our selves to all manner of ordinances of Kings, or of
Governors under Kings, whether they be good, or bad. And all the Doctors of
the Church have clearly been of this opinion in favor of monarchy, that it
was one of the chiefest blessings which God did vouchsafe upon the Israelites,
the conjunction of the tree of Joseph which was in the hand of Ephraim, with
the tree of Judah, as we find in the 30. Chap: of Ezechiel, that they should
be all under one King, and be no more a divided people, says God in that
place, for the Princely authority. We have Justin orat. ad Graecos, Athanasius
orations, contra Idola. Chrysostom. Homil. 34. on the 1. Cor. Cyprian de vanitate
Idolorum. Ierom, Epi. 4. Leon. Sermo. 1. de natiuitate. Tho. de Aquin. and all
the learned sort of them have preferred it, also all the famous Poets, Orators,
Philosophers, Historiographers, have done the same out of the light of nature.
Homer 2. Book, Euripides in Andromache, Isocrates ad Nicom: Demosthenes Olym.
1. Dion. Hist. Roma. Lib. 44. Pliny li. 11. cap. 1. Plato in Politicis,
Aristot. lib. 12. Metaph. Senec lib. 2. de benef. ca. 20. Plutar. de tribus
generibus Reipub. and as many more as have written, have left the same ground in
their Books. As both these be most true, so it is most true also, and a strong
argument for Monarchy, for the third, that the thundering of Gods judgments
against those who attempted to violate, even wicked and tyrannous Princes, it
does approve that calling to be a true ordinance of God: The banishers of the
Roman Kings, first Tarquinius superbus, then of Julius Caesar (who in effect
was a King) bearing still the name of Brutus, howsoever these enterprises
seemed for the time to be virtuously undergone, against unjust vsurpatours or
wicked Kings, yet the issue of the actors did show to be a divine vindication:
The first Brutus was brought upon the parricied of his own sons, and had his
own life spoiled thereafter, the last of them, that pretended brave Brutus,
who was called Vitimus Romanorum, because after him none did dream any more of
Roman liberty: he after a wretched while of afflictions did dye by his own
hand: attesting the Gods, Virtuti fortunam defuisse, that fortune was,
conspired against his virtue, and leaving behind him to the world a bloody
name, which has no other use, why to be remembered of men, but when it is
applied to those treacherous Traitors in whom his spirit bath made
transmigration, to be perfidious murderers of lawful Kings, as I have said
before, and all his accomplices the killers of Caesar, being mightiemen of
resolved action and strongly fortified, they did all perish by a sudden revenge
as the story tells, Intra annum vertentem, before the turning about of one
year; which made Cardan to say, that the ghost of Caesar was Maximus Demon, a
terrible spirit of revenge, and made other Philosophers to say of him, Non
mortuus est homo, sed reuersus quidem Deus in locum suum, That by the slaughter
of Caesar no man was dead, but a certain god returned to his own seat from
whence he came; Cassius in like manner the chief contriuer of that murder,
the night before the battle of Philippi, being visibly terrified with the
ghost of Caesar, he procured himself to be dispatched by the hand of his own
servant, and nothing did ensue thereafter during the space almost of twenty
years; in the time of the Triumuiri, but fires of civil combustion and
bloodshed, wherein Antho. Lep. Pomp Sextus, Cicero, and all the ambitious
spirits were spent with infinite numbers of the popular, and what violation of
Kings and Princes has not the like event? A more barbarous and more
supportable tyranny, yea a more cruel brutish man has never been then Nero,
the surprise of whose life, was accompained with the murder of three
succeeding Emperors, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, all within two years, of whom
Otho the worthier of the three was made his own executioner; besides many
thousands of Roman Gentlemen, whose lives were the propitiatory sacrifice to
the gods, for the contemptible Nero. To come to domesticke examples, Richard
the second of England degraded as an unworthy Prince: but in their stories we
see that an omnipotent revenge did follow upon it: for Henry the fourth in his
time had no other actions, but the dispatching and overthrow of those who were
of his side against Richard, so was he enraged with fear and jealousy, his
son again had some intestine repois and peace by means of his wars in
France: but his successor, Henry the sixth was deprived, his son Edward
poisoned, his children murdered, by their cruel Uncle the Duke of Gloucester,
and his tyranny again intercepted by Henry the seventh. These were the
infinite effusions of native blood, during that tempest of Naufrage, wherein
their Writers do collect, have been sixteen or 17 several pitched battles,
the slaughter of nine Kings, or Kings sons, forty Dukes, Marquesses, and
Earls, 200000. of the popular. And what extraordinary punishment have we in
our time seen inflicted, upon the persons, houses, and states of diverse
disloyal subjects, who have attempted to abuse the sacred authority of our
most gracious Sovereign: certain it is a ground in reason, a trial in
experience, a conclusion of all politickes, and warranted by Gods word in holy
Scripture, strengthened with the opinion of grave Doctors of the Church. That
Rebellon does ever move greater mischief then Tyranny.

CHAP. X.
A defense of Episcopal government by diverse most clear and ingenuous
reasons.

NOw we come to conside^ what affinity, the Church government has with those
others whereof we have spoken; before the written Law of Moses God did elect so
many Patriarckes, to rule his first Church: Enoc, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and others: And our Savior before the written Law of the Euangel, or of grace,
he did elect so many Apostles to rule the second, whereof the former was the
type: when the numbers of the believers did increase, even unto Moses were
adjoined seventy to assist him in his charge; so did Christ, next his twelve
Apostles elect seventy Disciples. In Israel there were many particular Princes
and Elders of the people, who did rule every man his own Centuries, and
Chiliads, but these seventy were created to bear universal rule, as we collect
from the words of Moses, Ego solus far omnem populum istum non possum I only
cannot bear the charge of this people, answer, Congregatibi, gather unto you,
which is to be his Colleagues, and yet they were subordinate, for while Moses
went to the mountain, he left a deputation over the people, Ecce Aaron and
Hur. If any man have controversy let him come to Aaron and Hur; even so these
seventy Disciples howsoever they were adjoined to the Apostles, yet they were
subordinate and inferior, the Apostles being still chosen to be conversant
with Christ, constant witnesses of all his actions, and only entire with him,
like unto Moses who only went up to talk with God. We read in the twelfth of
the Acts, how the Apostles found Iustus and Matthias only sufficient of all
the rest to succeed in the place of Judas, argument enough of the Apostolical
superiority over them, Luke again and Mark were of good authorities among the
Apostles, because they were the Euangelical Historians, yet were they not of
the seventy Evangelists, being elected by men and not our Savior, as
Tertullian writes of Luke, Non Apostolus sed Apostolicus, non Magister sed
Tertul. contra. Marcion. li. 4.
Discipulus vtique Magistro minor, Not an Apostle but Apostolical, no Master,
but Disciple, and always inferior to the Master. That diverse had the holy
spirit as the Apostles, who were not yet their equals it is evident, after
their dispersion Philip did Euangelize at Samaria, but Peter and John were sent
to constitute the churches. The holy spirit without the ministry of S. Paul,
did come upon Cornelius and his company: for besides these two orders of
Apostles and Disciples, there was a third, among the number of an hundred who
were present at the choosing of Matthias, besides the twelve Apostles, and
seventy Disciples, there were thirty eight who been in neither ordination were
Prophets, as all the learned do affirm who treat of this point, of which
number was Annamas, and Agabus endued with prophetical spirits, to impart to
the Church diverse revelations which they had.

Touching these again who were thereafter called Episcopi and Presbiteri, we
see that in the Apostles days the Church was a while without them: the first
mention of of that order we find it in the Church of Jerusalem, in the twelfth
of the Acts; for so long as the Apostles and Evangelists did remain, there was
neither Episcopus nor Presbyter, but after they were disseuered James being
beheaded, and Peter fled, then did they enter, and from that forth, Luke does
coniunctly report of them with the Apostles: Saint Paul so like unto himself
in all his Epistles, we cannot think that without a reason in his Epistle to
the Philipians, he has given salutation to the Episcopi and Diaconi, and has
not done so in the rest of his Epistles. In that Epistle to the Romans, he
salutes diverse whom he calls his co-operarij, or fellow laborers as
Andronicus and Vrbanus, famous among the Apostles. And of the Domestic Church
which was some while at Ephesus, and somewhile at Corinth, to these he gives
Acts 19. 28.
them their own praises, yet does he not call them Episcopi nor Presbyteri, as
he does Epaphroditus in that to the Philipians: And Archippus in that to the
Colossians, when he came to Rome, we read how he was received, but by no
Presbiteri, which had not been omitted, if that ordination had been then
among them, more then it is omitted in the 15. and 21. of the Acts, where he is
said to be received of Presbyters, all this time there was no Presbiteri yet
planted other then Timothy, Titus, Apollo, Luke; Stephen, Fortun. Achai. and a
few others whom the Apostles did send upon occasions, nor these Churches had
then no other Bishop but S. Paul. In the mean time the Apostles and the
Evangelists did at their commodities visit them as Epiphan. and Ambrosiu^ bear
witness. Epiphanius thus, while the preaching of the Gospel was but resent
the holy Apostle write according to the time, and to things that were, where
there were Episcopi he write to them, and unto Diaconi where they were, for
the Apostles did not ordinate, says he, al things upon the sudden, there was
great need of Presbiteri and Diaconi, under the Apostles, because by these,
Ecclesiastical function is perfect. Where none was found worthy of Episcopal
charge, that place did remain without a Bishop, for they being no great
multitude of believers, says he, they were no great numbers found capable of
the Presbyterat, therefore the Church at that time did rest under the
Apostolic Bishopric till with time things grew to greater perfection; in
which words we do observe this, that in the beginning while the Apostolical
mission was limited to Judea, Christ did only choose 12. Apostles, and 70.
Disciples, but after the Legation was general both to Jew and Gentile, they
took unto them co-operarij, Evangelists, Prophets and others, and when the
Gospel began to spread they did institute Episcopi and Presbyteri: So that
Christ's Church was planted by the like beginnings, and had the like growth of
policy as that of Jerusalem; both having their original in the persons of
Moses the figure, and Christ the man figured, and both with time diuoluing by
little and little into a diversity of subordinate rulers, of whom the Apostle
sets down the clear distinction and imparity, giving the first place to
Apostles, the second to Evangelists, the third to Prophets, the fourth to
Pastors, and the last to Doctors. Whereof the first of the number Apostolus
does comprehend in it as in genere, these whole species, ennumerated of
spiritual functions, so that every Apostle was also a Doctor but
notreciprocally.

By these we do manifestly see that Christ in the foundation of his Church,
did follow for government, the same Architype which was given unto Moses, and
that one God has but one meaning of one order in matter of Policy, as I have
said; for if ye will hold this comparison betwixt the Jewish and Christian
Church to be remote and fantastic, because the first was Typical, and is
expired, I answer, There was in the Mosaicall Law three parts, the typical,
the moral, and the political: the daily sacrifice and these ceremonial
things which were figurative of Christ's passion, they are finished and have no
imitation in Christ's Church, but for the moral it does remain: the same Law
lies over us which did astrict them, albeit we have easier means to perform
it by faith in Jesus Christ. And for the political it does also remain as S.
Paul says: Know you not that those who 1. Cor. 9.
minister at the altar, do live by the Altar etc?

But for the concordance of these two Churches in matter of Policy, I bring
first the testimony of S. Ambrose, who expounding these words of S. Paul to
Timothy, Seniorem ne increpaueris, do not reproach an Elder, among other
things he says also thus: Vnde Synagogaprius, and postea Ecclesia Seniores
habuit sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur, first the Jewish Synagogue, and
then the Church of Christ had their Elders without whose Council nothing was
done. Next I bring the testimony of John Calvin, who upon the harmony of the
Evangelists has written thus, Quant au nombre de 70. il me semble auoir, etc.
Touching the number of the 70. Disciples, it appears to me (says he) that our
Savior has followed the same order, whereunto the Jews of old were subject
and accustomed: So many Apostles were chosen who should be as Patriarchs to
assemble the members of the real body of the Church, and for the like respect
of imitation the 70. Disciples were elected, for we know says he that Moses
being unable to bear the charge, took unto him seventy to govern the
people. For of him who would object against the similitude of these Churches
for policy, that the 70. of Israel were no spiritual Rulers, and therefore
could not be resembled by the 70. Disciples, I would ask you how then did the
holy spirit come upon them, that they prophesied in the presence of the people,
and how was the spirit of Moses parted among them. Thirdly I give the Testimony
of Doctor Beza who has derived his reformed discipline whereby the Elders be
adjoined to the Pastors, from the Jewish example. But that which makes this
point of the similitude in policy of these two Churches to be most clear and
out of doubt, is the opinion of S. Ierom the pretended Patron of the
Presbyterians, who in the conclusion to the Epistle to Euagrius writes thus,
Quod Aaron and filij eius atque Leuit^ in templo gesserunt, hoc sibi
Pr^sbyteri, Episcopi, and Diaconi vindicent in Ecclesia, vt sciamus traditiones
apostolicas de veteri Testamento sumptas esse: says he, Whatsoever Aaron his
sons and the Levites did exercise in their persons in the Jewish Church, let
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons take on them to do the same, that we may
understand (says he) the Apostolical Traditions are exemplary drawn out of
the old Testament.

Always here it is where the Puritan and the Papist meet, to urge one thing
upon the Leuiticall imitation in Of Episcopal Government.
policy, the Puritan to infer an inconvenient, the Papist to induce his
advantage, first, say they, if you appeal to this exemplar, how can you avoid
Priestly Sovereignty, and a supreme Bishop: next they turn it over thus, If
your bishops be in the Church for unities sake (as they are) ad ^ollenda
Schismata, then this argument following must be good. Either there is as great
unity in a parish under a Minister, as in a Diocese under a Bishop, or else
the more Churches make the greater unity. If the second be true then must we
allow the Hierarchall Supremacy, because thereby all Churches are reduced under
one, so that upon this the Papist will build his Popery, and the Puritan will
have our Bishops to be Antichristian. Which objection is so frivolous that
Calvin himself (alleged by them to be a fautor of their Presbyterian rule)
does answer unto it, saying, there is not the like reason betwixt a peculiar
people as the Jewish Synagogue, I^si. lib: 4. cap 6.
and the whole world, under the Gospel; Neither was it the meaning of our
Savior, that as every particular Church should be under one Pastor, so all the
world under one head, otherwise why did he choose his twelve together, and in
parity? For howsoever we do mark in the particular members of nature,
manifest argument of Monarchiall policy, yet find we no general unity, no^
absolute Sovereignty, but in God. As for example, although the Lion be king of
beasts, who did ever hear, that all Lions were subject to one Lion? or that
all Kings be ordinarily subject to one Supreme Monarche. The Lord God is only
the Center from whence the diversity of nature has proceeded, whereupon the
Cabbalists did found that word, In Centro veritas, in circumferentia nihil, The
verity is in the Center, and in the circumference nothing but shadows, which
is confirmed by the holy Scripture, Solus Deus verus, and sermo eius veritas:
Only God is true, and his word is only verity, the (...) of nature have no
other fountain to return unto but God, nor no capital union to repose into,
but him. If the Angels have their own Hierarchies, we do not read that they
be all under one head, unless it be the Lord Jesus Christ called by the
Prophet the Angel of the Testament, and the Angel of the great Counsel, as is
said before: As God has reserved the Supremacy of general nature to rest in
his own person, so has Christ in his Church reserved it to himself, to be
only head thereof: in such sort that no Bishop can be called Antichristian,
but in so far, as he does depend from the Papal Sovereignty, and as the
setting up of a second Bishop in one Diocese, were to be Schismaticke from the
first Bishop, so to introduce an universal Bishop in Christ's place, is to
make defection from him. For even a^ Christ did send his Twelve with equal
Commission, and equal graces, that the establishing of our faith should be
more miraculous by the unanimity of twelve, then could have been by the
consent of one, even so has it been the meaning of the Apostles and their
successors, to mainetaine Catholic unity, not by Hierarchall Supremacy in
the person of one; no, lest it might both seem a work of man, and be the more
easily corrupted, but that it might seem the work of God, and be the more
miraculous by the harmony of many Bishops, who atall occasions might
communicate the confessions of their faith, by their Canonical, Pontifical,
and public letters. If any man did err, they first sought him to be reformed
by those, and failing thereof, they assembled their Counsels to depose him
Cyprian saiththat the Catholic Church is one not divided or rent with
Schisms, Sed coherentium sibi inuicem Episcoporum glutin^ copulata, as it Lib.
4. Epist. 9.
were coupled together with the glue of Episcopal Concordance; therefore says
he the body of Bishops is copious, and tied together with the knot of mutual
unity, that if any one should be author of heresy, the rest might endeavor to
control him, and as this was the true meaning of the Apostles, so (to reason
still from experience) it is true that until the coming of Papal tyranny in
the year 607 the Church of Christ was ever most free from that superstition,
ambition, avarice, and impiety of manners which si^ce have spoiled all.

Seeing we have thus truly and without inconvenience, brought the
Ecclesiastical government to the rules of the old Testament, it may suffice
to rectify a good and iuditious mind in that matter of the Bishops, yet
because it is a maine point, not only of general reformation, but of our
intestine union with that perfect Church of England, and of our sincere
conjunction also among our selves in Scotland, I will insist briefly in it, not
into the idle perplexities which the malice and ignorance of you who be
opponents does move, because they be exactly treated by learned divines, only
because my discourse is Empericall* I will speak two or three words touching
the promiscual and common use of the names Episcopus, and Presbyter, (which is
(...) questionis) affirmed by you to have had no difference at all in the
Apostolical days, so that thereupon you doebuild all the Sophistry of the
question. Secondly, I will give you the clear testimonies of the Catholic and
Consentient Antiquity upon two things, one of the great use and benefit which
has redowned to the Church, by the rule of Bishops; an other of their
successiue continuation from the days of the Apostles hitherto, without
intermission, excepting a few reformed Churches 60. years ago. Lastly I will
set down to you the judgment, and meaning concerning Church Policy of all
our famous reformatours, beginning at Luther even until now, to let you see
how they be as far against your Consistorian Discipline, as are our Bishops,
who be now in government.

And first concerning the community of the words Episcopus and Presbyter, it
is true they were as they are still, Unus Episcopat^, vnum Presbyterium, and if
you please to say, Vnus Apostolatus: O^e and the same thing, touching the
substance of their ministry, they preach one doctrine, but we must not from
that homonomie of word^ enforce such wrangling conceits, as if we had not
learned in the Logical School the definition of Equiuoca verba, quorum nomen
est commune, ea autem quae nomini conue^unt alia atque alia, which have a
common name; but things competent to the name most diverse in the one and in the
other, they labor about one subject, but they be distinguished by some
accidental points, wherein they differ by reason of degree of Ecclesiastical
authority. Quae differunt s^lummodo quantitate, and qualitate, non differunt
natura, say the Philosophers, the things which differ only in quantity and
quality, they do not differ in nature, as to say that the Archbishop has
within his rule the same power which the Patriarch within his, touching the
substance of his charge, excepting some reseruations to the Patriarchall
degree: unto the which by reason of superiority, appellation in some cases was
made from the others, and to the which belongs a power to conuocate
Archbishops, by reason of more ample presedence: so every Patriarchall Bishop,
was an Archbishop, but not reciprocally. And every Episcopus a Presbyter, but
not reciprocally: while the Episcopal power was in the Apostles themselves, or
in Apostolical men, they who had that power, were still called Apostles, as by
the worthier style, and therefore Ambrose in some of his Treatises upon the
Gospel by Apostles does understand Bishops: and Cyprian in like manner,
Apostolos id est Episcopos 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 18. 4. Lib. 3. Epist. 9.
and praepositos Dominus elegit: The Lord chose Apostles, that is, Bishops and
ouerrulers: for as Theodoret has well observed in these words, in time past
says he, they called one and the same man Bishop and Presbyter, and these who
now are called Bishops, they named Apostles, but in process of time they left
the name of Apostles to those who were truly Apostles, and the name of
Episcopus or Bishop they took away from Presbyter, and gave it to those who
were wont to be called Apostles, by confusion of names, only says he: which
testimony conferred with many others like, will make the truth of the matter
to be this, while as the Bishops were Apostles, or Apostolical men: (for so
were the first Bishops) the Angels of the Churches were also called Apostles of
the Churches, other inferior Pastors were then called Episcopi and Presbyteri,
by confusion of names, but when those first Bishops being dead, their
successors were to be chosen out of the Presbyters (men neither Apostles nor
Apostolical) which Ierom notes to have been done at Alexandria after the
death of S. Mark, as you shall hear, and was done in other places where no
Apostolical men did rest alive, then I say, and there, they left the name of
Apostles: to Apostles indeed who were dead, and for difference from them they
called the intrant successor Episcopus, or Bishop, and his inferior minister
again Presbyter, allowing no more confusion of names, so that this clear
distinction both of names and offices, was embraced in the very first
succession of the Apostles. For Ignatius who was Bishop of Antioch in the
Apostles time, after that Euodius had been there before him, he did usually
distinguish these three degrees of the Clergy, as the Church has ever done
since by these three names: Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, the difference of
which degrees and the superiority of Bishops, is witnessed by the same
Ignatius, writing to the Smyrnenses, Let no man do any thing appertayning to
the Church, says he, yea let not the administration of the Eucharist be
lawful, but by the Bishop, or by him who has his authority from the Bishop.

Next touching the restimonies of Antiquity upon the use and benefit of
Episcopal Regiment, all the Fathers do in one voice applaude that which
Cyprian the most modest of Bishops has written in that point, affirming that
all heresies and schisms have ever flowed from discontented humors of those
who contemn the authority of Bishops, which is placed to coerce, and correct
them. Unde schismata and hereses aborta sunt nisi dum Episcopus contemnitur,
and homo dignatione Dei honoratus ab indignis hominibus iudicatur, from whence
are heresies, Cyprian: lib. 4. epist. 9.
says he, but because unworthy men do censure and despise him whom God has
honored with preferment. Basilius says, that the unity of the Church does
depend from the unity of the Bishop, and that the erection of a second Bishop
within one Diocese (unless it be to help and assist him by his own consent)
has ever been esteemed the breeding of schism: but of all the Ancients Saint
Ierom does best clear the truth of this point, even he who is pretended to be
flagellum Episcop^, the scourge of Bishops, as you shall see. It is true indeed
that Ierom writing upon the first of the Epistle to Titus, has once called the
Episcopal authority rather a custom then an Apostolical Tradition, saying
thus: Before that by instinct of the Devil there were factions in the Church,
and that it was said among the people, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I of
Cephas, the Church was governed by the common consent of the Presbyters, but
after through all the world it was decreed, that one of the Presbyters should
be placed above the rest, to whom should apperteine the whole Ecclesiastical
care and extirpation of schism. Thus far I^m. Out of which words the
Presbyterians do extort this consequence, that the primitive Church was
governed by presbyteriall policy without Bishops: to this the answer is,
first, if it were granted to come in by a consueted and not by a primitive
tradition. Yet the consequence is void against Bishops, unless we will say
that Presbyters and Deacons were not neither an Apostolical ordination,
because in the beginning the Apostles did govern the Church without both
these, by consent of the people, as it is manifest by the Epistle to Titus, as
Creta, Corynth, Ephesus and Philippi before they had Episcopus or Presbyter,
whom when they did receive, the Church did yet remain under the rule of the
Apostles. Secondly, it is answered where he speaks of the choosing of one
Presbyter above the rest, for taking order with schisms, that schisms were
begun in the Apostles ownetime, so that this same election has been also then
begun: or otherwise, that the Apostles have not been so wise as their
Successors, which were absurd to hold. Thirdly, it is answered, that reason of
Ierom takes away Deacons as well as Bishops, because the murmurations of the
Greeks against the Hebrews, moved that institution Acts 6.
as we know, which was not in the beginning. Fourthly, it is answered, this
opinion of Ierom is singular, and perhaps of temerarious and discontented
humor, he being but a Presbyter. For while he speaks of a novelty in the
Church accepted through all the world, he should have put down the time by
particular circumstances, otherwise he leaves his opinion weak and
obnoxious. Lastly, the answer is, The best Doctors of the Church have erred in
their writts, and have set down their Retractions, as August^, so is it of
verity, that Ierom has mended himself (...) this particular, (...) has made
an ample palinode and Recantation, (...) in this argument it is over past and
suppressed by the presbyterian Clergy, as if none but they could find it
out. In his epistle to Euagrius, Alexandria, inquit, (...) Marco Euangelista
^sque ad Heracli^ and (...) Episcopos; Presbyteri vnum ex sese electum in
excelsiori grad^ collocatu^ ad tollenda schismata Episcopum (...), quomodo si
exercitu^ Imperatorem faciat: At Alexandri^ from Saint Mark the Evangelist
until Heracli^ and Dionisius Bishops. The Presbyters did ^ill choose one of
themselves to be above them for avoiding of schisms, whom they called Bishop,
even a^if an army should create an Emperor. Again in the preamble of his
Commentaries upon Matthe^ he says, that Mark^ was the first Bishop of
Alexandria, that (...) dy^ (...) the times of the Apostles the seventh year of
Nero, he does testify in his Catalogue, Script: ecclesinst. that which is true
tha^ Anani^ suereeded him, therefore it must follow of his own words, that he
was (...) by them, (...) (...) exeroitu^ (...) (...), a^ an (...) (...) ate an
Emperor. Thirdly, in an otherplace most plain^ Totius Ecclesi^ salut^m a Summ^
(...) dign^ate (...), c^ si non exors, and ab^mnibus (...) (...) potest^ t^ in
Ecelesia efficere^^r schis^ta quot Sacerd^ (...), (...) he The Churches
prosperitio does relie^n the (...) of the chief Priest, or Bishop of the
Church, (...) if he have not granted unto him a free power above the rest,
there would be as many schisms as Priests with the Church: so that Ierom must
confess that ^rke and Anian^ at Alex^, and (...) and Igna^ (...) Antioch were
constitute by the ordi^ce of ou^ S^our, or then that the Apostles did institute
(...) to the mind of Christ, which is abs^d to hol^ (...) lastl^ the
conclusion of tha^ Epistle, as I (...) (...) ^lated, does refer the (...)
(...) (...) (...) the Jewish Church, in which speeches first and last of Ierom,
we do not only observe the great benefit redounding to the Church by Bishops,
and the end why they were created, for unity and avoiding of schisms, but we
do in like manner mark the antiquity of that policy, from S. Mark, and the
authority and power thereof, as if an Army should choose an Emperor says
he, and the succession thereof to Dionisius, and lastly the universality
thereof, Decretum erat in toto orb terrarum, says he, It was decreed
throughout the whole world, whereupon he has concluded, that the weal of the
Church does depend, a Summi Sacerdotis dignitate, from the worth of the Bishop.

After that some of the inferior Clerks, who did assist the informall
election of Nouatian in the place of Cornelius, were again reduced unto the
Catholic Church, their penitence was declared in these words, We are not
ignorant, that there is one God, one Christ, one holy Ghost, one Bishop into
one Church. whereby we see that unity was the end of Episcopal institution.
When Constantine at the instance of the devout Matrons of Rome, licenced
Liberius to return, but withal appointed that Church government to be common
betwixt him and Felix. The faithful people deriding that ordinance of the
Arrian Emperor, cried aloud, as Theodore writes, one God, one Church, one
Bishop. So that antiquity does ever ascribe the benefit of unity in the
Church unto that apostolical and ancient policy.

Thirdly, for testimonies for the succession of the Bishops in the Church, from
the Apostles hitherto there be so many, that for a short rehearsal one knows
not what to choose. Against the Bishoprics of Titus and Timothy many things
be idly pretended, which are plainly discussed by those Theologues, who have
expressly handled this question, but against those who do allege that they
remained not at Ephesus and Creta numbers of Authors bear witness, Dorothaus
in Synopsi Soph: in Catal: in tot; Ifidorus de vita and morte Sanctorum
vincent, li. 10. cap. 38. Anthonius ex Policrate, Part. titul. 6. cap. 28.
Niceph. li. 10. cap. 11. who all report that they lived and died, the one at
Ephesus, and the other at Creta. And as they were ordained by the Apostles: so
were diverse others institute Bishops in diverse places. Eusebius witnesses
that about the year, 45. Euodius was Christi. anno 45. li. 3.
created by the Apostle Peter, and Paul Bishop of Antioch, and Ignatius who
succeeded him in the Apostles time does witness, that Peter and Paul ordained
L^nus Bishop of Rome, An. 56. whom Anacletus succeeded, and Ireneus li. 3.
after him Clemens observed by Ireneus and Eusebius, By the appointment of
Saint Peter, Mark was first Bishop of Alexandria. To whom Ani^us, Abilius, and
Cerdo, all in the Apostles times witnesses by Niceph. Gregory, Jerome, That
James the just was Bishop of Jerusalem, institute by the Apostles immediately
after the passion of our Savior: Jerome does affirm it, Catalog. scrip.
Eccles. Eusebius brings the most ancient testimonies of the Church for the
same. That to James the brother of our Lord surnamed the just, the throne
Episcopal of Jerusalem Ierom. lib. 14. 6.
was committed. In particular he brings Clemens, Alexandrinus testifying,
that James, Peter and John, did choose James the just, Bishop of Jerusalem after
the Ascension: and Higesippus, whom Jerome and Eusebius affirm to be of the
first successors of the Apostles, do Li. 2. cap. 24. Pro^m. in Mat. li. 2.
ca. 19.
hold the same of James. Eusebius in his History gives a Catalogue of 37.
Bishops in Jerusalem, between James and Macarius. The same is testified by
Ambrose, and Eusebius. li. 7. 19. Euse b. li. ^sto. 3 4. 5. 6. 7. Amb. in Gallat.
Augustine: yea and all the general Council of Constantinople, whose records
prove that James was the first Bishop, to whom the Chair of Jerusalem was
trusted.

Now if any would say, that these were Bishops but of one Church, if there was
but one in Crete, how was it said, Opidatim co^stitues sicut ego te: Irene^
counted among the first of the primitive writers, speaking of the Church of
Rome, says that the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, the foundators thereof,
Tradiderunt Lino potestatem administrandi totius Ecclesiae, That as the numbers
of Christians did increase at Rome, they were divided in several paroches,
under several Presbyters by Euaristus Bishop of Rome, which again were
augmented, the Churches I mean, by Higinus in the year 138 as Platina and
Onuphrius do testify, de Episcopat. and titul. and Eusebius in his sixth Book
cap. 3. does affirm that under Cornelius Bishop and Martyr in the year 250.
there was in the Church of Rome, 46. Presbyters, 7. Deacons, 100. other Clergy
men, and but one Bishop. But of this point there is a clear and manifest
example, and most free from controversy of the seven Churches of Asia, over
which was appointed the seven Angels as Bishops, confessed by Doctor Beza
himself, one also of your pretended Patrons: calling the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus (...). the Prelate or governor Antistitem, says he, vt vocat
Justinius: Of these Churches I say, that every one comprehended in circuit both
City and Country Churches, and every one of them had but one Angel or Bishop:
As Polycarp at Smyrna was Bishop 13. years before the Revelation was
delivered, as is observed by Bullingerus in Apocal. and he died a glorious
Martyr, as Eusebius proves in his 4. Book, cap. 15. by an Epistle of the
Smyrnenses and Onesimus, Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, testifies by
Ignatius ad Epiphanium and Ignatius himself was at Antioch. Epiphanius does
testify that the Church of Alexandria had besides the Church called Caesarea,
which was burned in Julian his time and reedified by Athanasius, it had also
that Church of Dionisius, that of Thomas, that of Pierius, that of Serapion, of
Mepdidius, of Annianus, of Baucalis and Abias, and that in one of those
Colluthus was a Presbyter, and in one Carpones, in an other Sarmatas, and
Arrius a Presbyter in one. Aps large testimonies have we of those of Asia,
that Ephesus was a great Metropolis having a large Country subject to it. That
Pergamus was a famous City, sometimes the seat of the Church of Asia, that
Smyrna, Sardis, Laodicia, Philodelphia, were great and mother Cities, having
within them many Churches. Ignatius to the Smyruenses, Viueremini inquit
Episcepum: Reverence your Bishop, says he, as Christ and his Apostles do
command, and in his Epistle ad Trallianos, what is a Bishop says he, but one,
Qui principatum and potestatem super omnes obtinet, who has power above the
rest, and what are Presbyters, says he, Sed Collegium sacrum, Conciliarij and
Coassessores, and in his Epistle ad Magnetianos: As Christ says he, does
nothing without the Father, so must not the Presbyters, or Deacons, do any
thing without their Bishops, Aliter iniquum est and Deo odiosum, otherwise it
is iniquity and odious to God. Cyprian who was the most indulgent Bishop we
read of to his Presbyters, and the most modest Prelate: In the fifth Epistle of
his second Book touching one Aurelius, whom he did ordinate, but advice of the
Church Clergy. We use dear brother, to deliberate with you before, and to
weigh the manners and merits of men by your concurrence: but we need not to
look for the testimonies of men, Cumprecedant diuina suffragia, when we are
strengthened by divine suffrages. Like to this again we find of him in his
ordination of one Numidicus, in the tenth Epistle of his fourth Book.
Brethren, says he, I advertise you that Numidic^ by divine inspiration is
adjoined to the number of our Carthagine Presbyters, and that he does sit with
us among the Clergy: and what has been done by Cyprian we read not where it
was retracted by any, which I do not put down here: yet any Bishop should
delight to imitate this kind of rule, but only to show what does in cure
appertain to the person of a Bishop, and the weight of his authority, as the
same Cyprian does testify in the 27. Epistle, Indeper temporum and
suecessionum vices Episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesia Ratio decurrit, vt super
Episcopes Ecclesiam constituatur. Et omnis actus Ecclesia peripsos gubernetur.
So has it fallen out, says he, by length of time, that the order of Bishops,
and the condition of Ecclesiastical rule is such that it does altogether rest
with them, and every act thereof appertain to them.

Now because I intend not to be tedious in this discourse, therefore you are
to mark how of all these ancients, I have chosen out three, whose testimonies
and opinions in the question of Bishops, is to be esteemed most sincere for
the reason following. Of all the Bishops of Antiquity, Cyprian was the most
favorable, and most affected to his Presbyters, and in his carriage more like
to a Compresbyter then a Prelate. Of all the Bishops of Antiquity whose
writings are extant in the Church, Ignatius is most ancient, and has drawn
his knowledge out of the pure fountains of Apostolical wisdom, and not from
the rivers as his fellows have done: Of all the Doctors of Antiquity, Jerome
is most sought to, by the Presbyterians: The Council of Sardica, cap. 10. 13.
has decreed that if a rich man by means of Court come to be a Bishop, he
shall first perform the office of a Reader, Deacon and Presbyter, that by
degrees he may ascend to the height of a Bishopric. Nazianzene gives
testimony of Athanasius and Basil, that they ascended into Episcopal dignity
by the spiritual Law, through all the degrees of Ecclesiastical offices. The
Council of Antioch, that whatsoever things appertain unto the Church are to
be governed by the authority of the Bishop by whom say they people are
instructed. The Council of Calcedon decreed that none should build a Cloister,
or Monastery, without the consent of the Bishop of the City, and that all
Monastical persons should be subject to the Bishop. And if we should search
all the Doctors, Fathers, and Counsels, we should find that Episcopal
policy accompanied with a clear consent of all Catholic antiquity to applaud
it. So far that for the first thousand years of the Church no man has been
known to deny or decline it, but only Aereus who was therefore compted an
Heretic by Augustine in his Catalogue of heresies, and by Epiphanius also,
which has not been rashly, nor with repentance affirmed by Augustine, as some
hold, for it was written after his retractation, and after his writing of 230
Books besides his Epistles and Homilies, He says in his preface, that it is
hard to give an accurate definition of an Heretic, he reckons up 53.
heresies which after Christ's ascenscion were contrary to his doctrine, giving
the last place to that of Aereus: And concluding in the end of all, Omnis it
aque Christianus Catholicus ista non debet credere. Every Christian Catholic
Concilium Nicens. cap. 8.
ought not therefore to believe them. The Counsel of Nice having decreed that
the Catharists or Nauatians or a sort of sublimitated Puritans of these days
returned to penitence unto the Church, those who had brooked any dignity of
before, should be repossessed of any office whatsoever in the Church, except it
were to displace a Bishop, which should not be lawful to him who has been a
Nouatian Bishop. But he should content himself to be a Priest, unless the
Bishop would receive him to be a Coadiutor, or communicate to him the honor of
the name, or if he like him not to find him a Choro-Episcopat or Presbyterat,
To the end as Ruffinus says, Ne in ^na Ciuitate duo sint Episcopi, that there
should not be two Bishops in one City: Augustine being ignorant of this when he
was drawn from Nauationisme to be Bishop of Hippona, while yet Ualerius
lived, because of his great worth, when Augustine himself became old, and
nominated Euodius to be his Successor, and had chosen him himself to be his
Coadiutor, yet he held it unlawful during his own life to ordinate him
Bishop, when Ualerius ordained me Bishop, said he, we were both ignorant of the
decree of the Connsell of Nice, but what was reprehended in me, shall not be
blamed in my Successor, as Possidon: has it, Quod sibi factum esse doluit
alijs fieri noluit. So did this holy man reverence that ordinance of Nice in
favors of orthodoxall Bishops, neither shall we find through all ancient
Counsels or Fathers one, who has not done the like, reposing still the glory
of the Church upon the authority of Bishops, according to that which David did
foresee in his Prophetical spirit, saying in his 45. Psalm, Instead of
Fathers children shall be borne unto thee, whom thou shall make Princes in all
the earth, which word Augustine does interpret instead of Apostolos, who were
thy fathers. O Catholic Church sons who are Bishops are created unto thee,
therefore think not thy self forsaken because thou see not Peter nor Paul
who begat thee: Agnoscant quiprecisi sunt, veniant ad vnitatem, Let them (says
he) who are Opiniators and Schismatiks acknowledge those sons who be borne
to the Church to be her Princes over all the Earth.

The like exposition Ierom the pretended Patron of Presbyters, makes upon the
words of Esaias in the 17. verse of the 60. chapter, according to the Septuagint,
speaking to the future estate of the Church, through a Revelation. I will give
thy Princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righteousness, whereon Jerome;
Herein says he) the Majesty of the holy Scripture is to be admired, who
calls futuros Ecclesia Episcopos, The Princes and Rulers that were to be of
the Church, Bishops whose visitation is all in peace, and the name of their
dignity all in righteousness (says he) So that we find an excess of honor
and dignity, which from Primitive and ancient times has been yielded to this
virtuous Prelacie in the Church.

Does not Tertullian who lived in the first 200 years write this of Bishops,
not only yielding unto them points of preeminence and jurisdiction: but
speaking of the celebration of the Sacrament, The Bishop (says he) has the
right to minister Baptism, and then the Presbyters and Deacons, but not
without the authority of the Bishop for the honor of the Church, which being
safe, peace is safe. In regard of which Catholic and constant testimonies from
time to time, what shall we say? shall we not for once think it impossible,
that the successors of the Apostles, all the holy Fathers, so many Martyrs and
Saints would have abolished that government whatsoever which Christ and his
Apostles left unto the Church, for the next shall we not hold it impossible to
fall out, that any policy which was not received from the Apostles could be at
one time embraced of the whole Christian world, and approved of all general
counsels in the Primitive Church. For the last shall we not think it a scorn
beyond all scorns, that all those antiquities and Apostolical traditions
witnessed by Apostolical men, general counsels, Fathers, Doctors, Catholic
consent without interruption, must be condemned for follies, schisms,
corruptions, by some pure and Heteroclite brains, who have start up more then
1500. years after, to impugn the credit of the Church Government, qualified
by so many divine men whose faith was tried in the fire of affliction, and who
sealed their profession with glorious Martyrdom. Certainly if it must be so,
we may say that the true light has endured a miraculous eclipse, and that
great knowledge has been long reserved to be at length vouchsafed to the
Allobrogicall Doctors.

CHAP. XI.
The opinion of the Archi-Reformatours concerning Church-Policie.

FInally to conclude this point of the Church-Policy, I come to show what have
been the opinions of Protoreformatours concerning the same. In the Augustine
confession which is the first public Protestant act wherein we can observe it,
this Article is contained, we have often, say they, out of our great desires
protested to Hist. confess. August. per Chytr.
observe the Ecclesiastical policy in all degrees as it is canonical in the
Chruch, and to reverence the authority of Bishops, providing they do not force
us to anything contrary to Gods word, which protestation shall excuse us to all
posterity, that the overthrow of the ancient policy be not imputed to us, say
they: which confession Calvin among others did soon thereafter subscribe
Melancthon to Martin Luther. Non credis quanto sum in odio Noricis and alijs.
You will not believe (says he) how I am hated of the Norricians and others;
Always it is not well that men should so abhor the restoration of Bishops:
for I know not with what a face we can refuse them: If they will permit us to
have purity of doctrine, And I do fear that Episcopal authority being
dissolved, we shall have more intolerable Tyranny in the place thereof, says
he; And in another place which was not written to Luther, Et mecum semper
sensit Lutherus, And Luther did ever judge with me, who says he, knew himself
to be the more loved of mer, because by his means Bishops had been cast out
and themselves set at liberty, which shall be dangerous for the posterity; for
what state of Church shall we have when the ancient policy shaken off, there
shall be no certain Rulers, says Melancthon, which solid judgment
Camerarius does praise in these words, Quod reclamantibus multis ille hoc
suadebat non modo ad stipulatore sed auctore Luthero, vt restituerentur
Episcopi si vsum purae doctrina permitterent, that against many he did not
only by Luthers consent, but Hist. confess. August. pa. 389.
by his direction persuade the Restitution of Bishops if they will grant the
purity of doctrine. In another little treatise of these times entitled
Articuls Protestantium de vnitate Ecclesiae. Gradus illos plures Episcoporum,
Archiepiscoporum, Patriarcharum, vtiles esse existimamus ad Ecclesiae salutem
si ij qui presunt faciunt officium, all these degrees of Ecclesiastical
policy are profitable for the Church, providing Prelates discharge their
duty. Bucer de vi and vs^ ministerij says thus. Therefore these orders of
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons established in the beginning by the holy
spirit, when Churches begun to be multiplied they did ordain to every Province
their own Metropolitan. And again thereafter to show how he thought it a
divine ordinance, he says, as the people were more and more frequent in
Metropolitan Cities, It a dabat Dominus vt haberent ampliores Episcopos illae
Ecclesiae, so did God ordain greater Bishops to those Churches. Hemingi^s is
of that same opinion, and both of them do blame that wrested sense of Ierom,
aforesaid, saying that howsoever it might be so while Churches were not
perfectly constituted, yet all the other Fathers were against him from thence
forth, and he contented to acknowledge his error, as you have heard. Philip
Hebr^nerus a great Protestant Theologue, having moved the L^ci com: in epist.
ad Tim^th: and Titum.
question touching these degrees Ecclesiastical; he answers in favor of
them, because the Apostles do mention them in the first place, the Presbyter
in the next, and the Deacon in the last, says he, who is more famous among us,
as I have said, then the venerable and learned Zanchius, who has left us a
long discourse of Episcopal government in the Church, which were too long to
relate here; and is to be found in his observations 25. in titulo 38. de
Disciplina clericali; beginning thus: Tertia pars disciplina clericalis est ea
quae gradus infimi subijciuntur superioribus, and it is most plain of any for
Bishops, as may be perceived also by those his following speeches in the
history of the Augustine confession. My faith (says he) does absolutely rest
upon the simple word of God: next upon the common consent of the ancient
Catholic Church, if it is not repugnant to the holy Scripture, for whatsoever
has been decreed by those holy Fathers assembled in general Cou^cells in the
name of God, if it do not contradict his word, that I take to flow from the
holy Ghost, albeit I do not account it in the same degree with the written
word, and seeing it is most evident by all the writts of the ancient Fathers,
that Bishops and these other orders have been allowed in the Church, Quis ego
sum: who am I (says he) who should take upon me to impugn that which the holy
Catholic Church has approved. Neither durst the most learned of our time
disprooue them, because they were instituted for good ends, and for edification
of Gods people. Besides I have respect to these reformed Churches, who having
embraced the Euangell, do yet retain the order of Bishops in name and
authority (meaning the Lutherians) And looking to the Protestant Churches I
find they have their Bishops and Archbishops under changed names of
Superintendants, and general Superintendants, and where neither the old good
Greek names, of Episcopus and Archiepiscopus, nor these new ill Latin names
of Superintendant, and general Superintendent be acknowledged. Notwithstanding
I see their (meaning of Presbyterians) chief men who take upon them all the
authority, where therefore these be maintained and Bishops refused, it is but
a controversy for names, so when we agree as we do upon the thing it self,
why should we strive about the name? Thus far Zanchius. Wherein we see that
he does acknowledge that distinction mentioned by me in the beginning of this
Article, of that which is directly divine as the word, and that which is diuini
Iuris, as the Policy both being of like verity, but not of like authority,
necessity, and perpetuity.

This sound judgment of Zanchius is so truly, naturally, and holily conceived,
that even the latest and most peremptory Reformators since, be forced to have
the same opinion, and to follow the same practice. Calvin speaking of the
primitive church before the intrusion of Popery, during all which time, says
he, the Church government has nothing almost dissonant from Gods word. For
the Presbyters who had the charge of doctrine, did choose one among them selves
under the style of a Bishop, ne v^ fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur ex
equalitate, that dissension should not arise of aequalitie, as commonly it
does, says he. And in his Epistle to Cardinal Sadolett he is contented to
obey a Bishop, providing he be reformed in doctrine, Talem nobis Hierarchiam si
dederint quae a Christo tanquam vnico capite pendeat. The opinion of Beza
concerning the Church of England I have told already, then for their practice,
it is manifest that all the Governors of the Church of Geneua since the Bishop
was eiected, have wished by all means to replant that authority, but could
not, for the State being altogether changed in a popular government, by
repining from the Bishop, who was also their civil head, it was so far from
receiving any image of Sovereignty either spiritual or temporal: that Calvin
being altogether out of hope to get a Presbytery established of Ministers
alone, was contented to comport a mixed Presbytery, of six Ministry, and
twelve Citizens, always while he lived he was perpetual President in effect
of the Ecclesiastical Senate, differing only in name from a Bishop, which
name and authority both he could have sustained in his person, if the State
had urged him, seeing he was contented himself to obey a reformed Bishop. Beza
likewise during ten or twelve years, carried the same authority, they did
both, rule over their brethren as a Primate over his Coepiscopi, or a Bishop
over his Compresbyte^, even as Zanchius has said. And how many Christian
Pastors of remote Nations did in all those times depend from their Oracles, as
Presbyters under Bishops? If any man will say it was the merit of the men, and
no ordination of the Church, I answer if it was so, it is all one to bear
authority, whether colourably or openly, only here is the difference, that
lawful authority is better then that which men do arrogate without warrant,
and it is better to endure a lawful Bishop then an usurping Brother; but to
neither of these two do I ascribe any disorder, they were wise, learned, and
divine men, who did comport with the policy of the time Inuita Minerua, as we
say, of necessity. For even Beza finding things yet to go farther from the
Episcopal rule, by the coming thither of Da^aeus, he did vehemently regrate
it to his familiars. And I say that Anthon: Fa^us, who is now Arch-Presbyter
there, is as wise in that kind, as any of his Predecessors, for I know it by
experience to be so. It may be indeed said, that the Church of Geneua is yet in
purity without faction, but who does not see the reason of it, because it is
parua Respublica, a small Commonwealth, easily ruled, where the Presbyteriall
Clergy is not above the number of eighteen, counting both Pastors and Doctors,
but if it were populous and gross, or if division should fall in that which
is, might it not come to pass among them, as it has done to others in the
like, that for want of a spiritual head, the Civil Magistrate behooued to
interpose his authority, and perhaps join him self to the wrong side, as
sundry Roman Emperors have done in such things, according as Ecclesiastical
Stories do record.

And what was the doing of our own Reformator John Knox, and of all those who
were wise Reformators, was it not like unto the Romans wisdom, who having
cast out their Kings, did in every case of danger clothe themselves with the
absolute authority of Dictators: Even so did they after the expulsion of
Bishops exercise the same power, as Zanchius has said, vnderchanged names, and
evil Latin names, as he calls them, of Superintendents, and general
Superintendents, until by length of time as the state of Rome was never stayed
before it fell again into the own natural center of Monarchy, Naturam furca
expellas licet, vsque recurret, Even so the Ecclesiastical policy, has
returned again to the own fountain from whence it did flow. All which
considered, I give you my counsel who are Puritans, that you be not ashamed to
say with Zanchius, Quis ego sum etc. who are you to oppose your selves against
the rule of God in nature, and in all her members against the rule of wisdom
in the Civil state, of Oeconomie in families, of morality in one man's person,
of God in the Architype of the Jewish Church: of the Apostles, the Primitive
Church and all antiquity following thereupon, I give you my Counsel to
understand the mystery of time, and the nature of reformation, which is not
compassed upon the sudden but with length of time, even as corruption grows
with time.

We see in the old Law the Priesthood was one thing. and the Priestly
transgressions an other: what did Man^sses, what did Ahas? and other kings of
Judah? How did Uziah the Priest, and diverse others concur with the impiety of
their kings to defile the house of God with Idolatry, we may see it in the
book of the Kings, and Paralyp: did God therefore take away from the people
the Priesthood? no, it was often times profaned, but never abolished, yea before
the Lord should take it away, he did rather suffer both Priesthood and
Principautie to be confounded in one person, as is said before: why should you
then maliciously transgress against so many examples, to contemn Episcopal
regiment, because the Papal tyranny has profaned it? why do you search
argumens for division, and not for unity? It is no Christian part out of the
sixteen Archbishops of Antioch, to object alone, Paulus Samositanus, who
abused his authority to pride and heresy: would you think the like advantage
good against the Apostles to speak of Judas? out of multitudes of Bishops you
have chosen a few of the most insolent and wicked to be of your side, marking
the disorders of Theoph. Alexandrinus, Valens, Vrsatius, Nestorius, Macedon.
Phoc. What would you answer to these, who would deal so with yourselues,
among hundreths of the like entercourses of your policy, to object but two,
your great feast day holden at Edinburgh, which made the seventeenth of
December so famous, and again, your caryage after the treason of Gowrie at
Perth, where the Lord God stood miraculously for the life of your most Gracious
Prince, and that for greater causes (as you have seen) then were revealed at
that time, and no doubt for greater ends then you do yet see: what can you
answer to the bad behavior of some brethren, who durst challenge such a king,
his Majesty's reputation and fame, and bring it in question before his people,
which things I mentioned here out of my true affection to your reformation:
because the Physicians say, Nulla medicamenta magis sunt salutifera quam ea qua
dolorem pariunt, There is no medicine more powerful then that which breeds
dolor to the patient, why do you not therefore ouerpasse your malicious
caption of men's faults, to lookevpon the benefit which does depend from
lawful policy: why do you not remember that the Archiepiscopall authority
has served to repress the Arrian heresy, the most mighty opposition that
ever has been in Gods Church: why do you not remember that Samositanus was
more times in parting from the troth, and more corrigiable thereafter as is
said, then Manicheus, Marcion, Arrius, Pelagius, and other Heresiarches who
were but Presbyters: why do you not call to memory the holy and reverend
names of Gregor. Nazianz. Basil. Nicen. Athanas. Chrysostom. Cyprian. Ignat.
Polycarp. Iren. Ambros. August. Whose persons were not so remote from this age
of ours as the sincerity of their Christian and Catholic government in the
Church was different for the present rule of the Roman Bishops. And
notwithstanding of the corruption which is this day pregnant in the world, and
which you do so much peril to fall in the state of Bishops, by diuoluing of
that charge in great and noble personages, more through the favor of Princes,
then for their Merit as you say, yet do but look a little upon the worthy
Prelates which have bin in the Church of England, still since the reformation
thereof, and who be presently, whom you shall see all to be ordinarily taken
out of the prime men of the Universities, and never brought from the Court to
that dignity, do witness in special those grave and most Reverend divines,
the Archb: now of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Elie and Bathe, more
shining lights then whom the Church of God has not within nor without the
kingdom, which I in special may affirm, who have heard some of their virtuous
names remembered with honor by their chiefest enemies in Christendom, a cleerer
mark then which cannot be of men's worth. I say no more, but God of his mercy
grant that ourmost upright Christian Ministers, may follow their example, in
true pastoral vigilance and sincerity, out of those mirrours, let us reverence
this beginnings which we see of our reformation, that by our zeal and love, to
peace and unity, God may be moved to overthrow that beast of Rome, and to
plant again his holy spirit in it, to dissolve the Papal tyranny, and to
reduce it to the ancient and regular limits of Patriarchall degree; If this
Counsel be contrary to your Theology, then learn it from nature, That
Princes and Prelates are the Superior Orbs that move you, and therefore that
no motion must be within the peculiar Sphere of your Pastoral discharge, to
make you disobey their motions, and if you cannot neither do this out of a
good instinct of nature, like the celestial Planets, whose proper mouements
do never hinder them to obey and follow their Primum Mobile, Then for the
last, make it a good and necessary policy to imitate that Goose, who knowing
her own imperfection, prouides for those evils which might fall upon her in
perilous places, through too much noise, and so to save her self from the
Eagles which frequent the top of mount Taurus, as she flies along it, she
keeps a low course, and carries a stone in her beak to restrain her
ordinary cry: Princes and Prelates tanquam aues solares are like the
celestial Eagles which go nearest to the sun, they receive the immediate
inspiration and deputation of God to rule the inferior world, they are placed
in the mountain of government, so that you must take heed, that you do not
concitate them by your disordered clamours.

Now having said thus far in favors of the Episcopal What ought to be the
temperate government of Bishops.
authority, to the effect that you may see how I intend here to serve God and
not man, I will also lawfully speak of that which ought to be the upright and
Christian duty of Bishops: They are to remember that it is the fault of rulers
which often times gives distaste to people of lawful authorities, as the
tyranny of Rome has made the Primative and Orthodoxall government of Christ's
Church to be abhorred: it is the wisdom and modesty of their carriage which
must cast a good smell in the nose of the multitude, the Popular is like to a
dead Ocean, which has no motion of it self, but from above, from the
influence of the Moon, or from the agitation of the air: Bishops are the
Spheres placed above them to give them influence, and the Planets which should
minister light unto them. So that they are to learn the temperament of their
government from the sun, the chief of Plannets, which if it should still
keep the altitude or summer solstice: howsoever the glory and force thereof
should be that way more perceived, yet no man, nor beast could endure the
vehemence of that heat, in such manner, that for the benefit of inferior
Creatures which be nourished by it, it follows as we see an oblique and
temperate course betwixt the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn. They are to
learn the arts of their government from God himself, who albeit he have
both absolute and infinite power, that he could of the stones of the earth
raise up seed to Abraham, and bring any thing to pass suddenly, and in a
moment in the generation of whatsoever his creatures, yet for the maintenance
of their order and policy, he does adioyne unto his working the ordinary
concurrence of second and inferior causes, making things to go on by natural
and mutual means: they are to follow the example of Moses in the Jewish rule
of Gods people, not as the Presbyterians do, following the Archi-type for the
Laicke Elders, and refusing it for the Prelacy, they must not only imita^ the
Moysaicall, where it serves to establish their power: but also in that which
Saint Jerome does record of Moses, Qui cum solus praeesse populo haberet in
potestate: who having in his will to be only over the people, yet he did
adioyne unto him seventy to assist him: among the most ancient Canons which be
Catholic, this is reckoned with the foremost, Episcopos singulartum Genium
scire oportet qui inter eos primus sit, qui habeatur. Caput, praeter cuius
Sententiam nihil agant, sed nec ille praeter illorum sententiam faciat. The
Bishops of all Nations must understand, that he who in his own jurisdiction
is head over the rest, without whose authority they can do nothing, neither
he shall proceed, but by their concurrence and advise, Sic enim vnanimitas
erit, and Deus glorificabieur, says he, by that means Unanimity shall be
kept, and God shall be glorified. Ignatius Epistela ad Trallian^s.
the most ancient of the Fathers, has called the Presbyters, Counselors, and
Coasessours: Cyprian followed this temperate rule; Ambrose also does teach the
same. For this sort of government, does much ease them in their discharge, and
nothing derogate from their authority: for who will say that a temperate
Monarch who follows his grave Counsel does thereby lessen his power, but
he is the more advised. The excellent virtues of the Episcopal function are
known by the excellent styles given unto it, by the Spirit of GOD in the
Apocalips, they are called Angels and Stars: Constantine did call them Gods
in his time, and seeing they get celestial styles, they must also imitate the
heavens, to be the chief Preachers of Gods glory, Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei
says the Prophet David. These be the properties of the heavens which also
ought to be in Psalm. 18.
them; bodies most subtle, most high, most lucid, most clean, most perfectly
ordered, most round, they do ever move, ever give life and light unto
inferior creatures. First, they must be subtle in solid knowledge of holy
scriptures, Quia tu Scientiam repulistirepellam and egote, ne Sacerdotio
fungaris (...) says the Lord, Hos. 4.
Because thou reiectest knowledge, I shall relect thee from the Priesthood:
They must be high in the virtuous show of their life, Tantum gregem praecellat
sanctitas presulis quantum ones superat vita Pastoris, The sanctity of a
Prelate should as far excel that of his flock, as the life of a Pastor is
more worth then a sheep. In the virtue specially of charitable frugality they
should shine, Eccles. 31.
Splendidum in panibus benedicent labia multorum. In nequissimo pane murmurabit
ciuitas. The mouths of many shall bless him who is liberal of his bread, and
the City shall murmr against him who does it not, and they shall call his
wretched conquest, Panem nequissimum, A knauish bread. If a Bishop study to be
rich he is neither Star nor Angel, nor no matter heavenly, Si terram
cogitas terraes, If a man's mind be muddy, he is mudde himself, riches are
indeed a blessing of God: but we find seldom mention in the Scripture of a
rich man in good terms, but with hard title, Solomon says, Alia infirmitas
sub sole, Diuitiae conseruatae in malum Domini: Riches heaped up for the
mischief of their Master, and the Evangelist speaking of a rich man, Mortuus
est Dives and sepultus in Inferno. The rich man died and was buried in Hell.
Again, our Savior says, It is as impossible for a rich man to enter into
heaven, as for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle: and the holy
Spirit speaking by Saint John in the second of the Apocalips to the Angel, or
Bishop of Laodicea, Dicis, quia Dives sum and nullius egeo, and ecce miser
pauper, caecut, and nudus: Thou say thou art rich and need nothing, and
behold, thou art miserable, poor, blind and naked. Whereby we see that earthly
desires in a Bishop be wretched nakedness, terra inanis erat and vacua, says
the Scripture, The earth was empty and barren, and so be all the Prelates who
delight in riches and earthly pleasures. Again, Bishops must resemble the
heavens being clean in their very hearts, they must not say, Placet quicquid
licet, That uery thing does please them which is lawful, but they must
forbear many pleasures lawful to others, that being clean they may cleanse
others? Non valet tergere sordes manus qu^ lutum tenet, The hand which is
spotted with clay it cannot purge filthiness. They must be well and perfectly
ordered in their behauiours, having them seasoned with wisdom and discretion,
as Christ faith to his Apostles, habeto in vibis salem, That they should have
salt, whereof, we see if there be too much in meat it makes it bitter, if too
little unsavory, if a discreet measure, it makes it pleasant and delicate to
the Taste: they must be round as the heavens, we know that a circle is figura
capacissima, and simplicima, a most simple and capable figure: which has no
Angle, crook, point, nor division: showing how evil lasinesse, rest,
duplicity, or crooked ways become a Prelate: Finally, they must still move as
the heavens do, going from virtue to virtue, from good to better, for the
common good of those who be under them. Woe were unto the infeiour world if the
Celestial spheres should intermit their course and stand still; even as the
round wheel when it begins to stand presently it goes back: so, In via
Domini non progredi regredi est, not to go forward in the way of the Lord is
to go backward: because in that circular and continual motion which should be
in pastoral piety, there is no station nor repose, Hec fuit iniquitas Sodoinae
abundantia and otium: Therefore finally they must like unto the heavens, make
continual influxion of life and light in the inferior members of Christ
Church, seeing it has pleased God to let unto them his Vineyard, they are to
remember the saying of our Savior Omnis arbor quae non facit fructum bonum
excid^ and per ignem mittetur, Every tree which brings not forth good fruit,
shall be cut down and cast into the fire: It is neither the blossom, the
flower, nor the leaf, which will please God; but the fruit, neither shows of
piety, nor learned preachings; but the edification of Christian souls, will
content God, Exemplum dedi vobit vt quemadmodum egofeci ita and vos faciatis,
says Christ, I have given you example that as I have done, so might you do.
The first Adam did feed upon the fruits of the trees in Paradise, but the
second Adam upon the fruits of his Saints, who are the mystical trees of this
Vineyard, as may be marked out of that answer given to his Apostles, saying to
him, Rabbi manduca, ego habeo alium cibum manducare, quem vos nescitis. I have
other meat to eat which you do not know, and this was the fruits of the
Garden of Israel even then transplanted: for example, the conversion of the
Samaritan woman was his thirst, and upon the Cross he cried, sitio, langushing
for the like wing-grapes: seeing Bishops are the chiefest trees in the
Vineyard, they must strive to produce the most excellent fruits of Christian
virtues, specially that every one of their actions be witnesses of their
humility. The tree the more it has the root humble and deep in the earth, it
makes the fairer fruit, the Prophet Esaias does affirm it, Mittet radices
deorsum, and faciet fructus sursum. And the Wiseman says, Odibilis Deo Esaias
37:
and hominibus superbia, Pride is hateful to God and man. The Prelates be as
is said before, the head, the heart and the stomach of the spiritual body,
which being in good Eccles. 24.
and wholesome constitution, the members have also their full vigor and
strength: The Prophet Jeremy speaking of the reformation of the people,
begins at the heads, Si feceritis iudicium inter virum and proximum eius,
aduenae, viduae, and pupillo: If you will judge betwixt a man and his neighbor
justly, and if you do justly to the stranger widow, and Orphane; Therefore if
Prelates would have people purged from those damnable vices of ambition,
avarice, pride and Atheism, they must keep themselves reformed, summarily
they may cast back their eyes a little, to look upon the ruins of their
Predecessors the late Bishops of Scotland, who because they fell away from
uprightness and sincerity, and did abandon themselves to public vices, the
Lord did spew them out, Malos male perdidi^ and lo^uit vineam suam alijs, he
made the wicked to perish wickedly, and did let his Vineyard to others.

CHAP. XI.
Why the Organs, Glericall Vestiments, and ancient Ceremonies which be used in
the Church of England are again to be received of us in Scotland.

IT follows now for the happiness of our domesticke union, to speak of the
ceremonies of the Church of England, which, as they are no many in number that
I will here treat of, so they require no over long and tedious discourse:
They are conversant about our two principal senses, the one (as Aristotle
calls it) the sense De anima lib. 2. sensus disciplina bilis. De art poetica.
of science and discipline, the ear, The other (as Horace shows) the conduit
and inlet of the most deep and firm impressions, our eyes; Segnius irritant
animos demissaper aures, quamqua sunt oculis subiecta sidelibus. Upon the first
the admirable and divine gifts of Music does work; upon the second the grave
and Maiestique, yet plain and sober habit of vestments: both have three
operations on us, one natural as we are men, and endewed with outward senses,
the vestiments to defend us from the cold, the Music to move our senses to
ioyfulnesse, or to sadness and contemplation, the second is a civil
operation, as we are distinct members of a political and well ordered society,
as we see the vestiments do show the distinction of men's callings or degrees,
and the Music is a delight and ornament used by us in feasts and public
triumphs. The third is a sacred and sequestered proper application in the
setting forth and beautifying (within due and decent limits) the service of
Almighty God. The first does work upon us as men; the second as we are civil
men, the third as we are Christian men.

Of Music I will speak in the first place, presuming that not only when it
is heard acting its own part to the ear in harmonicall sounds; but even when
the virtues and commendation thereof are made the subject matter of prosaicall
discourse, presenting the vigor and force thereof though but to the eye of the
Reader, yet it will have its wonted operation in sweetly charming the affection
of those, who have drunk in some prejudice against it; and distaste of the use
of it in sacris, so that my Readers mind being set in symbalis been sonantibus,
in good tune; by the impressions of Music (though by me an unskillful
artsman rudely fingered) they will I hope the more calmely and temperately
accept the other following treatise of uestiments, especially while it is so
brief. If those who have stopped their ears against not only the vocal
sound, but also the vocal defense of Church-Musique, think me too arrogant in
hoping that any Enthusiasme can proceed from my Musical discourse to surprise
their preiudicat opinions, let them but look into the very nature and instinct
proper to an intellectual substance, and they shall find that argument and
strength of reason, has no less unresistable force, to attract and purchase
the assent of the reasonable soul, then the actual sound of Music has to
move and mollify the hardest and most stony hearts: as it is written of
Amphi^ that he did Saxa mouere sono, testudinis and pre^e bla^da ducere quo
vellet, then should not the true reasons of Musical virtue (which are to the
understanding more strong than harmony to the sense) mollify and guide the
most obdurate hearts of such as profess a kind of deadly feade against the use
thereof.

If the Music were a thing only indifferent, that is to say, the
isntrumental Music i^ the Church were neither commanded not commended by
Gods word, it is enough for our reception again of it by the argument of
Zanch^ for: Unity as is said. But certainly the Church Music or that which
is grave, affectioned and holy, it is a true physic of the Spirit, which does
restore it from distemperature and confusion, whither it do proceed from
natural melancholy, it recalleth the dispersed faculties of the mind to one
center it does reconfort the astonished powers thereof, and by little and little
lead them back again to the sense of reason by getting their consent to
conspire together, and to attend the melodious harmony, so that in that case it
is a servant and soldier of the soul, which helps her and gives her the
meane^ to pacify a turbulent and disordered spirit, as ancient philosophers
speaking metaphisically of this point have said, that the Music does cure the
body by way of the soul, even as physic does cure the mind oftentimes by
^ay of the body: What shall I speak of Church Music, when profane
histories do record, that among the Greeks the Laconickes, y^a King Alexander
himself did employ the Music to medicin their extraordinary passions: And
who does not understand that there is a kind of furious madness of the mind
in Almaine called Sa^uitus which is not cured but by the sound of Musical
Instruments, and an other in Italy called Tarantula, which is not cured but in
the like sort, or whither it be that the distemperature of the Spirit, does
flow from external causes as from demoniacall Invasion, the Music does help
it much, as we see by that practice of David, who by the sweetness of his
harp, did terrify and banish for the time that unclean and disordered spirit
which vexed King Saul.

Always to proceed, the most apt and open reasons for the profitable use of
Music in the publibue service of God, may be drawn out of these two
fountains, the one of nature, the other of Scripture, the one will induce
credit as we are men, the other as we are Christians.

The voice of nature next to our own experience, we may best receive from the
judgment of those whom we either approve for Philosophers, or reverence for
discerners of that which in nature now corrupted, yet remains sincere,
useful and lawful.

And in vain should I undergo needless trouble if I would search what the
ancients have found out and recorded, hereof Plato shall be to me v^us instar
omnium seconded also by Tully in his second book de legibus, Assentior Platoni
nihil tam facile in animos teneros ac ^lles Cicer. de. leg. 2.
influere, quam varios canendi sonos, quoru^ dici non potest quanta sit vis in
vtramque partem. Namque and incitat languentes and languefacit excitatos, and
tum remittit animos tum contrahit. Music has an incredible power either to
stir up the affections when they are dull and heavy, or to allay and compose
them when they are incensed and troubled. Martin Bucer gives a plain natural
reason hereof (which I had rather stick to then to search of what harmonicall
proportion the soul of man is composed) Aminales spiritus quibus affectus
animae constant aerae sunt materia, atque Bucer in Psa. 33.
ideo ab infracto extrinsecus temporato que commodum aere per aures delat^,
mirum in modum citantur, proque illius temperatura immutantur. The animal
spirits of our bodies (the next instruments of the soul) being made of an aerie
substance are wonderfully affected with the external air when it is tempered
with certain proportionable motions and melodious sounds. From hence are the
diverse effects of diverse kinds of Music, the Phrygian, Lydian, Doricke and
Ionicke.

S. Augustine cites out of Tully a remarkable instance Aug. lib. 5. contra
Julian.
Cu^ vinolenti adolescentes etc. When certain younkers well tippled, and
whetted with light wanton music attempted violently to break open the doors
of a chaste matrons house, Pythagoras called to the Musician, vt spondeum
caneret, to play a slow, grave and stately tune, upon hearing whereof by the
gravity of that strain, their luxurious humor was presently allayed.

Whereby, as also by every man's daily experience it is evident what force there
is in Music for inciting, composing and moderating the passions of the mind.
But here even out of this example may be objected the abuse and corruption of
manners by some kind of light harmony applied to lighter Ditties; whereto I
answer, that this it self is no small commendation unto the grauer and more
divine sort of harmony, that the Devil (whose desire and use is always to
pervert the best creatures and gifts of God) has sought thus infamare rem
optimam, to discredit so excellent a gift as Music is. As Bucer says in
Psalm: Haud leuiter detestandum rem tam diuinam and religioni praecipue natam
abusu ad voluptates sic viluisse ac redditam infamem. The convenient and
necessary use of wholesome herbs and commodious mineralls is not to be
abandoned, but rather with more discretion and diligence to be searched into,
because some others are dangerous and poisonous. The Devil has not only his
furnished Quyre for Idolatry (as in the worship of the golden Image) and his
Minstrelsie for wantonness, but even his set invocations and Sacraments: yet we
do not therefore rob God of his due in these kinds, because the Devils
apishnesse has endeavored by imitation to derogate from his most decent and
formal worship. But this by the way.

To return to that kind of Music, whereof only we understand; whatsoever
we have or shall in this discourse bring for the advancing the service of God,
namely, the grave, constant, and as it is of the Ancients called, Spondaike
vein of harmony; that surely has a natural fitness to allay our incomposed
and disordered affections, to imprint in our souls if not the character of
virtue, yet the next aptitude thereto, if not to sow the fruitful seeds of
piety, yet to make animum subactum, that is, to prepare and ear up the
furrows of our hearts, and to leave our passions fertile and ready for receipt
of the best impressions.

And when I pray you can the use of such external helps be more seasonable,
then when we must most of all sequester our thoughts from the dross of
carnal and worldly encombrances, when we are to sublimate our souls and to
make them ascend unto the throne of grace? Where can the symphony of decent
Music more fitly sound, then where there is already a symphonic and union of
desires, yea of souls in a devout congregation of Christians? Where shall the
soldiers expect to hear the language of their warfare, the trumpet and drum
to give the alarm, to whet their fortitude and incite them to fight fiercely
and constantly, but there, where they are in their troops and bands combined
together, in battle array? What indeed are the prayers of a full Christian
Congregation, but an earnest striving with God, and even wrestling with him for
a blessing as Jacob did, or withholding him from judgments, as Moses did, nay
a kind of besieging and surprising the fortress of heaven it self by
violence? Most true it is that the fountain and root of all such powerful
intercessions and invocations is the inward zeal of the heart, which the eye
of the Almighty has special regard unto (so that without it the approaching
near to God with our lips is not only fruitless but abominable) yet as true
is it that this our inward zeal and devotion is the more enflamed and
increased even toward God, and illustrated and imparted mutually by one to
another by the outward additaments and helps of gesture, tunes, acclamations,
melodious harmony of voice and of instrument, by the passionate inflexions
whereof the soul is sweetly tempered, and lead with ease and delight to those
apprehensions which otherwise it could not without difficulty and laborious
intention be framed unto. By the loftiness whereof the soul gets wings to
mount the swifter and soar the higher. Not that the shrilnesse or sweetness
of these sounds does really pierce the heavens, or that God is delighted with
the melodious proportions of sounds, but as vocal prayer is commended and
commanded by him who before hand knows the vnuttered petitions and groans of
our hearts, not only in public invocation for a mean of conjunction, but
even in private devotions and eiaculations of the soul for the better
enflaming of our hearts with feruencie by the concurring of bodily expressions;
so also is this external and vocal adoration commodiously seconded and
strongly redoubled by those instigations and transportations which are
suggested by Music. In which, furnishing the service of God, it is not
necessary that every note or point in the smallest parts and fractions be
significant in it self, (that in Instruments especially being impossible) but
it is sufficient that they accompany and concord with the dittie and words of
invocation, clothing them as it were with habit and shapes fit for the
particular matter and phrase of the hymn; sometime putting on a large habit
and deep color of gravity and slownesse, otherwhile with quickness and
agilitie passing more lightly and hastily, sometime advancing with lowdnesse,
otherwhile depressing with lowness, still adding a lively and emphaticall
impression of harmony befitting the character of the subject matter.

Most powerfully does the heavenly vigor of stately and maiestike Music both
of voice and instruments, set forth it self as upon a fit stage of action,
when the universal Church presents to God her reverent and awful adoration
of his heavenly Majesty, when the tongues of Angels and of all other
creatures are represented by the tongues of men, when whatsoever gift is in
Art, is in a model shadowed in the artificial Music, all proclayming the
unspeakable power and wisdom of the Creator, the infinite mercy of the
Redeemer, the endless glory of him by whom and for whom are all things. Of this
streyne and style are those divine hymns scattered among the Psalms of David,
and recommended to the Church in all ages by the spirit of God: In special the
Psalms 33. 104. 135. 136 147. 148. 150. And next to those sacred portions of
Scripture, that excellent hymn Te Deum penned by S. Ambrose, and used in the
daily Liturgy of the Western Church. These and such like sacred Ditties of
glorifying God, and yielding to his throne the tributarie duty and thanks of
all the creatures, when they are duly consorted with voice and sober grave
Instruments, they are like bona merx in bono lumine collocata, precious wares
or fair pictures set in a lightsome place. nay they do so naturally symbolize
with Instruments, as if they had not been so much composed for Music, as
Music invented for them.

Another eminent transportation befitting solemn Music is (...), the lofty
streyne of triumph of Gods Church, which being armed and embellished with
harmony, does not only fortify the hearts of the children of God in their
rejoicing, but also seems to give a more powerful defiance to the enemies of
the kingdom of God, both visible oppressors, and invisible opposers, wicked
men, and spiritual wickednesses. Of this sort are the tryumphant songs of
Moses, Exodus: 15. of Deborah, Iud. 5. of David, Psalm: 114. which, with some
others of that kind being poetically penned, seem in their measure of words
and periods, to awake the Harp and Lute, and to call for the ornaments of
Music to be put upon them, as if bare reading or pronouncing were too cold
and thin a clothing for them.

Other passions of desire, of spiritual love, of hope, of awe, of sorrow, of
charity, of deuote humility, and whatsoever else is the exercise of a
Christian, may receive from hence their enlargment and extention. He that in
remorse of his own vileness would with the Publican beat his breast, and
strike sadly and softly at the gate of mercy, for the easier melting of his
soul let his ear be possessed with a dolesome, flat, and spondaike streine of
Music. Here of S. Augustine is a witness by his own experience, from whose
eyes tears were drawn by the public Conf
Music of the Church at Milan. And surely that heart must needs be very tough
and obdurate, in which grave and well composed Music displaying it self in
the house of God does never beget some good disposition to remorse or devotion.
Vere qui norunt quid sit toto cord, tota anima, totisque viribus amare Deum,
illi facile agnoscunt, quam apposita religioni fit Musica, propterea quod
tantum ad componendum and exci^andu^ animum valet. Says Bucer one of the
lights of the reformed Church.

So we see that Music has its part in the Church of God for edification,
though not of the understanding directly, because it does not infuse knowledge,
yet of the affections, which are the proper object of Music, as it is
operative. The affections are the Sea on which this heavenly light works by
perpendicular aspect. Their floats, their ebbs, are caused and guided by this
planet, their storms and waves are allayed by this sweet influence. As by
sleep concentratur calor, colliguntur spiritus, the spirits vital and animal
are called in, the natural heat is drawn to the center, so by the rauishing
slumber in which sweet harmony enwrappeth the soul, the senses are suspended,
and all exorbitant passions retired. And yet indirectly and by accident it may
be said to work upon the understanding also, by suggesting and proposing fit
streynes and harmonies, which being but dead in themselves, yet do invite the
mind to give a kind of form and soul to them, and to apply suitable
contemplations and eiaculations of the soul formerly instructed, and now
abstracted, and made in some degree extaticall: In which regard there is some
liberty given unto organicall Music, not only to accompany the voice, but
also sometime for short spaces to hold on when the vocal makes a pause, that
thereby it may be left a little to its own proper and solitary operation, as
also that some relaxation and intermission may be afforded both to those that
are employed in reading and singing, and to the continual intention of the
Auditors attention, always provided, that in these interims or interscenes,
neither to much time be taken up, nor in any Church music, to much curiosity
or ostentation of art be used, as the learned and iuditious Master Hooker
admonishes, much less any light and wanton tunes or strains: of which
abomination in the Popish Quyres Master Bucer complains, that their Organists
did Spurcissimarum cautionum melos Organis modulari, and sub Ecclesiast.
Politic. 5. book. 38. Section. Bucer. in Plal. 33
nomine Christi crucifixi nil aliud quam Veneri sacrificari, play filthy
ribauld tunes upon the Organs, and under the show of devotion to Christ
crucified, offer sacrifice even to Venus. But such profane abuses suggested by
the devil cannot prejudice the Godly use of grave music, as before I have
noted.

Now to proceed in my intended discourse: In the holy Scriptures we find very
frequent and diverse motives for the approbation and recommendation of the use
of Music in the service of God; In prosecution whereof, my intent is not to
take up whatsoever may be to that purpose avouched or collected out of the
book of God, but only to touch in brief the principal heads, whereto, any
one that will employ more particular pains in this search, may refer other
proofs which I shall pass by. The distinct consideration of these proofs,
may be raunged according to these several times, into which by the ordinance
of the Creator, all time, and even all succeeding eternity is divided: namely
the ages before the law, under the law, the current season of the Gospel; and
the boundless eternity of future glory.

And first under the law of nature, before the Mosaicall was instituted, we may
observe, that Genesis 4. 21. there is a special mark of recommendation to all
posterity set upon Tubal, That he was the father of those that play upon the
Organs and Harpes: that is, that such musical instruments were both intended
by Tubal, and afterward frequented and used by his instruction or immitation.
From whence I thus collect and argue: whatsoever has in it a natural fitness
for the glorifying of God, was in that age, if not by the inuenter intended,
yet by the after practices employed to the service of God: But music, whether
vocal or isntrumental, has in it a disposition to the advancing of the glory
of God, not in a general remote and indirect sort (as all both artificial
inventions, and natural creatures have in their particular ends, a secret
reference to the last and highest end the glorifying of him, who is all in all)
but properly and directly in guiding, conforming, altering and seasoning the
best of our affections, our zeal to Gods honor, and admiration of his
Majesty, as has been before declared; Therefore it appearing that in that
young growth of the world, such instruments were found out and published, it is
more then probable, that they were by the best men of that age, and
faithfullest employed to the best use, even the help and beautifying of the
invocation of the name of God. What, though it do not appear, what was then
the form of outward invocation and worship of God, beside sacrificing? What
though the Church was not then perhaps grown into a political state? As
surely as men had then, both by nature, instinct of the Godhead, and by
instruction from Adam, a knowledge of the true God, and of his due worship, so
certainly they did use outward invocation with the voice, as well as with the
heart: and why not by singing as well as saying: and why not with isntrumental
music, as well as vocal? Why then not ordained and ordered by the
oeconomical regiment of the Patriarchs, in whom the Priestly power was united
with the Regal, as well as afterward published by more distinct constitution,
when the Priesthood was severed from the kingly office. He that is incredulous
herein, let him but travail a little further with the Church of God, and
follow the footsteps of Israel over the red sea, he shall presently hear
sounding in his ears that most Patheticall and Poetical song of triumph,
penned and chaunted by the man of God, and Prince and Prophet of Israel the
great Moses, and not so only, but also ecchoed with solemn chorall responses,
by the sister of the high Priest, and to show that all voycing music, though
having so noble a precentor, and being celebrated by so full a Quire of all the
people of Israel (verse 1.) yet is not sufficient to display the zeal and joy
of the Church of God, there comes in besides, as in Medio Chori, the noise of
Tymbrels in the hands of Miriam, and of all the women that came out after her
(verse 20.) not to yield any new instruction to their understandings, though
she were a Prophetess, but (which is the true use of such music) first to
give a greater downeweight to their affections, and to make their spiritual
joy ouerflow the banks of ordinary apprehension, and to transport them into an
higher degree of heavenly rauishment, by those artificial sounds added to the
natural, and secondly to infixe deeper in their minds and memories those
divine strains, by recording and repeating the same point in the same verses,
a thing in Church music, not to be abandoned, if tempered with gravity, as
here we may expressly gather.

For when Moses and the people had begun their song in this manner. I will sing
unto the Lord: for he has triumphed gloriously, etc. Miriam with her troop
and instruments and voices, answered the men, Sing ye unto the Lord: for he
has triumphed gloriously, etc. (verse. 21.)

This because it did precede the delivery of the ceremonial law by Moses, I
think I may safely refer either to the law of nature, or to the inueterate
practice of the most ancient Church of God, even from the first Patriarchs and
Fathers of mankind. In time of the Law, the very enditer himself Moses, did by
the immediate command of God, when he was to die, leave as his last Testament
of monition or cygnea cantio^, a formal song, which as God put into his mouth,
so he into the mouths of the children of Israel, Exodus 31. 19. to be a
perpetual witness to and against them: which begins with a most
rhetorical and Poetical exclamation of adiuring the heavens and earth to be
witnesses. This pithy abstract of the admonitions and doctrines of Moses,
containing Gods benefits toward his Church, the vpbrayding of their
ingratitude, Gods threats against them, and mysterious predictions of the
vocation of the Gentiles, etc. The spirit of GOD did choose to set down to his
Church, rather in form of Song then of Sermon, thereby insinuating that it
would be with more facility received and with deeper impression retained, which
is implied by Moses himself in the following words of the beginning of that
song, ver. 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain and my speech shall distill
as the deaw. As if he had said this last doctrine of mine which I delivered to
Gods people by way of song, shall indeed by the divine matter thereof instruct
their understandings: but shall by the manner of musical indictment and
recording thereof, pierce with the greater sweetness and facility, and by a
secret unseen influence, feed and refresh your souls, as the herbs and
plants are cherished by the deaw and fed by the soft showers. And afterward
when the Temple was to succeed the Tabernacle, David did before hand provide
Levites and singers: his preparations of that kind were: first, when the Arc
had rest (1. Chron. 6. 31.) 1. Chron. 15. And shortly after the Temple was to
be builded by Solomon, 1. Chron. 25. At both David appointed Levites and
singers with instruments of music, etc. And added thereto the ditties which
they were to sing, being a set form of invocation and thanksgiving. 1. Chron.
16. 8. Praise ye the Lord, etc. which also is repeated among the Psalms,
Psalm. 105. Moreover, in a manner the whole Book of Psalms were by the same
Prophet, penned in Meeter to be sung (as they are since in all ages and places)
in the Church of God. Amongst which some Psalm. 33. and 150. make especial
reference unto the isntrumental music.

If heereto it be replied that all this furniture of music was proper to the
Temple, and merely typical, and part of the pedagogy of the old Testament, I
may answer that in regard of the number and distinct offices and certain
kinds of instruments, those constitutions of David might well be ceremonial:
but the use of isntrumental music in general in the public praising of
God, was and is moral or natural; not indeed of absolute necessity, as if
there were no lawful service in the Church without it, but of conuenience and
expediency for the natural fitness, and decent fruitfulness which they may
have. Neither can it be denied but that where the same cause of constitution
yet remains, the practice may be well retained, at least as times and
circumstances shall require or permit. Now those that are most severely
affected against the Church music among Christians, use this as a chief
reason why it was established in that Church, because it was a fit
Schoolmaster for that people. And are there not and always will be among
Christians, some that need to be fed with milk, as well as others with strong
meat? Did not Saint Basil Basil in Psa. 48.
observe this, and in that regard commend the providence of the spirit of God,
who by the Prophet David had provided for his Church perpetually, that heavenly
mysteries, might be mingled with sweet melody. That two sort of learners might
thus be the better provided for, those that are either young in years, or
green in growth of virtue might while they think to delight themselves with
the melody, receive some good impression of instruction.

But if this cause seem insufficient, or Saint Basils authority not strong
enough, we may out of the text it self, where this musical furniture for the
Temple is instituted. 1. Chron. 16. derive a more constant reason, which must
needs hold in both Testaments. Levites were appointed to sing with
instruments, etc. that they might make a sound and lift up their voice with
joy: whence I think I may thus infer. The end and reason of the institution
of such music by David is not (for ought I can find) said to be for any
prefiguration of action to be fulfilled by the Messiah, or for any cause or
consequent proper to the people and Church of the Jews, which with the
sacrifices and other ceremonies were to expire, but the reason there added is
from a natural or rather spiritual affection common to all Churches whether
under the Law of Moses or under the Gospel of grace, especially in flourishing
times, namely a clear and fervent confession and profession of the mercies and
graces of our God with thanksgiving and exultation, which as it is in the
congregation to be solemnly performed with the voice, and that lifted up viz.
with singing, so that it may be advanced to the highest streyne of joy, it
must, or at least with conueniency may, have the help of isntrumental music
which may make a sound and lift up their voice with joy. So if in the Christian
Church, where the veil is withdrawn, and the mysteries and mercies of God the
Father in his beloved appear more clearly and gloriously, there be no less
cause of holy joy (nay unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1. 8.) why should not
this our joy break forth into the like manifestation, and that the best
manifesting and enhaunsing thereof, is by music, and that even isntrumental,
the spirit of God bears record, as I have noted. And verily if the employment
of instruments in the Judicial Temple makes them merely ceremonial, and
debarreth the Christian Church of all such use of the like in that kind; why
does not the same reason banish also all use of singing in our Churches,
because David instituted singers for the Temple? for as yet I could never here
any direct and sufficient proof, why the one should have a moral and
perpetual use, and the other only a ceremonial signification.

Thirdly, as for the time of grace if sacred music were only a cloud and
typical shadow, it should then have vanished when the body came and the most
glorious morning star appeared. But we find that even this bright star,
when it first began to appear in the earthly Horizon, chose for the blasing
forth the beams of his majesty aboueall creatures, or means in heaven or
earth, a troup of invisible, yet audible Choristers: who descending from the
Temple of the celcstiall Jerusalem, Luke 2. 13.
praised God and cheered up man with a short Christmasse Caroll, but of a most
sweet and mysterious ditty; which all Christians delight to here still
sounding in their ears and hearts, nay the very Angels themselves desire to
behold and understand. The same our Savior, as he coming into the world would
be saluted with music, so even with that mouth whence dropped the like honey,
the words of grace and life: he vouchsafed to honor that exercise in the end
of his last supper, he and his Apostles went to Mount Olive singing an Hymn.

Neither after this our bridegroom was taken away Mat. 26. 30.
did the children of the bridechamber, let fall their parts in spiritual
songs, but both practiced and exhorted to the continuance of this enkindling of
zeal and piety. Ephesians. 5. 19. Colos. 3. 16. An express iniunction for
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and making melody. Which use to have
continued in the primitive Church, not only Tertullian and other ancient
Christians, but even the Ethnicke, Plinny in his Epistle to Traiane the
Emperor does testify, Christo cuidam Deo hymnos canentes antelucanes: But
here may be, and indeed is objected, that hymns and songs, used by our
Savior, or his Apostles, or continued in the primitive Church, were only
vocal and without all artificial instrument. Whereto that I may shape answer,
I doubt not (even granting that their melody was only singing) thence to
infer a pari, a firm consequence for the addition of the other kind of
music, and to avouch without imputation of a Paradoxe, that the modulating
voice of a man and of an instrument are in this respect eiusdem rationis.

For if one look into the nature of sounds, in their general cause they are
nothing but reuerberations of the air, in their form and relation they are
deductions or compositions of proportions in the distances or connexions of
high and low, flat and sharp. So that whatsoever the immediate matter and
instrument be whether merely natural as the throat, teeth and tongue, or
aritificially (...)
composed of pipes or strings with metal or wood, the sound it self, as it
melodious or symphoniacall makes no difference of object, but carries the
same representation to the ear and judgment of the hearers; To this purpose
may I, not unfitly, apply that elegant comparison which Theodoret makes
between the voice Theodoret de prouidentia lib. 3.
of a man and a pair of organs in the parts of each. In man (says he) the
lungs are the bellows, which are moved not with foot or hand but by the
muscels af the breast, the teeth and roof of the mouth supply the place of the
pipes, the tongue by its nimble motion performs the office of the Musicians
hand for the distinguishing and articulating the sounds. Thus in the viuacitie
of his rhetorique he seems in this comparison to make the protasis or
proposition in the artificial, and the reddition in the natural by making man
a musical instrument. Then presently follows the same resemblance with the
terms inuerted to the natural order, where he plainly shows that art has
herein imitated nature in Citeraes and such like instruments wherein the teeth
are represented by the strings, the lips by the frets, the tongue by the quill,
the understanding by the hand, which moves and strikes, or stops high and
low, loud and soft, slow and quick in diverse forms. The like comparison is
also used by Gregory Nyssen in his learned Treatise De opificio hominis, where
he resembles the use and parts of the flute or fife to the instruments of
speech in man. Upon which lively and mutual resemblances as Theodoret calls
man a living organe, and the copy of artificial organs, (...).
so may I term an organ a singing man made with the hand, or rather a
liuelesse though not breathless guide of many voicesand parts.

But here it will be replied, that all artificial instruments made by man,
come far short of this one made by God himself, that none of those how
elegant soever and cunningly handled, can possibly make a sound properly
articulate, much less significant; and therefore that they are to be excluded
out of the service of God, whereto the vocal music may be admitted because
significatiue and vnderstandable. To this may answer be made, first by
acknowledging with Theodoret that man being the image of God, in imitating his
Creatonr can produce no higher works then such as are but shadows of the
works of God. That nature is the model after which art works, and that art
is but the image or resemblance of nature. And therefore that all the most
curious instruments in the world are not comparable with an humane voice for
suauity and lively expressions, neither is isntrumental music to be opposed
unto, or compared with vocal, but added as an helper, a wife, or second, or if
you will an hand-mayd thereunto. In which respect I do not hold it to be
eiusdem gradus though in general eiusdem rationis: as belonging to the same
army, but to be ranged in an inferior squadron: a guest of the sacred feast,
but at a lower table. Secondly, as for want of signification, I maintain it
that the sound and harmony of Instruments though it be not articulate, yet it
is significant; in its own kind I mean and proper element, by gentle steps
and sweet inflexions working upon the affections, and expressly nay
powerfully speaking to them, even persuading, instructing, nay commanding them,
and imprinting in them the characters of virtue and devotion, and containing
the seeds of good motions in the inward seat of the mind by the outer part of
the senses and passions. Thirdly in vocal music I demand what it is that
shall make that lawful and convenient for Gods service? Is it the
signification of the words? or the melody of the tune and symphonie? If the
first, then singing is not recommended as it is singing, but rather as saying:
and then it were better such psalms or hymns were barely pronounced or read:
for so their sense and signification is best understood. If the second, then
isntrumental music must likewise be admitted, wherein the same sounds for
tune and concord of parts are by the same rules of art practiced and expressed.
But it may be oueradded that the music of the voice is passable, as having
both these together and performing them with one breath. Most true; and therein
is the chief excellency of that gift of God, that in one and the same sound
it edifieth both the understanding and the affections. Yet the other which
cannot act but one of his properties is not therefore to be condemned or
contemned. In physique some ingredients work attrahende by their searching and
vigorous quality of attraction, others only adiuuando by diffusing the stronger
simples, and so helping the operation of them: and without these the other
would be less active and profitable. Even so in sacred music the chief
vigor of our prayers and adoration comes from the ditty which works
immediately upon our understanding, but that is much helped and quickened by
adding thereto a proportionable temper of artificial harmony, which shall make
it penetrate the deeper into our affections.

As the Church militant in the three forenamd estates and several times, so
and much more the Church triumphant in eternity, does out of the Scriptures
supply us with proof of the conueniency of setting forth the praise of God
with mellodious harmony. For when in reading the Scriptures I view that little
(yet sufficient for our knowlepge) which God has revealed concerning the state
of the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven, me thinks it must needs be
great rashness, to condemn that as superstitious or superfluous, if imitated
here on earth, which the spirit of God testifies to be the endless
employment of those that see God face to face in heaven. Is not the Jerusalem
which is above the mother of us all, into whose bosom we hope to be gathered?
Is it not that which we hope and groan for in the vale of this flesh to become
once (...) like to the Angels? Is it not that which we daily pray for, that
Gods will may be done on earth as it is in heaven? why then may we not, why
ought we not even now to imitate the work of the Angels in their adoring the
most High, and as far as we can perform that in our Churches (the type of
the everlasting Temple) which we shall, when we are hereafter clothed with
immortality, intend in heaven perpetually? If we will open the book of God
(the very window of heaven) we shall there see and hear the blessed Seraphins
thus blessing and adoring him that sits on an high throne, crying to one
another and saying, Isai. 6. 3.
Holy, holy, holy Lord of hosts. The whole world is full of his glory. If we
look in further we may see the four Evangelists figured out by the four
beasts full of eyes, encompassing the throne and without ceasing day and night
singing the like Antiphone Holy, holy, Lord God Almighty Apoc. 4 8.
which was, and which is, and which is to come. If we will yet view to the
utmost end, we may behold Gods champions after their conquest over the beast
holding in their hand as banners of that victory displaied more audibly then
visibly the harpes of God, The melody of which instruments they do animate by
singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great Apoc. 15. 2.
and marvelous are thy works Lord God Almighty etc. Apo. 19. 6. The voice of
a great multitude as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong
thundrings, saying, Halleluiah, verse 3. And again they said Halleluiah. Lo
here we have plainly represented unto us not only singing and that by
repetition again and again, but interchangeable chaunting in the Seraphins in
that they are said to cry one to another holy, holy, holy, which three sacred
words the emblem of the euer-blessed Trinity, when I hear in the Te Deum in
the vulgar tongue with a point of maiesticall correspondence gravely and
reverently sung in the Cathedral Churches of England, how others are affected
I know not, but for my self me thinks the very Celestial Temple of God is
brought down among us, or we in these bodies rapt up among the Seraphims, and
bearing parts in the Quyre of heavenly soldiers. More over, unto such vocal
singing here is distinctly added the other help of adoring and adorning the
heavenly Majesty by isntrumental harmony, the harpes, and they honored with
an attribute, even the Harpes of God, so styled either in regard of the subject
to whose praise they are used, or of the Author by whose gift that and the like
blessings are afforded to the best of the creatures, both ways designing one
and the same fountain GOD.

I will not here (lest I should lose my self) intrude into the search of
hidden secrets treasured up in heaven, how and in what sense Angels and blessed
Saints in heaven are to be understood to sing before the throne of the
Almighty: whether this be in the Scripture described in a sensible form only
for our capacity, but to be interpreted in a spiritual and allegorical
allusion; surely if the substance of Angels and souls of men be not merely
incorporall, it is not absurd to maintain that they may immediately ex iunatis
principijs and similitudine substantiae in the most pure body or space of the
heaven of heavens the seat of the blessed, both raise such real and corporeal
voices, and also be affected with the sweet harmony and proportions of such
sounds. And when after the resurrection, the souls of the faithful shall be
clothed again with their bodies, it is not amiss to think that the body
shall partake with the soul as of fulness of joy, so of the act and exercise
of perpetual adoration. And as our natural eyes shall then really and
corporally behold the most beautiful object of our Saviors glorified
humanity, oculis meis videbo Redemptore^ meu^, says Job; so it is not against
the analogy of faith to think that our tongues and mouths may then employ
them selves in endless vocal hymns and songs of thanksgiving, of glory and
worship to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb who by his blood
has redeemed us out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and
has made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father. And sithence I have been
comforted from probable, sweet, and reverend contemplations of the more
learned, to think that some sympathy may be betwixt the musical Harmony and
the Angelical nature, it makes me to presume a little upon these following
speeches, to dispute whether there may not also be a secret antipathie and
enmity natural betwixt Music and wicked Spirits.

The reason of which when we begin to consider, we find it more sublime and
remote from our sensible capacity, then to search the causes of these other
things, which evil spirits are also thought to abhor: and therefore it does
argue, that Music is a thing supernatural and heavenly. We read that the
Devils do mightily hate the presence of fire, of salt, and of Music, the fire
because it is life and light, and Satan is the Prince of darkness, and
delights in darkness; the salt because it has a virtue to purge corruption,
it is the mark of eternity, and he seeks by all means to corrupt, defile,
and destroy, which is the reason why God commanded in the old Law to put salt
upon the Table of his Sanctuary, and to have Salt specially in the sacrifice,
forbidding by the contrary to put honey or wine therein, to signify that we
must offer the sacrifice of our prayers to God with sobriety and prudence, not
mixed with flatteries, or bold speeches. God says in the Law, I shall make
with you a covenant of Salt, that is of perpetuity, as many are of opinion,
that the changing of the wife of Lot into a pillar of Salt, was, as to say, a
perpetual Statue, but when we come to seek the cause why the Music is fled
of the Devil, we find it more subtle, if the opinion were true of the
Academicks, who say that the Devils be not only bodily but elementarie,
mid-creatures betwixt visible Arist: Metaph: 4.
and invisible bodies, animalia scilicet corpore aeria mente rationalia, animo
passiua, tempore aeterna. Then might we be induced without running to other
mysteries, to acknowledge some reason why they cannot abide the melody of
Music, nor no delectable suffumigations, by that which is read of the
exorcismes of Solomon, and of the smoke of the fish of Tobia, but the
difficulty to know the demoniack nature and substance makes this
contemplation remoter. S. August: says in his last chap: of the 3. de Trinit:
that the Devils are corporal, as Basil, Gregor: Epiph: say as much, whereon
this sort of demonstration is founded. There is but one infinite substance, the
supreme essence, a substance cannot be finite, but by extremities of
superficies, and that does only belong to corporal things, and therefore those
spirits must be corporal because they are finite. Always the more common
opinion of Theology is, as of Damasc: Greg. Nazianz: Thomas Aquinas, and of
the Master of the Sentences, that the Angels and the Devils be forms both
pure, and simple, and that both can form themselves in visible bodies, when
they would effect any thing bodily, which is testified of the Angels by their
apparitions to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses, to Eliah, to Abatuck. Of the
Devils again testified by experience inquestionable, of the aquilonar Succubi
and Incubi, testified by the Cabalists, who affirm that unclean spirits do
often take the shapes of Bucks, stoned Horses, and such like creatures repleat
with bestiall luxury, whereupon, say they, proceeds that in Leuiticus, that
you go not to sacrifice to those Bucks and Satyrs; and that in Esaias of the
destruction of Babell, Zijm shall lodge there, and their streets shall be full
of O him: Satyrs shall dance there, and ^im shall cry into their Palaces.
Testified again by many places of holy Scripture, the Devil spoke bodily to
Adam, to Christ. He took the person of Samuel, albeit that Justin: Martyr,
and many of the Hebrew Doctors reason that it was Samuel himself, as well
because of that Text of Ecclesiasticus, where it is said that Samuel did
prophecy after his death, as because of the answer given to Saul, which
seems to be full of piety, pronouncing the name of GOD six or seven
times, holding that Saul was not condemned eternally as they think, but in the
estate of that incestuous man, who was ordained by S. Paul to be
excommunicate, to the end his body being chastned, his soul might be saved.
Yet S. Augustine and the best Divines stand for it that it was Satan and not
Samuel, which no doubt is the only sound opinion; Scotus subtilis in the
second book of his Sentences says, that the Angels assumed bodies not to be
joined or united with them hypostatically, but to move them and use them as
instruments, much more then says he, the Devils can assume bodies because
they are more elementarie, as they do change themselves in bodies, so from
this same ground it is affirmed that they can also change bodies.

For three things we observe in Gods works, Creation, which is only proper
unto himself, to make of no thing by the power of his word; Generation, which
he has allowed to his Creatures themselves, by a natural instinct and
appetite of succession to have a power of generation; and lastly,
Transmutation, whereof he has given power unto Stars and to the Spirits, as
says Them: de Aquin: Omnes Angeli boni and mali habent ex virtute naturali
potestate^ transmutandi corpora nostra. All the Angels, good and bad, have by
a natural instinct power to change our bodies; we see how the Sorcerers of
Pharaoh did counterset the miracles of Moses. Job says there is no power on
earth like unto that of Satan, which proves that the actions of the evil
Spirits are actions indeed but extraordinarily, so that we must not think
them illusions, or prestigitations of our eyes. Augustine chap: 9. of the third
book de Trinitate, says thus: Mali Angelipro subtilitate sui sensus in
occultioribus elementorum seminibus norunt, vnde rana and serpents nascuntur
and hac per certas temperationum opportunitates occultis motibus adhibendo
faciunt creari. The wicked Angels by their subtle sense and knowledge of the
secret seeds of nature, know by what means the Frogs and Serpents are made,
and by using of certain tymous temperations they can accelerate their
Creation. Again they have power of transportation, whereupon some follow the
ignorant Viretus, who holds it a fortitude of imagination in melancholious
women, who apprehend they be carried with the devil, albeit antiquity has
esteemed it for a true ground, that seldom does a woman die of melancholy, or
a man of excessive joy: for melancholy proceeds of to much heat and
dryness, and breeds wisdom as Galen says in his Book De atra Bile, to
neither of which two is a woman subject, being of nature humid, cold, and
passive, and therefore not wise, as Solomon, among a thousand men one, among
women none. Besides that the Septentrinall people with whom the unclean
spirits are said to be most familiar, they have as little melancholy as those
have of phlegm, who dwell in Afric, which shows the leuitie and weakness
of this opinion of Viret: Always there be two sorts of transportations, one in
body and spirit, the other in abstraction only of the spirit, as to say
Ezekiel was rapt in his spirit from Babel to Jerusalem, it might be in spirit
or in body. The Hebrew Doctors hold in their remote Theology, that the Angels
make oblation to God of the souls of his Saints, who become dead by way of
this abstraction, alleging for it this passage of the 116. Psalm, Speciosa
in conspectu Dominimors sanctorum suorum, Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints, but to deny that transportation which is both in body
and spirit, were to deny the Scripture, Eliah, Enoch, Abacucke, were
transported, and in the Evangelists, our Savior corporally transported by
Satan, to the pinnacle of the Temple, and after upon a mountain: The best
Theologes hold, that Habacucke was indeed soul and body transported, and so
Saint Philip the Apostle, whereupon Thomas Aquinas reasons thus: If it be
possible in one, it is also possible in more: and in like manner, both he, and
Durand Herne, and S. Bonauenture do make this argument. If Satan can abstract
the spirit from the body, much more can he transport both, because the
separation is more miraculous of the two, and is next unto the verity of Gods
word, the strongest argument we have for the immortality of the soul, and an
argument subjected to reason; For says Aristotle in his ninth book De
Animalibus, if the soul can do any thing without the body, then it should be
immortal, always this Aphairisis, Exstasis, or ablation of the soul, is a
thing most vndoubtable: the Scripture approves it in diverse places, specially
in the persons of Saint P. aul and Saint John, the greatest Philosophers have
acknowledged it, Plato, and Socrates did call the body, Antrum animae: the
cauerne of the soul, the chiefest Sorcerers who know it by experience have
acknowledged it, Zoreaster did call the body the sepulcher of the spirit, and
the great Orpheus did call it the prison of the soul, and to reason even
naturally, we see that local motion can be some times without touching of
bodies, but only by virtue of the agent, as the sea is moved by the moon,
which is distant from it more, then 50000. Leagues, and the Iron is drawn to
move by Magnes or the Loadstone, without any touching, which being so in
things so insensible and Inanimal as Iron, much more it may be in things not
only animal: but who have their greatest force and vigor in that local
abstraction, as our souls be most Galliard, when they be most remote from the
body: And for this point of Satan's power to transport, I say, that while that
Cherubin which moves the eight Sphere, wherein there fixed stars, does role it
Millions of miles in one hour: what matter is there of admiration, if Satan
can transport a body some few miles upon the earth.

Lastly, there is the commerce or copulation of good and bad spirits with men
and women, and whether it be really, locally, or per exsta^n, experience does
commonly teach us, that sundry things which we may call spiritual (because
they are invisible and intouchable) do take really possession of our bodies,
as the passion of love, which entering by the subtle spirits of the eyes, does
wound the heart, corrupt the blood, weaken the vital faculties, and sometimes
spoil the life; yea, the vehemency of love toward God, has oftentimes
hereby wrought as much in his best Saints. Again, the plague of pestilence,
and such cotagious things do enter in a man's body in a spiritual sort to
possess it. The Scripture does testify this real, and local copulation of
good spirits with good men; our bodies are said to be the Temples of the holy
Ghost: Our Savior has said that the father and he would dwell in him, who
obey his will. The Prophet Ezekiel speaking of his vocation by God, to preach
to the Jews, I fell down said he upon my face, and the spirit which entered
in me, did raise me up, and set me on foot. In like sort, of evil spirits,
the evil spirit of the Lord is said to enter into Saul really, and the spirit
of Satan into Judas, and our Savior did eiect diverse real and sensible
devils, because their voices were heard: The odds and distinction of these in
my opinion is this, the good spirits has more celestial and subtle bodies,
and so their possession of men and copulation with them being more spiritual
then others: It is also more perceived by the actions of our spirit, then by
any change of our bodies: whereas Demones, as Saint August in his tenth Book
De ciuitate Det, Thomas Aquinus in Summa 2. Questi. 95. Origin in his book
(...), do affirm, that they be mere corporal, so that Arist. Plato and
diverse Philosophers who divided them in aereall, terrestrial, and
subterrestriall spirits; they hold that the two inferior species of them be in
some sort gross and elementarie, more removed from the celestial
intelligences of the supreme world, and therefore given to a wicked commerse
with men and women, by all sorts of deceitful and impious suggestions, whose
copulations are both bodily, palpable, and visible, possessing the bodies
specially of women, as gross filthy and contagious vapors, breeding
inflammation visible in the hearts and breasts, moving, swelling, and dumbness
in the tongue, depriving the organicke faculties of hearing, seeing and such
like, as daily experience does teach: Neither let any man imagine the carnal
copulation of the evil spirits with women to be a thing extaticke or
fantastic, that enemy spirit of whom the Prophet says, Ad conterendum erit
cor eius and ad internecionem gentium non paucarum: whose heart shall be bent
for the overthrow Isa, 20.
and destruction of many nations and people, he delights to defile or
extinguish the seed of man even in the mothers womb: so far that the
profound naturallist Paracelsus affirms, that those gross and unclean
spirits of devils do mix themselves with humane feed, where it is lost, by
natural weakness, or nocturnall dreams, that they do cooperate with it to
produce thereby those succumbent, or incumbent spirits, devils, which are found
chiefly in the moystie and Northen Regions: To which abomination it seems the
law of God has some relation, where it is said, that all these who should
couple themselves with the devil Peor should perish wickedly, and who will
mark these places in Exodus Leuit. Deuteronomy. Where sorcerie and brutall Paliardise
or luxury is forbidden, will find uncouth and unknown villainies covertly
touched, as there where it is said you shall not present to God the wages of a
harlot, nor the price of a dog, and again where God does say: you shall no
more sacrifice unto those Buckes and Satyrs after whom you went a whoring:
which I do not here introduce impertinently nor curiously, but that we may
learn to reverence whatsoever means the Lord has appointed for us to
withstand the malice of Satan, which is so dangerous for two respects.

First, because of his craft and skilfulnesse, who can change himself into
what creatures he will, change creatures in what form he will, can transport
our spirits and bodies, can enter to possess them, can counterfeit creatures
like to our selves by his wicked abusing of humane seed: again, his malice is
dangerous by reason of the multitude of seditious spirits, who he does
command, so far, that some allege that every man has his good and evil
Demon, which for my part I will not affirm, it is enough that the Scripture
makes mention of diverse devils who have practiced diverse wickedness: Isa. 12.
Ierem. 50. Ezech. 9. Genesis 49.
Some are called by Esaias, Vasa furoris, the vessel of fury: Some by Jeremy,
the vessels of wrath, some by Ezechiel, vasa interfectionis, the vessels of
murder, some by Moses, the vessels of iniquity: some of them have aerie bodies
and power in that Element, as those four which had the winds in their hands,
Quibus datum est nocere mari and terrae, to whom it was given to trouble the
earth and the seas, by gendring of pestilence, and destroying thunders, as that
of Job, which suddenly threw down his house, which sort of aerie devils, is
said to invade the intellectual spirits of men, to seduce them to Heresy, or
ambitious faction in State, and of this kind he is esteemed the Prince who is
called (...), or exterminans: others again that be more earthly do traffic
with base sorceries, as those who taught the enchanters of Pharaoh: unto all
which the Lord has opposed millions of good Angels to govern his works, and
to presidiate and guard the Saints, and so many to rule the spheres
Celestial,, which we may perceive by Ezechiel, and in the sixty eight Psalm,
where it is said, the Chariots of the Lord are 20000. Angels, and he is among
them as in the sanctuary of Sion: whereupon the Chaldean interpreters say, that
there be so many principal lights in heaven, and as many Angels to govern
them, and Leo Hebreus has written in his second Book, that the eight heaven,
or primum mobile, which makes his couse in twenty four hours, is moved by a
Cherubin with such miracolous swiftness, that every moments motion arises to
more then a million of miles. And of the Angelike care of the Saints of God on
earth, the Scriptures are full of testimonies, that which guarded the
Israelites coming from Egypt, that which wrastled with Jacob and blessed him,
that Ceraphin which purged the lips of Esaias and made him eloquent, that Raphael
whose presence Asmodeus cannot abide, those Angels who carried Lazarus into the
bosom of Abraham, that which delivered S. Peter out of prison, that which went
with Azariah into the furnace, and made him think the flames a soft deaw, and
so forth.

The Lord God does not only furnish us with spiritual arms against Satan: as
by the power of his Angels, by the force of his word, and by our faith in
Christ: but he has taught us some familiar things which they cannot endure in
nature as is thought; as the fire, whose presence does terrify him by a
mysterious antipathy, as the presence of the Wolf astonisheth a Sheep,
because God who is his enemy is a fire, a lamp, a light of glory and power to
the godly; a fire of love, mercy and goodness, and to the wicked a consuming
fire of wrath and vengeance: and as by a natural strife the voice of a
tyrannous Schoolmaster, does affraye a wayward child, so does the sound of
musical instruments, accompanied with the praises of God, afflict and terrify
the devil by a natural Antipathy, wherewith God has endued them. Again, the
harmony of music does by a natural simpathy collect, and unite the
distracted powers of our weak minds to greater strength and devotion, and is
quasi vehiculum the conduct of devotion. We read of the Prophet Elisha; who
being for sent to prophecy the issue of the battle, he would not do it
until he first caused to sound up an instrument of music, and then he fell
into his Prophecy: we read likewise that when Samuel had consecrated king
Saul: God (said he to him) to the Mountain and thou shall find a company of
Prophets who sound instruments and prophecy, thou shall enter among them, and
the spirit of God shall come upon thee there, and thou shall be changed into
another man: the reason of this natural antipathy betwixt Music and the
Devil is, because it is a divine thing which draws the spirit to harmony,
concord, love, and heavenly contemplation, and the constitution of his nature
is contrary to these, to be seditious, discordant, and implacable.

This whole Fabric of the world is nothing else but a musical order of Gods
works, they stand as the Scripture says, in numero, pendere and mensura, by
number, weight, and measure. All the creatures are but a music, every one
having in their kinds, their Supreme or Alt, their Counter Base, and their
Tenor, to show it in few examples. Among the Planets, the austerity of Saturn,
and the rigor of Mars are tempered, and tied together with the serenity of
Jupiter, as among the Elements, the repugnance of the fire and water are kept
in concordance, by the promiscuall qualities of the air, and speaking of the
inteligentiall world, the Angels are a mediate creature betwixt the divine
Essence and man: man is a mid couple betwixt good and evil spirits, the Ape
betwixt man and fourefooted beasts, the Niriades and Tritoues, which be not
things fabulous betwixt men and fishes. The Hermophrodite betwixt man and
woman, the Mandrake betwixt man and plants, betwixt the fruits of the earth,
and things which grow within her bowels, there are fruits and corns
petrefied, that is to say naturally shapen in stones, betwixt the earth and the
stone Argillum, is amid couple, betwixt earth and metals the Marcazitae are
neither of them, but a mediate thing, so that, as that divine Philosopher,
Jesus the son of Syrac, has observed in his Book of Ecclesiasticus, there
is first a common antithesis and contradiction in all the works of God, Omnes
via Domini secundum dispositionem sapientiae suae: Duo contra vnum, vnum contra
vnum: contra malum, bonum, contra vitam mors, contra virum iustum peccator, and
sic intuere in omnia opera altissimi, says the Scripture in that place; All
the ways of God according to the disposition of his own wisdom, two against
one, one against one, good against evil, life against Death, the just man
against the reprobate, and so look into all the works of the most high, says
he, which in effect is so true, that there is nothing in the world which can
fall into our imagination wanting this contrariety, but God again has made a
concordance in all by this divine Music, not only in natural substances, but
in their qualities and accidents, yea in time it self. Summer and Winter be
contrary, but by the harmony of the spring time they are conjoined: black and
white contrary do meet in mediate colors, heat and cold again contrary agree
in tepidity, swift and slow do meet in a temperate motion; the austerity of
Hannibal, and the meekness of Fabius agree in mid constitutions: In end,
there is nothing which wants this sweet combination and harmony, except Satan
and his following spirits, betwixt whom and God, betwixt whom and his Saints,
betwixt whom and goodness, peace, concord, love, and unity, there is no knot nor
ever shall be: but being of their proper corruption enemies to God and nature,
rebellious, factious, malicious spirits of discordance, and distraction, they
do naturally abhor the sound of Harmony and Music. So that for that point
of union with the Church of England, which stands in the restitution of the
Organs, I think this will suffice apparently to persuade any well disposed and
judicious man, who has not his brain set in Symbalis m^le sonantibus, as I
have said before.

Now I come to the ceremony of the Clericall habit which is in the Church of
England, and forbearing to reason Of Clericall vestiments.
in general of the expediency and good and necessary use of grave and
Maiestique ceremonies in the public actions of state and civil governments,
without which it were not so easy to procure and maintain popular reverence
to any authority whatsoever, and which be a true edification in Gods Church,
if not of our understanding, yet of our affections, when out dull and secure
minds are stirred up to a greater measure of reverence and devotion, through
beholding the exterior Majesty of Religious Ceremonies; only for the Church
Minister his habit in particular I will deliver my opinion in sobriety thus.
There was never any age in the world which did not distinguish Counselors and
State-rulers from the people, and the religious professors from the Laity, by
their robes peculiar to themselves, as God we see himself did institute Aaron.
Therefore now, while Christian Pastors be more truly venerable and
reueuerent, because their function holds nothing of types but is perfect, to
say that they should not have an honorable and comely apparel proper to them,
and not permitted to be carried of others, it is merely idle and absurd. That
he who is sequestered from the ordinary civil vocations in the world and
consecrated to God, who is the intercessour and ambassador of the people unto
the throne of grace, to offer out spiritual sacrifice, to be secret and in a
sort familiar with God, that such a sacred person, place and calling should not
be clothed with external marked of sanctity and holy profession, which
marks ought not to be assumed by civil men, I do persuade my self that no
man will affirm it.

Which ground breing true in the general, to come to a special consideration
of the Church-vestiment and to a comparison betwixe the white surplis and the
black gown, I would say the eullours be either in different or not
indifferent, if they be indifferent, then there is no great matter of debate,
but for unities sake, we ought rather to embrace that which our neighbor
Church have received from orthodoxall antiquity, then that they ought for our
sake, to follow that which is more late; If they be not indifferent, then the
minister ought to carry that color, which of the two is most suitable to his
person, but I subsume that the white is most suitable in his person, therefore
it is most fitting that he be clothed therewith, my assumption I take to be
true for these reasons, the white is most decent, most ancient, and most
useful in the Church.

For the first the decency of Apparel stands in two points, one is in that
which does most viuely represent to our minds the nature of a man's calling,
his degree or age, as the readdish color does fit a soldier, and the black a
Schooleman and such like, another is in that which does best distinguish a
particular professor from all others of different callings, the first of the
two does note a man himself in his own property, the second does note the
discrepance of other men from him: For distinction of several professors, we
must confess the white is more decent for a Pastor, because the black gown
is common to the Physician, to the Lawyer, the Schoolman and the Preacher, and
is not forbidden to any whosoever: And for noting the discrepance of the
properties of our professions, the white is much more significant of Pastoral
function then the black as I shall show hereafter.

For the second touching antiquity, the white is ancient in the Church, S.
Chrysostom. makes mention of it in his time, speaking of the gravity of the
administration of the Sacraments, Hom. ad pop. Antioch. 60. for if (says he to
the priests) a beast whose mouth were polluted with filthiness should come to
drink in a clear fountain whereof ye had use or benefit, ye would not suffer
him to lay down his mouth, and why will ye suffer those who be defiled with
odious and abominable vices to put down their mouths in the pure fountain of
Christ's blood, Hac vestra dignitas (says he) hac securitas, haec omnis
corona, non quod albam and splendentem tunicam induti circumeatis, In your
conscientious distribution of the holy Sacrament, is your dignity, your
security, and the crown of your glory more then in that white and splendid
Coat which ye carry in the administration of them, as if one should say to a
scholar graduate in the university, your honor and reputation which you have
abroad, lies not so much in the gown, or hood, or scarlet roabe which you
wear, as in the learning and endowment which ye show in your disputations and
writings, so as from such speech may be gathered; that in the universities such
habits are used for distinction and ornament in degrees of school, even so it
is clearly seen by those words of Chrysostom, that the Church service in his
time and before him has been adorned with such vestiments; And Saint Hierom,
Coutra Pelag. against those who in his time did despise the white Clericall
vestiments, what a madness (says he) is that to count it enimity with God, if
a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, go clothed in their comely white roabe in the
service of God.

For the third, that the white is more useful, it appears this way, speaking
of a pastoral habit the white has a more easy open and vnderstandble
interpretation then the black: The black we know is a mourning habit,
where as the white represents ioyfulnesse, and therefore is most proper to
him who brings the glad tidings of the Gospel, while as their is a simpathie
between his colors and his commission: We do find in the Scripture often
mention of white for a sacred and holy apparel, but never of the black, if
the Angels of God, who be his heavenly Ministers have appeared before men in
their ministration clothed in white, to say that those who be sacred
ministers of the mysteries of Gods Church here upon earth, cannot find more
divine shapes or colors to appear in before the world, it is an
interpretation not extorted, but plain and sensibly offered out of the nature
of the thing it self. And as it is necessarily required, in special above the
rest, in the Minister, that when he utters to God the public prayers of
the Church, to which they do resound their Amen, and administreth the holy
Sacraments, that then he must come with forethought and fore-sought purity of
soul and body, both free from other studies, and other actions, which at
other times were not to be blamed, is it not expedient also, that with his
inward sanctity, he shall bring an exterior show thereof, to purchase the
greater reverence of the people, and to season their minds with holy
apprehensions, and with present desires to consort inwardly in their hearts
with that visible habit of purity and integrity which they do contemplate
in his person.

Wherefore it was a custom in the primitive Church, as we may read in many of
the Fathers, that all those, who being Catechumeni presented themselves to
Baptism, should be arrayed in white, whereupon this title has grown of
Dominica in albis, white-sunday, wherein we may consider the judgment of the
purer age of the Church, who thought it expedient, that by the inward candor
and integrity, which the concurring grace of God, the soul and the whole
person of the baptized did receive being dipped and drenched in the lauar of
regeneration, should be not only infixed by faith in the inward apprehension
of the mind of the receiver, but also testified by that public and pure mark
of whiteness unto others their spectators, and brethren partakers formerly of
the same new birth; whereby we see, what extent the authority and judgment
of the guides and governors in Gods Church has, in things, though not enacted
nor imposed by the writings or constitutions of the Apostles, yet afterward
thought expedient, for the better edifying and furnishing the people of God, in
external, and in a sort ceremonial additaments, which of themselves, being
not superstitious, but having a holy, sober, and wholesome use of instruction,
and reverence in the sacred duties of the church (though perhaps not only
afterward, but even then, they might by some private misinterpretation of
superstitious and ignorant men be abused) were by the most and best,
instituted, maintained, and retained, being indeed not to be abrogated but by
the same hand which set them up.

But to prosequute my argument for the white vestiment of the Pastor, in
showing how it is useful and properly significant, I say all the varieties of
Aarons robe were contrived by intermixing a fine white linen, as you may read.
Whenever mention is made of Christ clothed, it is either in glory and light,
or in white lynnen; Induit enim stola gloriae, amictus erat lumine sicut
vestiment^, Ezech: 9. when Commission was given to fix destroying Angels
against Jerusalem, the man who stood in the midst having power to save the
Saints, who wept for Jerusalem (no doubt Jesus Christ) he was clothed in white
Lynnen. It is clearly said of Christ, Bissus and purpura indumentum eius,
white lynnen and purple, even so it is said in the Apocalypse of the Church,
Mulier illa amicta erat purpura and Bysso, that woman was clothed with purple
and white lynnen. The white lynnen does represent purity and innocence,
therefore it is said in the Apocalypse, Byssinum sunt instificationes Sanctorum,
the justification of the Saints is as white and fine lynnen pure and Apoc: 18.
19.
perfect, so that if any man will say that the robe of Aaron was altogether a
Jewish type, and that Clericall vestiments are of no respect after the coming
of Christ, I think it idle, that Candlestick of the Arc which was clothed
with the Hyacinth and celestial color, likely might be a Type which is
abolished, or what did carry the scarlet and reddish color in that Robe, it
may be holden expired, because it did figure the passion which is performed;
or in like manner, what was partie-coloured, as Joseph who always figured
Christ, he was a Type also by reason of his coat sprinkled with blood, as it
is in Ezechiel, sumpsisti vestiment a multicoloria; and again, Quare
vestimentum tuum rubrum est? you have chosen Ezech: 16.
a Robe which is parti-colored. what means it thy garments are red? Certes,
as these colors were figurative, so are they expired, Joseph has changed his
Coat. The text of Genesis says, mutauerunt vestes eius and ipsum induerunt
Bisso, Pharaoh commanded to change his garments and to clothe him in fine white
lynnen, and Christ has also changed his garments into mere whiteness and
justification, as I have said, and his Church has changed her garments into
white, Bissus indumentum eius, and mulier illa amicta erat Bisso. And therefore
has the Wiseman said in Ecclesiast: omni tempore sint vestimenta Eccles: 9.
tua candida: so that nothing can be so fitting for a Priestly and Pastoral
habit, as the the garment of Christ himself, and of his Church in the holy
Scripture.

In which respects it seems that we are to reverence antiquity, and to
think that not without grave causes they have brought in that Ceremony into
Christ's Church, and left it unto us. For whether it was derived from the Jewish
Church or no, I do not dispute, but who would not say that the Leuiticall
vestiments were rather things depending from the policy, then figurative
Ceremonies expiring in the exhibition of Christ. I would ask him of those
Pomgrannets and Bells which were tied to the fringe of Aarons robe, to signify
that in Priestly actions there should be continually a good smell, and from
their mouths a perpetual sound of piety in our ears, and of those twelve
gemmes planted upon the breast plate of Aaron with a Diamond in the midst,
which was the most principal, conspicuous, and precious part of the Robe, what
these did figure in his person, which is not yet most proper and convenient to
be figured by vestiments in the person of a Christian Prelate, whereupon
Epiphanius Archbishop of Cyprus, and after him S. Ierom have made these
observations, upon these texts of Exodus: and Leuit: The Gemmes first being
excellent things of rare constitution do note the dignity of the priestly
Function. Secondly, they signify the doctrine and christian virtues which
should be in him who carries that dignity, that even as those gemmes have
their secret and miraculous operations, so should Prelates and Priests by the
secret inspiration of Gods spirit, be able to work in people miraculous and
extraordinary effects of Gods fear and obedience. Thirdly, as these Gemmes
are full in our eyes, of a celestial beauty and splendour, so should the
carriage of religious men shine in our eyes, for a clear mirror and example,
that when we look into it we may by the light thereof discern our own blots
and darkness. Fourthly, as the gemmes have divine and admirable forms but small
matter, and that a substance more celestial then earthly, as we see. Even so
Prelates and Priests ought not to be so earthly as other men are, drowned in
mortal passions, spotted with ambition, pride, and avarice, defiled with lust
or other fleshly concupiscences, whereunto the greatest part of men are
obnoxious, but they should all consist of spiritual forms, and of the purity
of exemplarie sincerity, like unto Angelical and divine creatures. Fifthly,
as the gemmes have simpathising qualities with the spirit of man, in a sort, as
if they were animal creatures, that they will not only change their
proprieties and colors, at any great chance which happens unto men, but they
presege and forewarne our capital dangers, they redeem us from them, as it
were by giving themselves for our ransom, they cannot endure that by brutish
luxury we should be turned into beasts, things which neither Theology, nor
Philosophy make doubt of, as being approved by daily experience. The Coral
being carried by diseased persons changes the color to better or worse,
according to the change of their disease. The Turquine in great peril of man's
life bursteth in pieces. The Diamond has a virtue to encourage the heart
against fear or doubts, The Saphir to stir up the mind to devotion,
wherefore it is usually carried by Prelates and religious men, as we see, the
Smerald to banish the spirit of lust, and to temper that affection in men,
whereunto it is opposed by a secret antipathie, that Albertus writes how a king
of Hungary who delighted greatly in a rare stone of this kind, one night after
he had committed some act of abominable lust, he found it broken in three
pieces: and of Nero who took such pleasure in the Smerald, that it was called
the Jewel of Nero, carrying upon his thumb one of huge quantity, formed in
table, wherein he did from his Palace see the Amphitheatrall sports, as if he
had bin there, and with which he did solace and help his sore eyes, a thing
proper also to that stone, another night in like sort after some beastly
pollution of his body, he found his Jewel rent in pieces: Even so Prelates
and Priests, who have the charge of men's souls, they are not only to
simpathise with them, by feeling of their miseries, changing from joy to sorrow
for their iniquities, and from sorrow again to ioyfulnesse for their
conversion: like unto Coral, they are not only to supply the place of the
Diamond, to inspire into their hearts a courage and constancy in faith, the
place of the Saphir to indue them with piety and devotion, the place of the
Smerald to cleanse them from the filthiness: but if need be, they must take the
place of the Turquine to give their lives for their flock, like unto Moses,
who for that peoples sake, wished to be raised out of the book of life, like
unto Saint Paul, who wished to be made Anathema, for his flock, and like unto
the glorious Martyrs in the Primitive Church, and as S. Augustine says upon
the 86. Psalm, By these twelve Gems in the Apocalips, is meant the Church of
Christ, founded upon the twelve Apostles, and by that royal infrangible
Diamond which is in the midst, the eternal stabilitie of the Throne of Christ,
which so often as it has been seen by the transported spirits of the Prophets
and Apostles, it appeared in their eyes as these fiery and celestial Jewels;
So that seeing the chief doctors of the Church have so interpreted the
brestplate of Aaron, we must not think that all the ceremonies of his Priestly
habit did necessarily expire in the coming of Christ.

Now if we will say that the Brazen serpent must be broken powder, the white
Surplis is daily abused to Idolatry in the Papal Church: and therefore it
ought to be abolished, certain if the case were alike, the argument is good,
but it is much different: First, the brazen Serpent was the proper and only
object of the Idolatry committed by the Jews, putting a kind of Dietie in
that Serpent, but in the Popes Mass, howsoever polluted with diverse
superstitions and idolatries; the idolatrous actions therein are not terminated
upon, or intended to, the garment which the Priest wears, the Surplis being
only one of the accidentary adjuncts, which, as it were upon the by, do for
external ornament, and for the proper and significant representation,
accompany that action, even as there were tied to the end of Aarons roabe,
Pomegranates and bells, as I have showen before. And as it was never hard, that
any spectator of the Mass did adore the Surplis, worn by the Priest, so I
think none of the most superstitions worshippers of those incarnate wafers,
did ever dream the supposed transubstantiation to be wrought by the virtue of
any operative holiness inherent in that vestiment.

Secondly, if whatsoever kind of attire (of distinction) was then worn by the
Priest in Massing, must be utterly abandoned, as polluted with idolatry: what
warrant has any Minister of the Gospel in Divine Service to wear a black
gown, while as Priests do wear such under their Surplices, not wholly
covered, but appearing commonly beneath the skirts thereof, and perhaps such
Priests have thought their Mass as imperfect without a gown, as without a
Surplice.

Thirdly, if we would only repine at such particular and individual
Surpl^ces, as have been blotted with superstitious service, the reason were
more suitable and probable; as for example, it were evil done to use for the
Sacrament in reformed Churches, that very parcel of bread, which has been
consecrated to be the Hostie of the Mass: yet to take for our use of that same
lump, or of that same loaf, before the Papal Consecration thereof, it were no
wrong, nor just scandal, so to take exception against the white vestiment of
the Church of England, because of the Idolatrous Surplice of the Papal Church
it is sophisticate, Ab indiuiduo ad speciem, never a man in the Church of
England, will hold that the Surplice is operative, or does confer holiness*
but because it is a comely habit, received from antiquity, and found by them
in their Churches, most decent, and most significant of any: therefore do they
carry it, as also to show their meek and ready obedience to the authority of
their Church and laws of their state; nor never a man of true Christian
wisdom, who does abhor it, Eo ipso, because it is in the Church of Rome.
Among the Babilonians there were some sacred vessels of the holy Temple, as is
said; but alas for pity, many of us do build the wall of our separation from
Rome, to such disproportionable height, that if it stand, we shall never
return to play the true Christians in weeping for the holy Sanctuary. Such
was the simplicity and sweet simpathy of the greatest doctors of antiquity,
that they would not condemn any thing received from their forefathers in the
Church, except it was repugnant to Gods word, yea, they would rather turn away
their eyes, then look curiously upon that which might breed unto them a
scruple against the peace and quietness of the Church; so were they governed
with the spirit of charity: but such is our severity now adays, that we do
look upon every circumstance, with the jealous eyes of Juno, prying into the
smallest shadows of occasions, that are not to our humor, so has one
impetuous and vehement zeal extinguished our love, and too much curiosity
drowned our meekness, Confregimus iugum and rupimus vincula, we have broken
the bonds of Christian concord and harmony, as is said before.

The holy Spirit of charity should work among distracted Christians, like unto
that animal spirit of the Magnes, or Loadstone, which although it do banish
and chase away Iron by the one end, yet it is mightily attractiue by the other:
even so although we should abhor the Idolatrous points of the Popish Church,
yet by our kindly sympathising with things, which be without error among them:
we should contract and draw them as near unto us as is possible, but all in
contrary, the name of Popery is become more odious to some of us, then the
name of Paganism: and if we do not love the Turk more then a Papist, perhaps
we do less hate him, which is the reason why nothing can content us, but
absolute derelinquishment of all and whatsoever is into the Church of Rome
concerning the worship of God, yea I do think there be among us, who if they
knew how the Pope and his Priests do eat, they would strive to take their
meat in an other sort, that they might refuse to him the Communion of nature:
But as it were an ignorant part to refuse to eat of delicate and wholesome
fruits, because we do not see the root whereof they spring, nor the secret
conueyes of that moisture which does nourish them, or to refuse to dwell in
splendid and commodious houses, because we do not see the fundamental stones
whereupon they were builded, even so, no question, it is an idle and evil part
in us, if we do not feed upon the spiritual fruits of the Gospel, peace,
love, and unanimity; or if we refuse to dwell in one Arc, because we cannot
find to our curiosity all the reasons of the artifice, whereby it has been
builded: do not we contemn the fruits of the Gospel, when by our discrepance
in matter of ceremonies, indifferent at least, if not useful, we make the
Papist to say that the division of our language does testify that we are the
Giants, who enterprised the Tower of heresy, and when one Pastor does affirm
that his brother within the bowels of one Church and one kingdom does carry
an idolatrous habit in the service of God. yea when a Presbyter does avouch
that his ordinary Bishop is Antichristian, is not that a scandalous opposition
within one particular church, like to the twins of Rebecca, who shook each
other in their mothers womb, whereby she became mightily afraid and dolorous,
for if we do flatter our selves to think these light differences unworthy
the name of separation, we must remember that small sparkles do easily
concitate a great flame, chiefly when there be such cunning bellows to set it
a fire as the Iesuitique practices which be lurking among us, as the remanent
of the Canaanites among the people of Israel. And to conclude this point I pray
God of his mercy, that this kind of unnecessary distraction, do not make us
one day to say as Cyprian did, lamenting the Church persecution for the
contentions of his time; These evils (says he) had not come upon the
brethren, if they had been linked together in the brotherly concord.

As concerning the rest of the Ceremonies being in the Church of England,
certainly they are not of that weight that we need to insist on them. And
seeing it has pleased the Lord to bless these disordered beginnings of our
Reformation here in Scotland, by our Reunion with the ancient orthodoxall
policy of his Church, why should we not meet this merciful dealing of God by
our voluntary acceptance of whatsoever indifferent Ceremony not contrary to
Gods word, which is in our neighbor Church? yea rather in the bowels of our
own Church, according to the opinion of learned and sincere Divines, to the
effect that we may remove that the obloquie of our enemies, which we vnderlie,
why should we not be altogether consentient among our selves, to the effect we
may be the more apt out of Christian love, to wish and pray for the general
reformation of the holy sanctuary of all Christian people, whereof I will
return to speak, because it is the point from whence did flow this particular
Interim of our conjunction with the English Church, in indifferent Ceremonies.

CHAP. XIII.
A brief suruay of the States and Princes, which be Catholic Romans and of
the possibilities of general Reformation.

AND because I know that many good and wise men do hold it a thing merely
parodoxall, to reason of the reformation of Rome: As I have already spoken of
the means whereby it ought to be, after the true imitation of the refomation,
and the restitution of Jerusalem in three several conditions, so I will now
speak of the likelihood and possibility how they may come to pass. It is true
that the Church of Rome will not willingly follow that example of Daniel, to
confess before the Lord that her Pope, her Cardinals, her Priests, that both
her Consistory and her Cloisters, have declined to fearful Idolatry and
abuses, but what? yet no man will imagine but God has destinate a time for the
reformation of so many Churches as have drunken of that cup, he has hung
above her head the sword of his great servant Mahomet, wherewith he has
chastised Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, and many other mother Churches, he
has the sword of his omnipotent Word, which has already wrought admirable
effects since the time of Luther: If we shall wish her to be reformed by
Mahometan^ fury, we shall have no Christian hearts toward her, nor wisdom
toward our selves, if we shall wi^ it to be by the force of the spiritual
sword of Gods Word, we must wish it to be out of Christian love, and
brotherly compassion, otherwise our wishes, our prayers, our preachings are to
no effect: exhort in the spirit of meekness and love, says the Scripture. As
Abraham did even perturbe God in favor of the Sodomites, that he would pardon
that abominable people for the sake of tennemen, if there could be found so
many upright before him: there be no doubt, in the Church of Rome thousands of
good men, who have never bowed the knees of their hearts to ^aal, thousands of
devout souls who groan under that bondage, languishing for their relief, for
whose sake we would be heard, if our prayers were founded upon faith and
charity, if it were not that God does repulse them because they are mutual
imprecations, as is said, The Lord has neglected his holy sanctuary and the
pace thereof, he has suffered his people so long to lie in that captivity of
darkness, by reason of all our transgressions.

The Catholic Church is that ship, Qua agitatur and fluctuat s^d non
sub^rgitur, which is tossed still with tempests, but does not perish, her Pilot
can preserve her betwixt Scylla and Cary^dis: And albeit for our iniquities she
is become that ship of the Gospel, which was so dangerously shaken with the
raging sea, while the Disciples did awake and Christ himself did sleep, he
does not hear our noise, because we be nor astonished enough at the tempest,
because our Christian Doctors on both sides do sit in this ship secure, as
ignorant's keepers who know not the place of danger, they have no true zeal to
pacification and unity, like to the sons of Zebedeus, striving for the right
hand of Christ, seeking every one maliciously to condemn his neighbor,
craving mutual destruction and not reformation, which is the reason why our
Savior does sleep: or if he hear us, he gives us the answer he gave to
them, (...) quid p^titis: You know not what you ask. If we were right afraid
of the fearful storm, if we did fear the inundations of these waters,
which have already ouerflowed the Christian Churches of the Orient, and if we
did cry with these watchful Disciples, Lord we do all perish if we be not
strengthened with domesticke union. Then Jesus Christ no question would awake
to pacify the seas. Albeit our faith he weak that we despair of a general
reformation, yet certainly the Lord would not suffer the ship of his Catholic
Church, to be devoured with the tempest, but if Christian Pastors could lay
aside their malice and implacable contentions, to beg from God peace and
concord, he can lead us by the hand through those ^ouds of discord, to place
us in the bark of unity, to give us the answer which he gave unto Peter,
Modicae fidei quare dubitasti? O ye of little faith why do ye so much doubt,
Quis vnquam sperauit in Domino and confusus est; If Christian people could do
this, the means of universal reformation were both easy and ordinary, as I
will shortly show you.

Such is the credit of the primitive Church, for three or four hundred years,
that there is not a learned Doctor on either side, who is not content to say,
that she may be judge in all controversies, either touching Doctrine, Policy,
or Ceremonies: nor is there any so impudent, who will derogate from that age
for Christian reformation: They indeed who feed upon the fatness of the
Papal tyranny, they will decline the trial, suspend so far as lies in them
the convocation of general Commissions, or illude them being assembled.

But to take exception against the primitive Church: no, so that nothing is
wanting but the means of general Conuocations, which as I have before
discoursed at length, does properly pertain to Christian Princes, Cor regis in
man^ Dei, whenever it should please God to inspire these three Monarchies of
Christendom, to intend universal reformation, his Majesty of great Brittanne,
the French King, and the Spaniard: I think no Christian should be found to put
opposition: any man will confess this, The distraction indeed of these
Christian Princes, is the mystery of Papal ambition, and so studiously
entertained by the seat of Rome, that one may say, we have long to look for
that influence which must proceed from so extraordinary conjunction of these
chief Planets: and I answer once for my advantage, that whenever any of the
two last Kings, shall join themselves to our most gracious Sovereign, it
shall suffice to sway the balance, and to overcome all oppositions. But I
keep me on the ground, holding that present state of things does equally
impose upon all Christian Princes, a mere necessity of this concurrance to
reform the Church of Rome, because they be equally distressed thereby: for
while as unto their predecessors did belong a right to conuocate Councels and
to presidiate in them, having in their hands the raynes of Christian
government, as is before largely proved. Now Rome has so far delighted in
her own beauty, that she has drawn the whole splendour of the world upon her
self, and has trampled on the necks of the greatest Kings, as she, to whom it
was said, Dabo tibi potestatem in Gentes, and reges eas in virga ferrea, and
sicut vasa fictilia conterentur: And this has she done so openly and
insolently as you have heard, by violenting both Princes, Prelates, and
religious orders within her own bowels, that in our time, and in our eyes, her
pride mounted to the Meridia^ or Tropic, from whence by the very destiny of
the instability of this inferior world, she must return to decline again: so
that this common injury done by her in common to all Christian Kings, whom God
has deputed to be Pilots within the ship of his Church, does force them to
attention and jealousy, and draws on this great Iubile of general
reformation: And I presume it from this warrant, that all the States in
Christendom which be Catholic Romans, do feel the grievous burden of her
tyrannous yoke; as far as those who be opponents to her in matter of
doctrine and pure religion.

These Catholic States I comprehend in 5. the Estate Imperial, the French,
the Spaniard, the Venetian, and lastly the Dutchies within Italy. The story of
the French calamities, is so fresh, that I need not renew it, how that brave
and puissant Kingdom has been put in combustion by these profane fires of
Rome, and almost burnt into Funeral ashes, her Princes murdered, her laws
dissolved, her people massacred, her Churches violated, her cities desolate,
and in such a case as Rome was in, when the Poet said of it desunt que manus
p^scentibus aruis. That the Venetians have been equally with the French
attainted, albeit not equally wounded, it is as notorious by their late
dissentions sor the Abassie of Polliss, and for the expulsion of the Jesuits
from their dominions, and both have equally shaken of the bondage of Rome,
disclaiming and forbidding in their Territories the execution of the Counsel
of Trent, and wishing an universal reformation, it is well understood of those
who know the world, and I bear witness for one, to have heard many amongst
them of chief mark Catholic Romans to protest the same with much zeal; As
for the house of Austria with whom is established the Empire, although it be
the fountain of that Demo regnatrice the mother of the Spanish domination, yet
any man may find that her constant fears both of intestine and external
dangers have so weakened it for want of perfect repose, that there is no State
in Christendom whereunto an universal pacification would bring more
happiness.

As for the Dukes of Italy there be only two of importance: The Duke of Sauoy
who with the allies of his house, the Dukes of Mantua and Modena have their
own Cordoglio and greeuance against the grandeur of Rome, and the conjunction
thereof with Spain, as may be well perceived by these late tempests amongst
them: And the great Duke of Tuscan, who, although first he be next neighbor
to the Pope, and secondly, that he be the first of these who have grown fat
upon the reuersions of S. Peter's Trencher, his whole estate being contrived by
Popes or Cardinals of his house, and thirdly, although he be lately allied with
the house of Austria, yet for all these, this open and shameless insolence of
Rome urged notlong since against the Segniory of Venice, has made him
Suegliato to stir and rouse up his ears so far, that against and in spite
of this Jesuitical insidiation which threatens Christian Potentates, he has
made a Law, that no lands, rents nor mooueables above a beggarly portion should
be legacied to any Church person, Jesuit or other without his approbation
added thereunto.

It follows to speak of Spain, which although it has for many years past,
been the principal arch of the papal pride, yet when we consider how far
that great King has been frustrated of the ends propounded to him by these
who have been the chiefetiers of him to the Seat of Rome, I do also presume
that for good respects he may have disposition to fall away from the Idol of
her dangerous ambition: Because the Jesuit (as is said) having a chief
Maxim, that Religion must shoot out and flourish with a growing state, and
finding Spain most inclined to Monarchy, as he does imagine, has devoted
himself to the service of that Crown, that by the increase thereof his
society may likewise grow, and bear authority throughout the world, and from
this scope has he been, and still studieth to be the author and broacher
of many Christian calamities, and ever so unfortunate for the Spaniard whom he
pretends to advance, that in place of strengthening his dominions, the Jesuit
has been a cankering worm to rippe the bowels of the same, and to plague
them with consuming feauers of ambitious aspiring. By the Jesuitical documents
were the brave seauenteene Provinces of the Netherlands so entreated of his
Deputies, that as one taken with S. Authonies fire, he has been constrained
to cut them off being one of his most noble members, after he had sent from his
treasures of Spain about one hundred million of gold to cure the same. By the
Jesuitical infusion was likewise molded in favors of their monarchical
proiects, that holy league which stood him so dear in France, and whereof he
has seen the like unfortunate Issue, for they having spent a world of money
about the surprise of that Kingdom, so did God despise the iniquity of these
masked designs, that he did make the restoration of that Land a miracle of
this Age, being once in such broken weakness, and in so short a time ^rme
like a Diamond, and terrible to their Enemies. But with the most maigre and
poor fortune of all did they embarke their ambition, for the conquest of
England, where he did not only lose his (Instar mon^ quum) that invincible
called Armada, but in place to conquer the same, they do find themselves now
counterpoysed on this hand by a mighty Monarch, who like to armed Pallas
carries for his own defense a sword in the one ^d, and a pen in the other:
Summarily, that puissant King has been redacted to spoil his treasures, and
spend his time by the craft of those Archicharlatans the Jesuits, who like
deceiptfull Alcumists consuming every thing under a vain hope to make gold,
have extenuated the body of his estate with the poysonable smoke of their
Mercury, so far, that if it had not been the Christian candor and sincerity
of our most gracious Sovereign, to establish his peace first with England, and
next with Holland, there is no doubt but before now his late domesticke
conspiracies of his nouos Christianos or M^roscos in Ualentia conjoined to his
exterior diseases, had sufficed to render him a neighbor pray: That all these
Sincops have been bred to him by the pride of Rome, and by the Jesuitical
arts, it is clearly seen of those, who going through the world have known the
remonstrances, inuectiues, Apologies, and other political insinuations, which
have been published for strengthening of factions, chiefly who has seen
that Platonic jest of Doctor Parsons an English Ies. his treatise directed
with the foresaid Armada, prescribing the order of the new state of England,
and the Laws of the first Parliament to be holden after their landing, so
mightily was he possessed with that fancy, which did ever after make him a
fugitive from Spain, and abhorred as an abuser and treacherous Alchumist, and
for these causes it would seem; That of all Princes the Spaniard has greatest
reason to beware of the follies and falshoode of Rome, the maintenance whereof
has so endangered his Kingdoms, while in the mean time the Pope and his
Cardinals pigliano buon tempo, make merry days sitting in the calm of their
Consistory, giving order to the Legions abroad, as Nero and other voluptuous
Emperors, who succeeding Augustus were for a while heirs to his dominions but
not to his virtue.

Furthermore the Pope draws more deniers forth of the states of Spain, then
of all the world besides, notwithstanding the great revenues Ecclesiastical of
Spain, where the Church of Tolledo will amount to six hundred thousand
crowns, whereof more then the half is proper to the Archbishop himself,
diverse of the rest being not far under this, and all in great condition for
riches, nevertheless are the greatest part of things so absolute in the Popes
will, and so hardly granted to natural Spaniards, that before any of them can
be beneficed in the Church, he must attend at Rome seven years at least, at
his own charges, and that with splendor to beautify the Court, and shall not
neither have it in the end but with yearly pension given out of more then the
third part at least, to some of the Popes cozens or favorites, so that they are
daily heard to affirm that scarcely in all their life time will they redeem
their losses, and in the mean time that Court is never without thousands of
those poor Pretendenti who follow M^n Seig^r Illustrissgratis, living upon the
smoke of Alchumie or vmbragious hopes; Would not any man think that those be
real distastes to so powerful a Monarch, for howsoever the late King Philip
was abused by the Jesuitical subtilties, yet through a great deal of bitter
experience the case is now come to a manifest discovery of intolerable
inconueniencies, for if that King being so mighty and full of experience was
not able to bear through the Jesuitical machinations against the late Queen
of England, and against a dismembered and desperate state of France, how shall
he who now is there so good and so deuote a Prince, think his throne to besure
to his successors against the chances of the world which we now see, unless
he will concur to extinguish that fire which has blown abroad so terrible
flames against his neighbors to the end it may approach the more fearfully to
himself.

May not we imagine, that it is a great heart-sore to him, to see his fellows
so absolute Kings, his Majesty of great Britain like to Solomon disposing at
his pleasure of the Leuiticall functions within the house of God, the Church of
France from all antiquity having her liberties exempted from Papal
Hierarchy, both those Kings auowedly defying that pretended Sovereignty, while
as he, one of the first Christian Monarchs, does vnderlie the yoke of
Priestly Domination: For as touching this late practice of Cardinal Perone,
whereby he has so much strained his wits to stain the glory of the French
Crown, and to render the ancient, Christian, and famous privileges thereof
obscure and problematicke (as he speaks) that is but an illusion of the Roman
Circe, cast in to abuse the weakness offeminine and childish government,
which will soon appear in the own colors to any Prince in perfection, to be
an act of perfidious (...) against the strength and reputation of that brave
(...), as it is already both clearly and cunningly charactered, by the truly
royal answer and defense made by our most gracious Sovereign for his
neighbor King in minoribus, and for all Christian Kings in general, against
that serpentine and disloyal Oration of the aforesaid Cardinal. Always that
jealousy and distraction is easy to grow betwixt Spain and Rome. This is a
strong reason for it, and approved by experience; The Spaniards do already
possess the richest patrimonies of S. Peter, Sicilia and Naples: that if a
violent and headie Pope do recounter a troubled estate in Spain, it is like
enough they will redemaund these, whereof the proof was seen in the person of
Pope Sixto Quinto, who favored Henry the third of France against the holy
League for that same cause; upon the other side we are to presume from the like
reason, that the Spaniard has no better means to possess these things
securely, then by clipping the wings of the Popish pride, since he has
already gotten the fatness of his pot; Experience has in like manner
qualified this, Carolus Quintus of Spain, and Ferdinand and Maximilian his
Successors in the Empire, had no greater studies in their times, then to have
reformed the Church of Rome for Christian peace, and for their own security,
as is more particularly before rehearsed, the misgiuing whereof did breed so
great grief to himself before his death, and so great displeasure to his
posterity thereafter.

One other point makes me to apprehend this disposition of the world to
Catholic reformation; The whole Clergy of Rome is a thinking how to supplant
the Jesuitical Traffic, and to extirpate those plagueful weeds, who by
their large and unjust privileges granted by ambitious Popes for their
ambitious and wicked services have ouergone the whole religious orders of the
Roman Church, invading their Functions at their pleasure, as one may well see
in that little Treatise which some few years ago came out against them,
called Introductio in arcam Iesuiticam, wherein all their treacheries are
perfectly expressed.

CHAP. XIV.
A contemplation of the present condition of this Isle of Great Britain, by
sundry weighty points and worthy of consideration for our better knowledge of
this Time.

BUT finally of all the circumstances of this present world, there is one which
does most move me to think that this great Iubile of the restitutio^ of the
catholic Church does approach, and that we be already entered into the prime
of that new light. First, there is now a mighty Monarch of the Protestant
side, alike to whom, has not been in any time, his Majesty of Great Britain.
Secondly, a Monarch of such authority with all the Protestant States and
Princes in matters of Religion, that they give unto him the Style of the Great
St. Augustine to be flagellum haereticorum. Thirdly, a Monarch of that rare
learning accompanied with the true wisdom of a temperate spirit, that even the
judicious opponents except these who be Jesuitical, do hold his Majesty the
most sufficient instrument to go about and bring to pass a general
reformation, which points I will pray all those that shall read this discourse,
to weigh in sincerity, as I shall compendiously set them down for our
edification, that we may thankfully remarke the miraculous and merciful
dealing of God with our Age.

There has ever been since the first Creation, two generations in the world,
one of Cain, one of Abel; one of Isaac, one of Ismael; one of Jacob, one of
Esau; one of Joseph, one of his malicious brethren; one of David, one of Saul;
one of Solomon, one of Absolon; one of Simon Peter, one of Simon Magus etc.
Arace of the just, and a race of the reprobate, making that admirable
Antithesis, whereupon God does hang the balance of his glory swayed by his
mercy to the one hand, and by his justice to the other, this is the secret and
hidden mystery of Gods predestination in the government of the world, numero,
pondere, and mensura, as the Scripture says: And because the wicked as
impetuous floods do ouerflow the world, and overcome the Saints of God with
multitude of wicked Princes and false Prophets, therefore the Lord does
oftentimes, as the story of the Scripture declares, raise up both in Church
and State some men of extraordinary virtue and goodness to preserve the
faithful seed, which has made the Psalmist to say, Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis
suis, the Lord is admirable in his Saints. Psalm: 67.
In the first age of the original Creation, he had his servant Enoch, of whom
it is said, Placuit Deo and translatus est in Paradisum, he pleased God and
was translated to Eccl: 44.
Paradise. In the second age of universal corruption, he had Noah to be the
seminary of the godly, of whom it is said, factus est reconciliatio. In the
third, which was the peculiar election of the Jews, he had Abraham, of whom it
is said, Et non inventus est similis ei qui conseruaret ibid.
legem excelsi. In the fourth, which was his manifestation ibid.
to be the God of Israel by the written Law, he had his excellent Moses, of
whom it is written, Dilectus Deo and hominibus Moses cuius memoria in
benedictione. In the Eccl: 45.
fist, which was the establishment of the Jewish kingdom, he had his Prophet
David, whom himself did honor with this testimony, Inveni hominem secundum
cor meum. In the sixth, which was the prophetical illumination of 1. Kings 16.
the Synagogue, among greater numbers, he had in special his Eliah, of whom it
was said, Et quis potest similiter gloriari tibi. So in the seventh, which was
the falling of Eccles. 45.
the Synagogue, he had his great Priest Simeon Onia, of whom it is said,
Quasiignis effulgens, and quasithus redolens in igne, quasi vas auri soliduns
ornatum lapide pretioso. Even so in the later ages since the Gospel, albeit
things go not by clear revelation from heaven as then, because prophetical
actions be all finished, and all Scriptures concluded in our Savior, yet by
the like effects we observe one and the same working of God to maintain the
generation of the Just, for looking upon these famous Emperors, Constantinus
Magnus, and Carolus Magnus, most devout and Christian Princes, they resemble
David and Solomon, the first whereof eiected the Arrians, as David did the
Nations. And the last is said to have settled the first means temporal of
Christ's Church, whereby they were more able to guard themselves from barbarous
persecutions, as Solomon did build the Temple and house of the Lord.

Again in Princely exaltations we do observe this, that the Princes who be
called Flagellum Dei, and who be so indeed, such as Nimrod, said by the spirit
of God to be a mighty hunter before the Lord, such as the wicked kings of
Israel, such as the persecuting Emperors, such as Tamberline the Tartarian,
such as the formidable Ottomanicall Princes: These I say, and all such, the
Lord God does suffer to rise unnaturally, unlawfully, in fury, a good Prince
is a rare Jewel, like unto the vision of Ezekiel, where among six destroying
Angels, he saw but one man who had power of safety, because the sins of men do
merit oftentimes punishments, they come as fearful tempests in the air,
which overthrow the strongest Oaks and most firm Towers, they come as
impetuous inundations to spoil and destroy, they do all by violence, and
nothing can pacify their rage because they are sent to execute the wrath of
God. These Princes again who come for the solace and safety of people, sent
out in mercy, they rise as it were in the sweetness of Nature, they come in
peace and calmness, they shoot up by gentle and lawful means, and from
humble beginnings they mount in patience to miraculous greatness, Moses and
David from the sheep, Nabuc^ad-nezzar whom the Lord called his own servant,
he was a terrible Prince misknowing God, oppressing his people sub virga
ferrea, under a scepter of Iron, because he was sent by God in Justice. Cyrus
again a meek and temperate Prince, whose golden scepter brought comfort with
it, because he was directed in mercy: So that it is easy to mark in Kings by
their circumstances, what kind of Commissions they bring.

To come from this general contemplation to an Hypothesis, to consider the
condition of our most gracious Sovereign, whom the Lord has sent in his
mercy, to work pacification and unity in the hearts of Christian People, to
be a Father of Peace, Piety, and Justice, if we can rightly apprehend it, we
shall find great reason to say also Mirabilis Deus in sanctis suis: we shall
find this blessed age in this Isle to be like unto that whereof the Lord God
did prophecy to Abraham. That in the fourth generation his posterity should
be restored from the bondage of Egypt, so far, that one may imagine how the
growing of this royal Monarch is not unlike to that of the house of Israel,
and how God has ordained our Sovereign King for services, not unlike unto
those of Moses, as I will shortly show, by conferring these circumstances
following. First the poverty, division, and constant vexation of this Isle
under the Scots, the Pichts, the Danes, the Saxons, the Britains, the
English: does it not well resemble the Egyptian bondage? Next our being
obnoxious to much foreign ambition now practiced by France, now by Spain,
now by Rome; during our Sovereign his Minority, was it not a true servitude
of Pharaoh? Lastly our intestine contention for government both in the Church
and state these many years past, before the Lord did exalt his horn, and
place him upon the throne of this stately Monarchy; were they not like the
grudgings, and murmurations of the children of Israel in the wilderness? The
protection of God Exodus 2.
over the life of Moses was miraculous after his birth, when he was cast into
the river, and what floods of dangers did fall out about the Nativity of his
Majesty, the Stories of our country can record. Moses was called from the
sheep to talk with God in mount Horeb, to Exodus 3.
receive the mysteries of government, and we may say his Majesty, from humble
fields, and dangerous beginnings has ascended into the top of high government,
where the Lord as we see has inspired him how to settle both Church and state.
Moses was obstinate against the ambition of Pharaoh, and would not discontinue
the working of his miracles and his instance to have his people Exodus 6. 7.
dismissed: and let us sincerely and uprightly ponder what a miraculous
constancy was it in his Majesty, before his going into England, to be so
confident against the opposition of so many Pharaohs, who labored to keep his
Majesty still in Egypt, how many Spanish, Jesuitical and strong machinations
did he both contemn and frustrate, which were cunningly urged before he did
possess that Crown, and how many, even of his Majesty's friends and good
subjects, did hold his Highness both weak and impotent; thinking of his
Majesty that which Moses feared should be said of himself, Who am I that I
should go to Pharaoh, That who was his Majesty without stronger aid to
purchase so mighty a state. The host of Pharaoh was drowned in the red sea,
while they sought to bring Moses into Egypt. And did not that proud Armada of
the Spanish Pharaoh perish in his Majesty's seas, and in our eyes, while they
intended to detain him in Egypt? Moses was a man most painful in his long
and tedious voyage in the wilderness, and what were a number of his Majesty's
years, but a wandering in the widernes of our rebellion, and a languishing in
the discords of our distemperate stare, as we know; Moses was a man full of
mansuetude, patience and affection to his people, notwithstanding their daily
murmurations, whther God has endued his Majesty with such quallities, it is
easily seen of those who please to remember, how many grieuances his Majesty
has endured of some of his insolent subjects, in settling Civil and
Ecclesiastical Policy, and how many there be in Scotland, who be his
Majesty's creatures, Ex gratia, holding their lives and estates of his
clemency. Moses was a man replenished with great wisdom, that God is said to
have taught him the secret Cabbale of universal nature into the mountain, and
how his Majesty does meet that part, compared at least with the best knowledge
of these times, I have already given you the testimony of the world, so that
it has no need ofmine: With this consideration of his Majesty's person, let us
also weigh as well how he does possess as what he does possess in Dominion,
and we shall find indoubtable arguments to say, That the Lord God has sent
him in mercy and love, by marks which are not to be seen in any Christian
Prince in all the world beside; not only to make of us a mighty nation by
erecting among us a virtuous, and a prosperous Monarchy, but that he has
destinate him as he has Cyrus, for the restitution of Jerusalem, for the peace
and unity of his Church.

The antiquity of the Crown of Scotland in his Majesty's house, has nothing
comparable with it in Europe, And his Majesty has not bin of late more
lawfully, and lovingly installed in the state of England by his subjects, then
the Original stock of his royal house King Fergus the first was about two
thousand years ago, by our Predecessors called to the Crown of Scotland, he
did not invade it, or usurp it over Princes or people. And as the first Stone
of his Majesty's Monarchical foundation was thus laid naturally, in equity
and virtue, so has it followed from that pure fountain to this Ocean of
lawful Sovereignty, and grandrue which we see in a righteous line never yet
interrupted by any destiny, God has brought to pass in his Majesty's person
the conjunction of weak and dismembered kingdoms, which neither length of
time, nor the industry of watchful and ambitious Princes, or nature it self
could perform before his coming: that nature was not mature, before now to
produce that great work, I prove by the history of Arthur King of the
Britannes: who being the illegitimate son of Vterpendragon, was by the force
of popular affection advanced to the Crown, before the wife of Loath King of
Pichtes, lawful sister to the said Vterpendragon, and before her lawful son
Moderet, which competency after many debates was so transacted, that Moderet
should succeed King Arthur; whereupon both Loath and Moderet, yielded great aid
to the Brittannes against the Saxons: And yet notwithstanding in the end,
Arthur was constrained to declare Constantine a Brittan in defraude of Moderet,
without any pretext of reason, other then neighbor indignation, because the
people cried, Peregrini sanguinis Regem se nolle, They would not a stranger in
blood should reign Polyd. virg. lib. 8.
over them: wherein they were so obstinate, that this wrongful exclusion of
Moderet was followed with the slaughter of Arthur and Moderet both in battle,
and with the barborous murder of the children of Moderet, for the avoiding of
strange claims, as they held it: where we see that nature has given an
ouerture of this conjunction, but it could not work, for Moderet was then
nearer to the Crown of England, nor his Majesty now. To know again how this
Union has been contended for and urged by puissant Kings and all in vain, we
may read the disputation of the royal competents of our Crown betwixt Bruce
and the Baliol, and the carriage of Edward the first of England in that
process, and the dealings of the English Kings with King David Bruce the time
of his restraint there.

Therefore the case of this great Prince is merely extraordinary, not in
fortune, but in Gods disposition. There is nothing in the world which does so
lively bear the image of God, as a virtuous and temperate Christian Monarch:
and therefore the Lord does delight to express his power most in such a
creature. He who in his wrath raised Assure, and said unto him, woe be to thee
Assure the rod of my fury: I will send thee to a dissembling Nation, that thou
may tread them under thy foot, as mire: he has raised this print in
clemency and has said of him, as he did of Cyrus, that he should set his
people at liberty, both spiritual and temporal within his kingdom. Do we not
see what strange changes the Lord has already performed by him, as a holy and
sanctified instrument. Gothofred of Bullen, having in the siege of Jerusalem,
at one blow cut in two the body of an armed man, and being demanded upon the
miracle of his strength: I carry said he, a hand that never did touch a whore,
meaning it was rather a divine then a natural strength. Has not the world
seen in his Majesty, a constant sanctity in that degree, which has been
exceeded by none, equalled by few, and honored by the universal admiration of
all. For all which foresaid respects has God rarely blessed his government,
and as he has made this Isle in his happiness, to be called great, so may she
also most justly be called fortunate, we have a tradition of the Fortunate
Isles, that because of some sacred Nymphs do remain there, the ground does
yield her fruit without the labor or industry of man: What Isle in the world
has yielded the like fair fruits of virtuous and stately prosperity, and all
through being the seat of a sacred and sanctified King: what Isle, or what man
has seen a Prince, Legentem tam opima spolia sine sanguine and sudore,
gathering so rich and costly spoils without trouble, sweat, or pains. For
while the Lord God has brought to pass in his Majesty, as we have seen
things more then admirable, yet all has been done without noise or tumult,
without violence in any sort, that we have perceived the Axle-tree of our
government changed, but heard no motion in the action: because this great
Prince he comes in peace and mercy, for a blessing and consolation of Gods
people, and for the restitution of his Church. And who will look into the
ways of his rising, even through the light of nature and humanity, will think
that his chiefest fortunes be yet before him. Since the reign of Ferdinand,
and Isabell of Arragon, we have seen within few years the house of Spain,
grow unto a great mountain of dominion, and numbers of smaller states to
conioyne themselves unto it: we have seen how the Isle of France, which does
not exceed one days journey about Paris, it is dilated into a most ample
Kingdom, that as the thread of the Spanish sword, coelitus pendet, begins to
grow weak by natural vicissitude, it must be that the thread of Brittanne
destiny, begins to spinne at length, and that order of the French Crown,
Immensitremor oceani, is now so old and worn, that we begin already to be
masters of the Ocean. And who will search the condition of this Prince
supernaturally, shall think that God has appointed him to be a leader of
Christian Potentates, to step upon the disordered Theator of Christendom, to
make an end of Christian Tragedies, to banish the contriuers of bloody
Counsels, to set up Actors of peace, to persuade, to urge, and if need be to
force general Counsels of the Church. To try whether the pretended Aaron has
forgotten himself and fallen to the Idolatry of the golden Calfe, since his
master ascended into the glorious mountain, and so to reestablish Catholic
unity.

These be the six several points wherein does appear, the approach of the
reformation of Rome: First, her pride has already come unto the Tropicke, from
whence it must of necessity turn down again: Secondly, the Christian Princes
who be within her own bowels, begin to be wearied under the pressure of her
yoke, two chief appearances why the monstrous fabric of this tyranny is in
danger to be ransacked: Thirdly, you have heard that the Spaniard, who is the
strong Atlas that bears up the same, can above any Christian King, establish
the assuredness of his affairs upon the ruins thereof. Fourthly, all the
orders of the Papal Clergy are bent to overthrow the Jesuits, who are the
only cunning craftsmen, who build and uphold this Babilonian tower. Fifthly,
the means which God seems to put into the person of his Majesty, our
gracious Sovereign, to sway the world to peace and unity in Christian
Religion, as well by the weight of his power, as by the virtue of his temperate
wisdom and solid learning, which has procured unto his Majesty authority,
not only with all Protestant people, but with the best of the Opponents.
Sixthly, the absolute credit given unto the primitive Church, against which
there is no side of Christian Clergy that takes exception. All which things
well considered, what I pray you is wanting here to reform the holy Church,
but these two, Courage to undertake it, and this one word from the mouth of
God, Benedicamus.

And seeing the world points at your Majesty, as the only man to whom that
courage does belong, it compels me to turn my speech unto you, O great
and mighty Monarch: As they have seen how God has made your Majesty, like
Hereules, able to overcome the Gigantine forces of these Kingdoms,
dispairefully disseuered by inueterate and implacable emulations; placing your
Majesty in a triumphant Throne, over this fortunate Isle, that Cyrus-like your
Majesty has your foot upon the midst of the hyde, that no side thereof can
revolt, and has given your Majesty ample dominions without, and that in a
miraculous sort, having no concurrance of humane help, making your Majesty
alone, both the Actor, and the Instrument: Therefore do they look that your
Majesty, should in like manner cry with Cyrus, The Lord God of heaven has
given me the Kingdoms of the earth, and has commanded me to restore
Jerusalem, and to deliver his people from captivity, because they see how
almighty God has furnished your Majesty with prudence and power, like armed
Pallas to execute the same: your Majesty has hitherto well followed the
example of the powerful Moses, in this toilesome government whereunto the Lord
has brought you, but the chiefest praise of Moses was his perseverance, non
coronabitur nisi qui legitime certauerit, when he came up to the mountain he
was commanded to put off his shoes, to show plainly that he might make
himself light and able to walk, to show figuratively that he must shake off
all fleshly desires and affections which burden our minds, and pull them
downward from a familiar conversation with God: O, what a laborious thing it
is to come unto this mount, the valleys be rich, full of sensual pleasures,
and of easy passage, and therefore they are inhabited of the multitude of the
world, the mountains are steep and precipitious, and it is hard to clime up
into them, and yet there it is where the Lord has ever almost shown himself,
as mount Sinai, mount Horeb, mount Tabor, mount Oliuet, mount Caluarie, and
diverse others declare, to signify how difficult a thing it is to exalt our
selves above the sensuality of the world, and how few are worthy to come into
the familiar mount of God: only Iosuah was found worthy to ascend with Moses,
all the rest were commanded to remain at the foot of the mountain with Aaron
and Hur, which made his charge to be the greater, for not only did God
command him to come up, but said the Lord, ascend in montem and esto ibi, Come
up, and see thou be there, by which words he would stir him up from lazines
to think, that he must not only be there, but be watchful there, as it is
said, Non dicitur vemsse qui non steterit: who stands straight in the
mountain, he sees every thing which passes by below him, but to him who
wearieth and lies himself down to repose, all the things which are under him
be hidden, and if the enemies come to spoil the valleys, he can never discover
it.

As your Majesty has been most watchful hitherto; So let your Highness
think that the work of God does but begin in you, and that he has called
your Ma: to come up to the Mount not like a fainting Eliah, who in his voyage
to the mountain to talk with God, tired, or delighted with the beauty or
freshure of the tree, fell asleep under the Ginobre, but like unto a vigilant
Moses who stood upright forty days in the Mountain without refreshment, not
like unto a timorous Eliah who was afraid at the voice of a woman, but still
like a courageous Moses, who being of his own nature the most mild among men,
yet when he found the people in Idolatry of the Calfe at his returning from the
Mount, he was enraged, and commanded the Levites to be armed, and stood in the
gates of the Camp till punishment was executed: Let your Majesty therefore
have watchful eyes to penetrate the latent things of your popular valleys,
that no distemper grow among them which may renuerse your Majesty's former
cares. Do specially Sr. ouerwatch these two things: First that this lurking
Gangrene of pretended Puritanisme do spread no further, nor lie in wait to
trouble the settled order of your Majesty's government; But to the end your
Maieiesty and your Royal posterity may ever hit surely in that mark which
your Majesty has so long shot at, to reestablish into this Isle the primitive
and orthodoxall policy of the Church: Imitate the skillful Archer by choosing
your arrows of that wood, which is most proper for your Majesty's aim, by
receiving into Episcopal dignities those who be most religious and sincere,
rather the best then the most learned, considering how many men in these days
do carry Letters as Uria did, to cut his own throat: like unto those unhappy
Carpenters who builded an Arc for the safety of Noah and his family while they
themselves did miserably perish in the flood: Since your Majesty has now
store of men both of conscience and learning who are resolved enough in the
Question of the Church Policy let them see how your Majesty thinks no man so
worthy of the Episcopal chair as he who comes unto it after the sort of
that tradition which we have of Gregorius Magnus, who being chosen for his
mere virtue, was said to fly into the wildeines til he was discerned by a
pillar of fire which kithed above him; Let the light of their learning, their
zeal and integtity of their life shining above them where they are, be their
only recommendations to Ecclesiastical preferment, to the effect that your
Majesty may in that manner stop malignant mouths, and take away all pretext
of coffeehouse or disconformity, from these who say, that your Majesty does
not prefer the virtuous. So that the treacherous lesuite who like the crafty
fish conueyeth himself into troubled waters, may want a covert to hide his
head, which is the second thing that in all humility I beseech your Majesty to
have your eyes on, remembering how as the crafty goose who flying along Mount
Taurus carries a stone in her beak to restrain her cry that she be not
heard of the Eagles from the top thereof, as I have told before; So he can
pass by your Majesty with a closed mouth and masked face, he creeps into
your Majesty's Kingdom as the Serpent did into Paradise, to ouerturne the
happiness thereof. Look but upon the Tragical examples of strong neighbor
Princes; Remember that no Jesuit lives who has not that mind to your
Majesty, which Cic^ro had to Octauius, bonu^ p^er and t^llendus; Let your
Majesty consider how one particular man of this great multitude, Doctor Parsons
a vile excrement of his country of England, has presumed himself sufficient
to cut the line of the Royal succession, and to render the Estate Spanish, and
has so far proceeded in that dismal design, as to set down out of his
own brain the laws and policy of the new common wealth; the acts of the
first Parliament as I have said before, and has put to the ports of England a
mighty Armada to execute the same. What shall we then expect from multitudes
having the same inspiration, and gaping for the Spirit of this false prophet,
if they be suffered to practice your Majesty's subjects, or to frequent among
them: Therefore Sr. consider what dangerous enchaunters they be, and let your
Majesty like a wise and constant Ulysses be well tied to your Maine Mast,
Christ Jesus, that no Sirens song may illude your Majesty's perspicuous senses,
in the mean time when the subtle Cyrce does strive to be your Master, so
that your Majesty may keep your Kingdom united and firm like a Diamond, and
courageously proceed to greater service in Gods Church, to enterprise, this
general Reformation, whereof the world holds your Majesty to be so worthy,
which is immensi praemium labor is, the crown and glory of your Majesty's
travels, and which is so easy for your Majesty, that when your Majesty's
admonitory Epistle to Christian Princes came out against the Pope, wherein your
Majesty seems to appeal to the first 400. years of the Primitive Church
for Christian pacification, we know it who was then beyond Seas, that if it had
not been, because your Majesty does call the Pope Antichrist, showing by that
rather to be an open Enemy to the Roman Church; then a Pacificatour, (as they
said who took the advantage of that word) otherwise your Majesty might have
drawn upon your side the whole Church of France, and the whole body of the
Roman Church, other then Jesuits, and those who be poisoned with their
absinthium, that we have heard with our ears chief members of the Consistory
of Rome in contemplation of that business, express with unfeigned sighs their
reverence of the simplicity of these times, that nothing is wanting to your
Majesty of means, if God shall bless your Majesty in this Mosaicall
perseverance, to negotiate, to urge, to insist the present disposition of
Christendom will so second your Majesty's beginnings, that certainly no
opposition shall be so great, which shall be able to resist, for if any
should be, beside, the invincible powers of foreign Estates, who be ready to
march under your Majesty's Colors in that cause. Has not God given to your
Majesty store of warlike men within the bowels of your own Realms? Has he
not provided for you a brave and worthy Joshua to follow you into this
mountain, your Majesty's hopeful Successor, to whom your Man may confidently
say in the own time, Elige tibi viros fortes, and egressus, pugna contra
Amalechitas. The seeds of Numb: 17.
whose most royal expectation, the Lord God of his mercy bring to such
maturitie, that they may answer that which is universally thought -- non Romula
qu^ndam
Ullo se tantum tellus iactauit Alumno.
That the highest Occident did never see a more glorious Orient. God of his
goodness strengthen the courage of his great Spirit with the same promise he
made to Joshua, Noli timere quia tecum est Dominus Deu^tuus, in omnibus ad
quaecunque perrexeris; Fear not, because the Lord God is with you in every
thing you take in hand.

For the next touching this one word from God, Benedicamus, what ought to be
the true means of Christian concord, and how near the possibility is to
practice them, are both declared, but when the Lord shall pronounce a blessing
unto it, there is the mystery; And yet it is no mystery to know the cause why
he does not, even a^ God was not found in the vehement tempest, in the rupture
of the rock, nor in the fire, sed in fibilo aura tenuis, but in a soft air as
is said. God cannot be found in commotion; until the time that both sides of
Christian Clergy do cast off the shoes of their malicious curiosities, proud
and ambitious emulation, thundering contentions, to walk uprightly in the
mountain of God, teaching people to beg from God in humility, and out of
the gentle spirit of Christian love, this peace of Jerusalem, it shall never be
granted: but by the contrary, if we persist in our wicked contempt, God shall
make that vermin of the Turks, which have consumed the garden of Jerusalem and
all the Oriental Churches, to destroy us also. And even as the Lord did
procrastinate and defer the entry of the people into the land of Canaan until
their rebellious murmurations were spent, that of all the multitude which came
from Egypt, only Caleb and Joshua did enter. So shall he never neither bless
those clear possibilities which are in the person of our excellent Moses, to
lead us to the triumph of that Christian unity, unto the time that either our
murmurations or murmurers against him be finished.

Wherefore I exhort every one out of the blessed spirit of peace and harmony,
you who are Papists chiefly, and you my LORD for whose service in special this
Treatise is destinate, that your Lo* will be content to acknowledge that
obstinate and foolish superstitions are the danger of your Soul, the disgrace
of your Noble Spirit, the discredit of your House, the extinctio^ of your
Honors, which are proper unto your Lo: under your Sovereign Prince, and the
nullitie of all your faculties and active virtues in this Commonwealth, where
you have too great a place to be void, which things besides other perils that
may ensue by many and weighty inducements to reformation.

If your Lo: cannot upon the sudden become enemy to the Church of Rome, so
dearly beloved of you, and esteemed for your Mother, then like a kindly child
compassionate her disease, help to cover her nakedness, and concur to see her
purged from her fornications, seeing it pleases God to offer such visible
means to do it, and in his own time to send a gracious Cyrus for the
furtherance of her restitution, do abhor like a pest the poisoned counsels
and courses of the Jesuits* the which I do again, and again, assure you my
Lord, doetend to hold off Cyrus, and to bring against her an Assure, a rod of
Gods wrath to tread her in the mire, and to bring capital judgments upon all
those within this kingdom who hearken unto their voice. And seeing your Lo:
has so good a King, whose bounty has been great toward you, as you know,
whose Blood Royal is the brightest Star which you carry in the frontispice
of all your Honors, and whose sacred person you do so faithfully affect, whose
wisdom and learning has that reputation with the best of the Papal Clergy
(as I have related) that they could admit his Majesty among the first of
Judges to pacify Christian dissensions, if the Lord of his mercy should bless
this time with so happy a constellation. Therefore let your Lordship be
pleased to obey the voice of such a King, who does enjoin you nothing contrary
to holy Scripture. Be with his Majesty in the purchase of this crown of
glory, which God has said before him to obtain by his putting forwards of
Catholic Unity, for the safety of Christian Churches and people, from the
barbarous invasions of the common enemy the Turk, you my Lord in special,
whose special merit conjoined with the virtue of your renowned Ancestors,
have made you twice worthy to be next his Majesty in places of public
service, do hearken unto the voice of so many good and worthy Subjects in the
Land, who do heartily invite you to embrace those Functions in the State, which
God, nature, and your peculiar virtue have allotted unto you, to the
furtherance of piety and ius^ice in the Commonwealth. And to be brief, live
so, that you may be honored in this life, and happy in the next, for your
constant action of Christian virtues, which be much surer means to strengthen
a good Religion, then Cloysterall bigottrie or contemplation, in your Lo:
person principally.

As much would I exhort those also, who either brook in their hearts latent
displeasure against the Church government, or to whom the acceptance of these
useful Ceremonies would be distastefull, or who under color of those, have
distracted hearts from the State, seeing the first is you know a most laudable
restitution of the ancient Catholic policy; and the second a point allowed
for unity, not by the gross and obscure rudiments of reformation, as you
would say, by Luther and Bucer, but by Zanchius and others, who shined
thereafter as perfect lights in the Church: We may be ashamed to be
contentious against such grave judgments, and against the authority of a
whole National neighbor Church, whereof you are brethren, and which of all
those in Christendom has only been reformed perfectly, by putting forth of
all Idolatry, and holding forth of all novelty. Cato Utyconsis, because he
found no reason to obey the time, as he thought, he would not live but slew
himself, although he might have possessed chief dignities under Caesar.
Socrates having in his choice either to dye, or to be exiled, he chooses
death, because said he, a man cast from his common wealth is no more a man. Is
it not strange that you who hold your self an upright christian, yea and
Pastor, that upon sure and inquestionable points, or upon trifling and
indifferent Ceremonies, you will not only refuse to conform your self, but
by the means of your separation you give the opportunity of seditious
practices, both of foreign Insidiators and intestine malcontents, which is a
cursed and bad part. That we should embrace the name of Separists, to run
away and derelinquish that great City upon the mountain, called by the
Prophets, Ciuit as quaesita non derelicta, that we should turn back to
Iudaize by clandestine Synagogues, and renounce that ample and famous Title of
a true Christian Catholic. Christianus mihi nomen, Catholicus cogno^, said
all the holy Fathers. We do refuse communion with the Church of Rome, and with
the greatest part of those in Germany, and if we should lie ever divided from
the heads and chiefest members of our own body within this Kingdom,
certainly, I know not what way to excuse such open delight of separation and
singularity, since the mark of Christian profession is to be Catholic and
universal. I know you will say the Saints of God are a handful; true, but the
Church of God is not so, it has by exterior marke^ a large Communion and
extent, and cannot be griped in one hand or in two.

What is there, in reason, in nature, in Theology, which does not teach us this
Communion and conjunction, the light of reason does tell us that, Vi^ vnita
fortior. Things which be united are most strong; Nature does show to us, that
the dumb Elements communicate qualities among themselves, and that the most
distant Climates of the earth have mutual commerce, and beasts which do live
together within the precinct of our Isle, will be ordinarily of our society:
Theology has taught us to believe it for an Article of our Creed, that their
is a Communion of Saints: For the love of this Communion betwixt man and Angel,
and for the prosperity of the kingdom of heaven, God did pardon Adam, and
retreat his holy word, Thou shall die the death so soon as thou do cat of
this: And shall not we re^it one dram of our presumptuous purity for our
Christian Communion with our brethren of our Church (without the which this
great Isle, our common mother, can never be truly fortunate nor the ports
thereof surely closed against the plots and insidiation of our enemies) as if
the whole efficacy of Christianity did consist in that one point of
Preciseness, while as our good father Saint Augustine did comprise an
heretic under that word, Agnosca^ qui precisisunt, veniant ad fidem, and did
discriue an upright Christian, by those three properties, Contra rationem
sobrius, contra Scriptur as nemo Christian contra Ecclesia^ nemo Catholi^us.
That as a sober man, he must be subject to reason, as a Christian man subject
to the Scriptures, and as a Catholic, subject to the Church: The first of
which three does admonish us all in general, that (in any light of reason) if
we do not sing one harmony in the public service of God, we are not (as
good members of the Church should be) studious of her glory, nor (as good
subjects of this kingdom should be) desirous of its felicity: The second does
admonish you who are an obstinate Papist, that you are no true Christian, who
will not make the Scripture the infallible rule of your faith: The third does
admonish you who are a Stoicall and stiff Puritan, that you are not a
peaceable subject, who does contradict the authority of a settled and
Orthodoxall Church.

Always to you who do hatch grudges for other Interims of the state, such as
pressure of Subsidies, or pretended poverty of the time. I will say this, and
if it have no reason. I am content to sing my Palinodie: The better and worse
condition of things earthly stands in comparison; because there is no perfect
condition here, and the truth of our pleasures and displeasures stands in
the fortitude or weakness of our apprehension: therefore to know surely what
a Prince, and what a state we have, we are to remember our selves what may
be in Princes, as they are Prnces, and what also is commonly found in them and
in their rule. What may be in a Sovereign King, Look to the holy Story of
Saul's Creation: He shall appoint your sons for his Chariots, and for 1. Sam.
8.
caring of his ground, he shall take your daughters and make them Cooks, he
shall take your fields, vineyards, and best Olive trees, and give them to his
servants, says the Lord. Out of this you shall truly observe what a state it
is you live in, next to understand what oftentimes is in Princes, I might in
this argument send you to contemplate the cruel domination of Nero, the
exorbitant government of Caligula, the auaricious reign of Galba, the
treacherous Empire of Tiberius, etc. But because it has no kind of Decorum, to
bring those in balance with a most virtuous and most Christian Monarch, I will
wish you to call to memory, what was your condition during the Civil
calamities of your neighbor Countries, of France and of the Netherlands for a
whole age, when under the ^adow of your Princes wings you was covered from
those miseries while you stood securely on the shore, and beheld the troubled
Ocean of those tempests, do not you confess that those countries have felt
more afflictions in one month then we in all our time; Or if his Majesty by
violent and unlawful ambition should bring such armies upon our necks,
whither would you then make any great reckoning of a light Subsidy, or would
you cry that his Majesty should make a bridge of gold for your enemies to go
forth. Is there any mark of a Prince approved of God, and happy among men so
infallible as to become a great Monarch by just and peaceable means, as to
enjoy long and introubled tranquillity; Is there any happiness comparable with
it? Besides the private joys which peace does yield unto us, it is the nourse
of good letters, and good policies, and of whatsoever is good. As for riches,
it is true indeed that the accumulation of treasures is both lawful and
necessary for Princes, because they are the Gardians of people and states: And
Pecunia est neruus Belli, but speaking of subjects, remember when great Kings
be most mechanicke there the people are most governed, Sub virga ferrea,
whereof we have seen examples enough not far from our coasts. How is it
then we should so lightly esteem two such rare benefits of a constant peace,
and of a glorious Monarchy reserved for many years to be the most conspicuous
blessing of this age: certainly peace is so heavenly and extraordinary a good,
that the spirit of God has allowed (we know) the Church to pray for Infidel
and wicked Princes, that they might have peace under them; seeing our peace
then and prosperity is matchless as no man can deny, it is wicked
ingratitude in us that we should not thank God, and cry, Quis poterit
similiter gloriari nobis, If it were not that our ignorance does parley excuse
our ingratitude, for how can he value the sweetness of honey, who has
neuertasted of tartness, and acerbitie, the lightness of his yoke, compared
with the pride and insolence of many great dominators, and the serenitie of his
reign, to speak so, has been without any intermission, that how could you
know what a thing is the weight and austerity of domination, and if it should
not be that our own follies and evil government should breed unto us more
discontents and aggrauations then the misgouernment of the state does, we were
apparently the most fortunate subjects under the sun.

And if any should grudge in the court, I will speak thus far unto you,
(with humble reverence, because you are the most excellent Creatures) that of
all the grudges which be within the kingdom that is most pernicious, such a
malignant and proud spirit, made Lucifer to be put to the doore', when the
court of Heaven was first established, he is not worthy to live at a Princes
elbow, who knows not that as godly and Orthodoxall Kings bear the lively
image of God upon earth, so their Courts must resemble the seat of God in the
heavens, replenished with innocent Majesty, virtuous glory, noble and active
creatures, subject to perpetual sympathy and love, tranquillity, obedience,
and order; you have the place of the Spheres, which are nearest unto God.
Imaque telluris ventos tractusque coruscos
Nimborum accipiunt, nubes exedit Olympus,
Pacem summatenent.


So should you be free of those clouds which are bred in the inferior air of
popular distemper and discontentments; yea by your serenitie and secret
influence you should purge them, and make the multitude to admire the close
harmony of the Court; even as we are astonished to behold the silent murmr,
and music of these celestial orbs which are above the troublesome elements.
The Lord God has not found it good to make all his Creatures equally capable
of his graces, the Angels are not of like degree, yet all of them take sacrety
of Gods countenance, the inferior Planets have not bodies sufficient to
contain the whole splendour of the Sun, yet they are all saciate of light, to
illuminate their own spheres. God did vouchsafe unto Miriam a prophetical
spirit, but not in that measure as he did to Moses, therefore she was stricken
with leprosy for her grudging: remember that if the sun shine of his
Majesty's bounty, be removed from you for your murmuring, you should be
plagued with a sort of Leprosies to desend again into the inferior world,
carrying in your faces the visible impressions of consuming and contemptible
envy: shall the potsheard say to the Potter, what do thou make? certainly
no: And you who may happen to be principal Planet of the Court, or first
moouer of the Courtly spheres, if it should please you to learn the right
lesson of your motion in the common school of Nature, it should hardly fall
forth to you to become an errant Planet: wherefore has the Lord God made the
huge bosom of the great Ocean to be so spacious and receptible of waters, not
that she should acquiesce in her self, and be delighted in the largeness of
her fountains, but that by secret channells she should continually
communicate the use thereof to those rivers, which be appointed to water the
earth, and as a common servant in the house of Nature, render to the Sun her
ordinary moystures, to furnish rain for the fruits of the earth; wherefore
has God planted this glorious Lamp in the Sun, not that he should pride
himself in his own splendor, for that was a Luciferian trick; but that he
should illustrate and beautify inferior Planets, and that he should minister
life and light to other creatures: Does not your courtly witted Tacitus tell
you, that even the best Princes are jealous of Sovereign points, if any strive
to keep a constant eclipse upon a Kings face that it may not shine
universally, drawing the whole reflexe upon himself, he says it is arcanum
imperij a mystery of the Majesty. It is the fault of Prothemeus, to steal the
sacred and royal light, to participate of the Majesty, and become guilty of a
Sovereign point, it is to eat of the forbidden Tree, seeking to be like unto
God: who as in one Universe, he is only one Center, unto the which the end of
all motions and the glory of all actions do return: so is a King in one state
a only one Center, wherein the whole weight and praise of government does rest.
So that you who do abuse the divine bounty, which shines in some rare good
Princes, you become (as the same Tacitus says) Foedum mancipium and malis
artibus ambitiosum, a sordide slave of Ambition, ye do snare your self into
the wicked arts of the same to your ignominious overthrow, and to the eternal
testimony of royal piety and justice in him who does punish you for it.
Therefore as his Maiesty^, our gracious Sovereign, has been the first happy
Prince in the world, by his wise and skillful creation of those, whom he has
preferred to the chief dignities of his favor, witnessed by their great
service to the State, of whom many be gone, and numbers yet do live through
his Majesty's dominions: so let you only contend among your selves for that
Angelical happiness, to fly the wicked spirit of proud emulation, that you
on the one side may detest that unnatural and monstrous envy of the brethren
of Joseph, among the soones of one family, and he on the other, who among his
brethren finds himself beloved of his father, do not abuse himself with
the dreams of Joseph, unless he have also his prophetical spirit.

It Is a fearful thing to consider, how ingrate and rebellious people do
oftentimes constrain good Princes to offend against God, and procure his
judgments, both against their Princes and against themselves, whereof we have
that terrible example of the punishment of Moses, for the murmuration of Israel
at the waters of contradiction, therefore that it should not befall unto us as
it did unto them; that the Lord do not take from us our great Captain: Let us
no more murmr nor grudge, but seeing we see his Oracles have hitherto been
from God, and that the Lord has said to him as he said to Moses, Fear not I
shall be with thee, which our conscience will confess if we examine our selves,
how many times we have seen the Lord miraculously upon his side, Let us with
Zanchius say, who are we to oppose ourselves against such Laws, as he has
already established, or may hereafter do by the authority of a settled Church,
and well governed estate. Let us acknowledge both Papist, Puritan, and
Protestant; the revealed mystery of this time wherein we are, and reverence
this great Instrument of God who has opened the seal thereof, and under whom
we are come from Egyptian bondage, to be a great and mighty Nation. Let us
honor this Orient light which does arise with him after so long eclipse, both
in the Church, and in the Commonwealth; that being confirmed and strong by
intestine union, we may by the force of united minds aspire to that Christian
ambition to be led under our excellent Moses, or Joshua, to that joyful
Iubile, of the Catholic harmony of Christendom, and to eiect those detestable
and vile Amalakites of the Turkish race, that making so our way into the Land
of Holiness, we may all cry in one voice as the Prophet foretold of latter
times, Venite ascendamus in montem Domini, Come brethren let us ascend together
into the mount of the Lord, which is the only scope of an upright Christian,
Amen.

Now having treated thus far fot the glory of God and edification of his
Church, I will crave your pardon who are a discreet Reader to speak two words
for the justification of my voyage to Rome. The credit whereof has been so
miserably dilacerate by some Papists, who say that I went thither expressly
per fare la spia, to play the spy, that I received the Popes money and paid
him back with false measure at my returning homeward. And I affirm in this
foro publico contrary to these that I went to Rome out of mere zeal to the
Papal Religion: that I should not prove ingrate to so great a personage, as
the Pope, I confess to have been beholding to his humane and courteous
behavior toward me during my residence within his dominions: And to the true
affection of some few of his Cardinals, and certain other chief persons, in
whose manners (to speak ingenuously and Christianly) I did see nothing, but
virtuous conversation, much zealous mention of the Primitive simplicity of the
Church, great remorse for her present divisions, and many hearty wishes, that
it would please God, to make his Majesty of Great Britain another Constantine,
and to bless their days with Christian peace and unity: But I affirm that I
did never receive any money nor benefit whatsoever of the Pope, of his
Cardinals, Jesuits, or any other persons whatsoever within the Roman Church,
except in medals, beads, Agnus Deies. Indulgences, and such childish toys and
trash, whereof I made small account even then, much less now: I affirm that I
did never wrong the Pope nor any Papist whosoever, except this be wrong, Quod
metui danaos and dona ferentes, that is to say, that being Papist my self, I
was (as diverse were of my Country men professed religious in the Roman Church
beyond seas) contrarious to the alluring Iesuist, because I knew him to be
Enemy to my Sovereign King and Country, and except by my renuntiation now of
his Idolatrous religion: Further I affirm that I might have pursed the Popes
money and would not: And I swear by that blessed Trinity, whose countenance I
hope in the merit of my Redeemer to enjoy; that all these my foresaid
affirmations are sincere and true: And what one among a number of you, who have
so prodigally and unjustly spent my Reputation, is able to make the like
Apology for himself, that he has neither received nor refused that hostile
money, unless he will betake himself unto his lessons of Aequiuocation. What
came to my knowledge of the devises of those who seek the destruction of this
Kingdom, whereof I am a member, or of the counsels again of such as were
known to be faithful frinds and fautours of the same, all that I did most
sincerely relate by his Majesty's appointment unto the first watchmen of the
State under his Majesty's self, and all tending to this same end whereunto
this present discourse is directed, that is, to the assuring of his Majesty's
Crown from the treacherous craft of the Jesuit, for a testimony whereof and of
my most humble and loyal affection to the service of his Majesty, and of the
commonweal, I had the good luck to have a hand in the coming of Monfieur
(...) to his Majesty's service where he dyed. Which being so, I must have
about with you who have so liberally calumniated me, I would to God that you
your self could in these errands prove adeo potens aduersus Pecuniam, that
you may keep your own hands as free from Spanish, Papal, or Jesuitical
gold. I would to God you knew as well as I do what it is to converse with a
Jesuit, and to be defiled with his serpentine breath: Seeing there is no
Jesuit living does not in his heart approve that Diabolical plot and
machination of the Powder Treason, what do you think of your selves who are
their Disciples, who receive them in your houses and hearken unto their
insinuations, are you not a thousand to one a more dangerous Citizen here then
Cataline was at Rome who was declared hostis Patriae, because he did practice
the change of a civil state, you practice first against the person and life of
our Sovereign Prince; next against the stability of his royal Succession and
Crown; thirdly against the peace and felicity of your country: Fourthly,
against the famous antiquity and natural liberties of the same. Fiftlie,
against the good of every particular Subject of his Majesty's, who is not of
your lawless league. Lastly, you practice to remove the Candlestick of the
word of God; and to erect in the place thereof the darkness of superstition,
striving to deliver us all, both Prince, Subjects and Country, slaves to the
Galleys of Papal pride. These are your practices who do frequent the Iesuist,
in regard whereof what style shall I give you; are you not indeed the chafe
among the corn, the noisome cockle among the wheat, the cankering vermin among
the herbs, the filthy weeds among flowers, the moth among roabs, a coal in
your Princes bosom, a gnawing worm in the bowels of this Kingdom, a
contagious member of the Commonwealth, a thief in the house, a fearful
Sanguisuga thirsting after the native bloold of your own Countrymen, because
you have drunken of that burning and deadly poison of the Jesuitical
wormwood, which is never quenched but with the blood of Legions. The Lord God
of his infinite goodness inspire in you the lively air of his holy Spirit to
purge your hearts from these pestiferous humors, and once open your eyes to
behold the splendent light, so much contemned by you, that you may see your
own perils, and the perilous condition of Christ's Church: That your souls
may at last languish for a general restitution of ancient primitive
simplicity, that you may reverence all the means which lead thereunto, To the
effect that by our mutual honoring of Antiquity, we may also be honored of
our Successors, and said of them to be a happy age of Christian Reformation.

(...).

