1 MVltitude of prebendes.

2 Multitude of priests.

3 Multitude of temples and chapels

4 Multitude of aultars.

5 Diverse oblations and offringes

6 Worldly riches and pride.

7 Idleness and trwandisse of the shaven.

8 Multitude of harlotes.

9 Fained hours and prayers.

10 Detestable hypocrisy.

11 Devouring of widows, orphans, and the poor.

12 Renounsyng and destructyng of the death and passion of Christ.

And so consequently of the other, which are infinite.

TO make short ye error of the mass is most deadly and hurtful, as well to
the goods as to the persons, in as much as it seems to have most sign of
holiness and goodness saying that it is all execrable or cursed. Truly the venim
wherewith the pestilence is covered anoteth and greueth more greater tha^ that,
that is seen open.

Ite missa est. Amen

3. Esdras. 4. chap. Super omnia vincit veritas. Above all thing the truth
ouercometh.

MDXLVII.

Printed at Wittenberge by Hans Lufte.

A Chrystian, exhortation very profitable gathered out of the holy
scriptures, unto the great comfort, and vtilitye, of every faithful soul,
being in agony of death, unto whom, it ought to be rehearsed, with loud voice,
diverse and sundry times, if need so require unto the which is added, toward
the latter end a godly prayer for the sick drawing to an end of this life,
with a Catechism, not only to instruct the sick, but also to refreshe his
memory, with the great mystery of our redemption. Translated out of French
into English by Robart Heasse Minister at Algate.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Pawles Churchyard at the
sign of the Lucrece.

Anno. 1566.

Death is end, and the beginning of life.

Ecclesiastes.xvii. Ante lauguorem adhibe medicinam et ante iudicium in,
terroga teipsu^, et in conspectu dei inuenies propitiatione^

Apocalip. iii. Si non vigilaueris veniam ad te tanquam fur et nescis qua hora
veniam ad te.

Apocalip. xvi. Beatus qui vigilat et custodit vestimenta sua nenudus ambulet
et videant turpitudinem eius.

Math. 24. Luke. 12. Estote parati quia nescitis qua hora filius hominis
venturus est.

Unto the faithefull Reader, greting, in our Lord Jesus Christ.
DEarelye beloved Reader, I pray the take in good part this present
exhortacio^, that I have here translated out of ye French tongue, into thy
vulgar tongue with great thought and care until I of my part had performed
it, I trust to the great comfort of every faithful person, that fears God,
to use and practice, at the time of need, when as it shall please god to call
him out of this mortal and wretched world. But be advertised that thou maiste
use it right, that these three letters. B.S.N. The first signifies brother,
that is when thou speak unto a man The second signifies suster, a woman,
and the third emporteth, that thou must name the party sick, by his proper
name, for he ought not to be honored, by names, either, of worldly, honors
or worshipes, But rather to resist Satan the enemy of man's soul, in and
through the power of our lord and god, ye sick must be named, by his own
name, that he has received, in the holy sacrament of Baptism, and in so
doing thou shall obey the Lord God, whom I beseech of his infinite goodness and
mercy, vouchsafe to be Good and merciful, both unto thee and me in the last
judgment day. Amen.

A Christen exhortation which ought to be recited with loud voice, before
all faithful people, being in agonye of death.
ALL that is of God, Ihon, vii.
hear the word of God, Math, vii.
and not only to hear it, but keep it, Hebre. i,
and put it in execution for all things shall have an end and wax old as
does a garment, Esaias. 40.
but the word of God endures for evermore, Rom, v,
and seeing that it is so, that by one man sin is entered into the world and
by sin, death and consequently all troubles and adversities following, it is
by just occation that the life of man, Rom, vii.
is but a continual battle upon earth, in such sort, that the flesh
fyghteth against ye spirit and the spirit against the devil the world, and the
flesh, which are enemies unto our souls, but following thapostles counsel,
i, Peter, v.
to obtain victory in this spiritual battle, you must resyste constantly
through faith. i, Ihon. v.
For the victory which ouercometh the world, Hebre. xi,
is our faith which is a sure and certain knowledge of the love of God
toward us as by his gospel he declares him self to be our father and
savior, by the means of Jesus Christ. Having then such a steadfast faith
for your principal foundation. Acknowledge and confess unfeignedly before the
majesty of God that you are a poor and miserable sinner, Psalm, li, Luke, xvii,
conceived and borne in iniquitye and corruption, inclined to do evil and
that of your self so unable to do any Good by your often transgresing the
commandments of God, in which so doing, you have deserved by his just
Judgment, death and dampnacion upon you, yet notwithstanding you are
displeased in your self to have so often and many times offended him and
therefore you condemn your self and your vices with perfect repentance,
desiringe that the grace of GOD redres your calamity. Pray then with such a
steadfast faith. Psalm, li,
If you cannot with the mouth, say it with the heart, that God our father most
beninge, and full of mercy, do not enter in judgment nor to rekening with
us, Psalm. 142,
but rather vouchsafe to have pity upon you in the name of his son Jesus
Christ our lord and to wype away your offenses and sins by the merit of the
death and passion of the same Jesus Christ, in whose name present unto him,
his holy Prayer that he has taught us, saying with a good heart.

Math. vi,
Our father which art in. etc.

B.S.N Aknoweledge from the botome of your heart your unrighteousness, be
sorye for your sins, repent you vncessantlye, Math, iii
and the kyngedome of God shall draw nere, acknowledge that their is nether,
righteousness, Titus, iii,
innocencye nor any good works in you, nor from you, Ephe, ii,
Psalm, li,
but contrary wise, the son of wrath and Child of perdicion, conceived and
borne in the sin of the old Adam, you deserve eternal death and dampnation,
Rom, viii,
yet not withstandinge, let not this, nor all the sins of the world, if you
committed them, once fryghte you. For Jesus Christ the eternal and true Son
of God, Rom, i,
has made him self perfect man conceived of the holy Ghost, Luke, i,
borne of the virgin Mary for to sanctifye and cleanse you, Math, i,
he has suffered under Ponce Pilate, Phllip, 2
diverse afflictions, iniuryes, and wrongs, yeldinge him self as a slave and
Captive, Acts, 3,
for to set you at liberty, Math, 27,
Jesus Christ has been crucified and accursed upon the tree of the cross, to
deliver you from the malediction perpetual. Jesus Christ, Esaias, 53,
is dead in sheading, his precious blood, for to wash you. Apo, i,


For to redeem you, i, Peter, 1.
for to deliver you wholly from death and hell fire, and from the might and
power of Satan, Romans vi,
Jesus Christ has been buried in the Sepulcher, for to bury all your sins,
ye which he has borne on his shoulders and has wyped them out, Acts, i,
Jesus Christ is descended into hell suffering an extreme agonye, for to
deliver you, from al pains and griefs of death. Jesus Christ is risen from
death, i, Cori, rv, Acts, i. Colio. iii.
for to make you rise in your proper body to a glorious immortality. Jesus
Christ is ascended into the Heavens, for to make you ascend after him. i.
Ihon, ii,
Jesus Christ is set on the right hand of God his father almighty, Hebre, vii,
being your advocate and intercessor toward him and the atonement for all
your sins. Math. xv, Pa, ^i,
We look that he shall come to Judge the quick and the dead, Rom, viii,
for to render to every one according to his deds. But to his elect which
believe in him, their Sins shall not be imputed, for he will justify them
through his grace, Math, xxv,
and make them to reign with him in the heavenly throne, world without end.

B.S.N. Such is the great mestery of our redemption, the which through the
power of the holy Ghost, you ought fermelye to believe, it to be done for
your salvation. And doubt not, Ephe, i,
but that by the merit of Jesus christ chief of his church you be a member
incorporated unto the same, thankinge him with great humilite, that he has
vouchsafed to geeue you grace to have been associated in the fellowship and
company of his faithful, Math, iiii,
feeding you with his holy word, of his body, i, Cor, xi,
and of his precious blood, acknowledginge as fully persuaded, of the great
mercy and compassion of God by the remission of all your sins, Rom, v,
the which is done unto you, i, Cor, xv,
by Jesus Christ who will make you rise again in the last day, and their to
reign with him in the life eternal, Mark, 16,
which he has promised to all those that believe in him being baptized in his
name.

B.S.N. Now seeing you have such a faith doubt not to receive the promise of
faith. For God is true, Rom, iii,
he is not a lier as man is, Heaven and Earth shall pass, Math, 24,
but the word of god shall last evermore, God is your father and maker, Esaias,
40,
you are his creature and work of his hands he made you not to leese you.
Gene, i,
For he is the savior of all men and wills not the death of a sinner, 1,
Timo, 2,
but rather that he should turn from his sin, by faith full repentance and
so be saved. Wherefore I hear pronounce unto you, Jeremy,
in the name of God, that by and through his great goodness and mercy: Titus,
iii.
you have full forgeeuenes and remission of all your sins, 1, Timo, 1,
by the only merit of his dear son Jesus Christ our Lord in the sheding of
his precious blood. Acts, 4.
For he is the propiciation, Apoca, 1, 1, Ihon. 2.
not only of all your sins but of all the sins of the world.

B.S.N. Jesus Christ says that all things are possible to those that believe.
Math, 17,
Believe then without doubtinge that Jesus Christ puttinge on our fleeshe,
has made him self perfect man, dying for you, bearing all your sins on
his body, to abolishe and wype them out. (...)
Offer to god the precious death of his son Jesus Christ and by the merit of
the same death and passion, demannde of him mercy and forgeuenes, in saying
from the botome of your heart in and with great humility and repentance.

A Prayer.
Almighty God and heavenly father, show mercy unto me, poor and miserable
Sinner, Rom, iii,
for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord and savior. Ihon, xiiii,
And by the mirite of his death and passion vouchsafe to receive my soul whom
I commend in to thy hands. Math, 26,


Psalm, 30,
Have your full confidence in God, Rom, viii,
for seeing that God is with you, nothing shall be against you. For Jesus
Christ which is the inmaculate lamb has vanquished all things for you, Esaias.
6.
he has offered him self once for you, and by the same only oblation, has
wholye overcome all your sins he has ouerc^d all your infirmities: Heb. 7,
and, 9
unrighteousness, abhomynation and obligacio^. With this good Lord Jesus Christ
God the father has given you all things strengthen you in Jesus Christ who
has called you, Rom, viii.
by his Prophets, Apostles, Esaias, 55,
and Evangelists to come freely unto him saying. All yt are thursty come unto
the great fountain. Math, xi,
Come unto me all ye that travail and are laden, and I will ease you.

B.S.N. Believe steadfastlye that Jesus Christ has delivered you of all your
sins, i, Ihon, v,
and has reconciled you unto God his Father, unto whom with great reverence
and hearty repentance say from the botome of your heart.

A Prayer.
O Almighty and eternal Lord God, Romans iii, Ihon, xiiii,
be merciful to me, pore and miserable sinner for thy son Jesus Christ's
sake, my Lord and savior. And by the merit and worthynes of his death and
passion, Mathe, 26,
vouchsafe to receive my soul into thy hands. Psalm, 3^,
Amen,

B.S.N. Have hope: for truth it is, yt he will receive your soul as his own,
for the love of his Son Jesus Christ which is the savior and redemer of all
those that believe in him.

Mark, 16, Deute, 18, Psalm, 11, Esaias. 53, Ge, 3, and, 22,
Moses and all the prophets have witnessed that al nations shall receive
salvation and benedictio^ only by and through Jesus Christ the Apostles and
Evangelists do testifye that Jesus Christ came not to call the righteous,
Mathe, 9,
but sinners to repentance. Ihon, x,
And to geeue his soul for the redemption of many. Luke, 21,
For he has shed his precious blood, for the remission of sins. Believe
then, and doubt not at all, Hebre. i,
for Jesus Christ has made the Purgatyon for all your sins, promising that
all those that shall believe in him, and in the Father, Ihon, 5,
who has sent him life everlasting, and shall not come to judgment but shall
pass from a short death to a long life.

B.S.N. Take then a good courage in Jesus Christ, for he has loved you, and
washed you from all your sins in his precious blood, Esaias, 53, Apo, i,
take hold in this sure faith, to fight tryumphantlye against the adversary,
have no other shield to defend you withal the^ the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, who by the power and might of his death and passion, Rom, v,
has reconciled you unto GOD his Father, unto whom from the bottom of your
heart, in great humility and reverence say this prayer with me.

O Almighty and everlasting Lord God, Rom, iii, Ihon. xiiii, Math, xxvi, Psalm,
xxx,
be merciful unto me poor miserable sinner, for thy Son Jesus Christ his
sake: and by the merit and worthiness of his death and passion, vouchesafe to
receive my soul, which I commmend into thy hands.

B.S.N. Take sure hold through hope in this faith, John, x
that our good god full of all mercy, will and shall receive your soul, as his
own, into his hands for Jesus Christ's sake: for there is no other name under
heaven given unto men, Acts, 4.
through the which we can or may be saved, or look for salvation but in Jesus
christ arm then your self well with this our good Lord and master Jesus
Christ, Rom, viii,
for he has done all things for you, Rom, ^
he has acco^plisshed ye law for you, he has over co^d al things for you, go
to the^.

B.S.N. Rejoice in God, Hebre. xi
be evermore steadfast in this lively faith, follow the trace of the holy
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles which are all saved in this faith, the
which do all assure you that the enemy your adversary cannot annoy you at
all, for your suit is won thorough Jesus Christ which is your judge and
advocate also. Ihon, 5, Ihon, 2, Psalm, 23,
Wherefore say evermore in this firm belief, yea although I walk through the
valey of the shadow of death, yet will I fere none evil, for thou art with me
thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

B.S.N. Do never weary your self to say from the botome of your heart in this
wise.

O Almighty God and heavenly father, Rom, iii John. xiiii, Math, 2.
be merciful unto me pore miserable siner, for Jesus Christ's sake my lord and
savior, and by the merit and worthiness of his death and passion, vouchesafe
to receive my soul the which I do most humbly commend into thy holy hands,
Amen.

A singular Prayer for a body greatly afflicted with sickness which seems to
draw or approach more near to Death, then to life: with a little Cathechisme
expressly made to instruct the sick person, and to make him behold the great
mystery of our redemption.

Ecclesiasticus.xviii.
GEt thee righteousness before thou come to Judgment, learn be fore thou
speak, and use Physic or ever thou be sick, i. Cor. v
examine thy self before thou be judged, and in the day of visitacion thou
shall find mercy.

The Lord does admonish us evermore to pray: (specially, Mathe, 2^,
when we are touched with his rods) wherefore all Parents, and faithful
friends, which shall, or do visit the sick person ought not only to visit
and solicitate the body, but also to seek and demand the spiritual medecin
for the soul which ought to be done by good prayers, confession of sins,
Mathe, 9.
and Christian exhortation, according unto the word of God, without the which no
man can live: Math, 4,
and to thend that all things may be done in good order, and with good zeal,
it shall be convenient and necessary to prostrate our selves before ye majesty
of God and say unto him: our help and succoure be in the name of God the
Father, the Son, and of the holy ghost so be it, and then say this prayer
folowinge, confessing generally all your sins, from the botome of your heart.

Prayer.
Math, xviii
O Almighty god and most merciful Father, we being assembled in ye name of thy
well-beloved Son our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, we have under the self same
Jesus Christ, John. xiiii,
presumed to present our selves before thee: to call on thy holy name, having
our only refuge in thy sovereign bownty, the which we do not only desire to
feel and taste in our selves, James, v
but also in this the necessity of thy poor creature, being now afflicted
with bodily sickness, and troubled in spirit, 1. Cor. xi
we know O Lord that iustlye thou do punish it in chastesing it with thy
rods, for to make him understand thy fatherly affection, Psalm, 78,
but thy great mercies, which thou use toward our Fathers are not
vanished nor consumed away, for thou art the great and eternal God full of all
mercy, Math, 26,
who never do change: thy holy word instructs us full amply, that all the
earth is replenished with thy mercies, which do surmou^t far thy justice,
wherefore we beseech thee O most merciful father, cease thy wrath and
indignation toward this thy pore and wretched creature, have mercy and
compassion of him for Jesus Christ's sake: look not unto his sins and
offenses, but rather in the face of thy dear son Jesus Christ, who has
sufficientlye satysfied thee for the same, in offeringe unto thee the great
Sacrifice of his body on the cross, for us miserable sinners: we therefore
beseech the (O God) that art full of mercy to let him feel thy mercy and
grace, which thou never did refuse unto thy beloved ones, and because that
thou art our heavenly father, Math, vi,
which know all things necessary for our salvation: we beseech thee not to
prolong his life, neither to shorten it, for we repose our selves on thy holy
will, unto ye which desire only to accomplish and fulfill, Rom, xi.
thou art wise without counsel to dispose with this thy creature, according
to thy good will and pleasure, considering that if it be thy will O lord to call
him, what is he that may resist it (again) if thou will resstore him to
health, Rom, viii,
who is he that dare reprove thee, for all things are in thy hands, Ihon, i,
and nothing is done without thy good will and providence: yet nevertheless O
Lord if by thy grace thou do prolonge his days, Psalm, 2^.
this thy rod shall be unto him, a chastisinge to amend his former life: and so
be converted unto thee: and we all with him will yield thee thanks for ever:
but if thy will be stayed, to make him pass unto a better life: we pray thee
in the favor of thy son Jesus Christ to forget and do away all his faults
and sins the which thou haste vouchsafed to be washed in the sheding of his
precious blood: Apoca, 1, Math, 26,
vouchsafe O Lord by the merit and worthiness of the death and passion of thy
dear son, to receive his soul in to thy holy hands, Psalm, 30, Psalm, 137,
when it shall please thee to call it out of this world: despise not O lord the
work of thy hands: for behold thy poor creature almost overwhelmed, yet
calling on thy name, even in the midst of all his troubles and sorrows,
offering thee a woeful and penitent soul with an humble heart the which we pray
thee to accept, for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ's sake our Lord in
whose name thou have promised to exalt our prayers, and humble requests:
wherefore we pray thee, receive us in to thy holy tuicion, illuminating our
hearts and understanding to appear before thee, and to call on thy holy name as
thy beloved So^ Jesus Christ our Lord has taught us to pray, Math, vi,
for all things necessary, saying.

OVre Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed by thy name. Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
etc.

FInally O eternal god and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee
vouchsafe, to stre^then us, by thy grace, and power, so that by and through
the weakness of our flesh, we fall not, and because that of our selves we are
so weak that we can not, nor may not remain steadfast, nor constant, no not a
minut of an hour: vouchsafe we beseech thee to strengthen us with thy graces,
and heavenly benediction, in such sort that we remain constant unto the end
in the perfect faith, without the which it is impossible to please thee, Heb, xi
confirm this faith in us evermore, of the which we shall make confession
with heart and mouth saying.

I Believe in God the Father al mighty maker of Heaven, etc.

THe prayers ended, then may be perceived how the sick and patient does:
with inquisition of his health, with godly words and christen talk, and if ye
sick person decline from this life, and that no likelyhod be seen in him then
may a commodiouse hour be appointed to speak unto the said sick person, to
know if he be willing to hear speak of gods word to his comfort, John. viii,
whilst that he is yet in this world and of perfect memory, and if he be of
God, this little and breef Cathechisme may be recited as follows.

A brief Cathechisme, not only to instruct the sick, but also to refresh his
memory, with ye great mystery of our redemption: the which well to understand
and remember in his latter days, Eccle, 18,
he ought to make confession of his faith before the assistaunce of the
faithful: whereof one of those in the absence of the Minister ought to
question with him as follows.

The Minister. Any man that knows well him self, B.S.N.
and does not omit his condition and quality, truly he also ought to
acknowledge, Gene, 1, Psalm, li, Ephe, 2,
notwithstanding that he was created the Image and likeness of God, that he is
conceived and borne in the sin of the old Adam, through the which he is
become a poor and miserable sinner, ignorant, inconstaunt and full of
iniquity, and consequently subject to all miseries, afflictions, adversities,
and finally unto death it self, Romans 5
and all this has sin caused, yt which god not leaving it unpunished. he
daily afflicts us by sundry manner ways, in this world to thend that we
should not be dampened with the world.

B.S.N. Have therefore patience in your sickness, and surely in so doing you
shall posses your soul in joys everlasting. Acknowledge your sin, Psalm, 31
and accuse your self before the maiesti of God, the which you must behold and
contemplat through faith, making confession of the same, with heart and mouth
before all the assistaunce, for it is written: with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation, harken then
unto these demands that shall now prese^tlye be asked, and answer faithfully
according to the intelligence that you have received of the Lord, and if you
cannot by reason of the weakness of your sickness, I will answer for you
my self, and it shall suffice us to have understanding of your constant
faith, in ye which we all must die.

Q. I demand. Wherefore, and to what end have you been created in this
world. Math, 10



Sick. For to know God. Ge, 2



Minister. Was it not necessary unto you to know God.


Sick. Yes truly, Psalm, 17.
for saying that he is my soueraygne LORD, without the knowledge of him I had
been more miserable the^ the brute beasts. Psalm, 61, 17



Minister. Seeing you know GOD, you know, that he is my wisdom, and all
infinite goodness, one only God in persons three, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, he is the only God, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have
worshipped, Ge, 1, Ihon. i, Luke, i, Gene. 18
in spirit and truth, he is the only and eternal God, which has made the
heaven and also the earth, and al things which is in them contained: the
knowledge that you have of GOD, is it not in this sort.


Sick. yes.


Minister. But may such a simple knowledge, of God, lead you unto the life
everlasting.


Sick. Very hardelye: for it is life everlasting to confess and acknowledge
one only God, Ihon. xvii.
and he whom he has sent, his eternal son our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ.


Minister. Wherefore is it necessary to acknowledge, and confess the Lord and
Christ.


Sick. Because, that I must recover in Jesus Christ, Romans 5 Psalm, li, Luke.
xxiiii Psalm. 2, Rom, xi
all that I have lost in my self, by reason of the sin committed by Adam
our fore father, in the which I am conceived and born: so that now it was
necessary for my salvation, that Jesus Christ the son of God, both God and
man, clothed with our flesh, should give me through his grace and free mercy,
all yt I had lost in Adam


Minister It is very well said, that is the cause, Math, 1,
why Jesus Christ was conceived by the holy ghost and borne of the virgin
Mary, for to purge and sanctifye you, for all together contrary unto him,
Ephe, 2, Rom, viii,
are you borne and conceived in sin, and sinful Parents wherefore you must
confess that without Jesus Christ, you had remained a pore and miserable sinner
in everlasting Death.


Sick. Romans 5
I truly, but I believe and confess, that Jesus Christ has reconciled me unto
God his Father.


Minister. How has he reconciled you to God his father.


Sick. Math, 26,
By his death and passion, and by the shedding of his most precious blood, for I
know and am fullye persuaded, that Jesus Christ has suffered under Po^ce
Pilate, diverse and many afflictions, Acts, 3.
injuries, and tribulatio^s to deliver me from eternal death it is Jesus
Christ which has been crucyfied for me, Math. 2^
and accursed upon the tree of the cross, to deliver me from the malediction of
the Devil, unto ye which Adam had bound me unto, Jesus Christ has been truly
buried, for to burye all my sins, because they may not be imputed unto me
before God: it is mi Lord and savior Jesus Christ which is descended into
Hell, suffering an extreme agony, for to deliver me from the eternal Pit.


Minister. Is all that you have confessed of Jesus Christ presentlye
sufficient for to save you.


Sick. Esaias. 53, Math, xxvi,
No, but that it was requisite that the holy scriptures, might in all things
be accomplished, for what had it profited me, for Jesus Christ to have been born
crucified, dead, buried, and descended into hell for me only: with out the
resurrection: wherefore I believe and confess that Jesus Christ is risen from
ye dead for to make me rise with him as one of his little members, into
everlasting life.


Minister. It is consequently written, that he is assended in Heaven, and their
presently set on the right hand of God his Father, but what avails this
assencion unto you.


Sick. My cheef and savior Jesus Christ is assended into heaven, for to make
me asce^d after him, for where the head is, there the members be also, and I
believe that he being set on the right hand of God his Father, 2. John, 2
is my advocate, intercessors, and only mediator toward him, Rom, viii,
assuring me that none can hinder me since yt Jesus Christ is my mediator,
Ihon, 5,
and my judge all together: wherefore I need not to fear the day of his
coming unto judgment: when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead,
Math, 2^,
for I believe and also confess with steadfast faith, that there is neither
judgment nor condemnation, toward or for those which be his faithful members
in Jesus Christ.


Ministre. Who has given you grace to know and understand al these things.


Sick. It is through the grace of the holy ghost, one only God, with the
Father, and the son by whose means we receive al good gifts, which are
offered unto us through Jesus Christ.


Minister. Seeing that you have already confessed that you be the member of
Jesus Christ, it also follows that you be incorporated unto his Church, ye
which you must believe to be holy, catholic, and universal.


Sick. I believe steadfastly the holy universal church, washed and purified in
the precious blud of Jesus Christ, for the which most humbly I thank him,
that he has vouchsafed me to be as one of the little members of his church,
and being baptized in his name, has vouchsafed me to live in the communion,
Math, 4.
unity, and charity of the same, instructing me with his holy word and fed
with his perfect body, and quenched with his precious blud in hope of
everlasting life.


Minister. Now saying you be grounded on the lively roke, i. Cor. x
which is Jesus Christ in knowinge your self, you must acknowledge and
confess the principal benefit, that you have received of our Lord and Christ.


Sick. It is reason and very necessary, for I will not be unthankful to
acknowledge the gifts and benefits that I have received of God: Psalm, li,
wherefore I confess and acknowledge that I pore and miserable sinner, have
offended diverse and sundry ways, ye goodness of God, in transgressinge his
commandments in the which so doing, I have deserved death and da^natio^
everlasting yet notwtsta^ding flying unto ye mercy of God. I crave and ask
mercy believing and confessing undoubtedly, that full remission of sins is
granted me, by the only death and passion of my Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, and in the sheading of his precious blood, Hebre. i,
in whom and through whom I assure my self to be wholye washed and purged,
which is the greatest gift and contentation, Math, x,
that ever could have hapened unto me, and such is my faith in the which I
will live and dye, meaning ye grace of the holy ghost.


Minister. Seeing you have received so great gifts of God, by the means of his
son Jesus Christ it is also convenient and necessary, that you follow the
commaundemenet, for even as he has forgeuen you, and made satisfaction for
all your sins, so likewise you must forgeeue from the botome of your heart
unto all those that have offended you, else you walk not according to gods
laws.


Sick. In this I have known the law of Jesus Christ to be the only holy and
perfect doctrine commanding us to love our neighbors, friends, Math. xix,
and enemies, as our selves: wherefore I pray unto al those that I have offended
by thought, word, or deed, to forgive me with as free a will and good heart,
as I forgive all those that have offended or trespassed against me, being
desirous to do the^ good as unto my lovers and friends.


Minister. Seeing that God has ordained that all men shall dye, Gene. 3
we cannot resist his ordinance, and therefore we ought to be obedient unto
his will, wherefore dear brother you may not think it strange, though I
annouce unto you the words of Esaias ye Prophet te that he declared and spoke
unto king Esechias, Esaias, 38.
saying in the behalf of God.

Thus says the Lord, set thy house in an order, for thou must dye, and shall
not live: this good counsel ought to occasion you, to dispose your self
spiritually in your conscience, and first to persuade your self to godwarde
and weep and lament your sins, Esaias, 55,
as this good King did, crave his mercy, in asking him forgeuenes, and
evermore saying in your heart.

O Lord God thou merciful and heavenly father, be merciful unto me pore and
miserable sinner, for Jesus Christ's sake my Lord and savior, and then you
may not forgette your house and familye, yt which



