THE LINE of Liberality duly directinge the well bestowing of benefits and
reprehending the commonly used vice of Ingratitude.

Anno. 1569

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete near to S. Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe.

To the right woorshipfull Sir Christopher Heydon knight his ^ost courteouse
Creditour of many his bounties and benefits.
IN requiting courtesies good turns, and benefits received at others hands
(right worshipful,) heedily ought we to follow the fertile and frut^ful
grou^des: which yield in profit the manifold doubled gain of the labor cost
and traueile that their tyller and husbandly man employed upon the^, and
charyly fle the sour and naughty nature of barren soil: which after many
tillinges, great charge bestovved of pain and costs, in fine, aunsvvere
scarsely or not at all the own seed again. worthy to be resembled to
insaciable svvalovving goulfes deuori^g still, without show of any recept. And
for so much as (according to thaduise of Cato,) it behooves him that presumes to
give precepts and to advertise others, warily to take regard he deserve not
reprehension himself for that he rebukes others for, I thougt it more the^
high time after so many benefits and courtesies, so much traueyle and costs
sondrye vvayes at diverse times abundantly received by me and had of your
vvorshypps great bountye joined with courtesy, to show now at length some
proof of the nature of the soil whereupon so franckly you have employed the
same. Concerning which point of gratitude and thankful nature consisting in
requiting benefits, courtesies, and plesours received at your worships hands,
although in ability many do, in goodvvill yet well meaning and
thankfulness, no one shall surmount ne pass me. For albeit that blind Fortune
through want of eysight povvring out or pinching in blindly her gifts
without regard, grants to some ability to surcharg by giving: and again
pincheth others some by abridging their power to be able to aunsvvere like for
like received: yet since that (as Tullye says) the best and principal part of
requyting benefits and yielding condign thanks for benefits and courtesyes
received rests in the mind, which when it has unfeignedly declared it
self to be vvillinge to requite what has been received, is to be thought to
have made recompe^se abou^dantly: As one thorough eased herevvith of the heavy
charge vvhervvith the huge burden of your bounties, and Fortunes pinching
parcialitie oppressed me, amyd this narovv streyte of my disabilitie not
fainting but triumphing over Fortunes blind despyte, I present your goodness
(lo) with a mind vvelmeaning, and thankful heart: supplyeng that defect with
the certain riches of the mind, which the frail and fl^tting wealth of the
body will not permit me to do. A simple present for your vvorthie personage:
and inferior in value far to any of yours received: yet such as shall
suffyse to discharge me of Ingratitude. In vvi^he self same seking to requite
your benefit passed, I must of force yield me your double dettour. Touching my
self, ^or your gentle a^ceptaunce of my pore goodvvill: touching this my pore
present for your granted patronage, which simple gift of mine without al
regard had to your passed deserts (which on my part notvvithsta^di^g may in no
wise be vvrapt up in oblivion,) of very dew for titles sake may challenge to
be dedicated to your worship. For why to speak freely and yet void of all
suspicion of flattery, (the verity vvherof I refer to the report and
judgment of infinite vvellnigh and those credible,) who is he to whom the
report of your vvorshippes name has come, but with the same report has
lykevvyse heard your vvorthie renoume, and verteues vvelnigh of al sorts,
such as may challeng and claim your deserved crown of immortality. Among
which what shall I recompt your rare sobryetie, great lenytie, paslyng
familiarity, commendable policy, gentle gravity, pregnant wisdom, deep
discrecion, large liberality, paynefulnes to plesour all honest persons,
ample hospitality, to the admiration and vvellnigh astonnyeng of all that see
such rare gifts so plentifullye placed in your own person: with an
infinite number vvelnigh of virtues besides, in the lest of which rests
true vvoorshyppe. For which causes with one voice (as if they had conspired
together) all Norfolk sounds each where your immortal praise. In number of
which company, simplest I, yet depest bounden, acknovvledge among the rest
my vowed devvtie with happy acclamacions and vvellvvyshynges testifieng my
conceived perfitte ioyeng at your haypie estate, and desirous what in my
sclender power does consyst (for witness of my assured well meaning mind
dedicated to your vvoorshyp altogether,) to record by my simple skill confirmed
with a^ple testimony of vvellnigh infinite, your vvelldeserued praise unto
posterity. wherein for your wonted goodness, and beneuole^ce accept in good
part my well vvillinge heart, and seclude me not from your favor passed. Thus I
leave troubling your vvorshippe whom to the great vvelthe and earnest
contentacion of all your country with many others confy^es, God of his goodness
preserve and increase in prefit health with abundaunce and felicity to his
plesour.

Your worships deep dettour. Nicolas Havvard,

THE LINE OF Liberality. The first Book.
Chapter. 1.
Among the number and those great vices with raygne among men that live
discorderly and are not guyded with the rule of Honesty, I dare well say
there is no one that breeds so much hurt as this: That we know not dewly
how to bestow upon others, nor to receive at others hands, such benefits
and plesures as either we do our selves, or else by others are done to us. By
mean whereof, it follows that benefittes euilly bestowed, are in like manner
euilly repaied and of such over late we complain when we find the^ not as we
would wish them recompensed. For those benefits account I as lost, which are
so bestowed without dew regard. And certes it is no whit to be merueiled at,
though among all the faults of men which in deed are exceeding great and
welnigh innumerable, there is not to be found any one ryfer and more in use
then unthankfulness: Ingratitude the m^st common vice and the cause why.
which undoubtedly I see does happen through diverse causes. The first and
chefest is, for that we have no respect on whom we bestow our benefits. But
if we were to lend money to any one, doutles we would enquere diligently before
hand, what manner of man he were, of what credyt and ability. Neither is any
plowma^ so unwise we se to sow his corn on ground which he knows to be
barren. But our benefits which far excel any other thing that we can give,
we bestow here and there without any consideracion before had, whether they
are dewly employed, and upon such as deserved the same or not. And verily I can
not say whether is more discortesie to be thought in him that is to be plesured
if he refuse a benefit when it is proffered, or in him that does the pleasour to
requier recompense for that which he has done. But if we mind to benefitte any
man, we ought before hand to conceive this good opinion of him, that with his
good will we shall at his hands receive as much commodity again if we need, as
we presently do unto him. Which hope conceived though we hap to fail to find
it satisfied yet is it a most dishonest and vile part to make complaint thereof.
For why, in him that is to discharge such credit conceived, it is not welthe
ne substance that are to be required, but only a mindful and thankful heart.
For he has sufficiently requited the benefitte which he has received at an
others hands, who willingly does acknowledge himself his debtour. But like as
there rests a fault in those which show themselves to be both in word and
deed unthankful, Uery unthankfulness, in word and deed and the causes.
forgetting utterly and refusyng to requite the plesures that have been showed
the^, so rises there oftentimes on our parts no small cause of this their
Ingratitude. For as we find diverse that are of their own natures
unthankful, so do we our selves make many Ingrat which otherwise parhaps
would not have been so. For sometime we cast in their tethe and vpbraid unto
them what we have done for them: and otherwhile we exact importunatly at their
hands, recompense for such benefits as we before have done unto the^.
Otherwhiles again we show our selves to be so inconstant of mind that
forthwith it repents us of the pleasure that we erst did. And thus
complaininge our case and chaungyng our minds in the torning of a hand, we do
not only disgrace the pleasour we before showed, and loose the thanks which
otherwise should have been dew for the same, but also we agreue greatly the
party to whom we did the same. For who is he almost that will show himself easy
to be entreated, or that would do any plesour to speak of, with only ones
being desired? The true descripsion of him that does no pleasour but by
importunat request.
Who is ^e that understanding that his Frind being in need would request any
thing of him, but either he bended the brows at it, or turned his face aside,
or feigned to have a thousand lettes and a thousand businesses otherwise? Or
who is he that by long process and manifest feigned excuse, has not sought
busyly to shift of the occasion of dealing for his frinde whereby he thought
he should be troubled, or has not devised a number of delays to dispatche
himself of such matters as have been urged upon him? To be short, who is he
that being very ernestly requested by his frinde to do him a pleasure, has not
long tracted the time before he would assume it on him, or else plainlye made
de^yall to do it. Or if haples his promys escaped him with much a do and
after long entreatye weryed, has not yet done the same with such doutes
casting and ceremonies using that far better it were to be quyte deuoid of his
such pleasour, then with such a do to have it? Now is there any man (judge
you) that has cause to think himself beholding to such one at whose hands
with hart-grutching he has been plesured, or that has benefited him to this
end only that he may brag thereof, or for that he would be ridd from being any
longar disturbed with such importunat suet? If there be any that thinks he
should account himself his dettour whom he has deluded with delays, annoyed
with attendance and weryed with scornful talk before he would plesour him,
he is much deceived. For plesures ought to be requited with like mind and will
as they are done^ and for this cause, is it requisite that they be not done
negligently. For each one ought to render both that which he received, and in
such order as he received it. Whereupon, who that has showed plesour after
long entreaty, or by constraint (as it were) is worthy after the same sort to
be rewarded. Wherefore the benefitte or plesour that is done, should not be done
slowly or with over great deliberacion. For as of each thing that is done, the
mind of him that does it declares the order how it is done so the benefitt
that is done slowly and with much requesting, Benefits ought not to be done
slowly and upon request.
argues that he who did it in such sort, refused long to do the same.
Neither ought plesures to be done iniuriousely and with reproach. For as by
natural reason those things persist longest and are of longest continuau^ce
which are engraven deeper in respect of them which have but a very light
imprint, so likewise injuries who naturally have a deepar seet then benefits,
parsist also longar and rifar in mind. What reward or guerdon may he justly
claym, that would seem to plesour a man, and yet in very deed works him
greuaunce and displesour? He does sufficiently acknowledge the plesour and
good that has been showed him, who confesses the same. And albeit that the
number of unthankful people be in deed very great, The multitude of ingrate
pleople should not make us y^ slower to do good^
ye^ ought we not (this not withstanding) to become any whit the slower or
less willing to do good. For first as I have said, we augment and increase
thereby the number of the^. Moreover w^ leave thereby to show our selves to be
folowers of the living God, who will not change (we see) his largess and
liberality for the hainouse offenses and sacrileges of such as contemn and
despise him, but e^tendeth his goodness still indifferently to those that are
such offenders as well as to the^ that offended not. For as his nature is to
do good to all men, (I should say to all things,) so with them y^ be good,
socoureth he also the^ which show themselves far unworthy thereof. Let us
therefore follow him as our guide, so far as our frail and weke nature will
parmit. Let us do good and succor others, and that without desiring usury
therefore. He is wourthy to fail of his purpose who does a benefit for this
cause only, yt he may repe the like again. But some one perhaps will say that I
am much deceived herein. To whom I answer thus. That albeit yt our wives and
children do often hap to frustrat and decei^e thexpectacio^ which we conceived
of the^, yet notwtstanding we may not cesse to foster and bring up our
children, nor seek therefore to be divorced from our wives. Again if it be so
y^ we arm our selves to endure the thorough trial of worldly affairs, and
that for no manner loss in battle, or wreck on sea, we faint to attempt
the same again, That we should persist on in weldoi^g.
of more strong reason the^ is it fitting and fit for us, to persist and
co^tinew on in our weldoings. From which if a man cesse ones for y^ he was not
rewarded for ye like he has done toforetime, it is to be presupposed y^ that
which he then did, he did it to no other end, but for that he hoped by doing
thereof, to reap the like again. Whereby right well he excuses thuntha^kfull
man, who for this cause only is accused, that he does not requite the plesour
that others have showed him. See we not how many there are in the world
unworthy to behold the brightness of the Son, and yet he casts his beams
as well upon them, as upon the good men. How many are there I pray you that
exclaim against nature, cursing her that ever she suffered them to be borne
into the world, and yet gives she of^pring to this unthankful sort that
wished erst not to have been, and for all their unkindness permits them to
live. It is the property of a stowt and princely courage, and of a worthy man
not to pursew and follow after the fruit and reward which follow benefits and
pleasure showed, but to regard the worthiness only or the same good deeds
themselves, so that though he happen to light upon some unthankful persons,
yet he dismayeth nowhit thereat, but seeks to bestow the residew of his
benefits upon such as will more thankfully accept the same. For in all this
world who is he that benefiteth a multitude, and among them all, finds not
some that will frustrate his expectacion? But upon this point depends the
force and efficacy of a benefitte, Wheri^ co^siste^h the force of a benefyt.
when the geuer thereof looks not after any reward for the same. Of which
benefit in such sort bestowed, a noble heart has thereby already reapt
sufficient recompense. Undoutedly it is so far unseemly that the want of
findyng plesour for the like showed should dismay us from perseuering in so
honest a thing, that out of question if I were exempt from all hope that I
should ever find any one that would bear in mind and acknowledge the plesour
which I should do to him, I would yet rather wish to find no one of my
plesures requited, then for any ingratitude that I might have showed me, I
would su^cesse from doing good wherein I might. For who that will not apply
himself to benefit others, is far worse to be judged of, then any unthankful
person. And to conclude, this is my opinion. He that neither will acknowledge
nor render the benefits which he has received, is no more to be blamed then
he that being requested refuses in dew time and season to plesour him that
stands in necessity.

Chap. 2.
Beneficia in vulgus cu^ largiri institueris,
Perde^da sunt multa vt semel ponas been.
Qui veult fair plaisir a plusieurs, pour vng coup
quil addressera bien, il perdra beaucoup.
Who that on a multitude pleasours bestows
For one that he geues well, a number shall louse.

Immesurable geuinge is comme^dable in no thing.
IN the first line immoderat and bestowing of plesours without dew regard before
had upon who^ they are employed, is reprehended. For indeed we should give
nothing after such a careless sort. But of our benefits especialy, we should
not be so lauash: for if they happen at any time to be given unadvisedly, and
without dew consideracion, forthwith thereby they lose the name of benefits by
dew right, and would rather be termed by some other name. The second line is
straung, as that which with the well bestowing of one only benefit and good
deed, recomforteth the grief which might happily grow by ye loss of a number.
Mark well I pray thee and tell me if it be not mete and agreeable with the
worthiness of him that may do good, that we exhort and move him thoroughly to
persevere in weldoing and plesouring of all men, notwithstanding that it be not
his chance to employ any of his benefits so, that he may think them well
bestowed. For verily I suppose that that is not to be much acompted of which
is in thend of the second verse (to wit) That he shall lose a number of his
benefits. For why no benefit is lost. For he who is to do any benefitte,
must beforehand when he minds to bestow any such benefit, make this
accomp^, that he looks not to receive any thing again for that which he is
to do. The reason which moves men to plesour one an other is plain and
single. Grutche not to bestow thie benefits. If he that does receive them yield
thee the like, take it for advantage. If thou hap not to find the like, but
contrariwise Ingratitude for thie benefits, yet art thou nowhit da^nified
hereby. For thou must thus think with thyself. That which I gave, I did it as
fully resolved and determined before hand to give it, and to that end that I
might account it given, without looking to receive any the like again. None
should note in his book of Reme^braunces the plesours and benefits which he
does to others. Benefit^s done should not be reme^br^d by him that did them
For the niggish and greedy usurer we see does not always object to his
dettour the very hour when his det was dew. The honest fra^ckharted man never
takes regard to the plesures which he has done, when they are ones past, nor
minds them any more, except he that received them by his acknowledging and
thankesge^ing revive the memory of them. For if he should otherwise do, and
requyer recompense (as I said) for them, then might they not justly be said to
be given, but lent as it were for a season only. And questionles there can be
none so foul and dishonest usury of any thing, as to look for recompense for
that plesour that ones has passed thee. Howsoever thou have been considered by
them to whom thou have heretofore done good, yet c^sse not thou to do good
still. And persuade thyself that those benefits are of all others best
bestowed, that are done to unthankful persons. For either shame, or the like
need, or fear shall at one time or other cause the^ to acknowledge the
benefits precedent, and show themselves thankful at length. Cease not
therefore to benefit still. Strayn thine ability: play the part of a good
manne. Help him with thine own goods. Aid him with thy word and credit.
Assyst that other with thy favor. Let him have thine advise. Give him some of
thy wholesome council.

Chap. 3.
THere is not one among the very brute bestes that has not perseverance of
such good as is done unto him^ Brute bests acknowledge good done to them.
Again, there is not one of them so wild and sauluage of nature, and hard to
be made tame, but diligence and pains taking with them, causes them to forget
wholly their old feritie, and love them that keep them. The Lions keeper may
handle him with such security, that without al peril he thrusts his hand
in his mouth. The Elephant of nature most hauty and crewel, to his Foster yet
humbles himself in most lowly wise. Somuche preuayleth and of such efficacy
are benefits, that the continual doing and renewing of them, makes the very
brute bests deuoyd of all Reason and understanding, keep them rife in memory.
The like effect whereof they shall also work assuredly in thunthankfull man.
Who though perhaps he forgot one good torn done to him, he will not so neglect
the second: or if he show himself to have sklenderly remembered those two, yet
dowtles the third shall enforce him too call to mind the former twayn which he
had erst forgotten. He may well be said to have lost the benefit which he
did, that forthwith thinks it lost so sone as he has done it. But he that
does persevere still heaping afresh new benefits upon them which he has
already done, shall enforce the receiver to acknowledge the same at one time or
an other, were he never so hard hearted or currish of nature For who that shall be
so ouerlayed with benefits shall not have the heart to lift up his eyes against
thee, but he shall forthwith condemn himself of In^gratitude, if he have not
dealt with thee accordyngly as he ought, which way soever he would turn him,
thy benefits shall be so rife before his eyes, that by no means he shall be able
to shake them out of mind. By thy good deserts and heaping on of benefits,
give him cause to think that he is thoroughly bound unto thee. Which benefits
of what force and effect they are to make good nature in any man, I shall
herafter declare, so sone as I have showed my fa^tasy in one point or two,
somewhat different from our matter in hand. That is to wit, For what cause it
is said that there are three Graces, Three graces.
wherefore thy are called sisters, why they go linked hand in hand, what is the
cause why they are always smylinge and of merry countenance, what is the
Reason why they are ever young. Finally wherefore they are virgins, attired with
their garments louse and vngyrt about them: and the same so thin that a man
may see through them. Of these three Ladies, called Graces, thopinion of some
is, that the first of them bestows benefits: the second receives the same,
and then third confesses the recept, and requiteth them. Others some there are
that by these three Graces, would signify three kind of benefytes. Namely the
benefits which are given: the benefits which are received, and the benefits
which are received and repayed, togethers. But whether of these two opinions is
worthiest to be allowed, it is not much material to examine, and for that I
will leave it at large vndiscust. Let us then see why these three Ladies whom I
called Graces, do still behold the one the other, and make a ring as it were each
holding other by the hand. Why ye.iii Graces hold one the other by ye hand
Uerely it is for this cause. The gift that passes from the geuer, if it keep
dew order from the one to the other, it retorneth again from him that received
it unto the geuer by dew ordely course. Which order if it be broken or any
whit discontinued, forthwith thereby should it lose all the worthy
commendacion which the said benefit should requier: like as we see if any of
these Ladies should louse hands, the facion of the King were broken, and
straight should lose that name. They are always smyling and merye
countenaunced, Whi they laughe.
for that they should represent to us thereby, that those that are of good
natures ought when they bestow benefytes which may sound to the furtheraunce
of others, no less to rejoice, and show themselves wellapaid thereat, then they
should do who are by them in such sort pleasured. Whi they are yo^g and Uirgins
They are always young, for this that the remembrance of benefits ought in no
wise to wax old or fade forth of fresh memory. Uirgins they are, for this
that benefits ought to be pure, incorrupted, not stained, and to be done
without constraint or enforcement. They were their garments louse, which are
so clear and thin that a man may see through, why they are so aparelled.
to declare that benefits would be also seen and not hidden. With those Ladies
Mercury is also by some associated as companion: not for that eloquence is any
whyt requisyt to commend the benefyt that is done, or the order of doing
the same, but only for that it so lyked the paynter to devise the same Chrisippus
to whom for his great subtilitie of wit diverse attribute no small praise for
that he so exquisitely accustometh to sift out the truth of things, applieng
al his whole talk to the matter he treats of, and that with no longer process
of words then is requisite for ye thoroughvnderstandyng thereof, has yet
stuffed his whole book full of these and such like table: so that he speaks
hymsel^e very little or nothing at all touching themployeng, receiving, and
rendering of benefits. In which his book, he does not only now and then use
these tales, but he does so thoroughly store it with them, that it sauoreth
almost of nothing else but of such trifles. For besides that which he writes
of Hecates, he reports also that these three Graces were Jupiters daughters
begotten upon Eurinome: in youth, comelines of countenance, and beawty most
excellent, and for this cause were they all three appointed to have the keeping
of Heaven gates, and to be attendant on the Lady Uenus. Moreover. Chrisippus in
his said book notes also that not without good cause their mother whom I
showed you of, was called Eurinome, who^ for that thinterpretacion of her name
shows her to be rich and of great ability, he feigneth therefore to
distribute benefits and fre^dly plesures. As though the mother of force must
be named after the qualities and conditions of her daughters, or else what name
soever the Poets plesed to attribute to any thing, was the very name of the
thing indeed.

Chap. 4.
BUt least I myself offend in that which before I objected against Chrisippus,
I will ouerpasse th^se things, which as they vary from our matter in hand, so
concern they it no whytt at all. For we have taken in hand to speak of
benefytes, and to give precepts of that which above all other things
knytteth and conioigneth the society of mankind together. We are I say to
prescribe rules and precepts for men to frame their lives by, least that
under color of courtesye some fall into excessive prodigality: and least
that others some by ouernere scauuing and heed taking in bestowinge of
benefits, The law of life ^s to show the way how to live and to be
conuersante among others.
should happen clean to extinct and lose the right way of liberality.
Which as indeed it ought not to exceed, so neither should it be overmuch
skanted, but to observe a just, dew, and lawdable mean. Touching which matter,
these are thinstructio^s that we give. That men accept thankfully such
benefits as are done unto them, The co^te^cion of honesty rests in geui^g,
taki^g and rendri^g benefits
and that gladlye in lykemaner they requite the same. We are moreover to
propose unto them a great contencion which ought to be between the geuer and the
receiver of benefits. Which is, that we should not content our selves to
render the like only of that which we have received at the hands of those that
have pleasured us, but that we should strive to excel them far in well
meaning and mind to plesour them again. And impossible it is that any man can
requite a good turn, except before hand he have found it. For which cause
they that do any plesures or employ any benefits, are to be advertised that
they make none account of their benefit after they have ones bestowed it, and
they that have received the same, to think themselves so much the more endetted
to them for so doing. Of which honest and commendable contention this is the
whole and thonly end: The right use of this co^te^cion.
to strive ernestly to over match and excel them at whose hands we have
found plesures, by doing gretter good to them theu we before received. To
which contending to match or rather excel our benefactours, Chrisippus in
like manner exhorts us. Saying that forasmuch as these Ladies Charites or
Graces (of whom I told you before) are Jupiters dawghters, we ought to account
it no small offense if we should commit any thing that might seem repugnant to
the natures of those fayer damoyselles. But here would I gladly O Chrisippus
that thou had showed me the mean and way how I might have become more
liberal by showing freendship and plesours, and more grateful to them that for
their goodness and benefits have well deserved at my hands. How the minds of
the plesurers and those that are plesured ought to contend. Again how they that
have benefited others should tread the remembrance of those their benefytes
under foot, without thi^king on them any more, And those who have received the
said benefits, how they should frame their memory to be always thinking on
the^ without forgetting. But as for those folish and fantastycall fables which
Chrisippus reports in his book so commonly, let us leave them to Poets whose
whole drift and meaning is given only to please and delight men's ears, Poets
common liars and flaterers.
and to devise pleasant tales. But they that purpose to cure evil disposed
minds, and to conserve faithfulness and honesty among men, and cause them to
call to remembrance without forgetting such benefits and plesours as are done
unto them, had need to order their words with good aduisement, to talk
ernes^ly, and chose to frame his tale with words of most weight and
importance. Unless you think that light and foolish talk, and old wives
tales be able to redress the cause and root from whense so great hurt and
mischefe is like to ^nsew, What hurt ryseth by Ingrati^ude.
that may well sound to the utter ruin and decay of the wh^le world. Namely
that a man should make no more account of him that has highly benefited him,
then he would of such one at whose hands he never found any kind of plesour,
or el^s that you suppose that this giving of precepts touching ye welgeuing,
receiving and rending of benefits is but a new found thing and of late
devised.

Chap. 5.
NOw therefore likewise as I passed over the things that were superfluouse, and
concerned not our purpose, right so it is requisite and very necessary that I
show the way how we shall learn to acknowledge the good and plesour that we
have received of others. For some one yt has at time of his need received
money at an others hand thi^keth that he owes that or so much money as he
received. one other being p^eferred to ye dignity of a Consul judges he
does owe ye enioyeng of his Co^sulship to him by whose means he was so
preferred. Some other being rewarded with a spiritual promocio^ supposes he is to
re^dre the same. Other like wise that by the procurement of some or other have
attained the rule and government of a Province, adscribe the same as dew to
that person at whose hands he received his said office. Indeed truth it is
that each of these who has received any such or like thing at an other bodies
hand, is to think himself of duty bound, and endetted for the same to them
at whose hands or by whose mean they had or received any such benefits or
plesours. Howbeit if we will nearly examine the nature of benefits, and list
to see what a benefit is, we shall then find that any those things above
named or any the like of them are not to be called benefits, but only the
signs and shows of benefits. Where is the very seat and pla^e of benefits.
For no benefyt may be handled with the hand, but has his seat and abiding
place in the mind alone. And there is great diversity between the benefyt it
self, and the matter or substance by which the benefit is represented.
Whereupon we must know yt neither silver, nor gold, nor la^d, nor offices, nor
fees, nor any thing else what soever our dearest frindes bestow upon us ought
to have the names of benefits, since as I said they consist only and wholly
in the mind of the bestower of them. Nevertheless the rude and ignorant people
suppose that thing only that is seen with the eyes, given with the hand,
subject to our senses, and in our possession, to be the benefyt^ And asfor the
freendly mind which indeed ought chefely to be had in price and regarded, that
weigh they nothing at all. Wherein howmuche they are deceived, each one may well
and easyly discern. For why, those things which we possess, which we see,
and whi^hewe so gredely hunt after, are very uncertain and transitory. The
mutabilitie of fortune, the danger of the time, the violence and force of
enemies may quickly bereft and deprive us of all these things. But the true
benefit still persisteth, and decays not, Benefits never decay.
no though all that perrish and be lost quite that was given us. That only
should be called a benefyt, which no violence, no force, no misfortune is able
to undo, pluck from us, or make frustrate. As by way of example. I reskewed a
frind of mine from Pirates and robbers on sea: and when I had delivered him on
this sort and was gone other enemies took him and cast him. In prison. In this
case, they that so took him deprived him not of the benefit which I did to
him, but the use thereof only, Again. I delivered a number of men from drowning
or burning. Of which company since that time, certain of the^ dyed by sickness,
certain of them by other mysfortunes ended their lives. I say yet
notwithstanding the benefit I did to them remains still and decaieth not, no
though the parties be dead themselves to whom it was done. Then appears it
that all those things which falsely abuse thapellacion or name of benefits,
ought rather to be called fre^dly tournes, or such things by which the
freendly mind does declare it self. The like whereof is to be gathered in other
matters, whereas otherwhiles a word is used only significatiuely to represe^t as
it were ye truth of things, by signification or color of sense, and otherwhiles
is usurped for the thing it self. As you may see here. The Chefetain of the
ba^d rewards such as he has approved valiant after the feat wherein he has
experimented his said valiauntnes so^time with a Chain or collar of gold,
otherwhiles with a garland properly appointed for such as give the onset at
skalynge the walls at any seege, Corona muralis.
and otherwhiles with a garland assigned to him that saves a Citisens life in
wars. Which either Chain or garland if a wan will consider apart by it self,
Corona Ciuita.
and not having any relacion to any farther thing, what great excele^cie or
preciousenes consists in them? What great magnificence or worship rests
there I pray you in the Senators gown trayling on ye ground, purfled and
embrowdred round about, if we consider it only in that it is a gown or has
this or that facion? There is no one of these that is the honor it self, but
the only signs and shows of honor. In like manner none of those can be said
a benefit that is discerned with the eye, but are only mere tokens of
benefits.

Chap^ 6.
THen may thou well demand of me what it is that I call a benefit. The true
descripsion whereof admit this to be. The discripsion of a benefyt.
A benefyt is a courteouse and friendly deed which being done gives cause of
rejoicing to others, and conceiueth pleasure it self in doing the same thing,
ready of it self without constraint to do that which it does: So that it
appears it makes no matter what the thing is that is given or done: For that
(as it is said.) The benefit consists not in the thing that is given or done,
but only in the mind of the geuer. And that there is a great diversity
between these twain, thou may easily know hereby. The benefyt always is
simply and of his own nature good. The heart al one commends al things
But the thing that is given or done, is of it self commonly neither good nor
evil. It is the mind that extolleth and commends things of small valor,
and of no regard, and disgrateth and quyte debaseth other some things of
estimacion and great price. The things which we seek and pursew after so
ernestlye, are of themselves neither good nor evil. The diversity of their
qualities ryseth only upon the minds of them that have the rule and
disposynge of the same: by which disposing, they purchase either their
commendacion or the contrary. Then may we thus conclude. That a benefit is
not that thing which is given with the hand. Like as things offered up in
sacrifice be the same never so fat and fair, or richely adourned with gold
and rich iewelles, yet the divine honor does not rest nor consiteth in any
of the same oblacions, but only in the well meaning and disposed minds of
the sacrificers. For the immolations and offringes of godly, devout, and
weldisposed persons God accepts well and in good part be the gift never so
simple. Yea though it were but a courtsye of Corn and that in an earthen
vessel, whereas wicked men shall not escape the punyshement of their impiety
and the revenge thereof, no though they offer up never so plentiful and the
same rich sacrifices.

Chap. 7.
FOr if it were so that benefits consisted in the things which are given,
Simple things given with a goodwi^ more acceptable then rich gifts with
gru^chyng.
and not in the mind of him who gives the same, then should it also follow,
that lok how much greatter in valewe the thing is that is given, so much
gretter should the benefit be to be accounted of. But that is untrue. For
somewhiles we are more beholding, and to think our selves depelyer bound to
him that gives us things but of small value, whose goodwill notwithstanding
ought to be more dear to us and higher in estimacion then any the great
abundance and riches of Princes. For admit that his gift was but simple, his
heart yet was magnificent and liberal, in that he regarded not his own
poverty, he was so glad he had to serve my great want presentlye. Wherein he
declared himself not only to mean well to mewarde, but also to have an
earnest zele and desire in himself to declare and accomplish the same In which
his weldoing, he seems to take delight, bestowing those his benefits as one
not loking or hoping after any Recompense, more then if he had given me no
whyt at all. But of his own accord seeks to find and take occasion to
proffit and plesour me. On the other side (as I have said before) these things
are neither pleasant nor acceptable which though of themselves they seem to be
of great value and price, yet they are not without great entreaty, and
importunate seute and request obtained at the hands of the grau^ters, or else
which by chance and unadvisedly escape them. But far more thankefully is
the little simple gift to be received, given with assured goodwill and franckly,
then is plenty and afflue^ce given with grutching and repining. For why, in
such case thus may I say. Truth it is: that which this man has given me is
but a small thing, but wayeng his ability, he is much to be commended, for he
gave it me with a very good will: and besides, his welthe could not extend to
give me any thing of gretter value. Again, the present of that other. I
confess was very much and of great price, but with what distrust did he it
and long delay, and how much did he repent him after that he had done it? He
did it for vain glory only, and to thend he might triu^phe over me, and
report to others how much he had plesoured me, and in what necessity I stood
of his help. So that good cause I have to persuade myself that he did it not
for good will, and earnest love, or affection he bare to me, but to blase
abroad his own name and take occasion so to do at my necessity. Who that to
this end bestows his benefytes, I say he does not only deserve notes to be
accounted liberal, but rather an evil natured niggard.

Chap. 8.
A notable example of liberality of one having nothing to give gave hi^ self.
ANd for proof that small gifts given franckely and of a mere good will deserve
gretter commendacion far, then richer and costlier gifts which are bestowed
with difficulty and evil will, this notable example may make proof abundantlye.
Socrates that worthy and famous Philosopher being accustomed to reed
publicly and give precepts of good government, had repayring to his said
Lectour a great and populouse audience. Among whom there were both rich and
poor. It fortuned that his scollers with a common concent on a time concluded
among themselves that each of them after their ability in token of their
goodwills toward their said master, should present him with little or much,
which they did. Eschines one of the company in wealth far unequal to the
residew as he that had utterly nothing, and yet in good will to gratifye his
master not inferior to any the best, when he saw every one of his
companions to give unto Socrates their master presents of great Price, came
with a merry chere also to Socrates, and said. Sir in all this woorlde have I
nothing that I may present thee withal. Whereby I acknowledge easily my great
poverty. Howbeit in all this hard extremity, that only one gift which I have
to give, I make present with. Namely mine own person. Which simple present I
beseech thee accept in so good part as I now wilingly offer the same to thee,
persuading thyself that though my companio^s here have indeed richely presented
thee with gifts, yet has each of them left himself far more in store then
he has here departed withal. Whereas I have given thee all without reserving
to myself any whytte at all. To whom Socrates as thankefully aunswerynge
said. And why? Think thou not that thou haste also given to me a great
present? Unless thou make none acco^p^ of thyself being in state as thou now
art, wherefore assure thyself that I will restore thee to thyself far bettered
then I now received thee. Lo by this gift allmoste of no vallew, did Eschines
far surmount the bountiful heart of Alcibiades who was no less gentle and
courteouse then welthye. And in Socrates judgment passed the largess and
munificence of all his young companions.

Chap. 9.
HEreby may you well see that a noble mind is able to find out matter whereby
he may declare his liberality, even in the extremity and narowest straytes of
al his poverty. In which case Aeschines (me seems) might well have said thus.
A hard and cruel Fortune. Yet have thou gained nothing herby that thou haste
made me thus poor. For though I have nothing of thine wherewith I may worthily
or at all present my master, I will not yet let to do my dewty, but I will
now do it of mine own. And yet should noman think that he accounted nothing
of himself for that he presented so himself (as is said,) For hereby the wytty
young man found occasion to bind Socrates to him after a sort. So that (to
return again to our purpose) it appears that it is not the excellency or
value of the gift which is to be regarded, but the heart with which it is
given and the order of the doing thereof. The hawty and curious Courtiars who
are in office, ^he courtyar.
and by mean thereof have that seek unto them, will hardly and with much a
do be spoken with of their sewters about any matter of weight, and yet when
they are spoken with, they fode fourth selly folks with many fayer words and
bare promesses, which in thend stands them in very small or no stead. And
yet of a far worse nature judge I him to be, that with opprobriouse and crewell
words, with a churlish and frowninge countenance vttred after a dispytefull
sort, displayeth what he has done for this man or that. For therehens comes
it that although we see the poor outwardely make a face and show of goodwill
toward the Rich, yet inwardly they hat^ them in their hearts to the death.
And that altogether for their fortune. And yet diverse there are of them that
hate one an other for doing some things which they that reprehende them
perhaps would do, if they were in like power and authority. Few there are
but emproue their Lands to thuttermost to maigntaine their own avarice. They
regard nothing but despice othermennes poverty, and seek to the uttermost all
ye means they can how to shonne it themselves, fearryng nothing else but
falling into penurye. For redress and preventing whereof, they cesse not to
molest their underlings and inferiors, oppressynge their poor tenauntes,
always vexing them that are not able to make resistaunce, and keeping them
down still with might and mayn. And yet what can a man well say against some
such pilling of provinces and making the uttermost of such offices as thou
have thyself paid derelye for, seeing that the Common Law among men which
proce^eth and is grounded upon natural reason permits thee to sell again
the thing that thou bowghtest.

Chap. 10.
BUt lo the grief to see things so much disordred has caused me to straye
father from my matter in hand the^ I thought to have done, for that sufficient
matter to talk of, still offered it self. Wherefore for this time I make here
an end, for fear least I deduce the like cause of blame to these our days.
Our ancestors and forefathers have complained them of this hertofore: Cause
of co^plainte upon naughtines has not wanted in old time.
we our selves at this present find us agreued thereat, and I fear very much
that our posterity shall have like cause to be wayle them to see that good
conditions and honest manners among men are so corrupted, that naughtines has
altogether got their places: and that wordly affairs fall out each day worse
and worse with somuche evil that allmose there can be no more. And now are
these things rooted so, and settled as it were in this state, that lykely they
are so to continue and hold on still, only now and then perhaps they may
chance to be tossed to and fro a little, like the waves of the sea: which when
they have for a season, been still and quiet with in the shore, if there happen
to rise a sudden flaw or a sharp pyrry of wind, straight way they work
aloft and toss up and down for the time. So may it chance to fare with these
evil conditions of men. For as the times do alter and channge, right so
follow they. Somewhile shall ye see Daliaunce and bodily pleasure bear chefest
sway: eftsoon again unmeasurable festing, ryotous banqueting, and superfluous
feeding shall play his part. Sone after shall all they be exiled forth of
place, and then none shall rule but sumptuous apparelling and trimming the body
with costly arraye. And more then effeminat painting and prankyng the visage,
the most certain argument of the fowlenes and deformity of the mind with
wastful profusion and spending of large patrimonyes and ample enheritaunces.
Again before a man would almost think it could be so, all these vices are
quyte shut up as if they had not been, and Tyranny only takes place, then
fall they to Civil wars, whereby all holy things are profaned, Laws and
good order quite extinguished, goodness and god lines wholly abolished.
Dronke^nes for a time bears the bell. And it shall be deemed a vertew in him
that shall bear most drink. So that a man may see, that vices neither
continue always in one stay: but as they are altogether deuoyd of
stedfastnes, and at variaunce among themselves, so they force one to give an
other place. So that we may well pronounce of our selves to our great shame
and reproach, that we have been evil, that we are evil and that we are like
(it greueth me much to say it) to be evil still. For why, there shall not
fail to be among us from time to time, manquellars, tyrants, thieves,
adulterers, encrochers of other men's goods, committers of sacrilege, and
traitors as well hereafter, as heretofore, and at this present. And yet
Ingratitude ought no less to be detested then any the vices that I have named
before: Ingratitude the ro^e of al vices.
as that from whense and by which, all those others do proc^de and have their
rooting. Without which it is impossible that any evil could spri^g and take
his increase at full as it does. Wherefore, each one shun and flee it as ye
horriblest vice that may happen to any man. And yet if it be thy fortune to
byt upon any that shows the Ingratitude: Ingratitude the greattest vice that
may be done, and ye lightest that may be suffered.
forgett and forgive it still, as the lightest fault that thou may find among
all others. For the grettest loss that ca^ happen to thee hereby, pardy is but
the loss of thy benefit only. And yet he to whom thou did it, can not
accuse thee that thou pleasouredst him not, which is the commendablest thing
that may be, and deserves most praise. For as we should diligently in
plesouring of al men, especially have regard to do it to them that we judge
will prove thankful and acknowledge it wilinglye again, so ought we not to
make restraint of benefitinge those whom already we know precisely they will
prove unthankful: and that by proof had of them in times past. As suppose tha^
it lay in me to restore to any manne his Children, whom (to do it) I must
reskew with great peril and danger: I ought no whytte to stycke at the doing
hereof, unless I were to sustain assured lie great harm and hindraunce thereby
myself. And asfor him that I know worthy to he plesoured by me, I may in no
case refuse or lingar to do it, were it so that I should spend my blood and
adventure my life for him. And asfore him that I know assuredly unworthy to
who^ I should do any plesour, yet if I saw him in danger of thieves, The
perfect trial of a liberal heart.
and that by my outcrye I might save him and deliver him from them, I may not
stick to cry as lowed as possiblye I can for his such safegarde.

Chap. 11.
The manner how me^ should do their benefits
NOw follows it that we show what those benefits be that we should do the
one to the other, and how we should do the^. First of all the things which
we ought to give, should be such as be necessary to him to whom we give them.
Secondly they should be profitable, Thirdly acceptable and such chieflye as
are of longest continuance. It behooves then that we begine with those
things that are necessary. Which are divided into two sorts, under the one of
which, are contained those things which conserve ma^s life. Under the other,
are included those things which do well govern the same and cause it to be
of long durance. For among men ye shall find some that will wake but small
account of the recept of such benefits as are transitorye and of no
continuance, One as evil as an ingrate person.
and others some shall ye find which disdain to receive any benefitte at an
other bodies hand: saying. It suffices me that I have of min^ own: I am well
enough contented therewith, I will not trouble my self with any more to endet
or endaunger me withal. By which means he refuses not only to render the
thanks and courtesy dew for ye offer of plesour made to him, but with
shameful desdaigne rejects the same. A division of benefits.
Farther it is to be understood that emonge the necessary plesours which men
may do the one to the other, there be certain degrees, of which some are
principal as those without which we can not live: some next them and second
as it were, as those without which we can not live well: and other some third,
as those without which we will not live. Of the first sort are these. To be
delivered from the hands of our enemies, from the fierce crueltye of Tirantes,
to be saved from exile, and sentence of loss of goods and Lands, Causes why
benefyts seem the gretter.
and other such like dangers, which as they are indeed very great, so is our
life on each side assaulted with the same. And these I say are of that nature
that how much gretter and more perillouse they seem to be, Causes by which
our benefits may some ^^e gretter.
and thereby causers of gretter fear, so much the more shall they who are
delivered from them, think gentleness in us ^y whose means they are so
dispatched from the same. For why, the great fear which they were in, shall
make the benefytte when they find it, seem to them much the gretter. In
which behalf, we may if the cause will conuenientlye bear it without damage
or detriment to be sustained by the party so endaungered, some what delay the
speedy doing of the plesour to thend thapparant show of the danger, may cause
him both to account better, and bear in mind the longar, the benefyt when it
is showed. The benefits which occupy the second place and degree, are those
without which we may after a sort live, but yet so, that we were better dead
then lyuinge in such manner. As to be barred of liberty, to be deprived of good
name and fame, to lose a man's senses and wits, and others such like. In
which degree may be no^bred also al such things as by affinity of blood, by use
or long custom do become dear to us, as our fri^des, our wives, our Children
and such like things to which our mind is so tenderly affectionat, that it
seems to us less grief to los^ our life, then to depart with any the things
before mentioned. Next after these, as it were in the third place succeed those
things that are profitable. which part extends very large and includes a
very great multitude of things, as money not superfluous or excessif, but
competent and reasonnable s^muche as may mainteigne us in good state of life.
Hitherto are also referd prefermentes of honor, or attainment of any higher
degree. And among all the things that are accounted profitable, there is no one
better then for a man to endeavor to adu^untage and profit himself. Asfor all
other things which are not so necessary for man's life as the above named
things are, when they are had, they breed but superfluitye and excess, which
brings men to a certain wantonness and hauty mind. But the things which we
mean, and of which we now do entreat, we ^u^ht to show profitable plessours.
rest in this point cheefelye, that for the commodiousenes of the time and
place wh^che they serve, they may well seem to be pleasant. And again that
they be such as be not common to every man. For by diligent notyng of these
circumstau^ces, as time, place, person, and thing presented, we shall stand
well assured that lightie we shall neither give nor send to any man that
thing that shall be either superfluous or not acceptable. As to send books to
a rusticall person and unlearned, or nets to a studious man and one
altogether addicted to his boks, seem both gifts not fit, for that they are
not agreeable with the qualities and natures of them to whom they are sent. In
like manner behooves it that we send no such presents to any man that the
present may smell to touch any vice or infirmitye of his to whom we send the
same. Things to be noted in sending presents.
As to send wine to one that we know will lightlye and commonly be drunk:
and plasters and salues to him that is much given to sickness, or troubled
with sores. For in so doing we shall quyte disgrace our present, and forne good
will which we would seem to seek. Wholly into disliking, for that the
party may (after a sort) seem to be put in mind by our said present of the
vic^ which well enough he knows to be in him.

Chap. 12.
Wherefore if we will do any plesour or else bestow any benefit upon any man,
above all other thing we shall seek to do it by things of longest
continuance, to this end that o^r said gift, and the memory thereof may
continue the longar. For there are very few that be of so good nature to bear
still in mind the plesour that has been showed them, if it be not still tofore
their eyes. But those that are very forgetful and unthankful, Untha^kful and
forgetful me^
the present remaining of the benefyt before their sight which has been
bestowed upon them, shall not permit them to be forgetful, Gift^s ought to be
o^ longest contin^au^ce
but of force shall cause them, by beholding the same forthwith to remember who
it was that did them that benefitte. Therefore in seekynge to do plesour it
behooves us to do it by things of longest durance. To this end that by the
continuance of the thing given, the memory of the geuer may also remain so
ryfe, that we shall not need our selves to vpbrayde them therewith again, to
who^ we have done any such benefits: For better it were that the gift it
self should revive the remembrance thereof, when haplye it doith decay, then
the geuer by reportynge it himself, should disgrace his said gift. And asfor
me if I were to give goods, rather would I chose to give it Bullion or plate,
then Coin. Sooner would I give costely Images and Pictures of wood or stone,
then a gown or other garment of small continuance and lasting, which quickly
fades with the time. For there are a number of people who remember the gift of
any thing no longar while, then the use and occupacion of the same endures.
For which cause I would not if I might chose, give such a thing that should
pass over so lightly and come to nothing, but would do it by such things as
by the same still remaining before their eyes the remembrance of the plesour
they found by my means, they might continue fixed and rooted (as it were) in
the heart of them to whom I did such plesour. For as there is noman I guess so
void of understanding, and deprived of his senses, that would give light and
thin summer gowns in cold winter, or thick furred gowns for summer, So does
it behoue in employeng of benefits and freendly plesours to way diligently
both the time, the place, the nature and qualities of the person. For certain
it is that there are some times, yea and some minutes and instantes of time, in
which some things are plesaunt and acceptable, which self same things at some
other season, are as much displeasaunt and vncommendable. Who sees not what
great diversity there is between these twain. To give the thing that no man
else has at that time, and to give that whereof then presentlye each man has
abundauntly. Again to give that which a man has long sought after and could
not find, Things rare most acceptable.

Omne rarum charum.


and to give that which in every place with out traue^l one may have
pl^ntifully: It appears then that it does not skill so much how dear and
valewable the gifts are, as it does, how rare and e^celle^t they are, whereby
they purchase no small thanks even among the richest sort. As for example. A
few sorye apples which are timely ripe before any else in any other place,
we see what merueilouse great thanks the geuer gets for the nouelty of
them, when as within a short while after, a great multitude of them are not
worth godamercies, whereas before they were taken in better stead then if they
had been things of double value.

Chap. 13.
A notable example of arroga^cy and pride
ALexander king of Macedonye who for his innumerable and those great conquestes
was surnamed the great, as he returned one time victorious from the east parts
homwardes, was so pu^fed up with pride and insolence, that contemnyng to be
called any more a man, having deserved as he thought more then any man, began to
parswade his army, and charge them to. To honor him as a God. Which his good
and fortunat success each country frind and in legue with him seming to
rejoice at sent some under the name of the whole, to meet him as he returned,
and to present him with one thing or other. Among others, thinhabita^tes of the
City of Corinth to declare their unfeigned rejoicing at his good fortune, sent
ambassadors also under the Cities name who in toke^ of their faithfullnes
should signify to him that the Corinthians were contented to assume him into
the number of the Burgeses of that their City. When Alexander had heard the
tenor of their message, and scorned their offer, as nothing in respect of his
magnificence, one of thembassadours mildly answered. What Ale^ander, why
make thou so light of this our offer? Never was ye like made yet to any,
saving to Hercules and now to the. Which when Alexander understood, he accepted
with great thanks the offer as honor, which ye Corinthia^s made unto hi^, and
gave as courteous entertaineme^t to thembassadors as possible he might. Howbeit
he regarded not ye simplenes of the^ yt did him ye honor, but in thassuming of
the same so tha^kfully, respected only ye worthiness of hi^ yt he was partener
made wtall, which was Hercules Thus may you see he was altogether addicted to
pursew honor whereof notwithstanding he knew neither the true way nor mean
to attain there to, but followed thexample of Bacchus, whose mind was so
houen up with pride, that he was some way matched with Hercules, that forthwith
he thought he should reche the heavens and there join with Hercules also, as
he did at Corinth. Uery ma^hod.
But behold how unfit matches th^se twayn were. For Hercules never delight^d
to spoil any place. He went through the woorld too. But not for any
covetousness or desy^r that he had to get any part thereof to himself, or any
whit that he coueted that any part thereof should be subject to him, but only
for the zeal he had to revenge the iniures of them that without desert were
afflicted, and to redress the tirannye of naughty and cruel oppressors. A
defendour he was of them that were good, and a pacifier of troubles both on sea
and land. But Alexander even from his very youth trained himself in showing
and doing oppression: a decayer and utter despoyler of all contreyes where so
he became. An utter destruction as well to his Frindes as his enemies. Reposynge
his only felicity in making himself to be dread of all me^.

Chap 14.
BUt let us now return again to our purpose. The good or plesour which is
done to all men in common and a like, plesour general to al men is acceptable
to no^ in private
deserves singular thanks of no man privately. For why there is no cause why
any manne should yield great thanks to any vintner or ordinary tabler of
gestes, for that he had wine of him, or dyned with him. For he may well say in
this case. What great plesour has any of those (I named) showed me for any
the thing^s specified? He has done me herein no more plesour then he would do
to his enemy or the most dishonest parso^ of the world. For to what end did
he show me the frendlines which he did, but only to serve his own turn?
That thing therefore which thou geuest, and would have taken in good part
and well thought of, let it in no wise be such as thou do commonly and to
many. And yet would I not that any man should think I speak these things
as though I would make any restraint of liberality. But yet must it be so
done, that it may seem to keep the right way, and that it purchase not
reproach to the geuer. It is lawful to give every where. And yet who that
receives a benefitte in the open face and presence of a multitude, ought not
therefore to deem less well of the gift as though the presens of the others
were any whyt a disgracinge to it. Again, it does behoue each manne to have a
good persuasion with himself, and to think that although others be benefited
as well as he, and that at his hands who benefited him, yet that he did it with
a better will to him then to the rest. As thus I confess I have received but
the like benefytte or plesour that this other has done, howbeit it came to his
own mocion that which he did to me and without any request of mine. He
showed such one the like plesour as he did to me, but yet he did it quickly
to me and without delay, whereas that other had it not with out desert, and
that of long time to. Many bestow sundry things to several parsons, and yet
not to each man after one sort Fort to some it is done upon light request, and
to^ some upon long entreaty. To some upon condition that they shall do the
like again when they are required thereto. And to othersome for that old age
and wantte of children of their own on whom they might bestow their plesours,
easily persuaded them to do it there where they did. But who that would have
his benefits and the plesures which he is to do to diverse, acceptable and
well accounted of by each of the^, must find the means how to deserve a like
well of them all, and to cause that each of them in his own persuasion may
think himself preferred and esteemed above the residew. I would be loath to seem
to hinder the benefits and plesures that any man is minded to do what soever
they are. But this wot you well that how much greatter and magnificent the
benefits are, so much the greatter honor and commendacion shall they
purchase to them that do the same. And yet must a man use discrecion in giving.
For benefits which are done rashly and without consideracion, Regard to be
had in bene^iting.
can by no means be either plesaunt or commendable. So that when I council
that these things be used wisely, with moderacion, and dew regard, if any one
there be that for that thinks that I prescribe bounds and limits to
Liberality and restrain the same, and not to augment and, encrese it rather,
verelye he does not understand these my precepts aryght. For what vertew I
beseech you should we have in gretter price then this? Or to what vertew should
we parswade people unto, rather then unto this, which continues and lynketh
together the society of mankind?

Chap. 15.
HOwbeit as there is no honest vertew of the mind that is rooted and grounded
aryght, what plesour is well employed.
unless the same be ruled and governed by Reason, so is there no benefit rightly
and dewly employed, except the same be done with moderacio^ and discrecio^.
Wherefore I would not advise ne counsel any manne to be ^uerlauash and
prodigal in bestowyng his benefits, sekyng thereby to purchase the name of
liberality. For that benefit is well bestowed, and deserves to be lyked of
all men, when he that does the same, does it with advise and imployeth it upon
him that deserved the same. We our selves willingly would not accept benefits
at each man's hand, for fear least we should not be able to make ame^des
thoroughly as we would, for all such benefits as happly might be bestowed
upon us. Noman calls that a benefitte whereof he is ashamed to confess the
Author. Crispus Passiona was wont to say that there were some to whom he
would repayer for their judgment, good advise, and council, rather then for
their benef^tes. ^ wittye ^^yinge.
And again that there were othersome of whom he would rather accept their
gifts then their council: and expressed their names. I would rather (quod
he) have the good and sage advise of Augustus then of Claudius.

And rather would I wyshe to find the munificence and lyberalitie of Claudius
then the same of Augustus. But in mine opinion a man should not make any
great account of the benefitte that such one does to him, whose judgment
is but of small regard. Why then may you say Should not a man accept the
benefitte that Claudius gives? Yes verelye that shall he do. But yet he shall
way of it as of a thing coming by chance only, which a thou wottest well
is lyghtlye variable from good to evil. What means it then that we join
these things in such order that the one of them may not seem to be parfit
without that other? It is assuredlye for this cause. There can not be any
thing ryghtlye said to be a benefitte, that wants the better part which
yt should have. (That is to say) iudgegemente and discrecion.

And thereof it follows that if any man have given thee a great sum of money
and has not done it with good will and as a benefyt should be done, it is
no more to be accounted for a benefit, then if by chance or good fortune of
thine, thou should happen to find any treasure. So that it appears that we
must yet receive some things when they are proffred us, for which not
withstanding we are not any whit to think our selves to rest endetted.

The second Book of the Line of Liberality.
Chap. 1.
LEt us then consider that which follows next upon the first part of this
book. Now we should plesour others.
That is to say, after what sort we should do our benefits. For the parfitte
knowledge whereof, (as me seems) I can not show an easier or more brief way
then to say That we should benefit and plesour others after the same manner and
in such sort as we would desyer our own selves to be pleasured at others
hands. Whereby it follows that we must do it willinglye, quickly, and that
without stay or tariaunce. For that benefit^e or plesour is not acceptable
that has lyngred long time in thandes of the geuer, which argues that he did
it with grutchynge and evil will, and that it was by violence and perforce (as
it were) gotten at his hands. In like manner he that in doing of a pleasour,
doubts whether he were best to do it or not, is next neyghtbour to him that
plainly denies to do it, and deserves at al neither commendacion nor
thanks therefore. For like as in any benefitte bestowinge, there is not any
thing that commends the benefitte so much as the unfeigned good will of him
that gives the same, so must we say that who that by his delays has
declared that he did it with evil will can not be said to have done it
trewlye, and as it ought to be, but for that he could not longar withholde it.
But those benefits are ind^ed commendable which are sone redye, Which
benefits are most commendable.
which are easily obtained, and prevent the expectacion of him on whom they
are bestowed, and in which there is used no manner of delay. Which who that
will do aryght and as they ought too be, must frame himself to examine and
understand the natural desyer and appetite of them whom he would plesour:
and when he has so learned it, straight ways bend himself to serve their
said desyer. For far better is it that we prevent their need by geuyng,
then to stay geuinge until we be asked. For that many very honest natures
are bashefull. And so ashamed to ask that they would rather want the pleasour
that they need, then they would demand it. Now he that with free genynge of
his own accord, delivers any such from that blushing bashfullnes, deserves
double thanks and recompense for his such gift. But he that is driven to ask
and request any thing before he can have it, though he than obtain it,
Nothing so dear bought^s that is bought^ with entreaty.
yet can he not be said to have it freely and for nothing, although he give
no more for it. For as diverse our ancestors and those wise and sage men
men have thought, there is nothing de^elyer bought, then that which is
obtained by entreatie. Were it so that every request that men should make,
were to be made openly and in the face of a multitude, dowtles peticions would
not bemade so rifely as they are. For not somuche as the prayers which we make
to God, but so near as we can we de^ier to make them in secret.

Chap. 2.
A benefit done upon request comes to late.
IT is a grievous and strange word, and such one as is not vttred without
blushynge and skant daring to look in the face of him to whom it is spoken,
to say I pray or beseech you. The need or cause of using which word should
not he given to any frind, or him whom through thy good deserts thou would
make thie frind. There is none but does that plesour to late which he does
upon request, let him dispatch then never so spedilye. Wherefore we must so
near as we can, conjecture each man's desyer and imagine their need: and those
known, of our own accord deliver the^ from that urgent extremity of their
need without any their request. That benefitte most tha^kefull yt is done
without request.
For that benefyt is acceptable plesaunt, and longest will continue in the mind
of him to whom it is done, which preuenteth his asking. And if it fortune that
by no means we can prevent but we shall be request^d, yet must we cut of and
abridge the abiding of many words at our frindes hands, and being long
entreated, that yet by that speed making we may seem as though we had not
stayed to have been desired. And so sone as we understand ones the effect of
their minds, we must yield our selves with speedye grant to do it. For by
that hasty dispatche, we shall yet somewhat give them to understand that we
had a will to have done them plesour even before any their request made. For
in like manner as meat given in dew season is able to be dygested by him that is
very sick, and as water given in time convenient often serves the turn of
costlier medicine, A pre^ye similitude.
right so the benefitte be it never so simple, yea and common withal, yet if
it be redely done and willynglye, and in the very nicke (as a man would
say) it deserves gretter thanks, and is far more to be esteemed, then is
the benefitte of gretter value lingr^d forth long, and done with pawsyng and
delay: For dawtles who that does any plesour with pawsynge, and long
deliberacion, is never to be said to do the same with a free heart and
willynglye. Again who that doith it gladlye, his very countenance will
declare how willing he is to do it.

Chap. 3.
THe slacknes of a number and sparing to speak, Want^ of speaking bredeth want
of speeding
and their using sometime of a superfluous straungenes, is the cause why
oftentimes they want sundry plesours which haplye for the speaking they might
find at others hands. And again the lowering and sever countenaunces of some
when they do promise plesures, cause many of the^ to who^ they do so promise,
to conceive and think therein half a denial. O how far more commendable were
it to join plesaunt words with ye plesures which thou will do, and to commend
thy beneficence with courteous language? As if thou met with one who either for
simplicity or want of audacitie would gladlye have this or that plesour at thy
hands, and yet his heart fails him to prefer his own cause to thee, and
makes his substitute and spokesman, thou may freendly and gently pick this
quarrel of unkindness to him. As to say, well I am not well content that you
would not by your self do me to understand of this or y^ pleasour yt you
would me to do for you but make others your solicitours. And ^et godamercies yt
you would find some way and take some occasion to make proof of my good will to
you ward. Wherefore know you that from henseforth wherein I may stand you any
ways in stead, in any reason you shall command me, and for this one time I
pardon your bashfullnes. By this means shall thou make him whosoever he be, to
esteem more of thy frendlye gentleness, then of all that, be it never so much
that he would request of thee. Then shall the unfeigned benevolence and the
undoubted courtesy of the geuer be manifest and plainly appear, when he that
came to make request, after his departure shall have just cause to say to
himself, verily I thank God, this day have I made a passing good mart.
True acknowledgi^g of good will
Assuredlye it rejoices me no less, but does me as much good that I found him
so tractable. As the thing which I have obtained would have done, if it had
been far more valewable and gotten with great a do. Undowtedly I take
thought how I shall be ever able to render dew thanks and sufficient for his
pssynge gentleness.

Chap. 4.
BUt th^re ^^e a number of so froward and nawghtie natures, The woorst kind
of nature that do good.
yt through their sharp and bitter words annexed to their benefice^ce turn
the thanks which should and would ensewe the benefits they have done, into
mere malice, hatred, despite, and disdain. And by such their oultrage and
over thwart words, cause the^ that have received the same plesures, to repent
them of ever seeking to them, and much to be sorye that it is their hap to
have found that benefit at their hands, and to wyshe rather to have failed of
it, then by it to be laid at so, with such crooked language. Again, some
others three be contented to make promise of plesour showing: but when they
have promised, they stay very long before they will perform it. And surely
there is no one thing that cutteth a man more to the gall, then to be forced
still to entreat as it were ane^^, for that whereof long before he had the
government and promis at full. Diverse there are at whose hands with more
difficulty and pain a man shall get the bare doing and dispatch of a matter,
then he shall at some others obtain the gift or gou^rneme^t of a matter or sewt
it self, Better and easier leuyng to ye head ^he^ to the fet.
and that of weight. This man must be entreated that he will but put his master
in mind, and solicit the matter. That other must be desired that he will
dispatche and do that which his master has granted, yea and commonly these
will not spend so much as their speech a little, without great Fees, whereas their
master, for the thing it self granted requires nothing, but does it gratis.
Thus when so many are to be entreated and sewed unto, about thobtaininge of one
self thing, each one that comes after the first grauntour diminishes
parcel of the thanks which otherwise should wholly redound to th^^lye first
grauntour. And when on plesour passes through so many hands before it has
his perfection, it happeth oftentimes that the least part of plesonr is his
that requested it as a plesour^ wherefore if thou would do a plesour and
would have it accounted of as a frindly plesour, then in any wise see it be
not such that shall come from hand to hand be tossed from post to pillar, and
pass the pickes (as the proverb is) but yt it comme wholly from thy self and
that immediately, to the^ to who^ thou woldst show such plesour. For there is
none yt can get any thanks by the gift which thou geuest, but of force it
must lessen somewhat of that which otherwise should have been wholly dew to
thy self.

Chap. 5.
Long delay brede^h werynes.
THere is nothing that breeds so great gryef or is such a corosif to a man,
as to be long foded fourth with wanne hoppe, and in fine fail of his purpose
also. For few there are but had rather be abbridged of their hoping with a flat
denial at ones, then to be lingered forth with fayer promises, and find no
deeds when all is done. But there are a multitude which of set purpose and
for vain glory they have to be sewed to, will readily make fayer and faithful
promises enough, fearing least their number of sewtours would else perhaps decay,
Folish pride.
and so the blasoning of their authority should fail, if there were not a
number who with their painful and harmeful to themselves dancing of
attendaunce might record and testify it to them that see it. Such are many
officers in Court, and diverse other placed in authorytie and rowme about
Princes and other Lords of honor. Who repose no small point of glory to
rest, in manifestinge and making their pride to be apparent, persuading
themselves it were quite dashed, unless the multitude of seely following
sewters should show their authority. Like glorious Pecockes boasting only in
their tail. The injuries and wrongs that such list to off^r are ready enough:
but the pleasures which they show, so slack and faint, that their feet are
not able to bear them forward. They never will dispatche any one sue^ at ones
Remembering nowhyt nor troubling their brains with the saying of the Poet
comicall.

Quid? tu non intelligis tantu^ te gratie demere, quantum more adiicis?
Comment? nentends tu pas que moindres sont les graces?
Du bien, dautant ques long auant que tu le faces?
Who does not understand, that tra^^ of time and space.
The bewty of the benefit does thoroughly disgrace?
ANd hereof comes it that some of very anguish and grief after long gaping and
nothing catching. For dyre pain are forced to say. Sir I beseech you if it be
so that ye mind to plesour me, and to do for me in deed as you have long borne
me in hand you would, do it then. If the matter be of no great danger nor
difficulty, why do you thus lingar it? I had rather you would quite deny to
plesour me then on this wise to delay me. Which tariau^ce makes me welnigh
thorough werye, and to loathe the benefit, rather then I would thus long tarry
and attend for it. And is any manne to be called hasty, churlysh or
disdaignefull that having just cause shall thus say judge you? No never
adeale. For as it is a great piece of cruelty by tractyng the time to encrese
and augment a man's death, and again a piece of courtesye to hasten the speedy
dispatche of his death that is condemned and needs must die without pardon or
ransom, rather then by lingering the time to make him die a thousand deaths,
Right so deserves that plesour inumerable thanks that is done without delay,
in respect of ye which is tracted by long time and delayed. For painful is the
long waiting even for good things. And forasmuch as by sundry benefits and
plesours are helped and redressed sondrye grefes and harms, He that causes
any man to be long vexed and grieved whom he may ease quicklye, or hinders his
attayning to a benefit whom it lies in him to farther, seems in that, to lay
violent hands on him and for that time to conspire his death (as it were) Take
this for certeintie. Courtesy seeks quickly to plesour.
Courtesy always hastes to do that which it can do: and it is the property
of him that willingly does any plesour, to do it without delay. Who so showed
plesour and stayed but one day to do it, dowtles never did it willingly, if he
might as well have done it before. Whereby he lost two worthy and precious
things. The time, and the show of frindly good will.

Chap. 6.
IN every thing that is to be done, chefest regard is to be had after what
order and manner every such thing is to be done. Delay to do plea^our
hurtful.
For like as spedy dispatching does much advantage, so does long tariaunce not
a little annoye. For as in darts the Iron is always one, and a like able to
hurt, but the odds and diversity rises whether it be cast with a strong or
weke arm, and as the sword of it self is apt and plyaunt either to hurt but
lyghtlye, or wou^d dedly, or not at al, as force is used to it, and the place
of the blow lyghtyng chosen, So fares it by benefits: For that which is
given or done remains always one, at a stay, and vncha^nged, But yet the
mind with which it is given, declares great diversity to be therein. How
pleasant and acceptable is that benefit, for which he will not receive thanks
that did it, but even while he does it, endeavors to forget that he did any
such plesour? Again, to taunt and check and hit one in teth with the benefit
thou did, is an apparaunt sign of a naughty nature and churlishe and
vnfreendly stomach of thine, and disgraceth that quite, which otherwise thou
deseruedst praise for. See therefore that in no wise thy benefits be enterlaced
with sorowfulnes, or cause of disco^forte. And if there be any other thing
whereof thou would advertise and as a frinde admonish him of, whom thou have
benefited, chose a fit and convenient time and place thereto, and in no wise do
it by commemoracion of any thy said plesours paste and done.

Chap. 7.
FAbius verucosus was wont to lyken and compare, the benefit which any hard
natured man with pain did, to gravely or greety bread. Which notwithstanding
he yt is very hard pinched with hungar, feeds well on, and seems to find
savor and swetnes therein, though it be ^er so painful in chewing. But what
does not necessity? As none would feed on such bread yt might chose, and could
get other, so none would accept such roughe benefits and vnplesaunt plesours,
^nplesant plesours.
yt might well spare them, and do wellenough without. Tiberius Caesar being
requested on a time by Marcus Aelius his nephew that had been sometime Praetor
of Rome, to discharge and pay certain his Creditours their det for which he
was endau^gered, willed to give him in wri^inge both the names of his said
Creditours, and the sommes also. He did not now promise to discharge the detts,
but demanded to know his Creditours. when he had received a note of their
names, he wrate back by letre to Aelius not yt he had, or would discharge them,
but that he had given commaundment they should be discharged, with diverse
sharp tauntes and nippes, whereby though by his means Aeliu^ stood acquitted
of his detts, he had yet but small cause to conceive courtesy in him He sawst
his gentleness so stronglye and made it so sharp that it might seem clean to
dull the taste of Aelius Howbeit I suppose yt Tiber^us had a farther meaning
therein, then was expressed: namelye, to prevent others from making the like
request to him as his Nephew did, and therefore seemed to deal the roughliar
with Aelius to fear others from making the like attempt. But who that minds
to do a benefit a right, must deal therein far otherwise^

Chap. 8.
THerefore when thou mindest to do any pleasure to any man, thou must endeavor
thy self what in thee does lie, to cause the same to be most acceptable to him
to whom thou doist it. For otherwise thou could not say it was a benefit
which thou gave, but rather a good turn joined with a check and rebuke. And
to say freelye that which I think in this behalf, Doubtless it is no Royalti^
for a Prince to give any thing, which to do he is enforced by compulsion or
for thauoyding of evil report. Neither yet could^ Tiberius for all the slye
means he used in writing so sharply to his Neuew when he besought him to
discharge certain his dettes, avoid that which (as I said) I did judge he
thought to have forebarred others of. For not long after, diverse there were who
made the very same peticion to him as his Neuew had made before. Whom he
commanded openly in the ^ace of the Senate to declare the cause why they came
end^tted so to such and such their Creditours. Odious^ manner of benefits
which when they had exponed, he willed th^re should be given to them
certain sommes of money toward the discharge thereof. Was this worthy to be
called Liberality think you? No verily: but rather an ignominy to his
person. It may well be termed a help or subsedie granted by a Prince toward
thalleuiating the payment of a more sum. A benefit is such a thing that when
it is done, the doer may well abide the heari^g it reported again, without any
whyt blushing at it. If I be sent to desyer any thing at a Judges hand. I can
there but yield the cause of my demand, if I be thereto requiered.

Chap. 9.
Whereupon it is thaduise of all wise men that we should bestow certain of
our benefits openly, and again certain of our benefits secretly and closely.
Openly al such as renown follows the attainning of the^. Of which kind are
those rewards that are given for feats acheued by Cheualrye, and such like
dignities and promocio^s, which are bewtified and more commended when a
multitude knows of the^. And these things wherein consists neither renown
nor estimacion, but be only easers of need and poverty, and sauers of
honesty, those I say are to be given secretly, that they may be known only
to those to whom they are avayleable. And yet in some cases we should beguiel
him who^ we help, that though he have that that does serve his need, yet he
should not know at whose bands he received the same at that present, nor yet
from whens it came.

Chap. 10.
ARchesilaus on a time having a dear Frinde of his fallen in to poverty, and
yet for bashfulnes would not discover his great need, and were it for
thought, or for disease fallen sick, Archesilaus seeing and pitieng his case,
thought it was then high time of his own accord to socour him though his
frynde by no means would make him privy to his necessity. Whereupon,
taking with him a bag of money went with speed to this sick man making ^ys
errande to vysyt him: and being set on his b^d besides him, finding and
taking occasion of Talk, A true liberal act.
preuilie conveyed the bag of money under the pillow of the sickeman without
any word speking of it, and when he saw his time, took his leave and departed.

Wysshynge that his friend that was more bashefull then wisdom would, might
yet by chance find that that might serve his wantte, rather the^ then lack
still, or else be haplye stricken out of conceit with himself that any man
should know his penurye. But here will some one perhaps say. What? should not
he that received a benefit know of who^ he had it? whether it be requisite that
he that is plesoured know by whom he was plesoured,
I answer agai^e. That at the first, though he know not, it makes no matter:
and yet does that so bestowynge of benefits, include a great part of
principal benefic^nce. But when I have thus benefited him privily, I will not
there cesse, I will do him sondrie other plesures besides. I will do many
more things for him whereby he may gather that it was I that did him that other
plesour also tofore. And yet though perhaps he never know that he had that
benefit through me, I shall notwithstanding be sewer myself that I gave it. But
thou may say perhaps. That is but a simple reward. Truth it is if thou
did it to have gain thereby, and to reap recompense. But if thou have as
thou should have, respect to this point only, that that which thou geuest
may plesour him to whom thou geuest it, thou give it free lie without any such
regard taking. Let it suffice thee, that thy self art preuy to the gift, for
else thou should not seem to take delight in weldoing, but that thy desire
were to be seen to do well. Thou art not yet satisfied perhaps, but wilt still
say I will needs have him know it. Then tell me this. Whether thou would
he should think himself beholding to thee or no? Still thou sayes^ thou will
have him that receives plesour at thy hands, know whense he has it. What if
it be more profitable, if it be more honest, if it be more acceptable for him
that is pleasoured, not to have it known? Will thou not then change thie
mind? But all this notwithstanding thou will say he shall needs know that he
had the pleasour at thy hands. I see well then thou will not suffer him to
continue in ignorance and darkness. In very deed I grant that so often as the
matter shall permit, the geuer may if he plese take plesour of the
acknowledging receiver. Howbeit if it lie him upon that we help him, and
again that it will turue him to reproach if our plesouring him should be known
abrod, in this case I would not that that benefit should be Chronicled. Thou will yet perhaps say. And wherefore should I not do him to understand that it
was I that plesoured him? What though this be one of the most principal
precepts to be observed in bestowing of benefits that I should not vpbrayde
the same and cast him in the tethe with it to whom I did it, may I not for
that show him that it was I that plesoured him? No suerlye. For between any
two this is the Law positife touching the doing and taking of benefits. the
l^w of benefi^es.
That he that gave, for get so son as he has given that he gave any
thing. That he that received the same, be never unmindful that he received a
benefit at his hands. There is nothing that more vexes or troubles the
mind of any man then the often repetyng and reciting the plesours which have
been done to him.

Chap. 11.
WHo that should often tell me what benefits and plesours h^ had done for me
I would answer him as did one that had sentence given against him that he
should go into exile and be banished his native Land, An example of the^ that
upbraid others with their benefits
and yet by the special instaunce and entreatye of a dear frynde of Cesars
was delivered from the sentence executyng He then who had thus saved him,
took the saved person and causing him to be led round about the City, followed
himself with a loud voice saying. This is he whom I have sa^ed from being
banyshed.

And when without end he perseuered this still vauntynge and triumphyng over
him, the sellie man not able long to endewer his clamor, in presence of all the
people said. I beseech thee put me again (...) ye grace of desire. Let him
deal with me after his plesour. How long will thou continue thus castinge in
my tethe, I am he that has saved thy life? I did deliver thee from banishment?
if this had been acknowledged by me without thy telling, it had been as much
worth as double my life, but since that by thee it is thus notified, it seems
worse to me then death. I have little cause to think courtesy in thee, or to
thank thee for, if thou sauedest me only for this end, that thou might
boast over me. When will thou cesse carienge me about to show? When will thou
suffer me to forget my misery and state unfortunate? It might have sufficed
thee, and over much had it been, to have led me about the City only ones in a
triumph on this wise, to show what thou had done for me. Hereby it appears
that we should not make report of that we have given. A benefi^ ought no^ to
be recited by hi^ that did it to hi^ to whom he did it.
For who that recites to him whom he has plesoured what plesour he has done
for him, in that self same act seems to demand his plesour again. We ought
not by any talk seem to put him in mind of our passed benefits done but if
perhaps we think that oblivion has crope in his mind, let us do him an
other plesour. That by the recept thereof, he may call to memory the former
also. But in any wise we must be ware that we make no report to others, of
that that we have done. He that does any plesour to any other, let himself
keep scile^ce, and refer it wholly to the reporting of him that received it.
To him that reports what he has done for this man and that, it were well
answered as it was to one that had never done with publisshing the plesour
which he had showed here and there. Whereupon one demanded the cause why he
had not made an end of reportinge his benefits sith he had been so
sufficiently recompensed for the same. When he denied that ever he had any
recompense for any of them and demanded the place where. Mary quod that other
in every such place where thou made any report of them by thine own
talk. So that you may see a man ought not to report his own good deserts
and usurp the office of an other. Any other with more honesty may play that
part, whose report shall purchase thee commendacio^ whereas thiue own mouth
shall procure thee sklaunder and rebuke. In hearing report made what henefites
thou haste bestowed, thou must be so chary for incurrynge the danger of vain
glory, that were it so that others should recite to thee, what benefits thou
have bestowed, thou must answer that he whom th^w haste so benefyted, in
thye judgment was woorthye of more ample benefits then thy power according to
thy will and his deserts would permit thee to match. Neither must this
refusal of praise be done colourablie, and after a dissembling sort, as some
do who would seem to refuse thanks when indeed they most desire them.
Moreover those whom thou doist benefitte, thou must use courteouselie, with
unfeigned freendlines. The husbandemanne undoubtedly were in danger to lose
both his seed and labor if he should give over pains taking so sone as he
has made an end of sowing. A great deal more diligence is required before
it com to be ripe Corn after that the seed is cast into the ground: So that
if he hope to have the fruit of his traueile and labor, he must with equal
diligent pain pass each point from the first unto the last. Right so must
we deal with our benefits. Can there be any getter benefits think you the^
those that ye parents can afforde to bestow upon their Children? And yet should
they quit lose the thanks and praise precedent, if straight way in their
infancy they should neglect and forsake their said Children, and not nourish
the^ up accordinglye. So is it with all other benefits. Which except thou
persist to maintain and make perfect thou losest al. It is but a very small
matter to have plesoured any one, except thou continue on still in that mind.
If thou desire that they whom thou plesourest should think themselves bound to
thee, use them so that they may think thou love them still. And especially
beware using any taunting or checkyng talk that may grieve them to here. To
nippe a man for neglectyng the benefits he had received, Inconveniences that
grow by repetyng our benefits.
bredeth werines to hear thereof: and to vpbraid the plesour ones done,
engenders hatred. In employeng of bene^ites there is no one thing so much to
be avoided as pride and arrogancy. For to what end should a man in that
behalf use hauty looks, or many words to set fourth his benefits, when the
thing done deserves of it self sufficientlye to have commendacion? The matters
themselves shall declare our acts abundantly, yea though we say never a
word: It is not only a thankles benefit, but to be abhorred also, which is
skornefully given.

Chap. 12.
Caesar on a time gave Po^pee the Punicien his life (if we may say he gave
life that took it not away) wheruppon when Pompee bowed down himself hu^blie
to have reverenced Caesar, For his life pardoned, Caesar offered him forth his
lift foot to kiss. Which presumptuous fact of Cesars, they that seem to
excuse, say that he did it not for pride or disdainfulnes of mind, but for
that he would he should see the golden buskin he then wa^e on, richelye
garnyshed with perle and stone. But when all is said and the best they can
made of it, was it not shame enough judge you that he that semd to be borne to
no other end but to chaung ye Romain liberty into the thraldom of the
Persians, could not find any honester or more decent place of his body to
offer to so grave a man as Pompee was, who had also been Consul but make him
kiss the buskin upon his foot? He made but small account of this, that so
noble and ancient a man having borne so high dignity and office in ye weal
public, debased himself so much as to humble himself to him upon the ground
in the presence of such an assembly of so many great personages and men of
honor, in such sort that vanquished enemies to get grace at their Conquerous
hands could not do more. What seemed he to do hereby, but to tread as it
were dispitefully ye weal public under his feet? But some will say that the
kyssing of his left foot could avail but little to the undoing the state of the
weal public. Uery truth but he shrewdly showed his welmening mind. Ouermuche
had it been reproach to him to have dealt with so worthy a man as Pompee was in
giving sentence in such sort as he did upon him, though after such skornefull
wise he had not forced him to kiss his foot.

Chap. 13.
O Folish wantonness and pride of men that are ones clymen to honor. O passing
great folly and madness that rayggneth in them. How happy is he that has not
to deal with such, nor needs to seek for plesour at their hands? How sone
they can turn benefits to injuries, and plesours to pain? What pleasauntnes
and delight take they in excess? How unseemly are all their doings? And how
much the loftiar they seek to clime, somuche the lower they fall down at last.
Whereby they give me^ just cause to think that they know not themselfs nor
weigh their astates. What may it b^ that puffs them up so with pride and
insolency? Give they never so much it is counted but lost. I would here
demand of Caesar as I would also of any man else, what it is that they bear
themselves so lofty on? What it is that should chaung into worse nature both
the countenance and beh^uiour of men? Those plesures, gifts, or benefits
only are plesaunt, The nobler the personage is y^ court^ouslye does his
benefit, so much more praise worthi
that are given or done after a courteous manner and gentle sort. As when one
that is far my better, gives me any thing, and yet does not triumph over me
for that his munificence, but with all gentleness and debonairety makes
semblaunce as if he had nowhyt plesoured me in such sort as he did, chosing
by his own accord to do it, and that quickly with expedicion to prevent the
time, rather then to differ it until I had need. Necessary is it therefore
that such as are disposed to plesour others, take good regard that they commit
no folly whereby they shall lose the grace of the said benefit which they have
done, and again that they deem the plesours they have showed, to be nowhit the
gretter for that they are many in number, Uanglorie (...) full
which argues for all that, never the greatter bounty in them. And that in
any wise they avoid the desyer of vain glory for any their such plesours
done: which causes their doings to be hated, which otherwise would be loved,
commended, and had in great prite.

Chap. 14.
ANd yet some things there are which of their own natures are hurtefull to
those that request the same: Confide racio^s to be had in doing ou^ benefits
which it is more freendlines to deny then to grant. Wherefore in passing our
grant, we are to weygh as well the profitte as the sati^fienge the mind of the
requesters. For many times we make earnest pursuit after things that are
harmeful to us, and can not of our selves discern how pernicious they are for
us, for that our blind affection for the time, dimmeth the clerenes of our
judgment. But so sone as that heat begins to slake, when that burning
desire which erst vanquished discrecion is some what quaild, we our selves
then dislike and detest the counsailours and fortherers of those euilles. For
as we should not give cold water to him that is in the fyt of a shaking
agewe, nor we: pon to him that is besides his wits, no more ought we to
grant the request of every one by and by that humbly, ernestly, with
compassion and pytye desires some things of us? For Reason would that we
should take as good regard to thend as to the beginninges of such plesours as
we are to do: and that we should give such things whereby a man may take
plesour not only when he receives them, but afterward also. But some one
will say to himself perhapes, well. I know that that which such one desires
of me shall not advantage nor plesour him, but hurt and hindar him and yet
what should I do? He requesteth it of me so earnestly that I may not say him
nay. Let him see to his own safegarde, he shall not have cause to blame me.
This opinion is very falls, yes marye shall he have cause to blame thee, and
that woorthelie. For when he shall be better advised on the matter, and that
the hot fit of his shall be qualified, why should he not hate him that in his
time of follye forthred him to catch his bane? To give the assent to harm
one, is crewell pytye. And as it is a very charitable act to save them that
through follies rage would without nay mischeue and destroy and undo
themselves, so is it to grant hurtful things to each manne for the asking, as
sign apparaunt of pitiefull cruelty. Let us endeavor to give such things
that the longar they are enjoyed and kept the more plesaunt and profitable
they may appear to be, and never fail of their goodness. My money will I not
give to an adulterer, for that I would not seem to be a fortherer of his
wickedness. But if I know preciselye such follye to have place in him, I will
what I may dissuade him from it. Neither would I give it to a common
quarreller nor one that has no stay nor government of himself, for fear
that an other day he say Such one by loving me overmuch and to tenderlye
undid me.

Chap. 15.
IT chances oftentimes that there is but small odds between the friendly
freendshyp that some men show, and the evil wishing of the enemy. For what harm
the fooe wishes may chance to a man, the same his very and dear frindes over
timelye frindlines showed, otherwhyles procures and performs. Then see what
a miserable and piteous case this is, that there should be but one and the same
effect. and sequel both of hatred, and Love, evil wishing and well meaning.
Regard to be had whom and how we benefyt.
But let us so near as we ca^ to show our good wills, give such things as
shall never turn to our reproach. And for that it is the che^est point of
frindship to make our frinde equal with our self, it follows that for his
well doing and safeguard we provide as for our own. I will give my frinde that
he needs: but yet so that I be not thereby driven into necessytie my self. I
will gladlye help him being in danger to be lost, but yet in such sort that I
cas^ not away myself. I will not give any man any such thing that I can not
get, but if I ask it myself with reproach and shame. If I have done plesour, I
will not sprede it abroad, and by talk boast small things to make them seem
great. Neither will I account of benefits received, less then they deserve.
And as he that casts him in the teeth whom he has benefited with the
plesours he has done for him, loses there by the co^mendacio^ and grace of
his benefit, so he that ^au^teth what he gives gets not praise thereby, but
reproach. Let each man have an eye to his own ability, and that according to
that, he give neither more nor less. Let him again in giving, have a good
respect to the person to whom he gives. For as there are some things which
for their smalnes of vallew are not to be given to men of estimacion, so are
there again other some things more then meet to be given to mean or simple
persons. For which cause there is to be weighed as well the quality, condition,
and desert of the Receyuer, as of him that gives, and coutrarywise. Wherefore
such things as thou geuest, note well whether they be more then thou may
well give, or according ^o thine ability and state. Again, whether they be
such that he to whom thou geuest the same, may well enough accept for the
worthiness, or refuse or at least make small account thereof for their
sclendernes.

Chap. 16.
ALexander on a time (as he was desirous to seem magnifice^t) taking no regard
nor making any account of any thing except it were of very great value, made
offer to a simple man that had plesoured him some way, to give him a great
lordshyp i^ recompense. He to whom this offer was made, weighing with himself
his own mean astate, and fearing the envy and disdaigne yt some others, (as he
thought) might conceive against him that he should be so far above many of
them rewarded, strayned much courtesy to receive it, alledgyng that he was
but a simple man, and far unfit to have such a reward. To whom Ale^ander
answered. It is not thye fytnes to receive, but my fytnes to give, that I
regard. Dowtles this proceeded of a stowt and bountiful heart, and yet though a
king pronounced it, it was but folishly spoken. For having regard to himself
only and his own woo^thin^s alone, he should give nothing. It is expedient
in geuyng gifts, Circumstances to be noted in bestowyng ben^fites
to note both the gift, the person, his qualities, the time, ye cause, the
place, and all other circumstaunces, without which, dew order in geuyng can
not be observed. Note here the passinge great arrogancy and pride of
Alexander. If it were not meet for the poor man to acc^pt that offer, neither
was it fit for him to g^u^ it to him. Dew consideracion ought to be had both
to the personag^s and their degrees. And seeing that the ^hefest point of any
vertew is to observe a mesure and indifferency, it is as well to be adjudged a
fault what excedeth and is to much, as that that is ouersparing and wants.
Though fortune had dealt so favorably with Alexander. That he thought a City
as small a gift as he with his honor might ge^e, was it not also think you a
toke^ of as noble a heart in the poor man that refused the acceptaunce of a
town when it was offered him? Yet verily. For though Alexander had such an
insaciable and greedy appetite that he could devour and swallow up a number
of whole contreyes and Realms as ^e did in his days, rasing them down,
wasting them and leuyng them desolate as if there had never been any such
things, and yet never surfeit any whit upon it, yet he should weigh that there
were in like manner some febler stomachs that were not able to digest one
lordshyp.

Chap. 17.
DIogenes surnamed Cinicus for his bestly and doglike life, An honorable
a^^swere of antigonus
desired king Antigonus on a time that he would give him a Talent of silver.
Antigonus answered that it was not fit for such one as he was to demand so
great a gift. Then Diogenes seeing that he was denied ye request for the value
besought him to give him a penny. That again quod Antigonus is less then is
fyt^ing for a king to given Such shifting of men is very dishonest For by
this means he rid himself from giving any thing at all. In the asking of a
penye he regarded the honor of his own astate, in the demanding of a Talent
he respected the simple condition and degree of Diogenes: though he might
wellenough for his ability have given both the penny as a meet gift agreeable
with the poverty of Diogenes and the Talent also as a gift age fittinge with
the magnificence of a king to give. And though that one sounded somewhat more
in value the^ that Diogenes simple astate might well demand, that other
notwithstanding that it was very small yet was it seemelye enough in dew
place, and time for him to give. If any one therebe now will say that indeed
Diogenes ought not to demand so great a sum, I will also assent thereunto.
For to say the truth it is not meet that any such one should request money
which is himself an open despiser of the same. And if he profess that he
quite contemns money, it shall behoue him altogether to declare himself to
persevere in that mind, and to play the part of Cinicus thoroughlye, and not
to have a desyer to be rich and yet to color it under a cloak of voluntarye
pouertye. But return we to our present matter in hand. Who that is to give
any gift, ought to take as good regard to his own person, as to his to who^ he
gives it, and both alyke. ^ good similitude of Tenis play.
To the apt declaracion whereof me seems I can not use a fytter similitude
then that of Chrisippus which he uses of tossynge the handeball. For sewerlye
when the ball falls to the ground, it happeth so to do through the defaulte
of the one of the players. But then the bal keeps his corse trimliest, when
with like indiffere^cie of both Parts it is cast and tossed from that one ^o
that other, and is not suffered to fall to the ground. In which behalf, the
conninge player will take good regard not to cast it at all times a like, with
the like strength, but will be sewer to moderate or increase the same according
to the nigh standing or far of being of his companion. The which
consideracion is to be had in bestowing of benefits. For unless they be
fytlye applied to the persons both of the geuer and Receyuer, questionles they
shall neither depart from the geuer, nor come to him whom they are meant unto,
dewly and as they ought to do. And yet farther respect is also to be had
herein. For like as if we are to play with one well practiced at Tennys,
howsoever we hap to strike almost, yet he for his execcise and practice, if
any fault happen in our play, with his quiuernes and redines can well hide it
and save it from being openly espied by them that stand by. But if we have to
deal therein with one that is mere unskillful and void of knowledge, then
behooves it us to be the more circumspect, and with our play which must be
used with great obseruaunce and moderacion, direct and govern his play, and
(as it were) take on us both the part of the stryker fourth and sender back
again. If he stand far of, to play even in his bosom, and if he strike
short, to pain our selves to run and meet it as it comes. And so must we
do in bestowing of benefits. At first we must instruct and teach them how
they must do, and think it enough if we perceive that they will endeavor,
apply, and declare themselves willing to do as we teach the^. But indeed to
say the truth we our selves for the most part that do plesours, Ingratitude
often growth by us.
are the causers that there be so many ingrate and unthankful people as there
are, and cause them so to continue. For when we have ones done such a pleasour
as is indeed of great valewe, and more a great deal then he to whom it is done
is able to make recompense for, or to render the like, we should deal as do
these crafty gamesters that gladly would get and train into play some simple
body to cousin him (as they say). Which devise of theirs that they may the
easelier bring to pass, they affirm consta^tlie that they are as unskillful
in play as possible is for any to be. And when they have ones by little and
little trained him in, to make and as the proverb is, then to encourage him to
play frankelie, they let him at the first draw good hands on them to give
him a stomach to hold on, which dowtles the simple manne could never do if
they should play their best, neither would that sellye soul except he were
very singlie soulde, venture his money among them were it not that they with
their own losses for the time toll him forward until he have with exercise
and through practice got him a bold stomach. But there are a number now a
days that when they have ones done a plesour to a man, they had rather lose
altogether and cause him whom they have benefited to become m^re unthankful,
then they would seem to admit his thanks giving, and accept them in lieu
and place of sufficient recompense of their former benefits. A proud kind of
people, and such as loose themselves the whole grace of their said deserts.
How much better and seemelier were it and more courtesy to be though in the^,
to conceive so good opinion of them who^ they pleasured, as they would the other
should of them for being plesoured at their hands? To seem still to owe
like good will to them? To deem courteously of mean things, and to accept
and allow their rendryng thanks somwhile in place of full recompense of their
gentleness: In fine, to show themselves so well meaning to the^ when they have
plesoured, that with all their hearts they will be content to discharge them,
from so much as thinkyng that they would look they should owe any thing to
them for the plesour they received, or that they lok^d to reap any plesour at
their han^^s again for the same? The vs^r^r.
The cruel usurer why is he cry^d out upon and detested of al men, but for
that he takes vnre^sonable interest, or for delayeinge of men and making by
his such delays, men's need more urgent to the end that they should give him
his own askyng? But as a man in no wise should ask recompense for his
benefits and plesures done, so ought he easelye to admyt and accept in good
part an^e thing (were it never so small) that seemed to be rendered by way of
recompense for the same. Undowtedly he is worthy highly to be commended in
this behalf, that of his own accord, willi^gly bestows his benefits,
without ever requiring recompense: and yet if happily he find courtesy to be
showed for them, he reioyc^th passinglie at it. And for all that he never
thought upon them longar then while he was doing of the^. Therefore if any
recompense be haplye answered him for the same, he accepts it, not as dew
for any his deserts (having clean forgot what he did) but as a good turn
done to him causeles.

Chap. 18.
ANd as there are some kind of men which with great pride and arrogancy give
their benefits and plesures, How we ought to r^ceiue benefits.
so are there other some which in like manner receive amysse such plesures as
are done to them: which in no wise should be committed. Now for a time let us
leave her showing how men ought to do plesures, and let us now declare after
what order men should receive them at others hands. Every dewty that has
relacion and respect to two persons, requires the like of the one as it does of
the other in each degree. For who that list thoroughlye to examine and skanne
what is required to be in a Father, or incident to that name, let him
understand that as much and nowhit less is to be required in him that shall
bear the name of a child. Diverse things there are to be looked for at the
hu^bandes hand to his wife, and no ^ewer ne lesser are there to be required at
the wives hand toward her husband. And as it is impossible that the one of these
could keep his name but in respect of the other, as to wit to be a Father
if he have not a Child, or a husband if he have not a wife, right so is there
for their better conseruacion, a mutual and like duty to be required for
each at others hands, which is very hard. For as Hecaton says. Every perfect
ho^est thing is full of difficulty. And by the same reason, so is every
other thin^ the nearer it approaches to the absolute perfection, in respect of
that that is not so nighe. All things of which order, it is not sufficient to
do, but it is requisite to do them by Reason. Reason must be sturreswan and
hold the helm. Reason must guide them and direct them the way. Both matters
of least weyght^ and things of grettest importance must needs be ordered by
Reasons rule. And as she shall will and council us, right so must we dispose
our selves and our doyngs. And as for her, wot you well she will not advise you
to accept bene^ites and plesours at each man's hand. Benefits ought not to be
taken at each ma^s hand.
At whose hands then (it may hap) you will say shall we receive plesours? To
which question to answer brieflye, know you that we should chiefly wish to
receive them at their hands, to who^ we to fore have done the like. For with
far more diligence ought we to seek out him to who^ we may owe a good turn
the^ one to whom we may lend it. For to thend we may avoid al discommodities
and that none should ensew, whereof notwithstanding follow many diverse times, it
can not but be a grief to become bound to him to whom thy self would not. And
again it is a joyful thing and right plesaunt to receive plesour at his hands
who^ thou now love, although he have harmed thee sometime before. Again
there is no one thing so displeasaunt or that greueth an honest nature somuche,
as of force to be compelled to love or owe duty to him whom by no means he
can abide. Howbeit I must still put you in mind that I speak not these
things ne give these precepts to sober wise men who delyght in nothing but
that which is reasonable, To who^ these precepts are given.
and brydell their affections with the raynes of equity prescribyng to
themselves Laws and good orders, and follow them when they have so done, but I
give these precept^s to ignorant and vnskillful men, who though they have a
very earnest zeal and desire to mesure their doings and life by Reasons
lore, yet do their fond affections and folish fantasies bear such sway in
them, that needful it is to give them often aduertisementes what is most
e^pedient for them to do. It appears then that we must use discrecion in
chosing out him of whom we will receive any benefit or desire to be plesoured.
And to be plain with far more diligence and heed taking should we seek out
him by whom we would be plesoured, then we would do any one to borow money of.
For to him tha^ I borow money of, I am not bound to yield any more, but so
much money again as I received. Which when I have delivered and paid I am for
that discharged, and on clear bourd with him. But to him at whose hands I have
received a benefit, I can not be so excused. I owe to him far more then I
received. For when I have repaied that or as much as he gave to me, yet are we
bound to be Frindes assured the one to the other, and so to continue. And when
I have rendered, to him as much as I have received, then must I straight way
begine afresh again. To which conjunction the Law of true freendship and
amity would not that we should admit any one that is unworthy. Such I say
and so strayt is the sacred Law of benefits, from whense, and by whose means
proceeds love between man and man, and is thereby established and confirmed. I
may not yet always (will some chance to say) refuse a plesour that is
offered. For somewhiles I may be constrained to accept it whether I will or
not. As admit that a crewe^l Tyrant should offer to do me a plesour and
would think I scorned his gift if I should refuse it whereupon he would with
displesour take occasion to work me some great mischief, might I in this case
take it or no? Again put the case that some Pyrat or Thief that still
perseuereth in his Piracie or robbery will offer to do me any passing great
pleasure, what will you advise me to do in this case? well I know that none of
all these is such that I may well think myself bound to any of them for
any plesour they shall hap to show me. What shall I therefore do? I
answer thee that it rests in thy choice to whom thou will yield thy
sel^fbounden. Howbeit so that thy said election be free and quite deuoyd from
all violence and terour. But if any of them hap to come in place, all free
choice must of fine force stand abacke. If thou befree, and that it lies
whollye in thy hands to take which thou list, then note well my words I
have said: But if thou be barred of that free choice and liberty, A benef^te
enforced not to be repayd as of dewty
then note well thou do not chose it, but have it perforce for that thou
can not avoid it. Noman has cause to think himself bound for the having
of that which he could not be suffered to forgo. Well then since thou know
what my mind is herein, show me how I may do to refuse it. Admytte that any
such as thou did name has pardoned thee thy life. That makes no matter.
For it recketh not what ye thing be that is given, except it be done by one
that is minded to do it, and that to him that is minded to receive it. Though
such one hap to save a man's life, he deserves not therefore to be called a
preserver of life. The strongest poison that is somewhile serves in better
stead then the holesomest medicine that is, and yet is it not nombred among
the wholesome things that are commenly to be eaten. Whereby it appears that
diverse things there be that be good and profitable to be received at some time,
and yet he that receives them has not to think himself any whyt bound for
the recept thereof.

Chap. 19.
THere was on a time one sent purposely to kill a Tirant. And being come in
place where he was: Some receive Plesours and ye^ are to think the^ selu^sbo^^
for ^he ^ame.
with his naked sword struck him And supposing he had given him his deaths
wound fled incontinent for being apprehended. Now it chanced so that the blow
did light upon a great swelling which the said Tiraunt had upon his body,
which was grown so perillouse that all the expertest Phisicians he had, durst
not undertake to cure it and warrant his life. And yet by the chance that he
was cut so in that place, the corruption that there was long gathered and
festred purged so, that in short while he recovered his parfytte health of that
place by mean of that blow, whom all his most practysed Phisicians had before
given up, as past al recure. And yet did not the Tirant yield him any thanks
for that by his cuttinge him he was restored to his health, neither did he
deserve any. So you may perceive hereby that a man may sometimes do that act
to an other that may be great proffet to him and turn to his great good, and
yet not always to be accounted of, as of a benefit. Except it do proceed of
a mere good will from the very first beginning, it is not to be called a
benefit. For plesour that proves so but by hap hazard and chance medely, is
rather to be deemed an iniurye well proving, then a benefit well mente. There
was on a time (as the usage was often in Rome) in the Theater (a place appointed
for people to stand upon and behold the spectacles and shows,) diverse men
that had sentence of death past on them put, and cert^ine crewell wild bestes
let in unto the^, there to fight those condemned men with the beasts in the
presence of the Romans, and there either acquit themselves by slayeng the
bestes or else be slain themselves there in presence of the people. Among
the residew of the condemned men there was one brought who before time had the
keeping of a certain great Lion, which beast also as it fortuned was brought
in place and put in among the other beasts unto the condemned men standing at
their defense. And when the Lion had a while romed him about the place in his
stately pace vewing and notyng each one that stood in his danger, forthermore
he remembered him that so^metime had been his keeper and master: and therwithall
soudainlye cast himself between him and the other crewell bestes and defended
him against all their assaults. And what think you of this helpyng? Was not
this suppose you worthy to be called a benefit? No verelye. For neither of
these that I have told you of, did that which they did, for this that they
minded at the first beginning it should prove so well, or for that they meant it
should work any plesour to them to whom they did it. So that in this
respect you may^ very well match the wild and saluage beast, and him that was
sent ^o slay the Tiraunt together. Both he and the Lio^ were causers of saving
of life, and yet neither that one nor that other could be said to do any
benefyt. A man is not to be said to receive any thing as a benefit which is so
forced upon him that he can not refuse it. Neither is he to be said to owe
plesour to him to whom willingly he would not be beholdynge. If thou mind to
plesour me, let me first be at free liberty to chose whether I will accept or
refuse thine offer at my pleasure and then if I will accept it, do thy plesour.

Chap. 20.
IT has been called in question her^tofore touching Marcus Brutus whether he
were worthy to have his life at Julius Cesars hands or no since that he ones
gave his sentence of death upon Julius. This judgment after what order it was
handled, I will not here report. Truly in mine opinion although he were in
all other things a very notable man and great praise worthy, yet in this
point he ouershotte himself much, and no whyt followed the doctrine and
precepts of the Stoiques iu that he seemed to dislyke and sought to destroy the
name and a s^ate of a king, seeing that the best state of well governing any
weal public seems to be when any Realm is administered and governed by one
just king: Monarchy y^ best state of well public.
or for that he dowted there would ensew ouermuche liberty in the City, when
all should be at the commandment of one man who by large rewards might as it
were hyer men to obey him, or else for fear he had, lest the ancient uses
rytes and customs of that common welthe being adnihilated, made frustrate and
quite abrogated, ye City of Rome should be reduced to the former state when it
was at the beginning thereof under the Tyranny of kings. And that all good
Laws edictes and ordinances about which he had known so many thousa^des
ready to cut one an others throat (not for that they contended to be free and
discharged from owing allegeaunce, but for that they knew not redely to whom
they should do it,) should now be clean forgot. But see how much he forgot
both the natural course of things, and the fortune of his own country also:
persuading himself that if it were so that Caesar were ones dispacht out of the
way, who gave this first attempt to reduce the weal public of Rome to be a
Monarche, the matter had been safe enowgh for ever after any other assayeng it
again. And yet knew he well enowgh that before time after that a number of
the Roman kings had been slain some by sword, some by thonder and
lightninge down from heaven, there succeeded yet after them, Tarquinius one
far worse then any of them that were gone. But to come again to our matter
in hand. Whether Brutus was worthy of his life or not. Uerely I judge he was
worthy to have his life pardoned him at Cesars hand, but yet that Caesar had
not to account of him ne to call him Father as the guyse was there to name the
Senators. For each one that kills not a man when he may, is not therefore to
be said the sauer of his life, nor that he has done him a be^efyt, but rather
pardoned him for that time.

Cha. 21.
BUt this seems woorthye to be dowted of, A pleso^r should not be received at
a naughty persons hand.
if a merveilous dishonest man and such one as is quyte deuoyde of regard of
God and all godliness, and that ^abandoneth ^ymself over whollye to all myschefe
villainy and nawghtines hap to get me in that trippe that it is in his hands
to grant me life or slaye me, and of his own accord he promyseth my delivery
frankly, what shall I do in this case? Should I accept my deliuerau^ce at
such a man's hand? And if I do so, what thanks shall I render to him for my
such delivery? shall I content myself to live with him, and frame my life
after his filthy conditions? No seuerly: what shall I then do? I shall tell
thee. If I were taken prisoner and were to pay Ransom for my delivery, and
being without money myself, such one as thou have named would offer to give me
francklye so much as should dispatche the matter: well I would take it, but
yet not as any benefyt, but as somuche money borrowed to serve the need I was
in, making f^ll account to repaye it again, as I would do: and besides the
repaiment of the money, if I should hap to see him that dy^^ me that gentleness
for the time, in any peril or danger, I would what in me lay save him. Or
if I saw him sto^ble or ready to fall, I would stay him up. But as for
joining any freendshyp with him, (which can be but between the^ that be of like
disposition,) that would I never do^ And that which is more, I would not
account of him as of one that saved my life, but as one to whom I owed that
which I received of him in time of my need, we ought not to receive plesour
at our fri^des hand if y^ doing of ye a^^e may hurt him that off^^th it
which I would also pay him. Again, there is some man whose own proper
woorthines and deserts would that I should accept his benefits offered:
Howbeit, for that I know well and stand assured that it shall turn to his own
harm if he should do them, I may not receive the same. As if I were culpable
of a fact so apparaunt that it could not be denied, nor avoided, and yet one my
very frinde for the authority he bears or otherwise offreth to dispatche me
and save me harmeles which I know well he is able to perform, howbeit if he
should do it such clamor would arise thereby that it would purchase him
heuie displesour at ye Princes hand in this case I ought not to desyer his
benefitt, nor admit it if himself should offer it, but should rather put my
self to stand the iump and dawnger of the matter, then that my frind by my
means, and to show me plesour should be displesoured or harmed. But if you
will have a notable example of one that refuced proffit and commodity being
offered which hitteth our present purpose fully, A notable example of refusing
profit offered.
mark the^ the worthy examples of Crecinus Julius a notable man, whom Caesar
slew for this only that he was indeed a man of more worthiness the^ meet to be
about such a Tyrant. Taking upon him at a time to set forth certain
spectacles and shows which would grow to his great chargs, diverse his fre^des
for the ease of his burden, were contributary with their porcions. Among the
residew one Fabius Persicus sent him an exceeding great so^me, which Julius by
no means would receive. Whereof his fre^des having knowledge, and blaming him
much for it, Shall I quod he receive a benefitte or plesour at his hands whom I
would not pledge if he drank to me? Not long after, one Rebellius a noble man
for aucthority as of ye order of Consulls, but in qualities resembling
Persicus, sent likewise a passinge great deal of money to Julius, and urged
merueilous ernestly the receipt thereof upon him. I beseech thee pardon me quod
Julius, for not many days ago, I refused the like offer also made to me by
Persicus^

Chap. 22.
WEll then if we have ones deliberated and determined fullye to accept the
plesour that is offered, That we ought joyfully receive the plesours that are
done too us.
let us in any wise receive it joyfully, and declare outwardly what inward
mirthe and plesour we conceive at it. That the geuer may apparauntly see we
do so, to thend he may straight way repe some commodity and proffit by mean
of his said benefit. For doutles it is a full cause of rejoicing, to see our
frindes merry and rejoice. But it is a far more just cause of rejoicing to us
if by our means they have that cause of their such rejoicing and mirth.
Therefore when we are plesoured let us apparauntly declare our rejoicing without
fayning, and that not in the presence of him only who has so plesoured us,
but else where also. For who that after such a thankful manner has accepted
the plesour which was done unto him, has even in that repayd and discharged
the first dewtie that was to be demanded for the same.

Chap. 23.
A reprehe^sion of the^ that well r^ce^ue bene^ites in ^^net only.
SOme there are y^ never would receive any benefit or pleasour but pryuatele and
in secret. Refusing to have any present that might record it. Whereby it
appears how evil their mind and intent is. For how much a benefitte or
pleasure done by any one does more plese and content the fantasy of him to whom
it is done, so much the more ought he who receives the same, to publyshe and
spread the respect thereof abroad, to the co^mendacion of him at whose hands he
received the same. If thou be ashamed to confess it and acknowledge the recept
thereof, refuse also to take it. Some there are that be content to render thanks
for the plesour that has been showed them, by stelthe as it were, and in a
corner privily. But indeed that proceeds not of bashfulnes, but is rather to
be judged a flat denial of that they have received. He is well worthy to be
deemed an unthankful man that acknowledges the benefitte he has received and
renders thanks for the same then only when no man is present. Some in no
wise will have any witnesses present when they are to be plesoured that might
testifye the giving and recept thereof, nor will give any writing of their hand
to record it. Whereby they declare their desire plainly to be, that the benefit
or plesour that is done to them, may be kept as secret as may be. They would
not have it published openly, to thend they may vau^t that they got such
office, dignity, preferment, or welthe, rather by their own wit and policy,
then by the mean and liberality of any other man. And commonly such men
as these, show themselves most slack and negligent of all others in
acknowledging and requiting the dewty which of right may be demanded well at
their hands by them to whom they owe both that good a state of their life, and
their attainement to honor. And thus while they refuse to acknowledge that
which they have received, and render that dewtie which is incident thereto,
they throw themselves hedlong into a merueilous danger. Namely to deserve
the name of Ingratitude and unthankfulness.

Chap. 24.
AGain, other some there be of so ^uill and vile natures that they do not
only forget and neglect to do such duty as they ought, to those who have
benefyted them, but they report more^uer most villanye of those who have done
them most good. So that it is as good to displease some kind of people as to
plesour the^. Wherein they seek after a dispitefull manner, matter to clear
them from owing any dew^ie at all. How much the more they wrestle against,
so much the more it manifests their nawghtye and can kard natures, and
purchaceth commendacion to the parties whom they seek to deface, by bringing
to light and disclosyng their worthy acts. Whereas ind^ed we should
endeavor to thuttermost of our power to kep and retaigne fast in our memory
such plesours as have been done to us: and still renew them by often calling
them to our remembrance. For impossible it is to requite them if we do not
remember them. And if any benefit or plesour be offered us, we should not accept
it over rashelye and rudelye, neither yet refuse it over bashfullye. For who
that at the first offer made of a benefit, Diverse sorts of vntha^kefull men.
takes it as if he cared not much for it whether he had it or not, what judge
you he will esteem of it after a while when it waxes stale? (since that the
chefest rejoicing for the having of a ben^fit, if there be any rejoicing at
all, is at the very first acceptau^ce of it.) An other sort there are that take
benefits when they are offered, after a lothesome manner. As who should say.
In faith I need not greatly this courtesy and frendlines which you offer me:
Howbeit since you will needs force it upon me, you shall command me to take
it, and use me herein for this time at your plesour. Some other receive a
plesour offered so carelessly that he that gave it may in manner stand in doubt
whether he that received it had any perseueraunce that he was plesoured or
no. Some again for any benefit done unto them will scantly or but a little
move their lyppes to ye geuer: which is yet far worse and sauoreth much more
of Ingratitude, then if they had altogether held their peace and said never a
word. Whereas indeed a man should according to the quantity or quality of
the benefit that is done to him, comme^d and extolle the same with words:
which may import his grateful acceptaunce and unfeigned wellyking of it. Ways
to show our selves tha^kfull.
As to say. Sir through the plesour you did me such a time, you have won the
hearts of more then you are ware of. For there is no man but would that his well
doing should be publyshed and known to a great many. Again thus. Sir you
know not howmuche your benefits which you bestowed upon me stood me in stead,
howbeit I ne may ne will in any wise co^ceale it from you, but must let you
tu^derstand that I was much more plesoured thereby then as then myself wened
for. And who that unfeignedly and without glosing does on this sort charge
himself, can not be judged to conceive unthankful lie of the plesour he found.
As thus to say. In very deed I grant I am in no wise nor respect able to
render you dew thanks according to your deserts and yet shall I not cesse ne
fail at any time to acknowledge and confess my said unableness.

Chap. 25.
THere was nothing that purchaced Furnius so much favor and benevolence at
Augustus hands, or y^ brought him to that pass that he might request and
obtain what he would, as did that his humble acknowledging with submissio^ of
the favor, goodness, and bownte which Augustus had showed him, and his
extolling the same without all flattery. For being on a time driven to be a
peticioner for his Fathers life to Augustus, and obtaining grant of his
request, A notable and tha^^ful saying of Furius to Augustus.
he said. Truly there is nothing O Caesar that greueth me so much, as that I
shall now by thy means live grateful (as having showed part of my dewty to my
Father) and shall dye ingrate and unthankful, (as not able to requite thye
goodness.) See now what more evident or apparent argument can there be of a
mindful, careful, and thankful heart, then to grant that by no means he
can be persuaded ever to have yielded thanks enoughe and dow recompe^se: and to
confess plainly to be quyte exempt from all hope of ever being able to
attain thereto? with these I say or such like words let us declare and
show what ernest inward good will we have to our power to requite the
benefits we have received. Or if perhaps by words we be not able to utter
it as we ought to do, yet let us in such sort as we may declare our unfeigned
desire to make recompense. In which behalf assured lie our mind will not
fail by our face to show how we are bent that way. Who that receives a
benefit thankfully, in the very time of receiuinge it studieth how he should
make recompense for it. Chrisippus says that like as he that is appointed to
run for a wager, must watch diligently to get the start of his fellow, or
he that is in prison wayteth when he may find best opportunity to break
prison and save himself, so behooves it him that has been plesoured, by all
means he can, to devise and study how he may find convenient time to
requite the benefyt he has received: and if he hap to find that opportunity
to lay sure hol^ on it, that it escape him not.

Chap. 26.
NOw we have next to consider what it is that causes men to show themselves
unthankful. Which in mine opinion ryseth by some of these things. To wit
ouermuche arrogancy, Causes of Ingr^ti^ude.
self liking of his own doings or substance, covetousness, or envy. These
take I to be the principal heds out from whense Ingratitude flows and takes
his being. And to thend we may examine the^ thoroughlye, let us begin with
the first, and so descend from one to an other. There is no unthankful man al
most, but (I warraunt you) he will be thonly judge of his cause himself. And
thens grows it that what he has received, he thinks it no more then he has
deserved, and so judges it not worth the while to reco^pense, as skant worth
any such labor of his. And to confirm his opinion and make his tale good,
Thus will he say. Truth it is nor I will not deny but such one did this or
that for me. But how long was it I pray you ere I could obtain it? The saying
of thu^tha^kfull man.
What labor sustained I about it? Howmuche more might I have benefited miself
if I had bestowed ye service about such one or such one, or if I had not
troubled miself at all, but lived quietly with mine own? I wis I had well hoped
I should have been far otherwise rewarded at his hands. I had been better to
have been without his plesours, then to have endured half these troubles as I
have done about the gettyng of them, and they in thend to be so worshipful as
they are.

Chap. 27.
CNeus Lentulus (surnamed ye sothesaier) was in his time noted to be a man of
passing great wealth, until such time y^ certain which had been his bo^dme^ and
were by him enfraunchised, despoiled and robbed him. Lentulus great co^et^^e and
a^^ryce.
This Lentulus (as the report went) saw of his own proper goods together at
one time ten Millions of Crowns which at those days was counted infinite, as
at these days it were a good round so^me. And in that I said he saw them I said
very well. For indeed he did but see the^. For that only excepted, he had no
use of them. Of a passing dull and doltish wit he was in all other respects,
save only in muckering up of money. And for all yt he was an exceeding covetous
miser, and such a penie father as would part with nothing, yet with more ease
might an other get money from him the^ he could himself bring forth any ready
and plain talk, so great an impediment he had in his speech. And whereas of
dewty and right he should have adscribed all his advancement and attaineme^t
to wealth to Augustus, to whom at first he came bare enoughe, but what through
the great favor of Augustus. What through money wherewith he made way for
himself, he was now become to be as it were a Prince in the City.

And yet for all that, never ceast he complaining to Augustus how for his sake
he had given over his book, and received in recompense nothing the like plesour
nor gain as he lost by leuing his study. Whereupon Augustus over and besides
all that he had else done for him, dispatched him also from having any more
cause to complain him in that sort. Thus may you see that covetousness will
not permit a man to show himself thankful, Co^etousnes burns tha^kfulnes.
though he have never so great and just cause so to do. For to him that is
altogether set on having, impossible it is to give so much, until he say ho.
How much more we have, somuche more we desire to have. And look how much the
more we grow to abundaunce, somuche the hotter waxes the fire of our
covetousness within us, as we see the flame of the fire to be somuche the more
fervent, as thabundaunce of substance of wood ministers occasion. Ambicio^
bredeth Ingrati^^de.
Neither will Ambicion and inward disyer of honor permit a man to rest himself
in that degree and estate, whereunto some time before, himself would never for
shame have desired to aspyre. For if happily he be chosen Tribune, he does not
adiudge that office thanks worthy except he be prefer^ed to be a Praetor. And
having attained thereunto, yet he holds not himself co^te^t until he be made
Co^sul Neither will be rest there, if there be a^y one office above that, either
in estimacion or proffet. For Couetousenes always goes on forward, and
seeks still to have, never wayeng a man's present good state, or casting the
eye back thither where he began, but wholly addresseth the mind to attain
that it hunteth after. And yet is envy more pestiferous and harmefull the^ any
these that I have named. Enuy^ causer of unthankfulness.
As that which with her infinite and those odious comparisons making, never
suffers us to be at quiet with our selves. Thus says Envy. Indeed such one
did me such a benefitte, or showed me such a plesour, howbeit he did much
more for such one, and that with far more expedicion and speed. Moreover
Envy never examineth eyth^r one man's matter or other. And in th^se that touch
and concern herself she is ^ut of all measure parciall.

Cha. 28.
BUt how much better and honester were it to extol set forth and commend the
benefitte and plesour that we have received, After what ^ort we should perceive
of benefits do^^ to us.
and to persuade our selves that none stands so highly in the favor or grace
of him that has plesoured us as we our selves? As to say: undoubtedly I had
had a far gretter benefit at his hands then this, saving that in very deed he
might not the^ commodiously do it, for he had more to plesour after the same
manner besides me. Well this was the first and it is a good beginning. Let me
take this in good part, it shall encourage him to do the better by me an other
time, when he sees me take so simple a thing so gratefullye. Though it be
but little he did now, well he will do it the ofterner. What though he
pleasoured such one before me, did he not prefer me also before a number of
others? I grant that neither he, nor he, were to be compared with me in no
degree, and yet why should not he use his benefits as was his own plesour? What
though my parentage be better then any of theirs that were preferred before me,
yet must I needs grant in that he showed me any pleasonr at al, he did more
then he owed me. He extended his liberality more largelye upon varlettes then
he did upon me, and what makes that any matter? you may see how like herself
vncerteinly and vnequallye fortune does sometime deal. Do you not se how
naughty people are aduau^ced to honors and wallow in wealth, and far honester
then they are do want? To true it is, and yet not to be stuck at. Do we not
also see that goodmens corn is stricken with blightes and blasting, and yet
evil men's corn scapeth clear? As each man has his several hap and fortune
in other worldly matters, so has he also in finding frendshyp. But to
conclude, there is no benefitte done so thoroughlie nor effectually, but the
naughty and perverse natures of men can quarrel against it. And again there
is no pleasure so small or simple, but an honest naturd receiver thereof, ca^
enlarge it and make it seem great and ample. There shall never doutles want
cause of complaint, so long as a man will misconster the manner of doing of
benefits, and interpret them to the woorst.

Chap. 29.
HOwbeit it is but little or nothing to be merueyled at, though among our
selves we quarrel on this sort the one against the other, seeing not the ignorant
and vnleaned people only, but eue^ they also who profess Philosophy, and
take on them to have such understanding that they would take great scorn to
be trippt any whit in their doings or judgment, exclaim in many things
against godd himself: and that for matters of no importance, and such again
as nature neither will assent unto. Misconsterers of gods ordinance.
As for that me^ are not framed in fayture and proportion of body as huge as
Elephants, as swift as Roes, as light as birds, as strong as Bulls, their
skine as thycke as any bestes hyde, as comely to behold as does, as thick with
hear as a Bear, as soft as the Ownce, his smelling as fine as the dog, as
sharp sighted as the Egle, as long lived as the Crow, and as fortunat in his
nativity as any brute best, that he might straight help himself. And though
some of these qualities are not possible by course of nature to agree in any
one body together, as consistyng in manner of contrarieties, yet blush not they
to say that it is a great iniurye done to man's nature, that he being superior
to al things created, should want the exact perfection of diverse such
qualities whereby his inferiors excel him. Affirming moreover that manne was
much wronged that he had not in his birth and with his first being parfit
health, invincible strength and fore knowledge of things to come granted, Yea
they have caught the byt of Reason so fast between their tethe of folly, and
wax so hedstrong that they run gadding so far, that uneath they can be
stayed from enuienge that their nature is such as it is, and not equal with
God himself. But if we weighed and considered things aright, how much more
meet were it for us and agreeable with our estate, to direct the sight of our
mind to behold and dewlye consider the miraculous form and order of those
things? to render thanks for so many and sondrie benefits bestowed upon us,
for that we have our being here in this world in such sort as we have it, and
all other things under our subjection to use at our plesours? What soever has
been denied us by him which first formed us, we ought to judge that he did it
for that he knew it neither meet, convenient, nor expedient for us. Therefore
Whosoever he be that judges so wide of man's most perfect creacion, let him
consider with himself how strong beasts we master, how swift bestes and
fowls we catch. Finally what thing there is in all the world but is at our
plesour to save or spill, and he shall (I think) easelye perceive and confess
his great error. Besides all this, what a number of excellent virtues are we
far above all other creatur^s endewed wit all? the true thought that christian
men ought to hau^ of gods ordinance.
What knowledge, what sciences and arts, and what a wit and understanding have
we, which so son as it deuiseth any thing, forthwith it comprehends it,
swifter far then the stars themselves, as that which consydereth and
knows how their mouynge and course will be many years before they run that
course? Again what abundaunce of diverse kinds of fruits, or riches, and to be
short of all things that are to be had, have we heaped one upon an other and
all at our commandment? And yet if all this can not suffice thy fantasy,
traueile if thou list all the world over, examine dilige^tlie and mark the
nature, qualities, and in each point the condition of every thing that thou
shall there happen to see and find, and yet dare I well auerre and for truth
justify that among them all thou shall not find out any one, with which thou
willingly would exchau^ge thine own astate that thou now enioyst, be the
same never so simple or sklender, to assume in each point that of his. Which
things so falling forth, as upon dew proof they will assuredly do, then
caust thou not chose (I trow) but think and say that nature, yea God has
above al other things dealt most beneficiallie with thee as with his own dear
derling. For verily truth it is that God who is immortal both has done, A
certain argument of gods assured love.
and still does love us and that tenderly, for certain toke^ now hereof, he has
made us like himself ye most evident argument of his parfect love. At whose
hands we have received so great benefits besides, that impossible it is to
have any gretter.

Chap. 30.
I Thought it both good and necessary to say this that I have done by the
way, and to take occasion to entreat of great and weighty benefits also, since
I had waded so far in talk about the small ones, An argument a fortiori,
that they that set ly^ht by gods benefits no meruel though they neglect
men's.
partlye for that fromhense this detestable arrogancy and Ingratitude takes
rooting especially. For to whom I pray you do you judge he will render
courtesy, what benefit think you he will account great or worthy to be
repayed, that co^temneth and neglects the greatest benefits that may be of
all? To who^ will be adscribe his health his soul dew, that denies the
receiving of the same at gods hand, and yet desires daily of him the
continuance of the same? Whosoever he be therefore that teaches men to be
thankful, pleads for God and man. To whom (although he has no need of
them) yet we may give thanks wellenough. For the not doing which dewtie,
poverty or want of ability can not be alleged by way of excuse. As to say
what shall I do? or how can I show myself willing to render the like of that
I have received at his hands that is Lord and geuer of all things? I say thou
may do it with ease enough. For if thou be a niggard and loath too be at
chargee about it, thou may yet do it without expense. If thou be slowthfull,
yet may thou do it without travel or pains taking. As thus. In the very
same instant that thou receiuest a benefit, and so forth on still render hearty
thanks for the same, which is neither great charges nor labor to do.

Chap. 31.
Verily in my fancy this Paradoxe or opinionatif Sentence of the Stoiques A
paradoxe of ye stoiques.
should not be counted so strange as it is, and scant woorthye of credit.
Namelye. That he has requited the plesour which he received, who has
ioyfullye accepted the same. For sith that all things are to be referred to the
mind alone, I think that he has done enowgh who has declared himself willing
to requite it so nere as he could. And forasmuch as Piety, faith, Justice,
and to be short each vertew is parfect and absolute within and of it self,
though a man use no act of his hand to any of them, even so may any man be
thankful fullye and thoroughlye in will alone. For so often as the intent
takes such success and effect as a man before de^ised with himself, so often
also may he be said to reap the hoped fruit of his desire and travail. Who
that gives any benefit, what is his pretense at that time? Uerelie to benefit
him to who^ he gives it, and that he should take pleasure in it. Then if it be
so that he has done that which he would do, and that I have parfite
intelligence of his mind what it was, and that we have rejoiced mutuallye by
exchange (as it were) he has then that which he desi^ed himself. He did it not
for this that he looked to have the like again at my hands: for the^ it had
not dese^ued the name of a benefit but rather were to be called an exchange of
marchaundise. I say. That certeinlie he sailed well and made a prosperouse v^age
that chanced safely to fall into that haven or port whyther at launching
first forth he directed his course. That dart was sure cast with a skillfull
hand that hit the mark at which it was cast. Who that does any benefit, does
it to that end that it should be thankfully accepted. If it be so received he
has that he would. But perhaps you will say he looked to repe some other
commodity and gain thereby. Then certes might it not have been called a
benefit. It is not to be said a benefit for which ye doer thereof looks for
profet or reco^pense
The property whereof is not to look to receive any thing again. If I happened
to receive that which was given me with the same mind that it was given, I have
repaid as much as I received. In recompensing benefits and plesures received, I
must regard mine own fortune. Which if it be such that I be not able to
requite like for like it suffices that I owe a well meaning mind, for that of
his. How then? I will moreover dilige^tlie obseru^ ^o get thaduauntage both of
the time and things: and shall asfar as I may, show miself desirous to
satisfy him at ful^ at whose hands I have had any plesour. But truly in mine
opinion they scant merit the denominacion of benefits which a man may not
seem to requite with bare goodwill without any more, if his power will extend
no Farther.

Cha. 32.
SOme will perhap say that whosoever receives a benefit, That it behooves to
requite a benefit that is done.
though he receive it never so tha^kfully, yet has he not done so much as is to
be required at his hands, for that he is yet to make recompense for the same
beside. For like as in tossing of the ball, it is somewhat praise worthy to
receive the ball skillfully and conningly when it is tossed to him: but yet he is
not to be called an expert and parfect player except he stryke the ball back
again as finely and redely. This example is somewhat unlike to our now
proposed talk, although before it served our propose fitlye enowgh when we
talked of benefits generally but now we have strayted that kind of talkyng
of that generality and are come nearer home, to consider how they do consist
in the mind. The commendacion of this play consists in the nimble and
quick moving of the body and not at all in the mind. And there all must
needs be exponed and laid to the vewe where the eyes are to give judgment,
which can give sentence no farther then they are led by saying. And yet (to
answer this objected argument.) Nothing lets but that a man may have
skill enowgh for owght we see as yet in his play although he cast not the
ball back again which his fellow tossed to him before. For it may be that the
fault is not in him why he does not so. Yet if he will object again, that
admitting he has parfitte skill, and that as he received the ball conninglye,
so he can smite it back as Artificialiye, yet is not his play parfecte, so
long as he doyth but only receive. Whereas the perfection of it consysteth as
well in that one point as in that other. I mean in observing and keeping his
turn as duly to toss back to his fellow, as to receive the ball when it is
to^t to him from his fellow. But I will stay no longar upon refelling these
arguments. Let us admit it to be so that there is indeed some defect in the
play but no want of skill in the player. And so is it in the matter we talk
of. There wants indeed somewhat to the perfection of the thing that is to be
given again, but there is no want in the mind from whense the said gift
should proceed.

Chap. 33.
Such one has done me a plesour well: I receive it as tha^kfully as he meant it
to me fre^dlye. In this very one thing he has ye thing that he only desired:
that was that I should be thankful. When he has fownd this, yet rests there
that he should use me besides, and wherein I am able that I should do him the
like plesour: which is the certain sign of a thankful heart. And yet ought
not this to be called the other part of a dewtie yet vnparfyt, but rather the
way and mean to attain to the perfection thereof. As for example. Phydias the
painter made a picture. An example of a coming painter.
The fruit of his art is one, and the fruit of his artificiallnes and conning
is an other, and each far different from other. The fruit of his art was to
make that which he would. The fruit of his artificiallnes and conning, was to
make it so that it might yield him some profit and gain. He may have the
fruit of his art, and yet want it of his artificiallnes. For that he may have
finished his work, and yet not sold it, Again the fruit of his whole
workmanship consists in three points. The first is his own fancy which
is satisfied when he has accomplished his work in dew order and decently.
The second is report and fame which others give unto him for his co^ningly
handling it. The third is the proffit which he gets either by sale of the
said picture or otherwise. Let us appoint a benefit also to have three like
^ea^es. Three manner profi^^^ that grow by benefit^s.
The first whereof let be in ye mind or fancy of the geuer: wherein he is
satisfied fully, so sone as he sees he has benefited him whom he would, in
such wise as he would. The second is ye report and fame he gets thereby.
The third consists in such plesures as mutuallye the one may do to the other.
Whereupon I conclude thus: that when a benefit is tha^kfully received, he who
gave it, reaped already thereby thanks at the hands of him to whom he gave
it, (which is the principal point to be regarded:) although he have not yet
received the like reward again. It appears then that that which I owe for any
benefit received is no part of the benefit it self, namely the recompensinge
of a benefit. And as for the acknowledging thereof, I have repayd that
sufficiently in that I received it thankfullye.

Chap. 34.
BUt how can this stand with Reason will some happily say? It is impossible
that any one may be said to requite ye plesour I have done to him at whose
hands I never sith receued suit or service. I say doutles he has done very
much that has received thy benefitte thankefullie. For first he has therein
declared to thee his good heart. Secondlye he has showed himself willinglye to
owe like goodwill to thee as he found at thye hands: which is an evident
tooken of a freendly and honest heart. Benefits and the things that are lent
and borrowed, are not like, nor a like to be recompensed and repaid. If thou
ha^t benefited any man, look not for any recompense by hand. For the
requital thereof rests chefelye in the mind and heart of the man. It shall
not prove in thend very strange to thee that which I say, though it seem at
the first show somewhat to impugn and contrary thine opinion) if thou will
give me the hearing a little, and understand by the way that there is more
plenty of things in the world, then we have coppie and change of words to
term each of them severally by several names. By mean whereof we are enforced
to shift as well as we ca^ with such words as we have, though they be some what
improper and not full meet for that that they are applied unto. As for proof,
we call ye foot of our own body, the foot of a bed, and the foot of a verse,
by the name of a foot indifferentlye. Again a dog hound, a dog fish, and a dog
star, by the name of a dog alike. And this confusion by equiuocacion does
happen because we are not able for want and penury of several words to
term each of them diuersely: and therefore are we driven to use such words
as we have to serve the ^orne as it will be in this extremity. Stowtnes we say
is a vertew that despises and sets light by dangers and perrils, without
being moved or disquieted by them. Or else it is a knowledge showing us how we
should with stand endeuer, or avoid all dangers. So do we call Fence
players and desperate knaves which careless and without any regard put their
lives in adventure, stowt men. We do in like manner define or describe
Niggishnes to be a knowledge how to avoid excessive charges: or else an
understanding how to spend our substance moderatelye and yet we call a Misar,
him that hungar drops out of his nose (as we say) one that is so near himself
that he is not worthy to bear the name of a man, him call we a nigga^d also.
Thus we see and can discern a great diversity to be between meesure and
extremity: And that these things differ much in nature the one from the
other. Howbeit the penury of apt and proper words, causes us to call both
the one and the other a Niggard. Again, him stowt that with Reason endewreth al
dangers, and that other stowt also who though he cast himself head long into
the^ yet suffers he the same stowtlye, without seeming to be moved or any
whyt dismayed thereby. After the same manner, we call by the name of a benefitte
both the accion and doing of the benefit, and the substance of the matter and
thing which is given or done, as money, houses, Lands, or apparel. One
only name is attributed to them both indifferently, and yet the force, nature
and qualytie of them is far diverse.

Chap. 35.
Give me leave yet a little, and mark my words well. For hitherto have I not
said any thing that need to be misliked much withal, or can be well
denied. And now return we to our propose again. Touching somuche of any
benefit as the accio^ and doing thereof does accomplish, The poi^tes where upon
benefits consist
if we receive the doing thereof thankfullye, we have so far even now requited
the same. But as touching the substance of it, that is to say the thing
given, we have not asyet thereby made recompense for that, but that is referred
to our own will. For that good will which has relacion to the doing of the
benefit, we have answered with like goodwill by thankfullye accepting of it.
Notwithstanding we must think we owe yet more: namely one benefitte for an
other, one material thing for an other. And although I say he has rendered
thanks yt has declared himself to have accepted a benefit thankfully, yet
would I him to repaye some thing or other besides, like to y^ which he
received, yt may also deserve to have ye name of a benefit as that did which
he had. Some of these things that I say seem somewhat to varye from the
Common Phrase of spekyng some one way: and yet some other way to agree well
enough therewith. We say commonly that wise men can by no means bear wrong.
And yet if a wise man hap to have a blow thynk you not that he has wrong? So
say we in common speech, what should Fools do with goods? And for all that,
if any man should steal any thing from a fool and were appeched and attached,
think you he were not like to be condemned of theft? In talk we call such
and such mad. And yet we see the same which in some respect we called mad
men to have the electing of Magistrates, the deputing of offices, the
government of provinces, and rule of Cities. So though I say that he that has
received thankfully the plesour that is done to him, has in his so doing
rendered the like, yet do I notwithstanding aver that he is yet still in the
others det for all that, and that he must make father recompe^se though he
have already done some point of his duty: not thoroughly acquiting him of all
that he ought to do. So that this saying of mine weihged aryght, is an
aduertiseme^t and admonicion to men to requite such benefits as they have
received, and no discharge thereof. But in any case let us beware that through
the hugenes of the burden we faint not, and dispairing by mean of our
sklender ability we give not over in the plain. The saying of the thankful
man.
As if we would consider and weigh (as Reason an^ honesty would we should)
the whole matter with our selves, and say. Certes such one has done me
merueilous great plesour, he saved and clered my good name which was half in
danger to be disfamed. He delivered me from great poverty into which I was
fallen, I had douhtles lost my life if he had not been. By his only mean have
I my liberty which I hold derer then my life. And how or when shall I be
able to deserve his so great benefits? Which way is it possible that my
goodwill can by any means seem to requite the very least of al these? Uerely I
say who that has this kind of thought and mind with him has even thereby
showed sufficiently his thankful acknowledging of the good and plesour that he
has received. Therefore if thou have a plesour showed thee, receive it,
embrase it, be glad therewith, and rejoice at it. Not for that thou
receiuedst it, but because thou have thereby occasion to do the like again,
which of deuty thou must, and not fail to do it. And so shall thou be well
assured not to incur the danger to be called unthankful. I will not here
prescribe thee any hard precepts that thou should observe in requiting of
benefits, to thend thou should not despair, and that the difficulty of them
should not quail thy courage. Nevertheless if thou have been plesor^d by any
body, I would not in any wise thou should tract the time and lingar on,
but with speed seek to requite it, and render the like.

For questionles if thou be not presently, doutles thou will never be
thankful. qui no^ est hodie ^ras minus aptus erit
Thou will now perhaps demand of me what thou shall do? Whether thou shall
venture thye life in the feeld for him that has plesoured thee? I say perhaps
thou shall. Again whether thou shalt endaunger thie life upon the seas for
his cause? Yes verly, and it may fortune it shall be needful so to do, when it
shall blow merueilous foul wether, and be high and rough seas, and yet may
thou not stay though wind and tide were both against thee when thou
should launche forth.

But to conclude, desire thou to render the benefitte thou haste received?
Tha^kfull rec^iuing, the first poi^t of re-repay^ng a bene^it.
in any wise then receive it thankfully. Therein haste thou paid some part,
but yet think not that thou art so discharged, but persuade thie self that
thou may so much the boldlier and with better assurance yield and confess
thyself ^ettour for the rest.

The third Book.
Chap. 1.
IT is a foul vice and of all men worthelye so accounted not to acknowledge
nor render thanks for benefits received and had. Ingratefulmen co^plain upon
Ungrateful.
And for-this cause unthankful persons themselves take cause to complain them
upon such as they find to them unthankful. Wherein one of them espieth in an
other and blames that which in themselves is as worthy reprehension. Of
which kind of people the conditions of many of them are so cross and
overthwart, that they purchase disliking not only for their neglecting, or
^orgetting what benefits and plesures have been done to the^, but also for not
doing again such benefits as they should do to us. Which happens to some
through naughtines and peruersenes of their natures. And to others some for
that they suffer time to eat out of memory the plesours which we have done to
them. Which kind of men some would not judge worthy to be called unthankful,
but seem to give them (as they guess) a more manerlye name, and term them
forgetful. Forgetfulness of a benefit, y^ ch^fest cause of Ingratitude.
As who would say that that could excuse Ingratitude, which (to say the
truth) is the principal and master ^oot thereof. For how is it possible that
that should by any means seem to excuse a man from being counted
unthankful, that is found in none else but in them that are unthankful.
Howbeit there are sundry sorts of unthankful men like as there are of thieves
or murderers. Whose factes notwithstanding all agree in one kind: for each
theft is theft, each murder murder, and each unthankfulness is vnthanfullnes.
But some yet are more heinous then other some are, and differ in the
quantity or quality of the fact, or both. He is unthankful that denies the
recept of the benefit which he had. He is again unthankful that dissembleth
and will not voluntarily confess and acknowledge it. He is also unthankful
that requiteth not the benefit which he received. But he is most unthankful
of all the rest, that forgets it quite. The residew yet though they requite
it not, yet they rest dettours for it, and there appears yet in them some
sign and show that benefits were by them received, though they be reposed and
coucht in an evil conscience. And yet these persons upon some one cause or
other, may hap to be moved at one time or other, to render thanks. Perhaps
shame will work remembrance of their duties, or the like need at an other
time the one of these otherwyle takes place in very naughty natures. But he
that has quite forgot that he had such plesour showed him, seems to be past
all hope that he ever will show himself to be thankful. And to say the truth
if it should be put to your own judgment, which of these would you deem
most ungrateful? Who is to be said most Ingrate.
him that refuses and neglects to render thanks for the plesour which was
showed him, or else that other that forgets it quite, and remembers it
nowhit at all? Indeed those are evil eyes that can not endewer the brightness
of the light, but they are plain blind eyes that see no whyt. Assuredlye it is
a wicked part if any one should hate and not love his parents. But to refuse
and deny, and not acknowledge them, is a manifest sign of madness. Who is so
unthankful as he that has clean rejected careleslyke, that which he should
have allw^yes in remembrance, and that so sets it aside, that he forgotteth
it quite? It may be well thought that he never troubled his head much with
deuis^ng and studieng how to requite the benefits which were done to him, if
he have suffered them to slide quite forth of memory.

Chap. 2.
That to requite a benefit at ^ull what are requisite.
NOw who that will requite the benefits and plesours that have been showed him by
an other, has need of ability, time, and Fortune fauowrable: who that
bears in mind without forgetting, the plesour ^e has received, is thankful
without any Farther charge. And he that will not do that that requires
neither labor, riches nor great good Fortune, is worthy to have but little
alleged for him by way of excuse. Dowtles he never mente to show himself
thankful that cast benefits done to him, so far out of his sight that he did
not somuche as think upon them any more. For as that which is daily at
hand to us, and in continual use mouldeth not ne waxes hoare, and again
those things which are laid aside out of sight and forgotten gather soil of
their own accord by only lieng still, So what is in the daily exercise and
occupieng of the mind, is never forgotten: as that which loses nothing,
except it be that that is cast aside (as it were) never to be occupied, or
thought upon any more.

Chap. 3.
Besides this that I have alleged, there are other causes also which often
times let us from remembering such benefits as are done to us. Exc^ss if
coue^yse causes in gratitude
The first and chefest of which is. For that as we are altogether led with new
desires, so we regard never what we alredye have had, but consider whollye what
we would have, not casting any eye or regarding that which is in possession,
but respecting that only which we make pursuit after. The passing greedy
and covetous desire we have, causes us to set but light by any thing that we
have already, and to weigh him but little at whose hands we received it. But him
we love, to him we do all manner of obseruaunce, we affirm that all the stay
of our welldoing depends on him, so long as we list to like of the things
we receive at his hands. But so sone as we begin to take a smatche of other
greter plesours, and that we feel any life (as they say) in it, that it is
coming and may be got, (as the guise of men is nowadayes after they have
obtained great things to hunt still after greatter,) then farewell that we
before had in so great price, and after the other wc might and main. Then
weigh we no lo^gar the things which erst have preferred us, but fix our eyes
wholly to consider how yt which we shote at has aduau^ced to fortime those yt
had the same. And how can a man be both enuyous of an other man's state, and
thankful for his own? It is impossible: For Envy is always accompanied
with sadness and sorrow: and tha^kfulnes is associated with glad^es and
ioyfulnes. Farthermore forasmuch as we regard nor weigh the passing time any
longar while, then that it is in passing, seldom when we call to mind the
things that passed in that time. Whereupon it follows, that Scolemasters we
see so usually lost their benefits which they bestow upon us in our youth.
For which notwithstanding that they demeryte in^eed worthily great thanks, yet
for all that, they find them not repayde, for that we to whom they were done,
do never call to mind, nor weigh duly what things happened within that age.
Neythere of the time it self when it is ones past, no man makes more account
then as if it were lost. And as things done in that time, pass also with the
time, doutfull it seems, lest when they are ones past, they be also past hope
of remembrance.

Chap. 4.
The Epicures co^playnt.
BUt in this place me seems I may very well agree with the Epi^ure and fortyfie
his Reason: who complains always that we are so unthankful and unmindful of
the plesour that is past. What commodity soever we have had, we call it not to
remembrance nor account it any longar in the number of plesours: Whereas
indeed there is no one plesour so certain as that which is past, for that we
are well assured can by no means be taken from us. Asfor the present plesours
says the Epicure, they stand not yet on sewer ground: Multa c^du^t
intercalice^ supremaque Labra.
for by one misfortune or an other, a man may hap to lose them. Yea perhaps
when he thinks himself most assured of them. And as for those that are to
come and not yet done, but stand in hap de pays, they hang suspiciouslye
and upon great vncertentye. But those that all ready are had and be past,
they are ded sure. And who that will diligently b^hold the present benefits
which he now enjoys, and but call to mind howmuche those which he has
received in times past stood him in stead at the time of the Recept of the
same, can not those (as I deem) but show himself thankful. But who so passes
on, still gaping for fr^she benefits, dowtles will take but small keep to the
benefits that are ones past.

Chap. 5.
AS there are some things whereof it is sufficient to give precepts for
thattainment of them, A comparison of certain sciences and benefits.
and when they are ones had, they are not lightly forgotten, so are there some
other again which be they never so perfitelie and thorouglye learned, yet the
knowledge of them sone fades again, and is quite forgotten, except it be
continually and almost without intermissio^ renewed. As the science go of
metry, and the knowledge of natural and supernatural things and such like,
which for their subtilitie and perfect finenes sone begile ye memory. So fares
it with benefits: of which, some for their weightines will not be forgot. Again
othersom there are less in value but more in number: yet in time they are gone
out of mind quite. Which happens for this cause only, that as I said we do not
ef^sones call them to our remembrance, and thankfully acknowledge what we owe
to each man seueraly. But mark what we ca^ say when we ask any thing. There is
none of us then but we can affirm yt the memory of the plesours we have found
or desire to have, shall never forth of our mind. None but that yeldeth himself
wholly bounden for that time, Note.
and if there be any words of gretter humility and lowlines the^ others, they
are not th^n to s^eke, but we have them perfitely I warrant you and at our
fingars ends. But within a while after that we have obt^ined our propose, and
desyer, then farewell al our faier speech, it waxes the^ unsavory in our
mouths. And ye words which no rather we thought not half good enough nor
worthy the personages on who^ we bestowed the same, we count to base now to
proced forth of our mouths. And so within a very little while we come to y^
stay that the most and worst ungrateful men of al are a^: which is, to
remember nowhyt at al what plesour and benefits have been done unto us. And
doutles he is to be accounted as much unthankful, and is no less to be argued
of Ingratitude yt forgets a benefit ones done unto hi^, the^ he is to be
judged thankful, that still courteously and thankfully acknowledges the
recept of the same.

Chap. 6.
IT has been demanded of some, why this passing great vice worthy to be
detested and abhorred of all men that profess ye name of honesti^, should be
suffered still to escape without dew punishment limited for it, and why the
same Law is not dewlye executed upon thoffendours in that behalf in Cities,
which has been sometime practiced in Schools? Where it has been permitted to
the party benefyting to seek and use his remedy against him that he has
benefited if he show himself unthankful. Which seems to some but just
and reasonable it so were. But our auncetours men of great noblesse were wo^t to
requier of their mortal enemies money or such like things as they had
happily lent them in time of freendshippe and amity. As for the plesours or
benefits they had bestowed upon them what soever they were, like as with a
franck heart they bestowed them at the first, so did they no l^sse lib^ral^y let
them pass quyte, without demanding ever again. And except the Macedoniens
only, The macedoni^ns provided by order of Law against vntha^^ull men.
I know no kind of people that ever made any Law by which a man might sewe
him that he found unthankful. And yet is this the strongest reason and argument
we can allege to prove why the unthankful body with us should not be
sewed. We have say we, always assented and so usually practiced it to punish
sharply each heinous offense that has seemed to us worthy of punishment, as
manslaughter, witchcraft, murder, robbrye, profaning of sacred institutions
and such like. Against all these in some country one kind of punishment, in
some other an other kind is assigned. But eueriewhere there is some pain
appointed for the trespassours. But as for this vice which is so commonly
practiced and daily in ure, it is euerywhere reprehended, but no where
punished. Neither yet do we clearly acquit and discharge it from desert of
punishment but for that we can not agree upon it to determine punishment
certain for it, therefore we adiudge it only worthy to be hated, and despyted,
and refer it over wholly to the gods for reuengement.

Chap. 7.
ANd to say the truth I can allege a number and those very good and strong
reasons to prove whi this vice of Iugratitude should by no means have been
provided for by Law. (...) re^son^ (...) Ing^a^^tud^ s^uld not not be remedyd
by Law.
For first the chief and principal part, of the benefit were lost if a man
were to recover it by plee or otherwyse^ as one would do money or any such
like thing that he takes of love, and is to answer again, For this is the
chef^st thing that is praise worthy in bestowing of benefi^s, to persuade our
selves to loose the^ so sone as we have ones parted with them, and to refer
it wholye to the conscience of them on whom we b^stowe them, whether we shall
in deed find them so or not. For if I should b^t o^es ^ountenaunce to sew him
that I have plesour^d, or have him before a Judge for the recoueringe mine own
benefit or the like again, in that so dealyng, it resseth forth with to deserne
thappellacion of a benefit, and would be named a thing lent. Besides, as it is
an honest thing to render thanks for plesures received, so does it put of the
face of honesty, and may be ashamed to presume to challenge that name when
they are to to be requyted of necessity and by enforcement. For were it so that
sewtes penalties and punishments were limited in this case, then would none
commend ye grateful and thankful man any more then him that is bound to repay
a so^me of money by such a day, who preventing the day pays the money sooner
then he needed to have done. Farthermore if we should sewe for our benefits,
we then should lose two the most precious things in all the world Namely a
thankful man and our benefit. For then what thing worthy any great thanks
should there be thought to be in him, that did not do, but lend his
benefitte only for the time, or in him that repayeth the same not for that he
would of his own accord, good nature, and free will do so, but for that he
was enforced thereto to avoid the danger that might ensew? It should merit
no great co^mendacion to be tha^kfull, e^cept without peril and danger a man
might be unthankful if he so listed. But this one thing were sufficient to
discourage and dissuade us as I guess from sewing for our benefits. What and
if all the places in the whole world where Justice is had and cognisaunce of
plea holden should prove not sufficient nor rowme enough for each party
agreued to come in place to make his plaint? Should it come to that pass that
we might sew for right in this case, who is he that should not have cause to
plain, or who he that might not be impleaded?

Chap. 8.
FOr this cause this seems no meet matter to come in question of Law. And to
say the truth, it were a very hard matter and full of difficulty to find a
Judge able to decide all such controversies and dowtes as happily would fall
out upon thorough scanning some one of these causes. So that you would wonder
to think if you deepelye examine and consider the matter, how much he should
have to do that should give indifferent and upright sentence upon one impleaded
for this fact. Admyt the case to be this. There was one that gave his frinde
standing in need a very great some of money without askyng either interest for
it or his own money again. But he that gave it was a very rich man, B^ne^^^^
of like quontity f^r diffe^rent in qualitie^
and one of such welthe that he might spare it wellenowgh with out susteyning
any damage or detriment by it. There was again an other that having his frynde
in great distress for want of the like sum of money, and pitieng his Frinde
as much as himself, delivered him so much money but it was not his own of store
lieng by him, but for the getting of it redye for his frinde he was feign ^o
sell a piece of his liuelod and enheritaunce. See now the sum in these two
Cases is all one. But the benefytte not so, if it be dewly weighed. Again this
admit to be the Case. One that had his frinde at such a strayt that all his
goods were redye to be confiscated and made port sale of, being stored so well
him self that he had so much money of his own spare and doing him no plesour
in his house, let his Frinde have it to save his goods. An other in like
manner having his frinde at the like extremity, and not having of his own to
socour him withal, and yet loath to se his frinde undone, being better able to
shift at that pinche then that other who for care and gryef wist not whyther to
torn him, went to that manne upon his credit, to that other upon his bonds
and pledges, and in fine got together so much money as should serve his
frindes necessity. How say yo^, count you the one plesour and the other in
this case like? There are some benefits that are accounted great not in
respect of the quantity and value of themselves, but in respect of ^he time
which they serve so fytlye. A benefytte well and dulye bestowed is accounted
as necessary and as much to be esteemed, as breadde given to him that is all
most ^ead for hungar. It is no more but a benefytte to give aman a country
through which run such commodiouse Ryuers that he may use traffic of
marchaundise by the same.

And it is a benefitte also to do no more but to show him that is passing
thyrsty and near ded therewith, where ^here is any spring of fayer clear
water. Now who is he that dare undertake aptly to compare these things
together? It goes hard when not only the matter it self, but the difficulties
and hard quiddities (as they are termed among the old Logicians) are to be
narowly sifted and skanned. As sondrye benefits are diuerselie ge^en, so do
they not depend all upon one point. Such one did me a plesour, but he did it
not willinglye, but he reported to others what he had done for me, but he
repented him sith of that he had done, and sense that time he has given me
more proud and disdainful looks then ever he was used to do. Again it was
very long before he would do that which he did, and used many delays in
doing of it, whereby I was more hindered, then if he had quyte denied me when I
requested it first.

Now if any of these benefits so done should come in question as I said,
how can any Judge I pray you indiferently and as he should do weigh these
things, when as the benefit appears to be done and yet the talk that paste
with it, the countenance of the geuer, and the doubts and delays which he
made before he would do it, do quite destroy and lose the grace of the said
benefit.

Chap. 9.
WHat though there be some things which for that they are so excedinghly
desired and sought after, merit the names of benefits, yet are there other
some things again, which though they are not so commonly coueted, they are
for all that far greatter in value then any those other, The qualit^e of the
benefits bredeth their estimacion.
though to outward show they appear not so to be. You count it a benefitte
to be made Burgess of any rich, great and welthie City, and there to be
preferred from office to office until you come to the highest. Again you
count it a benefit to save his life that is condemned to dye. And I beseech you
what will you call it to give counsel to one for his most proffit and avail?
to stay him that pretended to do himself or some other some mischefe? to take
a sword from him that was re^ie to kill himself? with good and wholesome advise
to reco^fort him that was nigh spent out with mourninge, and to reduce him to
his pristinat state of health? to watch with him that is very sick, and
brought even to dethes door, and when his fit is over past, to reco^fort him
with good and wholesome meats and little and little strengthen again his fadyng
spry^es? ^o bring a Physician to one almost ready to yield up the ghost
despayring of li^ or recovery, whereby yet he obtains his health? Who is he
that can say howmuch these benefits though they appear but small, are to be
esteemed? Again who is he that would adiudge these that follow worthy to be
made any comparison of? Such one gave the a house. And I gave thee warnyng that
it would fall upon thy head as it had done if I had not told thee of it and
thou prevented it. Such one gave thee large enheritaunce. And I when thou were
in the sea and r^ady to drown, threw thee a planke which saved they life and
brought thee to Land. Such one fowght in thy quarrel. And I endaungered my
life for thee, thou neither ware of it, nor desiering me. Seeing that as
benefits are diverse, so they are diuersely to be repayed, it were a very hard
thing to order the matter with such indifferency that they could be judged
one to match an other fullye.

Chap. 10.
FArthermore there is great diversity between the repayeng of benefits and
money loned. For he y^ boroweth money, has his day of repayme^t assigned him,
but in benefits requiting, there is no day limited. So y^ he y^ receives a
plesour may wellenowgh requite the same when he shall think good or when he
shall find occasion thereto. A benefit may be repayed at any time.
Tell me then will you say perhaps, within what time may a man be well called
unthankful if he requite not the plesour he has received. Uerely the grettest
benefits that are, lie preuelye hid in the consciences and minds of them that
do and receive the same. And this I say for that we should do our benefits
in such sort, that they may be acceptable and well thought of without using
auy witnesses or record berers. What penalty shall we then assign for them that
are unthankful? Assuredly I would assign but one kind of punishment to be
dew to them all in general. And for that all kind of benefits are not of like
quantity nor value, but some gretter some lesser, I would the said penaltye
should be also diminished or increased according to the quantity and quality
of the benefit so received and not requited. Well the^ admit that there are
some kind of benefits of which we ought to make as good account as of our
life. And some again which we have cause to weigh deerer of, then of our
life. If he that has received these show himself unthankful for the same,
what pain shall we judge him worthy of? Ought it to be any less then the
benefit was which he received? It were against conscience it should, Shall it
be then equal with it and like? Alas, what thing were there more miserable and
crewel, then that the end of benefits which in each thing ought to be ye best,
should be requited and paid with the death and blood shedyng of those whom
they should benefit.

Chap. 11.
BUt some will say that Parents yet ought to have certain privileges above
others for such benefits as they shall do to their Children I say nay.
Benefits of pare^tes
For in receiving benefits done by them to us, we observe neither order nor
degree more then we do in benefits received at any other bodies hand.
Howbeit we ought to observe and keep the reverent respect o^ dewtie that is
and ought ^o be between the parents and their children sacred and unstained,
for this that it is expedient they should beget children. And to them in
bestowynge of benefits, a man can not well say as he would do to an other
person. Consider and mark well with thyself on whom thou bestowest thy
benefits any more henceforth. If thou have showed pleasour and have not found
the like answered, blame no man but thye self who should have been well
advised to have pleasoured s^che only as thou knew woor^hy of the same.
But though the having or not having of Children rests not at the pleasour
and discreci^n of the parents, but in the hands and pleasour of God, yet is
it meet when they have them that they should have power and authorytie over
them, which may some what recomfort them again in the pacient abiding and
willinglye suffryng such chances and casualties as are incident to them that
adventure themselves to attempt that kind of fortune.

Again great odds is there between the parents and others in bestowynge of
benefits. For Parents though they have ones or oftener benefitted their
Children, and have had cause to think the same evil bestowed, yet may not
they cesse from benefiting them still, for all that. Moreover the benefits of
all Fathers are like, for what is required of any one in that respect, that
same is required of every one that bears the denominacion of a Father, and
not of one or other more or less.

But thee Nature of benefits which which are done from one to an other
where there is no respect of causes why, is far other. And as those benefits
are different among themselves, so can they not be comprehended under any one
Rule.

Chap. 12.
Diversity of benefits and of the persons to who^ they are done.
Diverse things there are that are very costly and chargeable to the geuers, and
other some things there are that are as thankfully accepted, and yet not so
painful for charges to be given. Some things we give to our Frindes and
familiar acquainted, and some again to strangers and persons not known.
Though the gifts which thou geuest to several persons be to each of them
acceptable, yet is that most commendable that thou geuest to him whom thou
knew not before, but beginst by that to know, in respect of that thou
gave to him whom thou knew before. Some are able to grant aid in
troubles. Others to confort with counsel in heaviness. And others some to give
promocions and sundry prefermentes, whereby the hauers countenance is much
amended, and his astate bettered, and as al these diverse sorts of benefits
differ one from an other, so shall you see diverse men diuersely desire the same.
Some one you shall find that shall think nothing so excellent as to have one
that in the depest extremity of his miserye, and when he is almost desperate
with sorrow, can yet wisely reco^fort him with good council Some other is there
that has more regard far, to worship and preferment attayning, then to living
in safety. Again some other ther^ is that does account himself more beholding
to him that saves him from perils and dangers, then to him that carefully
provides for his honesty. So that we se any of these things is so much more
or less esteemed of, as the party who is to give his sentence upon the same,
does more or less frame his fansye to like thereof. In money matters I chose
my Creditour whom I list my self. But benefits sometime I have at his hands
that willinglye I would not, and otherwhiles I am unwittingly bounden. And what
will you do in this case? will you call him unthankful that does not requite
the benefit which he received either unwittingly or against his will.

Chap. 13.
ONe that has done me a plesour heretofore, wc in a while after woorketh me a
great displesour. Tell me now Should I think myself bound to endewer asmany
wrongs and injuries as he would lay upon me for that he plesoured me one time,
or else shall I set the wrong he did me against the plesour I found before
at his hands? (and as the proverb is) the hares head against the goose
ieblets? If you were to be judge in this case whether ^yde would you think
the heuyer? The benefit to charge the receiver, or else the iniurye to be a
bar to the geuer? Time should fail me if I would attempt to recyte all the
matters of diffycultye that might arise in these cases, by which the Judge (if
it were so that this matter should come to pleadynge) would by so troubled,
that he could hardely say what sentence to give. But you will say that
hereof it grows that men are so unwilling to show pleasours as they are,
partelye for that we are so slack in requitynge the same, partelye for that
they that are so slack are still permitted to escape unpunished. Not so
neither. There are few or none that enforce bene^ites upon any man whether he
will or not, and again who that does benefitte any man being moved so to do
for the goodness and honesty of the cause that gives him encouragement thereto,
he does that he does gladlye, and forthwith discharges him who^ he has
benefited, from so much as thinking that he should be endetted therefore, he
does the same so franckly. Except it be so that the party benefited of his own
voluntarye will, will willingly acknowledge himself his detour, and seek to
requyte it. For if he should look f^r recompense or demand it, all the whole
glory and commendacion of the fact were gone. And this I say was the cause
that made men so charye from passing any Law for redress of this vice.

Chap. 14.
VErelye if it were possible that there might a Law be made for the punishment
of this vice of ingratitude, we should have less number of plesours done: but
then they that were done would then be better done. That benefits should be
bestow^d with circou^spectnes and discrecion
And assuredly they that heretofore would never make Law against it, yet for
all that, they themselves very advisedly and with great heed and warines, did
bestow such benefits and plesours as they showed to any, meaning thereby as it
should seem that their such example of charines, might also direct us, to
take dew regard and respect whom we admitted and allowed worthy, on whom
we would dispose and bestow our beneficence. In which behalf, if you stand
fully assured and persuaded before you bestow your benefits that he that is
to receive them is worthy to have them, I dare then warraunt you from having
cause iustlye of desire to use any accion for the recoueryng it again. When
thou art to bestow any benef^ts, regard only the honesty of the Receiver.
In so doing, thye benefits are done as they should be, and become famous.
But if thou should make pleadyng matters of them, thou should digrace
the^ quite. It is I grant a conscionable saying and most agreing with Law to
say Pay that thou owe. To p^ye that a man owes is a Law g^ounded on
n^tural reason.
And yet touching benefits, it is the fowlest and most unseemly saying and
fullest of discourtesie to say Pay. For what should he pay? Sometime he
owes his life, his health his welthe and sometime such weighty things can
not be paid themselves, nor any things else that may cou^teruayle the same.
This is it that I say. The worthiness of so precious a thing as a Benefit is,
shall be quite lost if we make marchaundise of it. We should not enforce nor
willingly apply our minds to covetousness sekyng of quarells and discension, it
is to prone of it self to such matters, if haplye any such cause begin to
grow, let us cut it of, rather the^ increase it.

Chap. 15.
WHat will some say shall the Ingrate and unthankful person escape quite and
go unpunished? What pena^t^es ^rderly follow vn^hanfull People.
Then pardon also the wicked man, the ^awghtipacke the covetous niggard, the
skornefull and disdainful man and the Tyrant. Why? think you that those
factes that are hated and despited may be said to escape unpunished? What
more greuouse punishment can there be laid upon any manne, then to be
hated dedlye of all men? He may think it punishment enough that he dare not
desyer any thing of any manne, for fear to be noted, marked, and pointed
at of every manne, or at least to think that he is so: and to know that he
has lost the estimacion of the beast and chefest Iewelles of the woorl^e
(to wit,) his honesty, credit, and estimacion. Do you not count him
unfortunate that has lost the use of his eyes, or whose hearing is quitte
stopped up? who that has no perceuere^ce of the pleasour that is done to hi^
is worse then he that is deprived of his se^ces


Then judge him a very wretched man that has altogether lost the
understanding of such plesours as have been showed unto him. Such one ought
to think with himself that he always stands in the danger and displesour
of the gods who are Record bearers and will be Reuengers of his said
Ingratitude. Besides, his own gylty conscience cesseth not continually to
molest and accuse him. And think you it not punishment sufficient the
continual remembrance of the loss of so many worthy things as he thereby
does lose? Look who takes pleasour and delectacion aright at the receiving of
a Benefyt, diversity be^wene the tha^kfull and the ingrate person and their
two lives.
retayneth still and reuiueth it and makes a continual pleasour of it, by often
remembering the same^ rejoicing not alone in the thing why^he he has, but also
in the freendly mind of him at whose hands he received the same. But the
unthankful man rejoices but only ones, (if he do that:) namely at that
instant when he receives the Benefit. There is moreover great diversity
between their two lives. For the one of them is always sad and sorowefull: to
wit thunthankfull man, who honors neither his Parents, nor his scolemaster,
nor his bringars up dewely as he should do. And contrariwise the thankful body
is always merry and pleasant, always seeking occasion to requite the
benefits which he has received, and is gretlye delighted if he find it: not
sekyng how he may fully digest it, but studieng after what sort he may fully
and thoroughly answer the same, and that not to his parents alone, but to
his frinde also and each simple wight that has any manner of ways benefyted
him. And if his bondsman happen to do him a plesour, straight way he weighs
not of whom, but what it was that he received.

Chap. 16.
HOwbeit some there are (as Hecaton for one,) which dout whether a bondsman or
servant may do any thing that may deserve ye name of a benefit to his
master: and therefore they make this division, The d^uisio^ of such ples^urs as
may be done.
that there are Benefits, Benefits
deuties, or good endeavors, and services. Benefits they call those plesours
which any strangers do to us. A stranger they call (in this respect) such one
as may when him lists cess^ and desist from so benefityng us. Good endeavors
or deuties, Duties or endeuou^s.
those plesours or fre^dly tournes which ye Children do to their parents,
wives to their husbands, or co^trarywise, or any one of them to an other, whom
affinity and allyaunce of blood does will and command to help and socour each
other mutually. Services they call such as the servant does to his master,
Services
who^ fortune has placed in such degree, that whatsoever he do in his
masters behalf, he most think it all but his duty. Whosoever for all that,
does deny that the servant may benefyt his master, declares himself not to
know what is right. For only it is to be regarded of what mind he was that
did the benefit, and not of what degree. Uertew penneth her self up from no
body, The way to vertew open to every person.
she shows and offreth herself to every body to be had. She admits all
that will be sewters, And those that happily pass by her without regard, she
calls back of her own accord. Freeborn, free made, bondslaues, banished men
and Princes, and all a like. She choseth neither the house nor the degree. She
contenteth herself as well with the naked man despoiled from al gifts of fortune,
as with him that has the^ all in most abundaunce. For though Fortune bear
great sway in ye world, yet vertew triumphs over her. If you will say that a
servant can not do a benefitte to his master, then will I auerre that it is
not possible for a Subject too do it to his king, or a Soldier to his
Capitain. For though there are diverse respects and sondrye tytles of the king,
the Captain, and the master, yet in this point they are al one touching ye
dewty of them that are under them and at their commandment. For as the king
has his subjects, and the captain his soldiers, so has the master his
servants at commandment. If the baseness of his degree be an impediment to
the servant that he may not attain to the perfection of his desert, as to
call the plesour he has done, a benefit, the like shall it also work to the
subject in respect of his Prince, and to the soldier in regard of his
captain. Though they varye in names, yet agree they indifferently concerning
their dewtie. But manifest it is that subjects do benefit their Princes, and
soldiers their Capitaines, by the same reason then, why may not the servant
also benefit his master? That a bound man may benefitte his Master.
The servant may be just, strong, valiant, and one of noble courage. What
then should ayle him but that he may also benefyt his master, since that is a
vertewe as well as ye residew? To prove it brieflee this might suffice. There is
no dout but that the servant may benefit any^ body. What then should ayle him
why he could not benefyt his master among the rest?

Chap. 17.
TO prove that the servant can not benefit his master thou will happlye
allege, that though he lend his master money, yet he can not properly be
said his masters Creditour. That only excepted, he does that daily that may
cause his master to think himself bound to him. For if he ride or go, he
accompaneth him. If he fall sick he tends him, and does his diligence about
him. Which things if any other body had done them, they had deserved the
name of benefits: but since his servant did them they must be called but
services only. A benefit say they is that friendly plesour which such a one
does as may chose to do it, and again refuse to do if him so lyketh at his
plesour. But the servant may not say nay to what he is able to do.
Whereupon he can not be said to do a benefitte what soever he doith, for
that he does but fulfill his dewtie, which he can not chose but do perforce.
Admit all these things to be so: yet will I bear the bell away here, and
will set the bondsman in as good plight, (for of such a servant understand
that I speak) as if he were free. Tell me by the way if I be able to show
you a bound servant who without all respect of his own health and safegarde
fought in defense of his master stoutely and being grievously wounded, and
bleedyng, by whole streams, keept his enemies still at baye whilst his
master might escape and shift for himself? Will you say he has not
benefitted his master because he was his servant? Again if I can show yo^ a
servant that would not be corru^ted with any fayer promysses nor gy^tes of
the Tyrant, not feared with any his thretnings, nor vanquysht with any his
punyshementes to disclose thee secrets of his master, but what in him lay
cleared the suspicions, and adventured his life for him, will you say that he
has not benefited his master neither for that he was his servant? Dowtles a
benefitte done by a servant too his master ought not for the estate of thee
doer too loose his accounpt and parfytte name, but it ought too be somuche
thee better judged of in him, for that thee base condition of his servitude and
slauerye could not dashe him from doing his duty ^horoughly, effectually,
and faithfully.

Chap. 18.
The mi^d is always fre and is exe^pt ^ro^ slavish bondage.
HE is much deceived that thinks ye servitude has domination and rule over
each part of a man. The chefest part of him is clear from any bondage. For
though the bodies be bound and at commandment of their masters, yet is their
mind at free liberty, and so free, that neither that prison of the body
wherein it is shut, can restrain it from sekinge to accomplish that that it is
inclined unto, and that tempting somewhiles of worthy enterprises. It is
thonly body that Fortune has made subject, put in thraldom, and assigned to
be at the masters commandment, plesour, and disposicion. That he byeth, that
he sells again as lyketh him best. And yet for all that we have not to
command our servants in each thing touching their bodies that they can do,
The bo^dman may refuse doing the commandment of his master in some things
as if our co^maundment sounded to the damage and prejudice of the weal
public, they may chose to do it, or to assist us to commit any robbery,
they may refuse it.

Chap. 19.
BUt there are some things which the Laws neither command nor inhibyt the
servant to do: and yet if he do them, he may well be said to have done a
benefitte. For when all dewtie and service is had of a servant which is
commonly to be required at such men's hands, yet rests there in some of them
that ability to do farther plesour besides that may well deserve the name of
a benefit. Wherein y^ bou^dma^ may benefit his master.
As when he does us that plesour that stands us in great stead, this in no
wise would be called a service. There are in like manner (to requite the dewtie
of the servant toward his master,) certene things wherein the master
stands bound to his most abject servant. As to find and allow him
sufficient and honest meant, drink and cloth, and yet are not these to be
called benefittes though the servant has them dewlye and well. Wherein the
master may b^nefyt his bo^^dman.
But if he tender him more then as a servant, bring him well up, and cause him
to be instructed in such knowledge and arts as long to Free men, then may
he be well said too have benefited him. In like manner fares it with the
servant if he do more then is incident to the name and dewtis of a servant
which proceeds not by commandment and coustraint but of mere free will, The
be^^f^t of y^ servant to his master.
it owght as well to be called a benefit being so done by him, as if any other
had done it.

Chap. 20.
A Bondsman says Chrisippus is a continual hired workman. The discripsion of
^ bou^dma^^
And like as when we have hired a workman to do such or such work, if he
do that, and more also that may advantage us besides, we accept it
thankefully and in good part: right so when the bondsman passes that which is
commonly to be required or almost to be desired at ye hands of such one, and
attempteth to do yt which were great thanks worthy in any one far better
born in the^ he surmounting ye opinion and credit of his master, this I say is
worthy to be called a benefit. For as if our bondma^ should do less the^ his
dewty you would not blame us to be angry with him, but would adiudge him worthy of
punishment, right so if he do more the^ dewtie, should we not seem to offer
him wrong if he should not find at our hands his thanks according? But
would thou know when a thing is not to be called a benefit? Uerely thenwhen
a man does that which he could ^ot chose but do. But when he does any
thing which he might have refused to doo^ and which was at his choice the
doing of it, then lo, is his good will worthy commendacion and thanks, and
the plesour which he does merits the name of a parfit benefyt. These two are
contraryes a benefyt and a wrong. And who that may sustain wrong at his
masters hands the same party may also do a benefit to his master. And to
prove that a bondsman may be wronged at his masters hands I need not seek any
farther testimony then that there are appointed magistrates and officers by
public consent to be vmpars between them, to redress the wrongs offered by
any such masters, to restrain their crueltye and oultrage in Punisshing, and
mesure their niggishenes in geuyng them necessaryes. So then it, appe^eth
lykwyse that the master may be said to receive a benefit at his servants
hand. Yea even as well as any one may at an others. For the servant does what
lies in him, he offered it to his master. Howbeit he can not force it upon him
except him list. And what man is he I pray you so lofty that at some one time
or other may not have need of very mean personages? Well for proof of these
things which I have said, I will recite unto you a number of benefits done
by such men to their masters. Some that delivered their masters from being
slain: some that otherwise saved their lives. Some that saved their masters
from being cast away and if that be not much, that for the saving of them cast
away themselves.

Chap. 21.
Claudius Quadrigarius in his A notable history of two bou^dmen
xxii. book of Chronicles makes report that at what time the City of Drument
was beseeged by the Romans, and that they that warded within were quite
deuoid of hope of being able to defend it any longar against the force and
sharp assaults of their enemies, two bondmen servants in one house priuelye
stole forth of the City by some posterne gate, lowpe hole, or other pryuye
place, and straight way fled to the camps of their enemies, making a pitiful
complaint of their more then crewell usage which they found at their maistres
hands a sole woman within the City: from whose rigor they were so escaped,
beseching them of grace and socour: who as they were full of compassion easelye
admitted and allowed their complaint to be true, received and entreated them
very well. Sone after, the City was taken, then did the Conquerours busily
apply themselves to take the spoil. But these twain as they were better
acquainted with the City then the Rest, so ran they a nerer way with all
speed straight home to their maistres house, to prevent the other enemies: and
taking her forth, drove her tofore them along the City through the myddest of
ye enemies, which diverse of them seeing, demanded of them both who she was
that they entreated so crewelly ^o see to, and what they meant to do with her.
This (qu^d they)? this is our deuelysh maistres who many time has used us
sorye wretches to bad. But now is come the time that we shall be revenged on her
wellenough she shall know anon what punishment means, and whether it be
easy to endure or no. Thus when by this means they had brought her clean
with out the City and danger of the enemies, and placed her in as much
safetye as they could deuyse for the time, they returned into the City, and
under color of taking it for themselves, got and saved somuche as they
could of her goods safe and unspoiled. Then when thee rage and furye of the
of the enemies was pacified, and the broyle ceast, the conquerours to declare
that they were Romans, restored of those that remained each to his own
again. And they when they saw all things in saftie brought their maistres
also safe home again. Whereupon, she forthwith manumitted them both and was
not ashamed to acknowledge and confess that her life was only preserved by
them over whom she had authority both of life and death. This was not credit me
the fact of servile hearts to assume upon them the name of manquellars for the
time to the^d they might save their maistres life.

^n other notable History
Cluentius the Praetor of the Mersians was taken and led prisoner toward the
Emperor of Rome. By the way as he went, one of his servants seeing his
master was fallen into the hands of his enemies and like to be used with
great rygour and cruelty, suddenly stepping to one of them that led him,
plucked forth his sword, and ran his master through therewith, rather then his
enemies should glory or triumph over him. Having so done, now quod he that I
have delivered my master, time is it that I provide for myself also: and
therwithall thrust himself in with the same sword.

Chap. 22.
Caesar after that he had laid sege long time to the City of Corfewe at
last wan it, an other worthy History of a bou^dman.
and took Domisius prisoner. But Domisius taking that dishonor of emprisonment
so greuouslie, charged a Physician he had with him that was his bondsman, to
give him the strongest poison that he could devise to rid him quickly.
Which the Physician lingered and would in no wise do, for that he would not be
the fortherer of his masters death nor yet deny the doing of it expressly,
fearyng his displeasour which Domitius perceiving, in great angar said: why?
dowtest thou to give me death and see me reedye armed to withstand the
assaulth thereof? Whervppon the Phisicio^ to appease his fury gave him a
certain confection which he wellenouge knew that none of the ingredi entes
were either dedly or hurtful. Upon the recept whereof, Domitius fell in a
sleep, were it for the conceit he took with himself that it had been poison, or
else for dolor and anguish to think of his misery, which when the Physician
saw, although he assuredlye knew that that he gave him was not hurtful, yet
the tender heart, and faithful allegeaunce he owed to his master not suffringe
him to be so thoroughlye persuaded, ^ par^yt true ^art.
with great speed got him to Domitius his masters son, and besowght him
that he would commit him to ward until such time the truth were known
whether that which he gave his Father were poison or no. But Domitius lived
and did well. And Caesar pardoned him his life but his servant saved it before.

Chap. 23.
IN a Civil war that was at Rome proclamacio^ was mad against one that
who that could lay hold on him, a fam^u^e act of a boundman.
might lawfullye kill him, which when it was publicly notified, a boundman
of his against whom this sentence was paste, forth with conueighed his
master aside. And to stay them from making pursuit and search after him
whereby they might haplye find him out, put on himself his masters apparel
and ringes on his hands, which done he so resembled his master that except
it had been o^e that had been privy to the devise, none but would have
said it had been his master indeed.

When he was thus attired, boldly without any dread h^ went and met the^ that
came to seek after his master, and said. My masters lo I am here come not
to crave any favor or pardon at your hands, but put my self wholly in your
grace, use me as you shall think good, and with that laid down his hedde to
them to be smytten of. O what a noble courage was he of, that willinglye
without constraint offered himself to dye to save his master: and that at such
time, when faithfulness was almost quite exiled forth of the City? And was it
not more strange at that time to find such Loyalty in such one, when
nothing reigned among the very best but cruelty and treason? And what
gretter punishment could there be devised against the rankest Traitor that
ever was but death, with which he chose to be rewarded for his most trustines.

Chap. 24.
I Will not pass over with scilence what chanced in Rome of later time. an
other example of a pollitik bondma^.
In the reign of Tiberius Caesar, it was a common practice and a disease that
held w^llnyghe every man there, to exhibit and prefer bills of accusacion
one against an other to Tiberius. Which devise during the while that the war
Civil did last, had shrewdly shaken the nobles of Rome. There was presented
what talk men had of him as they sat on their alebenche: and scantly could a
man have any talk familiarlye with his Frinde, but it was blown to Tiberius
ear. There was no astate in safety, nor any man all most trustye. The least
cause that might be was matter sufficient for him to show his creweltye. If any
happily were detected, it needed not to listen what should become of him: for
even before the time of his attainder it was known welenowgh whether he
should. The axe and the block sat in judgment of him. It fortuned Paulus y^
Praetor at that time, to suppe abroad from home, and ware upon his fingar a King
in which was engraued the picture of Tiberius. This Paulus after he had dronk
hard, had list to make water, and chanced to take the chamber pot in that hand
whereon he ware that King, by Reason whereof the King touched the pot also.
Which thing Maro one that was present in company, a Sicophant and pick
thank noted full well rejoicing mithhimself that he had such matter to report
to Tiberius thinking for his tidinges (as it might have proved if he could have
brought his devise about,) to have had the spoil of Paulus. ^ut as he turned
him about to call witnesses to testify the fact, the servant of Paulus who
stood by his master and eyed Maro well, mis^rusting that there was treason
working against his master, sodeinly plucked the King from of his masters
hand. So yt when Maro turned him again about to have showed the others and
charged the^ to record how Paulus had irreverently and vnhonorably abused the
Emperors picture with touching so unseemly things with it, the servant of
Paulus (his master not able to say for himself for dronkennes,) denied it was
so, and for proof, showed the King which he had in his hand, affirming that
his master before he went about his necessaries delivered it him to keep for
the time.

Chap. 25.
DUringe the Reign of Augustus Caesar, men might yet with much more liberty, An
history great pr^yese worthy of ye sober wit and advise of bou^dmen
and safetye talk their fancies then they might under Tiberius, for that he
was not replenished with such furye and Tyranny. In that time it chanced
that one Ruffus a man of good honor, who had sometime been Consul of Rome^
as he sat at supper on a time and was over gone with drink, suffered this
unwise wish folishly to escape him. That Augustus might not safelye return
from a viage which he was about to make, but that he might miscary in it,
adding moreover that the very oxen and calves about Rome had cause to wish the
same. There wanted not to be those that harkned and marked well his words as
they past him. On the morrow morning very early in ye dawning of the day a
servant of his that stood by the night before and herd al his talk recounted
orderly unto him what he had unwisely among his cups suffered to escape him,
and soberlye advised him (to prevent all mischeefes) with all speed to get him
to Augustus, there accuse himself, and put him in his grace^ When after a little
deliberating with himself he was fully persuaded that his servant councelled
him for the best, determined with himself to follow it. Whereupon making him
ready with s^eed, got him on his way to Augustus ward, and there attended to
meet him at his first coming abroad. And having done first his obedience,
put himself wholly in his grace, and exponing to him all the discourse of the
matter and his disloyalty, with earnest repentance for his folly so sowlye
over shot, wishing it might rather hap on himself and his, besought him humbly
of his gracious pardon which. Augustus as he was bountiful and debonayre
granted immediately. But none quod Ruffus will credit that I stand in your
favor except it may appear to the^ that you gave me something, and thereupon
besought him that he would grant him a reasonable some of money as he then
requested, which Augustus gave charge should be delivered him. And farther
quod Caesar of my more ample grace this I promise thee that on my part there
shall be no cause given why we twain will ever hereafter fall out again. Did
not Caesar graciously so lightly to remit the fact? but more worthy of
commendacion was it in that he annexed to his clemency such liberality. Who
that shall but hear this History reported can not chose but highly commend
Augustus, and yet can he not chose but praise this bondsman before him. But
would you not now look that I should tell you that he was manumitted and made
Free for his labor? I think you would, and that woorthely also. He was so and
Augustus himself paid the money for his redemption.

Chap. 26.
Upon thalledging of somanye examples, I suppose there is no man that will dout
but that the master may well enough receive a bene^it at his servants hand.
And to say the truth, what Reason is it that the parson of the man should more
disgrace the thing y^ he does, the^ the thing that is done may commend the
parson of him that does it? Al men ingenerall have but one and the self same
offspring if we judge things aright and the causes of the same as they ought to
be, then shall we confess that he only is most noble, that is of best and
most virtuous nature and disposicion above others, Only one Original of al men
or more apt and given to good sciences then other. One only piece of mould
was the first pare^t to us al how soever we derive our parentage from thense by
base or noble race. The least cause of boasti^g that is, No parfyt glory (...)
boaste of our au^cetours.
rises of our auncetours, who if they were noble and famous for any their
vertewes, in which only consists true and parfect nobility, if we disse^t and
disarge from their said vertuousnes, with our shame and reproach enowgh may we
record them, or make claim to them: from whom w^ so far degenerat, that
uneath saf sauinge line of blood and lineall descent we savor nowhytte of
them. Asfor their welthe, honors, dignities and pre^errementes to which they
were advanced for their noblenes namely their vert^wes, were but only signs
and shows, and rewards of noblenes. Which who that has by succession of
inheritance, enjoys as in the Roman weal public he that had saved a
Citizens life and had merited y^ reward thereof a garlande called Corona ciuica,
might leave the same to his posterity. Who might glory therein not for their
own factes, but for the acts of an other who thereby left to them an example
of encouragement of attempting the like. Contemn noman be he never so base and
unnoble of fame, No man ought to be contemned.
and simply preferred by fortunes gifts, whether they have been bond heretofore,
or now presentlye are bond, or people of far and strange contr^y^s of what
estate or degree soever they be of, let them fortify themselves, and be of
good cowrage. Attain vertewes and show them selves worthy, Uertew pr^ferred
of ^l persons.
and think not but as perfect nobility attends them as any other. Why should
we be so puffed up with pride, that we should take scorn to accept benefits
and acknowledge the recept of the same at our servants hands. Only
regarding their estate, and forgetting their deserts?

Chap. 27.
THis thought I good and necessary to be said both for the repressing of the
wanton pride and folly of those men who altogether hang on fortunes sleeue,
and also for the mainteinyng the right acceptaunce and true understanding of
such plesour and benefits as servants may do to their masters, and
defendinge the same showed by Children to their parents. For it has been
dowted by some, whether Children can do to their parents any gretter benefits
then they have received of them. Whether children are able to do gretter
bene^ites to their parents the^ they received.
Towching which matter this I know will be granted, that possible it is that
Children may attain to gretter wealth, and aspire to higher promocions then
ever their parents did, and that which is more, to be better also, which being
so, it may be that they may also give far better things, for that their
fortune is better, and perhaps their well meaning heart also. But some may
happen to say. Well let the Child give what he is able to his parents, it is
yet less then duty may duly demand at his hands for that he owes to them
even all that ability of geuyng, as which without them he could not have had.
So that it is not possible for him to be overcome with an other man's benefit,
wose precedent benefit was ye causer of that that was subsequent. But see how
greatly they are deceived that are of this opinion. At the first you know well
a number of things take their original and beginning of other things which
notwithstanding in process of time outgrowe their said beginninges far.
Many thin^es excel^ their beginnings
We see that seeds are the ca^ses of many things, and yet are they the
smallest of those things which by the^ take their beginninges. Behold Rhine
and Euphrates: what are they and all the other notable and famous Rivers that
are else where, if we regard the heddes only from whense they ^irste break
out? if there be any cause why they are regarded, they take it a great way of
from the head. The great churches and Cities walls stand not without their
foundacions, and yet that which is the ground work and stay of all, lies
hyd under the ground and is not seen. So fares it in every other thing. For
the subsequent increase and grows shadoweth quite and ouerwhelmeth as it
were, oftentimes the beginninges of the same. I could not you say have had my
being without which I had never attained to these things if my Father had not
begot me, no more could I if after my Fathers begetting and time of my birth, my
Nurse had not fostred me up.

Chap. 28.
BUt let us go roundly too work and prove yt though the son have been
benefited by his Father very much, yet he may render as much again, and more
to. Admit my Father as ^e begatte me whereby he gave me my beginning, The
Father that is nourisht of his some receives more the he gave.
so he fostred me up whereby I took increase also. If I render the like of the
last part, I render more then I received. For in this case he shall have to
rejoice, not only that he is nourished, but also that he is nowrished of his
son, taking more comforth in my natural mind, then delectacion or pleasour
in the thing it self which he receives. Again what and if any man should so
use himself, that either for his eloquence, his worthy knowledge in Civil or
Martial policy he becomes famous, and by the noblenes of his said vertewes
shakes of the darkness and obscuritye of his base parentage, and by mean of
his woorthines causes the report of his fathers name to be crowned with
perpetual fame might not he worthily be said to have done an inestimable
bene^it to his parents? Immortal memory given by the children to their
parents.
Ariston and Grillus doutles long since had been raked up in the duste and been
as if they had never been with out all report, if Xenophon and Plato their
worthy sons had not by their noble memory caused the^ also to be still
remembered. And where had the famous name of Sophroniscus been now become if
Socrates his son had not as it were made him live a new? It were over tedious
and to long to goo about to recount here the names of al those whose names
certeinlye had never continewed unto these days, had it not been that
thexcellent vertewes of their sons made the^ famous to their posterity, and
as it were immortalized them. An infinite number of them assuredly had been shut
up in the deep dungeon of oblivion, if the famous memory of their sons had
not delivered the^ from that dime darkness. And though perhapps each benefit y^
the children may do to their parents severally considered and apart by himself
be not able to cou^teruaile the deserts of their said parents, yet a
multitude of them conjoined may be able to match them and pass them also.

Chap. 29.
IT was Scipioes chance to save his Father in a great and sharp battle,
^alta^tnes of ^o^g Scipio to sane his fathers life
which to do, he was forced being asyet but a very child to put spurs to his
horse, and abandone himself into ye thickest of his enemies, before he could
come to the place where his Father was. And setting light by any never so
perillouse adventure that might befall, stuck no whit to take to task any ye
most beten and practiced soldiers of his enemies far unfit matches for his
age, or experience of dealing in wars, as who that never before that time had
been in war fare. The same Scipio also an other time pleaded his Fathers case,
at what time he was accused, and by his well handeling of the matter discharged
him from a great conspiracy of some that pretended his death. He also procured
his father to be chosen Consul thrice arowe, and advanced him to other
honors. Besides all this, Pro^e by reasonable arg^me^t that the son may render
gretter benefits the^ he received.
he enriched his father passingly being otherwise but a very poor man.

Chap. 30.
BUt all this while have I recited for proof of my saiengs examples don by
others. Now let me assay if those examples were not, how I were yet able by
good and probable arguments to fortify and maintain that which I have
said. And that I can so do, you shall lightlye see by this.

Whosoever has given such a benefit as may be bettred, it may also be said
he may be excell^d: but the Father gives such a benefit as may be bettred,
therefore it may also be said he may be excelled. To prove he may be excelled
I say thus, who that receives a gretter benefit then he gave, may welbe said
to be excelled. I prove that again thus. The often saving of a man's life is a
gretter benefit, then the only ones giving of life. But the father may have
his life often saved by his son, which is a gretter benefitte then he gave
therefore. etc. Or thus who of twain receives the benefit he most needs of,
receives the gretter benefit. But the father who is now living receiving life,
receives the benefit he most needs of in respect of the sons need who is
not yet living and so had less need, therefore the father receives the gretter
benefit. But some that will be sati^fied neither with Reason nor owght else,
will still exclaim saying. It is impossible that the benefits of the father
may be excelled by the gifts of the son. For except the father had begot
him and made him a living creature, how could he have gotten any thing to
give? I pray you then what does the father more herein or deserve better then
he in whose hand it lies to save the life of the son or let him dye, and
yet does save his life. Has not any such in respect of the life of the son
merited as much as his father? Yet verily. For if any such had dispatched him
before he had attained any of those things which he gave to his Father, what
could the life he had at his fathers hands advantage him to the getting of
such things? But the benefit of any that gives me a second life as it were by
not berefting me the life I now have in use alredye, may be by me well enowgh
requited, and so may that also of my fathers which was again more weke and
vnperfecter the^ yt, that ye other gave me, as needing a number of other
necessary concurrentes without which it could not be conserved.

Chap. 31.
HOwbeit I would not that any man should conceive that opinion that I speak
these things to thend to diminish in any one point the dew reverence and
obedience that ought in all places and times to be acknowledged and done to our
Parents. For vertew by nature counts to seek and purchase praise by well
doi^g, Uertewe always counts to excel.
and contendeth in the pursuit thereof to excel those chiefly that are most
forward lie. Piety which is properly the dewtie which each man is most
straightly bounden to owe of duty to God first, and next to his parents
children kinsfolks and country native) should be the ioyfuller when it is
with an ernest desire done, contending to pass and excel all others therein,
which if it happen so to hytte, what gretter cause of reioycinge may there
be? What manner contention can yield a more commendable victory, then that the
parent may have just cause to say, that his son has ouermatcht him far
in requiting his benefits? For if the parents should show themselves after
such sort to account of their benefits as though they could never be
sufficientlye requited by their Children, then certeinlye they should make
them so slack, that they would never undertake to give thattempt to it, as
persuaded before hand that if they should, it were but labor lost and not
woorthe the while: where as they should rather encowrage them forward
themselves, and say. Well come on my dear Children it is an honest emulacion
and kind of contencion that is proposed between the parents and their
children: The encourageme^t that ye parents should give to their children to
apply the^ selves to goodness.
namelye to assaye without cessyng who should be able to vanquishe others in
bestowinge of benefittes.

I for my part and you for yours assaye which of us shall win the best, and
deserve most at others hands. To dispose and order this feeld there ^eedes no
skill of captains, nor sound of Dru^me or other instrument to encourage men to
march on stowtly not dowting but they may get that victory which has been
often had by the children against their parents.

Chap. 32.
A famous act of the young men of Cicilye.
THe young men of Sicily passed far the benefits of their parents For when on a
time Etna hill which allway burns over thaccustomed manner cast forth flames
and in such sort that the most part of that Island was set on fire thereby,
the young men that were inhabiting those fyred Towns seeing the danger was
past all recovery, and that there was no safe, guard of themselves but to make
their way amyd the burning flames which had altogether enuiro^ned them as
with a pale, escape if they could, taking upon their backs their old and
impotent parents of which sum for wantte of sight, some for lack of their
limbs could not shift any way for themselves, chose rather so to hasard their
lives, then standing still in their houses or streates to be burned so
cowardly. Who when they were thus armed with hardines and in sekinge their own
safety neglected not the dewtie they owed to their parents, the crewell and
raginge flames (a strange thing to tell) deuidyng themselves as it were to
reverence the pyetie of the fact gave the^ free passage a midde them without
any whit hurting them. Antigonus also was no whyt inferior to his Father in
requiting his benefits. Worthy fact of Antigonus.
For when he had in a wouderfull great battle disconfited his enemy and wo^ne
the kingdom of Ciprus, he gave wholly both the spoil of the battle and the
kindome also unto his father. A stout fact of Ma^lius where^^ he also showed
his assured l^ue and deu^y acknowledged to his father
Manlius in like manner who though he happed to have to his Father a very
severe and hawtye stomackt man, yet in requiting his benefits showed himself
no whit inferior to him. For when his Father on a time for his rio^ous and
unbridled youth had b^nished him from his presence, sone after he that was
then Tribune of the people in Rome, had pretended a conspiracy against
Manlius Father: and the day appointed when he should be brought to his
answer. Whereof Manlius having intelligence, came with speed to the Tribune,
desiring to know the day when his Fathers araynement should be: making
semblaunce of rejoicing at it for that his father had dealt so roughly with
him. The Tribune being preuie how rigourouslie he had been used by his
Father, at first moved his case and accused greatly the discourtesie and
vnnaturallnes of his Father: and hopyng that for revenge thereof Manlius would
what in him lay be a forthere^ of his devised pretense, declared to him when
the day should be.

Whereupon Manlius so sone as he had got opportunity, and that he had the
Tribune alone, drew forth a naked sword which he had privily hid under his
gown, and layeng hold upon the Tribune thretned him saying. Assuredly except
thou presentlye swear unto me that thou will neither make nor meddle with my
Father, but discharge him quite of this matter without making any farther a
do about it, I will here presently run thee through with this swoorde. For
well I stand assu^ed that it rests wholly in thy hand, whether my father
shall have any accuser or not. The Tribune seeing himself at such a strayte,
swear he would do as he required him, and right so performed it,

Chap. 33.
A Uerye easy matter if is to recite one after an other an infinity number
almost of notable examples of such as have delivered their parents from great
and present dangers: which have adu^unced them from base to high degree: and
whereas they were neither of name nor fame, but inglorious, they have by their
means made them to be remembered, and as it were, to live perpetuallye. By no
efficacy of fytt and sufficient words, by no exactnes and exquisitenes of
wit is it able to be sufficientlye expressed how exc^llent a thing it is and
praise worthy to make a man's fame to live perpetu^llie. What a noble praise
and comme^d^cion is it for the child to be have h^^self^ so, that indeed
without trip he may iust^ly say I have showed my self obedient to my parents.
I have done after their commandments were it right or wrong to my self that
they required of me, I have framed my self to serve their appetites. In this
only thing have I showed myself disobedient to them, that I would not
willingly give place ne yield to them in bestowing benefits on the^ and
requyting their received. Each child I wish to contend on this sort. No manner
pesons I would should yield herin to be vanquished, namely in rendering benefits
which at any man's hand they have received. And if it happen any to wax dull,
herein, let them whet their edges again and begine afresh. Happy are they that
shall get the victory: and happy they that shall be vanquished, if it be not a
yielded victory. What more noble thing is there then when a man may justly
say I have excelled my Father in doing him plesours, yea there is none at
whose hands I ever received benefitte but I have passed him far in requiting
the same? Who is there that lives more fortunat then the old parents that
may upon good proof report that they have such a child that has with
great increase yielded them the benefits which they bestowed upon him?
Generallye who can be called more happy then he that reportyng the truth may
say I never did plesour nor bestowed benefit that I had cause to repent or
think lost, but had it as redily repaid and requited as I was willing to do
it, and that doubled many fold? And then having brought each party to that
pass that they may justly so say and find what thing can there happen more
happy and so happly to make an end?

FINIS

