AN ADvertisement or admonition, unto the Congregations, which men call the
New Fryelers, in the low Countries. written in Dutche.

And Publiched in Englis.

Wherein is handled 4. Principal points of Religion.

1. That Christ took his Flesh of Marie, having a true earthly, natural
body.

2. That a Sabbath or day of rest, is to be kept holy every First day of the
week.

3. That there is no Succession, nor privilege to persons in the holy things.

4. That Magistracy, being an holy ordinance of God, debarreth not any from
being of the Church of Christ.

After these follows certain demandes concerning Gods decree of salvation and
condemnation.

Pro. 9.8. Rebuke the wise, and they will love thee.

Pro. 29.1. They that harden their neck, when they are rebuked shall suddenly
be destroyed and cannot be cured

Printed 1611.

To Hans de Ries, Reynier VVy-Brantson, and the Congregations where of they are.
Having long desired to publish our Faith unto this nation and in particular
unto those congregations whereof you are, (as we have formerly done to our own
Nation): and also to make known the things wherein you, and we differ, and
are opposite. We have now through the mercy of God, thus far, brought our
desires to pass, being only unsatisfied for our own insufficiency that we
are no better able to manifest your errors unto you we have diverse causes from
good grounds to do this we have done. First because we are bound to discover
the mystery of iniquity, by all good means that we can and in the cupp that
she has filled to us, to fill her the duble. Secondly that we might through
the grace of God (if your willing minds be thereunto) be instruments of good,
unto you herein and the rather, because you have been instruments of good in
discovering diverse of our erors unto us, which we acknowledge to the praise of
God, and with tha^k full hearts to you. Now in that we do this by way of
opposition and reproof publicly, which you did by instruction privately: for
our defense herein, we answer: you came publicly amongst us, and advanced
your error of Succession and order, From the proportion of the scriptures, and
have destroyed the faith of many therbye, who for sinister respect were
willinge to follow you: we have d^ltt diverse times with diverse of yoe
privately, but you have lightly regarded our loveing admonitions esteeming all
as nothing we have faced: some of you goeing on in your sin seeking to make
this people one with you, who are justly cut of From God and his people for
their falling away from Grace. We have written privately to the whole
congregation you are of, to prevent you in that evil. we have written
particulerly unto you H. de R. but all is in vain, in that you esteem the
truth we profess, and us herein as vain. Thus are we constrained (for the
defense of the truth of God we profess and that we may not seem to
justify you in your evils, and to make it known unto all that we have
good cause to differ From you) to publish these things in this manner as we
do: and that it may appear unto all, and to your consciences that we have
strong grounds for ch^^ things wherein we differ From you, though we be
vveake to the mainteynance of them. If any shall oppose part or all of that is
Here written, we d^^e this equal kindness, that it may be set over into
^lish For all our understandings, as we have caused (...) to be set over into
dutch for all yours, and if there because of Replye, we will by the
assistance of God (...) were, vvithall the abilyty vvherevvith God shall make
us able. Fare you well. Peace and love, with Faith. From God, and From our
Lord Jesus Christ, be with all ^m that are in Christ Jesus, Amen.

Thomas Helvvys.

THe Holy writer John in the second of the Revelation, writing to the
Church of Pargamus one of the Seven Churches in Asia, vvriteth thus verse. 14.
I have a fevv things aganist thee, because thou ^aist them there that
mainteyne the doctrine of Baalam, and Verse. 15. Even so haist thou also, them
that maintain the doctrine of the Nicholaitanes, which thing I hate. And
vvriting to the Church of Thyatira ver. 20. he says. I have a fevv things
against thee, that thou suffer the wooman Iesabell: In all vvch, the holy
man of God teaches this that it is great impiety for any Church of Christ to
suffer any false Teachers, or any False doctrine to be mainteyned by any
that are amongst them: and if they do and repent not, the lord that hats
wickedness as much now as ever, will certainly come against them with the same
judgments there threatened in his word. And there fore we in love fore-warne
you, that profess your selves to be the Church of Christ, and yet have (hear
us with patience) so many doctrines of devils professed and mainteyned
amongst you that you repent, least the Lord rise up in wrath against you: we
speak not by reports, but of our own knowledge, having heard with our own
ears and seen with our own ^e^es the things whereof we shall by Gods
assistance speak.

Of Christ's Flesh.
The First matter we will speak to you is, (wherein your iniquity does
greatly abound) that you have amongst you, that deny Christ to have taken Flesh
of Mary: some holding that he brought it from heaven, and some not knowing from
whence he brought it, both which destroy the Faith of Christ, who are such as
Thapostle 2. Pet. 2, 1. Speaks of, which privily bring in damnable herisies,
even denying the Lord that has bought them.

To say something to the First that hold that he brought it from heaven, that
the grossnes of their black error may appear. The ground of scriptures
testify that that which is from heaven is heavenly, therefore if Christ
brought his Flesh from heaven, the^ he must have had a heavenly body, in that
there can come nothing from heaven, but that which is heave^ly, and Thapostle
1. Cor. 15. says of heavenly bodies: They are glorious, they are not weak but
of power, they are spiritual, they are ^mortall. Now in that Christ's body was
mortal and died, it was not a heavenly, glorious, spi^ituall, powerful body:
but was an earthly, natural weak body, and had the same infirmities that our
bodies have (sin excepted, as is showed Heb. 4.15. For we have not an high
Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmeties, but was in
all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin as also Chap. 5.2. which is
able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are ignorant, and that are
out of the way, because that he also is compassed with infirmity. And his
infirmities appear in that he was hungry Mat. 4 2. He was weary Ioh. 4.6. He
was trobled, and his soul was in great heavin^ Mat. 14.33.34. And he
confesteth his Flesh is weak. Mat. 26.41. All these infirmieties, nor any,
infirmity could not come from heaven, for in heaven there is no imperfection
not imperfect thing. And we demand can heavenly bodies be weary? can they
be hungry? can they be trobled, and their souls be in heavines? or are they
weak and mortal? then is there misery in heaven, which cannot be. Therefore
it is to be concluded, never to be denied, by any that have Grace, that Christ
brought not his Flesh from heaven, in that there was infirmity and weakness
(which is imperfection) in his Flesh. And here) having so fit occasion) let
us pe^e a word by the way, to them, in whose sin death and hell has
consented, which say that God was turned into, or made Flesh. How could God be
made weak Flesh? whch was full of infirmities, as has been showed by the
scriptures Christ's Flesh was. And whereas some of these say, that all that
Christ suffered and did in the Flesh was but in show, it shall be unto them
according to their faith, if they repent not, for they shall have a Savior but
in show and though the wilful perverse stiffnes of these me^ promi^se littile
hope, yet let us say, what by the Grace of God we are any way able, if we
might by our best endeavors stopp men from running so violently to condem^^^ion
in this accursed judgment that they hold, which say, all that Christ suffered
and did hear upon earth, was but in show.

And for this purpose we will commend the godly disposed Reader unto the xv.
th. Chap. of the first to the Corinths, where Thappostle declares unto them
again, the Gospel which he had formerly preached, and which they had
received, and whereby they were saved, except they had believed in vain. And
he shows that first of all he had delivered unto them, that Christ died for
their sins, and that he was buried, and rose again the third day. So we
preach, ad so have you beleved says Thapostl not with standing a^l this, some
Corinthians were fallen to say that there was no resurerection of the dead,
with whom Thappostle (because he knew that they had recevid and believed that
Christ died and was raised again) reasons thus: If there be no resurrection
of the dead then is Chrst not risen, and if Christ be not risen then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, and we are found also false
witnesses of God, for we have testified of God that he has raised up Christ,
whom he has not raised up, if so be the dead be not raised. Ior if the dead
be not raised then is Christ not raised, and if Christ be not raised your faith
is vain, ye are yet in your sins: and they that are a sleep in Christ are
perished; and if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable. The Appostle by these undeniable arguments and reasons proves
Christ's death and resurrection: First that Christ died ver. 3. And for proof of
that, he takes the testimony of the scriptures, and by the same proof and
warrant he proves that ^e was buried and ros again and for further
confirmation of his being raised from the dead, Thappostle produces the witness
and testimony of Cephas saw him and of the twelve, and he was seen of more
then fyve hundredth brethren at once; and after of James: Then of all the
Appostles, and l^st of all of himself, and he adds for further proof hereof,
their preaching, so we preach says Thappostle, and he appealeth unto their
own consciences, for this truth of Christ's death and resurrection in saying
unto them so have you believed.

Hear Thappostle, that they might be brought to the sight of the depth of the
iniquity of this their error, declares unto them, what does necessarily
follow if there be no resurrection, and so Christ be not raised from the dead.
And first concerning us says Thappostle, (you that say there is no
resurrection, and so that Christ is not risen From the dead) this follows,
you make all our preaching vain, and so are we preachers of vanie things,
And you make us also false witnesses of God, for we have testified of God,
that he has rased up Christ from the dead and this reproach do you cast upon
us. And upon your selves this evil do you b^ing in saing there is no
resurrection, and so that Christ is not risen From the dead, your own faith is
in vain, you have a vain faith and you are yet in your sins, all your
sins rest upon you: further more by his your saying, you bring this judgment
upon all that are dead in Christ: that they are all perished and all the faith
full in Christ that are leveing, you make them of all men most miserable. And
having thus laid before them all the evil of this there saying there is no
resurrection, he concludes, but now is Christ risen from the dead, and was made
the First fruits of them that sleep.

To turn all this evil that Thappostle has Here showed unto the Corinthians
(that said there was no resurrection where by it followed that Christ was not
risen) upon all those that say Christ died but in show, and so died not at all
in truth, it is most plain that all this evil comes upon their heads, for in
that they say Christ died but in show, they must needs say, he did rise again
but in show, and so was there no resurrection in truth. And here do they (most
miserable men that they are all) make Thappostles preaching most vain, for
then are they preachers of vanities and shadows, if Christ be dead but in
show: so do they make them false witnesses of God, for they have testified of
God that he rasied up Christ from the dead, whom he has not raised up, if so
it be he died not. Then is the faith of the faith full in vain, and their
sins are yet them, if Christ be not dead and risen again, then are all that
are a sleep in Christ perished and all the faithful liveing are of all men
most miserable. But we conclude against them all that say Christ died but in
show with the same words that the Apostle concludes against the Corinthians.
But now Christ died, and is risen again from the dead, and was made the first
fruts of them that slept. And therefore Thappostles preachinges are not vain,
neither are they false witnesses of God. And the faith of the faithful is not
in vain, neither are any part of there sins abidinge or remaining yet upon
them And the faithful that are a sleep are not perished; neither are the
faithful in this life of all men most miserable. But all this is their portion
that say Christ died but in show (which is not at all) their preaching is
vain, and they are preachers of most vain things. And they are false
witnesses of God, in that they testify that Christ died not, and so that God
raised him not up from the dead, their faith is vain, and they are yet in
their sins, and all that are dead in this their false faith are perished: and
thus are their estates herein most miserable.

What were sufficient to speak against this wicked blasphemous opinion of
theirs, which say Christ, sufferings and death were but in show, these are
they that in the highest degree deny Christ to be come in the Fle^h: or if they
did confes^e and believe that Christ were come in the Flesh, then must they of
force confess that he died, for all Flesh must needs dye and be changed as is
showed Isa. 10.6. and 1. Pet 1.24 All Flesh is grass, and all the glory
thereof is as the Flower of the Field. And all the glory of man is as the
Flower of grass which withers and Falls away. All the disciples of Christ
never made question of his death for they saw and were sore he was dead, and
therefore they began to doubt of his resurrection through infidelity, which
there had been no cullor for them to doubt of, if they had been of these men's
opinion, that he died but in show.

In that all that is spoken of the resurrection from the dead, is spoken of
Christ, it shall not be amiss yet further to consider what the holy ghost by
the Appostle shows in this 1. Cor. 15. Chap. concerning the resurrection from
the dead, for by his resurrection his death shall appear. This is that then
which Thapostl has set down hear concerning Christ's death and resurrection
and concerning his natural and earthly body, and his spi^ituall and heavenly
body, Thappostle does show first of all in the 3. Verse. That Christ died, and
Verse. 20. Now is Christ risen from the dead, and Verse. 35. there is a question
how the dead are raised up: to which question the Appostle annsweres, speaking
of all dead bodies in general, and of Christ's dead body in particular (whom
he has showed in the 20. Verse. to be the first friuts of them that sleep)
That which thou sowest (says Thappostle) is not qu^^ned except it dye,
teaching hereby as he had showed before that Christ's body did dye, and all
bodies must dye first, or else they cannot be quickened, that is, raised again
from the dead verse. 36. Then it being most evidently in this scripture proved.
That Christ was raised from the dead, it is as evidently here proved that he
must needs, and did first dye: for (says Thappostl^) it could not be quickened
except it first dye. And Thapostl having thus annswered to that part of the
question, in sheweing how the dead are raised, then he proceeds to the second
question, whch is, with what bodies come they forth, to which questione he
answers Verse. 37.38. Thou sowest not that body that shall be, but God gives it
a body at his pleasure, to every seed his own body. Here Thapostle shows,
that Chr. body, and all bodies that are of Chr. (for of those only does he
speak as appears verse. 23.) are not raised in the resurrection with those
bare bodies that are sown, but God gives a body at his pleasure; even to
every seed his own body, that is to the seed of man, all one body (to them
which are raised in Christ) for there is but one Flesh of men. The Apostle
having Here First showed, that the same bare body that is sown shall not so
be raised up again, then he shows what manner of body it shall be in the
resurrection, and wherein it shall differ from that which was sown and died. In
the 40. verse says Thappostle, there are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies,
and in the 49. verse. we shall ^eare the ^mage of the heavenly. Here is set
(...) with what manner of bodies the dead are rased and (...) being the (...)
fruits of the dead, with such a body was he raised: then follows how the
heavenly body and the earthly body do differ in glo^ the earthly body is
corrupt, dish^norable, we^ke, natural, and mortal. The heavenly body i^
incorrupt glorious, strong spiritual, immortal. The image of the earthly
body we have from the First Adam, which was made (says Thappostle) a l^v^ing
soul, that is, natural and earthly. The image of the heavenly body all that
are of Christ shall have from the last Adam a quic^ing spirit, that is,
spiritual, heavenly which is the image of Christ's glorious as body after his
resurrection. Thus we see the whole d^st and intent of Thappostl in all this
scripture is to prove the resurrection from the dead, and how the dead rise,
and with what manner of bodies and all this by Christ's death and resurrection,
because as he died and risse again, in the fair^ order verse 23. with the same
bodies verse. ^9. shall all that are of Christ use again, proveing hereby also
that Christ ^d a natural earthly, and mortal body; sown in co^^uption, in
dishonor, and in weakeraised in incorruption, in glory, in power, a spiritual
body, Heavenly, immortal, what can be more plainly set down, if men that
have eyes would see, and would not wincke with their eyes; why will men pervert
the scriptures to their own destruction? taking Here a piece of a sentence,
and there a piece, and never lookeing to the scope and sense. And thus much
according to our small talent to show the error of them that are fallen, to so
deep destruction, as to say, God was turned into flesh, and so his death and
all his sufferings were but in show: and to say them (if by the grace of God
it may be) that are not fallen so far.

And now to speak to them that know not from whence Christ had his flesh,
they see it proved that from heaven he could not have it, for then there could
not possibly have been infirmity in it. They see further, or through the grace
of God might se, that Christ had a natural, earthly, mortal body, and that
there is but one Flesh of men will they still remain ignorant and doubting
whence Christ had his flesh^ then do they still remain in sin. Let them
therefore leave their doubting (which is through their ignorance) if they look
for salvation by Christ and let them know and believe from the scriptures of
God. That Christ is of the seed of David, and of the Isralites according to the
Flesh. Romans 2.3. And 9.5. The Son of Mary the virgin, made of hi^ substance.
Gal. 4.4. And so does this agree with the First pr^mis^e made concerning Christ
Genesis 3.15. Where ^ is spoken by God: That the seed of the woman shall break
the serpents head, without which knowledge and Faith, no man shall ever be saved:
ffor there is no salvation, but by Christ the promissed seed of the woman.
Those the^fore am^^^ you that will not know and believe that Christ is the
seed of the woman, conceived in hi^ womb, by the power of the most high
overshadowing her, shall never be saved by Christ the promissed seed of the
woman. This then is your great sin that you suffer many amongst you that
mainteyne a false faith concerning where Christ had his Flesh; and you approve
and allow of some, that hold and mainteyne no faith concerning where Christ
had his Flesh, and so do you approve and mainteyne them in their sin, for
whatsoever any holds or mainteynes not of says is sin: and to be ignorant
of any part of that the scriptures has manifested is sin, and to determyne
to remain ignorant, and so to continewe unto the end is death for without
repentance any one sin is death as Thappostle James shows Iam. 2.10. Who
soever shall keep the whole law and yet fails in one point he is guilty of
all. Deceyve not simple souls then by noriushing them in their sin, which
you do, in saying it is not needful to salvation to know whence Christ had
his Flesh, as though there were any part of the law or gospel, not needful
to salvation. And if there be any part of the law not needful then Christ
need not to have come to fulfill the whole law, which he did as he says Mat.
5.17. And if there be any part of the gospel of salvation (which Christ has
purchased with his blood Ephe. 1.13.14.) not needful to salvation, then Christ
has purchased more then is needful. In the fear of God walk not thus by
your own inventions, leading and suffering simple souls, to walk in the
ways of death and condemnation.

Of the day of rest.
The second is, that many among you (and how far you are all poluted we
know not but have great cause to fear) do profess and practice not to keep
the seventh day, a day of rest, and holy unto the lord, abolishing herein the
law, which was given in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of
the assembly, and which was written in the Tables with the finger of God, as
is showed Exodus 20.8.9.10.11. and Deuteronomy. ^.10. Of all which whole law, our savior
Christ says Man. 5, 17.18. I am not come to distroy, but to fulfill: for
truly I say unto you, till heaven, and earth perish, one jot^ or one title of
the law shall not escape till all thinge^ be fulfilled: not with standing all
the spoken by God the father, and Jesus Christ his son, many of you with an
high hand, (...) out, and distroy one of these Ten Commandments written by the
finger of God Exodus 34.28. and you will have but Nine, ren^g a sunder the law
of God, and casting away what is not pleasing unto you. Not holding the
examples of the disciples of Christ a sufficient rule of direction for you, who
as is showed Act. 20.7 and 1. Cor. 16.1, 2. The first day of the weak came
together to break bread. Upon every which first day of the week, when they
were come together Paul ordained in the Churches that every one should lay
aside for the necessity of the Saints, that there might be no gathering when
he came.

How will you be able to stand before the lord herein^ H^ has established a
law, the which it is more easy that heaven and earth should pass away, then
that one title of the law should fall Iuc. 16.17. And if you now be able to
show (which God forbid that any should be so wicked as to enterp^ise) that
all these words, spoken and written by God himself. Remember the Sabath day to
keep it holy, be no part, jot, nor tittle of this law, then you have some
cullor for the evil you practice and profess herein: but dare any moves of
blasphemy speak it? or any hand of blasphemy write it? we hope no, why then
give glory to God, and repent of this your sin, and pray the lord that if it
be possible the thoughts of your hearts, the blasphemy of your mouethes, and the
wickedness of your hands may be forgiven you. And sin not as you do against
God, in turning away your feet from the Sabath of the lord, and doing your
own wills on his holy day, wherein also you do wrong to man, and beast, to
whom the lord has in mercy given a special day of rest. But yet further to
show you that which you shall never be able to annswere. Our Savior Christ
Mat. 24.20. speakeing of the destruction of Jerusalem (which was to come to
pass, and did, long after his death) says. Pray that your flight be not in
the winter, nor on the Sabath day, sheweing vndenyably, that there should still
remain a special day of rest, for the people of God to worship him on: upon
which day Christ's bidds them pray that their flight be not, that they might not
be forced to fly when they should rest and worshipp God. And if our Savior
Christ had meant that his disciples should have been of your judgment, it had
been all one, upon what day their flight had been. God give you grace to see
your great error herein, that you may not still be hate full to God, and men,
and Beasts. And thus much of this, except further occation be offered: Omitting
to show you all the confusion you bring into the Church when there shall be no
day certain whereon the disciples ought to come together, to edify one an
other, to break bread, to pray, and to gather for the Saints, if your rule be
true (which is as false as God is true) they choose, whether they will come at
all, except you have authority to make a law to bind them, which sure you have
not from God: even so do you confound hereby all due proceeding in the rule of
admonition by the Church, if there be no certain day when the Church are bound
to meet. But we will pass by this, hopeing you will fall under the former
ground, and then you will easily see (through the grace of God) all these
things, and many mo^e which accompany that your error, that do utterly
destroy all godliness, Religion, and the holy communion of Saints. Therefore
repent and forsake this your error, for if you do thus distroy the law of God,
there can be no Religion of God in you.

Of Succession.
T^ (...) your Leaders are (...) them that mainteyne a Succession, and that
(...), and you will have all (...), and tongues to come to you, and (...)
Ordinances of Christ: and (...) administer in the holy (...) to you, and (...)
and (...) power and all the holy (...) with the man of sin (...) called o^
God, and (...) under the (...) under the (...) Romans 3.1.2.) (...) because (...)
of God. (...) your (...) manner of way? (...) of credit to (...) but (...)
confess^ (...) and the (...) unto (...) proceed from (...) Jerusalem (...) call
your (...) you and (...) do, to your (...) them to it, and to them everlasting
destruction in so d^ing and suffering them selves to be to dra^n. Thus then
(...) speak of the heavenly (...) And (...) people shall (...) up to the
mountain of the (...) to the (...) of the God of (...) will (...) S^on, and
(...) manner speaks (...) ^rd shall send the (...) these Prophecies (...)
(...) become (...) you this (...) (...) taught the (...) when he said (...)
word of the lord our (...) you only (...) you also taught of (...) humbled,
and humble your selve (...) people* (...)

If this will not (...) word (...) be called (...) Prophet (...) Compact
together (...) the Tithes of the (...) to praise the name of the (...) you this
(...) I^ you be the (...) but the Tithes must come to (...) the grace of God
(...) you cannot (...) but you will (...) shall be the people. And (...) Mount
Syon, which cannot be removed? and shall you remain for ever? If you can
promise this of your selves, you go beyond all the excellent Churches that are
spoken of in the new testament, whereof there remains no mention at this day
to be seen but only that the scriptures testify that such Churches there were
but not one of them has remained unto this day. Therefore none of them were
Mount Syon. And will you lift up your horn on high, and be more then they all?
this is the foolishnes of folly, bear with our rudenes: The lord knows we
seek his glory and your good herein, although our infirmities may too much
appear. It is your turning from these your evils that we disire, for Gods
glory and the salvation of your souls: and therefore will we through Gods
grace, endeavor yet further to show you your error in this point.

The Prophet in the 48. Psalm. 2.3. Seaketh on this wise Mount Syon Northward is
fair in situation, it is the joy of the whole earth and the City of the
great king. In the Palaces thereof God is known for a refuge, and verse. 8. God
will establish it for ever, Selah. To add unto this, the glorious description
so at large set down by John. Revel. 21.10. Where he saw, that great City
that holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God, whose wall had twelve
foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Appostles of the lamb verse.
14. which City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shinne in it,
for the glory of God does light it, and the lamb is the light of it verse. 23.
And the people that are lived shall walk in the light of it verse. 24. And the
Nation, and the kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish: and these
nations shall be utterly distroyed Isa. 60.12. See your selves now how unlike you
are this City: are you the joy of the whole earth? sorrow is the joy that we
the poor winesses of Christ have in you for our parts, as you shall further
hear: do the people that are saved walk in the light of you? and shall the
nation, and kingdom that will not serve you perish? God forbid: be content and
glade to have this City your joy, and to be Citizens of this City, and to
walk in the light of it, and to serve it or else you shall perish and be
destroyed. But this City cannot perish nor be destroyed, but you may be, and
therefore you are not this Jerusalem: and the world knows that you are not the
earthly Jerusalem, wincke not with your eyes but see, and st^pp not your ears
but hear how the word of God does convince you in this your error.

And now we beseech the upright hearted amongst you to be willing to hear what
Thappostle Paul does show Jerusalem to be, and follow not your own
inventions herein. Th'appostle to the Gal. 4.22-26. shows, that Abraham had
two sons, and two wives, one son by a servant, and one by a free woman, he
which was borne of the servant was borne after the flesh, and he that was of the
freewoman was borne by promise. By the which things, another thing is meant
(says Th'appostle) for these mothers are the two testamentes, The one which is
Hagar or Syna is a mountain in Arabia, and it answers to Jerusalem which
now is, and she is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above,
is free which is the mother of us all. Thus does Th'appostle so plainly as is
possible (for the understanding of all) teach, that by Hagar the bond woman, is
mente the old Jerusalem which is the old Testament, with all the carnal
ordinances there of. And by Sarah the free woman, is meant the new Ierusa. the
new Testament, with all the spiritual ordinances thereof. And this spiritual
mother, which is Sarah the free woman, the new Jerusalem, the new Testament, is
mother of all that are borne after the spirit: and they are her children, as
Th'appostle says of himself and others* verse. 31 Now will you be this
Jerusalem, the mother of all the faith full? will it not suffice you to be
children, but you must be the mother of all? Do but see how herein you agree
with that Antichrist of Rome that will be the mother of all Churches. How far
contrary is this to all the rest of your profession, who profess such
humblenes of mind in all things, and yet hereyn to seek thus highly to advice
yours selves above the poor servants of God, that through his grace and mercy
by the power of his word and spirit, are borne children of the free woman: and
though weak children, yet borne as free as you or any: what great evil is
this (in so maine of you as would to seek to bring us in bondage unto you
when you cannot (by aine warrant of Gods word) have any more freedom in any
holy thing, or to any holy thing, then we, if we be all the Children of
one mother, for then are we brethren. Sin not thus against God, and wrong
not us, by seeking to tread us under your feet, which you do, in advanceing
your selves over us to bring us in subjection, who are borne as free as you.

This being by the word of God made clear that neither you, nor any Church,
congregation, or people, are Jerusalem, it will easily follow, that nether you
nor any Church congregation or people are the kingdom of heaven for the
heavenly Jerusalem, and the kingdom of heaven are all one, as all that have
any understanding agree and know. Therefore it shall not be needful to use
(...) w^rds mo in this cause, let us inshort therefore show what the
scriptures speaks of the kingdom of heaven. Our Savior Christ Luc. 4.34.
Says thus. Surely I must also preach the kingdom of God to other Cities for
therefore am I sent. This kingdom cannot in any understanding be meant of
any people, for it must be preached to a people and this agrees with that
before spoken of Jerusalem which is, that it is the new Testament. And thus
speaks our Savior Christ Ioh. 3.5. except a man be borne of water and of the
spirit, he cannot (...) into the kingdom of God, whereby it is so plain as
any thing can be that no people are the kingdom of God, but that people
ought to enter into the kingdom of God, and when they are entered, then are of
the kingdom of God and children of the kingdom Mat. 13.38. And therefore we
pray the Godly reader to consider, that there is a difference betwix the
kingdom, and the people otherwise where was the kingdom before your first
begininge? was there no kingdom, for your first beginners to enter into? did
they make a kingdom and enter into it and all of themselves? then sure it was
not the kingdom of God, and it stands you upon to look it be for if they set
up a new kingdom, they entered not into Christ's kingdom, for Christ's kingdom
was and is an everlasting kingdom, and cannot be shaken, as the Author to the
Hebrews shows Heb. 12.22. speaking of mount Syon, the City of the liveing
God, the Celestial Jerusalem Verse. 28. Seeing we receive a kingdom that
cannot be shaken, let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may
please him with reverence and fear.

We have endeavored with our best abilities (which you may see are small) to
speak the larger of this point because we our selves have been formerly
misledd with this error, that the Church is the kingdom of heaven, and monut
Syon, and because we know some others are strongly possessed therewith, which
not with standing hold not Succession, but indeed it is the ground of all
Succession for if the Church be Jerusalem, then must there needs be Succession,
for there mus^ needs be adue proportion of all things between the Tipe and the
truth, between the old Ieru: and the new Ieru: betwe^e the shadow and the
substance. And there being therefore Succession in the old Testament, there must
of necessity be Succession in the new. If therefore you can prove your selves
Jerusalem, we yield you all the Prerogative of Jerusalem. Then must all people
and nations come to you, and receive all the holy ordinances from you. Then
must all sacrifices be offered up in you. And then they that are not in you,
are not in Christ. And all that are borne of water and of the spirit, must
enter into you, and all that are saved must walk in the light of you. And then
are you the joy of the whole earth. The^ must you be perached to other Cities,
and then can you not be shaken, for Christ's kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, which shall never be taken away nor be destroyed Dan. 7.14. But you
may be shaken, and taken away, and destroyed though you were as excelent a
Church as Corinth. Ephesus, Phillippi, Thessa: Smyrna, Philadelphia, for all
they are shaken, taken away, and destroyed, which were much more excellent
Churches then you, even so may you much more be. Therefore you are not the
kingdom of heaven: nor that heavenly Jerusalem, and so those previleges belong
not to you, which you challenge, and some wretched men have given you (whose
condemnation sleeps not) and all under that culler of your being Jerusalem.

And let us now bring to trial your other ground concerning this cause, which
is. That the ordinances of Christ being (as you call it) once raised up again
they are not to be raised any more, but all men must fetch the^ from those
that raised them up, or from them that have received them at their hands by
Succession First we say unto you that, which some of you could not. nor you
all shall ever be able to annswere whilst the world endures.

How know you of faith, that he or they from whom you received your
begininges were the first? This can you never prove to any man's conscience
that has any conscience, except you can show Prophecy of scripture
perticulerly that such a man should first raise up (to speak your own word)
the ordinances of Christ, and that he has done it, and that you have it from
him: All these must you prove by scripture, if your rule be true, and that men
must have faith in it: but not any one of these can you prove by scripture,
and therefore your rule is not true, and no man can have faith in it and then
not to be hold and practiced by any that wait for salvation by Jesus Christ,
who must have faith in all that they hold, profess, and practice, or else they
sin: ffor without faith it is impossible to please God. Romans 11.6. Let us by
the mercies of God entreat all you that profess the name of Jesus, not to
stand upon such uncertain and unfound grounds: For which way shall you ever be
able to prove, that he or they from whom you (by Succession) have your
beginning were the first? No man can ever prove it, the world is too vvide for
man to comprehend or know all that is done in it. It is avaine invention, cast
it away, seeing there is no vvarrant in Gods word to vvarrant it unto you,
that he or they were the first.

And if he, or they were, what then? Must all the world come to them? By
what rule of Gods word? There must be a special command for him, or them to
begin: And a restraint or forbiddinge comaund to all men for doing the ltie
after: ffor God is as merciful to his people now as ever he was, and he has
not left them without rule of direction, that they should sin and fall was
the lord so careful for his people Israel (for whom he had wrought so great
wonders, and yet they were continually rebellious against him) as to give Moses
twice warning at one time Ex. 19.21. and 21. Go down charge the people that
they break not to the lord to gaze, least many of them perish And again let
not the Priests, and the people break to come vpto the lord least they be
destroyed. And did the lord most carefully appoint Aaron and his sons, their
several Offices and services about the Tabernacle as is showed Numb. 4. where
the lord charge Moses and Aaron that they should not cut of the Tribe of the
famili^ of the Kohathites: But this do unto them, says the lord that they may
live and not dye, let Aaron and his sons come and appoint them every one to
his charge, least they touch or see those holy things, they ought not to touch
and see, and dye, was the lord out of his great grace, mercy, and love so
careful for his people then, to give such strait rules of direction to them,
least they should come near, handle, or see those things which apperteyned
not to them to handle or see and so sin, and dye. And has the lord left to
beg (...) now, in leaveing his people no directions, nor directors to appoint
them to their ^ffice, and show them what i^ commanded and what is for bidden*
Surely you will not say, but the lord is as merciful to rebellious Israel as
ever he was, then we require you to show, where the lord has now commanded
some especially to begin and meddle with the holy things, and for bidden all
others except by their appointment they be permittd and appointed thereunto. If
you will thus set up a special Temple and Priest hood of your own, show
your warrant from the word of truth which seeing possibly you cannot do, let
God have the glory, and see your own shame, and humble your selves, and
repent of this error. Will you now with patience suffer us a little to declare
and try your best ground f^r these things, which we have received from some
that are greatest amongst you we could repeat diverse of your arguments and
reasons, but we spare you, and we will take your strongest ground, which if
we can by the ground of truth show to be most unsound, we will hope that
they amongst you, that seek the lord in singlenes of heart will forsake it:
first know this and let all know that you have never been able at any time,
to produce any one scripture and mainteyne it, for your Succession, although
we have had diverse conferences with the chiefest amongst you but you reason by
simelies and proportions of your own devisings for the most part.

To come to your ground, this is the some of that you say. That baptism being
once raised up by one unbaptized, after, none did, neither was it lawful for
any unbaptized to baptize, but all must have it from him, and so you follow on
with your proportion from baptism, to the church and ministry. And this is the
way you run, not knowing whether it leads jou, we pray you mark what the
wiseman says. Pro. 4.19. The wa^e of the ungodly is as the darkness, they
know not vvherin they shall fall: even so little do you know into what pit
you shall fall, or upon what rock you do cast your selves and others in this
your way first whereas you say, that when baptism was once (by one unbaptized
raised upon (...), none after being unbaptized did or might. This John never
taught you, nor (...) of Th^appostles, where else you have learned it we know
not, but you (...) in it, and say it is the course and order of the scriptures.
But we require you with godly consideration to consider that herein under a
(...) of binding to the due (...) course of the matter and manner of the
scriptures (which all oug^ to follow) you bring men to a due particular course^
persons, which none are bound to follow except any da^ie say of themselves,
as that excellent and worthy Appostle Paul. said. Phil. 2.17. Brethren, be
followers of me In short see, if you would not be blind, whether you rule
leads you, if you will tie the word and ordinance of God unto men: Prist for
baptism, you must bring* man prophesied of, as John was, that shall able, t^
annsvvere as John did to them that asked him, vvha^ art thou that we may give
answer to them tha^ sent us, what say thou of thy self? why baptize^
thou? John aunsweres. I am he that the Prophet Esaia^ prophesied of etc. I am
the voice of him that cries i^ the wilderness, make straight the way of the
lord Thus does Io: prove his office and ministration to be lawful, and
therefore might Jerusalem and all Judea of faith come faith to him to be
baptized: And this man was sent in the power of the spirit of Elias. Therefore
whatsoever he did in his ministry was true and vvarrantable so that men might
safely join themselves to his baptism: Neither could men learn baptism and
the manner thereof but of John, and of them that received it from him, vvil you
now in the behalf of your first beginner, answer us that ask who art thou
that baptizest? And say all men must have their baptism from thee, What
say thou of thy self? Where is thy vvarrant? VVil you answer us as you
have done, that Io: his example is your vvarrant? We vvil answer you (as
we have often done) we also do the like by the same example. And we say
farther, that John's example, and all the examples and rules in the scriptures to
be followed are general, and there is no one particular example or rule in all
the new Testament, which is only to be ymmitated and observed, by any one man,
any two.

Tenn twenty or a hundredth: but what soever example in the scriptures, any one
Man may follow, and what soever rule or commaundme^t any one man may observe
and keep, even so another man may follow the same example and keep the same
coma^dme^t, and so of two men ten, twenty, or an hundredth. And the like may be
said of time, and place: for there is no example or rule in the new Testament,
that is only proper or appirteyning to any one person, or persons time, or
times, place or places for the new testament is the Covenant of Grace which
Christ has purchased with his blood, and there is no part of it can be
abolished till he come to judgment: But if any part of it, any example, or
rule in it be tied to any particular person or persons, time, or times, place
or places these al may be abolished before Christ's coming, and therefore no
part of the new testament, can be particulerly tied to any one of them.

To show for example the question in hand. If John's example of Baptizing,
being unbaptized (or rather not being of any other first baptized) If his
example be a particular example for one man only (as you say) the^ it
follovveth.
was it abolished when your predecessor had once begun to Baptize, and so is
that example now of no use, and it may be for anje thing you know or ever can
know that he was not the first, and then if your rule be true how wretched is
your case, that challeng apreregative, that by your own rule apperteynes not
unto you, and your best advantage is, that you can but jmagine that you are the
first and you would have us jmaigine so with you.

Well, we beseech you consider thoroughly this one point especially. That the
new testament, nor any part of it neither rule nor example, does perticulerly
apperteyne to any one person, or serve only for any one person, or serve
only for aine one time, or place, which if you deny, you abolish (...), and the
Testament purchased with his blood, and makes it a carnal covenant, for no
spiritual covenant can eve^ be abolished. And if you confence that the new
Testament, and all the rules and examples therein, are general to all: Then
may all men, in all places, whom the lord by his word and spirit shall stir
up, and indue with gifts and grace preach the go^ and men being converted,
baptize them, and so is your Succession fallen to the ground. And therein have
you no (...), if you love the lord, and his holy truth, for thereby shall the
holy ordinances of Christ be set at (...), which you have kept in bond^, to
the great (...) of God, and to the (...) diverse souls whose blood will be
required (...) your hands (though they be perished in their own sins) if you
repent not.

Moreover as we have showed before. John came in the power and spirit of
Elias, therefore what soever he did (...) office and ministry was warrantable
and according to truth, and he could not (...) therein. This no man that
knovves any truth will deny, and we speak to men of understanding. And
came your first beginner in the power of the spirit in this measure* and was
all warantable and according to the truth that he did in his ministry? will
any affirm that all was warrantable that he did? or can any affirm it? and
that he could not err-God forbid that any fearing God should be so foolish:
nay was he not a man coming forth in some small measure of the deep mist of
the mystery of iniquity, being then in much error and ignorance yea even in
that administration of baptism orels you have been unprofitable disciples of
his. And would you tie all the world from the East to the west to come fetch
the holy ordinances of Christ from him, and you, his successors, through all
your errors ignorances, and grevious corruptions, where of we know so many,
and have cause to be jealous of you for maine more. What truth, piety, or
godliness is there in this? that you should seek to make men either presently
swallowe up all your errors ignorantly, to be washed of you with water, or else
stay until they have learned them, otherwise they must not be baptized at all.
And further that men must be forced to learn your language, and so until the
poor disciples of Christ that would follow him, (English men or aine other
nation) can speak dutch, they are debarred from the holy ordinances of God the
means of their salvation by this your rule, a fearful mystery of iniquity.

Hereby you have wrought such wickedness amongst us, and brought such desolation
upon us the poor people of God, as we have cause to wish that in our heads
were floodes of water, and our eyes were fontaines of tears, that we might
power out a complainte against you, for this your abomination, which you have
set up, whereby you have wrought such destruction and ruin in the Church of
God, seeking to pull it down, to build up your selves. Hereby have you
glorified your Church, and set her up to sit as a Queen, taking unto your
selves all power and authority, yea even to shutt the gates of the holy
City, the heavenly Jerusalem, saieing that none may enter but by your
authority. Oh that you could see your great sin herein, and the lamentable
evil that you have wrought. First against God in destroying his Temple, which
is built truly (though exceeding weakly) upon the foundation the word of God.
And you have caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, and to make a mock at the
profession of Jesus Christ. And you have caused them that were more
indifferently minded, to doble their doubtings, and rather stepp backward, then
come forward. Thus have you sinned with an high hand against the God of heaven,
who is able and will fill you the duble for this your iniquity, if you repent
not. And for us you have brought much sorrow, grief and vexation of soul and
spirit upon us. The Lord does know we speak truly and great has been our
cause of grief to see the Church of Christ, which is his body, whereof we are
(though unworthy members) thus rent and torn in pecces, and our profession
and we made a scorn of men, who have wished and waited for our overthrow, and
have taken upon them to foretell, of these evils that have come upon us, which
being come to pass according to their foretelling, they have triumphed against
us and blessed themselves, as though their foresa^eings must needs come to
pass. Thus have our enemies rejoiced at our miseries, but the Lord has
wounded them upon their right eye, and made them a reioyceing to their enemies.

Were this all our woe, it were at full, enough, but you have by this your
great sin brought a further evil upon us, then to make our enemies rejoice
over us, saying there, there, so would we have it, for you have made our
friends our enemies, yea our familier friends, with whom we took sweet
counsel, and went together to the house of God. And such is the enmity
betwixt us and them (whereof you have been chief instruments) as it can never
have end, whilst any of us live, for it is that enmity, which the Lord put
between the seed or the woman, and the seed of the serpent, which can have no
end in them except we fall into the same destruction, for there is no p^ace to
repentance to be found for their trangression. For they were once enlightened,
and had trusted of the heavenly gift, and were made part^^^s of the holy ghost.
And had tastied of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come: and are fallen away: it is impossible they should be renewed again by
repentance: seeing they crucify again to themselves the son of God and make
a mock of him Heb. 6.4.5.6. Now to show how they were once enlightened. First
Mr. John Smy^h (...) upon whose head the blood of all this people shall be) has
by his profession in all his practice, and by word, and in his sundry
writings, with such force of argument, and strength of protestation with ground
of truth, (as his writings show) manifested himself to be enlightened with this
truth of God.

That wheresoever two, or three, are gathered to gether into Christ's name,
there Christ has promissed to be in the midst of them Mat. 18.20. and
therefore they are the people of god and Church of Christ, having right to
Christ, and all his ordinances, and need not seek to men to be admitted to the
holy things, but may freely walk together in the ways of god, and enjoy all
the holy things. From this truth of god wherewith he was enlightened is he
fallen, denying the words of our Savior Christ. That says wheresoever two or
three are gathered together etc. And holds that the first two or three that
are gathered together have only right to Christ, and all his ordinances, and
that after, all men must come to them, restraning the words of Christ which are
general so any two or three, only to the first two or three, and so has
set up a Succession against the which he has formerly by all words, writings,
and practice set himself with all detestation. And this man like Balaam has
consulted with you, and has putt a stumbling block before the people of God,
who were also enlightened, and so are many as you know fallen with him to the
same sin, and under the same condemnation. And M. Iarvase Nevile having
witnssed not only this but diverse other truths for the which he has been long
imprisoned and condemned to perpetual imprisoment yea expecting death for the
ame, yet notwithstanding all his former fidelity and constancy whereby his
bonds were famous through the whole land, falling with M. Smyth upon this your
blind Succession (forsakeing the rock whereon he stood) is now returned beyond
his vomytt, exclayming against your Succession, and strives to build up the
Succession o^ Rome, which he has formerly, with all zeal and holiness pulled
down, and so is become a hissinge of men, and a reproach unto all the godly,
and is made a scorn of the wicked a just reward for all that fall away.

More over this wicked man Mr. Smyth has professed and maintened with all
manifestation of faith and confidence that Christ took his flesh of Mary,
affirming that all the world was not able to answer that place to the Hebr.
2.14. where it is said: forasmuch, as the childeren are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them, as also that place Genesis
3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, but now he is
fallen from this, following a device of some of you. He cannot find in all the
scriptures where Christ had the first matter of his flesh: but the second
matter which is his nourishment, that he had of Mary, saieing further that if
he had the strength of many men, he would labor to cast the contrary out of the
Church for being a^ article of faith, and he has taught that Christ's
miracles, sufferinges, and death, yea his hanging upon the cross were all
typical and Carnal, Comparing Christ flesh to his garments, and therefore not
to be striven about. So like wise is he fallen from the faith of justification
by Christ's righteousness only, to inherent righteousness in himself, so will he
be justified partly by his own righteousness, either not standing need of all
Christ's righteousness, orels not holding his righteousness sufficient for him.
And he is also fallen from the faith in the point of Magistracy, professing he
knew not that he differed from you in any thing.

Further more this wicked man Mr. Smyth has professed and taught, and his
confederates had learned. That God is a spirit, and that he will be worshipped
wholly in spirit and truth. And he and they knew that the Appostle 1. Cor.
14.14.15.16. says. If I pray in a strainge tongue my spirit prays, but mine
understanding is without fruit. I will pray therefore with the spirit, but I
will pray with the understanding also. I will singe with the spirit, but I will
singe with the understanding also. Else how shall they that understand not, say
Amen. and verse. 11. Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be unto him
that speaks a Barbarian. This man not with standing, when he had himself but
a little understanding of your language, and the rest of his confedracie, when
some of them had not any understanding to be spoken of, and diverse none at
all, neither yet have: have, and do come to worshipp with you, being barbarians
unto you and say Amen (else what do they there) not knowing whether you bless
or curse.

The ignorant Papists shall stand up in judgment against these men, yea the
Idolatrous Heathens who have not known and heard the things that these men
have known and hard. Of such men as this and they that are fallen with him,
speaks Th-appostle Jude. VVoe be unto them: for they have followed the way of
^ayne, and are cast away by the deceit of (...) in the gain saying of ^ore.
(...) your persons in admiration because of advantage, which you might all
right well see, and ^ee doubt not but some of you do see, for you know then
understanding in your language, and for what cause can you ymagine that they
should ^unne to gaze at you. Th-appostle 1. Cor. 14.19. says. I had rather
speak to the Church or congregation, fyve words with mine understanding that I
might also instruct others, then Ten thousand words in a ^^^a^nge tongue. And
does not The-appostle reach here that it is better to hear fyve words in the
Church or congregation with understanding, then Ten-thousand words in a strai^g
tongue? But these men, with a sort of ween on that are void of understanding
had rather hear in your Church or congregation fyve words without any
understanding, then Ten thousand with understanding in a congregation or Church
gathered together by the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and baptized
into his name upon the confession of their faith and sins.

This they knew was our begininge: but your beginning they knew not neither
can know, and if you had any other beginning it is not according to gods word:
but that is all one to them, they have not regarded how you began in the faith,
nor how you stand in the faith, which (if they had not forsaken all religion)
they would have had regard of: but religion was not, nor is not their mark
that they aimed at* as you may easily descerne by these their wilful b^ind
courses, where into you have ledd them by your blind Succession.

Now you, and betwixt you and us, and let all the godly on ear^n consider,
whether you have walked uprightly herein or no, and whether you have not sought
your selves* and not the glory of god, nor our building up in the faith. And
thus we leave the Succession of your baptism, putting you in remembrance that
we have showed you, that by this your opinion you make John baptist his
example a particular example for one man, for what man you cannot tell, but
whose ever can first light of it he has the pre heminence, and this you
ymagine was your first beginner, which you shall never be able to prove except
you can know all things that are done under the sun, but all this in you is
vanity of vanities as we trust many of you will easily see, and we wish
all may. And for this people who have ^unne after your inventions, of whom we
would not once have made mention, but the better to bring you to the sight of
the greatness of your sin, and to set them out for an example that others
might be warned thereby, which we desire that they may be, when they shall
hear of such a people, whose knovvled, gifts, and graces were great, and
who vvalked, and preferred to walk, strictly by the rules of Christ, and
under his ^^^k, and now are they Behall, walking by no rule of Christ, not
being under his yock, having disclaymed themselves for having any power to
the ho^^e things, and have given all to you, all their religion being only to
come and gaze at you, who speak to them in a st^aing tongue, which is given
for a sign not unto them that believe but unto them that believe not 1. Cor.
14.22. And in that they are thus left in confusion not knovveing nor careing
whether to go, we have cru^e to magnify the name of god in that he has
confounded them in their ways that would have confounded (...) way of
truth: and we have cruse to bless god that has prevented you and kept you
from making them to be one with you, whereby you had strengthened the^ in their
evil, and enlarged your own sin excedingly.

Let us now proceed to the Succession of your Church and ministry, for we
cannot conceive which way you will be able ever to make any show or cullor,
that this unbaptized man should have commission to do all things, if your rule
of particular proportion be good, there is no such course nor proportion in the
scriptures. John his example will not serve your turn, for John planted no
Churches. If you will have planters of Churches, and that all men must come to
them, then must they needs be endued with like gifts as the first ^lanters
were, speak all languages as Th-appostles did, work miracles, and not err in
doctrine, for the Lords hand is not shortened, nor his grace and mercy lessned
to his Church and people. But if he send men with the same office and
authority, that he sent his Appostles, he will for the honor of his own
name, the advancement of his truth, and good of his people, give them the same
gifts, and not bring his truth and people in bondage to men full of errors,
ignorances, and blindness, as you and all men are: therefore be content to be
biulders upon the foundation laid, and forbid not others to build thereon, but
let every man take heed how he builds upon it. 1. Cor. 3.10. This may suffice
for this point and so we come to that, to the which the best approved amongst
you, have had no word of annswere hitherto, and we know you ca^ say nothing
for it, holding your rule of Succession according to your course and proportion
except you will be so very unadvised, as to hold proportion in one thing, and no
proportion in another, and this that we intend to speak of, is your ministry.

How come you to raise a ministry? where is your particular example, your rule
is that Elders must make Elders, and none but Elders must administer in the
holy things. You raise baptism after John's examples: but how will you do to
ordeyne Elders? seeing you have no such example, and when you have done, what
device will you have to keep this authority to your selves? This is your
ground for your Succession, as all had baptism from John the first baptizer,
so all must have baptism from your first baptizer, As all Churches proceeded
from the first Church at Jerusalem, so all Churches must proceeded from
Jerusalem your first Church. As Elders proceeded by ordination from the first
Elders, so all Elders must proceed by ordination from your first Elders; here
is your proportion. But how came your Elders by their ordination? did they
ordeyne themselves? where is your example and proportion for that? Did the
Church ordeyne them* then your proportion is gone, for the first Elders were
not so ordained. Thus are you overtaken in your ground not seeing whether it
ledd you. Forsake it, it shall be no disgrace for you to forsake error, you shall
therein show the true grace of God to be in you, in denying your selves and
your own ways, and advancing the way of the Lord. Hold you to the perfect
rule, that all gaynsaiers are not able to withstand, which was given by the law
giver, and that is. Where two, or three are gathered together into my name,
there am I in the midst of them and whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven: and what soever they loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Mat.
18.20.18. And 1. Cor. 3.16.21.22. Know you not that ye are the Temple of god.
Let no man rejoice in men, for all things are yours and 2. Cor.
6.15.16.17.18. what Concord has Christ with Be^all; or what part has the
believer with the infidel: and what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols: wherefore come out from amongst them and separate yourselves says the
Lord, and touch none unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a
father unto you, and you shall be my sons, and daughters says the Lord
almighty. These three places of scripture proves thus much. First, that
wheresoever two, or three are gathered together in Christ's name, Christ is in
the midst of them, and they have power to bind and loose, which is to receive
in and cast out, to appoint Officers and to discharge, and to administer in all
the holy things, for having Christ they have wi^h him all things also Romans
8.32. Christ's power cannot be divided from him, therefore where he is, his
power must needs be, and he is a king, and where he is, he gives power to his
servants to serve him in all his ordinances.

The second place alleged confirms this, where it is said. Let no man rejoice
in men, for all things are yours, and in the 5. verse. of this. 1. Co^. 3.
says The Appostle, who is Paul? and who is Appollos? but the ministers by
whom ye believed, sheweing that the Cornithians were not the Temple of God,
neither had interest unto all things, because of their persons, but because
they believed their doctrine. And wheresoever a compaine of men now, shall
believe their doctrine, even they are the Temple of god, and all things are
theirs, as well as all things were the Corinthians.

The third place ^ore alleged, proves, who they are that Christ has promissed
to be in the midst of, and that is, those that separate themselves from Behall
(which are men without a yock) from unbelievers, from Idols, and which touch
no unclean thing, these are they that God will receive, and among whom he
will dwell and walk and he will be their God and father, and they shall be his
people and children, and they shall not need to respect the persons of men as
has been showed, for by the free gift of Gods grace, and through their faith
in Christ, all things are thens. Will any men not withstanding all this say,
that any people or congregation separated from all uncleanness, may not enjoy
Christ and all the holy ordinances without they be admitted there unto by other
^en? Did Th-appostle Paul disclayme both for himself, and Cephas, and Appollos
from all previlige unto their persons, and teach the corinthians that their
persons gave not them interest unto the holy things but their doctrine through
their own faith; and dare any challenge previlege unto their persons, and so
take away the the authority of Th-appostles doctrine and ministry, that is
still in as good force and authority as ever, in the scriptures. And by whose
ministry and doctrine what people soever believes at this day, all things
are therein, by faith in the scriptures not by Succession from men.

Here we desire that all men that have any vprightnes of ^art, would enter
into a due consideration of the depth of (...) error of Succession, from, or by
the persons of men. And through gods assistance we will endeavor to speak
what we are able for the discovery of this error, which is so great and
dangerous, of the sharp bitter fruits whereof, we have deeply taisted, and
our vvounds are yet fresh and green: but not vvithstanding by the grace of
God, we will not be provoked to speak beyond the bounds of sobriet^e
herein: and to proceed herein by the most easy, plain, and evident way to
our best understandings.

We entreat you, and all men with all holy advisednes to consider, what
was the separation wall, betwixt the Jew and the gentill, and Th-appostle
Romans 3.1.2. declares plainly what is was in these words. The preferment of
the Jew and the profitt of circumcision is much every manner of way, for
cheiflie because unto them were of creditt committed the oracles of god, this
was the divisio^ wall, which the Lord had set up betwixt the Jew and the
gentill in that he gave his statutes and ordinances to Israel to keep^, not
debarring the ge^tills at all from e^ioying the benefitt of his statutes and
ordinances as the lord shows Exo. 12.49. One law shall be to him that is borne
in the land, and to the strainger that dwells amongst you. This then was the
preferment and the devision wall, that the Jews kept the oracles, and the
Gentills must have them at their hands: for if the gentills had themselves
possessed the land of Canaan. And the holy City, and the Temple; and all the
holy things they had been all polluted in their hands; but when the Jews had
the possession of all the holy things, and communicated them unto the ge^tills
they were holy to them. Thus could the gentills have no benifitt of the holy
things, except they came to the Jews and receyved them from them, and so
enjoyed them under them. This then is so plain as any thing can be, that the
partition wall betwixt the Jew and the gentill, was in respect of the
previlige that belonged to the person of the Jew, in that, to the person of
the Jews, the oracles were committed to be kept, for as we have showed there
was the same law of ordinances for the gentill as for the Jew, but the gentill
must receive them from the Jews, and they must come up to Jerusalem to worship
with the jews Act 8.27. and joh. 4.20. This stopp of the partition wall has
Christ broken down. That he might reconcile both unto God in one body, by his
cross and slay hatred thereby, and making peace Ephesians. 2.16.15. Thus has the
Lord of himself made peace both with jewe and ge^till, now not preferring any
one people above another in giveing his oracles to the^ to keep, but has made
his convenant with all, both jewe, and ge^till, they that are a far of, and
they that are near Act. 2.39. Ephesians. 2.17. To every man that does good shall be
glory and honor and peace, to the jew first, and also to the grecian. For
there is no respect of persons with god Romans 2.10.11. There are now by gods
appointment no more straingers and forreyners, but through Christ, all both jew
and gentile, have an entrance unto the father by one spirit Ephesians. 2.19.18. not
standing in need of admittance by men. And what people soever, either jew, or
gentile, are biult upon the foundation of Th-appostles and Prophetts Jesus
Christ himself being the ch^^te corner stone, in whom all the building cuppled
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, they are built together to
be the habitation of god by the spirit Ephesians. 2.20.21.22. And therefore no
people are bound to seek to men to be built a habitatio^ of god: But the
doctrine of Th-appostles by the work of the spirit is sufficient. All this
proves the partition wall is broken down, which is, that the oracles are not
now committed to any people of creditt to keep that all should be forced to
come to them as the gentills were of necessity constrained to come to the
jews, Christ has slain that hatred says Th-appostle, and has reconciled
the gentills to god, and so god is equally favorable to them both, that is to
all men (for all were either jews or gentiles) God does not favor any one in
respect of committing his orracles to be kept, they are now left free to all
that come, according to that prophecy of scripture Psai. 55.1. Hoe every one
that thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver come buy and
eat. Come I say buy wine and milk without silver and without money.

This then being confessed of al (that have any knowledge in the religion of
God) that the separation wall is broken down, and being rightly understood
also that the separation wall was a personal previlige unto the peculiar
nation of the jews by genealogy, which was to keep the oracles of God by
Succession amongst them selves, from generation to generation, and the gentiles
that were without could not be admitted to the holy things but by them, this
being the c^vision wall, and this being broken down, and the gentiles let
in, and the door set open for all, and freedom and liberty proclaimed. That
by the blood of jesus christ we may be bold to enter into the holy place, by
the new and liveing way, which he has prepared for us through the veil,
that is his flesh Heb. 10.1^.20. Hereby all Succession is abolished, all
previlige and pr^l^ment to particular persons in keeping the holy oracles is
taken away, and they are free for all men, (that believe to (...), for we are
all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, There is neither Jew, nor
Grecian: there is neither bond, nor free ^e is neither male nor feemale: or we
are all one in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26.8. Now they then that will set up
Succession, and (...) have all the orac^es of God committed to them, and that
all (...) receive the ordinances of Christ from them they herein build up the
per^ wall again they challenge to themselves the preferme^t of the Jew they
stopp the entrance into the holy place by the new and liveing way, which
Christ has made by his blood: they deny that any people built upon the
foundation of Th^appostles and Prophetts by the spirit, can be the ^on of God
they will not permit me^ to be the sons of god by faith: all these things
are nothing available without me^ come to the^, and be admitted by them: and
men cannot have Christ except they have the^, nor be joined to christ, except
they be joined to them: nor putt on christ except they putt on the^. Let all
the godly but equally judge betwixt you and us, whether this be not to set up
the (...) wall again, W^h is to give a special previlege ^d preferme^t to the
people more then another and that none may enjoy the holy things but from
their persons, which we de^e may yet better be observed, and well understood,
that you, or what people soever manteyne Succession o^ will have a previlege or
preferment, in the possession of the holy things it does apperteyne and is
tied to your persons and the power and authority you challenge it is in your
persons, for it is not in your gifts and doctrine for set^ by your persons and
tie us not to them, and then we will prefer the gifts and doctrine of
Th-appostles before yours, and we will be directed by the^. And the authority
and preferment you challe^ge is not in your office, for set by your persons
and personal presence, and send precepts and rules, by the authority of your
Office and we, and all that ^eare god will cast away your authority and
office and the authority and office of all others herein, with the precepts
and rules made by the power thereof, and we will only submitt our selves to
the office and authority of Th-appostles, and to the precepts and rules,
which they have set down by the power of their office, which power and office
they received from god, not from men, nor by man gal. ^. 1. Thus may you and
all men see, that what people church, or congregation soever do challenge unto
the^ selves any previlige or preferme^t in keeping the holy things, and that
they only are to dispose of the to others, such previlige, and preferme^t must
needs be proper to their persons only and from all such previlige to their
persons, as we have before showed Paul, and ^^phas, and Appollos disclaymes,
although they were the ministers by whom the corinthians believed. And will
you, or any people or church challe^ge privilege and preferme^t to your
persons over al men, although by your ministry they believe not: and all your
warrant for this is because you say, you are the first.

If you will yet stand for privilege by your being fi^^^ as you Ymagine) hear
what our savior christ says unto you for your instruction Mat. 2^.1.14. ^rend
I do thee no wrong, take that which is thine own, and go thy way. I will give
(...) much as unto thee: these men thought because they came first into the
veinya^d they should have had more wage them they that came last, although
there wages were agreed upon, so you think you are worthy of more
authority, them the last because you suppose you were the first: but our
Savior christ teaches you in th^^ place that the honor and reward in all one
to the last, as to the first. And take heed, least by this your sin, if you
had no other) the lord pass this sentence against you, and say unto you. The
first shall be last.

To dravve to an end in this point, that the gospel is come unto all the
world alike coll. 1.6. to god is no accepter of persons: And therefore all the
world ought to receive it, believe it, and obey it a like: and so doing, all
have free liberty to enjoy and administer in all the holy ordinances a like:
for of vvhomesoever the Lord requires obedience of all his ordinances, they
obeying, he gives to them the privilege and benifitt of all his ordinances.
Then what soever people receives, believes, and obeyes the gospel, as truly
as another people do, they have as much privilege and liberty to einoy the
gospel and all the ordinances thereof as any other people: For god is no
accepter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted with him Act. 10.34.35. And if any shall now fear
god, and fast and pray as Cornelius did, their prayers and alms shall come up
in remembrance before god and the spirit of god shall direct them to hear
what Peter says, and to be directed by Peter, and the rest of Th^appostles,
and not bid them send for you, or go to you, or any people to make them
perfect, for the word of God is all sufficient to teath them and instruct them
and make them perfect to every good work, as is shevved. 2. tim. 3.16.17.
The whole scriptures as given by inspiration of god, and is profitable to
teath to convine, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of
god may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. Here may you and
all learn and understand, that the word of god is all sufficient of it self,
to make the people of god absolute and perfect unto every good work, to pray,
to preach, to Baptize, to break bread, to administer in all the holy things
and to walk in all the ways of god, without the help of of any man or
men. And if any should be so unwise, as think that the meaning of the holy
ghost here is only to make a man perfect unto every good work in himself,
it were great weakness, seeing that the holy ghost testifies, That the
mainfestation of the spirit is geven to every man to profit withal. 1. Cor,
12.7. and 1. Pet. 4.10. Let every man as he has received the gift Minister
the same to another, as good disposers of the manifold graces of god. To make
this plain that he that runs may read it and understand it that Christ and
al things are geven to every faithful people, although they be but two or
three according to Christ's own words Mat. 18.20. Christ is there king Luke
1.33. he is there Mediator Heb. 9.15. by whose blood they may be bold to enter
into the holy place. He is their high Priest, who with one offering has
consecrated for ever the^ that are sanctified Heb. 10.21.14. And made them
kings, And Priests unto God Revel. 1.6. They are come unto Mount Syon. And to
the city of the liveing God the celestial Jerusalem Heb. 12.22. whose gates
are not shutt by day, and there is no night there Revel. 21.25. we conclude
therefore with those heavenly words of comfort spoken by the holy ghost, unto
every faithful man, and men though but two or three. Revel. 22.17. Both the
spirit and the Bride say come. And let him that hears, say, come, and let him
that is a thirst, come, and let whosoever will, take of the water of life
freely.

VVe^ with your selves now, and let all me^ consider, whether this be not al
sufficient. Here is the King: and the Mediator: and the high Priest: and the
city Jerusalem with her gates open: and the spirit of God bidding all come
freely: and all the faithful made kings, and Preistes unto God, what should
let the faithful for entering in, and offering Sacrifices, and administering in
all the holy things before the lord, seeing they only are appointed there
unto of God. 1. Pet. 2.5. and 4.10.

If the jews cominge out of captivity, had had Solomon their king, Moses
their mediator, Aaron their high Priest, Jerusalem their city with her gates
open and their god bidding the^ come, who should have for bidden the^ for
bringing their sacrifices and administering before the lord freely. If Pharoh
should hinder the^ all the plagues of Egypt should fall upon him. And though
Tobiah should despise the^, and Sa^ballett conspire against them, yet they
praying to their god their enemies shame should be turned upon their own
heads, and the lord should bring their counsels to naught Nehe. 4. And God
has promissed to do no less for his people now against his and their enemy
the mystery of iniquity, the man of sin for he will consume him with the
spirit of his mouth, and abolish him with the brightness of his coming 2. These.
2.8. And he will smite the earth with the ^od of his mouth and with the breath
of his lips shall he slay the wicked Esa. 11.4.

Now therefore take you heed, and let al people take ficed, how they go about
to hinder the people of god that have freedom and liberty to administer
before him, being a holy Preisthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ 1. Pet. 2.5. take heed we say how you go
about to hinder them, by setting up your own inventions and abominations, and
bring swist judgment upon your selves. And so we leave this point praying you
not lightly to pass by it though we have handled it weakly But let all that
disire unfeignedly in the truth of their souls to see the profession of Jesus
Christ florrish in purity and sincerity, and in the light of all truth, set
their own hearts and teach others to seek Christ in his word: And to follow
him in all worshipp and service according to the examples, rules and precepts
in the Striptures, which are written for us to that end. For, what soever
^^inges are written aforetime are written for our lea^^ing Romans 15.1.

Let all men therefore that in vprightnes disires to walk in the ways of god
according to true direction, seek to be taught of god by the Scriptures, and
not to be ledd by the examples and precepts of men: For if a people though but
two, or three, by reading and hearing the Scriptures, by the work of the
spirit, come to the faith of the gospel, must be compelled to join to any, or
some people that formerly profess Christ, then must they be forced, to
profess as they profess, and walk in their stepps with them: and so to be
brought in subjection to all their errors, and to be polluted by joining with
them in all their corruptions and so they cannot nor must not be ledd on for
ward toward perfection as they ought to be Heb. 6.1. But they must be ledd
forward or go backward, or out of the way, or stand still, as that people to
whom they join will lead them. This destroys all pure profession of the
gospel, and keeps men back from walking in the clear light thereof: ffor if
two or three shall in the honesty of their hearts disire to walk holi^^e with
the lord, and keep themselves unspotted of error, this woeful rule of
Succession debarrs them that they may not so do, and constraines them to join
to some people, denying them liberty to walk after the rules and examples in
the Scriptures and so to follow Christ, and binds them to follow Christ with
them, as they follow Christ. Hence it comes that the Pope says, lo here is
Christ, and seeks to force all to follow Christ with him. And the Bishopps
they say lo here is Christ and they seek to compel all to follow Christ
with them. The Presbitarie they say, lo heree is Christ, and they will
constrain all to follow Christ with them, we pass by the most ungodly and
unwise Familists and scattered flock, that say he is in the desert, that is no
where to be found in the profession of the gospel according to the ordinances
thereof until their extraordinary men (they dream of) come* which shall not
be, until there come a new Christ, and a new gospel. And you to whom we
especially write you say lo here is Christ, and you would have all to follow
Christ with you. Now in these troblesome days which our savior Christ has
foretold of, and are now come to pass wherein if it were possible the very
elect should be deceaved, let all the godly stay them selves upon that blessed
counsel of our Savior Christ who says unto all that will follow him, take ye
heed, behold I have showed you althinges before Mark. 13.23. which is by his
word, and therefore thither only must we go, and follow no men. And we pray
al you (that would have men follow Christ with you) to remember how our
Savior Christ reproved his Disciples for their evil disposition therein, who
when they saw one casting out deviles in Christ's name forbadd him because he
followed not Christ with them. Jesus utterly disaproving them, said, forbidd
ye him not, he that is not against us is with us. Luke 9.49.50 If the^ our
savior Christ would not suffer these his Disciples, to challe^ge to themselves
this privilege, nor would not restrain that his Disciple, for professinge his
name althoug he followed not with the^, why should any challe^g to themselves,
or why should the people of god think them selves bound to give unto any this
prerogative.

Let all the people of God therefore every where know, that they have liberty
to follow Christly them selves, which if Gods people would practice with fear
and reverence, relying only upon the direction of gods word and spirit, it
would make them (...) wary and careful of their ways, least they should run
into error, and so be justly reproved of all, whift all men's eyes are upon
them; whereas contrariwise, if of necessity they be bound to go and join to
another congregation, they walk securely, because that people^ walking is
their warrant and what soever they find amongst them must be received as
approved and good. And this makes diverse, who often receives many good motions
of the spirit to quench those provocations of the spirit, because they think
they must needs join to some people, and can see none that walk so uprightly
and nolilie, with whom they may have comfort to join: and this is a chief
cause of all this evil, in that many are blinded with this error that you,
and all the fore named people do stand so stiffly upon, that they must join to
the Church. And so is this liberty hidden from their eyes (you all that teach
that doctrine being instruments there of) that they may join the^ selves to
gether in the covenant of the new Testament, and so be the church and Temple of
God them selves as well as you or any people: and through the gracions
blessing of god, which he has promissed shall be upon them, they so doing and
walking in his ways, they may, and shall grow to be a most holy people, and a
house for the most high god to dwell in, the word and spirit of god being fully
sufficient to build them up, and they edifieing one another in their most holy
faith, according to the rules of the holy ghost in the new Testament: And all
this without the authority or admittance of any people professing before
them, but all this you hide from their eyes.

O that the children of god were as wise in their generation in all things, and
in this, as the Sons of men, then would they loose no part of that liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free, then would every people called of god,
run of them selves, the rac^ before them, and follow hard toward the mark,
for the price of the high calling of god in Christ Jesus Phil. 3.14. Unto the
which till the called of god by the word of his spirit, raise up their hearts
to do, striveing withal zeal and holiness to run one before another in the
profession of the truth, till these gracions affections and holy endeavors
possess the hearts and spirits of men, there can be no hope to see the glorious
light of Gods truth in the profession thereof to florrish and grow: ffor
whilst some Church or congregation settled in the dreggs of error, and
overtaken with a secure, cold, frozen profession of the gospel, and some other
church or congregation carried away with a head-stronge blind zeal into many
errors, will have all men come and follow Christ, or rather go out of the way,
or be frozen up with them, and while men think they are to give them this
preferment, what hope is there of the groth of pure Religion. We therefore
earnestly beseech all people, by the mercies of god (in whom there is any
faithful love of gods truth) not to respect any men, neither to follow
Christ, as you have them for an example: but follow Christ as you are taught
is his word, and as you have the holy men's examples, whose holiness is approved
in the Scriptures. And thus in all love, we exhort you to be thus minded by
the name of Jesus.

Although this that has been manifested from the Scriptures may give full
satisfaction to every faithful holy professor of the gospel (that Christ by
his presence gives all power to every congregation, as well as to any one
people or congregation, gathered together into his name, though they be but
two, or three, whether they be first gathered or last gathered: whether there
be^lder, or no Elders amongst the^, it is with god all one) wet because amongst
all (almost) that profess Christ, there is so much a do about ordination, o^
laying on of hands, as though olders hands were only sanctified to that use,
we pray the godly reader to receive full satisfaction from Act. 13.1.2.3.
where it does evidently appear that the church or congregation at Antiochia
(where there were no Appostles nor elders) by the direction of the holy ghost,
with fasting, and praying, and laying on of hands separated Paull and Barnabas
to the work of their ministry, whereunto the holy ghost had called them. And
Paul went not to Jerusalem to them that were Appostles before him, not so much
as to consult with them Gal. 1.17. but after they were separated by the church,
being sent forth by the holy ghost they came down to Seleucia. Act. 13.4. And
from this time did first begin to administer in the Office of their Appostle
ship: in all this let it observed, that it is here set down expressly in the
scriptures; that they were called unto their office of god and set forth of
god, and that the church did only ordeyne, or separate the^ to that work: and
therefore this does nothing contradict Gala. 1.1. where it is said Paul an
Appostle, not of men, neither by man: for he was called and sent of god. Thus
is it proved that the church or congregation, has power (with fasting and
prayer) to lay on hands, and so to separate and ordeyne me^ chosen, to
administer. And this is the ordinatio^ set down in the scriptures, which most
men make so great an Idol of. And we hope we shall not need to prove
perticulerly that the church or congregation has power to Elect or choose their
officers seeing that is so plainly set down Act. 14.23. and 6.3.5.

Of Magistracy.
THE fowrth matter that by the assistance of God we purpose to speak to you
of, is, to prove unto you, and all that are contrary minded. That king,
Princes, and Magistrates, ruleing and governing by the power of god, with the
sword of Ius^, may be members of the church of Christ reteyning their
Magistracy. For proof hereof Thappostle Paul to the Romans 13.1.^. first
shows (speaking of the higher powers) That all powers are ordained of god.
And whosoever resists the power resistes the Ordinance of God. This then
hereby is made most plain, that the power and authority of Magistrates is the
holy ordinance of God. They are further called. The ministers of god, and their
administration is set down. To take vengance of them that do evil, and to
praise them that do well, And the instrument wherewith they are to punish evil
doers, is the sword. And in all this they are the ministers of god for good and
for the good of gods children especially. And therefore are they commanded to
pray for them 1. Tim. 2.12. Thus is their power (being of god) holy and good:
and their office and administration holy, and good being (as is here showed by
Th-appostle) appointed of god for good, who does, nor can appoint nothing but
that which is holy and good, and pleasing to himself, for he is holiness and
goodness it self, and he may not, nor cannot appoint any thing contrary to
himself.

God then having ordained and appointed this holy ordinance with the end, and
use of it, and manner of administration, the magistrates applieing them selves
for the same thing, they obey the holy comandeme^t and will of god, and are
pleasing and acceptable to the lord in that their obedience: for by these
words. Applying themselves there unto. The holy ghost intends and shows, that
there is required a diligent willing, faithful obedience in their
administration, and not a forced constrained obedience, as the devils obey
god, whose obedience is not acceptable and well pleasing unto him: further the^
he is well pleased in sheweing the power of his own might, in that comaunding
them they must obey him: for the de^^ do not willingly obey god in any thing.
They do not willingly know god as appears when they cried Mat. 8.29. Jesus
the son of god, what have we to do with thee: and although they bele^^e
there is one god, yet they do it not willingly, because they tremble Iam. 2.19.
there faith increases their fear. All this we speak to make it plain to
the simplest: ffirst, that there is an obedience which god comandes by the word
and work of his power only, where in they that obey please not god: as when
he commanded the unclean spirits to come forth, and they obeyed him: And thus
did Pharoh obey, when he let the people of Israel go to serve the lord, as
Moses and Aaron had said Exo. 12.31. this was no willing obedience and
therefore not acceptable unto god. Secondly there is an obedience, which god
comandes by the word and work of his grace, wherein, and whereby they that
obey, please god, and are acceptable unto him. This is the obedience that is
better then Sacrifice.

And this is the obedience that god requires of kings, Princes, and
Magistrates, even a diligent, willing, faithful obedience, as is showed from
these words: They are the ministers of god applieing them selves for the same
thing. And let us with all grace and holiness unto god, and revere^ce unto this
his holy ordinance, consider what it is that they are to apply themselves
unto. It is to punish evil doers with the sword, and to reward or praise the^
that do well: these words might co^vince you all of your error in this point,
and they shall condemn you all, if you repent not, of your reaching and
stiftly mainteyning, that these Ministers of god, retayning this their Office
from god, may not be members of the Church of Christ. Hearken to their Office
or ministry yet again. It is to punish evil doers, and to reward or praise
them that do well, in which holy administration they are like unto god, and in
applieing them selves faithfully therein they do the work that is proper to
god: for to execute justice upon the wicked and show mercy unto them that do
well, is the divine property and work of god, and so far as the lord has
committed authority to Magistrates to administer therein, they do the proper
work of god: and therefore does the holy ghost by the Prophett David, speaking
of Magistrates say* Psalm. 32.6. I have said ye are gods, speaking in respect of
the great honor that is due unto them, by their holy Office, where unto he
has appointed them.

The some and scope of that which is hear set down in this point, is to
show unto you, that the Appostle does he^e teach, that the Office and
ministry of Magistrates is an holy Office appointed of god, and that the lord
requires of Magistrates a diligent willing, faithful, obedience, which is
pleasing unto the lord: the which obedience they preforming uprightly, though
weakly, and failing in many things, as Th-appostle confesses, he and all
the children of god did Iam. 3.2 yet believing the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
repenting of their sins, how can it be denied them to be admitted members of
the body of Christ? Is this a good exception, because they are Magistrates? why
then you except against them because they are the holy ministers of god, and do
his will in faithful obedience. What a doctrine of devils is this, that any
should be denied to be members of the body of Christ, for executing an holy
Office appointed of god. For further proof, that it is an holy ordinance or
office pleasing unto god, it is showed in that we are commanded to obey of
conscience; and that is only in that which is holy and good; for god forbidd,
that his children, should be tied of conscience to obey in any thing, that is
unholy and not good. Th-appostle shows here, that the holy ghost intends no
such thing, when he says verse. 3. Magistrates are not to be feared for good
works, and 1. Pet 2.17. Fear god: honor the king, and therefore if Magistrates
shall comaund any thing against god or Godliness, the people of god are not
bound to obey, and for this cause Th-appostles when they were commanded of the
Rulers and Elders of Israel, that in no wise they should speak or teach in
the name of Jesus, answered, whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey
you, rather then god, judge ye. All this does still give further proof, that
Magistracy is a holy ministry or Office appointed of god only for good, and
therefore none bearing that Office or ministry, is, for that cause to be
debarred from being members of the body of Christ which is his church, except
men for executing an office commanded of Christ, should be debarred from
Christ, which is more then madness, for any that profess Christ to affirm.

Furthermore: has god by reason of that high power and authority which he
has given to Magistrates commanded such fear such obedience, and so great
honor to be given unto them of all men, and shall they whom god has so
greatly honored, with such authority, dignity and power, for, bearing this
honor which god has putt upon the^, shall they for this be accounted unworthy
to be members of Christ's church? This is to bring the greatest dishonor, that
possibly ca^ be before god and his people, upon that ordinance and the
ministers thereof upon which, and upon whom, the lord has putt most honor on:
for it is a most miserable, wretched, and dishonorable ordinance, office, or
calling, that debarrs me^ from being members of Christ's body. And let all
know, that have any understanding in the mystery of godliness, that if
Magistrates ought not to be members of Christ's church they cannot be children of
the kingdom of Christ; and if they be not children of the kingdom, they
cannot be heirs of the promise: for those that are worthy to be heirs of
salvation, must needs first be children of the kingdom, being begotten by the
^mortall seed of the word and borne a new 1. Pet. 1.23. all such are worthy to
be members of Christ's Church. Therefore if you understand your selves se this
to be the end of your opinion. That if, you denying Magistrates, and hold them
unworthy to be members of Christ's Church, you much more deny them to be worthy
of salvation: for if by reason of their Office they be unworthy to be of the
comunio^ of the saints upon earth, they must needs thereby much more be made
unworthy to be of the comunion of the Saints in heaven. And thus do you by
this your opinion hold and mainteyne, that god has appointed an ordinance, and
they that are his ministers therein (by his own appointement) are by that
their Office and ministry debarred of salvation. Your sin herein is no less
then blasphemy against god, in that you charge the most holy to have appointed
an ordinance, the executing whereof debarrs men from salvation, we hope you do
it ignorantly, as also your leaders. Let not the antiquity of this your error
make it precious unto you, but rather vile: and sin not by tradition after
the doctrines of men: but be brought to try your ways by the word of god, and
set his spirit be your teacher and leader into all truth, and be not led by men
for all men are gone out of the way, and are full of ignorance and error.

And to make it appear how you are misledd in this be witched opinion. We will
come to some of your chief holds herein, whereof this is one Mat. 20.25.26.
Luke 22.24.25.26. and M^k. 10.5, 45. There arose a strife among Christ's
disciples which should be the greatest; And he said unto them. The kings of
the gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them are called
gracious lords, but ye shall not be so: but let the greatest be as the least,
and the cheif^st as him that serves. From hence you gather that kings and
Magistrates that bear rule in the world, may not be of the Church. To come (by
the gr^tions direction of the spirit of god) unto a due understanding of this
scripture: we must first seek to know, wherein the disciples of Christ did
seek to be greater one then another, and if they did strive for worldly
preferment, then may your ground prove partly true: but if they did not strive
for preferment in the world or worldly preferment, then is there no cullor that
your collected ground should be true: for our savior Christ his speech is to
put an end to their strife, and if they did not strive for worldly preferment
or who should be greatest in the world, then our Savior Christ spoke not at
all concerning worldly superiority and rule, although he brought an example
from the world which is most usual in the scriptures. This controversy then
we hope may easily take an end, if you be not utterly given up to your own
ways in all things: for if the ignorant will not be ignorant still, they may
by the grace of god see here most evidently the ground and cause of this
strife amongst the disciples.

Zebedeus sons disired of our Savior Christ, that they might sit one at his
right hand, and the other at his left in his kingdom not speaking of the
world. Our Savior first reproves them sharply and tells them they know not
what they asked. And when he saw that this their disire of supirioritie wrought
disdain amongst them all, Jesus called them unto him, and caught them to
know. That although the kings and lords of the gentiles and they that were
great amongst them, had domination and authority, and bare rule over them, in
his kingdom it should not be so, He came not to set up and establish such a
kingdom, wherein men should seek to be greater one then another, and to bear
rule one over another: and therefore taught his disciples another lesson,
telling them that whosoever will seek to be great, or be chiefest amongst
them in his kingdom, shall be the servant of all, that is the meanest of all,
for that pride or arrogancy in seeking to be chief and bear rule in, the
kingdom of Christ makes such the least, because god rejects and will cast
down the proud, but he will exalt the humble. Now as our Savior Christ taught
his disciples here, by an example from Kings and Rulers and great men, that it
should not be so amongst them in his kingdom: So also upon the same occation
of strife, and question who should be the greatest Mat. 18.1.4. and Mark.
9.34.36. and Luke 9.46.48. Our Savior Christ takes a little child and sets
it in the midest of them, and teaches them by the example of a child to be
humble and lowsy, and says, except they be converted and become as little
children they shall not e^ter into the kingdom of heaven. And whosoever shall
humble himself as a little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven.

From the first of these examples of Kings and Rulers and great men, because
our Savior Christ says. It shall not be so amongst you, you shall not in my
kingdom be like them, that is, Reign, and rule, and be great one over another.

From this first example you conclude, that Kings, Rulers and great men, may
not be of the kingdom of Christ. That you may the better see the error of this
your collection and conclusion, we will collect and conclude the like from the
other example which our Savior Christ brought of a little child.

He says the Disciples of his kingdom must be like little children, humble,
not seeking to be greater one then another: therefore little children may be of
the kingdom of Christ, because our Savior Christ says they must be like
them, we know you can easily discern the errror of this collection and
conclusion, and why can you not de^ne the error of the other we pray you as
you love god, and his truth, be not so partial in your selves, we will yet
endeavor to show you the equal like of these conclusions, that you may of
conscience (denying the one) deny the other also.

Our Savior Christ says. The Kings and Rulers; and great men of the Gentiles
reign and rule over them, but it shall no be so amongst you the Disciples of my
kingdom: therefore (say you) Kings and Rulers and great men may not be of the
kingdom of Christ. In like manner may it be said (our Savior Christ speaking
upon the same occation, little children are humble, and seek not one to be
greater then another, it shall be so among you the Disciples of my kingdom:
therefore may any as well say) little children may be of the kingdom of
Christ. Seeing you are confident (and that according to truth) that this last
is not a true collection and conclusion: so also of conscience, acknowled* that
the first, which you make is not true: for as in the last both you and we do
understand, that Christ (speaking of his kingdom which is spiritual) did
teach his Disciples by the example of a little child, that by reason of it young
years, was in quality and condition humble: so he would have them humble in
spirit; and our Savior Christ does not teach here, that little children are
spiritually humble, and therefore may be of this his kingdom: for infants are
but borne of the flesh; but they must be borne again of the spirit, that enter
into this kingdom of Christ Io. 3. therefore does our Savior Christ here
speak but of quality and condition of children; which is to be humble, not
teaching hereby that they may be of this his kingdom: Even so our Savior
Christ the in other example (speaking of the power rule, and authority of
kings, Rulers, and great men) teaches them, that in his spiritual kingdom
amongst his Disciples, he will not have them as kings Rulers, and great men to
reign one over another; or to be greater one then another in his kingdom. Not
teaching hereby, that kings Rulers, and great men may not be of the kingdom of
Christ but that his Disciples may not (as king Rulers, and great men) reign
one over another in his kingdom.

In all this our Savior Christ speaks of his kingdom which is spiritual:
and speaks against spiritual power and authority, and will not therein that
his Disciples should seek to be greater one then another not excepting
against, nor Disaproveing the power and authority of earthly kings and
Princes, which is his own holy ordinance, but that they may be of Christ,
retayning their power and authority, and administering in their office, and
ought to have all due honor and obedience: But if they, or any shall seek to
have spiritual power, rule and auctority in this kingdom, and therein make
them selves greater then the rest of the Disciples of Christ, that is it which
our Savior here does altogether speak against and disaprove, and ^re upon,
and in this respect teaches his Disciples to be humble as little children and
not seek in spiritual power and authority to be greater one, then another:
for if they do, he that will strive to be greatest shall be least. But how is
this rule of Christ (wherein he so carefully and so often instructed his
Disciples) trodden under foot, and utterly abolished, of them that profess to
be his Disciples. Not to speak of the Pope, and all his confederates who in
the hight of all iniquiti^ ^th exalted himself. What might we say to lord
Bishops who so directly oppose Christ^ans in* How shall they be able to stand
before (...) their spiritual gracious lordshipps and dignities so called, and
so directly against his word and will. Oh that these things were not hid from
their eyes. And they that profess a Prebitarie, who though they bear not such
high names and titles as the rest,) et by their ruleing power and authority
(which by all means they seek to enlarge) if they take not ^eed, their sin
against this rule of Christ will be found little less then any. And if we
speak sparingly of you that profess an Eldership think not you, nor let it
be thought of any, that we do it, either because we are partial, or because
your deserts are not fully evil enough, for the lord knows, and we know in
part, and would to god you knew your selves, that your iniquity is great
herein, in your seeking and holding superiority over the congregations whereof
you are, and that partly by authority, partly by humblenes of mind seekeing to
bear rule over the people of god. If by this our loveing advertisement any of
all you of whom we have spoken be provoked to evil, you shall therein
greatly increase your own judgments: for the lord knows we speak it not to
provoke you to evil, but to provoke you to repentance before the great and
evil day come, wherein (as for all sin, so perticulerly and especially for
this sin) the lord will have ast^ct account if there be not repentance: we
say especially for this sin, because this sin of seeking superiority,
rule, and authority has and does utterly destroy all sincere and holy
profession of the gospel, keeping in captivity and bondage the consciences of
men* overthrowing the strongest that resist, and treading the weak under
foot, stopping up the way of life, and men hereby taking upon them to have in
their b^ds only, the keys of the kingdom of heaven. To retain perticulerly
unto you to whom we first intended to speak, take you heed, least whilst you
set your selves (by your opinion) against Magistrates being of the kingdom of
Christ, you have in the mean time, set up a power and authority of your
own, and so your second error be as evil as your first.

To put an end to this your first ground, If this example which our Savior
Christ bring of Kings, Rulers, and great men, because he says, it shall not
be so amongst you, that is, you shall not be like them. It from these words you
will yet hold, that Magistrates may not be of the kingdom of heaven; and of the
Church, Then you must also hold (except you will show your selves void of all
understanding) that our Savior Christ in the same cause and upon the same
occasion, bringing an example of a little child, and saieing it shall be so
among you, you shall be like this little child, you most then hold, that little
children may be of the kingdom of Christ, and of the Church: ffor if where
Christ says. Be not like, debarr out them that are brought for the example:
then where he says. Be like, must needs admit in them that art brought for
the example. So then they that from this ground, will admit infants in, let
them see (if they have any sight) that they debarr Magistrates out: And you
that debarr Magistrates out by this ground must admit infants in ffor they are
examples of direct co^traritie, produced for one and the same thing. Therefore
they that debarr out both, and they that admit both, make things that are
direct contrary to be a like, which is the most unjust and false understanding
that can be in men. Let us therefore the rather prevail with you, to look to
your ways herein, and reconcile your selves to the word of truth. And mark
well the words of our Savior Christ concerning this point Mat. 18.4. whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the
kingdom of heaven and verse. 3. they that are converted and become as little
children, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, here is no exception of
persons, but Kings and Princes and all great men, if they be converted and
become as little children and humble them selves, they may enter in; and be
greatest in the kingdom of heaven, not by their princely power, but by their
humility, which we unfeignedly wish that all Kings, Princes, and Rulers would
see, that not their greatness, power, nor authority does any thing at all
advance them to, or in the kingdom of heaven: but it is their convertion and
humility. But your opinion leads you to this; that they cannot be converted
except first they cast away their Magistracy. This is of truth your ground, a
most woeful ground if you could see the footestepps of it, for if it be so
that they cannot be converted except they cast away their Magistracy, then is
their Magistracy sin, and if their magistracy be sin, then is all their
administration wherein they administer by power and virtue thereof sin, who
shall be able to contradict this? which way shall all the device of men and
Angels be able to avoid it, but that if Magistrates cannot be converted to God
(that is Repent and believe) except they cast away their Magistracy, then is
their magistracy sin, for their is nothing but sin that hinders faith and
repentance.

Do you (that hold this fearful opinion) yet see into what straytes you are
brought, that you have no way to turn yourselves, if there be any grace or
love of God in you, humble your selves unto the dust before the lord and his
people and proclaim your repentance, which that you may yet further be provoked
unto, see the hight of your sin, so far as we in our great weakness, are
(by the mercy of god) able to show you: wherein by reason of our so great
weakness, we must needs exceedingly fail, and come short; but yet to the
uttermost that by the grace of god we shall be able we will endeavor to be
faithful to god and you herein. we demand cannot Magistrates, Repent and
believe, and so be received or enter into the kingdom of heaven, except they
cast away their Magistratie? you profess and hold they cannot, why then is
their Magistracy sin and all that they do by the power thereof is sin. If
this be so then has the most holy, righteous merciful, and just god, the god
of all power, geven power from himself, and appointed an ordinance of
Magistracy by virtue of which power given from god, Magistrates do administer,
and are commanded of god to judge righteous judgment. To punish the wicked in
justice, and to reward or praise the well doers in mercy, and all this say you
is sin. And all this does god give them power and authority and
commandment to do, and in all this they are his ministers doing his will, yet
not with standing all this is sin, for if by reason of their Magistracy
(retayning it) they cannot be converted, that is, Repent and believe, then is
their Magistracy sin, and then all that they do by virtue of that
Magistracy which is sin, must needs also be sin. Hereby you charge the
most high god to ordeyne and give power from himself, to Magistrates, to sin
and so you make it sin in them to punish the^ that do evil, and to praise or
reward the weldoers, although they do it by the power and comaundme^t of god,
mainteyning hereby that god gives power and comaundment to sin, what a
fearful estate and condition is this where unto this your error has brought
you; how will they answer it, that have and do so stiftly mainteyne and teach
this error, is this the least commandment that they break, and teach men so?
Mat. 5.25. To blaspheame the name of god, in making him the author of sin,
saying the holy ordinance of Magistracy, which he has ordained is sin which
they say, that mainteyne that Magistrates may not be of the kingdom of heaven
nor admitted of the Church, except they first cast away their Magistracy: for
there being nothing to be cast away, to enter into the kingdom of heaven but
sin, if there be no entering for Magistrates, but by casting away their
Magistracy, then must it needs be said that Magistracy is sin. We go
often over this point, that we might move you with careful advised ^es to
consider of it, which we beseech you by the love of god to do and not to
dishonor god and your profession by such errors.

This which T^-appost^e writes to the Romans. Chap. 13. and that which is
spoken from that place, might suffice for this whole cause of Magistracy, for
their power, authority and administration, but it must yet be opposed to
another ground, that is held and strongly mainteyned against Magistracy,
whereby the most simple hearted are deceived, and that is this. The weapons of
our warefare are not carnal, but mighty through god to cast down holds. 2.
Cor. 10.4. ffrom this Scripture, diverse that holds there may be some sorts of
Magistrates to end causes and questions, do yet hold that in any case, they may
not make war; nor put men to death. It is to be lamented with the tear, of
men's souls to see the simple hearted thus mi^led, and they are deceived under a
dangerous cullor, and great show of holiness, not seeing the deceit of Satan
who transformes himself into an Angel of sight herein, for what holy heart
will not easily be brought to think, that war^ is an unchristianlike thing,
where there is so much slaughter and blood shedd, and which is accompanied with
so many calamities and mi^, and which is followed and mainteyned by so great
force and violence by the arm of flesh: so likewise is it a lamentable thing
that men should be executed and put to death by sentence of la^ for offenses.
Such Magistrates you will in no case admit of, we pray you consider, how
should such Magistrates as some of you would allow of, order and determyne
causes of controversy, without the sword of justice? who would obey their
orders and decrees if they had no power to co^straine, would evil doers be
persuaded by words to do well? and would wrong doers by perswation do right?
why if they would not, then were all your Magistrates labor lost, they are but
weak ymaginations to ymagine in your mynds that there can be such Magistrates,
but let us come to your ground. Thus speaks the Appostle 2 Co^o. The weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, the ground and cause of this Th-appostles speech
is this. There were certain false Appostles Chap. 11.13-20. cropped in among the
Corintheans that made a goodly show and exalted themselves, and had brought
the people in bondage, and to uphold them selves in this their exaltation, they
sought to disgrace Th-appostle Paul. And because his writings were of great
power and authority, that they could not ^^sten the authority of them
therefore they sought to disgrace his person Chap. 10. verse. 10. his letters
(says one) are fore and strong, but his bodily presence is weak and his
speech 1. of no value. To this Th-appostle answers verse. 1. look ye on
things after the apperance? and verse. 2. esteem you us as though we walked
after the flesh? though we walk in the fesh, yet we war not after the
flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. In all this showing and
teaching them that they should not esteem of him according to the out ward
appearance in the flesh, for he came not to make a great outward boasting show,
and to subdue and bring men in bondage by such men's but by the power of the
spirit, for says he. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal: but says
thappostle Chap. 13.23. Seeing that ye seek experience of Christ that speaks
in me, let them know that have sinned heretofore, and all others also that if
I come, again I will not spare. All this and much more to this sense speaks
he to the Corinthians. And to him that spoke those things he says. Chap. 10.
verse. 11. Let such on think, that such as we a^e in word by letters, when we
are absent, such also will we, be indeed when we are present. Thus
th-appostle labors to show them that his ministry was spiritual, by the
power whereof he came amongst them; but seeing they sought to disgrace his
ministry by disgraceing his person, they should see he would be the same in
his deed present, that they confessed him to be in writing absent: with what
understanding can men gather from hence, that there may be no other weapons
used in the world, then such weapons as th-appostle Paul used here in his
ministry of Appostleship against false Appostles. we have written thus much
of this, that you might see how you are seduced, by misapplying the words of
the Scripture from the sense, which is too usual amongst you.

Well, therein this place we have learned of th-appostle what were his weapons
in the ministry of his Appostle ship, teaching the Disciples of Christ to use
only such weapons in the like ministry.

Now let us also for a full (...) of this point in hand be taught of the same
Appostle (...) teaching by the same spirit and authority (...) with what
weapons Magistrates must administer withal in the office of their Magistracy.
And that is showed Romans 13. where it is said, they bear not the sword for
naught: for they are the ministers of God to take v^gance on them that do evil.

Here are the words and sense of the scripture goeing together, and that
evidently without all condiction, that God has given Magistrates power from
himself, and a sword to punish and take vengance of all evil doers, for if
they may take vengance of one, then of Ten, and so of Ten thousand: this has
god appointed, ordained and commanded, who is a gra^ious, me^cifull god, and
full of pity and compassion, yea more compassionate, then all men can be and
therefore let not men pretend holiness in this their compassionate and pitiful
disposition, that would not have Magistrates administer with the sword, for
Satan deceaves you thereby, and makes you more pitiful then god, and therein
you sin most greviou^ly, when you rejoice in your selves, and think you do
exceeding well. But the thing that mi^leads you all is this because you can
see no sword, but the sword of the spirit, and no armor but spiritual armor
in the kingdom of Christ: and therefore the disciples of that kingdom (say
you) must have no other weapons, nor put on no other armor, and then can there
be no putting to death, nor any war neither ought to be, but all spiritual.
Suffer our folishnes if we seem as fools to speak thus unto you. Even so in
the kingdom of Christ, there is no treasure but spiritual treasure, no baggs
but spiritual baggs Luke 12.33. No buildings, but spiritual buildings. No
apparel but spiritual apparel 1. Pet. ^.3. No meat but spiritual meat
Romans 14.17. If then you will cast away all weapons and armor but such as the
disciples of Christ use in his Kingdom, so must you also cast away all your
baggs and treasure, and all your buyldings and houses and you must wear no
apparel, but spiritual apparel eat no meat but spiritual meat. If to all
this it be answered, that in the new Testament the lawful use of al these
things be allowed, we answer even so is the lawful use of Magistracy with
the sword to punish evil doers allowed and approved in the new Testament, as
is proved from Romans 13. which no man with any good conscience shall ever be
able to gain say. To conclude we in love beseech you to see what an extreme
strait you are brought unto, (we mean all these that hold Magistrates may not
be of the Church of Christ, and retain their Magistracy) that you must say
that Magistracy is not an holy ordinance of god, and that all that is done by
the power and authority thereof is sin, and therefore Magistrates may not be
admitted to be of the Church of Christ, except they cast away their
Magistracy: for if you confess that it is an holy ordinance of god, and that
the administration and execution thereof, and whatsoever is done by the power
and authority of the same according to the word of god in the punishing of
evil doers and praising and rewarding the weldoers be good, and holy and just
in the sight of God, then may Magistrates be of the Church of Christ and retain
their Magistracy: for no man may be debarred out of the church of Christ for
doing of that which is holy and just and good.

But to deal yet more plainly with you, that the uttermost depth of your
error may be discovered, that you and all men may utterly detest and abhor
it. If you will say that Magistrates are no otherwise the ministers of god but
as the devils are which one of our own countrymen, the forenamed Mr. lervase
Nevile (falling upon this, and others your errors) most blasphemously has
affirmed: except you will also hold the same, (which god forbid that any child
of god should do) you can never deny Magistrates for being of the Church of
Christ: for if you confess that they are the holy and good ministers of god
applieing then selves there unto, then how can you deny them as unfit to be
members of the Church of Christ, and that only because they the holy and good
ministers of god retain that their ministry office and calling whereunto
they are appointed of God.

And now may you see that we had just cause in the beginning of this question
to endeavor to show that the lord requires a diligent, faithful willing
obedience of Magistrates: But the devils obey of force and against their will.
And God does never make them ministers of his mercy to any, but we see
here, God has ordained Magistrates his ministers for good, both in mercy and
justice, as well to reward the weldoers as to punish the evil doers. Of all the
people upon earth none have more cause, to be thankful to God for this blessed
ordinance of Magistracy then you, and this whole country and nation, in that
God has by his power and authority given unto you magistrates, who have so
defended and delivered you from the hand of a cruel distroyer and will you not
withstanding contemn this his holy ordinance, and accounte it as a vile
things far be it from you to continewe in this your so great evil.

Think not that in the handling of this point, we seek to bring your persons
in question or contempt with the higher powers, the lord knows we have no
such intent, we know their worthy patience in bearing with your great
weaknesses herein, but to bring this error into contempt among you, that you
might forsake it, that is it we see^e, and that the simple hearted might not be
betrayed with it as they are, not knoweing how far that de^pfull opinion leads
them, and all under a show of Godliness. Much more might be said then we are
able to say, and we would willingly have said something^ (...) this point and
of others, but that it is so difficult to get it set over into you (...) say
thus much more unto you (...) you to tread under foot this unholy disposition
that seems to be so holy, and makes you flatters your selves, and think your
selves most holy herein, and that is, in that you would not have evil doers
punished with the sword. You please your selves much, in your pitiful
dispositions herein, and think you please God, when it is most evident that
you sin greviously herein: for it is the good will, pleasure, and
commandment of God that evil doers should be punished by the sword, and to
that end he has given power and authority to Magistrates, and you contrary
to the good will and pleasure of God, would not have evil doers punished with
the sword. Is not this your great sin to be contrary minded to God? take
heed least by this your disposition you could also wish or disire that wicked
men dieing in their sin, might not be damned, whereby you should wish the
utter dishonor of God, for then should the enemies of God triumph over him:
and then would they much God to scorn and have him in great derision: but God
shall laugh at their destruction and mock when their fear comes. Pro. 1.26.
And all the Saints of God shall rejoice with him. Revel. 18.20. And if the
Saints in heaven rejoice and praise God, when he punishes and takes vengance
on the wicked, ought not the Saints upon earth to rejoice and praise God when
they see or hear that the evil doers are punished here on earth? by such
power and authority as god has appointed. And they are the more to praise
God. seeing the holy ghost does testify, that it is for their wealth* what
great sin of ingratitude and unthankfulness is this then in all you, that so
disaprove of Magistrates, and of their punishing of evil doers by the sword,
the which Ordinance if it were not, all the Godly on earth should be destroyed
and the most Godly first. Now we know that God is able to defend his without
the sword, but in that he has appointed this holy ordinance of Magistracy for
the preservation and defense of all good men, and for the subdueing and keeping
under and cutting of the evil doers, let none make the selves more wise and
more holy then God, which you all do that disaprove of Magistracy. Repent,
for your sinneing with a high hand herein, in dishonoring God by disaproveing
his holy ordinance of Magistracy; which he has commanded should be honored
with all godly fear reverence and obedience. And if you will repent and truly
obey god herein, then must you (being commanded by the authority of the
Magistracy) be ready with your own persons, and all that you have, to support
and defend that sword of justice which they bear and wherewith they administer
by that power and authority which they have from god: for who are fitter to
support and mainteyne the holy ordinance of god then they that profess to be
the children of god, and who are fitter to feight just and good battles then
good and just men; and what simplicity is this to think, that it is more
lawful to hier men to feight a battle, then to feight it them selves. The
people of Israel that were the people of god never did so, but they fought the
battles of the lord them selves, and the^ the lord went farth with their
armies, and gave them victory over their enemies, and put their adversaries to
flight, and if magistracy be a holy ordinance of God now, as it was then, it
is as lawful for them to defend their countries and people as it was then, and
so is it is lawful for the servants of god, and they ought being commanded by
the magistrates to go to war as well now as then: and the servants of god might
with better consciences and more comfort (...) to battle them selves (being
commanded by the higher powers that ^e of god) although they died in battle
then to hier me^ to be slain for them, to whom the cause belonges not. There
is no religion in this that magistrates by reason, of your unwillingness to go to
battle, for the cause of god and for your own safeties and preservation should
be forced to hier men to feight for you (although you pay for it) and in all
this you pretend Religion and conscience: but it is evident by the word of god,
that if magistracy be a holy ordinance of god, it is to be supported by all
holy and good men, and means: And if it be not a holy Ordinance of god, then
are magistrates but the ministers of god as the devils are: then are they not
to be obeyed for conscience sake, not to be honored: for we are not bound of
conscience to honor and obey the power, authority, and ministry of devils,
but to resist it: and so Th-appostle Paul's doctrine Romans 13. and Th-appostle
Peter's doctrine. 1. Pet. 2.3.17. Is all made false and erroneous. But far be it
from any that have any touch of true godliness, to deny that holy ordinance of
magistracy, and so to overthrowe the holy doctrines of Th-appostles. Let the
godly bewarr of such. Th-appostle Peter has foretold of them, and of their
manner of proceeding, for.

First he shows that there shall be false teachers, which privilie shall bring
in damnable heresies, even denying the lord that has bought them, and by their
followers the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And these are they which
shall despise government; which are bold, and stand in their own conceit, and
fear not to speak evil of them that are in dignity 2. Pet. 2.1-10. let us
apply this to the persons and cause in hand: These men that most stifely stand
against magistracy, have they not brought in damnable heresies? do they not
deny the lord that has bought them? are not these they that deny the true
humanity of Christ, denying him to have had a true earthly natural body,
wherewith he bought them: which they that deny or are ignorant of, that he had
a true natural earthly body, they deny, and are ignorant that the lord has
bought them. We will not now speak to the rest of their damnable heresies:
but to come to this which is one of them, they despise government, and speak
evil of them that are in dignity. Can there be greater dispisers of government
then they that deny it to be lawful to punish evil doers with the sword, for
take away the sword and where is government, will evil doers be governed with a
^od of reed? do we not see daily that many fears not the sword? and if the
sword of justice were taken away, all government were overthrown, and can there
be greater dispisers of government, then they that would altogether over throw
it. And they speak evil of them that are in dignity and authority. Do not
th^se men speak evil of them when then teach and condemn them for evil
doers in their execution of justice against offenders? and can they speak
greater evil then to say, they are (...) evil doers as are not worthy to be
members of the Church of Christ? what greater evil (...) ^^tempt can be cast
upon them, both before God and (...) people (...) hereby they are absolutely
(...) to be the ministers of god, but ^s the devils are. Can there greater
evil be spoken then this. To make it more plain, that you which touch these
things against Magistracy are these false The achers that the Appostle Peter
here speaks of. This is one ^peciall ma^ke, that you do it privilie, for can
false (...) teach more privilie then you that teach this (...) you do not
understand teaching privily to be in corners and privy places. Th appostle she
(...) meaning (...) for he speaks of bringing in heresies privily in teaching
of doctrine; and is not this heresy against Magistrates most privily brought in
under a culler? from our Savior Christ's own words where he says. It shall
not be so among you: And from Th-appostles words. The weapons of our warfare
are not carnal. Is it not privily done? to wrest the scriptures so deceitfully
from a show of words leaving the true sense of the place, and hereby
concluding most privilie and deceitfully, that Magistrates bearing the sword may
not be of the kingdom of Christ not of his Church. but let that suffice which
is spoken before of the misunderstanding of these Scriptures. And see further,
how under this first damnable heresy of denying Magistrates to be of the
Church, most privily is this heresy brought in that Magistracy is utterly
unlawful, and all that is done by the power and authority thereof is sin;
for as we have showed there is nothing but sin debarrs any from being
members of Christ's Church, they then that hold that Magistracy debarrs men
from being members of Christ's Church must needs hold that Magistracy is sin:
and that Magistrates by reason of their office and authority are sinners. For
although a Magistrate should manifest never so great faith and repentance, yet
these men will not yield that he may be of the Church of Christ: for except be
cast away his Magistracy, his says and repentance is nothing. This unholy
Office and unsanctified and horitie does utterly overthrowe faith and
repentance. Let it not displease you that we write thus plainly: set if it be
a holy Office, and Sanctified authority, then it cannot debarr any from
being members of the church of Christ.

Thus may you, and all see, that these among you which teach that Magistrates
may not be of the Church, And that it is not lawful for them to punish evil
doers with the sword, nor by the sword to mainteyne war for the preservation
of their contries and people, these are they that privily bring in damnable
heresies, despising government and speaking evil of these that are in dignity
and authority, in that hereby they seek the utter overthrowe of all
government, and acc^^pt authority and magistracy most vise, because evil
doers are punished thereby, which you teach ought not to be, but is sin and
wickedness to be done. And if all men in these Provinces under the government of
the lords and stats general were of your mynds, as you would have them, where
were government and magistrates? were it not all in the dust? Thus is it evident
that you would have Kings, Princes, and magistrates utterly abolished. Is not
this heresy privily brought in: under so great a show of godliness to destroy
the holy ordinance of god* and how many of you understand that this heresy
leads you to account magistrates the ministers of god, but as the devils are?
we hope there are tho^sands of you that have no such thoughs, and yet it is
most evident, and cannot be avoided but it is, the end of your ground and rule,
is not this privily brought in^^e not therefore deceived by f^re and humble
speeches, for weep^ feste unto you, that it by this that is already said it do
not plainly appear to any indifferent reader that your ground leads you to
this, that all that magistrates do, (by virtue and power of their Office in
punishing evil doers) is sin in them; if any think good to oppose we will
by gods assistance make it most clear, that all may see it that wincke not with
their eyes. If therefore you like not to hold that magistrates are no otherwise
the ministers of god, but as the devils are, then leave of also to hold that
magistrates by reason of their magistracy are to be debarred out of the
kingdom of Church of Christ. And also it shall appear, that this your ground
does evidently overthrowe all Magistracy in the whole earth: for if God would
have all Kings and Princes saved, and come to the knowledge and profession of
his truth, which Th-appostle says he would 1. Tim. 2.2.4. and you confess the
same, and if they cannot come to the knowledge and profession of the truth
except they cast away their Magistracy (as you say and hold) then must all
Magistracy be cast away in the whole world; for God would have all the Kings
Princes, and Magistrates upon the earth to come to the knowledge of the truth and
be saved. And if you like not to overthrowe all Magistrates and Magistracy in
the earth, then leave of to hold that they may not be of the kingdom and
church of Christ.

One other mark that shows you are the false Teachers Th-appostle speaks of,
is, that you stand in your own conceit, this we have found in some of you,
and we require we may not now find it in you all for then shall it appear
evidently unto all men.

Thus have we in these points wherein we differ from you, spoken so far as
God has enabled us, beseeching you all with singlenes of heart to try your
standing in these things we have spoken of, and that you would not hold these
opinions, because you have held them long, but that you will loveingly be
advised to search the Scriptures, and see whether you have any Good warrant
thus to hold and profess and teach men so. Approve your selves now unto us,
and unto all men, that you walk not blindly in the stepps of them that have
gone before you, but that you disire and endeavor to walk by true sanctified
knowledge from the Scriptures, and that you do not so much seek to heap
multitudes together, and build up great Churches and congregations; as to
gather together a holy people, and biuld up pure Churches in the profession of
the true faith, that you may be approved of God, which neither you nor any
people can ever do, except you first make sure, that your doctrine be pure and
undefiled: for though a people should never so much excel in all holiness of
conversation, yea though they should excel in works, in love, and service, in
faith and patience, and that their works should be more at last the^ at first
Revel. 2.19. yet if they suffer false doctrine and false teachers, they are
impure and polluted churches for a little leave^ leaveneth the whole lump Gal
5.9. and the lord will not approve of them, but will certainly come against the^
with the sword of his mouth, and will remove their candle suckes out of there
places.

This the Lord says, but who believes the word of the lord herein. If Churches
and Congregations did believe these words of the lord, it would make them try
their doctrines by the word of the lord and go upon sound grounds with knowledge
and understanding from the word of truth, being testified unto them by the
teaching of the spirit of God, and not receive doctrines upon the good opinion
they have of their Teachers knowledge, holiness and faithfulness, although they
should excel in all these things: neither would the people of God be carried
away after any doctrines by the strong working affections of their mynds,
judging it to be the working of the spirit of God, when it is nothing but the
spirit of their own affections, wherein they may have great motions and
feelings with much zeal but not according to knowledge. Romans 10.2. Therefore
are we commanded not to believe every spirit, neither in our selves nor in
others: but to try first whether they be of God. And hereby shall we know the
spirit of error. If we hear Gods wo^d 1. Ioh. 4.6. That is, if we search and
try every thing thereby.

(...) that Churches and congregations would thus look unto their ways, and
not hold errors for company sake, nor walk in by paths by affections. It is
better to hold the truth alone, and to walk in the ways thereof, co^rary to
all the affections of the heart, which is deceitful: but this is a hard
doctrine, who is able to hear it. It is a pleasing thing to walk in a
profession of Religion with a multitude, and especially it but some of the
grounds of their ^aith agree with men's mynds. This overthrowes the first
beginings of the Religion of God when men will choose to walk with that people,
and in that profession of faith that ^est pleases their mynds, not so much
regarding the truth of their faith nor the^ holy walkeing therein: although
they may mislike some things yet if some please them well, they will not
differ for smake matters: and when they are once gathered and kn^t together in
a multitude, then though error after error be discovered and sin after sin
committed, there may be no breaking upon any conditions. And this overthrowes
all growth of Religion. We wish you and all great congregations to look to
your selves, that you be not more careful to mainteyne your multitude^ the^
the lords truth. It is not a multitude in error and sin, that can please God:
Noe, a few walking together in the truth with holiness shall be acceptable in his
sight, if they be but two or three, he will be in the midst of them. Therefore
please not your selves in your multitudes, walking in so many errors as you
do: for if you repent not of these whereof we have made mention, and of all
other your errors and false doctrins mainteyned amongst you, the lord will
assuredly make you desolate: for thus has he threatened, and executed his
judgment upon Pergamus and Thyatira because they repented not and he threatnes
and will execute the same judgment upon you which sin after the like manner
of transgression, of you repent not. And your gifts and grates being many
less then the gifts and graces of those Churches and your false doctrines and
sins already many more, the greater, and more spedily will his jugdments be
upon you, if you repent not, which we unfeignedly disire the lord to give you
Grace to do; Be warned you that are leaders, whilst it is to day, and harden
not your hearts: why should you perish in your sins? and lead so many simples
soul to destruction with you.

Thus praying all the gracious hearted amongst you, to remember that the wise
man says. Open rebuke is better then secreet love, and the wounds of a lover
are faithful Pro. 27.5.6. And we will hope that though we reprove you, we
shall at length find more love (which is all we require of you) then they that
so flatter you with their tougnes. The grace of our lord Jesus Christ, be with
you Amen.

Cant. 4.8. COme from Lebanon, even come from Lebanon, and look from the topp
of Amanah, from the topp of Shenir and Hermon, from the Denns of the Lions, and
from the mountayns of the Leopards.


To all the most worthy Governors, Learned Teachers, and Godly people of all
estats and conditions in these united Provinces. Grace and peace from God the
father, and our lord Jesus Christ.
WE, among the rest of the people of God, that profess the gospel of Jesus
Christ, have great cause to praise the lord for the freedom and liberty that
we have in these Provinces to profess and speak in the name of Jesus: and
we are bound, and do with all humblenes of heart thankfully acknowledge it. And
we beseech the lord in mercy to recompense it seaven-fold into the bosom of
those that are in authority, by whose great favor we enjoy this blessed and
comfortable liberty: the which liberty we have not the least thouhts to
abuse neither by the grace and mercy of God will ever willingly do. And we
humbly crave now, that we may with favor and good acceptance use this
Christian liberty thus fair as to propound the ground of Religion by way of
question and demand, and we doubt not (through the grace of God) but it being
thoroughly and faithfully debated and tried by the Godly, wise, ^e learned, it
will put a short end to that long continewed controversy of Gods eternal
decree of life and death to salvation and condemnation, And thus with reverence
and due respect unto all deg^ees of persons we proceed.

Our first question and demand is.
1. Weather God decreed not, that if Adam did obey, he should live?

Our second.
2. Whether God did not, according to this his decree, create Adam in his own
jmage Genesis 1.17. In righteousness, and true holiness Ephe. 4.24. giveing him
thereby free will and power, in, and of himself, that he might obey and live?

Our third.
3. Whether God did not according to this his d^ and w^rke of creation give
Adam his commandment (...) obey, and live. Genesis 2.16.17.

Our fovvrth.
4. God then decreeing that if Adam did obey he (...) live and giveing him
freewil and power (...)* and of himself that he might obey and live, and (...)
him to they and live. Our demand (...) ^nderstanding it can be (...)* that God
decreed Adam should disob^ (...) were not this to make God in his de^ (...)
work, and in his comaundment contrary to himself? does God decree that if Adam
did obey he should live, and decree that he should disobey and dye? does God
create Adam after his own jmage, with power and will to work righteousness,
and decree that he should work unrighteousness and sin does God comaund Adam
to obey, and decree he should disobey we demand how these things can agree.

Our fifth.
5. Whether God ever made any other decree with mankind concerming life and
death salvation and condemnation but that he made with Adam? Then God not
decreing Adam to sin by whom sin entered Romans 5 1^. Nor Adam to be
condemned, by whose sin, condemnaton came on all men Romans 5.18. how can it
be said, that God has decreed any man to sin: or any man to condemnation?

Our Sixth.
6. Whether Gods decree was, not from before all beginings. That if Adam
desobeyed and sinned he should dye? Genesis 2.17. how then is it said, that it
was Gods decree that he should disobey and dye? both these cannot stand: and
can the first be denied.

Our Seventh.
7. If any should through vnadvisednes not knovving God, or of vvilfull
wickedness, deny Adam before his fall to have free will and power to work
righteousness: we demand of them was not his understanding holy? his will
holy? and all the faculties and powers of his soul and body holy? and had he
not power to use them holily? If all these things were not so, how is that
true which God has said. In the jmage of God created he him?

Our Eight.
8. Whether Adam before his fall did not use all the faculties and powers of
his soul and body wholy to Gods glory? when the lord brought unto him all
the foul of heaven and every beast of the field, to see how he would call
them, and he gave names unto all cattle, and to the fowls of heaven, and to
every beast of the field: as also when the lord brought the vvoma^ he had
made, to Ada^, Adam said, this now is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh,
she shall be called woman because she was taken out of man. We demand,
whether it be not hear most evident and plain, that Adam had free power
over his understanding will, and affections, when he did these things to the
glory of God?

Our Nynth.
9, Adam having then free will and power from God in, and by his creation to
obey and live, how can it possibly be said that God in his eternal decree
decreed him or any man to condemnation?

We disire a Godly careful consideration and reveivving of these things, for
upon this ground depends the whole cause of Predestination and gods decree
concerning salvation and co^de^natio^: for if Ada^ had freevvil and power to
obey, which never man that knevve God yet denied, then how could God decree
any man to condemnation? and if Adam had not free will and power to obey,
then God decreed he should disobey and sin, and then how can it be denied
but God has decreed men to condemnation, and so is universal redemption
utterly overthrovvne: for how could Christ redeame all, and God decree some to
be condemned: But if Adam had free will and power to obey, then God decreed no
man to condemnation: and if God decreed no man to condemnation before the
beginning of the world, then the lamb slain from before the beginning of the
world, must needs be given a Redeamer for all men. And then are all men bound
to glorify God in that he has given a Savior and means of salvation for
them. But if he be not given a savior for all men, then the greatest part of
men in the world, have no cause to glorify God therein. And we demand
whether this be not greatly to rob god of his honor herein.

And let us yet requier one thing more at your hands that baptize infants:
whether you do not of faith, baptize the^ as being redeamed by Christ in that
you declare them (as appears in your form of baptism) to be sanctified in
Christ and therefore that they ought to be Baptized, as members of the Church,
which is the body of Christ* Surely it cannot be but that you faithfully
believe that all the infants you Baptize are redeamed by Christ or else you
would not Baptize them into the name of Christ, and acknowledge the^ members
of his body. And if you do hold, all the infants you Baptize to bereadeamed by
Christ, then if your rule of particular Redemption and particular
Predestination, be a true rule, you must needs hold that all Dutch-land must be
saved, and no one of them can be condemned: and so must you hold the like of
all England, all France, all Scotland and generally of all the Nations whose
Baptising of infants you approve of. And in that you approve of the Baptising
of all the Turks, and all the Heathens what soever and their infants, if they
should come unto the acknovvledging of the faith of Jesus Christ which we
hope none can say, but they may, do you not (...) plain shevve that you ho^d
Christ ha^h R^ed the^ also: and thus you hold that Christ has Rede^med all the
world, if you (...) vndesta^d yourselves in your own (...) we beseech you
to (...) on be able (through Go (...) of your faith herein.

Oh that we might on Christ's be half require you with Godly careful
advisednes thoroughly to consider of these few things so simply and plainly
set down. That all the honor and praise that is due unto Christ for that his
great work of Redemption might freely be given unto him: and that none that
profe^e and fear his name would s^^ve to lessen his unspeakable work of
mercy herein, whereby they do not only lessen the honor and praise due unto
him for that his so gracious work of redeaming all without respect of (...),
but they do also depri^ (...) of God of (...) understanding of Gods (...) and
mercy unto all, being all but vnder^d the ^me transgression in Adam by whose
(...) condemnation went over all, the which (...) Christ was for given Adam*
and then must it needs be forgiven to all his posterity, seeing God does nor
punish the Child for the fathers sin, espe^ially forgiveing the father that
sin. Let men be^re how they take from the word of God and so flee^e vengeance
that is to come upon all those that shall so do.

Grace be with you Amen.
ANd whereas it is suspected that they which hold universal Redemption do, or
must hold freewill, we desire to testify unto all, for the clearing of our
selves from the suspect of that most damnable heresy, that god in mercy has
thus far given us grace to see That whosoever holds universal red^ption by
Christ, they cannot hold frewill, if they have any understanding: ffor
freewill does utterly abolish Christ, and destroy (...) and set (...) works:
for freewill is to have absolute power (...) man's self to work righteousness
and obey god in perfect obedience; And such men need no Christ, and if any
shall be so blind as to think that Christ restored man into his former estate of
Innocence, the^ must there needs be a new tree of knowledge of good, and evil:
for there is no other way showed in the Scriptures, for a perfect man that is
restored to Adams estate, to sin, but by eating of that tree, and if man be
restored to perfection: or if all men fell not in Adam, as the scriptures
testify they did. Romans 5.12.18. then man has power in himself to obey, and
then some may yet obey, and so stand no need of Christ.

We know not any certentie of these men's opinions, therefore we will not
enter into them, only one man once told us he had freewill, but we found him
to hold so many other horrible opinions wherein he was so obstinate as we had
no faith no have any further conference with him. To these men only thus much
do we say, that thus speaks the word of god Genesis 5.2. God created Adam, in
the likeness of god made he him, and verse. 3. Adam lived an hundredth and thirty
years, and begat a child in his own likeness, after his jmage. If me^ cannot
see hear that Adam begat not a could in the likeness of god, but in his own
likeness: and that the likeness or jmage of god, which is Perfection,
righteousness, and true holiness, does differ, and is clean contrary to the
likeness and jmage of sinful Adam, who when he began ^heth his son was of
himself an imperfect, unholy, unrighteous man. If they cannot see this, then
are they void of all knowledge of god And thus much we leave for a remembrance
to all those that stand for freewill, that they may look back in whose jmage
and likeness they are begotten and if their fathers begatt them in the jmage of
God, then are they certainly perfect, ^oly and righteous, and so have freewill:
but if then (...) begatt them, in their own jmage and likeness, as Adam begatt
Sheth his son, then let them with David cry out and confess. Behold I was
borne in iniquity and in sin has my mother conceived me. Psalm. 51.5. And if
they confess that they were borne in iniquity and conceived in sin as the
holy man David was, how does the devil bewitch them to make them think, that
they are perfect and have freewill.

For our selves we confess with. Th-appostle Romans 7.18. we know that mvs
that is in our flesh dwells no good thing. And Christ has taught us Io.
3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and therefore must needs only
do the works of the flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit,
and therefore all that are borne of the flesh must be borne again, before they
can be spiritual. And we confess with the same Appostle 1. Cor. 1.30. That
we are of God only in Christ Jesus, who of god is made unto us, wisdom and
righteousness and sanctification and redemption. and Ephesians. 2.8.9. By grace only
are we saved through faith, and that not of our selves but of the gift of god
not of works. Let it here be observed that faith is a Created quallitie in
man, as knowledge is, which being sanctified by the spirit of grace, is knowledge
to salvation, and faith to salvations: And therefore our savior Christ
sheweing that knowledge is not sufficient says. Not the knowers of my will but
the doers are justified. And the holy ghost (speakeing of faith) says. Faith
without works is dead, sheweing that the devils believe Iam. 2. And therefore
faith is not a new gift, but it is Grace in Christ which Th-appostle says in
this place, is the gift of God whereby men's knowledge and faith are sanctified
to salvation, and so are saved by grace only, through faith sanctified by that
grace of god in Christ. And this grace of god, which is his mercy by Christ,
has god given to all: ffor that grace of God that brings salvation unto all
men has appeared Tit. 2.10. but all receive it not, as Pa^^e and Barnabas
testify against the Jews Act. 13.4^. (...). Ye put from you the word of God
and (...) yourselves unworthy of everlasting life. And Stephen ^^ith to them
Act. 7.51. Ye (...) the holy ghost. Now we pray that the great (...) of such
as, by the d^ce^* Sati^^ and (...) carried into these errors before spoken of,
and we know not into how many (...) grevious and damnable, may not be a
stumbling block to hinder a^^e gracious ^att from se^ching, seekeing after and
^^raccing (...) of god they hold. Let the bl^^ed truth of god be never the
l^s^e beloved and liked of, because many that pro^e^ it hold fearful errors,
but rather embrace^ and use all godly diligence to bring them out of their
errors, if it be possible, least they perish in them, which is greath to be
feared in many of them.

THE END.
The Helvvys


