THE KINGS EDICT AND DECLARATION UPON THE FORMER Edicts of Pacification.

PVBLISHED IN PARIS AT THE PARLIAMENT HELD the xxv. of February. 1599.

AT PARIS, By the Printers and Stationers ordinary to the King. 1599.

Cum priuilegio dictae Maiestatis.

LONDON, Printed by R. F. for Thomas Man. 1599.

THE KINGS EDICT AND DECLARATION UPON THE FORMER EDICTS OF PACIFICATION.
Henry by the grace of God, king of France and Navarre, to all that are
present and to come, greeting. Amongst the infinite benefits which it has
pleased God to bestow upon us, this may well be accounted and esteemed as one
of the most rare and notable, namely that it has pleased him to give us the
grace and power to undergo and bear out the hideous and dreadful monster of
troubles, confusions, and disorders, which were rife and ouerflowed this whole
Realm at our coming to the Crown, as being then divided into so many parties
and factions, and that in such sort, as that the most loyal and natural part,
was in a manner the least: and withal in such sort to have opposed and
strengthened us against such boystrous blasts of stormy tempests, as that we
have in the end ouerrid and overcome them, arriving at the length in the haven
of the safe deliverance and peaceable quietness of this estate. Of all which let
God have the whole and only praise and glory, and we so stirred up, provoked,
and bound to him thereby, as that we may never surcease or give over the
offering up of our self, in all the best manner of service we can, for the
perfecting and full accomplishing of this worthy work: wherein his hand and
power has been most clearly and manifestly, showing it self unto the sight
of all men, giving us to bear and undergo, not only so much as our place and
ability did require, but much more and far above the same; and that in such
sort and measure, as (our dignity considered) in any other time would have
been very unmeet and inconvenient: as never fearing to hazard therein our
princely renown, by the free exposing of our limbs and life so often unto so
many dangerous occurrences accompanying the same. But now whereas we have found
it impossible to settle and bring into good order so confused a heap and
multitude of so great, so weighty, and so dangerous affairs and businesses at
once, and at one time: we have thought good to take this course, namely to
attempt in the first place, such things as could not but by force and might be
achieved, reserving for a better time the other, which ought and might be
determined by reason and course of justice. As (for example) the general
quarrels that then reigned amongst our good subjects, and the particular
mischiefs and injuries lying upon the soundest and most trusty parties of our
kingdom, all which we judged much more easy to be redressed and cured, when
the civil wars (the original and cause of continuance of the same) should
be cut off and taken away. Now we having (by Gods assisting hand) well and
prosperously prevailed herein, to the utter extirpation of wars and all
manner of hostility out of all the corners and quarters of our realm, we hope
with as good success to compose and set in order the matters as yet out of
square and order, that so we may attain the full establishment of a firm
peace and settled quietness, which has always been the scope and drift of all
our desires and resolutions; and the price we aimed at in all the pains and
travels which we have vndertake^ throughout the whole course of our life. Now
amongst the affairs and matters with patience and continuance of time to be
remedied (and that one of the chiefest and most principal thereof) were the
complaints, which we received from many of our provinces and Catholic towns,
for that the exercises of the Catholic religion, were not generally again
established, according to the Edicts heretofore made for the pacifying of the
troubles, which had risen and sprung from the cause of Religion. As also the
supplications and admonitions offered unto us by the^ of the pretended reformed
religion, as well concerning the default and lack of due execution done of
that which has been granted unto the^ by virtue of the aforesaid Edicts, as
also for that they desired, that there might furthermore be added unto the said
Edicts, the establishme^t of the exercises of their said Religion, the liberty
of their consciences, and the safty and security of their persons and goods,
presuming that they had just matter to draw them to the entertaining of some
new and great conceits, by reason of the last troubles and disturbances,
alleging that the principal drift and occasion thereof, was plotted and laid
to entrap and wholly to ouertread them. Which things (that we might not
ouercharge our self with multitudes of businesses at one time, as also in
as much as the raging heat of wars did gainsay and hold out all establishment
of laws, (how good, wholesome, and necessary soever they might have been) we
have still deferred from time to time to provide for. But now, seeing it
pleases God to give us to enjoy some better quietness and rest, we have
judged that the same cannot better be employed, then to make it our leisure and
liberty, to respect and take in hand the things concerning his glory and holy
worship, and to provide that he may be honored and served of all our subjects:
and that (though it please him not to have it after one manner of form, and in
one kind of religion, it may be at the least to one and the same intention, and
with such a carriage, as may be free from all manner of troubles and tumults that
otherwise would rise amongst them; and that we and this our Realm may evermore
deserve and conserve the glorious title of Most Christian, which has so long
since for so manifold our merits and deserts been purchased and obtained; and
by the same means take away the cause of mischief and trouble, which may rise
upon the matter of religion, as being the thing that always moves the heart
and eyes more then all other things besides. For this cause we (having
considered the waightinesse of the matter, and that it deserves with all
carfulness to be looked into, and having again received the humble requests
and supplications of our Catholic subjects, as also having permitted our said
subjects of the pretended reformed Religion, to assemble together by their
Deputies to make theirs ready, and to enclose together and shut up in one, what
they have to say or allege for themselves, and about the same matter to
confer with them diverse times; and having further perused the said former
Edicts thoroughly) have thought it meet to frame a general, plain, upright or
indifferent and absolute law concerning the whole matter, in the behalf of all
our subjects, that by it they may be ruled in such controversies, as heretofore
have risen amongst them hereby, or which hereafter might rise amongst them, and
whereby both the one and the other may find matter to content themselves
withal, as far forth as the time (considered as it is) will bear. And this
our resolution and mature deliberation, we have undertaken nothing at all in
respect of our self, but in respect only of the zeal which we have for to
see God served: and that it may from henceforth make, procure, and establish
amongst our subjects a sound and lasting peace. For the which we beseech and
still wait upon his divine Majesty, craving and expecting the like protection
and favor, which he has continually in most clear and manifest sort
vouchsafed this Realm, from since the time it first was, and throughout all
that long tract of time that it has continued: and that it would likewise
please his Majesty to show our subjects such favor and grace, as that they may
learn to understand, that in the observing of this our ordinance, consists
(next to that which they owe to God and to us) the principal foundation of
their unity and concord, tranquillity and rest, and of the entire
reestablishing of this estate in his former glory, wealth, and mightiness.
And as for our self, we promise to cause it to be exactly observed, without
tollerating or bearing with any manner of encounter or resistance. For these
causes having (with the advice of the Princes of our blood, and other Princes
and officers unto the Crown, and other great and notable personages of our
Counsel of Estate, being about us) well and diligently weighed and considered
all the whole matter, we have by this our perpetual and irreuocable Decree
pronounced, declared, and ordained, do pronounce, declare, and ordain:

I.
First, that the remembrance of all things passed of the one part and of the
other, from the beginning of the month of March in the year 1585. unto our
coming to the Crown, and during the other troubles going before, and by the
occasion of them, shall remain for dead and buried, and as things that never
were. And it shall not be lawful or permitted unto any of our Atturneyes
general, or any other persons whatsoever, public or private, at any time,
upon any occasion that may happen, to make mention thereof, or to implead or
accuse any for the same in any of our Courts or jurisdictions whatsoever.

II.
We forbid likewise all our subjects, of what condition or quality soever they
be, to renew the remembrance aforesaid, by multiplying of words, by stomacking,
wronging, or provoking of one another, with the reproach of any thing that is
past, upon any cause, pretext, or color whatsoever, in disputations,
protestations, or any manner of quarrels, neither yet to miscall or offend by
word one another, about any word or deed before past: but to contain
themselves and to live peacebly together as brethren, friends, and fellow
citizens, upon pain for offending herein, to be punished as breakers of the
peace, and disturbers of the public quietness.

III.
We ordain, that the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion shall be restored
and established again in all the places of this our Realm and countries under
our jurisdiction, where the exercise of the same has been neglected, there to
be freely and peacebly exercised without any manner of molestation or
impeachment. Forbidding most expressly all manner of persons of what estate,
quality, or condition soever they be, upon the penalty above named, to
trouble, molest, or disquiet the Priests in the celebration of the divine
service, or of the enjoying and reaping of their tenths, fruits, and revenues
of their benefices, and all other rights and duties belonging unto them: and
that all those which in the time of the troubles have been taken away, as
Churches, houses, goods, or revenues, belonging to the said Ecclesiastical
persons, and that those which do withhold and occupy the same, do surrender
the whole possession and peaceable fruition in such rights, liberties, and
assurances as they had them before that they were disseized of the same. In
most plain terms also forbidding those of the said pretended reformed
Religion, to make any Sermons, or other exercise of their said Religion in the
Churches, houses, and habitations of the said Ecclesiastical persons.

IIII.
It shall be in the choice of the said Ecclesiastical persons, to buy the
houses and buildings erected in places profaned by them which occupied them
during the time of the troubles, or else to constrain the possessers and
owners of the said buildings to buy the grounds, and in both cases estimation
to be made by such as are wise and skillful therein: in such sort, as that the
parties may agree and conclude together: and if they cannot be brought to
agreement amongst themselves, then the Judges of those places shall determine
the whole matter; the owners their aid and help always reserved unto them,
against such as it may concern or belong unto. And in case where the said
Ecclesiastical persons shall compel those in possession to buy the ground,
they (the said Ecclesiastical persons) shall not receive the price of the
valuation, but it shall remain in the hands of the possessed, and they still
stand answerable for the same, and for the profit for the same, after the rate
of a penny in twenty, until such time as the same shall be employed for the
profit of the Church: and this likewise to be procured within the space of a
year. And if it happen that the same time be expired, and the money not
employed, and that the occupier of the same will not keep it any longer at the
said rent, he shall be discharged thereof in paying the same over to any man
that is able to pay the principal and the rent, having authority from a
Justice, and warrant for that which he shall do therein. And as concerning the
holy places, there shall order be taken for them, by the Commissioners which
shall be by us ordained and appointed for the executing of this present Edict,
having been before by us instructed what to do in this point.

V.
And yet notwithstanding the grounds and places occupied and employed about the
repairing and fortifying of the towns and other places of our Realm, as also
the matter employed that way, shall not be to be challenged or redemanded by
such Ecclesiastical persons, or else any other either public or private,
except at such times as the said reparations and fortifications shall be pulled
down by our appointment and ordinance.

VI.
And to the end that there may not be left any occasion of jar or trouble
amongst our subjects, we have permitted and do permit those of the said
pretended reformed religion, to live and dwell in all the towns and places of
this our Realm, and countries under our jurisdiction, without any manner of
examination, vexatio^, molestation, or co^pulsion to the doing of any thing in
the matter of religion, contrary to their conscience, and not to be searched or
ra^sackt, in the houses and places where they mind to abide and dwell, so that
they carry themselves in all other their demeanor according to that which is
contained in this our present Edict.

VII.
We have likewise licensed al Lords, Gentlemen, and other persons as well
inhabiting this our Realm as others making profession of the said pretended
reformed Religion, having in our kingdom and countries under our jurisdiction,
the privilege of a Justice of life and death, or a fee in Knights service (as
in Normandy) whether he hold it as proprietarie thereunto, or as one having
right and interest unto the revenues of the same, in the whole, or in the
half, or by the thirds, to have in such their houses of Justice of life and
death, or in their see of Knights service (which yet they shall give the names
and notice of unto our Bailifes and Lieutenants, every one in his place of
their principal dwelling house) the exercise of the said Religion, both whiles
they are there resident themselves, as also their wives or family, or any part
thereof when they are absent. And in case the title of this their tenure
bearing to sit as Judges upon life and death, or the title of a whole Knights
see, be called in question, and stand in controversy in the law,
notwithstanding the exercise of the said Religion may be there kept; provided
that the parties aforesaid be actually possessed of the said house, bearing
such commission of sitting as Judge in matters of life and death, although our
Attorney general be a party therein. We further also permit and allow them, to
have the said exercise in their other houses privileged with the authority of
sitting as Judge in matters of life and death, or being a Knights fee, for the
time they shall be resident thereupon themselves, and not otherwise: and all
this to be understood and construed in the behalf of themselves, their
family, subjects, and whatsoever others that will resort thereunto.

VIII.
In the houses of those which have a see, where they of the said Religion have
not the privilege of high Justice, or of a Knights fee, they may not have the
said exercise but for themselves only and their family. We mean not
notwithstanding that if there come in other persons to the number of thirty
besides their own family, whether it be upon occasion of Baptism, the
visiting of their friends or otherwise, that then they may be searched: except
on the other side, that the said houses be in the towns, boroughs, or villages
belonging to the Lords Catholics high Justices, and those, others then our
self: and wherein the said Lords Catholics have their places: for in such case
those of the said Religion may not in the said towns, boroughs, or villages
exercise the same, except it be with the good leave and license of the said
Lords high Justices, and not otherwise.

IX.
We permit likewise those of the said Religion, to hold and continue their
exercises, in all the Towns and places within our jurisdiction, where it was
established and exercised by them publicly and many and diverse times in the
years 1596. and 1597. unto the end of the month of August, notwithstanding
any Judgment or sentence contrary thereunto.

X.
In like manner the said exercise may be established and reestablished, in all
the Towns and places where it has been established, or ought to be by the
Edict of Pacification made in the year 77. or by the particular articles, and
conferences held at Nerac and Flex: without any impeachment unto the said
establishment in the places of Demaine, granted by the said Edict, Articles and
Conferences, for the places of Bayliwickes, or which shall so be hereafter,
notwithstanding that they have been since then aliened and sold away to
Catholics, or shall so be in time to come. And yet our meaning is not, that the
said exercise may be established again in the places of the said Demaine,
which have been heretofore possessed by them of the said pretended reformed
religion, where it has been planted only in consideration of the safety of
their persons, or because of the privilege of the Lordships, if the said
Lordships be found at this present to be in the possession of such persons as
are of the said Catholic Apostolic Romish Religion.

XI.
Furthermore in every of the ancient Bayliwikes, Lieutenantships, and
gouernements standing in stead of a bayliwike, and being to have chief and
principal places in the Courts of Parliament, we ordain, that in the Suburbs
of some one Town besides those which have been granted unto them by the said
Edict, particular Articles and Conferences: and where there is no such Towns,
in some one borough or village, the exercise of the said pretended reformed
Religion may be publikly used for all such as will go thereunto,
notwithstanding there be in the said Bayliwiks, Lieutenantships, and
Gouernements, many places where the said exercise is already established:
excepted from hence the said place of Bayliwike newly agreed upon by the
present Edict, and the Towns wherein there lies any Archbishop or Bishop: and
that without any thing letting, but that those of the pretended reformed
Religion, may demand and name for the said place of their said exercise the
boroughes and villages near unto the said Towns: excepted also the places and
Seignories belonging to the said Ecclesiastical persons, as wherein we do not
mean that the said second place of Bailiwike may be established, having
excepted and reserved the same of our special grace and favor. It is our
pleasure and meaning, that by the name of ancient Bayliwikes be understood
those which were in the time of the deceased King Henry our most Honorable
Lord and Father in law, held and taken for Bayliwikes, Lieutenantships, and
gouernements of chief and principal place in our said Courts of Parliament.

XII.
It is not our meaning by this present Edict, to derogate or take away any
thing from the Edicts and Agreements made heretofore, for the reducing of
certain Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholic Towns under our
jurisdiction, in that which concerns the exercise of the said Religion: which
Edicts and Agreements shall be maintained and kept in this respect, according
as it shall be declared by the instructions given the Commissioners which shall
be appointed for the execution of the present Edict.

XIII.
We expressly forbid all them of the said Religion, to use any exrcise of the
same, either by way of the Ministry, Government, Discipline, or public
instruction of children or others, in this our Realm and countries under our
allegiance, in any thing concerning religion, except in the places permitted
and granted by this present Edict.

XIIII.
As also to use any exercise of the said Religion in our Court and train,
neither likewise in our lands and countries beyond the mountains, neither yet
in our City of Paris, or within five leagues of the said City: notwithstanding
those of the said Religion, dwelling in the said coasts and countries beyond
the mountains, and in our said City, and within the compass of five leagues
round about the same, shall not be searched in their houses, nor forced to the
doing of any thing in the matter of Religion contrary to their conscience: so
that they demean themselves in other things according as is enjoined the^ in
this our present Edict.

XV.
In like manner the public exercise of the said Religion may not be used in
wars, except in those quarters whose Chiefetaines are professors of the said
Religion, and yet furthermore it is to be understood, that those quarters must
be others then that in which we shall lodge in our own proper person.

XVI.
Following the second Article of the conference of Nerac, we permit them of the
said Religion, to build places for the exercise of the same, in the Cities and
places where liberty and license is granted unto them for the same: and
further, such places as they have heretofore to that end builded, shall be
restored unto them, or else the grounds whereupon they stood, in such state as
it now stands: Yea though they be in such places as they may not be suffered
to use the exercise of their Religion except they be translated and changed
into the nature of other buildings. In which case the possessors of the said
buildings, shall give unto them rooms and places of the same price and value
that they were of before they were in that manner by them translated, or the
just valuation of them in money at a rate set down by such as are skillful.
Reserved always unto such proprietaries and owners, whatsoever aid or succor
which the law may any way offord them against any whom the matter may concern.

XVII.
We forbid all Preachers, Readers, and all others which use to speak in the
places of public assemblies, to use any words, discourses, or argument tending
to the stirring up of the people unto sedition: having rather enjoined them, we
do again inioyne them, to carry and behave themselves modestly, not uttering
or speaking of any thing but what may tend to the edification and instruction
of the hearers, and to the maintenance of the peace and tranquillity by us
established in this our said Realm, upon the pains and penalty set down in
the former Edicts. Giving express charge and commandment unto our general
Atturnies and their substitutes, to give informatio^ according to their office,
against such as shall oppose themselves by contrary practices in this point,
upon pain themselves to answer in their own persons, and of deprivation from
their offices, for failing therein.

XVIII.
We forbid in like manner all our Subjects, of what condition or quality soever
they be, to train or draw by force or secret and subtle suggestions, the
children of the said Religion, to cause them to be Baptized or confirmed in the
Catholic Apostilike Roman Church, contrary to the good liking of their
parents. As likewise the same inhibitions are to be extended to them of the
said pretended reformed Religion: and that a like to both, upon pain of being
punished for examples unto all others, that they may beware to do the like.

XIX.
Those of the pretended reformed Religion, shall not be any way tied, or stand
bound by reason of abiurations, promises and oaths which they have made
heretofore, or for any suretiship which they have entered into in respect of the
matter of the said Religion, neither shall they be molested or troubled any
manner of way at all for the same.

XX.
They shall in like manner be enjoined to keep and observe the Festival
days, appointed in the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, neither may they
upon those days work, sell, or show wares in their open shops, neither
likewise may handicrafts men work out of their shops, either in chambers, or
in their houses shut close to them, upon the said Festival days or any other
prohibited, in any occupation or craft, which may make a noise to be heard
without by such as pass by, or yet of their neighbors. In which case also
there shall not any search be made but by such as are appointed officers for
the executing of Justice.

XXI.
The books concerning the pretended reformed Religion, may not be printed and
sold publicly, but in the Cities and places where the public exercise of the
said Religion is permitted. And as for other books which shall be printed in
other Cities, they shall be seen and perused as well by our officers as
Divines, as is appointed by our decrees and ordenances. We expressly forbid the
printing, publishing, and selling of all books, scrolles, or writings,
defamatory, and tending to the taking away of any man's good name, upon the
pains and punishment contained in our decrees and ordenances: inioyning and
charging all our Judges and officers to be diligent in the executing of the
same.

XXII.
We furthermore ordain, that there shall not be made any distinction or
difference (in respect of Religion) in the receiving of Scholars to be
instructed and trained up in Universities, Colleges, or schools, or of the
sick and poor, in receiving of them into Hospitals, houses for the diseased,
or public alms houses.

XXIII.
Those of the pretended reformed Religion, shall be bound to keep the laws of
the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, received in this our Realm,
concerning the matter of marriages already contracted or to be contracted, as
also concerning the degrees of consanguinity and affinity.

XXIIII.
In like manner those of the said religion shall pay the duties of entering, as it
is accustomed for the charges and offices which shall be discharged for them,
without being constrained to give their atte^dance about the executing of any
ceremonies contrary unto their said religion: and being urged to an oath, they
shall not be bound to make any other, then to hold up their hand, and to swear
and promise to God, that they will speak the truth: and again, they shall not
be bound to take any dispensation for oaths passed by them in matters of
bargains, and obligations.

XXV.
We will and ordain, that all those of the said pretended reformed religion,
and others which have taken party with that side, of what estate, quality, or
condition soever they be, be bound and tied by all good and reasonable ways,
and upon pain of such punishment as is contained in the Edicts made for that
purpose, to pay and discharge the tenths to the Curats and other
Ecclesiastical persons, and to all others to whom they belong and appertain,
according to the use and custom received in the places of their abode.

XXVI.
Disinheritings or deprivations, whether in state of life, or in matters
disposed of by will and testament, coming only of hatred, or for the cause of
religion, shall not take place either for the time past, or that is to come
amongst our subjects.

XXVII.
To the end that the affections of our Subjects may be so much the better and
more firmly knit together, as our purpose is, and to take away all
discontentments that may ensue: We declare all them which do or hereafter shall
make profession of the said pretended reformed religion, capable of holding and
exercising all manner of Estates, dignities, offices, and public charges
whatsoever, be they royal, Seigniories, or of the cities of our said realm,
countries, lands, and dominions under our allegiance, notwithstanding all such
oaths as have passed to the contrary, and to be indifferently admitted and
received there into. And as for our Courts of Parliament and other Judges, it
shall be sufficient for them to inform and enquire of the lives, manners,
religion and honest conversation of them which are or shall be invested with
offices, as well of the one religion, as of the other, without taking of the^
any other oath, then of well and faithfully serving the king, in the executing
of their charges, and keeping of his ordinances, as has from all time been
observed and used. And when any vacation falls out of any the said Estates,
charges, and offices, as for such as shall be in our gift and disposing, it
shall therein be held indifferent for us to appoint thereunto any manner of
persons, as capable thereof without distinction, as being a thing so greatly
making for the firmer uniting of our subjects. We mean likewise that those of
the said pretended reformed religion may be admitted and received into all
manner of counsels, consultations, deliberations, assemblies and functions,
concerning the things aforesaid, it being no bar or prejudice unto them, to
keep them for enjoying of the same, because they are of the said religion.

XXVIII.
We ordain for the burying of the deceased of those of the said religion, that
there shall speedy provision be made through all the cities and places of this
realm, and in every place thereof by our Officers and Magistrates, or else by
those Commissioners which we shall depute for the execution of the present
Edict, of some one place or other, in such convenient sort and manner as
possibly may be. And such Churchyards as they had heretofore, and are now
deprived of, shall again be restored unto them, except it fall out, that at
this present they be furnished with buildings, of what quality soever, and then
in such case there shall others be provided for them freely without any their
costs or charges.

XXIX.
We inioyne and straightly give in charge unto our said Officers, that such
diligence and endeavor be used in the said matter of burying places, as that
through their negligence there may not any scandale arise to any. And to come
more particularly and nearly to the point, be it known to such Officers, that
it shall be their parts, within fifteen days after request made, to provide
for them of the said religion a convenient place for burials, without any
further detracting of time or making of any delay, upon pain of loosing five
hundred Crowns, to be recouerd of their proper and private persons. It is
likewise forbidden the said Officers, and all others to exact or demand any
thing for the conducting and bringing of the said dead bodies unto the said
places, upon pain of being condemned as extortioners.

XXX.
And to the end that justice may be administered unto our subjects, without any
suspicion of hatred or favor (it being one of the principal means for the
nourishing of peace and concord) we have ordained, and do ordain, that in our
Court of Parliament of Paris, there shall be established one Chamber or Court,
consisting of a President and sixteen Counselors of the said Parliament,
which shall be called by the name and title of the Edict-court or Chamber, and
they shall be not only to deal in the causes and suits of those of the said
pretended reformed religion, which shall be within the ordinary reach of the
said Court, but also with the judgments of our Parliaments of Normandy and
Britain, according to the authority which shall hereafter be attributed and
granted unto the same by the present Edict: and this to be continued until in
every of the said Parliaments there be established a Court for the doing of
justice in the places suing thereunto. We further ordain, that of the four
Offices of Counselors in our said Parliament of Paris, standing and
established according to the form and manner of the last institution and
appointment made by us, there be presently provided and received into the said
Parliament four of them of the said pretended reformed religion, such as are
sufficient and capable of the same, and that they be bestowed or placed, the
chief and principal in the said Court of the Edict, and the other three
according to the measure of gifts granted them into the three Courts of
Inquiry: and further that for the two first offices of lay Counselors of the
said Court that shall fall void by death, there shall likewise be provided two
of the said pretended reformed religion, and the same taken in and placed: the
like course shall be taken in the two other Courts of Inquiry.

XXXI.
Besides the Court heretofore established at Castres, for the precincts and
liberties of our Court of Parliament at Tholosa, and which shall be continued
in the estate it stands, we have for the same considerations ordained, and do
ordain, that in every one of the Courts of Parliament of Grenoble and
Bordeaux, there shall be likewise established a Court, consisting of two
Presidents, the one a Catholic, and the other of the pretended reformed
religion, and of twelve Counselors, six whereof shall be Catholics, and the
other six of the said religion: the which President and Counselors Catholics
shall be by us taken and chosen out of the bodies of our said Courts: and as
for them of the said religion, there shall a new creation be made of one
President and six Counselors for the Parliament of Bordeaux, and of one.
President and three Counselors for the Parliament of Grenoble which with the
three Counselors of the said religion, which are already in the said
Parliament, shall be employed in the said Court of Dolphinie. And the said
Offices shall be created with a new creation, having allowed them the same
fees, honors, authorities and preheminences that others of the said Courts
have. And the syad seat of the said Court of Bordeaux shall be in the said city
of Bordeaux, or at Nerac, and that of Dolphine and Grenoble.

XXXII.
The said Court of Dolphine shall determine the causes of those of the said
pretended reformed religion, being within the products and liberties of our
Parliament of Prouence, without having need to sue out any writs for the
removing of the causes, neither yet any other letters of confirmation, the^
such as are to be had in our court of Chauncerie in Dolphine: as also those of
the said religion of Normandy and Britain, shall not be bound to sue out any
writs of removing of causes, neither yet other letters of confirmation, then
those which are to be had in our court of Chauncerie at Paris.

XXXIII.
Our subjects of the said religion of the Parliament of Burgundy, shall have
their choice to have their matters pleaded and heard either in the court
ordained in the Parliament of Paris, or in that of Dolphine. And accordingly
shall be acquitted and freed from suing out their writs of remove and letters of
confirmation from any where else, then in the said courts of Chancerie of Paris
or Dolphine, according as they themselves shall think good.

XXXIIII.
All the said Courts composed and appointed as aforesaid, shall determine and
judge with sovereign authority and unavoidable sentence, by judgment
vncontrolleable by any others of the suits and controversies raised or to be
raised, in which those of the said pretended reformed religion shall be the
parties principal, or the warra^ts in dema^ding or defending: and that in all
manner of matters, either civil or criminal, whether the said suit be by writ
or extemporal appeal, and that if it so seem good to the said parties, and
the one of them require the same before protestation made in the cause, in
regard of the removing of the suit: excepted notwithstanding al matters of
benefices, the personages not impropriate, ecclesiastical patronages, and all
other such causes as wherein shall be handled the rights and duties or revenues
of the Church, all which shall be handled and judged by the courts of
Parliament, the said Assemblies and courts of the Edict having nothing to do to
take acknowledgment of the same. As likewise it is our will and pleasure, that
for the judging and deciding of causes criminal, which shall happen betwixt the
said Ecclesiastical persons, and those of the said pretended reformed
religion, if the Ecclesiastical party be defendant, in such case the trial
and judgment of such causes criminal shall belong unto our sovereign and
high Courts, denying all dealing therein unto the said courts of the Edicts: and
where such Ecclesiastical party shall be plaintiff, and the party of the
said religion defendant, the trial and judgment of such criminal cause shall
appertain by appeal, and with power of absolute and definitive sentence to be
determined of, in the said established Courts of the Edict. The said courts
likewise shall hear and examine in vacation times such matters as by the
Edicts and ordinances are allotted and appointed to be heard and examined of the
said established courts in vacation times, every one in his precinct and
jurisdiction.

XXXV.
The said court of Grenoble from henceforth shall be united and incorporated to
the body of the said court of Parliament, and the Counselors and Presidents of
the said pretended reformed religion, called Presidents and Counselors of the
said court, and so held and accounted of the rank and number of the same: and
for these purposes they shall be first disposed of and placed in the other
Courts, and after drawn out from them to be employed and do their service in
such courts as we shall ordain anew: and withal in the places of their charge
where they shall be assistant, they shall have a voice and seat in all the
consultations which shall be held by the officers of the courts assembled and
come together, and shall enjoy the same fees, authority and preheminences with
the other Presidents and Counselors of the said court.

XXXVI.
And further it is our will and intent, that the said Courts of Castres and
Bordeaux be reunited and incorporated in the said Parliaments, after the same
manner that the others are, when need shall be; and that the causes moving us
to make such establishme^t shall cease, and shall not have any more place
amongst our subjects: and for the same purposes the Presidents and Counselors
of them of the said Religion shall be called and held for Presidents and
Counselors of the said Courts.

XXXVII.
There shall be likewise created and ordained anew in the Court ordained for
the Parliament of Bordeaux, two Substitutes of our Attorney and Advocate
general, of which our Attorney shall be a Catholic, and the other of the said
Religion; and these shall be invested with the said offices and competent fees
allowed thereunto.

XXXVIII.
The two said Substitutes shall not take upon them any other quality or
condition, but that of Substitutes, and when the Courts ordained for the
Parliaments of Tholosa and Bordeaux shall be united and incorporated unto the
said Parliaments, the said Substitutes shall be placed in the offices of
Counselors in the same.

XXXIX.
The dispatch of writs out of the Chauncery of the Court of Bordeaux, shall be
in the presence of two of the Counselors of the said Court, whereof the one
shall be a Catholic, and the other of the said pretended reformed Religion: in
their absence one of the Masters of the Requests of our said Town House, and
one of the Notaries Secretaries of the said Court of Parliament of Bordeaux
shall keep residence in the place where the said Court shall be established,
or else one of the Secretaries Ordinaries of the Chauncery to sign the writs
of the said Chauncery.

XL.
We will and ordain, that in the said Court of Bordeaux, there shall be two
chosen out and appointed Registers of the said Parliament, the one in Civil
and the other in Criminal causes, which shall exercise the said charges by
virtue of our Commissions, and shall be called Commissioners for the Register
Court Civil and Criminal, and therefore shall not at any time be cast out or
disanulled by the said Registers of the Parliament: and yet notwithstanding
they shall be bound to render the profit and commodity of the said Register
Court unto the said Registers or Clerks. Which said Commissioners shall be
rewarded by the said Registers as shall be adjudged and thought meet by the
said Court. Furthermore there shall be ordained Sergeants that are Catholics,
which shall be taken in the said Court, or from elsewhere, according as we
shall think it best: besides which, there shall also be two of the said
religion newly ordained and freely provided for, and all the said Sergeants
shall be ruled by the said Court, as well in the discharging and dividing of
their charge and business, as of the profits and commodities which they ought
to take. There shall likewise be given forth Commission for a Payer of fees,
and for a Receiver or Collector of the fines and amercements of the said Court,
for to have such a one provided as we shall think good, if the Court be kept
any where else then in the said City. And the Commission heretofore granted
unto the paymaister of the fees for the Court of Castres, shall take his full
and entire effect: and there shall be joined unto the said charge, the
Commission of the receipts of the fines and amercements of the said Court.

XLI.
There shall care be had for the good and sufficient appointment of fees for
the officers of the Courts ordained by this Edict.

XLII.
The Presidents, Counselors and other Catholic officers of the said Courts,
shall be continued as long as possibly may be, and as we shall see it to make
for our service and the good of our subjects, and in this time of thus bearing
with and tollerating of the one, there shall provision be made of others to
succeed them in their places, before their departure, and therewithal in such
sort, as that during the time of such their service, it shall not be lawful
for them to depart or be absent from the said Courts without leave granted, by
them which shall be Judges in the causes concerning the Ordenance.

XLIII.
The said Courts shall be established within six months, during the which
time (if the establishing thereof do stay so long before it be brought to pass)
the suits risen or to rise, in which those of the said religion shall be
parties, and of the jurisdiction and within the precincts of our Parliaments of
Paris, Roane, Dion or Renes, shall be removed into the Court already
established at Paris, by virtue of the Edict made in the year 1577. or else
into the great Counsel, at the choice and liberty of those of the said
religion, as they themselves shall require. Those which shall be of the
Parliament of Bordeaux in the Court established at Castres, or in the said
great Counsel, as they themselves shall think good: and those which shall be
of Prouence in the Parliament of Grenoble And if the said Courts be not
established within three months after the presentation and setting forth of
this our present Edict, then such of our Parliaments as shall have refused,
shall be forbidden to examine and judge of the causes of those of the said
religion.

XLIIII.
Suits not yet judged but depending in the said Courts of Parliament and great
Counsel of the quality aforesaid, shall be removed, in what estate so ever they
stand in the said Courts, every one to the Court within the jurisdiction and
liberties wherein they dwell (if either of the parties of the said religion do
so require) within four months after the establishment of the same: and as
for those which shall be discontinued and are not in estate to judge (the said of
the religion shall be enjoined to make declaration upon the first notice and
signification which shall be given them of the action in law, and the said time
past,) they shall not afterward be any more admitted to make their said
appeals or remoues.

XLV.
The said Courts of Grenoble and Bordeaux, as also that of Castres shall keep
the forms and styles of those Parliaments within whose precincts they are
held, and shall sit in equal number of the one and of the other religion to
judge, if the parties amongst themselves agree not to the contrary.

XLVI.
All Judges to whom directions and order shall be given, for the executions of
definitive sentences and final judgments, Commissions of the said Courts and
letters obtained in the Chaunceries of the same, as also all Sergeants shall be
bound to execute the same, and the said Sergeants to do all their business
and matters of execution throughout our Realm without demanding any Placet,
Visa ne pareatis, upon pain of suspension from their estates, and of the
charges, damages, and costs of the parties, the determination of which point
shall appertain unto the said Courts.

XLVII.
There shall not any appeals be granted for any causes, the determining
whereof belongs to the said Courts, except in matters concerning the
Ordinances: and then such appeal and remove shall be to the nearest court
established, following our Edict, and the dividing of the suits of the said
courts shall be judged of in the next adjoining, the proportion and form of the
said Courts observed, wherein the suits shall be commenced and laid: the court
of the Edict in our Parliament of Paris excepted, where the suits divided shall
be divided in the same court by the Judges which shall be by us named by our
particular letters directed to that end, if the parties do not rather desire to
stay the renewing of the said Court. And if it happen that one and the same
suit be divided into all the Courts half divided, the dividing shall be
removed to the said Court of Paris.

XLVIII.
The appeals which shall be made from any Presidents and Counselors of
Courts half divided, shall be judged by the number of six, to the which
number the parties shall be bound to refer themselves, for otherwise it shall
proceed, any manner of appeals to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLIX.
The trial of Presidents and Counselors newly elected and made in the said
Courts half divided, shall be made in our Privy Counsel, or by the said
Courts every one in his place, when they shall consist of a sufficient number:
and notwithstanding the oath accustomed, shall be by them taken in the Courts,
where the said Courts shall be held: and if refuse thereof be made, then in
our Privy Counsel; except those of the Court of Languedoc, which shall take
their oath at the hands of our Chaunceller, or in the same Court.

L.
We will and ordain, that the receiving and admitta^ce of our officers of the
said religion, be judged and determined in our Courts half divided by the
greater number of voices: as it is accustomed to be done in other judgments;
so that there shall not be any need that the affirmative voices, or approving
judgments be more then two thirds, following the Ordenance, which for that
cause we will to be abrogate.

LI.
There shall be made, handled, and contrived in the said Courts half divided,
such questions, consultations and resolutions, as shall appertain to the
public peace and quietness, and as may concern the particular estate and
civil government of such cities as the said Courts are held and kept in.

LII.
The Article of the jurisdiction of the said Courts, ordained by this present
Edict, shall be followed and observed, according to his form and tenor: yea
even in that which does concern the executing, or not executing, or the
breaking and infringing of our Edicts, when they of the said religion shall be
parties.

LIII.
The under officers Royal or others, whose admittance belongs unto our
Courts of Parliament, if they be of the said pretended reformed religion, shall
be examined and admitted in the said Courts, that is to say, those within the
liberties of the Parliament of Paris, Normandy, and Britain, in the said
Court of Paris; those of Dolphinie and Prouence, in the Court of Grenoble:
those of Burgundy in the said Court of Paris or Dolphinie, as they shall think
best themselves: Those of the liberties of Tholosa, in the Court of Castres:
and those of the Parliament of Bordeaux in the Court of Guyenne, no
oppositions, or parties making by others being to be used, besides our
Atturnies general and their substitutes, and those which are already settled in
the said offices: and notwithstanding the oath accustomed, shall be taken by
them in the Courts of Parliament, which shall have nothing to do with their
admittance, and in case of refusing to take their oath in the said Parliaments,
the said officers shall take their oaths in the said Courts, after the taking
whereof they shall be charged to present by some Sergeant or Notary the act of
their admittance to the Registers of the said Court of Parliament, and with
them to leave a copy thereof conferred and examined with the original by the
said Registers, whose duty it is to register the said acts, upon pain of
paying all the parties costs and charges: and where the said Registers shall
refuse to do the same, it shall be sufficient for the said officers to bring
back the act of the said breuiarie dispatched and sent away by the said
Sergeants or Notaries, and to cause the same to be registered in the Registers
court of their said iurisdictio^s, there to have recourse unto the same, upon
pain of the disanulling of their proceedings and judgments. And as concerning
the officers, whereof there has not been accustomed any admittance to be made
in our said Courts of Parliament, in case that they to who^ it belonged did
refuse to proceed to the said examination and admittance, then such officers so
refused shall withdraw themselves from out of the said Courts, til such order be
taken for them as shall belong thereunto.

LIIII.
The officers of the said pretended reformed religion which shall hereafter be
appointed to serve in the body of our said courts of Parliament, great Counsel,
court of Accounts, court of Aides, in the office of the Rolls, of the general
Treasurers of France, or as other officers of the fines; shall be examined and
admitted into the places where they were wont to be: and in case they be
rejected and refused or justice denied unto them, then and in such case they
shall be provided for by our Privy Counsel.

LV.
The admitting of our Officers made in the court heretofore established at
Castres, shall continue and abide of force, notwithstanding whatsoever
sentences, judgments or ordinances passed to the contrary. The admitting also
of Judges, Counselors, Elects, and other Officers of the said religion made in
our privy Counsel, or by Commissioners by us ordained, for the refusal made
by our courts of Parliament, courts of Accounts, and courts of Aides, shall
stand and continue in force, and that as full and absolute, as if they had been
made in the said courts, by the other Judges to who^ the admitta^ce does
appertain, and their fees shall be answered and allowed by the court of
Accounts, without any question or doubt made of the same. And if any such have
been razed or crossed out, they shall be reestablished and put in again,
without further need of having any other command then this present Edict, and
without any showing of any other admittance by the said Officers,
notwithstanding whatsoever judgments passed to the contrary: for they shall
be to no more end, then as if they had not been, and void of all force and
effect.

LVI.
And during the time that the fines and amercements of the said courts shall
come short of answering and defraying the costs and charges of the Officers of
Justice in the said Courts, there shall be by us appointed a sufficient
allowance for the discharge of the said costs, without any leauying of any such
moneys upon the goods of condemned persons.

LVII.
The Presidents and Counselors of the said pretended reformed religion before
admitted into our court of Parliament of Dolphine, and into the court of the
Edict incorporated into the same, shall continue and enjoy their places and
degrees before enjoyed in the same, that is, the Preside^ts, as they have
enjoyed them heretofore, and do at this day enjoy them, and the Counselors
holding on according to the decrees and ratifications made them in our privy
Counsel.

LVIII.
We declare and pronounce, all sentences, judgments, proceedings, seysures,
sales and decrees, made and granted against them of the said pretended
reformed religion, whether living or dead, since the decease of the late
deceased King Henry the second our most honorable Lord and father in Law, by
reason of the said religion, tumults and troubles since then befallen, as
likewise the executions of those judgments and decrees, from this day forward
to be extinct, revoked, and disanulled, and the same do extinguish or
frustrate, revoke and disanull. We ordain that they shall be razed and taken
from the Registers of the court of Registry, as also out of whatsouer other
courts, whether High and Great, or Inferior and lower ones. As we will
likewise that there be taken away and defaced, all the marks, notes and
monuments of the said executions, books, and diffamatorie acts against their
persons, memory, and posterity, and that the places wherein has been
committed and performed any pulling down, ruining, or razing for this
occasion, be restored in such estate as they were, unto the proprietaries and
owners of the same, to hold, enjoy, and dispose of the same as likes them. And
generally, we have frustrated, revoked, and disanulled all proceedings and
informations made against whatsoever enterprises, pretended crimes of high
treason, and others, which proceedings and judgments, containing reuniting,
incorporation, and confiscation notwithstanding, we will that those of the said
religion, and others their followers and heirs do reenter into the real and
actual possession of all and every part of their goods.

LIX.
All manner of proceedings past, and all definitive sentences and judgments
pronounced during the troubles against the^ of the said religion, which have
carried arms, or withdrawn themselves out of our realm, or within the same,
into the cities and countries by them held, and that for no other matter then
for their religion and the troubles sake: as likewise al manner of suits left
off long ago, all prescriptions, as well grounded upon the law, as agreed upon
by covenants, or confirmed by custom, and al seisures made by the Lords upon
Manors or Lordships falling in the time of the said troubles, or through
lawful impediments, caused through the same, as the just examination thereof
by our Judges, shall better make to appear, shall be accounted as not done,
pronounced or come to pass: and we have declared and do declare them for such,
and have passed them over, and still do pass them over for nothing, and that
without leaving any hope to the parties of ever releeuing themselves in those
cases, by any manner of means: and the rather, seeing it is our will and
pleasure that such things should be restored unto the same estate, wherein they
stood in former time (the said judgments and executions of the same
notwithstanding) and such possession as they enjoyed, again given unto them,
and that for the same regard and consideration. And this ordinance shall
furthermore in like manner take place, in respect of others which have taken
party with them of the said religion, or which have been absent out of our
realm because of the troubles. And as concerning the children that were under
age, of such persons as were of the aforesaid quality, and died in the time of
the troubles, we restore them, viz. the said children unto the same estate and
condition that they were in before time, without redeeming of the same, or
being bound to disburse any thing for any fines or amercements imposed upon the
same. And yet we mean not, that the judgments passed by the Judges,
Presidents, or any other the inferior Judges against such of the said
religion, or such as have followed that side, and taken parties with the^,
should stand void, if they were passed by the said sitting in the towns
possessed and held by them, and whereunto they might have free access.

LX.
The Judgments passed in our courts of Parliament, in matters, the
examination, hearing, and determining whereof appertained to the Courts
ordained by the Edict of the year 1577. and the Articles of Nerac and Flex,
and in which courts the parties have not willingly proceeded, that is to say,
have alleged and propounded means of evasion, and shifts to have avoided
them, or else have had them ministered directly unto them, through default and
want of appearance, as well in matters civil as criminal, notwithstanding
which shifts, the said parties have been constrained to continue their course
of trial: shall likewise be made void and of no force. And in consideration
of judgments passed against those of the said Religion, which have proceeded
willingly and without seeking how to be freed from the same, such sentences
shall stand and abide: and yet nevertheless without prejudice of the execution
for the same, they may (if they have any mind thereunto) find relief by
petition, such as is used in civil causes before the courts ordained by this
present Edict, so that the time limited by the ordinances be not too far
spent to their prejudice: and again until such time as the said Courts and
Chanceries of the same be established, appeals made by word or writing, and
entered by them of the said religion before the Judges, Registers, commissioners
or executioners of the said definitive sentences and judgments, shall have
like effect, as if they were relieved by the Princes letters patents.

LXI.
In all enquiries that shall be made, for what cause soever it be in matters
civil, if the Inquisitor or commissioner be a Catholic, the parties to be
examined shall know it to be their parts and duty to agree upon some one to
stand assistant with him, and whereas they cannot agree, the said commissioner
or Inquisitor shall take out of the office some one that shall be of the said
pretended reformed religion: and the same course shall be practiced when the
Commissioner or Inquisitor shall be of the said religion for one to stand
assistant with him, and the same shall be a Catholic.

LXII.
We will and ordain, that our Judges may determine of the validity and
efficacy of such wills and testaments as those of the said religion shall be
interested in, if they require the same, and the appeals from the said
judgments shall be to be relieved in the said courts, ordained for the suits
of those of the religion: any or all customs whatsouer contrary hereunto
notwithstanding; no not that of Britain.

LXIII.
To meet with all the controversies that might happen amongst our courts of
parliament, and those courts belonging to the said courts, and ordained by this
our present Edict, there shall be by us drawn and set down a good and large
direction and order betwixt court and court; and that such a one, as that those
of the said pretended reformed religion may wholly and thoroughly enjoy the said
Edict: which order and direction shall be verified in our courts of parliament,
and kept and observed without having relation to the former going before.

LXIIII.
We forbid all our high courts and others of this realm, to judge and
determine the civil and criminal suits depending or falling betwixt those of
the said religion, the determining and judging whereof by our Edict is confirmed
unto the said courts of the Edict: provided that the writ of remove be
demanded, as it is said in the 40. Article above specified.

LXV.
We will also (by the way of Prouiso, and that so long as till we have
otherwise ordained) that in all suits raised or hereafter rising, where they of
the said religion shall be in the state and quality of plaintifs or defendants,
the parties, principals or authors in matters civil, wherein our officers and
Presidentiall seats have power to judge in most absolute and peremptory manner,
it may be permitted them, to require that two of the Court where their suits
must be tried and judged, do abstain from sitting in judgment upon, or
meddling with them; which two (without further cause expressed) shall know it to
be their part and duty thereupon to abstain (any thing contained in the
ordenance notwithstanding) whereby the judged shall of necessity become
competent and free from all desert of refusal, without just cause: there being
reserved unto them still over and besides this, such refusal and exceptions as
are grounded upon right and equity against the others: and in criminal matters
wherein also the said Presidents, and others the Kings under Judges do
determine and judge as before in most absolute and peremptory manner, those that
come before them (being of the said religion) may require, that three of the
said Judges do leave of to have any thing to do with their cause, without
further yielding of reason for any such their request. And the Prouost-Marshals
of France, under Baylifes, under Stewards, Lieutenants of the short robes, and
other officers of like quality, shall give judgment following the ordinances
and directions heretofore delivered, in regard and consideration of the matter
of vagabounds: and as for dwelling places surcharged and brought before them
for matters concerning the Prouostship, if they be of the said religion, they
may require that three of the Judges which have power to sit in Judgment,
would notwithstanding cease and abstain from dealing at all in their causes
and matters, and that thereupon the said three shall accordingly take it their
parts to give over all dealing in the same, without further expectation of any
cause or reason for the same: excepted always if in the company where the said
causes shall be judged, there be to be found to the number of two in civil
matters, and to the number of three in criminal causes of the said religion:
for in such case it shall not be permitted them to take up any such exceptions
against any, without showing of good and sufficient reason: which course shall
be common and reciprocally used by the Catholics according to the form and
manner above specified, in regard of the said refusal and exceptions taken
against any of the Judges, whereas those of the said pretended refo^ed religion
shall be of the greater number. We do not mean notwithstanding, that the said
Presidentiall rooms of Prouost-Marshals, vnder-Baylifs, vnder-Stewards, and
others which have authority to judge in absolute and peremptory manner, should
take by virtue of that which has bin said the knowledge of the troubles past.
And as for the crimes and outrages coming upon other occasion then the
troubles since the beginning of the month of March, from the year 1585. unto
the end of the year 1597. in case that they come to their hearing and
determining, we will that therein they may make appeal to have their causes
brought before the Courts ordained by this present Edict. As it shall in like
manner be practiced for such Catholics as have been companions in wickedness,
and where those of the said pretended reformed religion shall be parties.

LXVI.
We will likewise and ordain, that from henceforth in all manner of
instructions being of other quality then the informations of Criminal
controversies in the Lieutena^tries of Tholosa, Carcassonne, Rouergue,
Loragais, Beziers, Montpellier and Nismes, the Magistrate or Commissioner
deputed for the said instructions, if he be a Catholic, shall be bound to take
unto him one of the pretended reformed religion for an assista^t, being such as
the parties shall be agreed upon, and in case they cannot agree upon any one,
then there shall be taken out of the office one of the said religion, by the
foresaid Magistrate or Commissioner: as in like case if the said Magistrate or
Commissioner be of the said Religion, he shall be bound in the same manner as
is aforesaid to take a Catholic assistant.

LXVII.
When there shall be called in question any criminal controversy by the
Prouosts-Marshals or their deputies, against any one of the said religion that
is settled in a dwelling place, as charging and accusing him of some capital
crime; the said Prouosts or their deputies, if they be Catholics, shall be bound
to call to the hearing, examining, and determining of the instructions or
inditeme^t framed to the matter, one assistant of the said Religion: and the
said assistant shall join with him in the judgment of competency, and in the
judgment or sentence definitive to be pronounced in the said criminal cause:
which competency or indifferency cannot be judged but in the Presidentiall
room or jurisdiction next adjoining, in an open assembly, with the principal
officers of the said seat, which shall be found upon the places, upon pain of a
nullity; except that such as are come before them had made request, that the
competency might be judged in the said Court ordained for the present Edict. In
which case of the dwelling houses in the Provinces of Guyenne, Languedoc,
Prouence, and Dolphinie, the Substitutes of our Atturneyes general in the said
courts shall cause (at the request of such as are there settled in houses) to be
brought into the same the charges and informations put up against them, that so
they may know and discern whether the matters be capital or no, that
afterward according to the quality of the crimes they may be by the said Courts
referred to the ordinary, or to be judged by the authority of the Prouosts, as
they shall see reason most to persuade them to do, observing what is contained
in our present Edict. And the Presidentiall Judges, Prouost-Marshals,
vnder-Balyfs, deputy Lieutenants and others which have absolute power
definitiuely and peremptorily to judge, shall be bound, respectively to obey
and satisfy the jurisdictions which shall be enjoined them by the said Courts:
altogether in such sort as they have accustomed to do unto the said
Parliaments, upon pain of being deprived of their estate and dignity.

LXVIII
All Cries, Bills of sale, and port-sales of heritages, by which any man goes
about to prosecute the course of the law and directions of the Decree, shall be
made in places and at hours accustomed, if it may possibly be so done,
following the manner laid down in our ordinances; or else in the public
markets, if so be in the places where such heritages are situate and lying
there be any market kept; but and if there be not, then the same shall be done
in the market town lying nearest to the said heritages, within the
jurisdiction and precincts of the judicial seat, where delivery of such goods
is to be made over into another man's possession: and the affixes or bills of
sale shall be set upon the posts in the said market, and at the entrance of the
judgment hall in the said place, and by this means the said cries of sale
shall stand good and effectual, and proceed according to the contents and
meaning of the decree, not being adjudged amongst the courses that are crossed
and disanulled, howsoever they might be alleged against the same, to that end
and purpose.

LXIX
All titles, papers, evidences, and instruments, which have been taken, shall
be restored and given back again, both on the one side and on the other, unto
them unto whom they appertain, although the said papers, or the Castles and
houses wherein they were kept, have been taken and seized upon, either by
special commissions from the last deceased king our most honorable Lord and
brother in law, or from our self, or by the commandment of the Governors and
Lieutenants general of our provinces, or by the authority of the chief and
principal on the other side, or upon what other pretext and color soever it
may be.

LXX
Their children which have withdrawn themselves out of our kingdom, at any
time since the death of the deceased king Henry the second, our most honorable
Lord and father in law, for the cause of Religion and of the troubles, although
that the said children be borne out of the Reame, shall be held and accounted
for natural Frenchmen, and as inhabiting and dwelling in our kingdom, and we
have declared and do declare them to be such, without suyng out of any writs of
naturalization, or any other warrant from us, then this present Edict, all
manner of ordinances contrary hereunto notwithstanding, which we have abrogated
and do abrogate: and yet we charge and command, that the said children born in
strange countries, shall be bound within ten years after the publishing of this
present Edict to come and dwell in this our Realm.

LXXI
Those of the said pretended reformed Religion, and others which have followed
that side, which had taken to farm any Offices, Land, Toll, foreign
impositions, and other rights belonging unto us, and have not been able to
enjoy the same because of the troubles, shall stand discharged, and we do
discharge them of that which they have not received of the said farms, or
which without any fraud they have paid elsewhere, then into the receipts of
our Fine offices, all manner of obligations passed by them concerning these
matters notwithstanding.

LXXII
All manner of places, cities and Provinces of our Realm, Countries, Lands and
Dominions, in obeissance unto us, shall use and enjoy the same privileges,
immunities, liberties, freedoms, faires, markets, jurisdiction and seats of
Justice, which they used and enjoyed before the troubles began, in the month
of March in the year 1585. and others going before: all letters to the
contrary, and whatsoever translations of any of the said judicial seats
notwithstanding: provided that they have been done only upon the occasion of
the troubles: which seats of Justice shall be reduced and reestablished in the
cities and places where they were before time.

LXXIII
If there be as yet any prisoners which are held by authority of Justice or
otherwise, as namely in the galleys, upon the occasion of the troubles, or of
the said Religion, they shall be enlarged and set at full liberty.

LXXIIII
Those of the said Religion shall not hereafter be surcharged or over borne
with any manner of charges ordinary or extraordinary, more then the
Catholics, and according to the proportion of their goods and ability: and as
for such as do find themselves ouercharged, they shall have their redress
before the Judges, to whom the examination of such matters does appertain.
And all our Subjects as well those of the Catholic, as those of the pretended
reformed Religion, shall indifferently be discharged of all charges which have
been imposed upon the one side or upon the other, during the troubles, by them
which were of the contrary party and not consenting. And so in like manner of
debts arising and growing due but not paid, and of the costs and charges
defraied and laid out without their consent. But there shall not any demand be
made of the fruits which shall have been employed in the payment of the said
charges.

LXXV
Our meaning likewise is not that those of the said Religion and others which
have taken party with them, neither yet that the Catholics which were
dwelling in the cities and places by them forcibly held and taken, and were
made to contribute to the^, may be sued for the payment of the taxes,
subsidies, graunts, great fifteenes, little fifteenes, toles, reparations, and
other impositions and helps falling, and imposed upon them during the troubles
happening before, and unto our coming to the Crown, whether it be by the
Edicts and Precepts of the deceased Kings our Predecessors, or by the advice
and counsel of the Governors and Estates of the provinces, Courts of
Parliament and other Courts: we have discharged and acquitted and do discharge
and acquit them, forbidding our general Treasurers of France and of our Fine
Offices, our Receivers, general and particular, their commissioners, and
brokers, and others the attendants and Commissioners of our Fine offices, to
search, molest, or disquiet the^ directly or indirectly in any manner of sort
whatsoever.

LXXVI.
All Dukes, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, incorporations of Cities, and
Communalties, and all others which have aided and releiued them, their widows,
heirs, and successors shall stand quit and discharged of all moneys by them
taken and levied, whether of the kings money to what sum soever it might
amount, or of those raised of the City, communalties and particular persons,
of rents, revenues, plate, the sale of the mouables of Ecclesiastical persons
and others, timber, trees, whether they were of demaine or others, amercements,
booties, ransoms, or moneys of any other nature whatsoever, by them taken upon
the occasion of the troubles begun in the month of March 1585. and the other
troubles going before, even unto our coming to the Crown, so that neitheir
they nor those which shall have bin by the^ committed and set on work for the
leuying of the said moneys, or which have given or furnished them therewith by
their ordinances, shall be any manner of way searched or inquired after, either
for the present or in any other time to come, and both they and their
Commissioners shall stand quit and discharged of all manner of ordering and
disposing of the said moneys, bringing of al manner of discharges (within four
months after the publicatio^ of this present Edict, made in the court of
Parliament of Paris) acquittances justly and truly obtained of the heads of
them of the religion, or of them which shall have been by the said leaders and
heads made Commissioners to audit and take the accounts, or of the communalties
of the Cities, which have had commandment and charge during the said troubles.
They shall likewise stand acquitted of all feats of hostility, leauies and
conducts of soldiers, coining and rating of moneys, made according to the
appointment of the said heads and Commanders, melting and taking of artillery
and munitions, making of gun-pouder and saltpeter, taking, fortifying,
dismantling and overthrowing of Cities, Castles, Boroughes, and hamlets,
attempts made upon the same, burnings and pullings down of Churches and
houses, establishing of Justice, judgments, and executing of the same, whether
it were in civil matters or criminal, rule and government framed amongst
themselves, voyages, intelligences, traficke, treaties and contracts made with
all strange Princes and communalties, and bringing in of the said strangers
into the Cities and other places of our Realm, and generally of all that which
has been done, acted, gested, and traded during, the said troubles since the
death of King Henry the second, our most Honorable Lord and Father in Law, by
them of the said Religion, and others which have taken parties with them,
although that it ought to be particularly expressed and specified.

LXXVII.
Those also of the said relgion shall stand discharged of all both general and
provincial assemblies, by them made and holden either at Mante, or afterward
in any other place, until this present, in like manner of counsels established
by them, and ordained by the provinces, consultations, ordinances, orders and
directions given to the said assemblies and Counsels, setting and augmenting of
garrisons, mustering of soldiers, leauying and taking of our moneys, were it
in the hands of our Receivers general or particular, collectors of parishes, or
otherwise in what manner soever it were, judgment under seal, continuance or
new establishing of treaties, and toles and the receipt thereof, namely at
Roan, and upon the river of Charante, Garonne, of Rosne and Dordone, armories
and fights by Sea, fortifications of cities, castles and places, impositions of
money, borowing and receipt of the said moneys, displacing of our Receivers, and
Farmers, and other officers, the establishing of others in their places, and of
all manner of marches, unions, and trades made as well within as without our
Realm: and generally of all that which has been done, deliberated, written
and ordained by the said Assemblies and Counsels. Those which have given their
advise, signed and executed, caused to sign and execute the said ordinances,
rules and consultations, not being to be searched or inquired after, neither
yet their widows, heirs, or successors, for the time present, nor any time
hereafter to come: howsoever every of the particulars be not here full set
down and declared: and as for our Atturneyes general, their substitutes, and
all those which might pretend any interest or dealing therein by any manner of
means whatsoever, we inioyne them perpetual silence in all and every one of
the said points: all judgments sentences, determinations, informations and
proceedings to the contrary notwithstanding.

LXXVIII.
We further approve, ratify and authorize the accounts which have been, heard,
taken and examined by the Deputies of the said assembly, and we will that they,
as likewise their acquittances and particulars which have been given up by
accomptants, be carried into our court of Accounts of Paris, three months after
the publication of the present Edict, put into the hands of our Atturny
general to be delivered to the Custos Rotulorum and Registers of our said
court, there to have recourse unto the^ always, or so often as necessity shall
require, and there shall not be any refusing or denying to receive the said
accounts: neither yet any cause of commanding the said Accomptants to appear
or in any sort to be punished, except in case of omitting and leaving out of
some receipts, and foisting in of false acquittances: Commanding our Attorney
general to say nothing about the remainder, or that which is behind, or about
their order and manner of proceeding, as not having been well and sufficiently
looked unto. Forbidding the people, and men employed in our courts of Accounts,
as well of Paris, as of other provinces where they are established, to take any
acknowledgment of the same, in any sort or manner whatsoever.

LXXIX.
And as for the accounts that have not as yet bin given up, our will is, that
they should be audited, perfected, and examined by the Commissioners which shall
be deputed by us thereunto: and they without making any scruple, shall pass
the same, allowing all such parties paid by the said Comptants, by virtue of
the ordinances of the said Assembly, or others having power and auhoritie
thereunto.

LXXX.
All Collectors, Receivers, Farmers, and all others shall stand well and truly
discharged of all the sums of moneys which they have paid to the said
Commissioners of the said Assembly, of what nature soever they be, unto the
last day of this month. And we will that all shall be passed and allowed for
accounts, which shall be given up in our courts of Accounts neatly and simply, by
virtue of acquittances which shall hereafter be brought in: and if any were
afterward dispatched or delivered, they shall stand as none: and those which
shall accept of, or deliver them shall be condemned in an amercement of false
employment. And whereas there have been already accounts given up, upon which
there should have fallen some charges, we have for this consideration taken
away and eased the^ of the same, and have reestablished, and do reestablish the
said persons fully by virtue of these presents: and there shall not any
particular letters, or any other thing then the copy of this present article
be demanded or required of them, for that which has passed before.

LXXXI.
The Governors, Captains, Consuls, and other persons put in commission for
the taking up of moneys to pay the garrisons of places holden by them of the
said religion, and whom our parishionall receivers and Collectors have
furnished by loan upon their bills and obligations, whether it were by
constraint, or by warrant and commandment from the general Treasurers, the
moneys necessary for the maintenance of the said garrisons, unto the iumping
and falling in of that which was brought and wrought by the estate which we
have caused to be addressed in the beginning of the year 1596. and the
augmentation and enlargement afterward granted by us, shall be held quitted
and discharged of that which has bin paid for the fact above specified,
although there be no express mention made thereof in the said bills and
obligations: which shall become unto them as nothing: and for the satisfying
thereof, the general treasurers in every their generality shall cause to be
directed unto the said Collectors, by the particular Treasurers their
acquittances: and by the general Receivers their acquittances to the
particular Receivers, and the discharge of such general Receivers, shall be
the sums which they have given up in account, in such sort as has been said,
indorsed upon the precepts given out by the Treasusurer of scarsity, under the
names of the general Treasurers extraordinary of our wars, for the payment
of the said garrisons. And whereas the precepts shall not amount to so much as
our said estate and augmentation of the year 1596. bears, we ordain that
there be dispatched and sent out new precepts, concerning that which is
wanting, for the discharge of those which stand countable to us, and for the
making of restitution of those promises and obligations, in such sort as that
there may not remain any thing to be demanded hereafter of them which have
thereby engaged themselves, and that all manner of writs or letters of allowance
that shall be necessary for the discharge of those which do stand countable,
be dispatched and granted by virtue of this present article.

LXXXII.
Again, those of the said religion shall leave off and surcease from
henceforth all manner of practices, traffic, and intelligences, as well within
as without our realm: and the said assemblies and Counsels established within
the provinces, shall separate themselves and break up with speed: and all
leagues and associations already made or to be made, upon what color or pretext
soever it may be, to the prejudice of our present Edict, shall be razed and
disanulled, as we do raze and disanull them: expressly forbidding all our
subjects hereafter to make any concurses, leauyings of moneys, without our
leave and license, fortifications, billing or banding of men, congregations and
assemblies, other then those which are permitted the^ by our present Edict, and
without arms. And this we forbid and forewarne the^ of, upon pain of being
most severely punished, and as contemners and breakers of our precepts and
ordinances.

LXXXIII
All Prizes that have been taken at Sea during the troubles, by virtue of
license or letters of Mart granted, and all such robberies as have bin made by
land, upon them of the contrary party, and which have been determined by
Judges and Commissioners of the Admiraltie, or by the head and chief of them
of the Religion, or their Counsel, shall lie dead and smoothered under the
benefit of our present Edict, it not being permitted, that they should commence
any suit for the same: neither shall the Captains which have taken the said
prizes, their sureties, the said Judges and Officers, their wives and heirs,
be searched or inquired after, neither molested in any manner of sort, all
Judgments of our privy Counsel and Parliaments, and all letters of Mart and
seazures depending and not judged (whereof we will have them to be fully and
wholly eased and set free) notwithstanding.

LXXXIIII
In like manner those of the said Religion shall not be searched or inquired
after, for the resistances and impeachments by them committed heretofore, and
those since the troubles ended in the execution of judgments and judicial
sentences, granted and given out for the reestablishing of the Catholic
Apostolic, Romish Religion, in diverse places of this Realm.

LXXXV
And as concerning whatsoever has been done or taken during the troubles,
either without any manner of hostility, or by way of hostility, contrary to
the public or particular orders and appointment of the heads and chiefest
persons, or the communalties of the Provinces which had commandment, it shall
be lawful to sue for the redress of the same by way of Justice

LXXXVI
In as much nevertheless as that if such things as have been done contrary to
the rules and good orders established, both on the one part and on the other,
be indifferently excepted and restrained from being within the benefit of the
general pardon established by our present Edict, and stand still subject to be
searched and inquired after, there beno soldier, but that he may be adjudged
to be punished, whereupon might ensue a renewing of troubles: For this cause we
will and ordain, that only the cursed and execrable cases and misdemeanors
stand excepted from the benefit of the said pardon, as namely rapes and
rauishing of wives and maids, burnings and consumings by fire, murders and
robberies committed by treachery, and wilfully, and that not in the feats of
hostility, but upon some particular grudge and contrary to the laws of
arms, infringing and violating of passeports and protections, with the
committing of murder and pillages without any warrant, in respect of them of
the Religion and others which have taken the part of such as were the chief,
and had authority over them, grounded upon particular occasions which did
move them to command and ordain the same.

LXXXVII
We ordain likewise, that the punishing of crimes and trespasses committed
amongst men of the same side and party, (if it be not in such cases and deeds
as they were enjoined to do by the chief of the one side and of the other,
according to the necessity, Laws and Orders of arms) shall be looked unto
and executed: and as concerning the leuying and exacting of moneys, bearing of
arms, and other feats of war grounded upon private authority and without
good avouch, it shall be prosecuted by way of Justice.

LXXXVIII
The ruins and razings of Cities dismantled during the troubles, may by our
permission be reedified and repaired by the inhabitants, at their costs and
charges, and the prouisoes granted heretofore to that end, shall hold and have
place.

LXXXIX
We ordain and will, and it pleases us, that all the Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen and others, of what quality or condition soever they be, of the said
pretended reformed Religion, and others which have taken party with them, do
reenter and become effectually conserved in the enjoying of all and every part
of their goods, rights, titles, accounts, dignities and actions, the Judgments
following in the times of the said troubles and by reason thereof
notwithstanding: the which judgments, seazures and definitive sentences, and
whatsoever else should have ensued, we have to this end, declared and do
declare, to be none, and of no effect and value.

XC
The purchases that those of the pretended reformed Religion and others which
have taken party with them, (have they done it by the authority of any
others then of the deceased Kings our Predecessors,) if they be any of the
immoueables belonging to the Church, shall take no place or effect. But rather
we grant and will, and it pleases us, that the said Churchmen reenter
incontinently and without delay, and be conserved in the possession and real
enjoying of the said goods so aliened, without being bound to restore the
prices of the said sales: and that (notwithstanding the said co^tracts of sale,
which to that effect we have razed out and revoked as none, and so also, as
that the said purchasers shall not have any redress or relief by course of
law, of them which were the Chief, and by whose authority the said goods have
been sold) may yet notwithstanding get into their purses again, the moneys
that they have truly and without fraud disbursed, there shall be granted out
our letters patents of permission to them of the said Religion, to impose and
make even upon them the sums whereunto the said sales shall amount, and the
purchasers of the said goods may not pretend any action for their damages and
interest, for lack of the enjoying of them: but rather they shall be content
with the restoring of the money laid out by them for the price of the said
purchases, reckening for part of payment of the said price, the fruits by them
reaped thereupon, in case that the said sale be found to be made at a very low
and unjust price.

XCI.
And to the end that as well our Justices and Officers, as other our subjects,
may be clearly and with all assurance advertised of our will and intention,
and to take away all uncertainties and doubts, which might arise by reason of
the former Edicts, through the diverse variableness that is in them, we have
declared and do declare, all other the former Edicts, secret Articles, letters,
declarations, qualifications, restraints, interpretations, judgments, and
inrolements, as well secret as other consultations heretofore made by our self
or others our predecessors, in our Courts of Parliament and elsewhere,
concerning the matter of the said Religion, and troubles caused in our said
Realm, to be of no effect and value; which together with the things therein
annihilated and disanulled, we have by this our present Edict abrogated and
disallowed, and do abrogate and disallow, and from henceforth (as then we did)
race, revoke, and disanull them: expressly declaring that we will that this our
Edict be firm and inviolable, kept and observed, as well by our said Justices
and officers, as other our Subjects, without leaving or having any regard unto
all that which might be contrary or derogatorie unto it.

XCII.
And for the stronger assurance of the maintaining and observing of the same,
as we desire it should, we will, ordain, and it is our pleasure, that all
Governors and Lieutenants general of our Provinces, Baylifs, Lieutenants
special, and other ordinary Judges of the Cities of our Realm, presently after
the receipt of the said Edict, do cause it to be observed and kept, every one
in his place: as also the Mayors, Eschetors, Consuls and Iurats of Cities,
as well those that continue but one year, as those that are perpetual. We
likewise enjoin our said Baylifs, Governors or their deputies, and other
Judges, to take an oath of the chief inhabitants of the said Cities, as well
of the one as of the other Religion, for the maintaining of the present Edict,
incontinently after the publishing of the same: taking al them of the said
Cities into our protection and safeguard, and commending the one to the good
observing and and marking of another, and charging them respectively and by
public acts to answer and courteously fulfill our requests, in discovering
the resistances which shall be made against or in our said Edict within the
said Cities, by the inhabitants of the sme, or else to present and bring before
the Justices the said resisters.

XCIII.
We command our loving friends, and faithful people, keeping our Courts of
Parliament, Courts of accounts, and Courts of Aides, that incontinently after
the present Edict received, they let al manner of things cease, and upon pain
of having whatsoever they shall continue to do disanulled, to take the like
oath as above, and to cause the same our Edict to be published and enrolled in
our said Courts according to the form and tenor of the same, sincerely and
simply, without using of any manner of qualifications, restraints,
declarations, or secret registers, and that without expecting or looking for
any other provocation or commandment from us: and of our Atturneys general,
incontinently, and without delay, to require and put in practice the publishing
of the same.

XCIIII.
So likewise we give in charge to our said Servants and officers of our said
Courts of Parliament, Courts of Accounts, and Courts of Aides, Baylifs,
Governors, Prouosts, and others our Justices and officers to whom it shall
belong, and to their deputies, that they cause to be read, published and
enregistred this our present Edict and Ordenance in their Courts and
jurisdictions, and the same to keep, maintain, and observe from point to
point, and to cause all them whom it concerns, to enjoy and use whatsoever
contained in the same in all full, ample and peaceable manner, staying and
ceasing and causing to stay and cease all troubles and impeachments to the
contrary: for such is our will and pleasure. In witness whereof we have signed
these presents with our own hand, and unto the same, that so they may become a
firm and stable thing for ever, caused our seal to be set and put. Given at
Nantz in the month of April, and in the year of grace 1598. And of our
Reign the ninth.

Signed. Henry.
By the king sitting in this Counsel.

Forget.


And upon the side.

Visa.


And sealed with the great seal, with green wax, upon a ribond of red and
green silk.

Read, published, and enregistred, yea and that the Attorney general for the
king at Paris in the Parliament the xxv. of February 1599. consenting thereunto.

Signed. Voysin.


Read, published and registered in the Court of Accounts, yea and that with the
consent of the Attorney general of the king. The last day of March 1599.

Signed. De la Fontaine.


Read, published, and registered, and yea that the kings Attorney general
consenting thereto, at Paris, in the Court of Aides, the thirtieth of April
1599.

Signed. Bernard.



FINIS.

