INSTRVCTIons given by the Princes of Navarre, and of Conde, the Count of
Colligny Admyrall of France, and other Lords and Gentlemen of their counsel,
and others chosen by the Nobility of the Provinces of this Realm, to the
Deputies of their part, upon the conferences holden with the Sieurs of Biron
and Malassize, two of the kings privy Counsel, and deputed by his Majesty,
for the negotiation of the peace, most humbly beseeching his Majesty to grant
unto them the most just and necessary demaundes which follow, for the health of
their souls, and preservation of their honors, lives, and goods.
1. THat all persons of what quality and condition soever they be, and in
whatsoever towns and places of this realm, and countries of the obeisance and
protection of his Majesty they do dwell or abide, may live in the same in
full liberty of conscience now and hereafter without impechement or
gainsaying, or to be compelled to do any thing in matter of Religion against
their will.

2 That all Gentlemen and other persons inhabitants of the realm, or
strangers, having high Justice in all or in part, of their own in property,
or during their lives, or else such as do fully possess royalties in
Normandy, may in the same places where they have the said Justice and
royalties, and in such places as they shall think most convenient as well
absent as present, have and cause to be used the said exercise of their
religion, as well for themselves, their householde and tenaunts, as for all
other that will resort thither.

3 As for other Gentlemen, having no such high Justice: that they may use the
same exercise of the religion in their houses for themselves and their
household. So as they do not dwell in the towns, boroughes, or paryshes of the
said Lords that have high Justice (saving such as be his Majesty's) or else
with the sufferaunce or license of the said Lords of high Justice. Which it
may please his Majesty to order that by his example the same license may not
be refused. And shall not suffer them to be reproched or blamed as breakers of
his Edict, if there resort to the said exercise of religion any other persons
than of their own household, or yt if there happen any christning that
requires have.

4 That in all towns and places where the exercise of the said religion is
now used, the same may so continue. And to accommodate the reast of the
Provinces of this realm with the same exercise of the religion, that in three
towns of the same Provinces and governments to be named in the said Edict,
the exercise of the religion shall be used for all persons that will resort
thither.

5 That the Queen of Navarre, the Princes and Princesses of the blood, and the
principal officers of the crown, being at the Court, may use the said
exercise of the religion, in ye lodgings of their trains.

6 That under the name of the exercise of the religion may be comprised all
acts appertayning as well to the ministry, ordring, and discipline, as also
to the public and private teaching of children and others.

7 As for Churchyardes, for the burial of the dead, that the Lords of high
Justice, Majors, Aldermen, and officers of the places where the said exercise
of the religion shall be permitted, may thereof consider and take order. And in
other places they shall get some place to bury the dead, and therein to have
the assistance of the kings officers.

8 That in all Universities and schools, all persons may be indifferently
received, whether it be to teach or to study, and not to be questioned withal,
or forced for the matter of religion.

9 That al pore and sick folks shall also be received into the Hospitals and
other like houses, and have part of all public almeses, and be used with like
indifferencye, being of the one religion or the other.

10 That those of the said religion shall not be challenged for their marriages,
being in the degrees not forbidden by the laws received in this realm.

11 That the lymits of.x. leagues mentioned in the article touching the
exercysing of the religion forbidden at Paris, as uncertain, may at the least
be changed into the Prouostie and Viscontie. In the which if it so please his
Majesty, to command it absolutely, he shall not need to be further pressed,
to have the exercise of the religion there. But if that shall not please his
Majesty: yet that it may please him to moderate somewhat the straightness of
this commandment, and not to take away from all Lords of high Justice, the
general license given unto them, to use the exercise of the said religion,
some of them having chief Lordships within the said Prouostie and Vicontie,
which shall be named unto him by the said Deputies. This to be done as well on
the behalf and favor of the said Lords, as of a great number of people that
otherwise shall be without heavenly and spiritual food, or else shall be to much
troubled in going far, to have it far of, but chiefly for the christning of
their children.

12 And as touching that which (next unto the conscience) is most dear unto
all persons, that is, the honor and goods, and to lay a sure foundation in
that which shall be for this cause ordered, to the end there be no doubt made of
the sincerity of the Queen of Navarre, of the Princes of Navarre, and of
Conde, the father and the son, according to the assurance given to his
Majesty of their part, that all yt which has been done in these wars, was
done for a good meaning, and for the zeal of their religion: his said
Majesty shall declare yt he does take the^ for his good Cosins, faithful
subjects and servants, as in like case he does take and esteem the Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, Captains, officers, and other inhabitants of the towns
and Boroughs of this realm and countries of his obeisance, who have followed,
succored, and helped them in the said wars, in what place or sort soever
the same has been, to be his good and faithful subjects and servant. And
for like good and reasonable occasion, his Majesty shall declare that he does
take the heirs of the late Duke of Deuxpontes, the Princes of Orange, Count
Ludouic of Nassau his brother, and Volrode Count of Mansfeld, to be his good
Cousins, neighbors, and friends.

13 And to show himself to be so in deed toward the said persons: he shall
order that the said Princes of Navarre and Conde, shall enjoy those lands
belonging to them, which have been taken from them, and are in the hands of
the king of Spain. Or else for lack of satisfaction to be made by the said
king of Spain, the King shall give them letters of Mart.

14 Also his Majesty shall effectuallye cause the said Prince of Orange, and
County Ludouic of Nassau his brother, to be restored and put in possession, in
the principaltie of Orange, rightes, lands, and jurisdictions of the same, and
all that thereunto belongs, and also in other lands, Lordships, and
jurisdictions, which they have in his realm and obeisance. Of which
principaltie, one part of the places have been taken by the Sieur of Suse
Knight of the order, and some other places have been seized by the kings
letters patents for his service. And that the said Prince and Count his
brother, may from henceforth enjoy the same, as they did before the troubles,
and as it is expressed in the treaties of peace, made between the late king
Henry of France and the king of Spain, and other provisions and declarations
sithence granted for the behoof of the said Prince: Notwithstanding all
proceedings, sentences and orders, made and given during the troubles, which
shall be as nothing, and of none effect or force.

15 He shall also cause to be restored effectually to the said noble me^, all
the writings, titles and documents, rents, fruits, and revenues appertayning to
them, taken in the time of the present troubles, as well in the said
principality, as in the lands of his majesty, the same to be executed by the
Commissioners, at the time of the execution of the Edict of pacification, or by
such other of the kings officers, as the said noble men will choose.

16 And his Majesty meaning to repair all things happened in the time of
these wars, as much as he can: his majesty will give order that al prisoners
and such as have been stayed by justice, and otherwise sent to ye Galleys upon
occasion of these troubles, shall be set at liberty on either part, without
paying any rau^some. And as for the Raunsoms already paid, there shall
nothing thereof be recovered.

17 And whereas variaunce may happen to arise upon occasion of sales of lands
and other immouable goods, and engaygings made upon occasion of raunsoms,
before ye Duke of Aniou the kings brother, (calling unto him the Mareschals of
France) to be by him decyded and ended: It may be ordered that all persons,
as well of the one Religion as of the other, reciprokely, and whom it touches,
shall enter again into all their immouable goods, which they did possess
before the said troubles, and that have fallen unto them during the same. And
as for their mouable goods which shall be found to remain, the same shall be
restored unto them purely and simply: and so shall also such as have been taken
between neighbors and neighbors, and delivered in trust to be kept. And as
for such as have been sold by order of Justice, they shall have them again,
paying the same price that they were sold for. And yet nevertheless such as
have been taken by way of hostility, shall remain as good prise, and not to
be brought again in question.

18 All they also of the said religion shall recover all offices of justice, of
revenues and other, together with the benifices whereunto they have any
interest, to enjoy them wholly and peaceably, and also al offices of dignities,
gouernements, captainships, charges, or pensio^s which they had before the
said troubles, except it be that they were constrained to resign the^ by the
kings Edict made in that behalf. In which case they shall restore the profit
which they shall have thereof in deed received, as likewise they of the said
religion do offer of their part to be a means for the whole restitution of
their said offices and benifices, to revoke and recover from them to whom
through the necessity of the wars, they have sold the temporal revenue of
the Clergy, the king granting unto them such letters and commissions as
shall be requisite for that purpose.

19 That all proceedinges, sentences, judgments, and definitive or
interlocutory decrees, given against any of them of the religion, of what
sort or condition so ever they be, as well dead as living, whether they have
borne arms or not, at the beginning, since, and during the troubles, and by
occasion of the same, till the day of the said Edict, shall be broken,
revoked, and made void, and so also all executions, if there have been any,
and all marks, tokens, and monuments, of the said slanderous executions
against their persons, and the remembrance of them, taken away with such
solemnity as is requisite for the full reparation and recovery of their
honor. And the places where the said executions have been made, to be
established in their first state, and restored to the owners of the same. And
as for civil proceedings and processes, the parties to be put in their first
state as they were before the troubles.

20 All prescriptions happened during the said troubles shall be void, and
taken as though they had not happened, and no means left whereby any of either
religion may help themselves therewith against other.

21 And for the better establishing of the peace for the time to come, and to
take away all inequalities, and a like good usage to be showed equally to all
the kings subjects: all those towns that be or have been kept by those of
the said religion, shall be used with like equality as the others be, and not
to be grieved and ouercharged with lones, garrisons, or any other burdens,
and the inhabitauntes of them and of others of this realm being of the
religion, or that shall be thereof hereafter, shall be indifferently admitted to
all offices, dignities, charges, and public functions, and called also to all
counsels and determinations, in town, houses, or in general offices of
Provinces.

22 That all places, towns, and Provinces shall remain and enjoy the same
privileges, exemptions, lyberties, and franchises, which they did before the
said troubles.

23 That the king shall extend the benifite of his Edict of pacification (in
such sort as he does to all his own subjects, and to those that be under his
obedience and protection) to those that be of the county of Venisse, and of
the Archbishopricke of Auignon, as being within his realm, and within the
compass or circuit of his crown, at the least for the restitution and
enjoying of their goods, the liberty of their consciences, their sure
habitation and free access and trading within his realm, and within the said
Countie^^ed Archbishoprike, as the kings own and natural subjects do and may
do: And this for the reasons that have been more at large set forth to the
Sieurs de Biron and de Malassize, and specially for the preservation of the
kings right and authority in the said County and Archbishoprike.

24 That although the Reyters who have been called to the succor of those of
the religion at their great need, and who be yet with them, ought to be paid
by such as have been the first and principal authors of this war, and that
have cou^selled and in manner constrained the king thereunto, and since also to
continue therein, notwithstanding the earnest and continual instance made by
them of the religion for the peace, and namely since the joining with them of
the said late Duke of Deuxponts: Yet nevertheless for avoiding of these
contentions, and not to omit one only point of all means possible for them,
they of the said religion offer to contribute toward the said payment, the
sum that the king shall understand by his said Commissioners. And for the
doing of ye same they offer the first part of the revenue of all those that be
of the religion, and that they may be after that rate taxed and coated
according to their vocations and living, as it is accustomed, until the sum
which shall be declared, shall be performed, deducting only from the same
revenues the ordinary charges, and forbearing the execution till the next
year, because the fruits of this present year shall scarcely suffice for the
entertainment of the said Reyters. And the said taxation or coting to be made
upon them that be of this realm only.

25 That all letters of pardon and of abholishments granted by the king,
either general or particular, for matter happened before and during the
troubles for the cause of religion, shall have their full force and effect, and
shall be executed by the Commissioners for this Edict of Pacification.

26 That the Queen of Navarre, the Princes of Navarre, and Conde, the father
and the son, the Lords, gentlemen, officers and others, that have aided and
succored them in their wars, shall remain quit and discharged of all money
that has been by them, or by their order taken and levied of the receipts and
revenues of the king, to what sum soever the same does amou^t unto, as also
of towns commonalties, and of rents, revenues, and treasories, of the sale of
moveable goods, as well of the Church as of others, that are come of the sale
of the kings timber, woods, alienation of the temporaltie and revenues of the
Church, of forfeytures, bootyes, raunsoms of prisoners, and of any other sums
of money, of what nature soever, by them or by their knowledge and consent
taken, upon occasion of these wars without any danger to them and their
heirs, or to those that have been by them appointed to levy the said money,
or that have furnished and given the same, to be touched either for the present
time, or the time to come. And as well themselves as their said Deputies shall
remain discharged of the handling, dealing and employing of the same, bringing
(for full discharge) an acquittance of the said Queen, or of the said
Princes, or of them before whom they were to give account. The establishment
also of officers of Justice made by them, of judgments and executions of the
same authorized and confirmed in time past, shall so remain. And also such as
have been appointed Deputies or Commissioners of what sort soever, shall
remain discharged of all treaties and contracts by them made with all Princes,
Potentates, and foraine commonalties, of all negotiation with them, of bringing
in of the said strangers, of casting of Ordinance, making of powder and
Saltpeter, taking of Ordinance and munitions in the kings Storehouses, and of
particular fortifications and rasing of towns, spoiling and burning of houses,
of Churches, of leuying and conducting of men of war, and of all acts of
hostility, and generally of all that has been done and treated before and
since the present war, and the wars past, as though it were particularly
expressed and specified. And to this end, that all things done by the
knowledge and consent of the said late Prince of Conde, or of the said Queen
of Navarre, and the other Princes, shall be sufficient for all warrant and
discharge.

27 And for as much as in the distributing of Justice (whereof does chiefly
depend the surety of this Edict of pacification) diverse abuses have been
committed, which proceeded of the passion and partiality of the most part of
the Judges, against those of the religion: therefore to prevent the like
dealing, and that from one war there be not an entry made to an other more
intolerable for them, under color of Justice, the process of those of the
religion, both civil and criminal, as well on the behalf of the plaintiff as
of the defendant, shall be treated and heard at the first, before the ordinary
Judges, and after, upon appeal, before certain others to be taken of all the
bodies of the said Courts of Parliaments, as the parties shall accord and
agree upon, to a certain number by which according to these particular orders
of the said Courts of Parliament, judgment may be given, saving where the
parties cannot agree, within one only and that a short delay, then the said
process shall be judge in the high council, being called thereunto four
masters of the requests of the number of those that the king shall appoint,
for the matter that shall be delivered by those of the religion.

28 As for the assuraunces, that it has pleased the king of himself
voluntarily to grant unto them of the religion, not in respect of it, but for
the conservation of himself, until the sharpness of the war might be
qualified with the time, and has for that end (for certain years)
commanded them to have the keeping of the towns of Rochel, Montauban, and
Sancerre, and that they may there during and after the said term, use the
exercise of the said religion: They desire and most humbly beseech, that it
may please the king, for the reasons that they have more at large declared
unto the Sieurs de Biron and Malassize, to grant unto them la Charity in
steed of the town of Sancerre for the said assurance, and to add to the
number of the three towns, the town of Angoulesme, in respect of the
situation of the said Rochell, and for better health sake, and other
commodities.

29 Beside these things, and touching others besides the King, as is
aforesaid, there have been diverse other things propounded, contained in the
Articles presented unto the King, of which there can nor ought to be cut off
scarcely one, seeing they serve all to this end, that the peace may be the
surer and stronger. True it is, that the principallest and most important of
them, are, that all strangers, men of war, may withdraw themselves the
speediest that may be out of this Realm, the Kings subjects to their houses,
or other places that they shall choose for their abode without being impeached.

30 And to take away all mistrusting; and not to give liberty to the governors
of Countries to execute their revenge against towns, and specially against
those that have been or are kept by those of the Religion, or to cause them to
redeem their ill handling by force of exactions upon the inhabitants of the
same Towns: It may please the King to discharge all those towns that be not
upon the Frontires, and wherein there have been no Garrisons used to be put.

31 That all the Mareschals of France in ryding their circuites according to
the distribution of their province, shall be only accompanied with Gentlemen
and other men of learning of both the Religions in like number, at the least of
the less partial and most lovers of peace and common tranquillity. Which
shall be likewise put in ure at the choice and election of the Commissioners,
for the execution of the Edict of pacification.

32 That the said Mareschalles of France and Commissioners, shall cause the
inhabitants of the towns of both the Religions to swear, the observing and
performing of the said Edict in all points And shall give the charge of the one
unto the others, and shall charge them respectively and by public act, to
answer for the breach of the said Edict, made by them of their said
Religion, within the town or village where they shall dwell, at the least wise
orderly, or otherwise to present them to the Justice.

33 That no person shall tax or reproach any other, for any thing past during
the troubles, and that which touches them, either by word or by writing,
openly or pryuately, and least of all, in Sermons, or in any public acts,
saving in judgment in the deducing of their rightes.

34 The trade of merchandise shall be restored and established in the same
liberty and surety, as it was wont to be between the subjects of his
majesty, and others, and change of habitation permitted to all. And the
Princes, strangers, and foreign potentates shall be required of his Majesty's
part, to suffer likewise the said traffic, in their countries and lands,
without exception of any person or religion.

35 It may please his Majesty to cause the exact observation of the said
Edict, to be sworn by the Queen his mother, the Dukes of Aniou and Alencon
his brothers, all the princes of the blood, Mareschalles of France, and by
those of the Kings privy Counsel, and officers of his Crown. And that they
may give Act of the said oath under their signs and Seals to those of the
said Religion.

36 That the governors of Provinces, Mayors, Aldermen, head Officers, and
Counselors of towns, may make the like oath, and renew it every year.

37 That all sentences, and declarations that shall happen to the prejudice of
the said Edict, shall be void and of none effect. Which Edict shall be firm,
stable, and irreuocable, and these words shall be mentioned. In the Preface of
the said Edict shall be mentioned, all derogations, and notwithstanding that,
and namelye those in the said ordinances made upon the alienatio^ of revenue
and vnitings to the Crown, and also the said derogations of Edicts,
declarations, sentences, retentions, and secret Registers made or to be made to
submissions, voluntary, or constrained, public or particular.

18 That there shall be a place and day of publication, which may not be
refused or deferred for any occasion whatsoever. Upon pain that those that
make delay shall make answer in their own name. And that shall be without
alteration, keeping back, or secret Register.

Given at Bussy the. 21. of June. Anno. 1570.

