A MARVEL, Deciphered.

ET INVENTA EST PERIIT



AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson, for John VVinnington, at the golden
Tun near to S. Dunstones Church in Fleete-streete. 1589.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord: Henry Carey, Baron of Hunsdon:
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Lord Chamberlain of her
Majesty's most Honorable Household: Lord Governor of Barwicke: Lord Warden of
the East Marches for an anempst Scotland: Lord Lieftenant of Suffolk and
Norfolk: Captain of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners, and one of her
Highness most Honorable privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable, where as mention is made in the twelfth Chapter of the
Revelation of saint John, of a great wonder in Heaven, namely, A woman clothed
with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of
twelve Stars, etc. A wonder of no small marvel amongst men; that was said
to be a wonder in heaven containing some strange mystery, wherein the nature
of the Sun is not unaptly to be considered, being a most goodly creature of
God, and glorious in the ornament of heaven, and no less beneficial to all
creatures of the earth, wherein also we may behold, not by any preposterous
comparison of the creature, with the Creator, but by natural conjecture with
more effectual motions in part to discern; the glorious omnipotency and
marvelous mercies in the mighty Majesty of the Creator of all beauty and
benefits: namely, in and by Jesus Christ the true Son that lighteneth all
the world. Jn and by whom we receive so infinite, so great and ineffable
blessings, both for body and soul, as also in this world and in the world to
come: unto whom the natural Sun with his good gifts does yield obedience as
tributarie for his creation. Wherein we are so impotent duly to express or
discern the abundance of his benevolence: that we are constrained with
grief of mind, to complain of this carnal Carcass so dull and unapt to
perform the same, as a weak and feeble post, that falls al to shiuers, under
the burden of some weighty frame. By whose most pure and holy law, he has
left us, the more to move our unaptness in some proportion according to our
capacities, to conceive of his most merciful liberality, in heaven and earth,
both now and evermore. Which holy law in general construction of Christians,
is truly said to be the aparel of the church: that does inuest her self with
the divine and immaculate Law of Christ the son of God. And whereby the
christian Church is endued with sound knowledge to know God aright: and to
live in concord and amiable affection with all men. Which may be said to be
the peace of God which passes all understanding, containing the most perfect
harmony of heavenly concord, as also yielding aspiring minds unto
inexplicable blessings: namely, to be delivered from the terrible and the most
cruel and inestimable calamities and bondage of Satan: to be made a citizen
of Heaven, of the fellowship of Angels, with most singular delight to behold
the glorious Majesty and presence of God, to possess joys unspeakable, that
the eyes of man did never see, or his ears has ever heard, either may be
contained within the thoughts of his heart. By which corporatio^ and number of
the christian Church, the heavens shall be adorned: and the glory of God most
magnifice^tly magnified. The glorious and heavenly apparel aforesaid, not by
outward appara^ce unto the eyes of carnal men, but by the eyes of a divine
mind is to be discerned: and in such wise to be considered as that which
contains all in all: for so much as it may not be truly said, that there is
any true felicity to be obtained by man, or to men; or true honor unto God,
but that in and by this said law, is found out, inioyed, and performed.
Which holy law so much prevailed within the space of five or six hundred
years after Christ's incarnation, that the whole known Nations of the earth
embraced the same, until Satan had begotten Antichrist his eldest Son, who
doubting some prevention of his fathers patrimony, obtained the true stamp of
his fathers phisiognomie, which is murder; to give most certain testimony by
what spirit he is governed also conseruing unto himself the very image of his
own guilefull father, contriuing deceit, to beguile the devil himself (if it
were possible) by a supposed holiness and religion, although counterfeit and
most false. Nevertheless, the very cloak and cover of the most infernal
drench of deadly poison, so shadowed with the vehement spirit of hypocrisy,
the guilefull enemy to all virtue, which the Christian estate both greedily
and generally swallowed and devoured in the darkened days of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, to the cruel overthrow of all true Religion: with the whole
frame of all the ineffable blessings aforesaid: And wherewithal by the power
of a doubled spirit received from Satan, in the Temple of the everliving God,
he both forged and placed a new unknown and a Monstrous god, never seen or
heard of before the coming of Antichrist, a presumption never contained in the
heart or thought of any person whatsoever, namely to increase and to establish
a new God, but in the man of sin; the son of perdition: which infernal
invention stretches it self beyond all his other wickedness leaving nothing
undone that was to be done, either to the blasphemy and dishonor of God, or
execrable cruelty against the whole generation of men: respecting either the
generality, in which number not one escapes: or the horror and the greatness
of the evil in which he that escapes best cheap loses body and soul. Upon
consideration, view and news of which cursed new god, with scorneful
derision: All Jews, Turks, Mores, Sarazins, all Mahomatists and Jndian
Idolaters, are fled as men hunted with a Monster from their salvation. Before
the invention of which wretched god the greatest portion of all these Nations
aforesaid, confessed Christ to be their only salvation: and doubtless
otherwise the whole Nations of the earth, had been submitted under the
obedience of the gospel of Jesus Christ, but now by Gods permission, when it
may justly be said, that this said Church of Christ the son of God, by the
malice of Satan, is brought unto her last decay, and left as desolate but
only in an angle of the world, the engine of man being utterly incapable of all
remedy or relief for the same.

Even then: Time, reuealer of hidden secrets, delivers demonstration that God
himself has erected the woman mentioned in the twelfth chapter of the
Revelation of saint John, that now at this instant by Gods great favor,
stands clothed with the Sun the right and most true vesture of the Church,
namely, the most pure and holy law of Christ Jesus the Son of God, who with
a most principal portion of fortitude, confirmed with an assured confidence in
her Christ and God, as a maine pillar erected by divine providence, to bear
the weighty frame of reparation of this decayed and desolate Church of God
aforesaid, proceeding with a mind vnappaulled to the dangerous defense of
the same, against all the enemies of Europe whatsoever, and as by a circle of
the Sun, being placed, by divine ordinance as a King amongst the Planets,
yielding light and life unto all signs and Stars of Heaven, even so that
woman, which is said to be the Revelation of saint John to be adorned with
the shining vesture of the Sun, from the brightness of which garment many
Nations has received, does and shall receive: both light and life unto their
great and eternal comfort, and having the Moon according to the Text, placed
under her feet, with great obedience to yield assistance with all her force
and influences, in strange enterprises by Sea to be achieved and right
happily finished: and upon her head, that Royal shining Crown of twelve
Stars. In all obscure and difficult causes to conduct with a fatal faith, in
most certain, true and clear direction: upon which infallible foundation, as
an Archtector to advance the most difficult, divine and inexpungnable
fortification for warfare, that ever was seen or heard: not after the carnal
man of flesh, but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down
imaginations, and every light thing, that is exalted against the knowledge of
God: and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
This said spiritual warfare, so sufficiently furnished with such divine armor
and munition, yielding most certain hope of assured victory.

Yet nevertheless, Satan which never cease his envious invasions against
the children of God, is now constrained, to furnish his agent and eldest son
Antichrist: not according unto his accustomed manner, to deceive the Nations
with a slumbring potion of lethargy; plausible both to the deceiuer and the
deceived, but with the invention of oaths: engines to invade the household of
faith, namely, fire, sword, treason and poison and such other strange and
ungodly tools, wherewith he has made sufficient proof of his counterfeit
holiness, and whereby he has made bloody havoc of infinite noble and holy
persons and has daungered the state of sundry and many Countries, Kings and
Kingdoms, the only evident reasons and arguments to defend his desperate
estate, to underprop his decaious kingdom. But God himself having care of his
own causes, providing at his own pleasure safety and consolation for his
elect in all their proceedinges, and also for service and defense of that
sacred person invested with the Sun aforesaid. Certain engines as yet
unknown unto the world, for overthrow of an hundred thousand of his enemies
upon land: and to confound a thousand Sail of Ships if they ariue within a
mile of any Shore of England, as also for doubling of any Cape, or forland
Rock, or sandy bank, either to pursue, or to escape being ouercharged with
enemies, to enforce a Ship to make way at Sea against both wind and tide.

These strange matters right Honorable, J thought convenient (enforced by your
Honors received favor) constrained in longing desire by some laudable means,
and in some portion to express my duetifull service unto your Nobleness, to
present my humble suit unto your Honor, both for my self and the matter; that
we may jointly be received into your Honors favorable protection, whereby
the work it self may obtain general and friendly entertainment, and the
testimonial and ornament of my commendation and behavior, by your Honors good
liking no little advancement: Craving with all humblenes that desire to do
well may be mine excuse, for all defectes that herein may appear: And J your
Honors poor Orator shall now and always pray unto the everliving God, to
illustrate your Nobleness with great increase and with everlasting felicity.

Your Honors most duetifull Orator, E. H.

A NOTE OF strange things mentioned of a Woman contained in the 12. Chapter of
the Revelation of Saint John.
AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun
and the Moon under her feet and upon her head a crown of xii. stars; Not
to be doubted what woman before all the kings or persons whatsoever upon earth
from the first publishing of this prophecy unto this day has been most
appara^tly clothed with the son namely Jesus Christ.
A woman to be clothed with the Sun, is a marvel both mystical and divine
containing some glorious effect, and the mystical description of the true
Church of God, described in the form of a woman, which is natural to
procreation, to be clothed with the Sun, is to put on or to be invested with
Christ Jesus the son of God and to be endued with his divine spirit. So as if
there be any sacred woman, that notably to the wonder of the world by the
mighty power of the spirit of God, without abashment of so dangerous an
enterprise has advanced the glorious Gospel of Christ, protected and
defended peoples and countries that have professed the same, to the perilous
hasarde in the eyes of men of her person and estate, contrary to all human
policy and has vowed to thadmiration of men, and in despite of Satan and
his agent Antichrist with all there adherents to perform the same, manifestile
discovering to be beautified with the vesture, and apparel of the sun. That
same woman whatsoever, may aptly be applied without figure to accomplish this
prophecy.

And the Moon under her feet. Not to be doubted what woman before all others
whatsoever as a substitute under God has brought forth so great and divine
light in time of so great darkness: either for who^ the moon by her force
and influence has brought more destruction to her enemies either unto her
enterprises at sea better success.
The Moon that receives light from the Sun, as a substitute, to give light
in time of darkness, whose nature is to give increase to growing things, and
ruler of marin causes and of nature inconstant, so as if by divine ordinance,
there be any woman that as a substitute from God and his Christ, that with
zeal, strength and power, in the days of ignorant darkness, has revealed,
and made to shine, with great and comfortable brightness, the holy mysteries,
and secrets of God in flowing abundance, so as countries, and nations, have
been lightened therewith, and unto whom the Lord of heaven and earth has
given power to perform maruels at sea and in contempt of inconstancy holds
the Moon, with her inconstant dealing under her feet, confirmed with mortal
hatred to all unsound and variable proceeding doctrine and religion, that same
woman effects this prophecy.

And upon her head a crown of twelve stars. Not to be doubted who it is
that with immortal glory stands crowned with the bright doctrine of the
twelve Apostles.
If there be any notable woman, that has made known unto the world. To
have beautified her head with the most singular holy and bright doctrine of
the twelve Apostles, and Prophets, all which speak but one thing in effect.
And has garnished her senses with vehement care to employ this proceeding, to
manifest the brightness of the same to all nations may aptly be said to be
crowned with twelve glorious stars, both in life, and death, yelding
immortal glory. Such a woman effectually effects this prophecy.

And she was with Child, and cried traueling in birth and was pained ready to
be delivered; Not to be doubted who above all others traueileth to bring
forth this child Jesus.
So as if there be any woman that with an ardent and an holy desire,
traueileth with zeal, cost and danger, and with power inforceth the birth of
the child, and the Lord Jesus which is his sacred word, and the Image of
himself, and her vehement desire made known by laws, aduertisments, and
proclamations, to all nations far beyond the reach of all crying,
discovering her pain, and readiness to have the same delivered and published to
all creatures, That God may be glorified effectually. Such a woman effects
this prophecy.

And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered to
devour her child when she had brought it forth; Not to be doubted what
woman or what child the Dragon has sought to devour.
If there be any woman of such worthiness wbose holy endeavors in divine
procreation of the child Jesus, with her zeal, in true religion and
advancement of his holy word, the very Image, of himself with ready power
and strength, for and in the assistance, comfort, and mighty defense of all
persons, and countries, that profess the same, which from the first time she
began to bring forth this child, has been mightily resisted and withstoode
by the Dragon and his assistances, in all notable appearance to destroy this
child: namely, the word of God, and in the first birth of the professors of
the same, to pull them up by the roots. This and such a wowan, may seem, and
be said, to effect this prophecy.

And she brought forth a man child, which should rule all Nations with a
rod of iron. Not to be doubted what woman or what child the dragon has
sought to devour,
This man child is Christ Jesus our Savior, which by his hypocritical
adversary Antichrist, has been obscured, and after a manner buried, and made
unknown many hundred years from the knowledge of the worldly multitude. So as
if there be any woman, to whom God has given special grace, not only to
bring to light, but also to defend the sacred word, and glorious Gospel of
the child, and Lord Jesus, so as in appearance she has brought forth with
great care and industry, and shall to the no small grief of her enemies,
deliver the same to the Nations of the earth. For this man child Jesus with
his rod of iron, namely, by his absolute power, shall grind his enemies to
powder, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel: an assured comfort to
all faithful in Christ that their redeemer, rules with such special power to
protect them, as also to chastise their enemies. Such a woman may effectually
be said to effect this prophecy.

And her son was taken up unto God, and to his throne. Not to be doubted who
against all resistance, does
Not to be doubted, but that when the red Dragon, described in the said
Chapter, with his seven heads, ten horns, and upon his head seven Crowns,
has disgorged all his venom, with most bloody cruelty: with his seven
heads, practiced all their subtle devises, in wicked inventions: his ten
horns, their force, and violence, to perform slaughter and shedding of blood:
his seven Crowned heads enlarged all their authority, to accomplish these
evils aforesaid: Not to be doubted that any person has more cause to joy
then that woman which is made an Instrument to bring forth a child that was
taken up unto God namely the word of God.
yet it shall no further prevail: then earthly and sinful power, may prevail
against the mighty and infinite power of God: which from heaven does scorn
and deride all their proceedings: for so much as he is taken up unto God, and
his power is from above. And by confusion of this said bloody beast, God has
determined; to glory in his holy name. And as the Virgin Marie, justly and
rightly reioiced for that by election, she before all women naturally did
bring forth, the Lord, and Savior of the world: even so that woman, which
above all women, has to this day since the first publication of this
prophecy, been adopted by Gods mercy, to revive his honor and glory: and
thereby does accept to say to be her Son; in her portion has iusi cause to
say; Magnificat anima mea Deus. And to rejoice above all other women, living,
and none like unto such a woman to effect this prophecy.

And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God,
that they should feed her there: Not to be doubted for what woman, God by
his so many deliverances has provided safety for a fixed time, which shall not
be altered by any power whatsoever.
a thousand two hundredth and three score days. As Christ sundry times
frequented the wilderness, to be delivered from his enemies, as also to commit
his temptations to God, by contemplatio^ and prayer, so God himself as the
Text says; has prepared a place for this woman in the wilderness, a solitary
and a rare haunt of persons, where by appointment she shall fly, and nestle
hirselfe; by her reposed confidence in the bosom of the highest, a place of
assured quietness, as also far in the utter parts of the world, under the
North Pole, where it is said, by the mighty multitude of men; dwelling on the
heart heart of the earth. That the inhabitants of that wilderness: are gross,
wild and barbarous, but it has pleased the highest, that there she shall be
fed and securely provided, and defended, a time fixed, and set down which
shall not be removed by any power of enemies whatsoever: so as if there be
any woman; that appears so placed and securely defended; That same woman in
all resemblance most properly seems to fulfill this prophecy.

And when the Dragon saw that he was cast into the earth, he persecuted the
woman which had brought forth the man child; Not to be doubted what woman
has been persecuted by the dragon, and his Antichrist since he was deprived of
al habitation in heavenly minds and cast into the heart of earthly rebrobate
by the revelation of the child Jesus.
That is, when the Dragon, the Devil saw himself, and his Angels; which is
Antichrist and his reprobates: by the almighty Michael Christ and his Angels,
the godly Magistrates and professors of his Gospel, to be cast into the
earth: that is to say, all his dross of superstition, idolatry, and all his
other filthiness, of religion deciphered, and made known to all persons (thonly
reprobates excepted) into whose earthly hearts, he is cast; as it were into
the earth: for that he is deprived of all habitation in heavenly minds, so as
if there be any woman that by a received grace, has, or now lives since the
first publishing of this prophecy, which with a manifest zeal, cost and
danger, has travailed to bring forth this man child Christ Jesus,
notoriously in the sight of the world: which is to say, confessed, published
and advanced his holy laws, his sacred word, and most glorious Gospel, her
only beauty and salvation. To the great and most discomfortable grief of
Antichrist, who forced therewith has now according to the second Psalm of
King David.

Conuented, the Kings and Rulers, of the earth against the Lord and his
anointed, but he that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and then
he shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure,
because they are not learned to serve the Lord in fear, and shall be forced to
kiss the son, left in his anger, they perish from the right way, if his
wrath be kindled, for to him shall be given the Heathen for inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, and blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.

Which mystery at this instant begins to work, and from henceforth be
accomplished, by which feminine instrument: this foresaid Dragon and his
Antichrist, with all their adherents, are, and must be thrown down,
confounded, and are now entered into so great a fume, and pelting chafe, as at
this day is most apparent, against this woman. Who may be said to effect this
prophecy.

But to the woman was given the wings of a great Aegle, that she might fly
into the wilderness, into her place where she is nourished, for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the presence of the Serpent. Not to be doubted
what woman by the mighty wings of the great Aegle, namely the two testame^ts
whereby she is taught rdsolutely to repose in the bosom of the Highest, which
is her prepared place for assured defense.
These wings signifying not only some assured, and strange deliverance, by
the mighty power of Gods providence, against the malice of Satan and his
agent Antichrist, his chief Factor; this woman's faith, being supported by the
two Testamentes of the great and only God of heaven and earth: as it were by
the wings of a great Aegle, whereby she is safely carried, directed and lifted
up in mind, far from the common tracke, of this wretched world: the more
aptly to be exercised, and to direct her contemplatio^ and function, in the
causes of her Christ, and God: and the more quietly with a reposed and resolute
confidence, in the bosom of the highest, which is her assured and prepared
place safely, to endure, all brunts of Antichrist: her cancred, hateful and
murdering enemy. Such a woman exactly may be said to effect this prophecy.

And the Serpent cast out of his mouth, water after the woman like a floude,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the floude. Not to be doubted
against what woman the dragon and his Antichrist has thrown out so many
Floods of devises for her destruction.
So as King David compared all his troubles and dangers to great floods of
waters, so here is said that the Serpent should cast out as it were a river
of water after this woman, that she might be carried away with the floude.
That is to say, out of his lying, blasphemous and damned mouth, he shall
disgorge floudes of false accusations, of heresy, of false usurpation of a
Kingdom, of absoluing subjects from obedience, of practicing conspiracies, of
poysonings, of diverse sorts of violent murders, of curses, by book, bell, and
Candle, and an ocean Sea of many more contrived mischiefs: devising by all his
natural and cursed means of lies, deceit, and murder, to persecute, and to
extinguish this woman, his most apparent enemy, from the face of the earth. A
notorious discovery, by what spirit this Antichrist is governed: so as is
there be any such woman, upon whom this Serpent and his Antichrist,
notoriously have employed so many evils, only for the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
That same woman may safely be said to effect this prophecy.

And the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the floude, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth; Not to be doubted for
what woman God has taken order that the earth and his other creature should
stand forth for her defense.
At the Lords will: all his creatures, shall be forced to preserve his elect,
as now the earth shall open her mouth, to assist those that love him: in which
cause, if the God of all power, had not taken order, that the earth should
swallow up that River, which is the multitude of earthly creatures, being
taught from God, to digest these cruel and false accusations, with a mind of
true knowledge and faithful obedience, which otherwise impossible, to have
escaped this whirlpoole of confusion: which diverse Kings, and Emperors, in
times past, could not by any means escape: which at this present, the Lords
good grace and favor, has made stark dry, and without effect: Now if there
be any woman upon earth that has found, and received this favor from God.
That woman may be said, to effect this prophecy.

And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war, with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ. Here the text it self makes clear exposition of
this wrath and war of this said beast against this said woman and her seed
namely the keeping of the commandments of God and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ for which causes how many temptations this woman has endured and
infinite seed and people, have and must suffer destruction.
Here the Dragon is said to continue his wrath, not only against the woman, but
also makes war with her seed, the cause is here also manifested: namely, for
keeping, the commandments of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ, our
only mean, and salvation, and our most special cause, to glorify God, and
wherefore we are chiefly borne. But such and so great is the impiety, and
impudency of Antichrist: which is mounted upon the highest degree of ll
wickedness and abomination: Who procures a so great slaughter, for so holy, and
so divine a cause: namely, the aduanceme^t of the glory of god, which he
himself, and all other creatures, whatsoever, should hold in most especial,
and singular reverence. But yet to speak the truth, and to give him his
right: we must needs confess, to have received this much favor at his
hands: who now, and at this instant, has given forth, a most plain and
clear exposition of this prophecy, to all persons that are not obdurate,
dull, or incensate.

And went and made war. Which number if by any possible means might be
registered that has been murdered in field or town only for the testimony
of Jesus Christ, it would oppres all honest minds with most doleful and
deadly grief, but alas for remedy how, where and by what means may we find
slaughtred Christian blood sufficient, which only and none other may satisfy
this most cruel insatiable monster expressing most cleerelie to be Satan's most
trusty and chief executioner to perform all manner his cruelties against God,
and man, unspeakable, but blessed are all they and a thousand times happy
whose courage is not daunted, to resist to fight and to destroy this horible
monstrous beast: And love not their lives unto the death.
That is to say, he hunteth and makes inquisition for blood, for of his own
venomous nature, he has no remission but seeks continually destruction, and
always without just cause, enforces occasion of slaughtet, for he has no
delight in the peace of GOD, but also makes war with the remnaunt of her
seed. That is, against all professors of the sacred word of GOD, whether in
France, Flaunders, or elsewhere: that by her example, or protection have
boldly, discovered the fruits of their faith in the commandments of God, and
the testimony of Jesus Christ. Wherein lies all the quarrels, and the true
cause of all this bloody broyle seriously to be noted: the professors
whereof, must all be slain (without exception) if they do not forsake their
assured salvation in Christ, and fall down unto the beast, to their utter
destruction both of body and soul. And forasmuch as from the beginning of this
prophecy there never appeared so great a conuention, and gathering together of
Kings, Princes, and Rulers, for the subversion and slaughter of true
Christians, and the Christian estate (as at this present) but as concerning the
rest, for what offenses soever, they shall have both his peace and blessing,
and his plain and full remission for all their sins, be it either perjury,
buggery, treason, murder, and all other such trifling sins; they are not to
stand in any doubt of his good favor, and blessing. Now if any such notable
woman, upon whom, all these aforesaid practices, conspiracies, and many more
evils, and mischiefs, have been notoriously inflicted. That same woman,
without exception, respecting her sex, her estate, her situation, her
profession, her proceedings, the condition of her enemies, their practices,
their executions, their counterfeite holy assemblies, and the true cause of all
their dealing, meaning, and quarrels effectually examined, and in a word to be
finished. What conclusion of peace might be doubted, if she renounce Christ,
and admit popery; This woman where, or whatsoever, beyond all other, that has
lived upon earth unto this day: most nearly, and fully performs this
prophecy: neither any other to be expected, that more effectually shall
accomplish the same; And yet I dare not to name any person, either presume to
confess any exposition, of so rare, and secret mystery of God; but for so much
as the Angel has said, it shall be revealed in the latter days in his time
appointed; except, they should be written in vain, some one person although
not special by Gods favor, who is all, in all, with his good spirit shall
give ablenes to perform the same. And thus with all humblenes, I beseech your
good Honor of your favor, not only to accept the reading of these premises:
but also, that desire to do well, may be mine excuse, for all defectes, that
herein may appear.

FINIS.
Edward Hellwis.


