THE FUNERAL POMP AND OBSEQVIES OF THE MOST mighty and puissant HENRY the
fourth, King of France and Navarre, solemnized at Paris, and at S. Dennis, the
29. and 30 days of June last past. 1610.

Together with the order and ceremony of removing the body of Henry, the third
of that name, King of France and Polonia, at Saint Dennis the 22 of June last
past.

All faithfully translated out of the French Copy printed at Roan by Petit,
ordinary Stationer, and Printer to the King, by the permission of Superiors.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Tigers head. 1610.

The funeral pomp celebrated at the burial of the high and mighty Prince,
Henry King of France and Nauar, in the city of Paris, and the town of Saint
Denis, upon the 29 and 30 day of June, 1610.
THe Destinies having had so great power, in so golden an age, so peaceable a
time throughout all Christendom, in a year so abundant, and in the middle of
the pleasantest month thereof, by the hands of a villainous and disloyal
traitor, to bereave the most Christian and flourishing kingdom under the cope
of heaven, of the greatest King, and most accomplished Prince for wisdom,
providence, magnanimity, clemency, and mercy, that ever lived in our time,
and to speak truth, the mirror and miracle of Kings, and the King of
miracles; as his own kingdoms, and other foraigne kingdoms and provinces,
yea and those that are fair distant, both on this side, and beyond the seas,
bear witness. But lest I should be over tedious, I will not particularly
rehearse the great number of his actions, atchiuements, battles, and
heroical conquests; or the histories sufficiently declare the same. I forbear
to speak of his notable and prompt proceedings, and his own deep and wise
counsels. I cease to set down the wonders of his life, and actions. He was
the forwardest of them most forward. The first in field and the last that
retired. A lover of the good, and the terror of the wicked; curious to enrich
and beautify his towns, as his lofty and sumptuous buildings may witness
unto all posterities. But when he thought himself to be seated upon the
Olympus of his prosperities, replenished with joy, to have seen his Queen and
dear espouse crowned, with as much magnificence, as contentment, which should
have been augmented at his entry into the famous city of Paris; after that to
mount on horseback, and from thence to go to place himself at the head and
forefront of the puissantest army that ever France sent into the fields, in
man's remembrance: even at that time (I say) that heaven had blessed his seed in
the multitude of his goodly and princely children left unto us, a parricides
knife suddenly cut off both the execution of his great dessignes, and the
thread of his life; the end whereof has made mortal men inwardly as much
grieved at their hearts, as they showed sorrow outwardly in their countenances.

The King being dead, the Queen assisted by the Princes, Prelates, and
Officers of the crown, with determination to yield him the last duties due
unto him in his obsequies, caused order to be taken, not only that prayer
should be made unto God for his soul, but also for all things requisite for
the accomplishing of the Funerals of so great a Monarch, as you shall hereafter
particularly read.

Two days after the death of this great King, which was upon the 16 day of
May, his body was laid on a bed, with his face open, that every man might
behold him; and then preparation was made for the ripping and imbalming of his
body: from whence they took his heart to send it to La Flesche, and his bowels
to Saint Denis, as he had determined in his life time. Which done, he was wrapped
in sear cloth, and put in a coffin of lead, covered over with purple velvet,
whereon there was imbroydered a great cross of white satin.

The next day after Whitsonday, at 4 a clock in the morning, the Kings heart
was honorably imbalmed, and being put into a little coffin of lead, it was
carried to La Flesche (which is the sepulcher of the King of Navarre his
father) by above 400 Lords, gentlemen, and others on horseback; the heart
being borne in a caroach, wherein there sat 4 Jesuits to accompany it.

Of the state and manner of the chamber wherein the dead body lay.
THe body being laid in the coffin, it was set in a chamber richly hanged, on
the sides whereof there were diverse altars erected, whereon every day there was
a hundred Masses high and low said, which were celebrated by several Priests of
diverse orders.

Within the chamber there were diverse benches richly covered, for the Princes,
Officers of the crown, the Lords, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, the
Almener, and other Prelates, and officers of the Church, to sit on; and hard by
the Censer, there stood 2 heralds of Arms, and diverse benches on both sides
whereon many religious persons sat singing continually night and day.

Upon the Kings body there stood the Crown, Scepter, and hand of Justice,
which were placed upon a cushion richly imbroydered.

The body of the King remained in the said chamber the space of 15 or 16 days,
and then it was carried down, and borne with great honor, and many ceremonies
into the great hall of the Louure, accompanied by diverse Bishops, Prelates, and
great Lords of the Court.

Of the Hall of honor.
THe great Hall was hanged with the Kings richest and most sumptuous hangings,
not only from the top to the bottom, but also on the ground. On each side
of the said hall there were two galleries, on either side one, for the Princes
and great Lords to pass through; which galleries were all richly hanged.

Of the Bed of Honor, and the Kings Image.
AT the upper end of the hall there was a tribunal place made four steps
high, whereon was placed a great pallet bed, covered with cloth of gold; and
on it lay the Kings image, made of wax, with his hands close together,
apparelled in his royal robes, and the crown upon his head, which rested upon
a cushion richly imbroidered. Upon his royal cloak he had thecollar of the
Order; on his right side his Scepter royal, on his left the hand of Justice.

Hard by the image there were two altars erected sumptuously set forth; the one
on the right, the other on the left side; upon that on the right side, there
was a Mass of Requiem with music, said; and on that on the left side, four
other high Masses; over each altar there hung a rich canopie, and between
those altars there were diverse seats for Prelates and religious persons, that
song continually, as they did in the chamber: and all along in the nether part
of the hall there were diverse other altars placed, which also were richly set
forth, whereon there were diverse low Masses celebrated.

The image being placed in this manner hard by his body, in the hall, every day
ordinarily there was meat served upon the table by the officers of the house,
Buttlers, Caruers, Sewers, Tasters, Almoners, and others; and such order used
and observed as if the King had been living, both for tasting, blessing, and
giving thanks: which done, the meat was given unto the poor.

Of the Hall hanged all with black.
THe 2^ day of June the Kings image and all the tapestrie hangings were taken
and carried away, and all the hall was hung from the top to the bottom, and
also under foot, with black cloth: and then the body of the King lying in his
coffin, was laid in the place of his image, covered over with black velvet
which hung down to the ground, with a cross of white satin, and a canopie
over it of black velvet.

Upon the Kings coffin stood the royal crown, the collar of the Order, the
Scepter royal, and the hand of Justice. At the foot of the coffin there was a
cross of silver, which lay upon a cushion; and hard by it great wax candles
continually burning in candlestickes of silver; and there also stood the Censer
of silver, and on each side of his corpse two heralds of Arms, who every two
hours were relieved by two others which came in their places. The 22 day of
June Henry the third, king of France and Polonia, was borne to S. Dennis,
conducted by the Duke d'Espernon, accompanied by a great number of Lords and
officers of the said King; and the next day his funerals were celebrated by the
Cardinal de Ioyeuse, Archbishop of Roan: and after that his body was buried in
the vault by his father Henry the second, the Queen his mother, and the Lords
his brethren decessed.

The order observed by the King in casting of holy water upon the body of his
dead father.
THe 25 day of June Lewis the 13. of that name, King of France and Navarre, at
this present reigning, dined at the house of Longueuille, and after dinner he
was led with great magnificence unto the Louure, to cast holy water upon the
body of his father the dead King; and with him his two brethren were borne on
each side of him, the one Duke of Orleans on the right hand, and the other Duke
of Auiou on the left: hard by his majesty went the Cardinals de Ioyeuse and
Surdy.

The King mourned in a princely roabe of Violet with a long train, which was
borne up by the Princes of Conty, de Soyssons, de Guise, de Iainuille, and
de'Elleboeuf, followed by the Marshals of France, and the Knights of the Order.

Many Bishops, Prelates, great Lords, and an infinite number of noble men,
great Ladies, and gentlewomen attending in the hall for the Kings coming: who
having cast the holy water upon his fathers body, went from the Louure again.

The next day the officers of the Court of Parliament at their coming out of
the court at ten of the clock in the morning, went also in their accustomed
order to the Louure to cast holy water, followed by the officers of the chamber
of accounts, and aids, the Kings receivers, the officers of justice, the
provost of Paris, the provost of Merchants, and the Shriefes of the city

On Monday the 28 of June the twelve sworn cryers of Paris, by commandment
given unto them, with the Kings arms hanging both before at their breasts, and
backs, went throughout the city of Paris ringing their belles, to signify the
celebration of the Kings funeral, pronouncing with a loud voice these words
following.

All noble and devout persons, pray for the soul of the most high, most
puissant, and most excellent Prince, Henry the great, by the grace of God King
of France and Navarre, most Christian, most imperial, and most victorious,
incomparable for magnanimity and clemency, who is dead in his palace de
Louure; pray unto God that he may receive his soul.

On tuesday at two of the clock after noone, his Majesty's body shall be
brought to the Church in Paris, in which place the same day shall be said both
evening prayer and the Vigiles for the dead, and the next day in the morning
his Services and accustomed prayers; which done, his body shall be borne to the
Church of Saint Denis, the sepulcher of the Kings of France, and there buried;
pray for his soul.

The manner of carrying the Kings body to our Lady Church in Paris.
TVesday the 28 day of June the streets were all hanged with black on both
sides the way, from the Louure to our Ladies Church, whereon were placed the
arms of the King, and the arms of the city, one hard by the other, and at
every house a burning torch.

The same day 2 hours after noone the funeral began to set forth in order, as
hereafter follows.

First marched the Captains, Lieutenants, and ensigne-bearers of the
towne-house with their long gowns, their swords by their sides, and in their
hoods and cornets; the archers and crossebowes of the said town following them
in colored cassockes, imbroidered with black hoods over them to the number of
172, marching two and two with their matches lighted, and their halbards and
pieces with the points and noses downwards under their arms, which were
divided into three ranckes.

After them went the Spiritualty in order as follows.

First the penitential fathers of the third order of S. Francis, to the number
of threescore.

The fathers of the third order of S. Jews, to the number of 45.

The Capettes, otherwise called the poor scholars of the College of
Mountagne, to the number of 33.

The Capuchines to the number of 83.

The Minimes to the number of 68.

The Cordeliers to the number of 224, gray Friars.

The Iacobins to the number of 190.

The Augustins to the number of 100.

The Carmelites to the number of 50.

The Of which Order Francis R^uiliack was one.
Fueillans to the number of 35.

Before all those religious Orders, their crosses were borne, and on the sides
of each cross 4 torches, on each side of which torches were placed the
Scutchions and arms of the said King; after them went 500 poor men in long
black gowns, with hoodes, hose, in manner and form, and shoes in like sort,
each of them carrying a burning torch in their hands, whereon hung the double
arms of the King.

Next them followed the 24 sworn cryers of the city of Paris ringing their
bells, with the Kings arms at their breasts and backs.

After them the knight of the watch with his lieutenant in black, with a staff
in his hand, followed by all his company, in their cassocks, with cornets of
black cloth at their backs. In the middle of the company went the ensign
bearer, drawing his ensign upon the ground, all covered over with black
fipres, the drums founding in doleful manner, all covered with black.

After them went the Sergeants of the Chatelet in long black gowns, and
cornered caps, each with a black staff in his hand to the number of 30.

After went the Sergeants of the town house on the left hand, and the
Sergeants of the Chatelet on horseback on the right hand.

Next them followed the Notaries, Commissaries of quarters, Atturnies, and
Advocates of the Chatelet, all in order, apparelled in long black gowns, and
cornered capes, on the right side; and the Atturneis, Commissaries, Clearkes,
and citizens of the town on the left hand, all apparelled in the same manner.

After followed the lieutenant civil of the Chatelet on the right hand, and
the lieutenant Criminal on the left hand, followed by the Counselors of the
Chaletet.

Then followed the religious persons of S. Auoy, alias Piquet.

The white Cloakes.

S. Catherines in the valley.

The College of Mathurins.

S. Paul.

S. Steuens of the mount, with two other Parishes.

S. Eustache, S. Croix of the city, S. Sauueur, S. Iacques of the shambels,
with two other Parishes: 4. other Parishes, S. Geruais, S. Protex, S. Innocent,
S. German the old, with an other Parish.

S. Hillary, S. James of the hospital.

S. Martial, S. Steues de Gray.

S. Nicolas de chardonneret.

S. Barthelmew, S. Seuerin.

La Magdaleine, S. Suplex.

The Bernardins, S. Magloire, or S. Iacques du haut pas, S. Martin in the
fields, and on the right hand S. Germain de Prez.

S. Vistor, S. Geneuiefue: The 4 little sons of our Lady, viz. S. Bennet, S.
Merry, S. Oportune, and S. German de Lannerrois.

S. Honor, S. Thomas, and S. Nicholas du Louure, our Lady with the holy
Chapel, and S. Marcel singing; and on the left hand went the University: viz.
the Masters of Art, Licenciates, Principals, Regents, Batchelers, Doctors of
physic, in red robes and miters: Doctors of the Canon and Civil laws,
Doctors of Divinity of all Orders, the Beadles of the University, and the
Rector.

After them went the sworn messengers, and next the master Porters of the
gates, with long black gowns, and hoods.

Then followed the pages of the querie, apparelled in black searge.

Then followed the masters of the ho-boyes, flutes, instruments of music,
trumpets, and drums, all covered, with black, sounding mournefully.

After them went Mounsieur de Cryquy, on the right side, and Mounsieur de
Lecure, on the left hand, followed by the Captains, lieutenants, and ensign
bearers of the Kings guard and regiments.

Mounsieur the chief Provost of the house following after them on horseback,
apparelled in black with a long train borne up by his Officers, followed by
his lieutenants, ensigns, and archers on foot, with long black gowns and
hoods, and their cassockes upon them, carrying their halbards and pieces under
their arms.

Then the Captain of the gates of the Kings house with his Porters, in their
imbroydered cassockes, with black hoods upon them.

Mounsieur Marolles went on the right hand of Mounsieur de Bouillon, and
Mounsieur de la Bordoisiere his lieutenant, followed by the Captains of a
hundred Switsers of the body, apparelled in black cloth, and unshorn
chamblet, with round bonnets pleated of chamblet, their ensign covered with
black sipres.

Mounsieur de la Palus at the head of two companies of 200 gentlemen
pentioners, followed by two ensigns, viz. that of Mounsieur le Vidame de Man
on the right hand, and that of Mounsieur de la Bordoisiere on the left hand,
all apparelled in black searge with cornets.

Then followed the ordinary Officers of the Kings house, to the number of 160.

Next them the Musicians, Physicians, Chirurgions, yeomen of the wardrobe, and
of the Kings chamber, every one severally.

Then the Vshers of the hall bareheaded, with their hoods hanging down.

The Gentlemen seruitors, and Masters of the house on the right hand, the
receivers of the money, ayds, and chamber of accounts, on the left hand.

Next them went 8. trumpetters in mourning weeds, the trumpets covered all
with black sipres.

Mounsieur de Rhodes master of the ceremonies, carried the Kings penon.

Then followed the chariot of arms covered with a great canopy of black
velvet, with a cross of white satin upon it, in it having four and twenty
great scutchions of France richly imbroidered, drawn by six great horses, all
covered with black velvet down to the ground, with a cross of white fattin
through the midst, led by two watchmen in black velvet with their hoods
hanging down.

Then followed messengers de Vitry and de Parlim, wearing their collars of the
Order upon their long gowns.

Then went 12 great horses all covered with black velvet down to the ground,
with crosses of white satin: upon each of them there fate a page apparelled in
black velvet, bare headed, with their hoods veiled.

The follow Esquires, Benjamin the head Esquire, bearing gilt spurs.

Next him the esquire Betzebe, bearing the gantlets.

Monsieur Pluuine bare the scutchion of France and Navarre, and another Squire
bare the coat of arms.

The chief Squire bare the helmet mantled with a royal mantle of purple velvet
seem defluers de lyt, and lined with ermins, the royal crown standing upon the
said helmet all covered over with black sipres; every one of the Squiers that
bare the said honors being on horseback in long black gowns, and hoods.

Then follow the Kings Preachers, Confessors, and Almoners.

Next them went 17 Archbishops and Bishops on foot, two and two together, all
with white Miters on their heads, with capes of black velvet, and after them
went the Archbishop of Lions alone, somewhat distant from all the rest.

After him followed the Ambassadors of Sauoye, Venice and Spain on horseback,
apparrelled in black, with long trains, every one borne up by six of their
officers, each ambassador being led by an Archbishop, or a Bishop riding on
their mules.

The Popes two Nuntioes, ordinary and extraordinary, went next them, and on
each side of them went the Archbishop of Aix and Ambrun mounted on their mules.

Then followed my Lords the mostreuerent Cardinals de Ioyeuse and Surdy, with
their purple capes, and red hats, mounted upon their mules, and followed by
their Officers.

Next followed the horse of honor, all covered with blue velvet, signed with
Flower de luces done of gold, as thick as might be, with a fringe of gold
about it, and a saddle and stirrops richly guilt; there was no part of the
horse seen but his eyes: it was led by two Squiers, each holding a reine, and
both on foot with their hoods hanging down: on both sides of the said horse
there went ten heraults of arms, apparelled in black, and hoods accordingly
with their coat armors, upon there black gowns all imbroydered with Flower
de luces of gold.

The head Esquire after them riding upon a horse covered with black velvet,
with a great cross of white satin, bearing the royal sword in a scarf, with
a scabberd of purple velvet imbroydered with Flower de luces of gold.

Then followed fourteen Vshers of the court of Parliament, with their little
wands in their hands, and after them the Presidents and Counselors in scarlet
roabes, to the number of eighty nine.

Then followed two Vshers of the Chamber with their Maces, bare headed with
their hoods veiled.

Also went the Bishop of Paris, and the Bishop of Angiers on his left side,
with their Miters and surplices and capes of black velvet.

Then followed the Kings Image in the same honor that it lay in the great hall
of the Louure, on his right hand holding the Scepter royal, and on his left
hand, the hand of Justice, borne by the bearers of the great seal of Paris.

About the said Image went the four chief Presidents with diverse Counselors
of the great Chamber, and the Scottish Archers of the Kings guard.

The Canopie over it was made of cloth of gold, and the under part of it of
purple velvet imbroydered with Flower de luces of gold, and a fringe of gold
about it, which was borne by the Provost of Merchants and the Shriefes of the
city of Paris.

Then followed the Earl of Saint Paul, bearing the staff of high Steward,
representing Mounsieur de Scissons, high Steward of France, on the right hand,
and Mounsieur le Cheualier de Guise representing Mounsieur le Duc de Esguillon,
High Chamberlain, bearing the banner of France on the left hand, mounted upon
two great horses covered and hooded with black velvet, with crosses of white
satin.

Then followed Mounsieur the Prince of Conty upon a little horse, hooded, and
in complete mourning, wearing upon the same the collar of the Order, his train
being borne up by seven Gentlemen.

After him followed Mounsieur County of Soissons, also on horseback in the
same sort, and in like mourning.

Then followed Mounsieur le Duc de Guise without the Order, but in the like
mourning habit; after him went the Prince of Ianuile on horseback in complete
mourning, without the Order.

Then the Duke de Ellebaeufe on horseback in the same manner of mourning.
Then the Duke de Espernon followed him on horseback, with with the order in
like complete, and after him the Duke de Mountbazon, in the same order and
mourning: their trains were borne up, by gentlemen their own followers.

The Usher of the order bearing a black wand in his hand, apparelled in black
with his hood down.

After the Princes and Dukes followed the knights of the Order on foot, with
their colors upon their mourning gowns, their trains borne up by their pages.

Then followed a great number of Noble men, two and two together.

And after them the twelve pages of the chamber in black velvet, with their
bonnets.

And after them followed the captains of 400. Archers of the guard, with their
ensigns, followed by the Archers of their said guard, bearing their arms
downward, in black gowns and hoods.

Before their departure from the Louure, there was some controversy between
the great personages, the court of Parliment, and Scottish guard, but by the
Queens wise direction it was well pacified.

This was the order which they observed in going from the Castle of Louure to
our Lady Church, going over the new bridge, along by the Augustines, and so
passing over S. Michaels bridge through the new market, and from thence to the
said Church, wherein to they entered at nine of the clock in the evening.

The streets were hanged with black cloth, and upon the same the Kings arms
fastened, with the arms of the city not far from it all the way as they went.

How our Lady Church in Paris and the hearse were adorned.
THe body of the deceassed King was set in the middle of the quire of the said
Church, under the light hearse, which was erected about a pickes high.

The quire of the said Church was hanged with black cloth, and in the middle
thereof there was a range of black velvet all along, upon the which the
Scutchions and arms of the King were fastened, two foot distant one from the
other.

The great body of the said Church, was likewise hanged with the same
throughout all the said Church, upon and between the said pillars with the
other circuit thereof, about in every place, was full of wax tapers and lights.

And the same evening there was evening prayer, and vigiles for the dead.

The next day in the morning being the last day of the month of June, The
Princes, Cardinals, Lords, and Officers of the crown, the court of Parliament,
Couents, Parishes, and all those that had accompanied the body of the King the
day before, came again to the same Church of our Lady about ten of the clock
in the morning, where then Divine Service was celebrated by the Bishop of Paris.

And after the offering, the Bishop of Here Is, made the funeral oration, which
continued a long hour. All the services were finished by two of the clock in
the afternoon; and from thence all the Princes, Cardinals, Bishops, and all
the principal persons went to dinner to the Bishop, and in other places not
far from thence, where provision was made for them.

In the mean time the foremost of the train began to go forward each in
their first order and ranckes, which they had holden the day before, from the
Louure to our Lady Church, passing over our Lady bridge, and along through
Saint Denis street, till they came to Saint Denis in France, without any stay.

The streets from the said Church of our Lady, to the gates of Paris called
Saint Denis gate, were hanged with black cloth on both sides, and on them the
arms of the King, and the arms of the Town, one an elle distant from the
other.

The religious persons and Priests of the Parishes, as also the Fathers,
Confessors, Almoners, Batchelers, Regents of the University, and Donors of
Divinity, accompanied the body of the King through the town, every one in
their order until they came to the Church of Saint Ladred, which is in the
suburbs of Saint Dennis; from which place the greatest part retired, and left
the body of the King: which was accompanied by all the Court, with his officers
of the Court of Parliament, the Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen,
Captains, Guards, Archers, and Priests from our Lady Church to the cross
which stands in the middle way between Saint Dennis and Paris; at the which
place the Priour and religious persons of Saint Dennis, came to receive the
body. There the Priests of the parishes departed, and the Cardinals, Bishops,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and all the Court, both of the King, and of the
Parliament, and the officers, accompanied the body to Saint Dennis Church,
where it was set under a light hearse, elevated on high, where certain Vigiles
and Suffrages were said for the dead.

The said Church of Saint Dennis was hanged with black, both in the Quire and
the body thereof, upon it having a broad range of black velvet, which went
clean through the Church, whereon the Kings arms were made fast.

The high Mass was celebrated by the Cardinal de Ioyeuse, and answered with
music.

After the offering, the Bishop of Angiers made the funeral Oration,

This office being performed, and the accustomed prayers and oraisons said, the
master of the ceremonies took the Crown, the Scepter, and the hand of
Justice off from the kings corpse, which stood upon it, and together with the
cloth of gold. Then the Gentlemen pentioners and the archers, bare the body to
the grave, which was before the high Altar of the said Church, on the right
hand.

Then the Cardinal de Ioyuese went and cast earth upon the body, and the last
holy water; that done he sat down by the grave by the high Altar, and the
master of the ceremonies on the other side, and between them a herault of
arms, who calling the Gentlemen one after the other that had borne the Kings
honors, which being brought were thrown into the grave.

That done the Earl of S. Paul, struck with his high stewards staff upon the
ground, and with a loud voice said, The king is dead. Then the herault of arms
taking the word from him said three times one after the other, The King is
dead, the King is dead, the King is dead, all of you pray for his soul. Then
every man fell down on their knees and wept.

A little while after, the Earl of Saint Paul took the staff in his hand
again, and said: God save the King, God save the King, God save the King,
Lewis the 13 of that name, by the grace of God King of France and Navarre, most
Christian, our foueraigne Lord and good master, to whom God grant most happy
and long life. Which words ended, Trumpets, Shackbuts, Flutes, and Phifes began
to sound.

After that each of the said Lords took up again the said pieces of honor,
which they had thrown into the grave, and the Princes and great Lords were
conducted to the great hall, where the funeral feast was prepared for dinner.

Every man having dined, the Officers of the Court of Parliament, of the
Chamber of account, of the Aides, of the Receipts, of the Town house, of
Paris, and other Officers assembled together in the hall; where the Earl of S.
Paul holding the stewards staff in his hand, made a little oration unto them
touching the Kings death, offering them his service: with promise to recommend
them unto the King now reigning, to the end that he should continue them in
their offices, and estates: and to show that he himself also was out of
office, he brake his staff in presence of them all.

FJNJS.

