A LEARNED AND fruitful Commentary upon the Epistle of James the Apostle,
wherein are diligently and profitably entreated all such matters and chief
common places of Religion as are touched in the same Epistle:

Written in Latin by the learned Clerk Nicholas Hemminge, professor of
Divinity in the University of Hafnie, and newly translated into English by
VV. G.

JMPRINTED AT London by Thomas Woodcocke, and Gregory Seton, and are to be
sold at the sign of the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard.

ANNO. 1577.

To the godly and reverend Father, and faithful Minister of Christ, M.
Alexander Novvell, Deane of the Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, W.
Gace wishes grace and peace from God the father through Christ Jesus our Lord.
GOD FROM THE BEGINNING, has as in a most clear and evident glass, set
forth himself to be beholden and known of us, even in his creatures, and in
the orderly course of the world. For when we see and consider the unmeasurable
greatness of the world, and the parts thereof to be so framed, as they could
not possibly in beauty be fayrer, nor for profit better: we understand
thereby the omnipotent power of God in creating them, his divine wisdom in
ordering and disposing them, his infinite goodness in continually preserving
them, that they run not to ruin and utter decay, but are by him vpholden,
even to the necessary use and sustentation of man's life. Although this
creation of the world, and the maruaylous ordering and preserving thereof were
sufficient whereby men might know God, and worship him being known, or else
be without excuse: yet it has pleased God of his great mercy to give unto us
his word, wherein he has more plainly and fully revealed himself, and his
will, to our most singular commodity and comfort. For we through the fall of
our first parents being become blind in understanding, corrupt in desiring,
and wicked in working, are by the word of God fruitefully of us received,
lightened in our minds, reformed in our affections, and ordered aright in our
doings: in so much as the Princely Prophet David says, that the means whereby
a young man shall cleanse his way, is to rule himself after this word, which
word also he pronounces to be his delight and his counselor, yea he
perceived it to be of such virtue and excellency, that he prefers it before
all worldly treasures whatsoever: I love, says he, thy commandments above
gold and precious stone. Again, thy law is dearer unto me then thousands of
gold and silver. But I mind not to enter here into the worthy commendation
of this word, or to rehearse the manifold and most singular commodities,
which redounde to the godly thereby. Only that which I have mentioned out of
David may suffice to declare that it is a treasure of all other most precious.

Forasmuch then as the word of God is a treasure so excellent, what shall we
think or say of the true and sincere Preachers and expounders thereof? We
acknowledge great friendship in them, by whose means we attain to an earthly
commodity, and how shall we be affected toward them, which open to us the
way to an heavenly treasure? We think our selves much beholden to those,
which minister unto us the food of this frail life: but what recompense
shall we render unto them, by whose means we come to enjoy the food of
everlasting life? Wherefore right worshipful, if I should render a reason of
my labor bestowed in translating this treatise into the english tongue, I
think it were sufficient if I should say no more, but that the word of God is
therein soundly and syncerely expounded. Although I may descend unto particular
points, and show other weighty causes thereof. For you are not ignorant how
the Papists both have bine and also be grievous enemies to the doctrine of
justification by faith only in Christ, pretending for their chief defense
the testimony of S. James, where he seems to attribute justification to
works and not to faith only, whose authority they have wrongfully wrested
and misinterpreted. Whereby they have not only erred themselves, but also
have caused many other to err. Which false interpretation of theirs is in
this treatise very learnedly and thoroughly improued, and the meaning of the
Apostle truly and plainly declared.

Again, your wisdom does well know, that the mysteries of God are wisely and
discretely to be disposed, and not only the doctrine of faith faithfully to be
taught, but also the doctrine of works diligently to be urged, both to stop
the sclaunderous mouths of many prating Papists, and also to remedy many
abuses very rife among us. For whereas the sincere preachers of Gods word do
according to the Scriptures teach, that the blood of Christ is a sufficient
salve for the sore of sin, and that we are justified by faith alone in him,
without men's merits, works, or satisfactions: many sclaundering Papists are
not ashamed most falsely to affirm, that they are lovers of lusts, preachers of
present pleasure, and giuers of liberty to all licentious living, and making
no store of good works, do cast only faith under men's elbowes to lean upon.
When as the true preachers have always preached, and all the writings of the
godly have most diligently taught, that that faith, which is not lively and
fruitful of good works did never profit any but to the increase of their
own damnation: and contrariwise, that that faith, whereby alone according to
the Scriptures, they teach that we are justified, has good works necessarily
accompanying it, not as causes of our salvation, but as necessary fruits of a
lively faith, as is also in this treatise of S. James very learnedly and
diligently declared. Whereby not only the Papists are admonished, that they
do not open their lying lips so wrongfully to rail upon the true preachers of
Gods word, but also many other are advertised of their duty, who by profession
are Christians, but in life more then profane, who are not ashamed to say: if
faith justify without works, then let us work nothing, but let us only
believe and do what we list, and so like carnal and careless livers they
turn the liberty of the Spirit into wantonness and fleshly liberty. But let
these men understand, that such profane profession and careless contempt
does highly displease almighty God, and is diligently detected and sharply
reproved of his faithful ministers, both in words and writings, whose
wholesome admonitions let them carefully regard, and be advertised and brought
thereby to follow in works that which they profes in words, least they
deceive them selves, and at the last reap most bitter fruits of their feigned
faith.

Not only these are in this present treatise admonished of their duty, but
many other most profitable points of Christian doctrine and godly instructions
are learnedly handled and lively set forth therein, whereby the Christian
readers may learn to direct their doings, and order their life according to
the prescript rule of Gods word. As for them which obstinately refuse, or at
the least wise little regard such godly instructions as God has in these
days (his name be highlye praised therefore) by his faithful Ministers both
by preaching and vvriting offered unto them: let them remember that they that
are of God hear and receive Gods word, and if they do the contrary that
they are not of God: let them know, if they be now vvearie of it and come to
the lothing of it, that their soul is fallen into a dangerous disease. For as
a good appetite to natural food is a token of the health of the body, and to
refuse and loath the same is a sure sign of some sickness or disease: so is it
likewise in the soul refusing or lothing the heavenly food of Gods word.
Again let them call to mind, that it was answered to the rich glutton
being tormented in hell, when he would have one sent from the dead to
admonish his brethren, least they came into that torment, that his brethren had
Moses and the Prophets, whom they ought to hear, if they would avoid the
like fiery flames and hellish torments. Let them assure themselves that the
day will come, when Christ Jesus shall with unspeakable majesty and
infinite power come to judge the quick and the dead, when from the furthest
corners of the world shall be heard the sound of the trumpet, vvherevvith all
shall be called to the judgment seat, then the secrets of all hearts shall be
laid open, and the doings of every man plainly discovered. Then the ungodly
and wicked ones, which have in this life despised the word of God, neglected
his commandments and will contained therein, and not repented them of their
wickedness, shall instead of comfort on every side feel extreme dread and
horror. If they look behind them they shall see the world consuming with
fire, if they look on the right hand, they shall perceive a sinful
conscience accusing them, if they turn to the left, there shall be the deuel
ready to receive them into endeles pains, if they look before them, they
shall see a terrible and just judge coming to judge them according to their
wicked works. Whereas the godly void of all these dreadefull terrors, shall
see a most loving Savior, who shall then admit them wholly into the full
fruition of eternal joy and blessedness.

Seeing then the case thus stands, it is requisite that all men, which mind
to be saved, do search the Scriptures which testify of this Savior, do
diligently hear and read the word of God, do use such means as God has
appointed to come to the knowledge thereof, and knowing it, do follow it in
their life and conversation, yea and do become most heartely thankful unto
God, that it has pleased him in mercy to send to reign over us, not a
tyrannical Herod to oppress us, but a most gracious Princes so in peace and
godlynes to govern us, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has not in any age
had freer passage, nor has bin more abundantly and truly preached and set
forth, which God for his Christ's sake grant long to continue. So far then
ought all to be of from despising or neglecting the word and the Preachers and
Ministers thereof, that they ought to acknowledge the enjoying of it to be an
inestimable benefit of God, and to show themselves thankful for so great a
benefit, not only in hearing, reading, and meditating of it, but also
according to their ability and power it setting in forth and making it known
unto other. Wherefore I, according to that small talent, which God has
bestowed upon me, have employed my travel in translating this treatise into
our mother tongue, that those my godly country men, which are ignorant of the
Latin tongue may become partakers of such Christian doctrine, wholesome
admonitions, and godly instructions as are contained therein: Which treatise,
reverend Father, I thought good to publishe the rather under the protection of
your name, that thereby it might be the more willingly accepted, and the better
lyked of many, who have of a long time known you to be a learned and
faithful preacher of Gods word, and an earnest furtherer of all godlynes
which God grant that you may long be, to the great advancement of his glory,
the singular commodity of his Church, and the daily comfort of your own
conscience.

Your worships humbly at commandment, VV. Gace.

Faults escaped in the printing of this treatise gentle reader correct as
follows.
Fol. 17. page 2. lin. 5. for tabernanacle, read, tabernacle.

Fol. 55. page 1. lin. 11.14.16. Pass over this word (part) as being
superfluous.

Fol. 62. page 2. lin. 21. for duty, read, benefit.

The Argument of the Epistle of James the Apostle.
FOUR THINGS IN MY IVDGEment are diligently to be weighed and considered in
the beginning of the exposition of every treatise of the holy Scripture, to
wit, who is the author of it, what occasion there was to write it, what
is the end and purpose of it, and what is the manner, method, or order of
handling it. For these four being aptly and rightly declared are as it were a
certain light before the reader to guide him to the entrance of every treatise
of the holy Scripture. Of these therefore I will speak in order, whereby the
argument of this Epistle may be the better understand.

The author of this Epistle was James the Apostle, The author of this Epistle
who and what he was.
who is called the brother of the Lord. He, together with the rest of the
Apostles, was not only the space of three years instructed by the voice and
spirit of the Lord: but also after the resurrection of Christ with the other
Apostles received the holy Ghost, and a commandment to preach the Gospel to
all nations, and on the day of Pentecost was again by a visible sign
authorized and confirmed in his Apostleship. Hereof it appears what is to be
judged of this Epistle, to wit, Of what authority this Epistle is, and from
whence the same authority is taken.
that we must give no less credit to it, then to the voice of God, for the
author thereof is the Apostle of Jesus Christ, who at the last sealed the
Gospel of Christ with his blood. For when he taught Christ to be the
conqueror of death, and to sit at the right hand of God in heaven, the Jews
did cast stones at him, and at the length he kneeling upon his knees, and
praying for his persecutours, was slain with a fullers clubbe, and that not
long before the city was assaulted by Vespasian. Whether therefore thou
considerest the ministry of God, vvherin this man did labor, either his
life, either his confession, or his end, thou have a testimony of the
infallible truth of his doctrine.

The occasion which James had to write, seems to be double, The occasion
which moved James to write this Epistle, is of two sorts.
one the persecution of the Church, an other the hypocrisy in many. How great
the persecution of the Church was in the time of James, the Ecclesiastical
history does teach at large. For the Jews were not only afflicted by
being dispersed through the whole world: but also they were even almost
overwhelmed with diverse tentations of heretics and deuels. For as inwardly
they were molested by false brethren: so outwardly by tyranes they were
provoked to forsake their profession, sometime with threatninges sometime
with promises. Hypocrisy also did not a little offend them. For many did
profess Christ, and acknovvledging him to be a savior, did extol his
benefits, but they lived without a lively faith and repentance. With these
troubles was the Church then tossed, with these vexations was the spouse of
Christ then afflicted, which when James did see, he took thereupon occasion
to write, that by some means he might remedy these evils.

The end and purpose of the Apostle.
Of this occasion the scope and purpose of James in this Epistle may be easily
understand. For all which he here says, tends unto this end, not only to
confirm and strengthen Christians and those that be godly in deed, against
the offense of affliction, whom he exhorts unto patience, that they should
not, being overcome with te^tations, give over their confession, but rather
look to the event and end of affliction: but also that he may call back
hypocrites from their error, whom as he teaches how vain the bosting of
faith is without a lively confidence in God and the true fruits of faith: so
he exhorts them unto manners worthy of a Christian profession, and dehorteth
them from the vices contrary thereunto, except they had rather suffer just
punishment for their stubburnnesse and disobedience. The manner or order of
handling is somevvhat free and bold, as is wont to be in exhorting and
reproving, The manner and order.
which I will diligently show in the exposition of every chapter.

The profit and use of this Epistle.
But how necessary this Epistle is in our churches at this day, he may easily
understand: which sees that the most part that vvil be called Christians, do
bost of a vain and a dead faith: Which foolishness our Apostle does discover
and most justly condemn. Again, he which daily beholds with how many and
sundry vices (discipline more and more decaying) christian people are polluted
and defiled, will without all dout confess, that there is need of some James,
who may freely and boldly reprehend and condemn these sins which are so common
and rife among us. The author of this Epistle is a glass of godliness and why.
Besides all this the author of this Epistle deserves to be called a glass of
godliness. For whether thou considerest his office, either beholdest his life,
either think upon the constancy in his confession, or weyest the end of
his life, thou have both whereat greatly to marvel, and also which thou
may desire to imitate and follow, if thou will be counted a true Christian.
Thus much concerning the argument, Why this Epistle and certain other in the
new Testament are called General.
profit, and use of this Epistle. Now it remains to declare why it is called
General. The Epistles of the Apostles, of Peter two, of John the first, one of
Jude, and this of James are called General, because they were not appointed
and written to certain cities and persons (as all the Epistles of Paul and
the second and third of John were) but were given to all the godly
indifferently, dispersed in diverse places through the whole world. Some do
call these Epistles Canonical, thereby to put a difference between them and
the Epistles of Paul, who are in a manifest error. For the Epistles of Paul
are no less Canonical then the Epistles of James, the Epistles of Peter, or
of John, because that whatsoever we read in the Epistles of the Apostles, we
ought to embrace it as a canon or rule of the truth.

CHAP. 1. The sum of the first Chapter.
HE exhorts Christians that they faynte not under the heavy burden of
tentations, and that by showing the reward of ouercomming tentation. And least
any impute the beginning of tentation to God, he teaches both from whence
tentation proceeds, and also that all good things are of God, who has
begotten us again by his word.

The order and parts of the first Chapter.
THe first part of this chapter is an inscription. The parts of this chapter
are six, which are here in order rehearsed.
The second a proposition, wherein he persuades Christians not to be overcome
with tentations. In the third because it may sometime be, that some being
seduced with error do yield unto tentation, he admonishes that wisdom is
to be asked of God by faith without wavering. In the fourth, least any being
discouraged with poverty and contempt, do yield unto tentations he exhorts
both rich and poor unto true humility. In the fifth is set forth the reward of
ouercomming tentation, and the beginning thereof is also showed, that the
deceites of it may be the better avoided. The sixth is an admonition taken of
contraries, that God is not the author of tentation, but rather of all
goodness, which he confirms as it were by a testimony of the goodness of
God, setting forth the benefit of our regeneration. And so this chapter
tends to one end and purpose, to wit, that we suffer not our selves to be
overwhelmed with the heavy burden of tentations. To this end also serve the
rest.

The exposition of the first chapter with an observation of the Doctrine.
1 James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes
which are scattered abroad, salutation. THis inscription conteyneth three
things. For first it has the name of the author of this Epistle, with a
description thereof, and also his office. Secondly, the Apostle makes mention
of them to whom he writes. Lastly he adds a salutation. The author of the
Epistle is James, who by profession was the servant of God, but by office the
servant of Jesus Christ, that is, To whom the Apostle vvriteth this Epistle.
an Apostle. He did write to the twelve tribes scattered abroad, and as Peter
has mentioned, dispersed through the world. In histories mention is made of
the manifold scattering abroad of the Jews. For first the ten tribes were
dispersed through the kingdom of Babylon, then the two that remained were
lead away into Babylonicall captivity, and the captivity being ended only
the least part of the tribe of Judah and Benjamin did return. To these Jews
therefore dwelling here and there, and converted to the faith of Christ, James
does write, and in the beginning saluteth them, or as it is in the Greek,
bids them rejoice, signifying that the surest way unto true joy is faith in
Christ. The scattering abroad of the Jews declares an exceeding great
difference between the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdoms of the world.
The kingdom of Christ, and the kingdoms of the world do greatly differ.
The kingdom of Christ is not enclosed or compassed with certain bounds in
this world, but it consists in a good conscience, in righteousness and joy
in the holy Ghost, as Paul says. In this kingdom are all even as many as
truly believe in Christ, whether they be nere at hand or far of. Again this
scattering abroad does admonish us, that the Church of Christ in this world is
not tied (as the Pope thinks) to any certain place or succession, but rather
to the word of God, to the sacraments, and to obedience toward the Gospel.

2 My brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse tentations. The
proposition of the first exhortation, to wit, that the believing Jews be not
overcome of tentations. This exhortation is worthily made first unto them, who
being driven out of their country, were oppressed with diverse injuries of
their neighbors. Whereas he says not simply, be not overcome of tentatio^s,
or some such like thing, but count it all, that is, full joy, when you fall
into diverse tentations: he puts a difference between the effects of the
tentation of the godly and of the ungodly. The ends of the tentation of the
godly and of the ungodly are diverse.
For as the end of the tentation of the ungodly is sorrowfulnes and
desperation: so the end of the tentation of the godly is joy and victory
over tentation. When he says diverse, he signifies that the beleuers are not
tried with one kind of tentation, but with many and diverse, wherefore it
becomes Christians to watch, least that they being compassed about with
diversity of tentations, do fall into the hands of the adversary.

3 Knovving that the trying of your faith brings forth patience. A reason of
the proposition taken of the effects of the tentations of the godly. For first
tentation is, The effects of the tentation of the godly.
as it were a touchstone, whereby the faith of Christians is tried, we have an
example in Abraham. For they whose faith is not true, in the time of tentation
do depart, according to the parable in the Gospel, Matthew. 15. Contrariwise
they, whose faith is firm and sure, are made stronger through tentations, for
they are vphelde by the spirit of God. Moreover, faith being tried works
patience, that is, makes that we do patiently suffer affliction, for hope of
our deliverance: Whereupon Paul says, that experience brings forth hope, and
hope makes not ashamed, that is, fails us not, that at the length we should
be ashamed in the sight of the son of God.

4 And let patience have her perfect work. We must continue constant unto the
end. Matthew. 10.22.
This is an exhortation to perseverance in suffering, for the Apostle will have
the godly to continue constant in patience even unto the end, because he is
blessed that indureth to the end. The word patience in this place signifies
constancy and perseverance in patience. The effect therefore of patience is
constant perseverance.

That ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing. The final effect of the
cross of the godly.
The end and effect of the affliction of the godly is here declared, which is
the perfecting of us in Christ. For all our life time we ought to endeavor to
come unto this perfection, which is daily polished and fined with affliction as
with the instrument of God, until such time as it be fully finished. This
place does admonish us to speak some what of Christian perfection, which James
defines here to be entirenes. But because the Papists do but trifle and dally
concerning Christian perfection, it is expedient rightly to instruct the godly,
that they may know what they ought to think concerning the same. We must
understand therefore, Two kinds of perfection mentioned in the scripture.
that there is a double perfection commended to us in the Scripture, whereof
the one is absolute, and is an imputation of the perfect righteousness and
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ. For as Christ by his obedience on the
Cross does make a full satisfaction for sins: so his obedience to the law
imputes righteousness, so that every one that believes, may appear perfect
and righteous in the sight of God through the perfection and righteousness of
Christ. We having confidence in this perfection, do look for the glory of
immortality. An other perfection there is in the regenerate which the word of
God commends to all the godly: walk before me (says the Lord unto our
father Abraham) and be thou perfect. Christ says: Genesis 17.1.
ye shall therefore be perfect, Matthew. 5.48.
as your father which is in heaven is perfect. There is no doubt, thou will
say, concerning the commandment, but it is demanded wherein that perfection
does consist. We must understand that Paul Philip. 3. uses the word of
perfection after two sorts. For he says thus: Not as though I had already
attained to it, Philip. 3.12.13.14.15.
neither were already perfect: but I follow if I may comprehend that for whose
sake also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren I count not my self that
I have attained to it, but one thing I do: I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self unto that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark,
for the price of the hie calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore as
many as be perfect, be thus minded. In these words of Paul there is a most
manifest contradiction, unless we will admit, that there be more kinds of
perfection then one. First he says that he is not perfect, afterward he
numbreth him self among them that be perfect. There is therefore a double use
of this word, for sometime one is said to be perfect in substance, as we say
that a child is a perfect man, that is in substance. Sometimie one is said to
be perfect in quantity or degrees, as when we say: no man has perfect
obedience according to the law of God. After the first manner Abraham, David,
Paul, the thief on the cross. etc. were perfect. According to the latter
manner no man in this life has bin found perfect, beside Christ Jesus alone,
but that perfection we shall obtain in the life everlasting, where we shall be
made like unto Christ. But that the state of grace in this life is perfection
after a sort, Definitions of christian perfection taken out of the words of
Paul.
it may be taught partly by descriptions, partly by examples. Of the words of
Paul which I have rehearsed, this definition may be gathered, that Christian
perfection is to forsake sin, to rest upon Christ by faith, and to prease
toward the mark for the price of the hie calling of God in Christ Jesus. Or as
Paul defines it in the Epistle to Timothe: Who may be said to be perfect
according to the use of the Scriptures.
Christian perfection is to fight a good fight, to have faith and a good
conscience. Whosoever therefore forsakes sin, renounceth lewd and wicked
desires, comfort himself with confidence and trust in the mediator, and
endeavors to approve his whole life before God, yt his conscience be not
defiled: according to the use of the Scripture he is called perfect, and that
in substance, not in degrees. For Christ only was perfect both in substance
and in degrees. But this may more euidentlye be perceived by examples. It was
said unto Abraham Genes. 17. walk before me and be thou perfect. A lively
example of christian perfection.
How Abraham obeyed this precept, and how he walked before God and was perfect,
it is plainly declared Genes. 22. by the commandment of God, and the
obedience of Abraham. But that this may be the better understand, let us annex
the words of Moses: Genesis 22.2.3.4.6.9.
Behold therefore, says the Lord to Abraham, The commandment of God to Abraham.
take now thine only son Isaac whom thou love, and get thee unto the
land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the
mountains, which I will show thee. Here thou have the precept, the obedience
follows. The obedience of Abraham tovvarde God.
Then Abraham rose up early in the morning, and sadled his Ass, and took two
of his servants with him, and Isaac his son, and cloue wood for the burnt
offering, and rose up and went to the place which God had told him. And a
little after: Then Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac. And afterward it follows: And he bound Isaac his son, and laid
him on the altar upon the wood, and Abraham stretching forth his hand, took
the knife to kill his son. By this example of Abraham it plainly appears,
what that perfection is, which the Lord requires of his servant in this
life. God commanded that Abraham, who was justified before by faith, should
kill his son. Abraham had nothing more dear unto him then this his son,
nothing more sweet and pleasant. For he was the only comfort of life to the
old man Abraham, and to the most holy matron Sara. What does Abraham here? He
beholds and considers two things, God commanding, and his son, then whom
nothing was more dear unto him in this life. But he prefers the
commandment of God before the life of his son. Hereupon therefore I
conclude, that the perfection of the Saints in this life is, by faith so to
obey God, What we must do if we will be counted perfect in this life.
that they prefer obedience toward God before all worldly things,
whatsoever. They which are so affected, are by good right counted perfect. But
they which at the commandment of God will not kill so much as one of their
affections, how can they boast of this perfection? Let us propound an other
example out of the new Testament. Another example where by perfection and the
parts thereof may be perceived. Matthew. 19.21.
Christ Matthew. 19. says to the young man of whom he was asked concerning the
obtaining of eternal life: If thou will be perfect, go, sell that thou have and
give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and
follow me. Christ knew that this rich young man was to much addicted to riches,
and that he could not easily turn his mind from them. That therefore this
young man may understand how far he is of from the true perfection of
obedience toward the law, the Lord bids him forsake his riches and follow
him. The Lord seems here to make two parts of perfection, to wit, to leave
and forsake riches, and to follow Christ. But we must know that as it was a
personal precept, in the which Abraham was commanded to kill his son: so is
this personal which is here given to this young man. Wherefore neither of them
particularly is to be transferred to the general definition of perfection, but
generally only, otherwise neither Noe, neither David, nor Paul had bine
perfect. Wherefore we will apply these examples to the general definition
after this manner: As Abraham, because by faith he preferred obedience toward
God before the life of his most dear and only son, is said to be perfect,
and the young man following Christ, if he had preferred poverty and liberality
toward the poor before his riches, had bine perfect according to the sentence
of Christ: Who is said to be perfect and who to be imperfect.
so every one which by a true faith prefers obedience toward God, before
all things of this world, is said in the Scripture to be perfect. And on the
contrary. They which prefer worldly things, their own affections, honor,
glory, pleasures, and diverse other deceits, before obedience toward God, are
imperfect, yea, they do but in vain glory of the name of Christians. These
things agree with those which we have before mentioned out of Paul, of which
also we gather this definition of Christian perfection:

The definition of christian perfection.
Christian perfection is, imperfection being acknowledged, to prefer obedience
toward God by faith in Christ before all worldly things, and to make good and
allowable the whole life before God. Two parts of christian perfection.
Of this christian perfection, Christ makes two parts, to wit: to follow
him, which is done by true conversion: and to prefer obedience toward him,
before those things which are even most dear unto us. And hitherto of
christian perfection concerning the substance. But we shall then be perfect in
degrees when the son of God shall appear, to whom we shall be like, because
we shall see him as he is, and every one that has his hope reposed in him,
does purify him self, even as he is pure.

5 If any of you lack wisdoms, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. Least that any man
pretend ignorance, whereby he endures not tentation, To what end wisdom
is to be asked of God.
the Apostle bids that he which has not wisdom, do ask it of God, and
that unto this end, that he may not only understand how to behave himself
in tentations, least that being pressed down with the heavy burden of them,
he do faint and be overcome: but also that he may know for what end and
purpose God suffers his to be tried with affliction, least that he be deprived
of the fruit thereof. God (says he) gives liberally, for he seeks not any
recompense, but only is liberal of his mere goodness and bounteousnesse, and
does not after the manner of men, vpbrayde any with the benefits which he has
bountifully bestowed, Wisdom that teaches to be patient in affliction
consists in two points.
so as he continue thankful. If thou demand what wisdom that is, by which
we are taught and instructed to bear tentations patiently: I answer that it
consists in knowledge and sense or feeling, The first point
knowledge is to understand by the word of God that in all tentation and
affliction both the judgment and mercy of God are to be considered. How the
judgment of God is to be considered in afflictions. Psalm. 39.11.
The judgment is, that we understand that we are tempted and oppressed with
diverse afflictions because of our sins. Thou do chasten man, says the
psalmist, rebuking him for sin. What we must know concerning the mercy of
God in affliction.
Mercy is that we may know that it is the will of God, that we should be vexed
with tentations and afflictions, that we may repent us of our sins, and not
perish with the wicked world. For the Apostle speaks thus, 1. Cor. 11. When
we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. The sense or feeling of wisdom, The second point
of wisdom in affliction.
is to feel comfort and consolation in the mind, through the holy Ghost,
who supporteth us in affliction, that we fall not, and vpholdeth us with hope
of our deliverance to come, as we see in Job, who when he was oppressed with
affliction, Job. 19.25.
did comfort himself with this trust and confidence: I am sure that my
redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter day.
Hereupon Paul writes to Timothe: Remember that Jesus Christ was raised again
from the dead. 2. Tim. 2.8.


6 But let him ask in faith, and waver not. He prescribes how wisdom is
to be asked of God, to wit, in faith without wavering. This place contains
many points of doctrine: God the fountain of wisdom and all goodness.
for first it teaches that God is the fountain of all wisdom, yea and of
all goodness. Secondly, it shows that he is liberal to communicate of the
fountain of his goodness to them that do ask. Also it declares that prayer
proceeding from faith, How al good things are to be obtained at the hands of
God.
is the ordinary mean by which we may obtain and receive good things at
the hand of God. Again, it gives to understand that in prayer is required
faith, which rests upon the goodness of the mediator. Furthermore of this
place is gathered, that all douting is far to be removed from prayer: for he
which douteth or wauereth when he prays, does only pour out words
unprofitably, and prays not effectually, whereupon this also follows, that
if we must not waver nor dout in prayer, it is but in vain to make more
mediators. A vain thing to seek after more mediatoures.
For they which seek after more mediators, do think that they are not heard
for the one and only mediator Christ. Moreover with this saying of James
disagreeth the opinion of the Papists, who go about to make faith and douting
to agree together. To these may be added that all things that pertain to the
salvation of our souls, are to be asked without any condition. Finally, the
opinion of the Stoics is here confuted, concerning the necessity of the
falling out of things: for as wisdom is here promised to him that asks it
by faith, so the wisdom whereof mention is here made, is not given to him that
does not ask it.

For he that vvauereth, is like a vvaue of the sea, tossed of the vvinde, and
carried away.

7 Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Our faith must not waver in prayer and why.
This is a reason, why in prayer he requires faith without wavering: for he
which wauereth, says he, is compared to a wave of the sea, that is, he is
unconstant. For as the wave of the sea is driven sometime into this coast,
sometime into that, according as the wind and the raging of the sea is: so a
man douting now thinks this thing, shortly after his mind being changed, he
thinks an other thing, even as he is driven on with erroneous doctrine and
blind affections. Such a man prays in vain, because he is destitute of true
faith. These things ought to admonish us of constancy, both in doctrine and
also in godly exercises. An objection.
But perhaps some man will object and say: there is douting in every man
therefore there is a firm and constant faith without wavering in no man. The
answer.
I answer that according to diverse principles both may be, both steadfast
faith and doubting. For if thou do respect the spirit in the regenerate,
Both faith and wavering are in the regenerate in diverse respects
faith is a firm consent nothing wavering: But if thou lokest unto the flesh,
doubts do oftentimes arise, which are the works of ye flesh, against which the
works of the spirit do strive. We have an example of either of these in
Abraham. To. 4.

8 A double minded man is unstable in all his vvayes. He is here said to be a
double minded man, Who is double minded.
which doubts of the doctrine or will of God, such a one because he is
unconstant in all his doings, therefore has he no stablenesse, or constancy
in his prayer. The foundation of all godly doings.
Let us therefore in this place note that the foundation of all godly actions,
yea and of that most excellent work of prayer, is constancy in the doctrine
concerning the will of God, and in faith.

9 Let the brother of lovv degree rejoice in that he is exalted:

10 Again, he that is rich, in that he is made lovv: for as the flower of the
grass, shall he vanish away.

Because both poverty by which all kind of calamity as by a particular or an
example, is signified, and also riches, by the name whereof all prosperous
succes in this life is understand, may minister matter of tentation: he does
very conveniently prevent an objection, and teaches both, The poor man's
lesson.
that is, the poor man and also the rich. He teaches the poor man not to
fasten his eyes upon the calamity of this present life, but rather to consider
that he is exalted, whereby hereafter he being made the son of God, shall be
advanced unto the glory of immortality. The rich man's lesson.
He teaches the rich man to think with himself how frail and deceitful the
riches of this world are, which as they do not make him blessed that possesses
them, so do they sone vanish away even as the flower of the herb. What? does
not Paul say, Let him that rejoices, 2. Cor. 10.17. An objection.
rejoice in the Lord? Wherefore the^ does James bid him that is poor and of
low degree, rejoice in that he is exalted, and him that is rich, in that he is
made low.

The Apostles do nothing disagree the one with the other. The answer.
For both of them do place the foundation of true rejoicing in the Lord.
Wherefore these exceptions are to be held: first what good thing soever we have,
let us acknowledge that we have received it of God, attributing nothing to our
selves. Secondly let us hold fast this foundation that we trust to be saved
through the only mercy of God. Finally let us rest in the only author of all
goodness: with these exceptions we may rejoice and that godly in every kind
of thing that is good.

11 For as when the sun rises with heat, then the grass vvithereth, and
his flower falls away, and the goodly shape of it perishes: even so shall
the rich man wither away in all his vvayes. He amplifieth the comparison
wherein he compares the glory of riches to the fading flower, The glory of
riches fitlye compared to the flower that soon fades away.
which when the heat of the Sun increases, is wythered, falls away and
perishes. As therefore it is a foolish thing to rejoice in vain riches: so
the godly man should do preposterously, if he being discouraged with the
grieuousnesse of his poverty, should be overcome of tentation.

12 Blessed is the man that endures tentation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the croune of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. Before he willed that christians do rejoice when they shall fall into
diverse tentations, now having confuted those things, that seemed to be against
his purpose, he renders a reason of his exhortation. The argument is
concluded after this sort: Blessed is the man that endures tentation, The
reason why the godly ought to rejoice in tentations.
that is which faints not under the burden of tentation: therefore the godly
ought with good cause to rejoice, when they fall into diverse tentations. The
antecedent he proves by the end of tentation being overcome after this manner:
when he that is tempted, is tried, he shall receive a crown of life, The
blessed end of the tentations of the godly.
therefore he may well be called blessed. The antecedent is grounded upon the
promises of God, which crown, says he, God has promised to them that love
him. The Papists abuse of this place, and the confutation thereof.
This place ye Papists abuse to confirm their opinion concerning merits of
works. But the very circumstance of the place confuteth them. For the Apostle
deals here with them that are converted, who being justified before by faith,
do go through diverse tentations to the haven of blessedness: Again, it is one
thing to speak of the cause of salvation, and another thing to speak of the
way, by which we must come unto salvation which is free. Neither is the crown
of life a reward due to our fight, but a free recompense of our labor. For
we do not deserve a crown by fighting, but the father gives it unto his
children of his mere goodness, who considers not so much what the children
do deserve, as what he has promised them of his fatherly love. Furthermore,
if any man object: An objection.
the crown of life is promised to them that love, therefore love is a merit or
desert of the crown: The answer.
We must answer that there is committed a fallacion of that which is not the
cause as of the cause. For the antecedent does not contain the cause of the
crown, but the quality or manner of crowning. And because there be two
principles of things, one that the things be, the other that they may be
known what they be, The very principles whereby we are justified and saved.
we must understand ye concerning God, his mere good will and pleasure, and the
redemption which his son has wrought, and faith concerning our selves are
the very principles, which do justify and save us. But if thou considerest
the knowledge of righteousness and salvation, The means whereby we are
known to be righteous and saved.
the principles thereof are rightly said to be patience under the Cross, love,
mercy toward the poor, and other virtues. For these do make that thou may
be known to be righteous, and saved. Whereupon the Lord says: Matthew. 25.35.36.
I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, I was naked and ye clothed me. By these
fruits of faith the angels of God and men shall judge the tree in the last
day, and thereby shall account the righteousness and salvation of the elect.
But here of more in the second chapter, where shall be entreated of a lively
and of a dead faith.

13 Let no man say, when he is tempted: I am tempted of God: for God can not
be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. He being about to entreat
of the causes of tentation, first takes away the error of them which thought
God to be the author of tentation, God is not the author of tentation, or of
sin.
and forbids that any man, when he is tempted (that is, when he is provoked
to do evil) say that he is tempted of the Lord. For God will not have sin,
therefore he provoke not to sin, neither is delighted with the perdition of
men. Wherefore as God himself is void of tentation: so does he tempt no man,
that is, he does not move him forwards to sin. This place does plainly make
against those that make God the author of sin.

14 But every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence, and is entised. He shows the cause and fountain of tentation,
that is, From whence tentation proceeds, and the manner how.
of provoking to do evil. This fountain or spring he makes to be every man's
own concupiscence, to the which he attributes a double effect. For the first,
it withdraws the cogitation of man from that which is good. Secondly, it
entiseth the affection of man, and ouerwhelmeth him unawares. We must therefore
strive against the first motions, least that being entised by our
concupiscence, we fall into sin.

Of tentation, and the remedy against it.
TEntation is a driving forward or persuading of a man to enterprise some
thing, that is, either to commit, What tentation is.
or to omit. Hereof there are diverse sorts, which take their differences of
their ends. Three kinds of tentation.
For there is one tentation of seducing or beguyling, there is another of
presumption, another of trial. Of these three I will speak in order, and
show the remedies against every of them. Tentation of seducing what it is.
Tentation of seducing, is that, the end whereof is seducing or beguiling. By
this man is provoked to enterprise something against the law of God, whereby he
being deceived, is miserably excluded out of the family of God, falls from
grace, and becomes guiltye of eternal death, until such time as he repent.
For faith can not abide and and remain, when man gives place to such
tentation, and knowing and willing does disobediently despise the commandment
of God. Two kinds of tentation of seducing.
This tentation of seducing is of two sorts if thou considerest the causes
thereof. For it is either outward or inward. I call that inward, Inward
tentation of seducing.
whose beginning and cause is in man himself, to wit, euel concupiscence:
which fights together with a domestical tyranne, that is original sin:
and drives a man to offend, that by this means the old man, that is,
original sin may obtain the rule in man. But concupiscence in every man is
of two sorts, one natural, an other of the flesh. Natural concupiscence is
that, Natural concupiscence what it is and how far to be approved.
by which we do naturally desire those things, which by the right judgment of
reason we judge either honest, either profitable, either pleasant. This by it
self is the work of God in man, and by no means to be condemned, as long as
it keeps it self within it own bounds, that is, whiles it desires those
things that are showed by the right judgment of reason, to wit, those things
which are in very deed honest, profitable and pleasant, by which nature is
not defiled but preserved. Concupiscence of the flesh is, when by the
corruption of the flesh we desire those things, which please the flesh and
displease God, Concupiscence of the flesh, and the description thereof.
as when we covet after any thing, which is forbidden us by the law of God.
This of Plato is worthily called a beast with many heads, of which it is spoken
prouerbially, Concupiscence is the first beginning of all euells. For it is a
most fruitful mother of pernicious children: to this Marcus the Heremite did
attribute self love. The plentiful fruits of fleshly concupiscence.
Of this do spring surfeiting and drunkenness, covetousness, thirst after
vain glory. Of this surfeiting come unlawful lusts and all kinds of
pernicious pleasures. Of covetousness comes fraud, guile, iniurye, lying,
violence, manslaughter. Of thirst after vain glory springs pride, wicked
ambition, diverse ill practices, briefly contempt of God and of our neighbor.
Thou see what a fruitful mother of all vices the concupiscence of the flesh
is, which one has called, and not unworthily, Fleshly concupiscence the root
of all mischief.
the fountain of all euel, in as much as it is not only the evident cause of
all iniquity and hatred of God, but also it calls men from that which is
good and honest. For when men do study upon heavenly things, and meditate
upon divine matters, this comes, and with entisements as with certain cords
draws them back. Wherefore James does not without good cause affirm, that
men are entised by their own concupiscence. But how shall we overcome the
concupiscence of the flesh? This beast is to be bound with singular art and
cunning, By what means concupiscence of the flesh may be overcome.
and to be mortified: but it is bound, not by man's strength, but by a divine
power, that is, by the spirit of faith, which in the man that is regenerate
does engender a certain new concupiscence, which is called the concupiscence
of the spirit. This, when it is first conceived by the spirit of faith, The
flesh in the godly fights against the spirit. Gal. 5.17.
sets it self against the concupyscence of the flesh, whereupon there
rises in all the godly a very sore conflict between the flesh and the
spirit. Hereupon is that which Paul says: The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. But from whence is that
concupyscence of the spirit? Concupiscence of the spirit from whence it
comes.
It proceeds from the virtue of the death, burial, and resurrection of the
Lord, which in time past was represented in the old sacrifices which were
first bound and then killed, but all the whole virtue is in the Cross of
Christ. Therefore to bind the concupyscence of the flesh, is to fasten it to
the cross of Christ, that in it it may be mortified, that it be not effectual
to work. Wherefore this beast is then bound, when thou do not those things
which it commands, it is wholly mortified, when the force thereof is not
felt, which comes not to pass before we have changed this life with death,
which is a passage to the true life. To the bynding and mortifying of this
beast, Means to bind and mortify fleshly concupiscence.
all the exercises of godliness must be referred, as prayer, reading
meditation, sobriety, diligence in our duty, flying of evil occasions,
thinking on the providence of God, consideration of the evil of concupyscence,
the glorious end of victory, the shame and dishonestye that accompanies them,
which submytte them selves to this beast. The outvvard tentation of seducing,
which is of three sorts according to the causes thereof, which are the world,
the deuel, the things that are about us.
Thus much briefly concerning the inward tentation of seducing or beguiling,
and of the remedy against it. The outward tentation of beguyling, is whose
beginning and cause is without a man, and this may be distinguished according
to the diuersitye of the causes. Wherefore, seeing that some time the world,
sometime the deuel, sometime the things that are about us are the causes
thereof, When and how the world tempts us.
it comes to pass that there be three differences of this outward tentation.
The world therefore tempts when it provoke to sin by it vanity and
wickedness. Many are overcome by this kind of tentation. For when they behold
the most corrupt manners of men, and see them also unpunished, many are allured
by this example. Whereupon it is said that an evil custom is the nourishing
of euel. Remedies against the tentation of the world.
Against this kind of tentation we must set the glory of the kingdom of
Christ, wherewith the vanity of the world being compared is as a smoke sone
vanishing away. Secondly let us think upon the shortness of man's life, which
although it may be filled with the vanity of the world, yet those continual
delights in the kingdom of God are by infinite degrees to be preferred before
it. Also let us consider how Christ the Lord, and many of the saints of God
despised the vanity and wickedness of the world, looking unto the price that is
set before them that run lawfully.

To what end the deuell tempts us.
The devil tempts men after diverse sorts, and that unto this end, that he
may hinder them from being gathered together into the fold of Christ, or that,
when they are gathered together, he may cast them out again, that they should
not be saved. For there is nothing more pleasant unto him than the destruction
of all men. The engines of the deuell which he uses in tempting the godly.
And for this cause he uses especially three engines to invade the fold of
Christ. For either he corrupts the doctrine, or raises up offenses, or else
gives occasions of infinite mischiefs, that I may in the mean season say
nothing of his hypocrisy, tyranny, and craftiness, which he continually
uses to assail the Church of Christ. He enters into the heart of man, and
with speed takes out the word of God from thence, Examples of such as were
led with the tentations of the deuell.
that a secure contempt of God may follow, as in Rabshakeh: or hatred and
wrath against God, as in Saul: or a furious defending of a wicked opinion, as
in the Papists. Such were the tentations of Cain, Saul, Judas, Samosatenus,
Arius, and in our time of Seruetus, and of very many other, and at this time
Satan does rage much more, than ever he did at any other. For he knows that
the end of his fury is at hand, Why Satan rages more now then heretofore.
and that the son of God will shortly come, who shall judge him with all his
members to everlasting torments. What remedy is here? the adversary is
mighty, the company of his warriors is great, we have need therefore of a
most strong defense. What I pray you is that? This is the victory, says
John, 1. John. 5.4.
that overcomes the world, even our faith. And Solomon says: Prou. 18.10.
the name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it, and is
in safegarde. How the tentations of Satan may be resisted and overcome.
For seeing there is no other way to overcome this tentation of the deuel,
then a lively faith in Christ the co^querour of Satan, yt this lively faith may
be kindled with earnest prayer, let us with exceeding care and study keep ye
purity of doctrine, whereon faith depends. Also against offenses and other
practices of Satan, let us fortify and strengthen our selves with the examples
of the Saints, and encourage our selves with the hope of our deliverance,
which shall be through Jesus Christ, whom we look for to come shortly to judge
the quick and the dead. More defenses against the assaults of Satan, Paul
numbreth up Ephesians. 6. which ought from thence to be taken.

The things that are about us, Tentation that comes of the things that are
about us.
do above measure also tempt us. Before us death, the judgment of God, hell.
Behind us our sins that are past, many things committed and omitted. On our
right hand, power, riches, honor. On our left hand perils, persecutions,
offenses, the most sorrowful state of the Church of God outwardly in this
world. Remedies prescribed.
These euels Jesus Christ only does remedy, whiles he is possessed by faith.
For if thou beholdest those things that are before us, he has overcome death
with life, he has satisfied the judgment of God, paying the ransom for our
sins, he has spoiled hell. If thou look unto those things that are
behind us, it is he only, which makes a full satisfaction for sins. If thou
set the treasures of all good things in him, the power, riches, and honor
of the world shall not easilye draw thee from Christ, neither shall thou give
over being discouraged with any evils, so as thou possessest him by a lively
faith, and desire his help against all things that do annoy or hurt thee.

The second kind of tentation which is of presumption.
Tentation of presumption is, when a man is provoked to tempt God by abusing his
long sufferance, justice, mercy, liberality, and many other benefits. This
tentation truly is dangerous, for if any man be overcome of it, he sins
more freely and boldly, because he determines with himself that God is good
and merciful, and slow to anger, Remedies against the tentation of
presumption.
as the Psalm says. This tentation these things do chiefly remedy: first,
a thinking on the shortness of life: secondly, a consideration of tragical
and lamentable examples. For many sinning securely, have been suddenly prevented
by the wrath of God, and taken from hence without repentance: thirdly, the very
unworthiness it self. For what is a more unworthy thing, than for the child
to despise the father, because he is good to him and merciful toward him. Let
every one therefore walk carefully in the sight of the Lord, and know that
it is a deuelishe fury and madness, to sin aduisedlye and of a set
purpose, or to defer repentance, because GOD is said to be long suffering,
gentle, and merciful. For he is said also to be a just Judge, which is angrye
with sins, and is determined seuerelye to punish the unrepentant.

The third kind of tentation, which is of trial.
Tentation of trial is, whereby the faith of man toward God is tried, to wit,
either when any work is committed to a man heavy and grievous to the flesh,
or any affliction comes to him from God for his trials sake, Abraham tried
with tentation.
or when any heresy against the articles of our faith is suffered to arise.
Abraham receives a commandment from God, wherein he is commanded to kill
for a burnt offering his son Isaac, his only heir, which Sara a free and
noble matron brought forth unto him. This commandment without all doubt was
heavy and grievous to the flesh: but what does Abraham here? He prefers
obedience toward God before this his most tender son, then whom nothing was
more precious unto him in this world, and prepares himself to execute the
commandment of God, Genes. 22. Job tried with tentation.
Job is oppressed with affliction in his body, and with many other miseries,
but in patience he prefers obedience toward God before his own life and all
other things whatsoever. I am sure, says he, Job. 19.25.
that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter
day. Also, Job. 2.10.
shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not receive euel? The primitive
Church was tempted with many and diverse heresies, The primitive Church tried
with tentation.
as we are at this day, but as they did, so let us set the fountain of our
savior against all the cesterns of Heretics full of deuelish stinch and
filthiness. Of this kind of tentation Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 13. The Lord your
God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart
and with all your soul. How we must behave our selves in tentation of trial.
Against this kind of tentation let us strengthen our selves with two things:
with holding fast the purity of the Gospel, and with constant obedience
toward God both in prosperity and also in adversity,

15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when
it is finished brings forth death. In the former verse the Apostle compares
concupiscence to a bayt, wherewith the fisher covers his hook, that he may
deceive and catch the fishes: here he compares the same to a woman that
brings forth children, that he may thereby signify that it is the mother and
fountain of all sins, yea and of all euel. Concupiscence is then said to
have conceived, When concupiscence conceyueth.
when it possesses the affection and will, which when it is done, forthwith it
brings forth actual sin, whereof as it were a certain issue comes death
and damnation. Here therefore is mention made of two kinds of sin, to wit,
original and actual. Original sin is signified by the name of
concupiscence, Original sin.
the proper and next effect thereof. This, although by it self and of it own
nature it is a mortal sin, yet in the regenerate it is pardoned, so that it
brings not death, except first it begin to reign through the euel desires
thereof. Whereupon Paul Romans 6. says: Let not sin reign therefore in your
mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Actual sin.
Actual sin is, when we do voluntarily submit our selves to concupiscence
to obey it, and suffer it to have the whole rule in us.

16 Err not my dear brethren. We must in no wise think that God tempts any
man to do evil.
Because that many had persuaded themselves, that men are tempted of God to do
that which is euel: he does again admonish and exhort them, that they suffer
not themselves to be entangled with this error, signifying that many absurd
things and unworthy of God do follow this opinion. But that they may more
attentiuelye and gently here the most strong reason thereof, he does as it were
prepare them, by calling them by the name of brethren, and by a signification
of his love, wherewith he embraces them. For we do more willingly hear them,
whose goodwill we perceive toward us, when as contrariwise we fear the
deceites of them, whose minds we understand to be estraunged from us.

17 Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variablenes, neither shadovv of
turning.

18 Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be
as the first fruits of his creatures.

This is a most strong reason, wherein the Apostle does confute the error of
them, which did contend that God does tempt men to do euel, yea and that he is
the author of sin. But that the parts of this reason may be the better
perceived, and the benefits of God toward us may be more manifestly
acknowledged, Six reasons follow in order, which do most firmly prove that
God does in no case tempt any to do evil.
I will make a resolution of the words, and will divide them into six parts,
in every of which I will bring in the proposition of the Apostle, that it may
be understand of what great force this reason is to confute the error of the
adversaries. First therefore he says: Every good giving and every perfect
gift, (that is, nothing at all counterfeit) is from above. The first reason.
By which saying he signifies that soliciting or moving to do evil is in no
wise from above, for how should it agree that good things and evil should
flow out of the same fountain? But if any man do except that the evil of
punishment is from above, let him again know, that the cause, that is, the
euel of offense is in man, which God being just does justly punish. Wherefore
if thou considerest the justice of God, the punishment is not to be called
evil but good.

Secondly he says: The second reason.
Coming down from the Father of lights. As Father here signifies the
author and fountain: so by the word lights is meant all good things, even as by
the word darkness calamities of every sort are to be understand. Whereof is
made this reason: God is the father of lights, that is, the author of all good
things, therefore he is not the author of darkness, that tentation to evil
should be attributed to him. Let this testification of the praise of God be
marked, which belongs only unto him, to wit, that he is the fountain and
author of all good things, which ought to admonish us of prayer wherein we
may ask those things which are good of him who is the fountain of all
goodness. We ought hereby also to be admonished of thankefulnes, that we may
show our selves thankful toward him. The third reason.
Thirdly he adds: with whom is no variableness. These words seem to be a
preventing of an objection. For least any man should say that he is the
author both of good things and of evil, he sets against that his
constancy, whereby he is immutable in his doings. Seeing therefore variablenes
has not place with God, and that he is manifestly proved to be the author of
all goodness, who can without blasphemy attribute unto him those things that
be euel? The fourth reason.
Fourthly he adds: or shadovv of turning. These words also seem to be a
preventing of an objection. We see that the turning and change of the heavenly
lights is diverse and manifold. For the sun sometime shines bright and clear,
sometime again it being as it were darkened is hidden from us. Least that any
attribute unto God any such shadow, he proves, that he is free from all
shadow of turning. Whereupon it may be gathered seeing he is always like
himself, that nothing but that which is good does proceed from him. Fifthly he
says: The fifth reason.
of his own good will begat he us with the word of truth. This he adds
for examples sake. For God when we were by our first nativity the children of
wrath and damnation, of his mere fatherly goodwill made us his children by the
word of truth, that is, by the Gospel. For he which believes the Gospel, is
made the son of God by the spirit of Christ. Seeing therefore God does
vouchsafe us so great honor, who believes that he does provoke any man to do
evil? The sixth reason.
Sixthly is added an argument of the end of our regeneration when he says:
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures, that is, that we
should be holy. Inasmuch therefore as he has begat us that we should be holy,
it is an absurd thing to think that he makes us defiled by provoking us to
do evil. When as he calls the saints the first fruits, he alludeth unto
the custom of the law, whereby the first fruits were consecrated unto God,
whereupon we are admonished continually to meditate on true holiness. The Church
and the world differ much.
Here also he puts a difference between the Church and the rest of the
world. For as the Church is holy and dedicated to God: so the rest of the world
wrapped in it filthiness is profane and wicked. Furthermore, upon this doctrine
of regeneration the Apostle makes these exhortations following: 19 Wherefore
my dear brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slovve to speak, and
slovve to wrath. By the example of Christ, Paul, Peter, yea, and of all the
Prophets and Apostles, he, by the virtue of regeneration makes a necessity
of living godly and holily, for godliness and holiness is the proper effect
of regeneration. The circumcision of the ears and lips wherein it consists.
And because God requires a certain circumcision of the ears and of the
lips, James urges the same, and will have him that is regenerate, swift to
hear and learn those things which are good and healthful, but slow to
speak. By which saying, he will have first that the tongue do not run before
the wit. Secondly, that we do fly trifling, vain, and railing speeches.
Thirdlye, that we speak only things necessary, which tend to edifying and
honesty. Herewith very well agrees the saying: Either speak that which is
better than silence, or else altogether keep silence.

20 For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. What
kind of wrath is here forbidden, is to be gathered both by the reason which is
under annexed, and also by the conclusion, yea, by the whole circumstance of
this place. The wrath of man, says he, does not accomplish the righteousness
of God, that is, it does not execute that, which God speaks and prescribes,
What kind of wrath the Apostle forbids.
nay it makes that thou do in vain hear God speaking. Wherefore wrath in
this place is taken for that wrath, which proceeds of a desire to contend,
whereby the audience is hindered. The Apostle therefore will have one to hear
another, their affections being appeased and quieted. For where tumults and
contentions have place, the righteousness of God is banished, that is, those
things are nothing accounted of, which God prescribes to us, and requires of
us.

21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of malitiousnes, and
receive with meekness the word that is graffed in you, which is able to
save your souls. This is the conclusion of the exhortation, in which he
exhorts us that we be swift to hear without wrath. This place does very
well teach what hearers the word of God requires. A description of the true
hearers of the word of God.
First, filthiness and superfluity of malitiousnesse ought to be away, that
is, the affections of the flesh and reason ought to give place to the word of
God, that they stir not up contentions, whereupon wrath arises. Secondly,
meekness ought to be present, which succedeth in ye place of wrath. Meekness
here is as much as modesty or aptnes to learn. Thirdly, the mind being thus
ordered and prepared, the word which is graffed in us is to be received, that
is, ye word is to be received by faith which is graffed and implanted in us by
the labor and travel of the Ministers. Fourthly, ye effect of the word
received is added, The effect of the word of God faithfully received.
yt by it as by a prick we should be stirred up to hear more diligently:
which, says he, is able to save your souls, and that because faith is
conceived by hearing the word of God, whereby man being justified, is enforced
to give himself to newness of life, whereupon it follows: 22 And be ye
doers of the word and not hearers only, deceyuing your own selves. What
kind of hearer the Apostle requires, he declares in these words. He will
have that we be not only hearers of the word, as the greatest part of men is,
but doers also, What it is not only to hear the word, but also to do it.
that is, such, as in whom the word being engraffed, does take root, which
comes to pass when faith is conceived by the word, and our obedience does
witness our faith. This Christ calls to keep the word, when he says:
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, Luke 11.28.
and keep it. Moreover, we must note, Two sorts of doers of the word.
that one is said to be a doer of the word, after two sorts, to wit,
according to the rule of the law, and according to the grace of the Gospel. A
doer of the word according to the law.
According to the rule of the law he is said to be a doer of the word, which
does perfectlye fulfill the law, which Paul Romans 1.2.3. shows by four most
evident reasons, that no man living is able to perform. He is said to be a
doer of the word according to grace, A doer of the word according to grace.
who by true godliness does witness his faith conceived by the word, and
does all his life long as much as may be in this corrupt nature, meditate upon
true repentance. Although he falls sometime either knowing or through
ignorance, he does by and by through true repentance return to the Lord, as
infinite examples of the Saints do witness. Why he will have men doers of the
word, The reason why we must be not only hearers, but also doers of the word.
and not hearers only, he shows when he adds: deceiving your selves, that
is, beguyling your selves through deceytfull imaginations, or through your own
subtlety, as not only hypocrites do, which put trust and confidence in
outward works without true repentance: but also many, who under the name of
Christians bear a Turkishe mind. These always have faith in their mouths,
they always glory of the benefits of the mediator although they never think
upon true repentance.

23 For if any hear the word and do it not, he is like unto a man that
beholds his natural face in a glass.

24 For when he has considered himself, he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what manner of one he was.

Why we must not be hearers only he proves by a worthy similitude.
By a very excellent similitude he renders a reason why he will not have a
hearer of the word only. The which similitude is thus much in effect: Even as
he that beholds his image or shape in a glass, does retain in his mind a
knowledge which soon passes away, and a weak memory of his form, and
therefore such a contemplation profits nothing: so a hearer of the word
only retayneth no firm and sure knowledge. For forthwith after he has heard
it, it vanishes away, and therefore such knowledge is unprofitable, and
nothing avails the hearer. The works of hypocrites fitly compared to an
image appearing in a glass
Hypocrisy is very properly and fitly compared to an image appearing in a
glass. For as in a glass although there appear a certain similitude, yet it
is false, inasmuch as those things are represented in the glass on the left
hand, which are in deed on the right, and those that are on the right hand,
are showed to be on the left, and by this means there is a counterfayting of
the truth: so in the works of hypocrites although there be a fair show
outwardly in the sight of men, yet it is false, for that those things which
are ungodly and wicked are counted holy and true. If any man demand how it
comes to pass that there is such a slender knowledge and so weak a memory
by the beholding of the glass, let him know that the manner of doing according
to the philosophers does follow the manner of being. For, because ye image or
shape in a glass does but only seem to be, and is not in deed, it comes to
pass yt it makes so weak and slender an impression in ye mind, as we see to
be done in certain dreams also.

25 But who so looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be
blessed in his deed. He declares who is to be counted a doer of the word, and
that, as I admonished before according to grace, Why the law is called perfect.
and not according to the rigor of the law. He calls the law perfect,
because it prescribes a perfect rule to live by: Wherefore he calls it a
law of liberty
he calls it of liberty, because that how much more a man is given and
addicted to it, so that he believe in Christ, so much the more he declares
himself to be free. For to serve God is to reign. He that looks in this
law, Who is not a forgetful hearer.
to the intent he may thoroughly know it and express it in his life, he, says
the Apostle, is not a forgetful hearer of the word, but a doer of it, who also
shall be blessed in his deed. For faith is known by the effects as a tree by
the fruits, 1. Cor. 1.30.
which faith only does apprehend Christ, who alcne of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that he that
rejoices should rejoice in the Lord. James therefore speaks here of the
quality of them that are justified, and of the rewards of their obedience,
and not of the causes of their justifying. Bernard says: Good works are not
the causes of reigning, but the way to the kingdom.

26 If any man among you seems religious and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. He reprehendeth
hypocrites which did boast that they did religiously observe the law, and yet
in the mean time were given to backbyting and sclaundering, An usual vice
among hypocrites.
which vice is common among all hypocrites, as the historye of the Gospel does
show in the Pharise, who gloried of his religion, and in the mean season
accused other men with his sclaunderous tongue. From whence this vice
proceeds he shows when he adds: but deceives his own heart, that is, is
a lover of him self. For he judges that he is godly and religious, but his
religion is in vain, as is proved by the reason following: 27 Pure religion
and undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the fatherles and
vviddovves in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.

He proves by certain properties of religion that hypocrites which are given
to sclaundering and euel speaking are not truly religious the concludes his
argument after this sort: Certain properties of them that are truly religious
They that are truly religious do keep them selves unspotted of the world,
and do show mercy to the afflicted. Hypocrites which will seem to be
religious, do not keep themselves unspotted of the world, neither show mercy
to the afflicted. Wherefore they are not religious, but rather vain boasters
of religion. It was not the purpose of James perfectly to define religion, but
only to set down certain properties thereof disagreeing with the vanity of
hipocrites. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which here sharply reprove and
find fault with James as a man ignorant of true religion. For it is one thing
to define a thing and an other to signify or show it by certain signs and
tokens. Which, it is an unseemly thing and a shame, for the sharp reprouers
and taunters of James not to know. But this is a full and perfect definition of
Christian religion: A full and perfect definition of christian religion.
Christian religion is a lively faith in Jesus Christ, and a confession
thereof, whereto is joined a pure study of worshipping God, and sincere charity
toward men together with a hope of immortality promised. The substantial
parts therefore of Christian religion by nature joined together, are faith,
the worship of God, charity toward our neighbor, and hope of salvation
promised by Christ.

Chap. 2. The sum of the second Chapter.
AS he does dehort those that are converted from despising and disdayning the
poor, and from accepting of persons: so he does condemn a vain boasting of
faith, which is void and destitute of it right and true fruits.

The order and parts of the second Chapter.
THere are two parts of this Chapter, the first whereof contains a dehorting
or diswading. For he does therein dehort Christians from accepting of persons.
This part consists of a proposition and a confirmation. The latter part
contains a teaching or instructing. For therein he teaches that that faith
is vain which wants works. This part also consists of a proposition and a
confirmation.

The exposition of the second Chapter with an observation of the Doctrine.
1 My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory
in respect of persons. THis is the first proposition of this Chapter
containing a certain hidden reason which is thus to be resolved and made
manifest: Brethren do not accept persons. This is the bare proposition. To
have respect of persons is not agreeable to the christian faith.
The reason of the proposition is this, for that the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ and the accepting of persons do so disagree, that they cannot stand
together. Why so? Because the glory of Christ requires, that we reverence all
those, in whom Christ dwells. So the word of glory, was not added in vain.
It is an hebrew kind of speech, whereby the Genitive cases of nounes
appellatiues are put oftentimes in the place of Epithites. An objection.
What? does not the Psalm place him among the dwellers in ye tabernanacle of
ye Lord, Psalm. 15.4.
that is, among the heirs of eternal life, which contemns a vile person,
and honors them that fear the Lord? Whether is this accepting of persons
or no? The answer.
Accepting of persons is properly, when as the true cause, by the which we
ought to pronounce of the person, being neglected, we do consider in the
persons some other thing without the cause, for which either we pronounce false
sentence against the person, or otherwise do accept and favor the person.
Wherefore this precept of the Apostle does not subvert and overthrow the order
of God established in the The fifth according to the division received among us,
for all do not divide the commandments alike, which notwithstanding is a
thing indifferent: he follows here the custom of their Churches.
fourth commandment concerning the honor of superiors. But if any man should
despise a poor man that is godly, and prefer a rich man that is wicked, he,
leaving the true cause should judge amiss, as James shows when he says: 2
For if there come into your company a man with a gold ring, and in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment,

3 And ye have respect to him that vveareth the gaye clothing, and say unto
him, sit thou here in a goodly place, and say unto the poor, stand thou
there, or sit here under my footestoole:

4 Are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?



By this example he declares what manner of accepting of persons he condemns,
What manner of accepting of persons the Apostle disalloweth.
to wit, that, which follows a false judgment for a true in judging men. For
he which does that, is not only condemned by the judgment of his own
conscience, but also his judgment is perverse and naughty, which takes
riches for a rule of difference. He does not therefore simply forbid to honor
the rich, but he speaks by the way of comparison, and condemns him which
honors wicked rich men with the contempt of godly poor men. Wherefore that
accepting of persons is here condemned, which follows a false difference for
a true, which keeps not a right manner, which erreth from the right end. If
any man therefore prefers a rich man before a poor, because he is rich, his
judgment is perverse and corrupt. Again, if thou do so prefer a rich man
before a poor, that thou handle the poor man reprochfully, there is sin in
the manner thereof. Finally, if thou prefer a rich man before a poor to win
favor thereby, thou have erred from the right end. For what thing is more
unworthy than to despise the poor man which is godly and learned, and
honorably to receive and entertayne the rich man which is ungodly and
unlearned? He which makes such a difference with himself between the poor
man and the rich, is become a judge of evil thoughts, that is, is not
rightly affected, but judges peruersly against the rule of godliness and
charity.

5 Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world
that they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he
promised to them that love him? He does in a short entrance or preface stir
up the hearers to be attentive to the argument which he afterward annexeth.
God has chosen the poor of this world, Why the poor of this world are not
to be despised.
which are rich in faith, that they should be heirs of the kingdom, which he
has promised to them that love him. Therefore the poor of this world are not
to be contemned. The order of the restoring again of mankind.
In this argument note the order of our restoring again. In the first place is
set election, which is nowhere else to be sought but in Christ. Ephesians. 1. In
the second is set faith, whereby general election is applied to the hearers of
the Gospel. For God has chosen on this condition if men be engraffed by faith
in his son without whom is no election but mere reprobation. In the third is
put inheritance, whereby is signified adoption, by which the believers receive
prerogative to be the sons of God. In the fourth is added love, for that is
the true fruit of faith, and an affection proper to the sons of God. It is
no maruayle therefore if God has promised a kingdom to them that love him.
For they by faith have obtained power to be the sons of God, yea and to be
called heirs of the heavenly kingdom. For it is manifest out of Paul that
love is not the cause of reigning when he says: Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Of Election.
THis place does admonish that I speak something concerning election. For I
see not a few to err from the true cause thereof. Paul says. 1. Cor. 1.26.
Brethren you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish things
of the world. etc. And here James says: God has chosen the poor of this
world. Hereupon some do not rightly gather, How far some are deceived in
the doctrine of election.
yt wise, mighty, noble and rich men are reprobates, and on the contrary, the
ignorant, weak, unnoble and poor are chosen. For if wisdom, power, noblenes
and riches, which all are the gifts of God, were the cause of reprobation, and
contrariwise, foolishnes weakness, vnnoblenesse and poverty were the cause of
election, it should follow that all rich men are reprobates, and all poor men
chosen, but both is false. For not a few rich and noble men are godly, chosen,
and saved, and many poor men are ungodly, reprobates, and condemned. Why
therefore does Paul say: Not many wise men, not many mighty, not many noble?
Paul does not speak of the counsel of God, who will that al men shall be
saved and come unto the acknowledging of the truth. 1. Timoth. 2. Which would
have no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance. 2. Pet. 3. But
he accuses the naughtines of men, which abuse the gifts of God to their own
destruction. The Gospel calls all, Why so few come, when as God calls
all by his word.
but some pretend one thing, some an other, whereby they do not come. Many
being entised, and as it were made drunken with wisdom, many with might,
many with noblenes, many with riches, many also with other things cannot abide
the sweet savor of the Gospel. Whereby it comes to pass that not by the
counsel of God, which has created no man to certain damnation, but by their
own fault they are not elect. For God will have all at length to be saved if
so be that they do embrace by faith the author of their salvation. They which
contemn him, do worthily fall away from salvation. For God will cast away
those and condemn them, no otherwise then an earthly father does cast of and
disherit an obstinate and disobedient son, which he would not have done if
he had obeyed his father. God will have al to be saved, but yet by such means
as he has appoi^ted, which they that refuse, are justly condemned. Matthew.
20.16.
If therefore we consider the counsel or purpose of our creation and restoring
again by Christ: God in deed will have all men to be saved, but yet by
salvation and life, that is by Christ the mediator. But if thou mark the
event or end, he will condemn all, which have not obeyed him calling by his
Gospel. This is confirmed by the saying of ye Lord in Matthew: many be called,
but few be chosen. Of this saying there are two parts, Many be called, but few
be chosen, how it is to be understand.
the first commends unto us the goodness of God, which calls many by his
Gospel that they may be saved. For we must not think that God calls them
whom he will not have saved. The latter part is a complaint of the greatest
part of men, which contemn the Gospel, and will not live worthy of so noble
a calling. Whereof Christ complayneth in Matthew, where he is reprehended which
had not a wedding garment, to the which reprehension afterward is joined this
complaynt of Christ: Matthew. 22.12.
few are chosen. This complaynt he also shows with tears. Matthew. 23. when he
says. How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen
gathers the chickens under her wings and ye would not? Behold Christ will,
Jerusalem will not. The meaning therefore of the saying of the Lord is: many
be called, to wit, to obtain salvation by Christ, so that they will believe
the Gospel. But few be chosen, that is, few have the wedding garment, that
is, few do believe and are godly in deed. That this is the signification of
the word election, it is manifest out of the psalm, where elect and perverse
or froward are set one against the other, Psalm. 18.25.
for he says thus: with the elect thou shall be elect, and with the froward
thou shall be froward. Therefore he is said to be elect which is in deed a
godly and sincere worshipper of God, keeping faith and a good conscience.
Wherefore there is no cause that any man should be troubled with thinking of
his election, as though God had appointed some certain men to salvation, and
the greatest part of men to certain damnation: but rather let him think,
Whom God will save and whom he will condemn.
that this is the immovable will of God, that as he will save without
difference all that be penitent: so on the contrary he will condemn all that
be impenitent. And these are said not to be elect, because of the event or
end. For they have shut from them selves the way of salvation. What al they
must do which mind and desire to attain salvation through Christ.
Let us therefore obey the Gospel, let us live in true repentance, let us not
suffer our selves to be carried away from Christ with the cares of this world.
But rather let us prefer obedience toward the Gospel before al things of the
world, whereby we may obtain the salvation promised through our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom God has chosen the beleuers before ye fou^dations of the world.

6 But ye have despised the poor. By this setting of one contrary against the
other, The poor in no wise to be contemned.
he shows the grieuousnesse of the sin. God does honor the poor that
believe, but you do despise the poor. Your sin therefore is grievous and
unworthy of the heirs of the kingdom of God.

Do not the rich oppress you by tyranny, and do they not dravve you before
the judgment seats?

7 Do not they blaspheme the worthy name, after which ye be named?

In these words are contained two plain arguments. It is a foolish thing for
men to honor them of whom they are oppressed and tormented, and to contemn
them that excel in true godliness. Ungodly rich men must not be honored with
contempt of godly pore men.
You do that when you do honor your rich men which are tyrannes with the
reproach and disdain of the pore. The ungodly rich men do blaspheme that
worthy name of Christ, whereby you will be named, and whereof you are called
Christians, therefore it is an unworthy thing that you should honor them
with the contempt of the poor.

8 But if ye fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, which says:
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

9 But if ye regard the persons, ye commit sin, and are rebuked of the law
as transgressors.

This is a preventing of an objection. For he preuenteth the objection of
hypocrites, by the which they might excuse themselves, that they did well in
honoring rich men, seeing that honor is included in the love which the law
does require toward our neighbor. He answers by a double condition: If you
fulfill (that is, if you endeuer by true faith and integrity of mind to
perform it without coloring or hypocrisy. For here the word of fufilling is
to be referred not to the degrees, but to the substance of obedience, or to the
parts thereof) the royal law, (that is, the law which is like the kings hie
way, that is, straight and plain, which leads the wayfaring man without
turnings to the place appointed. But that kings hie way is to love our
neighbor, and to consider this only in him, that he is our neighbor, and to
have respect to no other things in him, ye do well, that is, your defense is
just. But if ye regard the person, ye commit sin, but that you regard the
person, it is manifest by your deed. For you honor wicked rich men, and
despise godly poor men, which truly is not to go in the kings hie way to the
love of your neighbor.

10 For whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet fails in one point, he
is guilty of all.

11 For he that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also, Thou shall
not kill. Now though thou do none adultery, yet if thou killest, thou art
a transgressour of the law.

He does more forcibly urge the hypocrites, which did flatter them selves when
as in one point of the law they had done their duty well, He that fails in
one point of the law is guilty of the whole law.
whose hypocrisy he reprehendeth by this argument: he which breaks some one
point of the law, is a transgressor of the law and guilty by the judgment of
the law. For he has broken the whole law. This is declared by propounding an
example of the The sixth and seventh according to our division.
fifth and six commandment. He which of this place does contend either that
all sins are alike, or that the giltines of every transgression is equale, does
wrongfully understand and take the words of the Apostle, who in this place
does deal only with hypocrites which did judge the perfection of the law in
part, against whom the Apostle sets transgression in part. Diverse reasons
which prove that all sins are not alike, as the Stoics do falsely affirm.
But that sins be not alike or equal, as the Stoickes would have them,
first it is evident by the causes. For who does not perceive that it is more
grievous to sin of maliciousnes, than of infirmity or ignorance. Secondly,
the event proves the same. He which sins wittingly and willingly, does as
it were shake of the holy ghost, but he that falls through weakness, does
not so. Thirdly, the inequality of the punishment, wherewith God the just
judge punishes, does conclude the inequality of sins. Luke 12.47.
That servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Fourthly, every
man's own conscience does naturally understand the degrees of sins, for they
are vexed with some more, with some less. Fifthly, the law of God and all
civil laws do acknowledge degrees of sins according to which they do
moderate punishments. The arguments of the Stoickes have a fair show, but
they are grounded on a false foundation, against which let those reasons be set
which I have rehearsed.

12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty.

13 For there shall be condemnation merciless to him that shows not mercy,
and mercy rejoices against judgment.

He brings in a general exhortation to live godly and holily, by an argument
taken of the sentence of the last judgment, which is recited Matthew. 25. For
when as the Apostle says: as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty, he has relation to the sentence of the Lord, who when he judges
the world, shall say unto them on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my
father, Matthew. 25.34. The sentence of the last judgment, and the manner,
thereof.
take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of
the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. etc. Contrariwise he
shall say to them on the left hand: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire. I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat. etc. To this pertayneth that
saying: John. 5. The hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves,
shall hear his voice, John. 5.28.
and they shall come forth, that have done good unto the resurrection of life:
but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. And 2.
Cor. 5. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he
has done whether it be good or evil. That these sayings and such like are to
be understand of the quality of the^ that shall be saved, and not of the causes
of salvation, the whole consent of ye scripture, yea, the precious blood of
Christ does show, as shortly after I will more distinctly declare. Why the
Apostle calls as the law of liberty.
But why does he call it ye law of liberty? That by that name he may show yt
the fruits of liberty are by good right required of christians. For as he
which does commit sin, is the servant of sin: so he which is delivered by
Christ, will be no more bond but free, and therefore will not take upon him
the yoke of bondage. He shows a cause or reason when he says: for there
shall be condemnation merciless to him that shows not mercy, but he that
shows mercy, is so far of from being condemned, yt he shall rejoice against
condemnation, triumphing over death, sin, and the devil. These things do
teach, how necessary continual repentance and a perpetual study of
godliness and righteousness is among Christians, least by their own fault
they lose the free benefit of salvation. But because the adversaries of free
salvation do abuse this place and such like, and make the causes of salvation
of the tokens and qualities of them which shall be saved, I will briefly gather
an answer, whereby the godly reader may have, wherewith he may be able
thoroughly and truly to answer to this false cavil. Seeing therefore that the
Scripture does expressly say, Matthew. 16.27.
that the Lord shall give to every man according to his deeds. Or as Paul
speaks to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 5.10.
according to that every man has done whether it be good or evil: First of
all, this is to be held, How the sentence of the last judgment is to be
applied to the wicked, and how to the godly.
that this general sentence which is the very voice of God himself, ought to
be applied unto two sorts of men, according to the proportion of faith, that
is, to the wicked, according to the law, to the godly, according to the
Gospel after this manner: when the Lord gives unto the wicked according to
their deeds, without all doubt he gives unto them hell and condemnation. For
those are the merits of the deeds of ungodliness. But concerning ye godly or
regenerate, there are mo things to be considered. For first it is evident out
of the infallible word of God, that eternal life is not the wages of
servants, but the inheritance of children, and the free gift of God. Romans
4.5.6.8. John. 1.3.5. Secondly, the proportion between the heavenly father and
an earthly father is to be considered: for as an earthly father does give unto
his children according to their deeds, that is, inheritance to them that are
obedient, and disheriteth them that are disobedient: so God the father
promises inheritance to his children, but those which of children are made
obstinate and enemies, he suffers not to enjoy the inheritance. But now it is
manifest that the children of an earthly father are neither children nor heirs
through desert of their works. We are heirs not through works but through
grace
After the same sort the children of God are neither made children nor heirs
because of their works, but through the grace of adoption, which is received by
faith alone, notwithstanding either of them does give unto his children
according to their deeds. But yt this may yet be more plainly understand, how
God shall give to every man according to his deeds, four circumstances are to
be weighed of us, the first whereof is, that the rigor of the law is taken away
from ye godly, according to ye saying Galat. 3. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the law. The second is, that the person now believing does by faith
please God and is heir of eternal life. John. 1. The third, that God does
not only require obedience of the person that believes, but also does promise
him a reward, and that not of debt for the worthiness of the work, but of
grace for his fatherly promise sake: The fourth, that works so done by faith,
are testimonies of faith, as proper effects are most certain tokens of their
cause. And therefore it is said that God shall give unto every man according
to his deeds, Why it is said that every man shall be judged according to his
deeds.
both because deeds are the true tokens of the fear of God and of faith, and
also that the whole creature may bear witness of the justice of God in
judging. This answer is taken from the conferring of the Scripture, which we
must of necessity surely hold, lest that with the Papists we attribute
salvation to the merits of works, or with the Antinomians and Libertines we lay
aside all care and study to do well. This solution is made manifest by an
evident example. Mat. 18. where ye Lord says that ye kingdom of heaven is
likened unto a certain king, that is, that there is the same reason of the
spiritual state of the Church, which is between an earthly king and his
servants in the affairs of this present life. For even as the king, his
servant owing him ten thousand talents, yet when he fell down and besought
him, he forgave him the whole debt freely and of his mere liberality: so God
the father does freely forgive them all debtes, that is, sins, which fly
unto him for succor with trust and confidence in Christ. Hereof it is manifest
that remission of sins is free. But even as the king called again unto
punishment that servant, being unthankful and cruel toward his
fellowseruants, and that which before he forgave him when he humbly besought
him, now he requires again of him being stubborn and cruel toward his
fellows: So God, after he has received us being sorry for our sin, into
favor, will have us imitate his example in liberality and goodness toward our
neighbor. This the Lord teaches Luke. 7. propounding an example of two
detters, the one whereof ought unto the lender five hundred pence, and the
other fifty: who when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both. Here the
Lord asked the Pharisees whether of them will love the lender most, to whom when
the Pharise had made answer, he to whom he forgave most, the Lord said, thou
have truly judged: signifying that God does require thankfulness of them, whom
he has freely received into favor. Hereof are gathered two things, to wit,
both that forgiveness is free, and also that they which have obtained
forgiveness, do owe thankfulness unto God.

14 What avails it my brethren though a man says he has faith, when he
has no works, can that faith save him? Because there were among them to whom
the Apostles did write, hypocrites, which when they were touched with no true
repentance, yet they did boast that they were saved by faith, when as they had
no true and lively faith in deed: That faith which brings not forth good
works, is not true, but vain, and cannot save.
he makes a confutation of their erroneous opinion, and teaches that that
faith is vain, which does not bring forth it true fruits. This proposition is
diligently to be marked, faith which has not works is ineffectual and vain,
or as James speaks, cannot save. This only proposition is confirmed even
unto the end of the chapter. Paul and James speak diversely of faith.
Wherefore they are fowly deceived which compare James with Paul, when as
James disputes only of the vain boasting of hypocrites, Paul of a lively
faith. And therefore let us diligently mark in this place, what faith the
Apostle calls vain, to wit that, which has no obedience toward God
accompanying it, in as much as it neither worshippeth God nor does well to it
neighbor, whereupon it manifestly follows that James does not speak of a
lively and a right faith, from which the spirit of Christ ca^ not be separate.
For where the spirit of Christ is, there are new actions of the new man,
although not perfect, yet imperfect, by which the force and virtue of faith is
acknowledged and brought forth. What therefore is that vain faith? is it
altogether ineffectual? What fruits a vain and false faith brings forth.
It brings forth no good fruits, (for it is void of life) but it brings
forth the bitter fruits of hell and death. For it is a most fruitful mother
of vanity, superstition, and hypocrisy, it is a foolish boasting, it is but
an image of faith, it is a stop or let from salvation, it is a guider or
leader unto death, briefly it has it portion with hypocrites and deuels.

15 For if a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food,

16 And one of you say unto them, depart in peace, vvarme your selves, and fill
your bellies, notvvithstanding ye give them not those things, which are
needeful to the body, what helps it?

17 Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self.

He proves by a very fit similitude that faith without good works is vain.
He makes manifest the proposition by a most apt similitude. Even as that
speech is vain, wherein it is said to the needy, warm your selves and fill
your bellies, when as helping hands are not also put to: so that faith is
vain and dead which is in the mouth without the fruit of works. Note here the
name of faith, (which he calls vain) for when it is called dead, it is
compared to a carkas, wherefore it deserves no better to be called faith, the^
a carkas deserves to be called a living creature. This using of one word for
another does sufficiently show yt James does dispute of a vain opinion, which
of ye hypocrites was called faith, according therefore to the opinion yt they
had of faith, ye Apostle speaks by a license of rhetoric.

18 But some man might say, thou have the faith and I have works: show me
thy faith out of thy works, and I will shevve thee my faith by my works.
Another reason proving faith which is without good works to be vain.
An other reason that faith which is void of it fruits is vain, as if he
said: some godly man, O thou hypocrite, may repress thy vanity by obiecting
thus unto thee: thou hypocrite have faith, as thou say, (for it is a license
of scorning) I have works, thou, if thou can, show me thy faith by thy works,
which truly thou can not do, because thou have none: I will show thee my
faith by my works. Wherefore it is manifest that thy faith is like unto a dead
carkas, but that mine is lively, which appears by the fruits and lively
motion thereof. A proper similitude.
For even as the spirit which is inwardly in a living creature quick and
lusty does bewray it self by moving and feeling and by the outward actions: so
a lively faith does show it self by good works. The word faith is here used
in diverse significations. For in the first place it signifies a boasting of
faith, but in the latter place a lively faith.

19 Thou beleeuest that there is one God: thou do well: the devils also
believe it and tremble. He teaches both what the faith of hyprocrites is,
Another reason proving the faith of hypocrites to be vain and not able to save.
also how vain it is, yea and that it does not save. He affirms therefore
that there faith is only a knowledge of the hystory. For they believe that
there is a God. That this is vain, he proves by this reason: the faith of the
devils does not save. For the devils are not saved. The boasting of hypocrites
is the faith of the devils: for it has nothing in it, which the faith of the
devils has not. Therefore the boasting of the hypocrites which they falsely call
faith, does not save, and therefore is vain. Whereas the Apostle in this place
does acknowledge no other faith in hypocrites, then is in the devils, it is no
marvel, because he takes from it the power of justifying. What kind of
faith Paul speaks of.
But of what sort faith is in the disputations of Paul, it is taught Romans 4.
by a manifest example propounded, to wit, that it is not only a knowledge of
the mercy promised, but also a trust and confidence, whereby a man determines
with himself that the promise does appertain unto him, wherewith is joined as
an inseperable companion thankfulness of mind toward God, prayer, patience,
mortifying of the old man, Fruits of true faith.
stirring up of the new man, and other fruits of the righteousness of faith,
which fruits although they do not justify, yet that is the nature of a
justifying faith that it always brings forth those fruits sometime more,
sometime less, even as it has received increase.

20 But vvilt thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which is
without works is dead?

21 Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered Isaac
his son upon the alter?

22 See thou not that the faith wrought with his works? and through the
works was the faith made perfect.

23 And the Scripture was fulfilled which says: Abraham believed God and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God.

24 Ye see then how that of works a man is justified and not of faith only.

The sum of this reason is this: Such as the faith of Abraham was, That our
faith ought to have good works joined with it, it is proved by the example of
Abraham.
ought also the faith of other believers to be. (For he is therefore called the
father of the believers, because that they that believe ought to imitate and
follow his faith): but the faith of Abraham had works joined with it (which is
thereby proved, because he did so much esteem obedience toward God, that he
would rather kill his only son, then not obey God) Therefore the faith of
other also ought to have works joined with it, which if it have not, it is
worthily to be accounted vain and dead. What James means by this word
justified, which the Scholmen have wrested, as it is proved by three firm and
strong reasons. The first reason.
This is the sum of the argument. Now let us wey the words of the Apostle,
which are wrested of the Schoolmen against free justification. First the word
justified is to be discussed, which is as much, as if he had said, was declared
to be just, or was known to be justified and that this is so I prove by three
necessary arguments. The first is taken of the scope and end of this present
disputation. For James has not purposed a disputation of the causes of
justification, but only does show by what effects justification may be
gathered, and as it were set before the eyes of men. Seeing therefore it is an
exceeding great error, of effects to make causes in respect of the same thing,
they are by no means to be borne, which forgetting the scope and end of the
disputation and proposition that is to be proved, presume very high, and go
about to disprove the doctrine of Paul concerning free justification, Paul and
James are nothing contrary the one to the other, but there is difference only
in the purpose of them both.
when as the purpose of Paul was far otherwise tha^ of James. For Paul seeks
the cause of justification: James the effects of the same: Paul descends from
ye causes to ye effects: James contrariwise ascends from the effects to ye
causes. Paul seeks how we are justified: James how we are declared to be
justified. Paul excludes works as causes of justification: James includes
the same, as the effects of justification. Seeing there is so great difference
between the purpose of Paul and James, who sees not the vanity of the
Scholemen, which say that the Apostles are contrary the one to the other. The
second reason concerning the taking of this word justified
The second necessary argument is taken of the order of the causes and the
effects, Genes. 15. Abraham is pronounced to be justified. Abraham believed the
Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness. But this came to pass
thirty years at the least, before he received a commandment concerning the
offering of his son Isaac. Genes. 22. How therefore can it be that he
should be said to be justified by that work, which he did the thirty year
after yt he was by the voice of God said to be justified. It is necessary
therefore that to be justified in James do signify to be declared justified.

The third necessary argument is taken of the words of the Angel, Genes.
22. The third infallible argument concerning the taking of this word justified
After that Abraham had purposed to kill his son at the commandment of God,
and was called back from his purpose by the voice of the Angel, he hears of
the Angel: Now I know that thou fear God, Genesis 22.12.
seeing for my sake thou have not spared thine only son. What other thing, I
pray you, do these words mean, than that ye voluntary obedience of Abraham
was a testimony of the fear of God, and a certain declaration of the
justification of Abraham. And thus briefly it is declared, what the word of
justification does signify in this disputation of James. Afterward when he
says that the faith wrought with his works, he expresses the nature of a
lively faith, to wit, that it is effectual and full of good works. Seeing that
the faith of hypocrites has not this nature, it is in no case to be judged a
true and lively faith. This saying therefore of James does teach nothing else,
but that good works do proceed of faith. That which James adds: through
the works, What it means that Abraham's faith was made perfect through
works.
the faith was made perfect, is nothing else than yt the faith of Abraham was
declared by his works, not to have been counterfeit or hypocritical, but true
and sincere. For if thou do call that perfect here, which is in it degrees
absolute, no mortal man living at any time has had a perfect faith. Moreover,
when he says that the scripture was fulfilled which says: Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, that is not to be
referred unto the cause, but unto the effect. For by that deed Abraham
declared that he was in very deed justified before by faith. This fulfilling
therefore ought to be referred to the experience of men, and not to the
judgment of God.

25 Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified through works, when
she had received the messengers, and sent them out another way? Another
example that true faith is not destitute of good works.
He proves by another example yt a true and a lively faith is not without
works. Rahab by her deed or works declared her self to be justified by faith,
when with the peril of her life she sent away ye messengers of the people of
God, least they should come into the hands of them that sought them.

26 For as the body without the spirit is dead: even so the faith without
works is dead. Hypocrites faith is vain.
By a most apt similitude propounded, he proves that the faith of hypocrites is
vain, in as much as it is like a dead body or carkas, wherein is no lively
spirit, and therefore no moving or sense of a living creature is found in it.
And thus James by six firm reasons has proved that a true faith is fruitful
in good works, and that the faith of hypocrites, which is void of works, is a
vain boasting rather than faith.

A declaration of the doctrine of repentance.
WHen as Christ does define the Gospel to be preaching of repentance and
forgiveness of sins in his name: The Gospel is the preaching of repentance
and forgiveness of sins.
he sets forth two things unto bs, whereof one is the benefit which the
Gospel offers, the other, the means by which the benefit is applied unto
men. The benefit which is offered, is forgiveness of sins. The means is
repentance. For they only which repent, are made partakers of the forgiveness
of sins, wherewith is joined justification, salvation, and eternal life.
Hereof it easily appears, that nothing is more necessary for a man in this
life, than to understand wherein true repentance consists, without the which
forgiveness of sins comes unto no man. Of this wholesome and true
repentance I will speak, and will so declare the matter by the word of God,
and manifest examples, that every man may acknowledge the truth and playnnes
thereof.

The foundation therefore of the preaching of repentance without all doubt is
the mercy and grace of God, The first foundation of the preaching of
repentance. Matthew. 3.2.
according to these sayings: Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Now
the kingdom of God is the kingdom of grace, in which Christ being a King and
Priest does reygne. Ierem. 36. Return every man from his evil way, Ierem.
36.3.
that I may forgive their iniquity and their sins. Ezech. 33.11.
Again, I desire not the death of the wicked, return and come again. Also,
Ierem. 3.22.
O ye disobedient children return and I will heal your rebellions. And Christ
says: Matthew. 9.13.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.

These testimonies do sufficiently prove that mercy through Christ is the
foundation of the preaching of repentance. For without all doubt, repent, or as
the Prophets speak, return, is not the voice of the law condemning, but of
God having mercy, and offering salvation, life and deliverance from the
sentence of the law that condemns. Wherefore there is no doubt but the
preaching of repentance is a part of the preaching of the Gospel, especially
since it is manifest that the law does preach unto sinners eternal
punishment: and Christ being raised up from the dead, does affirm that
repentance and forgiveness of sins is to be preached in his name. But
because there are two things in man which do hinder him that he cannot see his
euilles, Two things there be which hinder repentance in us, whereunto the Lord
adds remedies.
and repent and amend at the voice of the Gospel, to wit, ignorance and
dullness or sluggishnesse. The Lord does give a remedy for both these evils.
A remedy against our ignorance.
He remedieth ignorance by the law. For by the preaching of the law he
brings us to the knowledge of sin, whereof the Gospel bids us repent,
Romans 3.20.
that we may be saved. By the law, as Paul says, comes the knowledge of
sin. Dullness or sluggishnesse he shakes of by diverse means: How the Lord
drives away our sluggishnesse
he sets forth threatenings of eternal death, he denounces wrath and
displeasure against them that do not amend. He chasteneth the impenitent with
corporal punishments, with diseases, and by diverse other means, he sets
tragical and lamentable examples before their eyes, as of Cain, Judas, Saul,
Achitophel, and diverse others, which examples Christ does apply unto all,
Luke. 13.3.
when he says: Except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. He
witnesses his wrath and displeasure by diverse signs in the heaven, the earth,
and in the sea, sometime by pestilence, sometime by wars he stirs us up to
obey the voice of the Gospel: he sets forth the death of his son, which
does witness of the wrath of God against sinners, except they repent, Act. 2.
Christ which calls all that he weary and laden, unto him, yt they being
converted by repentance, may be eased of their burden, does send the Lawyer,
that does not acknowledge his evil, unto the law. We have a most excellent and
lively example hereof Luke 15. A lively example.
in the prodigal son. He being first pinched with hunger, does perceive his
evil. Then a hope of a better state if he did return to his father, gave to
the young man a mind to repent, for he is encouraged by confidence in his
fathers gentleness, to seek for reconciliation. This example does teach
plainly, that the beginning of repentance is an acknowledging of the mercy of
God, which stirs us up to hope well, which do see and perceive our own
evils and perils. For as this young man through trust in his fathers clemency,
does return unto his father, after that, he being taught by hunger did
perceive his evils: so we with confidence of mercy in Christ, do return unto
God, after that by the preaching of the law we have come into the knowledge of
our selves, and by feeling the curse and wrath of God do shake of our dullness
and sluggishnesse.

Now what wholesome and true repentance is, and of what parres it consists,
we will declare by testimonies of the Scripture, and by examples. Jeremy
says: Let every man return from his evil way, and I will forgive your
iniquity and your sins. This saying conteyneth two things, a commandment
and a promise. The commandment is, that the ungodly do return from his evil
ways. The promise is of reconciliation and atonement for sin. Hereupon it
is gathered, What true repentance is
that repentance is a conversion or a turning of man unto God, in the which
conversion, he does depart from evil, he believes the promise of
reconciliation, and studieth to lead a new life according to the will of God.

Adam having fallen into sin, did hyde himself with the leaves which he
took of the tree, and did not see his evil, neither as yet did know the
promise concerning the seed: How Adam by little and little came unto true
repentance.
but when he is accused by the voice of God threatening death unto him, he
acknowledges his sin, which also did exceedingly displease him, so that
there was in him a misliking of his fact, but not true repentance. But when he
hears the promise concerning the seed of the woman, which should come, and
break the head of the serpent and abolishe sin: he returns unto the Lord
with true repentance, he is sorry for his sin, he comfort himself with
the faith of the promise, calls upon God, and takes heed least that again
he does against his conscience offend God. David an example wherein the parts
of true repentance are lively set forth.
David having fallen into adultery, being as it were lulled a sleep with a
certain drowsinesse, does live securely, but when he is reprehended of the
Prophet, he begins to lament his sin, and there were in him horrible
terrors and extreme fear which he himself describes in the Psalms: Psalm.
38.3.
There is no rest in my bones because of my sin: for he did fear everlasting
punishment. But hearing this voice of the Prophet by the commandment of God:
2. Sam. 12.13.
Thou shall not die, the Lord has put away thy sin: He turns again unto
the Lord and repents, he hates his sin, he flies unto mercy by faith,
Psalm. 51.1.
saying: Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness. He
promises obedience in time to come: verse. 15.
My mouth shall show forth thy praise. verse. 13.
Also, I shall teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee. In this example also we see what conversion is, what is the
foundation and parts thereof. Like unto this were the examples of Manasses, of
the sinful woman, of the thief, of Peter, of Paul: which examples when we
do apply them to the rule, they do most plainly set before us the lively
forms of true repentance. But because the doctrine of repentance is chief in
the Church, and because it is very profitable for men to be well instructed
concerning it: we will briefly declare by definitions the parts thereof, as
they are taught in our Churches out of the word of God and by famous and well
known examples. The parts of true repentance.
The parts thereof as is said before are contrition, faith, and new obedience.

Contrition is not a misliking of the fact, Contrition the first part of
repentance what it is.
as was in Judas, but it is the beginning of true repentance, to wit, an
extreme fear of conscience for sin, a true hatred of sin, and an avoiding
of sin not without hope of pardon, as appears in the prodigal son. For a
knowledge of mercy must of necessity go before true repentance, according to
the saying of Ambrose: No man can repent except first he hops for pardon: and
that of Augustine. The mercy of God is necessary not only when we do repent,
but also that we may repent.

Faith is a knowledge, consent, What faith is, which is the second part of
true repentance.
and desire of the promised mercy, and a sure confidence in Christ the
mediator. Although the former examples and the fourth chap. to the Romans do
confirm this definition, yet let us add more reasons concerning the
properties of faith. Christ pronounces them saved that believe, therefore it
must needs be that faith does signify a trust in the promise, seeing that no
man is saved by knowledge alone. Again, Paul does sometime call this faith a
sure trust or confidence, sometime a persuasion, whereby a man does certaynely
persuade himself, that God both will, and also is able to perform that which
he has promised. This therefore is that faith, by which alone without the
works of the law the Apostle affirms that a man is justified before God. For
such a faith only as we have described, does apprehende Christ and possess
him with all his benefits. I will therefore set forth a plain and manifest
doctrine concerning this justification which comes by faith in Christ, and
will briefly confute the errors with the which this doctrine both in time past
and also in our age, is darkened and made obscure.

The definition of justification.
Justification is a deliverance from sin of the man that does believe in
Christ, an imputation of the righteousness of Christ, and an accepting of him
being justified to life everlasting, freely for Christ's sake. In this
definition five principal points are to be considered. First faith by which
the grace which is offered, Faith.
is received, whereupon Paul says: Romans 3.28.
we are justified by faith. For faith is as it were a certain hand, wherewith
we receive Christ offered unto us, with his obedience, that it may be our
righteousness. Deliverance from sin.
The second is a clensing or deliverance from sin through the satisfaction
made by Jesus Christ, according to that saying of John: The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1. John. 1.7.
To this also belongs that saying of David: Psalm. 32.1.2.
Blessed is he, whose wickedness is forgiven, Also, Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. What deliverance is, it is to be
gathered by ye definition of sin. For as sin is a defect or reuolting from
the law and will of God, with a bond unto eternal death and condemnation: so
deliverance is the discharging or setting free of a man from the bond of death
and condemnation. But that this deliverance does come unto him that believes
in Christ, many testimonies do witness. John. 3.36. Imputation of
righteousness.
He that believes in the son, has everlasting life. The third is the
imputation of ye righteousness of Christ. For his obedience, death, passion, and
resurrection are the matter and foundation of our justification. 2. Cor. 5. He
has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made
the righteousness of God in him. This righteousness, which he says that we are
made in him, the Apostle defines Romans 5. when he says: As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many also
be made righteous. Christian righteousness therefore is the obedience of
Christ imputed to the believer. For faith is imputed to him for righteousness,
which believes in him that justifies the wicked. Of these this also
follows, How we are righteous before God.
that the quality of righteousness is in Christ, but is imputed unto us which
is proper unto him. For we are so just before God as Christ was a sinner. As he
after a sort took upon him our person, whereby he might be made guilty in our
name, and might be judged as a sinner, not for his own sins, but for the
sins of other, seeing that he himself was pure and clean from all sin, and
might suffer punishment due unto us and not unto him: So we now are just in
him, not because we do satisfy the judgment of God with our works, but
because we are accounted righteous with the righteousness of Christ, which by
faith alone we do put on, that it might be made ours. Accepting of us unto
eternal life.
The fourth is an accepting of the person unto eternal life. For Paul sets
this degree after justification. Romans 8. Whom he justified, them be also
glorified. To this belongs the saying of the Lord: He that believes in me
shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life. The fifth, freely for
Christ's sake: freely that all the merits of men may be excluded: for
Christ's sake, that the redemption of the only begotten son of God may be
acknowledged to be the merit of so great a treasure.

Although this doctrine of our Churches is grounded upon the just, sound, and
perfect word of God: Diverse errors in the doctrine of justification.
yet there be diverse and sundry errors spread abroad against it. For there be
some which place this justification of man in the works done of men: other
some will needs have it to consist of faith and works together: some go about
to establishe a certain essential righteousness. Although these things which
we have spoken, The first error of them which say that we are justified by
works, with a confutation thereof. Psalm. 143.2.
do confute the errors of these, yet we will speak somewhat severally of
them. They which affirm that man is justified by works, are more easily
confuted, seeing that the most manifest oracles of God do cry out against
this error. David cries out openly: Enter not into judgment with thy
servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. And Paul Romans
3. Therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. Gal. 3.10.
And to the Galath. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the
curse. Again: If righteousness be by the law, Gal. 2.21.
then Christ died without a cause. Their opinion therefore is manifestly false,
which affirm that a man is justified, that is, made just by works. But we
acknowledge with James, that good works are required to the declaring of this
justification, that the good tree may be known by it fruits, neither is there
any disagreeing between Paul and James. For when Paul says that a man is not
justified by works, he signifies that he is not made just and without fault
before God by works. When James says that men are justified by works, he
means that men are by works declared to be just. The second error of them
which affirm that we are justified by says and works together, and the same
confuted.
But the saying of them has somewhat a fayrer show, which affirm that the
righteousness whereby the wicked man is justified before God, does consist of
faith and works together. For they say that faith is the beginning of
righteousness, and works the perfection thereof, whose error S. Paul
confuteth by these reasons. Romans 10. I bear them record that they have the
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to stablishe their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness unto every one that believes. Here Paul makes
this to be the cause of the casting of of the Jews, for that they would join
their own righteousness with the righteousness of God which is by faith, and
of both joined together make one form of righteousness. Verse. 6.
Also Romans 11. he reasons thus: If it be of grace, it is no more of works,
or else were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace,
or else were work no more work. Paul here first sets down two contrary
propositions without any mean between them: If election and salvation be of
works, it is not of grace: If it be of grace, it is not of works, because
that debt and gift are so contrary, that neither of them may rightly be said
one of the other, or both of them of any third. Either therefore we are
justified and saved by faith alone, or by works: but the testimonies before
alleged do prove that no man is justified by works. Again, if christian
righteousness did consist of faith and works together, the reasoning of Paul
were fond and vain. Romans 4. To him that works, the wages is not counted by
favor but by debt: but to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Here Paul
makes two sorts of righteousness, which differ the one from the other. For
they have contrary causes. For the righteousness of faith, Two kinds of
righteousness.
by which he that believes is justified, is imputed and given freely, but the
righteousness of works is not free. Furthermore, if one part is to be
attributed to faith, the other part to works in the justification of man, two
absurdities should follow thereof: one that the promise should be made
uncertain which ought to be certain. Another, that the satisfaction of Christ
could not suffice, except it were stablished by our works. Wherefore we
embrace the saying of Augustine, which says: It is grace in no point, except
it be free in all points. But the occasion of the error of the Papists was a
Philosophical imagination, The error concerning justification by faith and
works together, from whence it proceeded.
which knows no righteousness except it be a certain quality in us. For it
understands not that a man may be justified by the imputation of the
righteousness of another.

Now let us come to essential righteousness, concerning which first it is to
be understand, The third error in the doctrine of justification confuted.
yt we are in no wise righteous before God by ye essential righteousness of God,
but in respect of the principal efficient cause. For the formal
righteousness, by which we are righteous before God, is no other than the
obedience of Christ, as Paul plainly teaches Romans 5. By the obedience of one,
many shall be made righteous. The obedience of Christ is double.
But the obedience of Christ is of two sorts, of the cross, and of the law.
By the obedience of the cross ( whereby he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Philip. 3.) the Lord
does make a full satisfaction for our sin. The obedience of the law he
imputes unto us that believe, that by it we may appear righteous in the
sight of God. Paul says that this righteousness or obedience of Christ is
imputed to them that believe, therefore it is neither substance nor quality
abiding in them, whereby a man is made righteous formally. Wherefore this
affirmance is surely to be held, Christian righteousness.
that christian righteousness is the obedience of the son of God imputed to
him that believes. But in the mean season we must also understand this, that
the Scripture makes mention of three kinds of righteousness of man, Three
kinds of righteousness of man.
whereof one is of faith, by which we stand before God, and this is perfect,
as the obedience of Christ is perfect, Perfect righteousness in this life.
neither is it diminished or increased by the diminishing or increasing of
faith. For the Publicane had this full and perfect as well as Peter, although
the faith of Peter was much more manifest and known. Imperfect righteousness.
Another is the beginning of obedience, which is also called the righteousness
of a good conscience. This is not set against the wrath of God, because it is
not perfect obedience of the law, yet it is necessary, in as much as it is the
proper fruit of faith. An other there is, Righteousness perfect and absolute in
the life to come.
which is as yet looked for, whereof Paul speaks Galat. 5. For we through
the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through faith. And 1. John. 3.
Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what
we shall be: and we know that when we shall appear, we shall be like him: for
we shall see him as he is: and every man that has this hope in him, purges
himself even as he is pure. This righteousness therefore is a making of us
like unto God, a dwelling of God in us, a full fruition of God, an absolute and
perfect love. And although we must confess, that the hearts of them that
believe are the temples of the holy ghost, and Christ says John. 14. If any
man love me, he will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and will dwell with him: yet it does not follow that this
dwelling of God in us is the righteousness whereby we stand before God, but
it is a divine presence in us, by which we are renewed, do feel comfort, and
begin to approach to eternal life. Furthermore, if men were justified here by
essential righteousness, there should be no difference between the
righteousness by which we are righteous in this life, and that by which we
shall be like unto God in all eternity. But Paul puts a manifest
difference between these two. For he says that we have the righteousness of
faith, now here in this life, but that we do look for another
righteousness, which John defines to be a framing or fashioning, whereby we
shall be fashioned like unto God, which fashioning shall proceed from hence,
in that we shall see him as he is. New obedience does necessarily accompanye
says.
New obedience is necessarily joined with faith. For regeneration, which
cannot be absent from a justifying faith, does necessarily bring forth it
fruits which are seen in new obedience. For after that a man through the
grace of regeneration is made a new tree, he ought to bring forth new, that
is, good fruits, which Paul in his Epistle to the Philip. calls the fruits
of ye righteousness of faith. James pronounces in his own peculiar and proper
phrase that men are justified by the same, that is, acknowledged and declared
just. This new obedience is sometime called sanctification, which consists
of the mortifying of the flesh, and of the quickening of the spirit. For Paul
says thus: Christ is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and sanctification, How Christ is made our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification. etc.
and redemption. He is made our wisdom in the preaching of the Gospel. He is
made our righteousness by the atonement for sin, and imputation of
righteousness. He is made our sanctification, when he gives us the holy
ghost, which does after a sort turn our nature, and make it, that the old man
being by little and little mortified, we may live after the spirit, that is,
we may give our minds to godliness toward God, charity toward our
neighbor, to holiness of life, and diligence in our vocation, briefly, that
we may submit our selves wholly to the rule of the spirit. In what man soever
the force and virtue of this regeneration, or of this sanctification is not
felt, there of necessity faith cannot be. For a true and a right faith is
fervent in spirit, and endeavors to bring forth it true fruits, and
desires nothing more than to serve God in spirit, and to abound in all
knowledge and understanding. Seeing that this is in very deed the property of
a justifying faith and of regeneration: who can bear or abide the saying of
them, which with all their might in words and writings do impugn the
necessity of good works? which truly we say are necessary, How good works
are necessary to salvation.
not as merits and causes of salvation. For ye saying of Paul is firm and
immovable. Ephe. 2. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast
himself: but as necessarilye accompanying a justifying faith, and as the
effects of the spirit which does regenerate us. Furthermore, that the reason
and manner of good works may be the better understand, I will declare in order
six questions concerning good works. Six questions to be handled concerning
good works.
The questions are these. The first, what works are to be taught, and to be
done. The second, how they may be done. The third, how they do please.
The fourth, what are the causes of good works. The fifth, why promises are added
to good works. The sixth, because all men have sin, it is not without cause
demanded, whose obedience does please, and whose does not please. The first
question what good works are to be taught and done.
When it is enquired what works are to be taught and done, two things are to
be weyed of us, who we be, and whom he is unto whom obedience is to be given
by works. When we behold our selves considering our own corruption, we are
admonished that we our selves do not imagine works by which we think to
worship God. For by our selves we do not understand, what either pleases or
displeases God, and the Lord pronounces that he is worshipped in vain with
the commandments of men: Let us therefore certainly think that works, albeit
fair and goodly, which have been invented of men, are in no wise good.

But if we consider God, we are admonished of reverence toward him, whereby it
comes to pass that we think that that only pleases him, which he
prescribes in his word. For he only is our law giver. Such works are to be
taught and done, as God has commended to us in his word.
Ezechiel comprehends both in chap. 20. walk ye not in the ordinances of
your fathers, neither observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their
Idols, I am the Lord your God: walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments
and do them. Also, 33. I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me.
Hereof therefore it manifestly follows that no other works are to be taught
and done but those which are commended unto us by the word of God.

After that the mind of the godly man knows, The second question.
what works are to be done forth with, How those works which God has
prescribed, may be done. Heb. 11.6. John. 15.5.
it inquireth how they may be done. The dissoluing of this question is to be
taken out of two sayings of the Scripture. The Apostle says to the Hebr.
without faith it is vnposible to please God. And Christ says: without me can
ye do nothing. Wherefore these things are required in order. First, the
knowledge of Christ. Secondly trust and confidence in Christ. Thirdly
vivification, whereby Christ does quicken us by the Gospel, and pours his
holy spirit upon us. Hereunto makes ye saying of Esaias, chap. 40. But they
that wayt upon the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall lift up the
wings as the Egles: they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk
and not faint. For there can be no love, no obedience, except mercy and
reconcilation for the mediators sake be first apprehended. In this consolation
the divinity does dwell in the heart. For the eternal father is effectual in
deed by his son which comfort by the voice of the Gospel, and the holy
Ghost is given of the father and the Son which stirs up in us joy and
calling upon God, according to these sayings: Zach. 12.10.
I will pour upon them the spirit of grace and compassion, John. 14.23.
etc. And in John: We will come unto him and dwell with him. 2. Cor. 3. We
beholding the glory of the Lord with open face, are changed into the same
image, that is, we beholding the word which is the image of the eternal
father, and in consolation does show the presence and goodness of God, are made
like unto his image, the holy Ghost inflaming our hearts.

The third question how good works which are done of us do please God.
After that the mind is taught how good works may be done, it inquireth
furthermore how they please, for they are done in vain, except they please.
Scipio fights for his country, David also fights, but the works of both
of them do not please God. It is fitly therefore demanded, how good works
may please. To the which question we answer in general, that they please in
the regenerate. The works of Scipio did not please because he was not
regenerate. But the warfare of David did please because David was accepted by
faith. But here are three things to be considered in order. First we must
certainly think concerning the person, that he is reconciled by faith and just
for Christ's sake freely. Then we must confess that the person justified by
faith, cannot as yet satisfy the law. For many inward sins do abide and
stick even in the Godly. This uncleanness is to be lamented and doubts and
evil affections are to be resisted and striuen against, and also we ought to
pray with true sighs of the heart, that God will not impute unto us this
filthiness wherein we are wrapped. Thirdly, although we acknowledge this our
filthiness, notwithstanding we must certainly think that God does require a
certain imperfect obedience in us, and that this imperfect obedience does
please for Christ's sake. For so Peter does plainly teach: Offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, which is our reconciliation and
now makes intercession for us. How our obedience pleases God.
Our obedience therefore does not please God for the worthiness or perfection
thereof. For by it self it is unworthy to come into the sight of God, neither
does it fulfill the law, as it is said, but it pleases because of the person
reconciled, which for Christ's sake is counted righteous: so also does he
please, although he carry about in the flesh sin and great infirmity. Seeing
it is evident that a man is in no wise justified by works: Three special
causes which ought to move us to do good works.
it may fitly also may be demanded, what are the causes of good works by
which men ought to be stirred up and pricked forward to work well. There are
numbered three most weyghty causes, necessity, dignity, and reward.

Necessity may be made to be of five sorts: Five kinds of necessity which
ought much to stir us up unto the doing of good works.
of ye co^ma^ndeme^t, of worship, of det, of holding fast ye faith, of avoiding
punishment, and of conversion or regeueratio^. Necessity of the commandment
is, because God does seriously and severely command obedience toward his law.
Keep mine ordinances says he, and walk therein, and Paul says: Leuit. 18.4.
This is the will of God even your sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Necessity of debt or duty that we owe is declared Romans 8. We are detters not
to the flesh but to the spirit, for we are not our own, but his that has
redeemed us with his blood. Necessity of holding fast the faith is commanded
to us of Paul. 1. Timo. 5.8.
If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse than an infidel. ^. Timo. 1.18.29.
And again: Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience, neither of
which is kept while we give our selves to sin. Necessity of avoiding
punishment is confirmed by the testimony of David. For iniquity, says he,
thou do chastise the children of men. Necessity of conversion is affirmed
in this saying: Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. When therefore conversion is made, man
is also quickened by faith through the holy Ghost. Moreover, unto conversion is
joined regeneration, which is a beginning of a new life, a new light,
wisdom, righteousness, and a renewing of the image of God in us.

The second special cause which ought so move us to work well.
The second cause is dignity, which consists in this, that the man converted
or regenerate, is now the son of God, according to that saying: He gave
power to be the sons of God to them that believe in his name. John. 1.12.
How great a dignity is it, that they which believe, are the temple of the
holy ghost living? that Christ dwells in them by faith? that the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, do come unto them, and will dwell with them? that
they are the members of Christ. On the contrary, wey what a wickedness it is
for the children of God to resemble the image of the enemy: how great a
danger it is, that the temple of God should be polluted with the filthiness
of Satan, what a cruel thing it is to drive God out of his dwelling place.
Wherefore it becomes the children of God to imitate their heavenly father,
which says: ^. Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Hereupon Paul says that we are called to
sanctification, The third special cause which ought to stir us up to good
works.
and not to uncleanness.

The third cause is a reward, that is, a recompense of the patience and
obedience of them that believe. This reward is not given for the worthiness
of the work, but for the promise of grace. Seeing that the good works that are
done of the godly, are the bounden duties of servants, Five causes wherefore
God has added promises to good works.
and imperfect and defiled: it may be demanded why God has added promises to
good works. And there may be numbered five causes hereof. The first, that they
may be testimonies of the providence of God. The first.
For God will have it known that good things pertaining to the body, are
created of him, and are not spread abroad by chance, but are of him given to
the Church, and preserved according to the saying: He is thy life and the
length of thy days, in the days of hunger they shall be satisfied, the rich
have suffered hunger, but no good thing shall be wanting to him that fears the
Lord. The second, The second.
that they may be testimonies, that God will, yea even in this life keep and
preserve his Church. Wherefore Paul says 1. Tim. 4. Godliness has the
promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Because God will of
his infinite goodness gather his Church for his sons sake the mediator, he
keeps this order of nature, he makes the earth fruitful, that he may feed
and nourishe his Church even in this life, and because for his Churches sake he
does feed also the rest, it becomes us especially to be thankful. The
third, The third.
because God will have corporal necessity to be a monishment and warning
concerning faith, prayer, hope, giving of thanks: therefore has he set forth
his promises, and will have these good things to be asked and looked for by
faith, and by this asking and looking for he will have faith, hope and patience
to increase. The fourth, The fourth.
that they may be warnings of the promise of grace, because that faith which
acknowledges the son, and receives reconciliation, ought always to go
before in the asking of corporal things, and for the sons sake the other
promises were set forth and ratified. All these things are comprehended in the
saying: Ioh. 15.16.
Whatsoever he shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. The fifth,
The fifth.
because God will have both these things to be known, both that the Church is
subject to the cross, and yet nowithstanding that it is marvelously preserved
in this life, even among perils and dangers, that all the maruaylous
preseruations of the Church, and all the wonderful deliverances of the same,
may be testimonies of the presence of God in his Church, as it is said Number.
14. That the Egyptians may know, that thou, O Lord art among this people.
Iosu. 3. Ye shall know that the Lord God is in the midst of you. 1. Kings.
17. That all the earth may know, that there is a God in Israel. Esaias. 37. Now
O Lord our God, save thou us out of the hand of Zenacherib, that all the
kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou only art the Lord. Seeing that al
men have sin, it is rightly demanded, whose obedience does please, and whose
does not please. To this question I do answer thus: Two general sorts of
sins
Sins are of two sorts: some are committed of them which know and are willing
against their conscience, such sins are not in them that believe. For if he
that believes, does fall against his conscience, What follows sin against
the conscience.
he does as it were shake of the holy ghost, renounce the faith, and is made
guilty of the wrath of God, and except he repents, he falls headlong into
eternal punishment. Moreover they, which being deceived by the delusions of the
devil, do revolt from the foundation, that is, do renounce and forsake any
article of the faith, whether they understand it, or understand it not, do
cease to be holy, do shake of the holy ghost, and become guilty of eternal
wrath and displeasure, as Cherinthus, Ebion, Arius, Fotinus, The sins of the
godly.
and such like heretics. Other some sins are not committed against the
conscience, as blindness, and ignorance, doubting, many omittings of our
duty, and vicious affections, against which euilles the godly do strive, and
do believe that they are put away for the mediators sake. Although this
uncleanness is in the godly, yet they do please God for the mediators sake,
receiving by faith forgiveness of their sins, according to that saying:
Blessed are they whose sins are covered. Psalm. 32.^.
And Paul says: If ye mortifye the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, Romans
8.13.
ye shall live. These things I thought good to speak more at large concerning
true and wholesome repentance, and the parts thereof, that the manner of true
repentance or turning unto God, may be plainly understand of every one, and
the order of the parts of repentance may be considered, that that which is
proper to every of them may be given unto it, that we do not confound the
properties of the parts, that we may understand that justification and
salvation is free, that we may not deprive faith of it properties. Briefly,
that we being justified by faith freely for Christ's sake, may give to God his
glory and worship, and exercise our selves in all kinds of good works whiles
that we shall be strangers in this life, which a full and perfect redemption
through Christ our only savior shall follow, to whom be praise for ever. Amen.

Chap. 3. The sum of the third Chapter.
AS he persuades that none do rashly usurp unto him self authority of
maistership and government, but rather that he bridle his own tongue: so he
requires that wisdom be showed by modest conversation, rather than by
contention and envy, whereof many mischiefs do come.

The order and parts of the third Chapter.
THere are two parts of this Chapter: the first concerning maistership not to
be rashly usurped over other, but rather that the tongue is to be bridled. The
second of the use of wisdom and gifts without envy and contention. Either
part has it reasons by which it is proved.

The exposition of the third Chapter with an observation of the Doctrine.
1 My brethren be not many masters. THe meaning of this proposition considered
by it self is doubtful, but if it be restrained, as it needs must be, to the
reasons by which the proposition is confirmed, the meaning is easy. Seeing
therefore that all the reasons which are afterward added, do contain the
discommodities of an intemperate tongue, we must of necessity here take
masters for them, which take unto them selves authority to refourme and
censure others, and do seuerly and rigorously call other men's deeds unto
examination, and in the mean season do not see there own faults. What the
Apostle condemns in the former words.
He does not therefore condemn here brotherly admonition, which proceeds of
faith and love, which has the commandment of Christ, and is the foundation of
Ecclesiastical discipline: but he condemns the lightness, ambition and pride
of them, which do not so much regard edifying, as they do give them selves
to sclaunder and backbite. Christ says: Matthew. 23. Be not ye called Rabbi: for
one is your master, to wit, Christ, and all ye are brethren And call no man
your father upon the earth, for there is but one your father which is in
heaven. etc. If any contend upon these words, that it is not lawful for any
godly man to take upon him the title of master or teacher: The names masters
and teachers are not taken away by the words of James.
I object against him the forbydding of the name of a father. For here we are
no less prohibited to be called fathers then masters. Wherefore as it is not
simply forbidden to be called fathers, but in this or that respect: so neither
are we simply forbidden to be called masters or teachers. This meaning
therefore is to be considered. Christ does not esteem by what name or title thou
art called, so as thou abidest under his government, and maintaynest brotherly
concord without ambition and contempt of others. Paul calls himself the
master and teacher of the Gentiles, yet he has not broken this commandment
of Christ, but rather obeyed it. For his maistership did tend unto this end,
that he might bring all under the government and rule of Christ. They therefore
which either upon the words of James or the prohibition of the Lord do
condemn scholasticall promotions, do mistake and falsely apply the Scripture,
and appayre and diminish the profitable government of a common wealth
concerning learning. Let ambition be far from us, let us submit our selves
to the maistership and government of Christ, and let us reverently retain and
keep scholasticall order.

Knovving that we shall receive the greater condemnation. The first reason is
taken of punishment: they which are ready to condemn others, who
notwithstanding them selves, are in the same faults or greater, do provoke the
wrath of God against themselves. For seeing that love does cover a multitude of
sins, and they are desirous to discover the sins of others, they do
sufficiently declare, that they are void of love.

2 For in many things we sin all. The second reason taken of our common
imbecillitie and weakness. For our common infirmity and readiness to sin ought
to admonish us that we be not over rigorous against others. The greatest causes
which move men to sin so often as they do.
The chief causes of our falling into sin are these, 1. Sin dwelling or
abiding in us. 2. The manifold crafts and assaults of the devil. 3. The
examples of the greatest part of the world, and those exceeding evil. 4.
Negligence of governors of manners and discipline, as in parents, ministers of
the Gospel and civil rulers.

If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the
body. The third reason taken of the profit of a bridled tongue. He that can
temper his tongue is a perfect man, that is upright or entire, and endued with
many other virtues. Therefore he that does use his tongue unruly and
dishonestly is no whit upright or entire: for he is polluted with many vices.
Wherefore we must not rashly take unto us authority to judge and refourme the
manners of others.

3 Behold we put bittes into the horses mouths, that they should obey us, and
we turn about all their body.

4 Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of
fierce vvindes, yet are they turned about with a very small rudder,
vvhithersoeuer the governor lists.

5 Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts of great things.

The tongue is compared to the bit of a bridle, and to the rudder of a ship.
The fourth reason likewise is taken of the profit and commodity of a well
ordered tongue. For as a bitte put into the horses mouth, does turn about all
the body of the horse, and as the rudder of a ship does guide the whole ship:
so a well ordered tongue boasts of great things, that is, it brings to
pass great matters, and does as it were direct the whole man into the way of
perfection: when as contrariwise a disordered and an unruly tongue is like to a
bitte that is lewse, and a rudder that is set at liberty.

Behold how great a thing a little fire kindles.

6 And the tongue is a fire, yea a world of wickedness: so is the tongue set
among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell.

The fifth reason taken of the discommodities of an unbridled and an unruly
tongue. The discommodities which arise of an unruly and an intemperate tongue.
As, says he, a little fire does with burning consume the whole wood: so the
little tongue is as it were the kindling of many vices, which although it be but
small, yet it is a world of iniquity that is, a gathering together or an heap
of all wickedness, as therefore in a little fire there is power to kindle the
whole wood: so in the small tongue, there is power to defile the whole body of
man, and to set on fire the course of nature, when as it self is first set on
fire of hell. But what is the course of nature, and what is it for the tongue
to be set on fire of hell? As the course of nature is the world it self: so
the tongue to be set on fire of hell is as much, as to be breathed upon of Satan
himself, whereby it is made a sit instrument to stir up all mischief in the
world. Hereunto may be referred that saying of Menander: the tongue is the
cause of many evils. How true this is the tongue of Mahomet and other
heretics does witness.

7 For the whole nature of beasts and of birds, and of creeping things, and
things of the sea is tamed and has been tamed of the nature of man:

8 But the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil

The sixth reason taken from a comparison: beasts birds, and fishes of the sea
may be tamed, A hard thing to rule the tongue, and therefore it must be bridled
in time.
but the tongue that is unbridled and accustomed to speak ill, can by no
means be tamed. It is therefore an exceeding great evil. Wherefore we must
most diligently take heed, that we do not give it to much liberty.

Full of deadly poison.

9 Therevvith bless we God even the father, and therevvith curse we men,
which are made after the similitude of God.

10 Out of one mouth proceeds blessing and cursing.

The seventh reason taken of the wonderful inconstancy of the venomous
tongue. For it fayneth ye it blesses God, and by and by it curses him in his
image, then which wickedness what can be greater?

My brethren, these things ought not so to be. The eight reason taken of an
inconvenience: this disorder of the tongue and reproachful speaking does not
become Christians, wherefore it is especially to be avoided.

11 Does a fountain send forth at one place svveete water and bitter?

12 Can the fig tree, my brethren, bring forth olives, either a vine figs? so
can no fountain make both salt water and svveete.

The ninth reason taken of that which is impossible. As it is impossible that a
fountain should be able to send forth at one place sweet water and bitter.
Impossible it is for a tongue accustomed to speak ill, to utter that which is
good and undefiled.
For that can no more be, than that a fig tree should be able to bring forth
olyues, or a vine figs: so it can not be, that that tongue which is given to
evil speaking and sclandering, should be able to bring forth any good thing not
defiled with the venim of the tongue and the heart. Wherefore seeing that it is so,
let every one apply his tongue only to speak well, which will be counted godly
and among the children of God. Wherefore let no man rashly usurp unto himself
authority to control and find fault with others.

13 Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him shevve
by good conversation his works, in meekness of wisdoms. Hitherto he has
beaten down the statelynesse of proud controllers of other, and has with
firm reasons bridled the unruliness and sauciness of the tongue. Now because
this evil did proceed of an opinion of wisdom, he commends the true
moderation of wisdom, and teaches the use thereof in our life and
conversation. The proposition is this: True wisdom will show it self by
honest conversation.
He that is endued with true wisdom and knowledge, let him show it by the
works of an honest and meek conversation, as by the true and continual
fruits thereof.

14 But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, rejoice not,
neither be liars against the truth. The first reason of the proposition taken
of disagreeing or contrary effects. A man cannot be full of envy and strife,
and also wise.
He which is full of bitter envying and conte^tion, does boast in vain that he
is a wise man. For these wicked affections are contrary to the nature of true
wisdom, which loves honesty and meekness. To be a liar against the truth
in this place, is falsely to usurp unto himself the name of wisdom.

15 This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
deuilish. The second reason of contrary causes. Contention and true wisdom
can not stand together.
Wisdom wherewith bitterness of mind, and desire of contention are joined,
is earthly, sensual, and deuelishe: Therefore it is not true wisdom. For
true wisdom is heavenly, spiritual, and divine. James in this place does not
condemn natural wisdom, which is the good gift of God by it self, whereof
he makes here no mention, but he condemns the wicked affections of men, and
the vain boasting of divine wisdom.

16 For where ennying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works. The third reason of the discommoditie of envy and contention, which
follow a vain opinion of wisdom. Envy and strife open the gate to sedition
and wickedness.
Experience does sufficiently prove, that when men are full of bitter envy,
and desirous of contention, the gate is open to them unto sedition and all
wickedness, whereof Germany being afflicted at this day, has to much experience.

17 But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
judging, and without hypocrisy. The fourth reason taken of things annexed or
joined unto true and heavenly wisdom. An excellent comparing together of
earthly and heavenly wisdom, wherein is showed how the one differs from the
other.
Which things we will declare by setting one contrary against the other.
Earthly wisdom is corrupted with affections: heavenly wisdom is pure,
undefiled, and not polluted with affections. Earthly wisdom is desirous of
contention: heavenly wisdom is peaceable, that is, diligent to make peace and
quietness among men. Earthly wisdom is rigorous and cruel: heavenly
wisdom is gentle, and gives place to rigor. Earthly wisdom will yield to
no man: heavenly wisdom is tractable, and does easily obey him that
commands those things that be good and right. Earthly wisdom is
unmerciful: heavenly wisdom is merciful, and full of good fruits. Earthly
wisdom does accept persons omitting the cause: heavenly wisdom does in no
case regard the persons, but the causes. Earthly wisdom has hypocrisy
joined with it: heavenly wisdom is void of all hypocrisy.

18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.
The fifth reason taken of the fruit, which comes unto them that use wisdom
and other gifts of God peaceably unto edifying, The use of wisdom and all
other good gifts received of God.
also he teaches a general rule concerning the use, not only of wisdom, but
also of other gifts. For he will have us use both wisdom and other gifts as
the fruits of righteousness peaceably unto edifying, which if we shall do,
we shall at the length joyfully reap the fruits of our righteousness.

Chap 4. The sum of the fourth Chapter.
AS the Apostle exhorts them, that unlawful lusts from whence contentions
do come, and humane desires being excluded, they do cleave unto God, and live
rather in mourning the^ in the vain joy of the world: so he does earnestly
admonish them, that laying aside backbiting and speaking evil one of another,
they presume to do nothing rashly.

The order and parts of the fourth Chapter.
ALthough the scope and drift of this Chapter is one, that the faithful do
not any thing couetously, deceitfully and rashly, following their own lusts
and desires, yet I make four parts hereof, The fourth Chapter consists of
four Parts.
that the first may be a sharp dehortation from the desire of private things
through lusts and concupiscence, from whence many mischiefs do spring,
whereunto is added a confirmation. In the second is set forth counsel or
remedy against the fire of lusts. The third is a dissuasion from the desire
of backbiting and condemning other. The fourth is a correction of rash
presumption in the purposing and doing of things.

The exposition of the fourth Chapter with an observation of the Doctrine.
1 From whence are vvarres and contentions among you? are they not hence, even
of your pleasures that fight in your members? HE shows that the lusts of the
mind are the fountain of all contention and mischief among men, How men are
led to sin through the lusts of their own minds.
by the which men are carried to desire those things which they judge
acceptable and pleasant unto them selves. When he says that pleasures do
fight in the members, he has relation to the kingdom of original sin,
which is said of the Apostle Paul then to reign, when we do obey it through
the lusts thereof, which are as it were certain soldiers of it. These he
says, do fight in the members, because the members of the body are
instruments by the which sin that dwells in us, does finish it work, and
which also men do use to commit wickedness. The sum of the whole matter is
this: The fountain of concupiscence is original sin, passive concupiscence
which is unwilling is stirred up and provoked of original sin, and that by
the ministry either of the sense or of the complexion, or of the memory. The
will is moved to consent, whereof arises active concupiscence which is
willing. To this now bearing rule the members of the body are obedient, and
do prepare them selves to do the work, which when it is done, original
sin is said to reign and concupiscence to fight, obeying the tyranne sin,
and using the members of the body as instruments in their fight. But that this
be not done Paul forbids when he says. Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof.

2 Ye lust and have not, ye envy and desire immoderatly, and cannot obtain:
ye fight and war and get nothing, because ye ask not.

3 Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might lay the same
out on your pleasures.

He lively describes the wicked motions and travail of them, The inordinate
carfulness of covetous men described.
which endeavor gredily to increase their substance, that they may provide for
their pleasures. They lust after those things that are other men's, they envy
them which have, they desire immoderately, that is, they do marueilously
covet, and are vehemently carried, they do earnestly follow contentions, that
by right and wrong they may obtain those things which they desire. Sometime
also they call upon God by prayer, but in vain, because they ask amiss, even
those things which would turn to their own destruction if they should
receive them. We see how aptly he does here describe the carfulness of
covetous men in doing their business.

4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the amity of the world
is the enimitie of God? Who soever therefore will be a friend of the world,
makes himself the enemy of God. The first reason of the proposition whereby
he confuteth the perverse opinion of them, We can not serve two masters, we
can not please both God and the world.
which would both be godly, and also follow the pleasures of this world: but
he shows that it is impossible for that to be. For one thing pleases God,
another thing pleases the world, and God and the world do command things
clean contrary. Seeing therefore that every one must be either a friend of
the world and an enemy of God, or a friend of God, and an enemy of the
world, it is meet that every one, which desires to be a Christian, do
renounce the friendship of the world, that is, the wicked lusts thereof, and
cleave unto God, and obey him. This place agrees with that saying of Christ:
No man can serve two masters. Math. 6.24.
Hereof it is manifest, that many at this day do boast of the name of
Christians, which in deed are profane enemies of God, and abominable before
God. Tit. 1. They profess that they know God, but by works they deny him,
and are abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.
Spiritual adultery.
Finally he calls here adulterers and adulteresses forsakers of God, in as
much as they leaving God, to whom they ought to cleave as unto a husband, do
join themselves unto other lovers.

5 Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain: The spirit that dwells
in us lusts after envy? He proves that friendship cannot stand between
the world and God, and that by the testimony of the Scripture, which
testimony, although in these words it is not found in the Bibles, yet as
much as appertains to the sense thereof, it comes very often. For it
agrees with that saying, Genes.6. God saw that all the imaginations of the
thoughts of man's heart were only evil continuallye. And with that Genes. 8.
The heart and thoughts of the unregenerate are evil continually.
The imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. By these
testimonies is signified, that men which are not regenerate, are carried hedlong
unto evil, which seeing it is contrary to God, who is most gracious and good,
who does both will and also think those things that be good: it cannot
otherwise be, but that there should be a certain enimitie of the world and of
God.

6 But the Scripture offers more grace and therefore says: God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. To whom God gives his grace.
The second reason is taken of a reward. God has promised to the humble, that
is to the poor in spirit, and to them that despise the vain lusts of the
world, grace, which is better then all the delites and riches of the world. Let
Christians therefore seek this rather, then that favor of the world and the
pleasures thereof, which the proud do diligently seek after. But as he
gives grace to the humble: so he resists the proud as a most sore and
grievous enemy.

7 Submit your selves to God: resist the devil and he will flee from you. Now
he teaches remedies against the evil of lust or concupiscence. What it is to
submit himself to God.
To submit himself to God, is to set before himself the word of God as a rule
of his life, and according to it to submit himself in all obedience. To resist
the devil.
To resist the devil, is to strive against unlawful lusts, which are the
instruments of Satan, by the which he draws men unto destruction. To this he
adds a promise: And he will flee from you, that is, he will not hurt you, he
will not overthrow you with his subtleties and delusions.

8 Dravv near to God, and he will dravv near to you, cleanse you hands, ye
sinners, and purge your hearts, ye double minded. He commands and promises.
He commands that we draw near unto God, to wit, Who is said to draw nere
unto God and who to draw nere unto the deuel.
by faith and true obedience. For as he is said to depart from God which does
abandon and give himself to the lusts of the world, by which he draws
near unto the devil: so he which departs from these, is said to draw near
unto God. He promises when he says: And he will dravv near unto you. This
promise is grounded upon the continual love of God toward mankind, whereby he
desires not the death of a sinner. He does here call them sinners, which
exercise manifest impiety, and them double minded, which said in words, that
they did worship God, and in the mean season did follow their own lusts and
concupiscence.

9 Suffer afflictions and sorrow ye, and weep: Let your laughter be turned
into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. He sets this against the
pleasures of them, We must not rejoice in our own lusts, but be ashamed for
our sin.
which follow their own lusts, and laugh and rejoice in them. For it
becomes the godly rather to mourn and suffer affliction, and so to be
ashamed for the sins which they have committed, that they cast their
countenance down to the earth for shame. For that the greek word signifies,
which ye Apostle here uses.

10 Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up. Because
the godly are conte^ned and despised in the world, Though the godly be long
cast down, yet the Lord at length will raise them up and comfort them.
the Apostle does encourage thee^, and bid thee^ remain in that subjection,
whereby they are subject to God in true fear: also he does comfort the^, when
he says, yt it will come to pass that God at the length will lift them up, and
wipe away the tears from their face. For by the word of lifting up is
signified comfort against the sorrow of this present life, and deliverance from
all the miseries and troubles of this life.

11 Speak not evil one of an other, brethren. He that speaks evil of his
brother, or he that condemns his brother, speaks evil of the law and
condemns the law: and if thou condemnest the law, thou art not an obseruer
of the law, but a judge. He does again repress the intemperance of the
tongue in accusing and condemning other, adding a most strong reason taken of
the grieuousnes of the deed. No man ought to speak against the law and
condemn it. He that speaks against his brother and condemns him, We must
not be rash to reprove and condemn our brethren.
speaks against the law, and condemns it. Therefore no man ought to speak
against his brother and condemn him. The Minor or second proposition of the
argument he proves, because he that condemns the law, is not an obseruer of
the law, To condemn the law what it is.
but a judge. Now, to condemn the law, is to reject the authority thereof,
and to challenge unto himself that right which is due to the law, and so to
pervert the order of things. The office of the law
For it is the office of the law to prescribe a rule of life, and to judge of
those things that are done. But it is the duty of man to submit himself to
the authority of the law, and to observe it. But he which does the contrary,
that is, he that usurps authority to judge and censure others, does with
sacrilege challenge that to himself which is proper to the law. All judging of
our brethren is not condemned of the Apostle
James in this place speaks only against those, which of a perverse and
corrupt judgment speak against their brethren, that they may distaine their
good name, and get unto them selves an opinion of holiness: he does not
reprehend those which judge of duty, so as they follow the authority and
rule of the law in iudgeing. For he that does this, is to be said not so much
to judge himself, as to pronounce the judgment of God, which we see James
here often times to have done.

12 There is one law giver which is able to save and to destroy. Who art
thou that iudgest a^ other man? That which is proper unto God, no man without
sacrilege can usurp unto himself. Another reason against rash iudgers of
their brethren.
It is proper unto God to be a Lawgiuer and a Judge, which hereby is manifest,
because he only has power to save and to destroy. Therefore no man can take
upon him self this authority without sacrilege. James speaks here also, as
I admonished before, of rash judgment proceeding from a desire of deprauing
and sclaundering.

13 Go to now ye that say: to day or to morovv we will go into such a
city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain,

14 (And yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow. For what is your life?
It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away)

15 For that ye ought to say: If the Lord will, and, if we live, we will
do this or that.

This is a correction of rash presumption in determining upon things to be
done, Two necessary conditions to be observed in determining and purposing to
do things.
and he prescribes two conditions which he requires in all deliberations. The
first is, that we give place to the will of God, and that we attempt nothing
without calling upon him. The cause of this condition is, for that the will of
God ought to be unto the godly a rule to work by. The other condition is, that
we do always think upon the fraylenesse of our life, which seeing it is like
unto a vapor that continues but a small time: he is unwise, which promises
unto himself things that are to come and uncertain: Wherefore we are
admonished in this place, that we do so behave our selves in all our doings,
that we may be ready whenever we shall depart from hence.

16 But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil. He
shows from whence this presumption in doing things does come, to wit, of an
arrogant rejoicing, which seeing it is evil and always to be avoided: that
also which springs thereof, is not without good cause to be eschewed.

17 Therefore to him that knovveth how to do well, and does it not, to him
it is sin. The conclusion directly brought in of that which went before
should be this: No man therefore of a vain rejoicing ought rashly to purpose
with himself to do any thing, as though the event or falling out thereof did
lie in his own hands. But in the place of this conclusion he puts an
exaggerating or amplifying of that sin which he reprehendeth. To sin of will
is far more grievous then to sin, of ignorance.
He sins more grievously, which sins willingly and knowing thereof, than
he which offends of ignorance. Wherefore he cannot be excused, which knows
what is to be done, and how it is to be done, and yet does it not.

Chap. 5. The sum of the fifth Chapter.
AS he forbids a rash oath, and gives counsel to the afflicted, having
first sharply rebuked the rich, and stirred up the poor unto patience: so he
requires pardoning of one another offenses, praying one for another, and
diligence in calling back their brethren from going astray.

The order and parts of the fifth Chapter.
OF this Chapter there are five parts. The first is a sharp rebuking of the
rich. The second, an encouraging of the poor unto patience. The third, a
forbidding of a rash oath. The fourth, an instruction what is to be done in
diverse cases. The fifth, a commendation of mutual duties.

The exposition of the fifth Chapter, with an observation of the doctrine.
1 Go to now ye rich men: weep and hovvle for your miseries that shall come
upon you. HE speaks not unto all rich men, To what rich men the Apostle
speaks
but only unto them, which were unmerciful toward the poor, and either
abused their riches couetously, or else spent them lewdly upon delites and
pleasures. When he bids them weep, he will have them call to mind the
miseries which in time to come they shall suffer for their cruelty and
covetousness. In these words therefore this proposition is contained: Let not
rich men abuse their riches unto their own destruction.

2 Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth eaten.

3 Your gold and siluerss cankred, and the rust of the^ shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped up
treasure for the last days.

These words of the Apostle contain three things. The exceeding covetousness of
many rich men.
First, he shows by a sign the insatiable covetousness of rich men, which
had rather that their treasures should be corrupt and perish in their coffers
and chestes, than that they would bestow any whit of them to supply the
need of them that be in misery. Secondly, he declares their cruelty toward
the poor, whom they ought with their riches to cherishe and help. Thirdly,
Ungodly richmen at the last shall not escape unpunished.
he threatens punishment unto them, in as much as they gather unto them selves
the treasure of iniquity, covetousness, and cruelty against the day of
wrath, who in time to come shall be so eaten of hell fire, that is, they shall
be tormented with everlasting flames, as now their treasure is eaten of the
rust.

4 Behold, the hire of the laborers which have reaped your feeldes (which is
of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped,
are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. Pay the true labourer his
penny for his pain.
He accuses the injustice of rich men, denying laborers their due hire, and
threatens punishment unto them. For by the word of crying he signifies, that
this injury does as it were sound in the ears of the Lord, and call for
vengeance.

5 Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness. Ye have
nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. He reprehendeth the pleasures,
lasciuiousnes, and wantonness, wherein the rich men did delicately pamper up
themselves. He calls the day appointed for sumptuous and delicate bankets,
the day of slaughter.

6 Ye have condemned and have killed the just, and he has not resisted you.
This may be referred both unto cruelty against the pore, whom the rich men are
said to have condemned and killed, when as they did not relieve their need
with their abundance, whereof is that saying of Augustine: If thou have not
fed, thou have killed: And also to the rigorous extortion, whereby they have in
judgments exacted their debts of their debtors, and have oppressed them with
servitude that did not pay.

Of riches and contracts or bargains.
Seeing that James seems in this place to deal somewhat hardly against the
rich men of this world, it seems unto me a thing worthy the labor to add
something hereunto concerning riches and contractes or bargains, which serve
to increase our substance, and that unto this end, that the godly may be
admonished, how far it is lawful for them to use such stays of their life.

Forasmuch therefore as some godly men do get riches by the blessing of the
Lord, and also the society of man cannot want bargains, it appears
sufficiently, that neither to have riches, neither to bargayne by it self is
sin. For we must not think that the Gospel does either break the lawful
bonds of humane society or take away those things which are necessary to the
maintayning of the life of man. But because it is often times offended in the
getting of riches, likewise in the possession and use of them, and also many
faults are incident in bargaynes: it is needful that the godly mind be
rightly instructed, whereby it may know, both how to get riches without offense
to God, how to use them being gotten, and also how far it may exercise usual
bargains with a good conscience.

Wherefore first of all let this rule of Christ be most surely kept: Seek ye
first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and other things shall be
ministered unto you. Matthew. 6. This rule of Christ conteyneth two things, The
rule of Christ consists of two principal points, the first whereof is a
commandment.
to wit, a commandment of Christ, and a promise joined with obedience toward
the commandment. The commandment is: Seek first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness. He which will not obey this commandment, as he is not
partaker of the grace of Christ: so he abides in the kingdom of sin, and
serves Satan, to whom everlasting death is reserved for his stipend. Let
therefore obedience toward this commandment of Christ have the principal
place, that is, The pro^ise annexed to the commandment.
let the care of our salvation be first and chief. The promise is: And other
things shall be ministered unto you. This promise will both have faith, to wit,
that we do assure our selves that Christ is true, and will have a care of us,
if we will obey his commandment: and also it secretly requires, that every
one by faith do diligently in the fear of God those things which are
agreeable to his calling, Heathenish and profane carefulnes being excluded. For
we must not think that the promise of Christ does commend slouthfulnes unto
us. Wherefore let him that is endued with the faith of Christ, know, that it is
a part of godlynes, without which faith cannot be sound, diligently to do that
duty, to the which every man is called. To this pertayneth that saying of the
Apostle: 1 Timothy 5, 8.
He that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household,
denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. The promise therefore of
Christ requires a holy diligence and an earnest labor of every man in his
calling. But least that any man does here by and by as it were in the entry
stumble, and doubt whether his calling be lawful or no: A lawful calling.
I will briefly touch, what is required to a lawful calling or function. Two
things generally are to be considered, to wit, the kind of office, and the
execution thereof. Concerning the kind, this rule is to be observed. What
offices are lawful and to be allowed
Every office that makes for the maintayning and furnishing of the states
ordained of God, as are, the civil state, the state concerning the governing of
an house, the ecclesiastical state, is commanded in the first and fourth
commandment, as the duty of the ministers of the word, the function of the
magistrates, the service of them which help the magistrate, the care and charge
of masters of households, the occupations of them whose help is profitable and
necessary in the states ordained of God, the traffic of Merchants, which
bring in profitable marchandice: briefly, all offices which serve either for
the order of the Church of God, or of an house, or of ye common weal, are
lawful in them selves, and also in the persons, when they are lawfully called
unto them. And although it be free for every man to choose any kind of life,
to the which he shall feel himself apt: yet we must put a difference between
a public and a private office. To a public office is required ordinary
authority. For no man may take unto himself a public office either in the
Church, or in the common weal, except he be appointed thereunto by ordinary
authority, he that does the contrary, does sum, and in affliction can have
no certain comfort. Wherefore here the godly man will especially take heed,
that he do not enter into a public office without a lawful calling. How
every man may take a private office upon him self.
A private office every man may choose unto himself, yet the authority of
parents ought not here to be contemned. He may apply his mind to the trade of
marchandice, whom this kind of life does please: he may follow husbandry, which
thinks that it is commodious for him: he may choose some art or occupation,
which is persuaded that it will be profitable unto him. An idle life belongs
not unto a godly man but unto an Epicure rather, wherefore of that I will say
nothing.

In the execution of the office or duty more things are to be considered. Most
excellent rules to be observed of every man in perfourming his office and duty.
First let faith and love be rules of the actions. Faith takes head that it
offends not God, and refers al things to ye glory of God. Love admonishes
yt there be no injury done to any man, and that ye commodities of our
neighbor be furthered. Faith desires God to work with it, and to be it
helper. Love embraces our neighbor in God. Faith keeps him that works, in
the fear of God. What we must do if God bless us with increase of riches.
Love keeps him in charity toward his neighbor. Here if riches by ye
blessing of ye Lord come unto him yt labors in his lawful calling, singular
heed is to be taken, yt our riches be not made unto us through our own fault,
thorns and snares. For they that are rich have instruments both unto virtues
and also unto vices, eue^ as their minds are affected which possess the^.
Therefore Plato in my judgment has rightly said, ye riches without wisdom are
blind, but yt the same do quickly see when they follow true wisdom. For true is
this saying: Riches of evil and mischief much
are ministers with speed:
Which do also contention
amongst us often breed.
And for that cause the Lord says: Math. 19.23.
That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. For the most
part use their riches ill, which they might use well if they would take the
counsel of godly wisdom. How the rich of the world ought to be affected.
First of all therefore, let the godly man know how he ought to be affected in
his riches, this may very well be known both by the words of David and also
of Paul. Psalm. 62.10.
David says: If riches increase set not your hearts thereon. Paul says:
Charge them that are rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6.17.
that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches but
in the living God. These two sayings do preach both of the mind or affection
of a rich man, and also of the use of riches. The mind ought not to be set upon
riches, or upon a desire to have, a godly man ought not to measure his
felicity with the deceitful measure of riches, but he ought to use them well,
least that he himself lays snares for himself. Nazianzenus does very well
describe the mind of a godly man toward riches saying: The mind of the godly
concerning riches.
One drop or little portion,
of wisdom I wish more:
Then of riches and worldly wealth,
abundance and great store.
When as the covetous and ungodly man contrariewise says: How the wicked and
covetous are affected toward riches.
One drop of fortunes pleasant cup,
I do much rather crave:
Then great increase, yea even a tun,
of wisdom for to have.
Whosoever therefore will be godly, How the godly man must behave himself
concerning his riches.
let him cast away trust and confidence in riches, least that they be made
snares unto him, least that they do shut from him the passage to the
kingdom of heaven. Let a sure hope be reposed in God alone, whether riches be
increased or diminished, yea or quite taken away, let us hold fast the true
treasure which is Christ Jesus. For he that has him is rich in deed, although
with Lazarus he does beg his bread. Moreover, when thy mind is thus affected
toward riches, this care shall come into it, that thou do rightly dispose the
riches bestowed upon thee of God, and that thou be a faithful steward of
them. Wherefore I will hereunto add a few words concerning the lawful use of
riches. Ischomachus in Xenophon being asked concerning the lawful use of
riches, answered in these words: I ought with my riches to honor the Gods
royally, to help my friends wherein they have need, and to suffer the City
to be vnadorned in nothing wherein I am able. The use of riches divided into
three parts.
This man being ignorant of true religion, makes three parts of the use of
riches, the first part he attributes to the worship of God, the second to his
friends being in need, the third to the maintaining and adorning of the common
weal, wherein he lives. But although this sentence of a profane Philosopher
is to be praised, and worthy to be commended to the godly: yet I will show
more distinctly and plainly the godly and true use of substance and riches,
which consists in four points.

The first and principal use of riches ought to be, The chief and principal
use whereunto riches ought to serve.
that they serve to the maintayning and increasing of the glory of God. This
use is confirmed by the end of man. Man was first made, and afterward
regenerate by the holy ghost, that he should glorify God. Therefore what
gifts so ever we have, they ought to be referred to this end of our creation
and restoring again. How the first and principal use of riches is utterly
neglected of many.
Here many being miserably deceived, do sin. For there are some which bestow
nothing at all to the mayntaining of the ministry. There are some which do
wickedly take away those things that were appointed of our auncetors for the
service of God. There are some which with their riches do increase the power
of tyrannes, to the oppressing of the church and abolishing of religion, for
whom it were better, if they had never been borne. For their portion shall be
with the devil whose members they are. Let the godly man therefore unto whom
riches have chanced in this world, look unto this end of his creation, and
bestow part of his goods upon this use, that he may set forth the glory of
God, and maintain true religion. Examples of such as have used their riches
chiefly to the glory of God.
Let him set before himself the examples of godly men, as of David, Josias,
Ezechias, Constantine, Theodosius, John Frederick Duke of Saxony, Christierne
the third king of Denmark, and other Princes and godly men, which desired
nothing more, than according to their ability to set forth the glory of God,
to help them which taught and learned religion, to maintain schools, and
honest privileges of schools, to defend the teachers of godliness against
the cruelty and injury of wicked men, to whom nothing was more pleasant, than
to invent diverse crafts and ways, whereby they might oppress both teachers
and learners, the case of which men I do with all my heart lament. For by their
reprobate mind they do more and more plunge themselves in hell.

The second right and lawful use of riches.
The second true and lawful use of riches ought to be, that we help and
adorn the commonweals in which we live, according to the measure of our
riches. For this cause tributes are enjoined, that by them as by sinews the
common weal may be kept and preserved, that is, that they may be ornaments of
peace, helps of lawful war, the rewards of them which govern the common
weal. But here two kinds of men do not a little offend. Two sorts of men do
chiefly offend in the second right use of riches.
For there are some, which although they abound with wealth, renoume, and
glory in the time of peace: yet when any thing is to be laid out to the use
of the common weal, this they craftily put of from them selves to the silly
and simple people who are compelled beyond their strength and ability to
bestow those things which are required. Here although the simple people do
rightly obey: yet these inuentors of mischiefs are reserved for their
judgment. There are also perhaps some, who being not content with their
ordinary rents, do lay new exactions upon the subjects, which are condemned
by the testimony of John the Baptist, in as much as they do not bring forth
the fruits of repentance. Christ says: Matthew. 22.11.
Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and give unto God those things
which are Gods. But let Caesar know that there is a certain rule which the
laws do prescribe unto him. If he shall offend against this, he is made
guilty of the wrath of God. But thou will say, A question.
is it never therefore lawful for the magistrate to exact of his subjects
any thing beside the ordinary tax? The answer.
We must put a difference between the times of peace and war. In the time of
peace let him be content with his ordinary revenues, least that he sin
against God: In the time of war the subjects do owe not only their goods,
but also their bodies to the magistrate making just war, and the godly
magistrate may exact unaccustomed tributes, and require the help of the
Citizens against the enemies. There may also necessities be incident in the
time of peace, that ordinary stipendes are not sufficient for the magistrate.
When this comes to pass, godly subjects ought to help the present
necessities, and the godly magistrate may require so much increase as shall be
needful. But they which do thereupon by little and little bring in a custom to
oppress subjects, shall as insidels look for their punishment at the hands
of the just Judge, which knows how to bow down the necks of the proud
and tyrannes.

The third right and lawful use of riches is, that every man find himself
things necessary, and do maintain his family according to the state of his
calling. The third lawful use of riches, wherein are two things especially
to be taken heed of.
But here two vices are to be taken heed of, covetousness or vile fashions,
and prodigality. Covetousness or filthy behavior is unworthy of a man.
Prodigality does rashly waste riches, often times upon bravery altogether
unmeet for that state or calling. Wherefore a mean, which in every thing is
commended, is here also to be kept. An honest citizen therefore may with his
goods maintain that which becomes his estate, let him beware that he take
not upon him that honor that belongs unto another, let him leave to the
nobility their nobleness and reputation, so let an honest noble man maintain
his state, and leave unto the Princes their magnificence and sumptuousness.
After the same sort let teachers of godlynes in schools and temples modestly
maintain their state. Brieflye let every one think what is agreeable to his
person and condition.

The fourth and last lawful use of riches.
The fourth and last right and lawful use of riches ought to be, that we should
be moved also with the calamity of the needy, Why God will have the poor to
be among us.
and hold this for most certain, that God does suffer the poor and needy to
be in the mydst of us, that he may try of what redines we are to obey his
commandment, (for he does command us that we should reach forth our hand
to the needy) and how merciful we are toward the members of the son of God,
which if we do contemn, we do despise also the head. For it cannot be that
he should love the head which causes pain and grief to the members. But of
this use more hereafter.

Of contractes or bargains.
Mutual society and bargains are very necessary among men.
FOrasmuch therefore as men are so created, that they must of necessity live in
society, and their condition is such, that they cannot maintain their state
without mutual labor and duties: the life of man truly has need of
contractes or bargains, by which is made a certain interchangeable course of
labors and offices. And the society of men among them selves can no more
want the commodity of bargaynes, then water and fire. Wherefore seeing that the
godly and ungodly are wont to bargayne one with an other, and there is
oftentimes no small offense made in bargayning through the naughtines of men:
it is a thing necessary that the godly be instructed whereby they may know how
far it is lawful to bargain with a good conscience and without offense to
God, that they do not attempt to do any thing, their conscience either
douting, either being deceived, either striving against them. And although a
full and absolute doctrine concerning bargayning does pertayne to the lawyers,
who of purpose do very often teach of bargaynes: yet because civil rules often
times do not satisfy men's consciences, I will gather a certain brief
advertisement which the godly mind may safely follow in bargaining. First
therefore I will lay two foundations, upon which all those things which I am
about to speak shall depend. Secondly I will declare the chief kinds of
bargaynes, and will show how they agree with the foundation. The first
foundation of all contracts and bargaynes.
The first foundation shall be this, taken from the law of nature: That which
thou will not have done to thy self, do not thou to another, and
contrariwise, that which thou will have rightly done to thy self, thou may
do to another. Nazianzenus utters this foundation after this sort: To do
those things to other men
see that thou do refrain:
Which thou thy self unwilling art
to take of them again.
Upon this foundation Christ will have all duties among men, yea and all
actions and bargaynes to be builded. The confirmation of the first foundation
of bargaynes.
For thus he says: Matthew. 7. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
even so do ye to them. He adds the reason of this foundation. This, says
he, is the law and the Prophets, that is, this is the scope and end of the
Law and the Prophets, or whatsoever the law and the Prophets do command,
it is contained in this common point. And Paul says: He that loves another,
Romans 13.^.
has fulfilled the law. Also: 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, signifying that all
duties among men are to be tried and examined by love as by a touchstone. The
effects of true love.
This love as it does not to any other that which it will not have done to it
self: so it does rightly to every man that which it would have done to it
self. This foundation as it does in every bargayne require true dealing and
exclude deceit: so it will have equality between them that bargain
according to the proportion of an Arithmetic, which does measure, number and
wey all changing equally, and therefore the bargain which is grounded on this
foundation is to be accounted equal and lawful. Bargains grounded upon the
foundation aforesaid are both equal and lawful.
Equal, because an Arithmeticall proportion is observed therein. Lawful,
because it is agreeable to the law of nature, which a wise lawyer in the
doctrine of bargains does set before his eyes. Whereupon it comes to pass
that it is called lawful also, because it is confirmed either by a law made,
or by the decree of wisemen not disagreing with the ten commandments, which
are an abridgment of the law of nature.

The second foundation of contracts and bargaynes.
Let the second foundation be this taken from the nature of the Gospel: The
Gospel does approve civil ordinances, which the wise magistrate does judge to
be profitable to his common weal. This is manifest, because the Apostles of
Christ did never change the form of civil ordinances, where they taught the
Gospel: which without doubt they would have done, if they could not have
stand with the Gospel. The Apostle knew that there was a difference to be put
between the kingdoms of the world and the kingdom of Christ. They, because
they are worldly, are ruled by civil laws and ordinances, this, because it is
spiritual, is governed spiritually. Upon this foundation it follows, that as
a godly man may use the civil ordinances of that common weal wherein he
lives: so it is lawful for a wise magistrate to make laws profitable to his
common weal, by which bargains and offices of a civil life are governed. But
I would have these things so to be taken, that the law giver do not swerve
from the first foundation, and the ten commandments, that is, that he make
no law disagreing with the love of God and charity toward our neighbors.
These two foundations I will have applied to all bargaynes, as consultations by
which it shall be pronounced as often as a question is moved concerning any
bargayne.

The kinds of civil bargaynes, He purposes to speak of six several kinds
of bargains.
of which we have determined in this place to speak are these: 1. Exchange of
things. 2. Bying and selling. 3. Borowing. 4. Lending 5. Letting forth and
hyring 6. Contracts of society. If there be any other kinds of bargaynes, let
them be learned out of the writings of wise lawyers, whom the godly mind may
safely follow, except it sees them contrary to the love of God and charity
toward our neighbor. There are some which make two chief kinds of bargaynes:
one whereby the dominion of a thing together with the use is translated from
ones possession to an others, the other, whereby ye only use of a thing is
granted. Aristotle taught that the exchange of things is divided into three
parts The first, whereby things are changed with things, the second, whereby
things are changed with money, the third whereby money is changed with money. I
confess yt either division is learned and perfect, yet I do prefer before
others this common division which I have set down, not because it is more
perfect or learned, but because it comes nerer to the capacity of the
people, and is more usual. Wherefore I leave both that division of two parts,
and also that of three parts of Aristotle to the lawyers and philosophers to
be disputed upon, being about to speak in order of those six kinds which I
have propounded.

Of the Exchange of things.
Changing of one thing for an other before money was invented was most usual
and profitable, as without which the society of man could not be mayntayned.
But the use of money being invented, it was not so usual amongst all. How
exchang of things is made and when it is lawful.
Now exchange of things is then made, when things are changed not with money
but with other things, as when wine is changed with corn, or hides with
butter. This exchange of things is then lawful, when it does not depart from
those two foundations which we have made concerning every honest bargain. In
the changing of things therefore equality is to be kept with out deceit. For
deceit may be here committed many ways, In changing of things chiefly three
kinds of deceit may be used.
but especially after three sorts, in substance, in quantity, in quality. In
substance, if mingled wine be given for pure wine, if grain or corn mingled
with cockle or darnel, or with the seed of any such corrupt and naughty
weeds, be uttered for good grain. In quantity, if equality be not kept in
weight, measure, and number. In quality, when naughty and corrupt things be
uttered for pure and sound things. Whosoever uses deceit in these, as he does
overthrow ye foundatio^s of justice, so if he do it knowing it and willingly,
he sins against God, passes ye rule of charity and is made guilty of ye
breaking of humane society. Many men do flatter and as it were tickle
themselves, when in exchange of things they do deceive any, but it falls
out with these as with yt fishes, which together with ye bait devour also ye
hook. For the gain is pleasant, but they being held fast with the hoke of
Satan, shall not escape punishment. But I am not ignorant what good men do
perhaps speak against these things. For deceitful me^ have a thousand wills and
crafts, by which they do deceive themselves and not God, who equity requires
te^pered with sincere charity.

Of bying and selling.
Bying and selling neither very ancient nor yet common among all nations.
Bying and selling are properly said to be, as often as things are changed not
with things but with money. This kind of bargayning is neither most ancient,
nor most common. For both it was unknown to those men that lived in the former
ages of the world, and also at this day it is not in use among many nations.
But it was brought in among many only through the necessity of man's life,
whereupon also it has the name of money. For it is called in Latin Namus, as
it were of the Greek word Nomos, which signifies a law, because it has
oftentimes it use and value by the judgment, determination, and law of men. A
seller.
In this kind of bargayne he that translateth a thing into the dominion and
possession of another receiving money for it, does sell, and the thing that is
translated is ware or merchandice. On the contrary, A byer.
he which giving money receives ware or marchandi^e, is said to buy. Here we
must not regard what the monye is worth in it self, but public authority,
use, or judgment is to be considered. For the value of the money is by law
rather than by nature. Wherefore equality is not here to be considered in the
substance of the money, but in the use thereof. This kind of trade according to
the foundations before laid, requires equality without deceyte between the
byer and the seller: He which here wittingly and willingly does oppress or
defraude his brother in any matter, 1. Thessal. 4.6.
has contrary to the precept of Paul broken the equality of justice required
in contracts and bargaynes. The office and duty of him that sells.
Wherefore the godly must take especial heed, that they do use no deceyte
either in the wares or in the price. Let the ware be said of the seller to be
such as it is in deed, or at the least, such as it is thought to be, without
falshode and deceit, let the due price be aunswereable thereunto, that the
proportion of an Arithmeticke may be observed. But here it may not without a
cause be demanded what the due or reasonable price is. To this I do thus
simplye answer. What is to be observed concerning the price of things.
Every price is not due and reasonable which the byer and the seller do agree
upon between themselves by their private judgment: but yt which either is
named and set of the just and public prisers of things ordained of the
magistrate, or which is priced according to the common value of the thing, at
that time when the bargayne is made. He therefore which to day does buy a
busshell of corn according to the common price for three shillings, may
afterward, a certain time being between, sell the same for six shillings, if
this then be the common price. Contrariwise, if after certain months it be
bought commonly for one shilling, he offends which asks three for it,
although he bought it for three. For here regard is to be had of the time and
place, and the plenty and scarcity of the things which are sold, is to be
considered. Three kinds of men especially do offend in bying and selling.
But here three sorts of men do most grievously offend, as they that
ingrosse all into their own hands, that no man may sell or gain but they,
hucksters commonly called regraters, and they which do first set a price of
things according to their own private judgment, that their covetousness may
be satisfied. In the number of these are they which have plenty of Butter,
Oxen, wine, corn, or other things through the yearly profits of their rents.
When as some having need do buy of these they are compelled, whether they
will or no, to give so much as is asked: Whereby oftentimes it comes to
pass, that the seller of corn or other things, the common price being not yet
set and confirmed, does sell exceeding dear. Whose example when other also
which have plenty of the like things, do follow, it falls out that a
bushel of corn, which perhaps otherwise might be sold for two shillings, is
sold for eight. An objection.
But thou will say, the ware is mine, why is it not lawful for me to sell it
as I can? the buyer is free, he may either buy or not buy, what do I
therefore offend? The answer
Thy sin is exceeding great, cloak it by what name or title soever thou will.
How grievously they sin, which enhance and raise the price of things without
cause
For thou doste not so much offend against thy buyer, as against the whole
common weal, which thou do wound worse, than if thou did invade it with
robbery. For through thy covetousness it comes to pass that many are pyned
with misery and famine. He which is injurious against one man does deserve
everlasting pains: what shall be thought concerning thee, which killest so
many families with hunger, or at the least art the cause that they live in
greater misery? Thou may excuse thy self before the judgment seat of men,
but God does not esteem such crafty euasions, neither is he deceived with the
perverse interpretation of his law. For his judgment seat is just, which does
not regard the person. The buyers also do here oftentimes offend. For it
falls out sometimes that they buy dearer, either because the payment is
deferred, or that they may procure the favor of great men, of whom they buy,
that the gain which is nothing at all hoped for by the things that are bought,
may be recompensed by some other means. Here more things might be said, but
these may be sufficient for them that have understanding. For I do look to
prevail little with them, To love godliness with Ajax, is so long only to be
godly while nothing is required of us contrary to our own affections, in which
number are too too many at this day.
which love godliness with Ajax. Ajax would seem devout toward God so long
as he perceived nothing to be required of him which was contrary to his
affections: but when he was commanded to spare Ulysses: In other things, says
he, I will obey thee, but not in this thing. Of this sort is the religion of
many at this day, they will be lovers of godliness so that it does not
disagree with their affections, which they will have wholye to be satisfied,
yea though God be angry therewithal. What I pray you, is more horrible than
to prefer their own affections before the commandment of God? But this is
sufficient, for these men will not hear us. The question concerning the
redeming of a bargayne, is dissolved out of Leuiticus, where the Lord does
commend unto his people the law concerning the redeeming of bargaynes.
Redeming of bargains.
But then only I judge this kind of bargayning to be allowed, when it does
not disagree with the foundation before taught: Do not that to another which
thou will not have done to thy self. As the conscience of a godly man may
trust unto this only foundation in all bargaynes: so also in that bargayne
wherein is made a covenant for the redeeming thereof.

Of Borowing.
What borowing is.
Borowing is a contract or bargayne whereby the dominion of a thing is
translated unto an other, no price being put between, but with a covenant that
the same thing be restored again in the same kind of sort. But here are two
things to be considered of the godly, equality, and a bond. Two things to be
marked in borowing.
Equality, if in equal number, measure and weight thou restore that which thou
have received with out deceit: deceit excludes fault in the substance,
quantity, and quality of the thing. To this belongs that precept of
Hesiodus: A precept of Hesiodus concerning borowing and restoring that which is
borrowed.
Borowe of thy neighbor by right measure, and restore again by the same
right measure, and by greater also if thou art able. Where as he says: and by
greater if thou art able, it may apertayne unto thankfulness, although the Poet
makes an other cause, to wit this: that thou may find thy neighbor ready
to lend thee, We are bound by a double bond to lend unto others.
if at any other time thou have need. Let there be a double bond observed, a
natural and a christian bond. The natural bond is that, by which we are bound
by the law of nature to lend unto others, which do need that thing that is
ours. Of this bond the precept of Hesiodus may be understand. The christian
bond is, by which the Lord does bind those that are his to lend all that need,
that is, not only them, of whom we hope for the like again, but even those,
of whom we look for no such good turn or benefit. Luke. 6.35.
Lend, says Christ looking for nothing again. Christ does not speak here of
free giving or of alms, whereby he which has borrowed any thing, is bound to
restore the same again, without deceit in the same kind or sort: But this
commandment of Christ is set against the malice of the Jews, and the
corrupting of the law of Moses. The law commands to lend, How the Jews
corrupted the law concerning lending.
but the Jews took it to be spoken with this exception: lend not
indifferently to all that have need, but only to them, of whom the like
benefit may be looked for again. This error and corrupting of the law of
God the Lord does correct, and commands them that be his, not only to
lend them which are able to render the like good turn again, but also
others, to wit them, of whom they never look for the like benefit again. Let
us make this manifest by an example: Some fisher desires to borow something of
thee, now thou think with thy self, that he may at some time or other
pleasure thee again either in the like, or in some other kind of duty. If
thou have lent him with hope of the like benefit again, thou have offended
nothing. For what does he offend which for a good turn looks for
thankfulness. There comes another having need, whose state is such that
thou may look for no recompense at all of him. If thou will not lend this
man, thou breakest the rule of Christ, following rather the wicked custom of
the heathen, than the commandment of Christ, whereby thou show that thou
do contemn the voice of Christ. The meaning of the saying of Christ before
mentioned concerning lending.
Wherefore Christ does not here command that thou should not look that
that should be restored which thou have lent, as some do unwisely interpret
this saying, for then it should not be called lending, but alms rather: but
he has regard to the persons, to wit, that the godly do help them by
lending, of whom they look for no commodity or benefit again. This my
interpretation ye circumstances of ye place do confirm, for in that place the
Lord corrects ye corruptions of the Pharisees, by which they serving their
own affections, had maliciously corrupted the law of God. They did interpret
the precept concerning lending, as I have also touched before, after this sort.
Lend, but lend him which is able to lend thee again when thou do need, or
by some other kind of duty to recompense the benefit and to show
thankfulness. This restraynt Christ takes away by this foundation: Luke.
6.33.^4.
If ye do good for them which do good for you what thank shall ye have? and
if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank shall ye have? for
even the sinners lend to sinners to receive the like, that is, that they may at
some other time show the like pleasure to them again, either particularly or
generally. The sum therefore of the precept of Christ is, that we do not
lend them only which are able to requite the same, but also others of whom we
look for no recompense of a benefit bestowed. Hereunto pertayneth the saying
of the Psalmist: Psalm. 112.5.
A good man is merciful and lends. Here the Psalmist numbreth the duty of
lending among the fruits of the fear of God. The lending of the godly and of
the ungodly do much differ.
And although the ungodly also do sometimes lend, yet we must diligently put a
difference between the lending of the ungodly and of the godly. The ungodly
do only regard their own commodity, but the godly do meditate and think
upon these things in order. What the godly consider and regard in their
lending.
First they have regard to the commandment of God, by which they know they
are bound, and therefore they lend with a cheerful mind and a ready will,
because God has so commanded, and they judge the duty of lending whereby they
do relieve the needy, to be a necessary work and a service which God does
earnestly require of them that be his. Secondly they do adioyne faith by which
they behold the promise of God who promises recompense of obedience as the
Psalmist says: Psalm. 15.1.2.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. etc. Also, who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle? he that works righteousness. Moreover the godly do consider the
objects, they weigh with themselves that they are the members of Christ which
require their help. Wherefore they do lend them that they may comfort and
refreshe the members of Christ. By these differences the lending of the godly
is distinguished from the lending of the ungodly, who regard only them selves
and their own commodity.

Of Usury.
THat borowing is done after two sorts even experience it self does witness.
Two sorts of borowing.
For sometime it is done with a covenant, yt so much, equal weight, measure,
and number being kept, as was received, be restored, and nothing more. Of which
kind of borowing it has been hitherto spoken of us. Sometime it is done with a
covenant, that somewhat more then the principal, as they call it, be given for
the duty of lending. The taking of this excess or overplus is an offense,
especially when it comes for the duty of lending which we owe to our
neighbor by Gods law and by the law of nature. And it is called usury of
this, because it comes to the principal for the use of every thing. VVherin
Usury consists.
Neither must we think that usury has place in the lending of money only.
For in the lending of all things that is said to be usury, which for the
bounden duty of lending is given, more then that that was received, as the
law does plainly show, and Ambrose witnesses, when he says: Meat is
usury, and a garment is usury, and give it what name thou will, it is usury.
Now I call that the bounden duty of lending to the which we are so bound by
Gods law and by the law of nature, that unless we do lend him that desires us
and does need in deed, we do sin against God, and violate the charity due
to our neighbor. And although it may after a sort be understand by those
things which have been said concerning borowing, what is to be judged of
usury: yet for plainer instructions sake I think it meet and expedient to
add hereunto something concerning usury. But that there may be a due order of
the handling thereof, The chief points which he means to handle concerning
usury.
we will entreat of these things in order. First we will declare what
prohibitions or forbiddings there be of usury, and what be the causes of these
prohibitions. Secondly, we will note the punishments of usurers, that the
thinking of the punishments may somewhat repress the covetousness of
usurers. Then we will make diligent inquisition whether there be any contract
or bargayne like unto usury in part, which is not forbidden by the law of God.
And if there be any such, how far the godly man may use it with a good
conscience, and without offense to God. Moreover we will gather certain
admonitions, unto which as unto certain consultations, and rules to take
counsel by, it shall be profitable to have regard in every kind of bargains
and business. Finally we will admonish how the stewards of the mysteryes of
God, that is, the preachers of the Gospel may behave themselves in the matter
of usury, that they do neither communicate with other men's offenses, nor
attempt any thing that may turn to their destruction.

Of the first.
Four prohibitions of usury.
THe prohibitions or forbiddings of usury are four, into which if we will
godly and earnestly look, we shall perceive more clearly than the day what
is to be judged concerning this whole trade of usury. Wherefore I will
rehearse them distinctly and in order.

The first prohibition of usury.
The first is said to be natural. For Aristotle without controversy the
chief of Philosophers, does teach that usury is against nature, being moved
by this argument: Money by nature cannot bring forth, The very heathen
Philosophers did disallow usury and affirm it to be contrary to nature.
therefore to take usury of money is contrary to nature. And for this cause
usury is thought to be called of the Grecians Tocos, of bringing forth, as
though there were a certain birth of money, that even by the very name it may
be infamous. Aristophanes calls usury a beast, which in process of time
does bring forth money in more abundant increase. Plato also does cast usury
out of his common weal. For thus he says in his fifth book of laws: Let it
be lawful if any takes money upon interest, to render neither the interest, nor
the principal. This prohibition of Plato is grounded upon a natural
principle, to wit, that that is in no case to be suffered in a city, whatsoever
it be, which is against the law of nature and mutual charity, and is the
cause of the ruin of families and commonweals, which nature bids to be
preserved and maintained. Plutarch concludes that usury is contrary to nature
by this principle: Of nothing nothing is made. Cicero compares usury to man
slaughter. Wherefore it is manifest that as manslaughter is contrary to
nature, so also usury is contrary thereunto. Moreover, Other reasons proving
usury to be against nature.
inequality in bargaining is against nature. For the work thereof is the
destruction of nature. Gain therefore that is given for the bounden duty of
lending is against nature. For it does manifestly bring inequality. Finally,
seeing that the civil society is especially according to nature, truly it
must be that usury is an enemy to nature, inasmuch as it does appayre and
diminishe humane society.

The second prohibition is divine. For Moses, The second prohibition of usury
out of the word of God.
the Prophets and the Psalms do forbid and condemn usury. The cause of
this forbidding is expressly added in many places, to wit, that our neighbor
be not oppressed with usury. Exodus 22. If thou lend money to my people, Verse.
25.
that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an usurer unto him: thou
shall not oppress him with usury. Leuit. 25. Verse. 37.
Thou shall not give him thy money to usury, nor lend him thy vittayles for
increase. The cause of the precept goes before: that thy brother may live with
thee, to wit, not oppressed with usury. Verse 19.20.
Deuteronomy. 23. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother: as usury of money,
usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury. Unto a stranger
thou may lend upon usury, but thou shall not lend upon usury unto thy
brother, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou set thine
hand to. Moses speaks here also of the usury that oppresses our neighbor.
For out of the Hebrew text it may thus be translated: Thou may byte a
stranger with usury, Verse. 8.
but thy brother thou shall not byte. Ezech. 18. He that has not given forth
upon usury, neither has taken any increase, is just, and shall surely live.
Hereupon it follows in the contrary sense, that he is unjust and shall die
which has given upon usury and taken increase. In the 15. Psalm it is said
that he shall dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord which gives not his money
upon usury. And that this Psalm also speaks of usury which byteth and
oppresses our neighbor, it is manifest. For the Psalmist uses the word
Nesec, which has it name of biting. Again, there is no doubt, but that usury
is here prohibited, which before was forbidden in Moses, to wit, that which
biteth and oppresses our neighbor. For the Prophets bring no new doctrine,
but only are interpreters of Moses.

The third prohibition of usury taken from civil ordinances and laws of
commonweals.
The third prohibition is politic or civil. For among the most ancient
Romans there was no manner, no permission of usury, but public cursing and
punishing thereof. But in process of time, when together with rule and riches,
covetousness and riot did increase, usury began by little and little, and was
oftentimes more and more increased, until the matter of usury came unto
sedicion and discord, for which cause the governors of commonweals, because
they could not utterly abolishe usury, did with laws repress it as much as
they could. The city of Athens did commit wholly unto Solon that he should
moderate the usury by which the Athenians were almost oppressed. For when
there was a sedition risen for the cruelty of usurers, which did compel the
sons and daughters of their debtors to be brought into bondage, and to be
sold, that the interest might be paid: Solon, the Citizens requesting him,
made the first law, that it should not afterward be lawful that any free
body should be brought into servitude for debtes or usury. How Solon did
moderate usury among the Athenians
And this measure of usury did Solon ordain, that no more should be demanded
than the hundredth part, that is, so much as did counteruayle the principal in
the hundredth moves, that is, of an hundredth crowns every month one crown.
The moderation of usury which the ancient Emperors made.
But the Emperors did forbid the hundredth part to be received for interest,
except it were in things carried over the sea, but in other lawful trades they
did permit the eight part of the hundredth, that is, of an hundred crowns every
year eight crowns. But to the Noble men in every contract or bargain they did
not permit above the fourth part of the hundredth, that is, every year of an
hundredth crowns, four crowns, but to the common people the sixth part of the
hundredth was permitted, that is, every year of an hundredth crowns, six
crowns. This moderation of the Emperors was highly to be praised, which did
both repress the unjust exaction of usury, and also provided that the goods
of private men were not wasted by unmeasurable usury.

The fourth prohibition is ecclesiastical. The fourth prohibition of usury
which is taken out of the decrees of Synodes and the sayings of holy fathers.
Now I call an ecclesiastical prohibition, not the decrees of the Pope, whom
we do acknowledge neither the head, nor the tail of the Church, but of holy
Synodes, by which usury was straightly prohibited. Also the sayings of holy
fathers against usury. In the 47. decrees there is mention made of the canons
of the Apostle, in which usury is condemned. The Nicene Synod, in which were
318. fathers did also condemn usury. Gratianus against usury.
And Gratianus against the usury of Clergy men, does add these words out of
the decrees of the Nicene council. Because many of the clergy for covetousness
sake, seeking after filthy lucre, Psalm. 15.5.
have forgotten the divine precept, wherein it is said: He that gives not his
money upon usury, this holy council has decreed, that, if any be found after
this decree to take usury, or by any such trade to seek after filthy lucre,
etc. he be thrown out of the Clergy, and counted void of all ecclesiastical
decree or office. Hierome against usury.
Hierome says: To seek usury, or to defraude or to take violently do
nothing differ. Lend to thy brother, and take that that thou have lent and
seek for no overplus, Augustine against usury.
because the overplus is counted for usury. Augustine says: what shall I say
of usury, which even the very laws and judges themselves do command to be
rendered? whether is he crueller which steals or takes away any thing from a
rich man, or he which kills a poor man with usury? These things verily and
such like are possessed ill, and I would that they were restored, but there is
none who being Judge they shall be required again. But now let us wisely
consider what is written: To a faithful man the whole world is riches, but to
an unfaithful man not so much as a halfepeny. Do we not convince all men,
which seem to themselves to rejoice in the goods that they have gotten, and
know not how to use them, to possess that which belongs to an other? For
that truly belongs not to an other which is possessed rightly. But that is
possessed rightly which is possessed justly. And that is possessed justly,
which is possessed well. Every thing therefore that is possessed ill, belongs
to another. Ambrose against usury.
These words says Augustine. Ambrose says: Why doste thou turue the
industry of nature into deceyt? Why doste thou desire that there should be
lack of things necessary? Why doste thou make scarcity to be wished for to
the poor, and doste lament common plenty. Thou do epsy when there is
small increase. Thou call that industry, which is the practice of
subtlety, and that which thou call a remedy, is a devise of mischief. But
may I call usury theft (those are taken for the times of theft, in which thou
being a cruel deceyuer, doste creep into the bowels of men) unto whom the
usury of corn laid up is multiplied? Why do thou wish evil to all men?
thy gain is public loss. The same says also in an other place: He fights
without a weapon which exacteth usury: he reuengeth himself of his enemy
without a sweard which is a receiver of usury. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom
against usury.
Lend, take greater usury, but lend so, that thou shall receive there where
as is no envy, no accusation, no deceit, no terror. Lend nothing to them that
be in need but unto Christ who both suffered need and hunger for thee, and
also nourishes all men. For this usury does prepare a kingdom, but the other
prepares hell fire: this is a point of godliness and mercy, the other of
cruelty and covetousness. The same says in an other place: there is nothing
more filthy then usury, nothing more cruel. An usurer procures the miseries
of others and his lucre makes the adversity of an other. Such a one does as
it wrre lift up his hand and thrust into shipwrecke. The same says in an other
place: The money of an usurer very fitly compared to the poison of an Aspe
The money of an usurer is like to the sting of an Aspe. For he that is stong
of an Aspe being as it were delighted, does fall into a sleep and through the
soundnes of sleep does dye, because then the venim does privily run through
all his members: So he which takes upon usury, does for the time feel as it
were a benefit, but the usury does run through all his substance, and
conuerteth all into debt. Lactantius against usury.
Lactantius says: If a man has lent any money let him not take usury, that
the benefit may be safe and perfect, which releeueth necessity, and let him
altogether abstain himself from that that is an other man's. For in this kind
of duty he ought to be content with his own, whom it behooves otherwise not
to spare that that is his own that he may do good. But to take more then he
gave is unjust, which he that does, does after a sort practice deceit, that he
may get his pray by the necessity of an other. Bernard against usury.
Bernard says: What is usury? the poison of a Patrimony. What is usury
according to the law? a thief foretelling what he intends, (to wit, to
rauin). Luther does most grievously inueigh against usurers, whose writings,
because they are in the hands of many, I will not here make mention of any
thing out of them. Hitherto we have spoken of the prohibitions of usury, and
of the causes of the prohibitions, of all which this sentence is concluded: The
chief causes wherefore usury is forbidden.
that usury is therefore forbidden, that by it our neighbor be not hurt, that
charity among men be not broken, that humane society be not disturbed, that
the goods of private men be not wasted to the destruction of families and
commonweals. As often as therefore we read that usury is prohibited, let us
look unto these ends of the prohibition, least that under a pretense of
usury that is forbidden, we do judge to sharply of other contractes and
bargains which the laws do allow.

Of the second.
Three kinds of punishment of usurers.
J Find that the punishment of usurers is of three sorts, to wit, civil,
spiritual, and ecclesiastical. The civil punishment according to the ancient
laws of the Romans, as Cato witnesses, How the ancient Romans punished
usurers and what they judged of them
was, that usurers should be punished with paying four times as much, thieves
with paying only twice as much. Surely the ancients did sufficiently declare
by this sentence, that they did judge usurers to be worse and more hurtful
then common thieves. And for this cause they were not suffered to come to
public dignities and offices as men unworthy of them. The corruption of our
time is great.
But, alas, so great at this day is the corruption of christian manners, that
they which were infamous among the profane nations, and counted worse then
thieves, are judged worthy of very hie honor, yea and that among Christians. I
remember being a child when there were only two usurers in this realm which
were commonly known: of whom one being one of the common sort did dwell in
Morea in Denmark. An example worthy to be noted of all, but specially of
ungodly, usurers.
This man although he was exceeding rich through usury, yet after his death his
children which he left were brought unto such poverty, that we have seen in
this city a certain daughter of his, not only in a torn and filthy garment,
and that scarce covering those parts of the body which nature bids to be
covered: but also following, in the sight of many, a most filthy trade,
whereby notwithstanding she could not keep her self from beggerie. There was
an other which came of a better family, Another example of an usurer.
unto whom no small substance had come by inheritance. This man, greedy desire
of money pricking him forward, does apply his mind to usury, and by little and
little does so heap up gain gotten by usury, that he became exceeding rich in
money. But what comes here to pass? riches unjustly heaped up went partly to
the kings Escheker, I cannot tell for what causes, and partly do yet serve to
maintain gluttony and riot. Whereby it is easy to conjecture, what the end of
them will be, which as yet do enjoy any of those riches, unless they do in
time repent.

But thou will say, what do these things pertayne to civil punishment? very
much in every respect. For this is the order of the justice of God, Though
usurers are not punished of men, yet they shall not escape the punishment of
God.
when the civil magistrate does negligently execute the office committed unto
him, God, as the chief monarch and prince is wont to put to his hand, and to
punish even civil transgressions with corporal punishments, that men may
think that they shall not therefore escape their due punishments, either
because their doings are hid from the civil magistrate, or because the
magistrate him self either through fear, or slouthfulnes, or ignorance, or to
much parcialitie does not his office, nor calls all offenses to diligent
examination.

Let not men therefore hereupon promise themselves to escape unpunished, because
they seem that they can easily avoid the hands of the civil magistrate,
neither hereupon, because punishments do not straight way follow their
deeds, God himself not punishing by and by, but deferring the punishment by
his wise counsel. Though punishment be deferred, yet it is not therefore taken
away.
For punishment is not therefore taken away because it is deferred, since that
the Lord is wont with slownesse of vengeance to recompense the grieuousnesse
of punishment. God does oftentimes mitigate the punishment for repentance sake,
yet so, that he leaves evident testimonies of his judgment.

A profitable admonition to ungodly usurers.
Wherefore I do admonish all Usurers that they do speedily repent, and rather
follow penitent Zachaeus, whose repentance the Gospel commends unto us, than
Judas, who by his theft was at the last brought to hang himself. Although they
do little fear the judgment of God them selves, yet at the least let them
take pity upon their children, least that the poison of Usury which the
parents do gather, be deadly unto the very children. Let them know that it is
a most true saying: The riches that with wrong are got,
to the third heir continue not.


The spiritual punishment of usurers though little esteemed of many, yet truly
exceeding grievous.
The spiritual punishment of Usurers although it be most grievous, yet many do
contemn it as ridiculous. For whosoever does practice Usury, he is without
all doubt, out of the family of God, out of the body of Christ. For how can
he be the member of Christ, which with Usury kills Christ in his members?
How can he be counted to be of the family of God, Note.
which fights under Satan? which mocketh and scorneth at the word of God?
Now they that are not of the body of Christ have nothing to do with the
treasure of the Saints, which is far more precious than all the riches of
this world. What treasure can be greater than to possess Christ? What riches
more excellent than the inheritance of the kingdom of God? These treasures,
these riches has Lazarus being full of sores, and pore, but fearing God, which
the rich glutton shall want for ever, and with him, as many as casting aside
the fear of God do seek after unjust gain. What, I pray thee, is it, if
thou be able with thy usury to gain the riches of Croesus, and in the mean
season to lose thine own soul? O perverse judgment. Thou have exceeding
great care of this time which shall shortly come to an end, but there does not
so much as a thought come into thy mind concerning the time to come, whereof
there shall be no end. I therefore, if my admonition may any thing prevail,
do exhort all them which do think verily that there is a God, which do
acknowledge God to be a just judge, and which do believe that there is any life
remaining after these ashes, that they do speedily repent, that when the Lord
shall come sooner than they think for, he may find them apparelled with a
wedding garment, and not with an hellish garment which they have got unto
themselves by their usury.

Ecclesiastical punishment against usurers was in time past of this sort: How
usurers were punished heretofore according to the censure of the Church.
First they were not admitted to the solemn ceremony of the offering. Also
they were put back from the communion of the body and blood of the Lord.
Moreover, they were excluded from Christian burial. This punishment against
Usurers was most grievous, nevertheless, most just. Usurers were very justly
prohibited from the ceremony of offering.
For first concerning the ceremony of the offering, or the alms given to the
use of the ministers of the Gospel, or to the releeuing of the poor, we must
understand that alms given of goods gotten by Usury is abominable to God.
For no sacrifices (for liberality toward the poor being rightly done, is a
certain kind of sacrifice) can please God, but those which being justly
gotten, do come from a pure mind and right will, faith shyning before. For
this is most true, that no man's work can please God, before that the mind
does please him, but the mind does in no wise please except it does before in
the spirit of faith humble it self before God. Both of the^ is confirmed by
this saying of Esaias. chap. 66. To him will I look (says the Lord) that is
humble and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. He that kills a
bullock (to wit, without humility of spirit) is as if he slew a man, he that
sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut of a dogs neck. By these words (that I may
speak briefly) the Prophet signifies, that to the unclean all things are
unclean, and that nothing does please God, but that which proceeding from the
true fear of God, is done justly and of them that be just. But I see what is
objected against me: An objection.
Usurers, say some, do profess one Christian faith with us, why therefore is
it not lawful for them to communicate with the godly in outward things only?
I grant in deed that Usurers do profess the Christian faith with us, The
answer
but they do that only in words, and in the mean season they do most
wickedly deny it in their deeds, whereby it comes to pass, that both their
profession is abominable before God, and also they themselves, such is their
obstinacy and disobedience, are reprobate unto every good work. Usurers were
in time past put back from the holy communion, and that for most weighty
causes and reasons.
Again, where as Usurers were put back from the holy supper of the Lord, it
was most just reason: For what participation have swine with the body and
blood of Christ? what have they to do with the meat of the children of God,
which are the bond slaves of Satan? Matthew. 7.6.
Give ye not, says the Lord, that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye
your pearls before swine. How, I pray you, is the table of the Lord meet
for them, who being filled with the food of the devil, that is, An admonition
to the ministers of the Gospel.
with Usury, do excessiuely abound? Wherefore the Ministers of the Gospel
whosoever they be, that knowing and prive thereunto, do offer the most holy
body and blood of ye Lord unto Usurers, do not only wickedly communicate with
other men's sins, whereof they shall also at the length suffer the punishment:
But also as much as in them is, they do with sacrilege cast the body and
blood of the Lord, into a most vile and filthy sink of Satan, of which
wickedness they shall in no wise avoid the punishment. But thou will say,
many which are as evil as Usurers do come to the supper of the Lord. I
believe this truly. For even Judas also the brother of Usurers did come to the
table of the Lord, but what did it profit him? did he not together with the
bread swalowe the spirit of Satan, and that not through the fault of him that
offered, but through his own proper fault receiving it? The Lord truly offered
salvation, but he infected with the venim of covetousness, did wickedly refuse
that which the Lord offered, and all that Satan gave, he swallowed quite up.

But concerning the punishment of Burial, Usurers in time past were excluded
from christian burial, and that by the just censure of the Church.

Why we solemnise the burials of holy men.


the censure and judgment of our auncetours did not want most just reason. But
this he shall best understand, which shall perceive the cause why we do
solemnise the funerals of saints and holy men with ceremonies and obsequies.
But what is the cause? The hope of a glorious resurrection. For it is a most
worthy thing that we should bestow honest burial upon those bodies, which we
hope in time to come shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ. For
when we see the bodies of the faintes to be committed to the dust, we do lift
up our minds to him, which in time to come, the voice of the Archangel going
before, shall say: Arise ye dead. And to the dead being raised up he shall give
the glory of immortality. But now seeing that the ungodly, Reasons and
testimonies wherefore usurers have been excluded from christian burial.
among whom are usurers as the chief soldiers and hierlinges of Satan
occupying the first place shall rise again, as Daniel witnesses, to
everlasting ignominy and confusion, what godly man will judge them worthy of
the honor of Christian burial? The 15. Psalm numbreth him among the godly
Who in his eyes despises a vile person, and honors them that fear the
Lord: How therefore shall he cause him to be buried in glorious and honorable
burial whom he does abhor? Jeremy foretells that a tyranne shall be
buried with the burial of an Ass, Ier^. 22.19.
and that by the just judgment of God: What shall we determine by the same
judgment of God concerning Usurers, which are crueller then any tyrannes? I
do not pass or esteem though some champion do falsely attribute unto himself
the spirit of prophecy and say, that it may come to pass, that many which
are the enemies of Usurers may be buried with the burial of an Ass, and in
the mean time Usurers may be brought to burial with great pomp, the bells
ringing and torches carried light before them. I will make no other answer to
these, but that even as in the sight of the Lord the death of his saints is
precious: Psalm. 116.15.
so is their burial also honorable before God. Wherefore that which we have
witnessed concerning the honest burial of the Saints does pertayne to
Ecclesiastical discipline, and not to the judgment of God whose ways are
unsearchable. What will here come to pass? whom shall I not have resisters
and striuers against this most just censure and judgment of the Church? surely
they will not be wanting which with their colors and fair gloses will mitigate
the evil of Usury. Many will cry (the Serpent which deceived our first
parents, With what fair gloses some will seek to diminishe the heynousnesse
of usury.
being their master) that the law of Moses many years ago by the coming of
Christ was repealed, made void, and abolished, and does nothing pertayne to
christian people, who enjoy their liberty, and do not suffer them selves to be
straightly bound with the prohibition of Moses. This speech truly is plausible,
but it is reproved by the testimony of the conscience. For they which paynt
their covetousness with this color, being deceived of their Their own natural
corruption.
domestical Eve, which was miserably seduced by the serpent, do fall headlong
into their own destruction, and deceive themselves by their own subtlety.
For these men do not weygh aright the prohibition of Moses, neither do they
confer the forbidding of Usury with the law of charity as they should
do, which if they did, they should plainly see that usury being established,
Where usury is established, there charity is ouerthrown
the rule of charity is overthrown, which God will have to be perpetual.
Seeing therefore that charity shall be abolished neither in this life nor in
the life to come as much as pertayneth to the commandment and will of God and
obedience perpetually due to the same: who does not see that Usury, which is
quite contrary to charity, is condemned? But of this thing sufficient. For
before it was showed of us at large when we did entreat of the causes of
forbidding Usury, that the forbidding of Usury did proceed from the law of
charity. Wherefore without al doubt they shall be found naked before God the
judge, which use this leaf already perced through, to hide their filthiness.

Perhaps some will yet except and say: An objection in the behalf of usurers.
There is no injury done to him that is willing. He which does humbly desire
to borow money of an Usurer, does covenant to pay Usury, not compelled
thereunto, but willingly, therefore an Usurer which helps a man that humbly
entreats him, is not to be said to do against charity. The answer.
The principle from whence this reason is taken, is doutfull, in as much as it
fails in two parts, of which one is true, the other false. Every will is not
without constraint, as it is showed by examples.
For every will is not without constraint and of it self, which we may easily
see in examples. The wayfaring man does willingly deliver his treasure to the
thief, which he would not do, if he did not fear the sweard of the thief.
The mariner does make loss of his merchandise and that willingly when
shipwreck is at hand, but from whence I pray you, does that will come? truly
not of election or choice without constraint, but of fear of the shipwreck
which is at hand. For the mariner does therefore cast away his merchandise
willingly least that he himself perish together with his merchandise.
Wherefore, two evils being set before him, he will willingly choose that evil
which seems to be the less. After the same manner is the will of him that
boroweth money upon Usury, affected concerning the covenant and promise to pay
interest, which truly he promises willingly, which he would not do, if he
were not constrained by poverty, thereby to avoid a greater evil.

Another objection in the behalf of usurers.
Furthermore where as some do object that families and commonweals cannot
stand without Usury: this surely I confess to be true in this corruption of the
world and in the banishment of manly virtue which was in our auncetours. The
answer.
But from whence I pray you, comes that commodity by which thou criest that
families and commonweals are maintained? does it come of Usury? no truly.
For no good thing can come of Usury by it self, but rather a sea of evils. Now
if perhaps any good seem to come of Usury, that is not to be attributed to
usury, but to the lending, which lending if it were done without Usury, it
would more profit families and commonweals. Usurers are Idolaters, and why.
But thou will say, thou losest labor in speaking which go about to call
Usurers, being Idolaters (for Usurers in steed of God do worship riches as
God) into the right way. But be it so, inasmuch as they as adders are deaf at
ye word of ye Lord. For they hear nothing with so great indignation of mind as
that their Usury is condemned. That most filthy lucre is more pleasant unto
them then that they would want it even with any peril set before them. And
surely hereupon it is, that not a few, which might live welthily enough for the
manner of their calling, of the profits of their own land, Usury which some
affirm to be the upholding of families and commonweals, is in deed in the
end often times the utter ruin of them.
do sell their inheritance, that a certain su^me of money being scraped
together and put out to Usury, they may live idly upon their Usury, and
invent diverse subtle devises, by which they may hold their detters not without
usury upon usury, until they have utterly undone them, not without the
exceeding great loss of families and commonweals. But although these perhaps
will not allow of our sentence, yet it is our duty to admonish them, that at
the least they think that the day will come unlooked for, in which they shall
render an account to the just judge, who as he is corrupted with no accepting
of persons, so is he deceived with no sophistry or subtlety. And then at the
length Usurers shall perceive that we did advertise them of good and profitable
things, and that that heathen Poet Hesiodus did say true, who being no vain
Poet writes after this sort: Use not ill means to gain for gain ill got
from very loss and damage diffreth not.


From whence had Hesiodus this: had he it out of the word of God which Usurers
do contemn? no truly. For that silly man did not see at any time the
writings either of the Prophets or of the Apostles. From whence therefore had
he it? experience and nature being his teachers he set forth in writing this
most true oracle very well agreeing with the voice of the Prophets and
Apostles. With Hesiodus agrees Pindarus that most ancient Poet of ye Thebans,
whom for his singular wisdom Alexander the great is said to have embraced:
for he says thus much in effect: The minds of men are redier,
to praise deceitful gain:
Then justice to embrace and eke,
true dealing to maintain:
Although they creep to that sharp day,
their life being nigh spent:
When for injustice done they shall,
receive due punishment.


That day, which shall follow the delights and pleasurs that the ungodly take
of their unjust gain, Pindarus calls a day appointed for punishment. For as
in the next day after the festival days (in which the most part do more
freely without consideration give over themselves to all kind of pleasures and
delites) men are wont to call to remembrance wherein they did offend more
licentiously through drunkenness: so the day of death and of the last judgment
shall be to Usurers as the next day after festiual days, in which they do at
the last repent them of their sins, but in vain. For he is by no means
thought truly to repent, which abstaineth from sin against his will. These
things I thought good to write somewhat more at large, that I might advertise
Usurers of the wrath of God and of the punishment that hangs over their
heads, What usurers ought to do, to whom God has given grace to repent and
to forsake so detestable a sin.
which they shall no way escape, except they do repent in time, and for a
testimony of their repentance do justly restore again, if they shall be able,
that which they have unjustly taken. But if they shall not be able, let them at
the least do what they can, let them crave of God pardon of their fault, let
them ask them whom they have hurt with their usury, forgiveness of the injury
that they have done, and let them be reconciled to the Church by public
satisfaction, least that their portion be with Judas. But if any shall contemn
and deride these our counsels and admonitions, which I dout not but it will
come to pass, it makes no matter to me. I seek the salvation of wretched
men, I tell out the truth which he that will not obey, shall in his time find
a just judge who will most justly punish both his contempt and the contempt of
his favorers.

Of the third.
AFter we have now spoken of the prohibitions of Usury and of the causes
thereof, and also of the punishments of them, who despising the law both of God
and of man do practice Usury which is prohibited: the place requires that we
see whether there be any contract or bargain like unto Usury in part, yet not
disagreeing with the charity toward our neighbor, and if there be any such,
how far a godly man may use the same with a good conscience and without
offense to God. First of all this is to be held as most certain that Usury
condemned by the word of God, is therefore unlawful, prohibited and condemned
because it is contrary to the foundation which proceeds from the law of
charity: that which thou will not have done to thy self do not thou to an
other. But that this our foundation is immovable we have declared before,
where we have laid the foundations of contracts and bargains. For there we
showed that charity is the scope and end of all duties in this humane
society. No bargain is disallowed, which is not contrary to charity.
Of this foundation an immovable consequent is concluded, that no contract is
condemned which is not repugnant to the charity toward our neighbor.
Wherefore if any such can be showed, it shall be without doubt accounted lawful,
although it shall appear much like unto Usury. For it is not just and meet
that we do condemn al profitable contractes and bargains in a common weal
under a pretense of Usury, because of the likeness. And although many such
contracts are wisely condemned of the lawyers, yet we will speak of them of
which the greatest controversy is, especially in this realm. But that we may
judge of these contracts without error, and find out that which with a good
conscience and without offending God it is lawful to follow: it shall be
needeful to speak of diverse sorts of men, that it may be understand to whom
we are bound to lend, and to whom we are not, for there Usury is properly
committed. Here the laws of magistrates may determine of those things, which
they shall wisely know to be good and profitable for their common weal. A
profitable rule concerning bargains
For this is to be marked as a profitable rule in the society of man: that
bargaynes allowed by the laws and by the authority of the magistrate, that
is, of a good and wise judge or lawyer, are permitted to a christian man. For
it is lawful for a christian to use civil ordinances, and these ordinances are
of force not only for reasons sake, but also because of the authority of ye
magistrate. Let a christian man therefore so instruct his conscience, yt it may
understand yt these things are permitted, because God does allow laws and
magistrates, and will have us to use civil ordinances, and in bargaynes let him
be content with that mean, with that equality, that the laws and the
magistrates do appoint, except they do plainly varye from the ten
commandments and from the law of nature. This rule does first admonish us,
that we do judge reverently of ye laws and ordinances of a good magistrate.
Secondly that we judge not rashly and too sharply of ye bargains which the
laws do approve. Now, as we have purposed let us see ye orders and states of
men. In the first state may be the poor and beggars, which being hindered with
old age, or grieved with sickness, or otherwise with some great calamity
oppressed, are not able to live without the alms of other, The duty of
charity which we owe to the poor and impotent.
no nor to make any gain. To these we do by bond owe the duties of charity
and alms. Wherefore we must give unto these without al expectation of
recompense or duty again, for the commandments sake of God, and for
charities sake, which by nature we owe one to an other. And this det is so
necessary, that he that does refuse to pay it, does obstinatly violate the
commandment of God, does ungodly refuse to obey the precept of Christ, does
cruelly oppress the members of Christ, does wickedly reject the law of
charity, and purchases unto himself certain destruction. Hereuppon
therefore it may easily be known, how necessary a duty it is to give alms,
and to relieve with his ability those that do in very deed stand in need.
Diverse causes which hinder men that they are so slack in the necessary duty
of giving alms.
But because I see that there are many causes by which the most part are
hindered, whereby they are not occupied in this necessary and dutiful office, as
in many there is a study of covetousness, ignorance of the providence of God,
heathenish diffidence, riot, abuse of things, to much folly, much unprofitable
spending, and (alas) cruel unmercifulness in the most part, whereby it comes
to pass that they are not moved with the need of them that be in misery: I
will here somewhat at large handle the place of alms and that for this purpose,
that both the necessity of our duty, Why he purposes to entreat of alms
more at large.
whereby we are bound to them that need in deed, may be understand, and also
we being admonished, may more wyllingly and readyly do our duty, and be made
more liberal toward the poor.

First therefore I will show where alms is to be given and what are the kinds
thereof. What chief points he means to handle concerning alms


Secondly I will rehearse the causes, with which the godly ought to be stirred
up to give alms.

Thirdly I will note the affection of him that gives alms, and I will also
prescribe a manner and measure to be observed in giving alms.

Lastly I will entreat of the ends of alms which is godly bestowed, and of
the fruit that comes unto them, that give alms with a cherefull mind
according to the commandment of Christ.

Of Alms.
WHo soever has determined to give alms, let him give his alms in this
order. First of all, We must bestow the first alms upon our selves.
let him be merciful to himself, that is, let him give the first alms to
himself, which then is done when a man leaving his own evil ways, does
turn himself unto the Lord by true repentance. For no mercy (for so the word
alms does signify) can be showed of him, which as yet is not under the mercy
of God. Wherefore Jesus the son of Syrach does well admonish when he says,
Chap. 30. Have mercy on thine own soul pleasing God, Wherein the mercy
consists which we ought to show first to our own selves.
and comfort thine heart: drive sorrow far from thee. When he says: Have
mercy on thy soul pleasing God, he shows in what thing that mercy does
consist, which we ought to show to our selves, to wit, in turning unto God,
and in faith, without which it is impossible to please God. After this sort
Abraham did begin his alms, according to whose example all the rest of the
godly have begun their alms at them selves. To this pertayneth that saying of
Augustine: If thou will give alms, begin at thy self. For how can he be
merciful to another which is cruel to himself? He that has begone his alms
after this manner, will forthwith turn himself to his neighbor, and will
show mercy unto him. The first distinction of alms.
Hereupon rises the first distinction of alms, that there is one kind of
alms which every one bestows upon himself, which is by nature the former,
another which every man gives to other, which is by nature the latter. Two
kinds of alms which is bestowed upon other.
Now this latter may also be made to be of two sorts, one spiritual, another
civil. That which is spiritual, pertayneth to the spirit, which he
bestows, which calls him into the right way that erreth from the fold of
Christ, Spiritual alms what it is, how divine and passing al other kinds of
alms.
and brings him into Christ's shepefolde. There is no alms more divine than
this, none more profitable, finally, none more necessary. For as the soul
does excel the body, so alms whereby the soul is refreshed, is by many
degrees to be preferred before the alms with which the necessities of this
frail body are relieved, and as eternal good things are more to be esteemed
than all the commodities of this life which continue but a short time: so the
alms which helps to the attayning of eternal life, is more to be esteemed,
than the alms that serves for this frail life. There is great commendation
hereof in James the Apostle, who says: Brethren, Iam. 5.19.20.
if any of you has erred from the truth, and some man has converted him, let
him know that he which has converted the sinner from going astray out of his
way, shall save a soul from death, Civil alms what it is.
and shall hyde a multitude of sins. Civil alms does belong to this present
life, to wit, when we being touched with pity, do succor the need of the
poor. To either kind of mercy Christ does exhort us by the example of his
father, when he says: Luke. 6.36
Be ye merciful, as your heavenly father also is merciful. Let every one
remember this precept, which acknowledges Christ for his master.

The causes with which the godly ought to be stirred up to give alms, are
very many, among which these are the chief. The first cause is Christianity
it self, The first cause yea and that most weighty which ought to stir up
all christians to be diligent in giving alms.
or the profession of Christian religion. For this does require, that we
abound in every good work, and that we embrace and cherishe one another as
the members of one body, the head whereof is Christ. When this is done of faith
in Christ, we do, in the fear of God practice true christianity, that is, we
do truly imitate the divine nature. For seeing God, whom christianity bids
us follow, is rich in mercy, we by following his mercy are after a sort said
to be followers of the divine nature. But they that are not occupied in this
following, do falsely attribute to themselves a christian name. Furthermore
they are not counted the lawful sons of God but bastardes rather. For God
acknowledges none among his sons, but whom he sees at the least to
endeavor to imitate his fathers virtues. To this pertayneth that saying of the
Lord in the Prophet. If I be a father where is mine honor? Malac. 1.6.
But the cheifest part of honor, which children can do to their parents, is
to imitate their virtues. Whosoever earnestly looks for the glory of
christianity, let him set before himself this cause of showing mercy to his
neighbor, and let him not suffer himself to be led away with evil examples
from this necessary and due worship of God.

The second cause is the commandment of God, The second cause which ought to
move us to the giving of alms.
unto which all creatures ought to obey. Of this cause Jesus the son of
Sirach makes mention. chap. 29: Help the poor for the commandments sake,
and turn him not away because of his poverty. And a little after: Bestow thy
treasure after the commandment of the most high, and it shall bring thee more
profit then Gold. Our treasure that does never fail we must lay up and keep
in heaven, but yet it is in this life bestowed upon the poor, upon whom the
benefits that be bestowed the Lord so accepts as if we had bestowed them
upon himself. All the testimonies of the Scripture which do commend unto us
the love of our neighbor, do require especially liberality toward the
nedie. For this is the chief part of true love. Hereunto belongs that saying
of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 15. I command thee, saying, He cannot rightly fear the
Lord which is not merciful to the poor. 1. John. 3.17.
thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother that is needy. He that contemns
this precept of the Lord, how can he love God? how can he fear him? for thus
says John: Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
And Job 6. He that takes away mercy from his neighbor, has forsaken the
fear of the Lord. Whosoever therefore determines to love God and to fear him
from his heart, let him think that he does owe obedience to God commanding.
Of which thing Micheas speaks after this sort: I will show thee, O man, what
is good, and what the Lord requires of thee, surely to do justly, and to love
mercy and to humble thy self to walk with thy God.

The third cause which ought to provoke us to be liberal in giving alms.
The third cause is the imitation of examples, of Christ our Lord first, and
then of his members. Christ was made poor for us, that he might enrich us.
What therefore do we again, owe to the members of Christ: especially seeing he
witnesses that that is done to himself whatsoever we do to the least of his
members. Matthew. 25. The holy fathers desired nothing more than to relieve the
poor Saints. Abraham does reverence strangers, and bids them to eat with
him, that he may show liberality unto them. Lot desired the Angels to come
into his house, whom he thought to be poor strangers. Cornelius the courtier
is written to have given himself to continual prayer and alms, which the
scripture witnesses to have come up into remembrance before God.

The fourth cause is the dignity and estimation of alms godly bestowed before
God. Proverb. 21. The fourth cause which ought to stir us up diligently to
distribute our alms to the poor.
To do mercy and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice.
Christ says Matthew. 9. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Heb. 13. To do
good and to distribute forget not: for with such sacrifice God is pleased. So
great dignity, so great estimation is there before God, Alms rightly bestowed
is a thing much accepted and esteemed before God.
of the alms godly bestowed. It is preferred before sacrifice: God is said to
be singularly moved and delighted therewith. This dignity ought worthily to
admonish them which abound in this worlds good, that they endeavor,
according to the counsel of Paul, to be rich in good works.

The fifth cause is our neighbor himself. The fifth cause of giving alms.
But that every man is neighbor one to another, the Parable of the Samaritane
does teach, although this neighbourhode is greater with some than with other
some. A triple bond wherewith all men are joined in neighborhood one with
another.
Every man both godly and also ungodly is neighbor unto me, and that first by
reason of our creation. Secondly for likeness sake. Thirdly in respect of our
common life and humane society. And although this triple bond wherewith men
are bound among themselves, is a great cause wherefore men ought to do good
unto men: nevertheless there is yet a far greater bond wherewith Christians
are knit together with Christians. Other exceeding near bonds wherewith
Christians are knit together, which also ought not a little to move us unto
liberal alms toward our nedy brethren.
For first one vocation is common to all Christians, whereby we are called to
the unity of spirit in the bond of peace. Again, by the same spirit we are
begotten again to be the sons of God, whereby it comes to pass that both
we have one father which is God, and also we are brethren among our selves.
Moreover, we are members of the same mystical body, the head whereof is
Christ. Finally, we have the same hope of the glory to come, for we are heirs
of eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. If we do earnestly think upon
this fifth cause of mercy toward our neighbor, there is none that does not
acknowledge how necessarily liberality is to be showed to them that be in
need. I do not make mention of that bond by which al men in this world are
debtors one to another. Who will seem to be a contemner of the unity of the
spirit, whereunto the Gospel calls us? Who can abide to hear that he is a
denier of spiritual brotherhoode? Who dare so despise the members of Christ,
that he will suffer them to be tormented with cold, hunger, and nakedness?
Who will not worthilye suffer him to be partaker with him of the things of this
world which soon fade away, whom he assuredly thinks shall be heir with
him of the heavenly treasures? If this cause of liberality and mercy were
esteemed of many according to the worthiness thereof, they would not set
their minds so much upon deceyte and unjust gain, they would not so much
spoil and rob the needy members of Christ, and they would think more of
cherishing and making much of their own flesh. As often as we see any that is
in misery craving our help and succor, let us, Esaias. 58.7.
I pray you, remember the saying of Esaias: Hide not thy self from thine own
flesh.

The sixth cause that ought to move us to give alms, is the sundry punishments
which shall light upon them that are unmerciful toward the poor.
The sixth cause is the punishment, yea and that manifold of them which are hard
toward the poor. The first is the wrath of God, Ecclesiasticus 4. Turn not
thine eyes aside from the poor, because of anger. The second is the curse. In
the same place it is said: For if the curse thee in the bitterness of his soul,
his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. The third is the refusing of
thy prayer which thou make in thy necessity. Proverb. 21. He that stops
his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry and not be heard. A
horrible punishment truly, then which none can be more grievous: and it is no
marvel that he is not heard of God, which does not hear the Son of God
crying in his members. The fourth is a depriving them of their gifts. For it
is written: Matthew. 25.23.
From him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away. But he is said
not to have, which does not use his gifts and goods to the glory of God, and
the relieuing of them that be in misery. To this pertains that saying,
Proverb. 3. He that despises the prayer of the poor shall suffer poverty.
The fifth is the begging of their children, or their most wicked life which is
far more grievous then all need and poverty. I have spoken of the
punishments of them that are cruel toward the poor, and that not out of
philosophy which may err, but out of the very oracles of God, which cannot
deceive or lie. He that shall contemn these, shall in short time find a just
judge. Now we will speak of affection, of what sort we require it to be in him
which has purposed to give alms, and of the due and convenient manner of
alms. Two things diligently to be taken head of in giving alms.
Christ will have two vices to be excluded from alms Matthew. 6. which are
hypocrisy and vain glory. For these two do as pernicious poisons, infect
whatsoever they touch. Neither is that any marvel. For where hypocrisy is,
there is no faith: where vain glory is, there is no love of God, no fear of
God. Let therefore pharisaicall Hypocrisy and foolish boasting be far of
from our alms. What affections ought to be in him that bestows alms.
What affections then do you require in alms? love of God, charity of our
neighbor, sincere gentleness and cherefulnesse. For with these affections as
with a certain heavenly salt, our alms ought to be sprinkled, whereby it
ought to be a sacrifice acceptable to God. Furthermore, with alms faith is to
be joined, by which we do not only assure our selves that our alms does
please God, but also that he has a care over our whole life, that he does
furnishe us with necessary defense and living. And because he requires that we
should help others, and has promised rewards, we shall for Gods sake bestow
benefits, and again by faith look for the help of God. Quantity in alms
how to be considered.
In ye manner of our alms we shall consider the quantity, according to the
counsel of Tobias, who says: Tob. 4.9.
If thou have much, give plenteously, if thou have little, do thy diligence
gladly to give of that little: Equality, Equality in alms.
that thou of bounden duty do bestow thy alms on the needy, Readiness and
chearefulnes in giving alms.
and he again with a thankful mind receive it and wish well unto thee:
Readynes of mind, according to that saying of Paul. 2. Cor. 8. If there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not. Upon whom especially alms is to be bestowed.
Difference of strangers and them that be of the household of faith, according
to the counsel of Paul Gal. 6. While we have time, let us do good unto all
men, but especially unto them, which are of the household of faith, that is,
them which by faith are in the same family of God that we be: Prouer. 5.16.
Possession, according to the saying of Solomon: Let thy fountains flow forth,
but be thou master of them.

Now it remains that we speak of the ends of godly alms, and of the
fruit thereof. And although both the ends, and also the fruit of holy alms
may easily be gathered of those things which go before, yet that I may the
more stir up the godly reader to this necessary, holy, and dutiful office,
I will add somewhat of the ends and fruits of alms godly bestowed. The
ends of godly alms are four.
The ends are four: The first, the relieuing of our needy neighbor, and the
refreshing of the members of Christ. The second, the provoking of others to
liberality toward the poor, according to that saying: 2. Cor. 9. Your zeal
has provoked many. The third, the witnessing of our faith and of the fear of
God. For the duties of charity are directed unto this end, that by them we
do witness that we fear God, whose commandment we obey. The fourth, the
glory of God. Diverse and manifold fruits do follow liberality toward the
poor. ^. Cor. 9.8.
Paul witnesses that it will come to pass that they which have been liberal
and bountiful toward the poor, shall abound in every good work. For so it
pleases the Lord to recompense obedience toward him with new graces. And
this is it which ye Lord says Matthew. 6. The Lord shall reward thee openly. And
Psalm. Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor: Psalm. 41.1.
the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Solomon: He that has
mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord. Prouer. 19.17.
Paul says: He that sows liberally shall reap also liberally. Esaias. 58. If
thou pour out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul: then
shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as
the noone day. Ecclesiasticus. 29. Lay up thine alms in thy secret chambers,
and it shall keep thee from all affliction, it shall fight for thee against
thine enemy, better than the shield of a strong man, or spear of the
mighty. Here the wise man calls the necessities of our neighbors secret
chambers, in which benefits are to be laid up and kept, whereupon one of the
holy fathers has said elegantlye and well: the hand of the poor is a
treasure house of Christ. Then the wise man adds the exceeding great fruit
of the bounteousnesse laid up in those secret chambers to be deliverance from
evils, and a most strong fortress and defense against our enemies. For a man
can by nothing be more defended and protected against perils, than by
bounteousnes and mercy. But I speak of ye alms which proceeds of faith, as
it sufficiently appears by those things that I have before spoken, least that
any man think that I agree with the Papists, which value their alms without
Christ, and without faith. These things concerning liberal and godly alms, I
thought therefore to add, that I might admonish especially them that are of
the richer sort, of their duty, that they may understand that they are bound
by the law of God to bestow part of their substance upon the poor, and that
freely for the commandments sake of God, and for many other causes which I
have rehearsed. Furthermore that, if they shall refuse to obey the
commandment of God, they may know that they are guilty of disobedience
toward God. Of these things that is plainly concluded which I propounded, to
wit, that none may without great sacrilege take gain of this That is, such as
either through poverty, age, or for some other cause are not able to help
themselves.
first kind of men. In the second order or state of men I place artificers, and
those which get their living with the labor of their hands. To these,
according to the precept of Christ, we must lend, and look for nothing again.
For as the Apostle forbids to give unto these freely when he says: He that
labors let him eat. As charity does not require that we should give of
our goods freely to them that are strong and able to labor: How we must
behave our selves in lending to artificers and laborers.
so if necessity urging them, they desire to borowe any thing of thee, obey
the rule of Christ and lend without looking for a recompense in the like or in
any other kind of duty. The reason of the rule is, because that they, which in
the sweat of their brows and in the labor of their hands do get their
living, are wont to gain little more then their living and their clothing. If
such therefore should be grieved with Usury, they should be plainly oppressed,
not without the great hurt of commonweals and families, and so the
foundation of the contractes and bargains which we have laid before, should be
utterly overthrown. But I cannot with silence pass over what I judge most
justly to be found fault with in this kind of men. Three great faults in many
artificers and laborers.
For beside that many of this sort of men do seem to have cast aside the
fear of God, Judge three most grievous vices to be restrained in them, which
are: more then barbarous drinking, excess of apparel altogether unmeet for
this kind of men, and fraud and false dealing in their workmanship and labor.
The first fault found in artificers and workmen.
Many artificers and workmen, whatsoever they gain the whole week, this on
the holy days they spend in drinking, having no regard of their silly wives
or of their poor children. Whereby it falls out, that artificers and
workmen do more often want, and are more often constrained to borow. If such
were restrained by laws and by punishment, it should be better provided not
only for them but also for the common weal. If any thing be remaining more
then will suffice for their drinking, The second fault.
this they turn into excess of apparel. He speaks not of our country
England, but of his own country Denmark, whether the same may be said of
our country, that I leave to the judgment of others.
For a man may see often times a peltmonger or a shoemaker or some other
crafts man to be more finely appareled, then a Knight has been when I was a
child, when as yet the noble virtue of our auncetors was in any estimation.
They are not contented with common cloth, which was very much set by among our
elders, but they imitating noble men and princes, do seek for garments of
silk. And they whose ability does not permit that do guard the hemmes of
their sleeves and skirts of their garments with clean silk, that as by a
certain sign or token they may bewray the pride of their mind. Here I judge
the magistrate to offend most grievously which does not restrain this lightness
with laws and punishment. An objection.
Here perhaps will rise up against me some prating workman and will except after
this sort: What? is it not lawful for me to use my own things as it shall
please me? am I not master of mine own things? The answer.
A seemelines is to be kept in every kind of life, wherefore it is in no wise
lawful for thee to abuse thy things contrary to that which beseems thee,
which if thou shall do, it is the duty of the magistrate, that he do correct
thee and teach thee what kind of apparel does become a shoemaker or a
peltmonger. Thou think that thou art made more trim and commendable before
men with thy ornaments of silk: but wise men do judge far otherwise of
thee. For of the excess of apparel they do gather an excessive and a riotous
mind. The third fault in many artificers and workmen.
What shall I say of the fraud and false dealing of workmen? what of their
new colors, wherewith they do paynt and set forth their works? who does not
complain of the deceit of artificers and workmen? Let me speak somewhat more
freely what I think. In every kind of trade they have a gods name, their
overseers after the manner of the ancient Athenians. But what I pray you, do
these overseers? there are perhaps some among the^, which, that they may
receive part of the gain or may get of them those things that are necessary
for them at a lower price: will wink at many faults of the workmen (which
they ought to correct, if they would rightly execute the office of overseers)
having little regard of the health of the body, that is of the common weal. It
is the duty therefore of wise gouernoures, that they bring into order both the
artificers them selves and also their overseers or assistents. That which I
have said of shoomakers and peltmongers, I will have to be understand of all
workmen and laborers whose occupation and practice is necessary in the
common weal.

In the third order or state of men may husbandmen be placed, who also do get
their living with the labors of their hands. If these did there duty in the
fear of God, and tilled the earth diligently, truly they should less stand in
need, especially they which have but small fields. For the earth which they
labor does render with increase that which it receives, Very unjust usury
practiced among husbandmen.
so as the labor of the husband man be watered with the fear of the Lord.
Among this kind of men most unjust Usury is used, and such Usury truly as the
Turks and other profane heathen would without dout abhor. Some man
peradventure boroweth a quarter of grain in the time of sowing, but with a
covenant, that either he restore the same double at the years end to him of
whom he borrowed it, or else that he sow of his own charges freely so much as
he borrowed. I speak not of the usury of money, which is far more unjust
then the former. It behooves the godly magistrate to correct this injustice,
and it is the duty of godly pastors to provoke the husbandmen to do
pleasures and good turns one to another without all usury in the fear of the
Lord, and to paynt out that cursed usury in it colors, that they may learn
to eschew it as a certain plague or pestilence. I would wish also in this
state of men both excess of apparel to be restrained, and also unprofitable
expenses at marriages, and at the birth of their children. For it is wont
oftentimes to come to pass that they are destitute of things necessary, which
forgetting the manner of their state, do not keep a mean.

In the fourth state of men may be placed nice and delicate young men, of whom
Horace writes in this manner: Nice and delicate young men.
The young man not yet ripe in years,
from keeper once set free:
Does set delight in horse and dogs,
and in green field to be:
Soon led to vice, is sharp to them
that warn him as his friends:
For profit slowly does provide,
in waste his money spendes.
Is lofty eke and covetous,
and soon does that forsake:
Which he once loved, and wherein
his pleasure he did take.


To this order therefore I thought good to add the welthier young men, which
are not yet married, whether they be noble, or the sons of citizens, who being
now set free from their tutors and governors of their manners, are carried more
freely according to the lust of their mind. It often falls out with these,
yt by reason of their prodigal spending of things (for it is wont to come to
pass for the most part, that they which are borne unto wealth, or come easily
by it, are more wastfull of their things) do desire to borowe money of others.
But how we must deal with these I will declare, when I shall first show what
I find wanting in them, and what I would have to be reformed in the^. Although
I fear yt the same will happen to me, which in time past chanced to the Hares
that gave laws to the lions, Ill bringing up is a cause of marring many, which
are of a good towardnes and wit.
nevertheless ye truth is to be preferred before al peril. First not a few which
are of good towardnes are marred with evil bringing up, and get those vices
from their tender years, which all their age after do for the most part
accompany them. For when parents do either too much cocker their children, or
by their own example allure them to naughtiness, or neglect due instruction,
what other thing, An apt similitude.
I pray you, can come to pass, than which we see in trees, which from the
beginning being neglected, become crooked and unfruitful. Contrariwise, they
that are pruned, erected and watered with the hand and cunning of the husband
man, are made straight, fertile, and fruitful. How much bringing up prevails
either unto virtue or vice it is declared by an excellent example.
But how much it skilleth to accustom from tender years, Lycurgus taught his
Lacedaemonians by this example: he took in hand to bring up two whelps which
came of the same sire and damme, of which one he suffered to be pampered and
well fed, the other he applied to hunting. These thus brought up, he brought
unto the common theater or stage of the Lacedaemonians, and placed them in the
midst thereof, and together in the sight of the whelps he set a pot of flesh
and a live Hare. This being done, he let them both lose, the Lacedaemonians
beholding him, of which the one with great vehemency runs after the Hare,
the other thrusts his head into the flesh pot. But when the Lacedimonians
marueyled, what this sight did mean, Lycurgus answers: both these whelps
came of the same sire and damme, but you see the one given to the belly, the
other to be delighted with hunting. This diverse disposition is long of the
bringing up. Know ye therefore, O ye Lacedaemonians, that the manner of life,
education, and custom, are of great importance to virtue. The ancient Crates
also ascending the highest part of the city did wisely cry out: whither are ye
carried O ye citizens? is it meet that you should be wholly occupied in getting
riches, and to be nothing careful for your children, for whose sake riches are
gotten? Believe me, says he, Good education a most profitable patrimony.
there can none more precious and better heritage be left unto your children,
the^ if they be well brought up from their tender age, and be rightly
instructed unto virtue from their infancye. This patrimony remains with them
continually nothing at al subject to the storms and troubles of fortune. Two
things which much hinder good education.
But I see two especial causes why certain parents do more negligently
provide that their children be instructed, to much cockering and nigardship.

In cockering mothers do more often offend, and especially those which have
not very many children. A very apt similitude.
These do like as if some husbandman should refuse to till his field because
he has but one only. Who could suffer this man's folly and perverseness of
judgment? is it not much more to be tilled because it is only one? It is so
truly, that the profit and increase of one may recompense the want of many:
The fewer the children the more diligently to be cared for that they be well
brought up.
After the same sort I judge it to be the duty of mothers, so much more
diligently to bring up their children, by how much they are fewer. But I see
what does let mothers, they love their children more dearly than that they can
suffer them to be an hour out of their sight, but it is cruel love so to love
their children, Cruel love in many mothers that think them selves to love
their children most dearly.
that they should be as it were given over of their mothers unto all
naughtiness, of which perverse and cruel love, not a few shall suffer the
just punishment, which with great grief of mind and with tears shall be
compelled to see the unbridled wantonness and ungraciousness of their
children, unto which they do now all to late go about to provide a remedy.

On the other side niggardship is oftentimes greater, The second cause which
hinders good education.
than that parents will bestow the cost. Whatsoever is spent upon horse
breakers, or horse keepers, fools, minstrels, dogs, etc. that they think well
bestowed, but if they see any thing to be spent about instructing their
children, they think all that ill bestowed, and are much more careful that an
horse be well framed to vaunting and leaping, than that their child be well
instructed to virtue. Plutarch declares a very goodly history making
hereunto: Aristippus, The discommoditie of evil bringing up is properly showed.
says he, being demanded of a certain foolish father how great a reward
he would ask for instructing his son, answered, a thousand grotes. This
answer being heard, the father with indignation cries out: O good God,
says he, I can buy a bondsman or slave for a thousand grotes, to whom
Aristippus: buy, says he, a bondsman, and so thou shall have two bondmen, both
the servant whom thou have bought, and the child whom thou have begot:
signifying that the minds of children, honest discipline being neglected, do
become servile, and open unto all naughtiness. For the Poet truly says: The
untilled and neglected field,
the fruiteles fearne for fruit does yield.


For so it is altogether, if thou leave a field untilled, thou shall find it to
have plentifully brought forth fearne and thistles: after the same sort, if
thou shall leave the wites of children unlooked unto and unexercised, thou
shall reap most abundant fruit of wantonness and ungraciousness. We have what
be the beginninges of unbridled and wanton youth, whereunto afterward come the
very evil examples of them which are taught after the same manner. What other
thing I pray you, can be looked for here, then that which is reported of a
certain kind of chalkie clay, which as Pliny says, has so great affinity
with the fire, that the flame does pass unto it from what place soever it be
seen: for whatsoever vice is in others whose acquaintance they use, this
comes upon them as a certain flame, and if there be any virtue left, it
consumes it, so great a nourishing of all naughtines and unbridled
sensuality is the acquaintance and conversation of evil men. In this
fellowship, virtue being banished they begin to strive who shall pass other in
pleasure. Contending who shall pass one an other in quaffing and drunkenness.
Here it is a goodly thing to contend in drinking and to overcome. It is
thought to be greater glory not to be overcome in quaffing, then valiantly to
drive back the enemy. They that overcome in this striving are no less
praised them Achilles was in time past, because he ouercam Hector in a singular
combat. Briefly, according to the saying of Esaias, they show them selves men in
drunkenness, and so they carry away the spoils of Sarmacis without blood and
sweat. There is also an other kind of striving wherein one contendeth to
overcome an other in vanity, in stra^genes, Contending in vanity and excess
of apparel.
in price and excess of apparel. Here when none will be the last, O good God,
what unprofitable expenses are made? as this striving is exceeding gainefull to
marchantes: so is it a most ready way to empty the purses of unwise men. I say
nothing of other striuings not worthy to be remembered, unto which there are no
small charges required. What at the last will here come to pass? their purses
being emptied, they run unto their friends, they desire to borrowe money, that
nothing may be wanting to the soldiers of Epicure. How we must behave our
selves in lending to them which are prodigal and riotous.
Here if any deny that which is asked, he gets unto himself an enemy, if
he lend, he adds oil to fire. What, I pray you, must a godly man do here?
ought he to give money freely unto these, or ought he to lend it them? No wise
man will give it freely, because alms is due not to riot, not to drinking, not
to dyce, etc. but to necessity. Parents and kinsemen which will seem here to
be more liberal, To lend a prodigal man money is to reach a sword in to a
mad man's hand.
and do minister money which is the instrument of naughtines, to them yt ask
it, do as it were reach a sword unto a mad man. Ought they to lend these any
thing? No truly. For thou art bound by no law neither of God, nor of nature
nor of man to lend money to them, We must not lend money to prodigal persons.
which abuse it to their own destruction, yea thou do not a little offend
if thou do it. For he that has given an occasion of loss, seems to have
given the loss, wherefore he is made guilty of an other man's fault, as though
his own proper burden were not enough for him. For when these nice and
delicate young men do find where they may readily borow money upon Usury, they
spend more prodigally, till their substance being quite wasted they be brought
unto poverty not without shame and reproach to the family whereof they come.
Wherefore sithence it is profitable also to the common weal that honest and
especially noble and ancient families be mayntained, he does not a little
offend against the common weal, who by lending does give occasion of utter
decay of honest families. Wherefore let a wise and godly man be nothing moved
with the offense of these light men, neither let him communicate with other
men's faults, neither let him give occasion of greater spending, but let him
fear God rather and help them by lending unto them, whom the Lord
commands to be helped.

Unto the first order or sort of men they may be referred, which are come to
their full and perfect age, whose study of life the Poet describes in these
verses.

The manly mind and age now ripe,
old studies does forsake:
And friendship, wealth and honor eke,
to get it means does make.
What men of full and perfect age are most commonly inclined unto.
These leaving the fond toys of youth, as the Poet witnesses, are occupied
with new studyes: they seek riches, they desire friendship, they are tickled
with honor. Who if they would enter into a just trade of life, and call their
liberty to an account, they should have sufficient to mayntaine their state.
But they being not contented with their mean state do seek after higher
matters, and having no regard of the means of their calling they streyne them
selves to do greater things then their ability does bear. Such therefore
when as they are destitute of feathers, nevertheless they enterprise to strive
with the egle in flying: they had need some otherwhere to borow feathers, which
they them selves have not at home. What I pray you, is more fond or foolish
then these? what is more unadvised or rash? they see other much richer then
themselves to wear costly garments. What do our country men hear? yt they
may not seem less noble the^ they, they desire to borow money upon Usury, that
they may have whereby they may maintain and increase their bravery. They
marvel at the sumptuous houses of others, in which thing when they will not
give place to them that are of the richer sort, they must by all means seek
to get money whereby they may build the like houses. We must not presume above
our ability.
Should they not do much better if measuring themselves by their own foot,
they did prepare a nest fit and agreeable for themselves and for their chickens?
Were it not a ridiculous thing if the Lark seeing the nest of the Swanne,
should make an account that the like were to be prepared for her self. A
worthy saiing of Frances King of the frenchmen, wherein is showed that we must
not go beyond the limits of our state
There is reported a very pretty saying of Frances King of the Frenchmen
concerning the house of a certain noble man builded and set forth sumptuouslye
and after a princely sort. For when as the King was brought into the house, and
the noble man did look for the Kings voice concerning the sumptuousnes of the
building: at the last the King being asked his judgment of the house,
answered, that al things were fair and sumptuous, but that it was to great a
nest for so little a bird. The King did very well truly and sufficient wittily
in few words reprehend the folly of the man, and also by his answer
admonished, that it behooves every man to abide within the limits of his state
and calling, beyond or beside which nothing can well consist.

He describes at large the presumptuous prodigality of diverse of his own
country men the Danes, but all other whosoever that be in the same fault, may
be thereby also admonished.
They do furthermore behold others to wear great chains of gold as tokens of
their nobility and authority to whom if they be not made like even in this
thing, they think that there honor is ill provided for. What must they needs
do hear? their ability is more slender then that it does suffize to bye so
costly and great chains: wherefore they must seek to borow gold some other
where, for which either their fermes are to be morgaged, or money is to be
borrowed upon usury. For no man gives unto them freely, no man ought to lend
them for naught. For free lending, as Christ witnesses is due only to them
that need. Ecclesiasticus. 29. Lend unto thy neighbor in the time of his
need. Here the wise man does plainly restrain the duty of lending unto the
time of need. Hereupon it falls out that sometimes their rents are scarce
sufficient to pay the usury. The husband first wearing a chain does in vain
desire the friendly countenance of his wife, before she also be adorned with
chains and other innumerable ornaments. Then the daughters seking to have the
like trimming and decking that their mother has, do not cease to provoke
their father by entreaty, till they also wear chains.

They see moreover in the families of great personages noble and honorable
furniture, in which thing they do not suffer themselves to be the last. Here
gilded cups, costly wynes, precious hanginges of houses and sumptuous
ornaments must be gotten. These things being gotten, great feasts are made
that this excellency and bravery may be known unto others. There are also in
this sort of men who being not content with their fermes and fields whereupon
they might live honestly enough according to their state, do think of the
bying of other men's fields and fearmes, that they may leave their children a
greater patrimony, but when these also do want ability they must seek money
some where or other, that they may have wherewith to suffice their avarice.
What shall he do here which has money, wherewith he is able to satisfy their
desire? Perhaps it will be an uncivil thing to deny, and to give freely or to
lend, neither the law of God, nor the rule of charity does compel thee. What
therefore will thou say, shall I do? He knows yt I have money, which if he shall
not receive, he will cry out that he is forsaken of his friend, and so by
deniyng that which is asked, for a friend I get to my self an enemy. Is it
lawful therefore for me, for ye benefit of lending to covenant for usury,
especially seeing yt I do not owe to him that asks neither by Gods law nor by
the law of nature, that which he asks? I owe alms to the poor by the law of
God and of nature. To him that needs, but is strong and able to thrive with
that he boroweth, I ought to lend by Gods law and by the law of nature. Here
if I do not render that which I owe, I do offend, and if I ask a reward for
my bounden duty, I break the rule of Christ, and pervert the law of nature.
But here I am not bound neither by Gods law nor by the law of nature. All
taking of more than the principal is not condemned, neither properly to be
called usury.
Wherefore if here I show any benefit which is not due, what forbids that
I may not bargayne to have a reward for my benefit? and according to the
received custom, to receive five of the hundred every year? I say that Usury
is not here properly committed, because that this benefit was free, whereunto
thou wast not bound neither by the law of God nor of nature. For Usury
condemned by the word of God is properly committed, when for the lending which
thou owe freely by the law of God and of nature, thou requirest some thing
more then the principal for the bounden duty of lending. Hereunto pertayneth
the rule of Gerson: When it is usury to take more than the principal, and
when it is not usury.
Every contract or bargayne, which by it own kind, or by the circumstances
ought to be free, if a covenant of receiving more than the principal, comes
between, it is named Usury, and properly such only is named Usury. Of this
rule of Gerson it follows, that it is not a bargain of Usury, which by the
circumstances ought not to be free. Wherefore if I take any thing according to
the appointment and limitation of the laws, for the benefit of lending which
is not due, that there may be equality, I do not commit Usury. I owe alms
to the poor, I ought to lend to the needy. Wherefore? Because the ordinance
of God and the law of nature does require this. But to him that needs not I
ought of duty by no law to lend. If therefore I deal or bargayne with him,
a covenant being made between us concerning receiving somewhat more than the
principal, Usury is not properly committed, especially if the equality be
kept which the Magistrate has appointed. Wherefore in this kind of dealing I
allow the sentence of D. Aepinus, who writing upon the 15. Psalm, rehearses
three sorts of men, to wit, of beggars, of them that do in very deed stand
in need (who notwithstanding are able to thrive with the money that they
borowe) and of them which are welthie, and have whereupon they might live
honestly with their family so that they were content with their mean. Of
these three kinds of men Aepinus does learnedly dispute, and at length
concludes, that in the third kind Usury is not committed, so that otherwise
there be no departing from equality. It is natural equity to render one good
turn for another.
Now it is natural equity that for a benefit, which by right we do not owe,
a benefit be rendered, that there may be equality. Concerning this equality,
the determination of the Magistrate is to be heard. The King of most
commendable memory Christierne the third, did provide by a law, that no man
should receive above five every year of the hundred. These limits and bonds
he that does pass, departs from equality. But I would have the godly
always to have certain sure aduertisements in their sight, which a little
after I will annexe.

In the sixth order of men I place merchants, to wi^ them, which have not so
great substance whereby they are able to maintain themselves honestlye, but
do live by trade of merchandise, and do get gain by the changing, carrying
out and bringing in of things, whereby often times they do not a little gain.
It falls out often with these, that they seek to borowe money, without which
they cannot exercise their mean trade of marchandice. Here it is demanded
whether it be lawful for the creditour to covenant for usury. I answer
plainly that it is not lawful. For both by the law of God and of nature thou
doste owe to thy brother being in need the duty of lending. For when he does
in deed stand in need, and thou art able without thy certain hinderance to
help him, thou do offend if thou do not help him, and thou do also
offend, if thou take any thing more than the principal for the bounden duty
of lending. But here are four observations to be marked. The first concerns
merchants that are not content with their mean. The second pertayneth unto
society. The third to the inheritance of wards. The fourth is referred to
the interest. Now as concerning the first observation, we must understand,
that no man ought by the law of God and of nature to lend unto a very rich
merchant, whose great wealth and substance is well known. For that which is
lent is due to necessity, and ought not to serve insatiable covetousness.
Wherefore we may deal with this kind of men, according to the rule which we
gave when we entreated of the fifth sort of men. The second observation, which
we said to pertayne unto society, is after this sort: a merchant boroweth
money of thee, How we may lawfully covenant for part of the gain of that which
we lend.
and thou do agree with him for part of the gain upon this condition, if
he shall get any gain by thy money. Here it is demanded, whether it be
lawful for thee to covenant for part of the gain. I answer, it is lawful
so that thou will take part of the peril upon thy self. For when this is done
it does not become usury. Thou may therefore for a year require five of
the hundred as part of the gain, so that thou again wilt suffer five of the
hundred to be abated of the principal, if he suffer damage. For he that
couenaunteth only with condition of the gain and will be free from the loss,
does in very deed commit Usury. Wherefore he is found guilty by the law of
God and of nature. But as concerning wards, How Gardians may lend the money
of the wards committed unto them.
the Gardians of the wards, that the inheritance wherewith they are put in
trust be not by little and little wasted, may lend the money of the wards to
them that desire it especially to them that are of the richer sort, and for the
benefit of lending and the use of the money require that which is reasonable,
that is, according to the limitation of the magistrate, five of the hundred
every year. This kind of dealing is not to be counted usury. For neither
Gardians are bound to lend of that which is another man's, neither they which
borow, when as neither divine nor natural bond or debt went before, can
justly refuse to be thankful for a benefit received. The observation which
pertayneth to the interest, does also hinder the manner of usury. For if by
deferring the payment of that which is borrowed the creditour be endamaged,
Interest whereof it is said to come.
equity does require that the dettour make a recompense for the damage. And
this they call the interest which they say does arise, either because of the
loss that comes or because of the gain that cease. For if the dettour
shall not pay that which he borrowed, at the time appointed for the payment,
natural equity requires, that the dettour make recompense for the loss that
came to the creditour thereby. The like is to be said of the gain ceasing.
But here let the lender beware that he use not deceytfull balances. Charity
most necessary in all kinds of bargaynes.
Wherefore charity is to be added, which is the most just rule of all
contractes and bargaynes. This if it be sincere, will easilye find equality.
If other sorts of men be offered beside those that are rehearsed, it shall not
be hard by the former rules to judge, what is to be determined concerning
them. For there shall easily be found some likeness in them with the former
kinds, which may dissolve the question.

Of the fourth.
IT follows that we speak of the fourth member of our partition, which shall
contain certain admonitions, which may be unto the godly as certain
consultations not only in this trade concerning usury, whereof we have spoken
now sufficiently: but also in every kind of contract or bargayne shall keep us
in our duty, so that we will give godly ears unto them.

The first, Paul. 1. Tim. 1. faith: The first rule whereby we ought to examine
our doings.
The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned. We said before that usury is therefore
forbidden by the word of God, that charity may not be hurt among men. What
things are required in love that it may be true and sincere.
Now this rule of Paul wills, that charity proceed from a pure fountain
of the heart. Thou must take heed therefore, least that while thou do
outwardly pretend charity toward thy neighbor, thy heart be unclean, with
the filthiness whereof the duty is defiled, which thou seem to perform to
thy neighbor. Charity moreover requires a good conscience, to wit, that thou
may truly witness before God, that in all thy actions thou seek the glory
of God, and the profit of thy neighbor without falshoode or dissimulation.
For whereas falshoode and dissimulation is, there charity is banished, the
conscience is spoiled, and faith perishes. Whereupon it follows, that
nothing is well done. Let this rule therefore of Paul be always in our sight,
whereby we may try all our doings, as examined with a touchstone.

The second, Abstain, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. The second rule of our
actions.
from all appearance of evil. This rule is exceeding necessary. For it
admonishes that we do fly not only those things that are evil in very
deed, but also that we abstain altogether from the appearance of evil, that
is, that we avoid whatsoever pretends any outward show of evil. Let this
rule admonish the godly, that they do abstain not only from those bargains
which are in deed evil and unlawful: but also from those which have any
appearance of evil.

The third admonition concerning our doings.
The third, Paul. Hebr. 13. says: Let your conversation be without
covetousness. This precept does not belong only to the mind, to wit, that the
mind be not profaned with the most filthy idol of covetousness: Our mind must
in no wi^e be profaned with the filthy Idol of avarice.
but also to outward manners. For he will have us so to live, that no man may
lay upon us the fault of covetousness. For when the conversation bears witness
of the covetousness of the heart, godlynes and faith without all dout are
banished. Wherefore it is not without good aduisement which David prays when
he says: Psalm. 119.36.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. The fear of
God and covetousness can not agree together.
Here David sets obedience toward God and covetousness one against the other,
signifying that their condition is such, that where the one is the other cannot
be. If therefore the heart be infected with the vice of covetousness, sincere
religion toward God can in no wise be there. If a covetous man does sometime
pretend some obedience toward God, it is mere hypocrisy. But contrariwise, if
the heart be seruent in the love of God and in his religion, covetousness has
no place there. For what agreement has the idol of avarice with the temple of
God? Furthermore because the most holy King David desires of the Lord that his
heart may be inclined to the testimonies of God, and not unto covetousness, Our
heart of it self is prone unto covetousness.
he does manifestly show, that the heart of it own accord is carried to
covetousness, and cannot deliver it self from covetousness except God puts to
his hand. The precept therefore of Paul: Let your conversation be without
covetousness, I would have the godly to have always before their eyes, and this
prayer of David: Incline my heart to thy testimonies and not to covetousness. I
would have earnestly to be made, which if it were done, there would be less
striving among the godly about usury.

The fourth, Paul will have Christians so to live, The fourth admonition
concerning our actions specially in bargaining.
that our commodity be not evil spoken of among the heathen. Now it is
certain, yt the trade of usury is infamous among the Turks, and all profane
nations. What therefore will they say of Christians, if they shall hear that we
do contend with the most profane nations, and exceed them in unjust
bargains? These things truly ought worthily to admonish all godly men, that
they would rather live after a meaner sort, then that they would give occasion
that the name of God and the Gospel of Christ should be evil spoken of among
profane men. We ought with all examples of godliness and honesty to allure and
provoke them, that they would together with us worship Christ and be saved,
but, O good God, what is done? under a Christian name in many lurketh a
Turkish heart.

The fifth, Paul commands us to avoid offense, The fifth admonition.
least that the weak being offended at our doings do stumble. And he will not
have this only that we abstain from things that are evil by them selves, but
also from things lawful. It was lawful for Paul by christian liberty to
eat flesh, but what says he? 1. Cor. 8.13.
before I will offend my brother, I will not eat flesh while the world
stands. So far does the duty of those which are godly in deed extend, not
only to beware that they do not defile themselves with any spot of sin, but
also that they be not by any means a cause to other of falling, whereby they
may have occasion not to judge so well of us.

The sixth, The sixth admonition which ought to move us to deal truly and to do
well.
let the dignity of a Christian name come into our mind. Which name ought
truly not without most just cause to be holy among Christians. to move us to
deal truly and to do well.
It is a shameful and an unseemly thing for a man that is borne of a noble
and famous house to follow trades that are servile and contemptible, least that
he does any whit distaine the nobility of the house whereof he comes: much
more unseemly is it that the children of God do defile themselves with any
blemish which afterward may spread over the whole family of God.

The seventh admonition which ought to fear us from doing unjustly.
The seventh, punishment in the heirs is to be feared. For if any man by unjust
gain heapeth up much goods for his heirs, he shall not escape punishment. For
God does either in the sight of them take out of the world them who they hoped
should have been their heirs, that they may see their own vanity and amend,
or else he punishes the heirs by forsaking them, suffering them to run
headlong into sundry vices, that those things which were unjustly gotten may
most dishonestly be dispersed and perish, unto the certain destruction of the
heirs.

The eight admonition which ought to withdraw us from wrongful getting of
riches.
The eight, let this cogitation come into the mind: that oftentimes the children
of poor and honest parents have come unto very great dignities, and that not
by the means of riches, which they had not, but by the benefit of excellent
sciences of honesty, of wisdom, of prudence. I could name even domestical
examples, but because they are known, I let them pass. But contrariwise that
many, to whom great riches were left of their forefathers, have bin either
brought unto extreme poverty through their own fault, or else have bine as
painted tables profitable to nothing in the common weal, altogether like to
the wooers of Penelope and the swine of Epicure, borne to consume the fruit of
the earth. Let this cogitation admonish the godly, that they do rather leave
unto their children virtue and a good name, then without virtue many riches,
which children are seldom wont to use but to their own destruction. This
saying of Cicero is worthy of remembrance: The glory of virtue on excellent
patrimony.
the best inheritance which is given of fathers to their children, and more
excellent then every patrimony, is the glory of virtue and noble acts. And
again: a father can leave no monument more notable or famous, than a son
which is the image of his manners, of his virtue, constancy, godlynes and
wit. I hope that I have profitably added these admonitions to the disputation
of usury, now I desire the godly reader that he will weigh them godly, and
take them into his counsel in all his business.

Of the fifth.
IT remains, which in the last place we propounded, Aduertisements to the
ministers of Gods word, what they ought to do concerning usury and bargains.
to speak of the office of the ministers of the word, whose duty is in the
stead of God, as Preachers sent of him, to lift up their voice as a trumpet,
and to accuse the sins of men having no regard of persons: yet not without
spiritual wisdom, which takes heed that nothing be done unseemly or
amiss. First therefore let the Ministers of the word earnestly and sharply
condenme every unjust bargayne, yea and that usury which is condemned by the
word of God, and let them show that no unjust bargayne can stand with true
godlynes. Then let them diligently see, that they judge not too rashlye or
too sharply of bargaynes which the magistrate approves. Let them put a
difference between those bargains which God in his manifest word has
prohibited, and those which the laws do wisely ordeyne for the maintaining of
humane society, It is the ministers duty as much as they are a^le rightly to
reform manifest errors in contracts and bargains.
and let them not under a pretense of usury condemn those bargaynes in which
in deed there is no usury. Moreover let them reform as much as they can,
manifest errors in bargaynes, by Ecclesiastical discipline, and that not of
any private affection, but with sage and wise counsel, least that correction
out of due season does hurt more than profit. Furthermore, although the
Preachers of God can not correct all faults in bargaynes, The Church must be
troubled as little as may be.
yet let them not trouble the Church, but commend the thing unto God, and pray
that he will put to his hand. For where there is any peril of schism, the
sentence of excommunication being already pronounced against many, I judge that
they ought altogether to abstain from excommunication. The tares truly are to
be rooted out (as Augustine says) so that the wheat be not pulled up together
with them. A moderation to be observed of godly ministers in reforming manners.
Wherefore in amending manners let them follow this moderation: let them
correct the horrible sins of many, not with might, but with counsel, let
them reform them not with threatening but with admonishing. But contrariwise,
let them chastyce the sins of a few with severity, least that they take
force and invade the multitude. Which when it is done, they are more hardly
corrected. How the ministers of God ought to admonish concerning the right use
of riches.
Finally, let them most diligently admonish the rich men that they suffer not
them selves to be deceived by their riches, and that they take heed least that
they being beguyled by the deceytfull reasons of the foolish flesh, do lose
the faith, and fall into the snares of Satan. Let them admonish also that the
Lord did not say in vain: that it is an hard thing for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Let them now and then commend the true use of
riches unto them: Let them show that Christ would therefore have in his
Church certain needy and naked members of his body, that he might try the
rich men whether they did by a true faith love him in his members or no. These
aduertisements we have given to the Ministers of the Gospel which are of the
simpler sort, the other, especially they that are more exercised in the
ministry, do easily understand by themselves how the word of God is to be
decided and applied.

Of Lending.
LEnding does follow, Lending what it is.
which does not alienate a thing into the proper possession of the receyuer, as
it is done in the former bargaynes, but does only alienate the use of the
thing, and that for a time, that the very same thing in due time may be
restored again. This contract has the name of the use of it, because the
things that we borowe, do bring unto us some commodity and profit. Let this
kind of contract be without deceyt both in the lender and also in the borower,
and let it be subject to the law of charity.

Of hyring and letting out.
LEt the bargaynes of hyring and letting out be subject to the custom and
condition of the time and place, What is to be observed in hyring and letting
out.
yet so, that there be no departing from the law of charity. He therefore
which lets out the use of his thing or his labor, according to the custom
of the Realm, and other circumstances, may require a price or reward of him
that hireth it. He which will not pay it, is unjust. Hereunto me thinks
pertayneth the bargayne which the Lawyers call emphuteusis, that is, planting
or graffing, therefore so called, because they that in times past did hire
barren fields, did make them better by planting and graffing, that is, by good
ordering and usage, and did pay to the owners a certain yearly rent for the
use of the fields, the right nevertheless of the possession remaining in the
letter of them out. This particular was afterward translated to a general,
that is, to the letting out of all fields and houses. This contract therefore
concerning tilling and planting, consists in the dealing with the ground and
land only, wherein fruit comes to him that hyreth, by tilling and due
ordering: but the letter of it out does remain the true owner of the land,
and therefore according to the laws and customs of countries, he does justly
receive part of the fruit by the bargayne.

Of the contract of society.
The contract of society wherein it consists.
IN that which they call the contract of society, that is, whereas one
bestows money only, and another only labor, or one bestows money and
labor, another only money or labor, or both bestow money and labor, but not
equally: we must follow the foundation without deceit: do not that to an
other which thou will not have done to thy self. He which contrary to this
foundation shall deceive his fellow is unjust, and has broken the laws of
brotherly society. These things I thought good to add concerning contracts
and bargains that I might herein have consideration of the consciences of the
godly. A full and perfect doctrine of bargains may be taken out of the
writings of the lawyers, who of purpose as cunning and skillful in these
matters, do write of them most copiously, neither is there any cause, that any
man should think that the ordinances or decrees of wise gouernoures concerning
bargains or other offices profitable in the life of man, are against the
Gospel. For, as before we have witnessed, the Gospel does not abolish civil
ordinances. Ioh. 18.36.
For the Lord says: My kingdom is not of this world. The Gospel therefore
leaves to every nation the laws thereof, which varying not from the ten
commandments do tend to the mayntayning of commonweals and families. A rule
which the godly may safely follow in all kinds of bargains.
Wherefore the godly may most safely follow this rule: All bargaynes approved of
the lawful magistrate, which has the chief government, are lawful unto
Christians, so as they do not plainly disagree with the law of nature and
the ten commandments. And therefore the godly may use them freely with a good
conscience without offending God, no otherwise then these elements, which are
common both to the godly and ungodly.

A Question concerning the goods of the Church.
Whether it be lawful for heirs to require again the goods, which their
forefathers have bestowed upon the Church for the celebrating of Masses: the
Masses now ceasing, ye being quite abolished.

The Answer.
A Difference must be put between the next end of the giving and the last
end. Two ends to be considered in the giving of goods to the celebrating of
masses. etc.
The next end of the giving was the celebrating of the Mass, which, seeing it
is ungodly, they do well, which abolishe the custom thereof. The last end
was the mayntaining of the worship and service of God. To this end, because
it is good and holy, ought all the goods to be referred, which in time past
were given to the celebrating of Masses.

An objection.
They object, that in many of their deeds of gift this clause is expressed: If
such custom of celebrating Mass or of singing shall cease, let the heirs
have power to receive again those goods which their forefathers have given to
the celebrating of Masses. etc.

The Answer.
THey that bestowed those goods upon the Church, did err in the particular,
and not in the general. The particular is the celebration of the Mass. The
general is the worship and service of God. The heirs therefore being better
instructed, ought to correct the faults of their forefathers, and convert that
to the true worship of God, which was appointed for the profaning of the
supper of the Lord. Flora an harlot of Rome how she bequethed her goods and to
what end they were afterward employed.
Yea I think that this is rather the office of the godly magistrate, that
these goods be not suffered to serve the avarice of private men. Flora an
harlot of Rome bestowed the substance that she had, which was very great, to
the maintayning of a yearly pageant or play at Rome. When the most grave
censor Cato thought good that this play should be abolished for the dishonestie
thereof, and for the filthy gestures and behavior of harlots, the heirs of
Flora, the plays of Flora being abolished, do require again the goods that
Flora had given. But the Senate of Rome did most wisely judge, that these goods
ought not to return to the heirs, but that the purpose of Flora which gave
them was to be considered, whose last will was, that the goods which she had
given should serve the common weal of Rome. For Flora although she erred in
the particular, yet did she not err in the general. Wherefore that the
general might be kept, the Senate of Rome did most rightly judge that those
goods which Flora had given should not be restored to the heirs which required
them, because the plays of Flora were abolished. After the same manner those
goods that are given to the maintayning of masses, ought not to be restored to
the heirs, How such goods ought to be bestowod which in times past have bine
given to the maintaining of superstition The judgment of Bartolus a singular
lawyer.
the masses ceassing, but are to be converted to the general end, that they
may serve the Church of God, that is, that they may be given to them that
teach, to them that learn, to them that have deserved, to them that are
keepers and defenders of the Church. They ought not to serve the pleasures of
men, but the necessities of ye Church. So also does Bartolus a most excellent
lawyer judge, which touches this very case concerning masses, in his
commentaries upon the law. Of that which is given to the city. The words of
Bartolus are these: If he that makes his last will and testament has left an
hundred pounds for singing masses, which masses cannot be song because of the
commandment to the contrary, that which was left ought to be converted to an
other use. The same Bartolus does a little before set down the general
sentence: If, says he, he that makes his last will, adds a manner or
condition which is impossible (to wit by reason of the prohibition) for some
lawful and honest end, then if it can not be fulfilled after that sort, which
he has fayd, it is converted to some other lawful use.

The grieuousnes of the sin of them which couetously and greedily get into
their hands the goods of the Church.
THey which couetouslye and greedilye get into their hands the goods of the
Church, They which wrongfully enjoy the goods of the church are guilty of both
tables.
do violate both tables. For they are both ungodly against God, and also
cruel toward the Church and the members thereof. Inasmuch as they do both
with sacrilege usurp unto them selves those things that are given to the
worship of God, and also do spoil the needy members of the Church of their
living. Cicero affirms that he does more grieuouslye offend, which wrongfully
takes any thing out of the common treasury, then he which steals the
treasure of a private men. Wherefore it is certain that they do far more
grieuouslye sin which wrongfullye possess the goods of the Church. The Lord
condemns them, which do not bestow somewhat upon the poor of that substance
which they have: how shall we think that they shall escape the judgment of
God, which greedily get unto themselves those things that belong to others? He
is reproved by the voice of God, which does not suffer injury with a patient
mind: how may it be that he should escape unpunished which does injury to
the members of Christ? God is not deceived with subtlety, he does not receive
unjust excuses. Wheresoever these covetous and greedy getters into their hands
of the goods of the church do turn them selves they cannot avoid but that
they are guilty of the Note that he follows not the same division of the
commandments which we commonly do
seventh precept. For when the Lord says: Thou shall not steal, he
forbids us by any pretense of right to challenge to our selves unjustly any
thing which belongs to an other. But although many at this day wrongfully
possessing the goods of the Church, do seem pleasantly to enjoy them, yet
they carry about with them their conscience as a witness, which although it being
as it were seared with an hot iron, does for a time rest securely: nevertheless
at length, and that at the point of death, The testimony of a man's own
conscience against himself a thing most grievous.
being as it were raised out of a dead sleep, it shall be instead of a
thousand witnesses, and shall more grievously afflict the heart, then any
renting or tearing of the body can vex and torment the body. Then they shall
truly perceive, that it was not for nothing which in time past was said of
Esaias. chap. 33. Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled: and do
wickedly and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shall make an end of doing wickedly,
they shall do wickedly against thee. They shall at length perceive that these
words of the Prophet do not vanish away into the aer. These men think that
there is no danger, because they do not feel the present hand of God, whom
notwithstanding the history of the Jewish people does sufficiently teach, that
the punishment of the^ that commit sacrilege is not taken away although it be
deferred for a time for their sakes, whom the Lord by his goodness does call
unto repentance. Sacrilege shall not escape unpunished with out earnest and
hearty repentance.
The Jewish people contemned the voice of the Prophets, but at the last, the
measure of their sins being filled up, they came to utter destruction. At
this day the voice of the Lord does sound in our ears, and we sleep securely
on either side without repentance, but our sins being come to the full, the
Lord will pour out his wrath also upon us, and so that will come to pass
which Jeremy has foretold: As a thief that is taken with the deed comes
to shame: even so shall thou come to confusion. By which word the spirit of
God does signify, God will in his time justly punish the scorners and
despisers of his word.
that it will come to pass, that they at length shall suffer due punishment,
which mocking and scorning at the word of God, do think that al things are
lawful unto them which the lust and sensuality of the mind does persuade.

A Question of the right use of the goods of the Church
BEcause the goods of the Church have bin a long time in great abuse, it is
with good cause enquired, what is the true and lawful use of the goods of the
Church, and upon whom these goods ought to be bestowed. For one does not
therefore by good right possess the goods of the Church either because he
wears a hoode, or because his voice sounds in the church, ye or because he
understands the Latin tongue, in which error many have hithereto bin: But
here the holy fathers are to be heard, which can judge with a sincere
judgment. The sentence of Augustine concerning the right distribution of the
goods of the Church.
Gratian rehearsing the sentence of Augustine, does witness that the stipends of
the Church, that is, the yearly reuenews and gifts, ought to be distributed
into four parts. Whereof the first ought to be given to the Bishop and his
family, for maintayning his office and hospitality, The first part of the
Church goods.
not to mayntaine riot, pride, chains of gold, ringes of gold, not to feed
palfreys, not to keep a courtly rout: but to necessary and honest
sustentation, least that he being deceived and carried away with the riches of
this world, do forget his duty, as it is sufficiently known to have come to
pass in this realm in time past. The second part of the goods of the Church,
how it ought to be bestowed.
The second part ought to be given to the clergy, whereof I make three orders
or sorts. In the first are they which teach and learn in the church, to whom
stipendes and exhibition is due, least that being compelled with poverty they
forsake their office. In the second are they which in time past have served the
Church, but now either grieved with sickness or wasted with old age, not able to
execute their office. To these liberal sustentation of the goods of the Church
is due. In the third order or sort are they, which do deserve it by their
labor and trauail in the studies which are profitable to the Church, these
ought as soldiers to be maintained to the use of the Church. The right
bestowing of the third part of the goods of the Church.
The third part ought to be bestowed upon the poor, which are such in deed,
whose life past has been honest. For they that have spent their goods in
hunting and companying with harlots, are unworthy to be nourished or
maintained with the goods of the Church. The fourth part of the goods of the
Church how to be employed.
Let these beg for their living. The fourth part ought to be reserved for the
building and repayring of temples and houses. This sentence of Augustine is a
godly and a true partition of the goods of the Church. That holy man will not
have dogs and harlots to be maintained with the goods of the Church, Abuses
of the goods of the Church.
he will not have idle bellies and sluggishe drones to become fat by the
goods of the Church. He will not have swarms of Monks, most unprofitable
lumps of earth, to live delicately of the goods of the Church, he will not
have smoke and vain soundes of words to be sold for the treasure of the
Church, but he requires a just distribution according to the proportion of
Geometry, which has regard both of the office and also of the labor in
assigning stipendes. And although I allow this sentence of Augustine,
concerning the partition of the goods of the Church, nevertheless, this with
good reason I add: First, because civil government is not meet for Bishops,
it is lawful for godly Kings and Princes to transfer government, rule,
civil jurisdiction, furniture and riches of Bishops unto themselves, so that
they convert them to the preserving of the Church of God, that is, it is
lawful for godly Kings and Princes to fence and fortify themselves with these
goods, that they may have wherewith they may defend the Church against
enemies, and whereby they may be bountiful toward the godly exiles and others
that have well deserved of the Church and of the common weal. Civil government
not meet for the ministry.
But that we do rightly say that civil government is not meet for Bishops,
those sayings do sufficientlye show, which put a difference between the
ministry of the Gospel and civil government. Ioh. 20.21. ^ 18.36.
As my father sent me (says the Lord) so send I you. My kingdom is not of
this world. The kings of the Gentiles reign over them, Luke. 22.25.
but ye shall not be so. 2. Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal. But the Papists object that
certain Provinces were given to the Roman Bishop of Constantine. If we
grant this to be true, though it be most false, yet though that power was
given to Syluester, it was not lawful for him to receive it in that function
in which he was, and to deliver it to his successors. Because every one ought
to do the duties of his vocation, according to the saying: Study to be quiet,
1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
and to meddle with your own business. The Bishop ought to teach, the King to
govern and ouersee armies, stipends, wars, the peace of the bodies. These
things therefore are not to be committed to a pastor, Every one must meddle
with his own business.
but let every one in his calling be mindful of his rule: Do your own
business. Again, let every one walk as God has called him. Again, do
those things devoutly which God has commanded thee. The saying therefore, but
it shall not be so with you, may not only be understand thus, that Christ
does not give civil power with the ministry of the Gospel, but also that it
be not taken or exercised of him that is in ye ministry. When as the Papists
object the answer of the Lord to the saying: Behold here are two swords,
they do sufficiently declare that they deal Sophistically and subtly. For
when he answers that it is enough, he signifies the complaynt concerning
the two sorts of enemies. It is enough that the swords both of the high
Priests and also of Pilate are drawn against you. Hereof without all doubt is
concluded that civil government is not meet for Bishops and Pastors.
Wherefore Christierne the third, king of Denmark, did well and godly, when he
transferred the dominion and rule of Bishops unto himself, to preserve and
maintain the studies necessary to the Church, and to repress the enemies of
the Gospel. Moreover, wheresoever the revenues of the Church are as yet more
plentiful, as where it is well looked unto them, of whom it is said, a godly
King or Prince ought as a steward and nourisher of the Church, to have regard
of the goods that remain, and especially to take heed that the goods of the
Church be not possessed of idle bellies, which neither have served the Church
at any time, neither do serve it, neither are able to serve either it or the
common weal. For as the Lord above is the defender of other public goods: so
is he also the defender of the goods of the Church. And as it belongs to the
king, if a city do bestow the goods of the treasure ill and amiss, to
provide and see that they be more diligently and profitably bestowed: so also
does it belong to Kings and Princes to have a care of the goods of the Church,
that those things which have hitherto served superstition, may now be applied
to their true uses. But in the mean season let every one take heed, least that
under a pretense of godlynes he convert the goods of the Church to riot and
profane uses.

7 Be pacient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Upon the
rebuking of rich men he brings in an exhortation to godly poor men, An
exhortation to the pore to be pacient.
that when they see what kind of end there shall be of them, which abuse
their riches in this life, they may rather patiently bear the present
miseries, then that they will desire the riches of rich men with peril of
their salvation. And this is the proposition of the exhortation. Behold the
husbandman vvaiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain.

8 Be ye also pacient therefore, and settle your hearts: for the coming of the
Lord draws near.

The first reason of the proposition is taken of the example of husbandmen. The
first reason of the exhortation to patience.
Even as husbandmen laboring in tilling and sowing their fields, do
patiently look for fruit: so the godly ought by patience to look for the end
of faith, The end of our faith.
which is the salvation of their souls. That is called former rain, which
falls in the Spring time, the seed being now newly cast into the earth.
That is called latter rain, which falls in the Autumn, when the ears of
corn are full, whereby the grains do swell and are made bigger. The reason of
the calling thereof is, because the whole time that the seed is in the ground,
is compared to one day, ye beginning whereof is the Spring time and the end
the Autumn. 9 Grudge not one against an other, brethren, least ye be
condemned: behold, the Judge stands before the door. The second reason
taken from the punishment of impacience. The second reason of the exhortation
to patience.
By the name of grudging is signified an inward complaynt, which proceeds
from impacience. To stand before the door, is to be near at hand. 10 Take,
my brethren, the Prophets for an ensample of suffering adversity, and of long
patience, which have spoken in the name of the Lord. The third reason of the
example of the Prophets, The third reason of the exhortation to patience.
who though they did supply the place of the Lord in preaching the word, yet
they were not free from affliction, wherein they declared exceeding great
patience. See the 11. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 11 Behold we count
them blessed which endure. The fourth reason taken from things that are
adjacent or adjoined one to an other. The fourth reason of the exhortation to
patience.
They are said to be blessed which suffer, Matthew. 5. Therefore it behooves us
patiently to suffer present afflictions. But they are blessed two manner of
ways, by feeling and by the event or end. By feeling, because they do in
deed under the Cross feel the presence of God comforting them. By event or
end, because they shall in deed be delivered, according to the promise of
Christ, Matthew. 5. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what
end the Lord made. The fifth reason taken of the end of present remedies, The
fifth reason of the exhortation to patience.
which he shows by propounding the famous example of holy Job. Job was
afflicted above measure, but the end which the Lord gave was most joyful. For
the time of affliction being overcome, he received comfort, and was gloriously
delivered from all his afflictions. And so in our present troubles and
miseries, our eyes are to be fastened not so much upon these miseries, as upon
the joyful end of them. For the Lord is very pitiful and merciful. The
confirmation of the fifth reason taken from the affection of God toward them,
which do bear afflictions patiently in faith. Because oftentimes mention is
made in the Scripture of the mercy of God and that for most just cause, How
God is merciful and how he shows mercy.
and God is said to be merciful, and to show mercy and compassion. (He is
merciful inasmuch as he is in deed moved with our miseries, and does as it
were suffer with us. He shows mercy and compassion because he reaches his
hand to us being in misery, and delivers us out of misery) I will briefly
rehearse what things ought to come into our mind, Most worthy cogitations
which ought to come into our minds as often as we hear the mercy of God
toward us mentioned.
as often as mention is made of the mercy of God toward us. First ye object of
mercy is to be thought upon, which is ye misery of mankind whereby ye whole
race of mankind is in it self most miserably lost, subject to the tyranny of
ye devil, in danger of al calamities, spiritual and corporal. Secondly, the
cause of this misery is to be considered, which is sin, the most horrible and
most filthy thing of all things, The second cogitation. The third cogitation.
ye most just punishment whereof is everlasting torment of souls and bodies.
Thirdly, the infinite love of God toward mankind is to be reuolued in the
mind, that God has not utterly cast away mankind for so great filthiness and
uncleanness. The fourth.
Fourthly let the sacrifice of the son of God be thought upon, whereby he
helps our misery, and makes a full satisfaction for sin. By thinking upon
this sacrifice the holy fathers have comforted themselves in their sacrifices.
To this sacrifice David has regard, as often as in the Psalms he earnestly
desires the mercy of God, which psalm 51. does sufficiently show, where he
makes his prayer in these words: Have mercy on me, O Lord, according to thy
loving kindenes, according unto the multitude of thy mercies wipe away my
wickedness. When he says, wipe away, he has respect unto the blood of the
mediator as he does more plainly show in the seventh verse, where he makes
mention of the satisfaction for sin, for so he says: Purge thou me with
hysop and I shall be clean Fifthly, The fifth cogitation concerning the mercy of
God
repentance or conuersiion is here required, without which we are not made
partakers of this unspeakable price, of the sacrifiee of the son of God.
Hereunto pertayne many sayings of the Prophets. 2. Paral. 30. The Lord your
God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye
convert unto him. Iere. 3. Turn again ye children, and so shall I hear your
backturninges. Again chap. 18. Let every man turn from his evil way, and take
upon him the thing that is good and right, and your iniquity shall not turn to
your destruction: To this conversion the Gospel calls us: Repent, for the
kingdom of God is at hand. And Christ him self says: I came no to call the
just but sinners to repentance. Sixthly, The sixth cogitation or rather
meditation.
a continual thankfulness in our whole life with extolling and setting forth
the glory of God is required, and a certain holy carefullnes is to be had in
governing our manners that we may seem in heart, mouth, tongue, and in our
whole conversation to extol the mercy of God. Seventhly, The seventh
cogitation.
because our weakness is great, which is increased by thinking sometime upon
our particularitie, sometime upon our unworthiness, we must think that the
mercy of God is not contained within narrow bounds, The Lord is most abundant
and rich in mercy.
neither that the greatness of our sins do exceed it, but that it is
extended to all the ends of the world, and does by infinite means abound
above sin. The blessed Virgin says: Luke. 1.50.
The mercy of God is from generation to generation on them that fear him. And
Peter says: 2. Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all
men to come to repentance. Of this most rich mercy of God S. Cyrill writes in
this manner. The mount of Olives does signify the height and abundance of the
divine mercy plentifully showed unto us by the coming of the son of God in
the flesh. Why the mercy of God is in the scripture compared to oil.
The mercy of God is often times in the Scriptures expressed by the name of
oil, because the nature of oil does agree with the manner and condition
thereof. For oil is carried above other licours and swimmeth above them, so the
mercy of God is above all his works, and does more appear unto men then the
rest. For mercy exceeds judgment: and, his mercy is over all his works.
Moreover, oil does mitigate the griefs of wounds, and does heal swellings
and sores: but the mercy of God does heal the sores of our souls, and drives
away all faintnes of sin, as the Prophet says: Psalm. 103.3.4.
Who forgiueth all thy wickedness and heals all thine infirmities, who
satisfies thy mouth with good things, and crowns thee with mercy and loving
kindness. Finally they that should come into the place of wrestling or striving,
did come forth into the midst being anointed with oil, whereby their bodies
might be more pliable and fit for that kind of exercise: so the Lord shows
unto them his mercy which are about to strive against the ayrie powers, with it
he preuenteth us and gives us strength, whereby we being fortified in so hard
a fight with his help, may at the last go away conquerers. Psalm. 18.28.
In thee says the Prophet, I shall be delivered from tentation, and with the
help of my God I shall leap over the wall, And again: Psalm. 27.1.5.
God is my light and salvation, whom then shall I fear? God is the strength of
my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? Though an host of men were laid in
camp against me, yet shall not mine heart be afraid: and though there rose up
war against me, yet I will put my trust in him. Lastly in another place: My
strength will I ascribe unto thee: Psalm. 59.9.10.
for thou art the God of my refuge. My merciful God will prevent me.

Augustine in a certain sermon says: A description of the great mercy of God
toward man.
His mercy is most abundant, and his benevolence large, which has redeemed us
with the blood of his son, when because of our sins we were nothing. For he
did some great thing, when he created man to his own image and similitude. But
because we would be made nothing by sinning, and took the issue of mortality
of our parents, and were made a mass of sin (a mass of wrath) nevertheless
it pleased him by his mercy to redeem us with so great a price, he gave for
us the blood of his only son innocently borne, innocently living, innocently
dying, who has redeemed us with so great a price. He will not have them perish
who^ he has bought, he has not bought them who^ he will destroy, but he has
bought the^ who^ he will quicken and make alive. 12 But before al things, my
brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath:
but let you yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation. As
he condemns a rash custom of swearing, setting down the punishment thereof:
so he prescribes a manner of affirming and denying, when he says: Let your yea
be yea, and your nay, nay, that is, that which is to be affirmed simply and
without an oath, affirm, and that which is simply to be denied, deny.

Of an Oath.
Because the Anabaptists abuse this saying to abolishe every oath, I judge it
expedient to declare this place more at large, that it may be evident how
far it is lawful to swear and how far not, and that I may keep a
certain manner in the handling hereof, I will speak of these things in order.
What points he means to entreat of concerning an oath.
First I will generally show that it is lawful sometime to swear. Then I
will inquire out those things, which are required to a lawful oath, that it may
appear which is lawful, and which is unlawful. Moreover, whom we must believe
when they have sworn, for we must not believe every one that has sworn. In the
last place I will refell the arguments of the Anabaptists.

Of the first.
Six firm reasons that it is lawful sometime to take an oath.
THat oaths are sometime lawful, it is taught by the six arguments following.
The first, the second precept of the ten commandments, does manifestly
require the religion or right using of an oath. For when it forbids the
abuse of the name of God, it requires the lawful use thereof, to wit,
invocation of God, part whereof is a religious oath. The second, the
declaration of the They divide not the commandments after the same manner that
we do, which nevertheless is a thing indifferent.
second precept Deuteronomy. 6. does prove the same, for there Moses says: Thou shall
swear by his name, this saying does both witness that an oath is lawful, and
also does show a manner of swearing. For God will not have, that the Israelites
swear by the names of Devils, after the manner of the Gentiles, but by his
name. The third, Exodus 22. The commandment of the Lord is this, when there
is controversy concerning a thing committed to another to keep, if the thing
be taken away, God has commanded, that he to whom it was committed to keep,
do purge himself with an oath. The fourth, the many examples of saints and holy
men, as of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of many others, who in no case would
have either sworn themselves or required oaths of other, except they had
thought that it had been lawful to swear. But the oaths of them do make a
rule of a lawful oath, as I will afterward declare. The fifth, the example of
Christ and of the Apostles in the new testament. How often does Christ use
this manner of swearing? Verily, verily. etc. How often does Paul swear, and
also the other Apostles. These things the Apostles had in no wise done, and
much less Christ, if every oath had been unlawful. The sixth, the end of an
oath, Heb. 6. And an oath, says he, for confirmation is among men an end of all
strife. We have firm reasons, by which it is plainly showed that every oath
is not unlawful, as the Anabaptists cry out: Now let us go to that which we
propounded in the second place.

Of the second.
IN an oath which is an affirming or denying of some thing, with a calling to
witness of the name of God, What an oath is.
or of some other thing, which ought to be unto us sacred and inviolate, four
things are required, Four things to be considered in an oath.
which are diligently to be considered in every oath: as the parts of the
oath, the causes, the affection of him that swears, and the end of swearing.
The parts are two, The first part of an oath.
the one is the calling of God to witness about the thing which we affirm or
deny. For he that swears, when he has no other witnesses, appealeth to God,
from whom nothing is hid, and desires his testimony, and confirms by an
oath that that which he says proceeds from God as a witness. Hereupon it
follows, that we must not fly to the divine testimony, but when as both
other witnesses can not be had, and the matter is so known to him that
swears, that he knows that he does not rashly appeal to so great a witness.
The second part of an oath.
The other is the condition of the vengeance of God against him which swears
and deceyueth in swearing. For if he does not escape punishment, which does
falsely allege the testimony of an earthly king, what shall be done to him
which makes God a liar? This condition ought to call back all men not only
from perjury, Two principal causes of an oath.
but also from lightness of swearing. The causes of swearing are two, the former
is the ignorance of the thing which is in hand, the latter the weyghtines
thereof. For in trifling matters, and of none or small importance, we must not
fly to an oath. For the name of God ought to be more sacred and holy unto us,
than that we should fly unto it by swearing, except exceeding great necessity
does urge us. The affections which ought to be in him that swears.
The affection of him that swears ought to be double, for he ought to be
moved thereunto both with hatred of a lie, and with the love of the truth.
Wheresoever this affection is not, the name of God is taken in vain. The end
of swearing is also double, Two ends of swearing.
one, that the truth may be known, another, that God may be honored, by whom
it is sworn. Of these four rightly conferred together, it shall easily
appear, when it is lawful to swear, and when not. Certain do allow this
distinction, that a public oath only, that is, required of the lawful
magistrate, is lawful, but not a private oath, that is, which one makes of his
own accord, either in his own or in another man's cause. But because many
examples do prove even private oaths, The definition of a lawful oath.
I do not receive this distinction. Now I define that to be a lawful oath
which is taken in the fear of God to confirm the truth of that thing, the
ignorance whereof would either hinder the glory of God, or hurt the safegarde
or good name of our neighbors.

Of the third.
NOw is to be declared whom we must believe, when they have sworn. The oaths
of wicked men are vain and not to be believed.
For we must not believe every one, no though he have sworn. The Poet
Menander says: write the oath of wicked men in the water. He signifies
therefore by this sign, that it is vain that wicked men swear. For he which
does plainly transgress the other commandments of God, as with idolatry,
injustice, tyranny, dronkennes, adultery, haunting the company of harlots,
and with such like: he will easily also contemn God with swearing. Wherefore
let neither the godly magistrate nor any other easily approve such men having
sworn. Paul swearing in these words: Romans 1.9.
God is my witness. Forthwith adds, Whom I serve in my spirit, Whom we must
believe when they swear.
signifying that we must believe them that fear God if they shall swear
concerning any thing. For they that being void of faith can not worship God,
how are they to be thought to worship him with the religion or right using of
an oath? How will thou give part to him, from whom thou have taken the whole?

Of the fourth.
NOw let us see what foundations the Anabaptists rest upon. The foundations
which the Anabaptists lean unto in taking away al oaths and swearing.
First they bring the saying of the Lord Matthew. 5. I say unto you, swear not
at all. Secondly they urge the words of James: Swear not my brethren, neither
by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath. Let, says the Lord, your
communication be yea, yea: Nay, nay. For whatsoever is more then these, comes
of evil. These foundations the Anabaptists lean unto, to whom I would yield, A
declaration of the saying of Christ, wherein the Anabaptists affirm that he
does forbid all kind of swearing.
if that the former reasons did not better instruct me. But that it may be
understand what the prohibition of the Lord means, which seems to be
universal, we must mark the purpose of Christ in this whole sermon of works.
It is not the purpose of the Lord to correct the law of his father, but to
disclose and reprove the errors of the interpreters of the law. The law of
the father is: thou shall swear by my name. This law the Lord does not
abolish, but does rather mayntaine it, whiles that he reprehendeth the
corrupting thereof. The Pharisees of this law concluded after this sort: How
the Pharisees corrupted the law of God concerning swearing.
God has commanded that we swear by his name, therefore we may swear for
every cause and after every sort. This erroneous consequent the Lord
reprehendeth when he says: Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall
perform thine oaths to the Lord. But I say unto you, swear not at all,
neither by heaven. etc. The general word at al ought to be referred to the
manner of swearing then received, to wit, to swear for every cause and after
every sort according to the manner of profane men. Here therefore Christ
prohibiteth his Disciples and them that truly fear the Lord to swear rashly
for every cause and after every sort. For he will have the name of God to be
reuerensed and worshipped more religiously then that it be taken in vain.
James likewise does not abolish the commandment of God concerning the
religion or right using of an oath, How James is to be understand when he
forbids swearing.
but he does only correct the custom of swearing rashly and after every sort.
For the lawful manner of swearing is reckened among the promises of the
Gospel: Iere, 4. Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in equity, and
righteousness. This is not a saying of commanding but of promising, that the
true Israel may become a true worshipper of God, and that the Gentiles may
embrace the true religion of God. A proof whereof shall be, that they shall
swear after this manner: the Lord lives, and not after this: Baal, Saturn or
Jupiter lives, But that which is said Osee. 4. The saying of Osee expounded
wherein he seems to forbid swearing.
Neither shall ye swear the Lord lives: is a voice of threatening. For he
threatens the unthankful Jews, that their country shall be made desolate
for their stubbornnes and disobedience against God, that in the place of the
true worship of God shall be set the worship of Idols, whereupon it shall come
to pass, that they shall not swear any more: the Lord lives, but Baal
lives, etc. The Anabaptists urge the form prescribed of the Lord: Let your
communication be yea, yea: nay, nay. What means the Lord by these words?
that instead of a rash oath they use constant and advised talk. The Lord
therefore requires constancy in our sayings, that our yea be yea, and our nay
be nay. He does not forbid but that it is lawful for us to fly to a religious
oath, when the weightines of the cause does so require: but they do more
forcibly urge that which follows. For, says Christ, Whatsoever is added more
then these comes of evil, That is, that which is rashly added more then a
simple affirming or denying, no weighty cause requiring, it comes of evil,
that is, of an evil affection of the mind, or of an evil conscience, or of
the deuel himself. He says not that a lawful oath comes of euel, A rash oath
but a rash oath only which is taken with a certain lightness, of an euel
custom, and for every light cause. Again, it may sometime fall out that an
oath comes not of the euel of him that swears but of him that does not
believe a bare and simple affirmation, which when it comes to pass a
religious oath shall not therefore be evil. For every thing is not evil which
comes of evil, in as much as it falls out often times, that those things
that are evil are the occasions of those things that are good: as when we
say, that good laws do come of evil manners and conditions, to wit, by
occasion not by effect.

13 Is any among you afflicted, let him pray. Brief admonitions are annexed,
and first that he which is afflicted and suffers persecution, do pray. Prayer
a special remedy in affliction.
For there is no more present remedy against the miseries of this world then
prayer proceeding from faith. Whatsoever says the Lord, ye desire when ye
pray, Mar. 11.24.
believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. And the reason
thereof is very well noted in the book of Judith chap. 9. where the most holy
woman does thus say in her prayer: In the prayer of the humble and meek has
thy pleasure bin evermore. And Psalm. 49: Call upon me in the day of trouble
and I will deliver thee. Is any merry? let him sing. He counseleth him that is
in prosperity, to sing: by which counsel the Apostle teaches three things.
What it is to sing when we are merry and in prosperity.
For first, when he bids us sing, he will have us acknowledge God to be the
author of our prosperity. Secondly, he will have us extol and praise him,
giving him thanks for his benefits. Thirdly that we do not with the world
abuse our prosperity to the contempt of God, but that we do rather rest in
the author thereof singing unto him, and not attributing any thing to our
selves. But the world does contrary: for it neither acknowledges God to be
the author of the felicity which it enjoys, neither is it thankful to him,
so far is it of that it sings unto God, yea it does rather furiously
triumph with profane joy and gladness. 14 Is any sick among you? Let him call
for the elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him with
oil in the name of the Lord:

15 And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

He counseleth him that is sick, what he must do. First let him send for the
elders as Physicians of his soul. Then let the elders being called pray for
the sick and anoint him with oil, not that he may die, but that he may
miraculously be restored to health, as ye Apostle here plainly speaks. Why
anointing the sick with oil is not now used, but taken away.
But seeing that oil was an outward sign of the gift of healing, which gift
continued for a time to confirm the doctrine in the primitive Church, and now
the Church has not that gift: It were fond and foolish to keep still the
sign without the thing signified by the sign. That I may in the mean season
say nothing concerning the idolatrous adiurations and trust in the anointing,
wherein was thought to be a most sure aid and defense against the deuel, which
kind of things they do retain as yet in the papacy. Wherefore let us leave to
the papists their color wherewith they may sinere their dead to be sent into
hell. Moreover this place does most manifestly confute the opinion of the
Nauatians, which denied them returning to grace that had fallen after they knew
the truth. Wherefore this testimony of James is especially to be marked. For
he says plainly: If they have committed sins, that is, (if they have
committed any thing against their conscience) they shall be forgiven them. 16
Acknovvledge your faults one to an other. An other brief admonition concerning
pardoning one an others faults that happened among them. We must pardon one
another offenses.
For it cannot otherwise be, but that in this weakness of nature and in this
most corrupt and as it were doting old age of the world, many offenses be
incident, which the Apostle will that we both acknowledge, and also pardon one
an other. Auricular confession falsely gathered of the Papists.
The Papists interpret this place of the confession and rehearsal of our
sins, which is made to the Priest, which feigned devise of theirs is not only
contrary to the custom of the Church, in the Apostles time (for such kind of
confession was unknown to James and the other Apostles) but also it is plainly
confuted by the words of James, who says: Acknovvledge your faults one to an
other. For if the interpretation of the Papists were good, then not only the
lay man should confess his sins to the priest, but also the priest should
confess his sins to the lay man, which their priestly dignity can in no case
away with. And pray one for another that ye may be healed. Another brief
admonition concerning mutual prayers. We must pray one for another, and why.
For he bids us pray one for another that we may be healed, that is, that
there may be as few offenses amongst us as may be. For I refer this to the
health of the minds and affections, which being sick, many times offenses do
as it were certain little sores burst forth. For the prayer of a righteous man
avails much, if it be fervent. A reason of that which went before, taken of
the effect of godly prayer. And note that as he requires one thing in him that
prays: so he requires an other in the prayer it self. What the Apostle
requires in him that prays.
In him that prays, he requires righteousness: wherefore Paul also bids
us lift up pure hands. This righteousness consists in two things, to wit, that
he which is about to pray, does fully persuade himself that his sin is
forgiven him, and that he cast of all purpose of sinning. For he that does not
this, What is required in the prayer of the righteous.
does lose his labor. In the prayer he requires efficacy, that is, a
singular feruentnesse which proceeds from faith, whereby a man determines
that he is heard through the merit and intercession of the Lord his mediator.
17 Helias was a man vnderinfirmities even as we are, and he prayed earnestlye
that it might not rain, and it rayned not on the earth by the space of three
years, and six months.

18 And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit.

A confirmation of the last reason by an example: A reason confirming the
prayer of the righteous to be effectual.
Helias prayed effectually.
Helias was righteous,
Therefore the prayer of the righteous is effectual.
In stead of the Mayor or first proposition of this argument the confirmation
thereof is set down, whereof read 17. Chap. lib. 3 of Kings. But least any
man except and say that that was done because of the singular holiness and
merits of the man, he preuenteth them and says that he was subject to like
passions as we are, inasmuch as he was subject to the same affections and
infirmities of the corrupt nature, that we are. 19 Brethren, if any of you has
erred from the truth, and some man has converted him.

20 Let him know that he which has converted the sinner from going astray
out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hyde a multitude of
sins.

Diligence in furthering the salvation of their brethren is commended to the
godly, We must as much as in us is, call our brethren from error both of
doctrine and life.
that one call another from the error of his way, that is, of doctrine and of
life. Which he that does, first saves the soul of him that did err:
secondly, hides a multitude of sins, in as much as a sinner being converted
by his admonition is reconciled to God, and his sins are covered with God and
are thoroughly forgotten. How a man may save the soul of a man.
But how can a man save the soul of a man from death? And how shall he hide a
multitude of sins? By the ministry, and not by his own proper power. So
Paul says that he did beget the Galathians, and writing unto Timothe he
says: 1. Tim. 4.16.
In doing this thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.
Although it belongs to God only to save, yet he adioyneth us unto him as it
were associates, and ascribes unto us for the ministeries sake, that, which in
very deed belongs only unto himself. This ought to make ye dignity of ye
ministry of the word more commendable unto us, when we hear that we in
procuring the salvation of men, are workers together with God, to whom he does
impart also divine honor after a sort. How a man does hide a multitude of
sins I have now declared: he does it not by power, How a man hides a
multitude of sins.
but by doctrine and pardon. By doctrine he causes the sinner to turn
himself unto God, who only cleanses sin: by pardon while he hides the faults
of his brother. Hereunto pertayneth that saying: 1. Pet. 4.^.
Love covers the multitude of sins. The Papists, which of this saying do
gather, that man by his love does merit remission of sins, are deceived, as
the setting of one contrary against the other (...) for there hatred (...)
against another, as contrary causes (...) Hatred (says he) stirs up
strifes: (...) ^ereth the multitude of sins. For as ha^ is the cause of
contentions among men, so love covers faults, either by reforming them, or
by winking at them.

FINIS.

