A lamentation of the death of the most victorious Prince Henry the eight late
King of this noble royaime of England.
IF the river Phison and Euphrates,
With Tigris and Gehon were in my head,
with weping Pliades, yet should I lack teres
Worthily to bewail our king that is ded.
Not his mysfortune, for he (without dred)
Is there, whence he would not come to be here
Though al our lamenting might turn him to chere.
But we, whom he loved, as the head his members,
As parents their children defending us aye:
Cannot have such abondaunce of tears,
As may suffice, the truth for to say,
The lest part of our loss tustly to bewraye,
Such is the loss that a publycke weal has,
When their king is taken from them by death.
The child, without father or mother may be,
And yet not defaute though it be but young.
But a publyke weal did we never se:
That without a king might continewe long.
For alwayse the multitude will be headstrong,
And has no less need of a gouernoure,
Then the great ship has of a nauclere.
Consider therefore what great loss England
Has, by the death of Henry her king.
In whose myghtie hand no enemies might stand,
So long as he was in this world living.
yea, the Lord prospered him in all thing.
Though diverse did him, diversely assail:
Yet could there none be able to prevail
His marcial prowes and civil policy,
His sage wisdom and most politic wit:
Brought such things to pass so easelye,
That men would scarsly have believed, it
Had been possible such knottes to vnknyt,
Without great disturbance danger and perell.
Yet could his wisdom undo them full well.
What blindness? what error? what supersticion?
What sturdy Idolles? and what blasphemye?
What fond disgysynges and false religion?
What diuilysh doctrine, and Romyshe papry?
Has he extincted in this his country?
And in how short time did he these things finysh:
And all their contraries fyrmely stablysh?
What liuinges for students has he appointed:
In Cambridge and Oxford, aye to endure?
Besides the great number of Coleges builded:
Abroad in the country to maintain litterature.
And that each coast of preachers might be sure.
Such care he took the truth for to auaunce
And quit to abolyshe all ygnoraunce.
He did not forget the impotent creatures,
But for them also provision he made,
Estemyng them no less then gostly treasures,
Of whose relyfe students should be glad.
And therefore among them he caused to be had.
In every of their colleges a place several,
With all things needful to releue them withal.
But to what purpose is it to rehearse.
The manifold benifites received:
Sith half of them worthily to express,
If I thought my self able I were disceiued.
But seeing great plenty of them are perceived,
Let us pray daily (as our duty is)
That he at the last day may rise to blys.
And as we have lived to him in subjection,
For the time of his reign, so let us do now:
To noble King Edward in succession,
Desiryng our Lord God his youth so to bow,
That he may accomplish his fathers vow,
In setting abroad the truth more and more
Commaundyng all men thereby to set store.
And you that erst have been stubbourne and stiff,
Resistyng gods truth, relent, be not blind
Still, but embrace ye your goostly relyffe:
For thereunto reason does you bynd,
Since you that should go before are so far behynd,
Go forward lustely, and be not slack.
Setting your hand to the plough look no more back,
Set contencion a part, as a thing vain,
That you may embrace concord and unity.
Let charity your affeccions restrain,
And as we by nation and religion be
But one body, so let us now study
To be of one mind, and not to dissent,
Then doutles we shall have no cause to repent.
Let us, show charity each one to other,
For that is the badge of Christ's elect:
Who wylleth us to be as brother and brother,
And all our study hither to dyrect.
That we may live worthy the chrystian sect,
Declaryng with works what faith we profess,
And that we detest all wyckednes.
So doing no doubt this realm shall prosper,
No less in the days of our noble young king:
Then it has done in the days of his father,
Who studied alwayse to set forth that thing
That might be to our edefiyng
In christian faith and true religion,
Abolyshyng all vain supersticion.
That we may this do now let us pray,
To him that is able to grant our request:
And all contencion aside let us lay,
For concord and unity is ever best.
And thereby are kingdoms always increst,
Weak things made strong, and strong things maintained.
Envy expelled, and friendship retained.
For noble King Edward pray we also.
And for the nobles each in his degree,
That they may aye condissent hereunto,
And for the prelates of the Clargye,
That they may also study an unity.
Than all that is a mysse God will amend,
To whom be all honor world without end.
Finis.
Imprinted at London in Pater noster row by Ihon Turcke.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


