THE Whole and true Discourse of the Enterprises and secret Conspiracies that
have been made against the person of Henry de Valois, most Christian king of
France and Poland.

Whereupon followed his death by the hand of a young Iacobin Friar, the first
day of August, 1589. Whereby the enemies of the Crown, thought to have reduced
and brought all France to their will and devotion.

Together with the assembly that the king before his death made of the Princes
of the blood; Lords and Gentlemen that were in his Army, with the heads of
the strangers, to whom he declared his last will.

Englished out of the French copy, printed at Caan in Normandy

Imprinted by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be soulde at his shop without
Newgate, over against S. sepulchers church, 1589.

The true discourse of the enterterprise made against the Person of the late
deceased King, wounded (whereof he dyed) by a young Iacobin Friar, the first of
this month of August 1589.
IF the holy scripture, yea God himself, expressy forbid us, (and that with
threatening us to fall into ye indignation and iugdme^t of the higher power) that
we should not in any wise couch or hurt the anointed of the Lord: It is a
matter worthy to be wondered at, that he (who calls himself the preacher of
the gospel) should so far forget himself, as yt he neither knew nor
understood the will of God, who so greatly esteems, and ordains to be
honored and respected, the party to whom he commits the the government of
a common weal: although he use rigor and severity.

And who (I pray you) from time out of man's memory, can give us testimony of
so wretched an act, and so worthy of everlasting blame, to have hapened, and
to have been committed and perpetrated in all christiandome, as that which is
yet all bloody in our France, committed against our so gracious and merciful
King, Henry de Valoys, King of France, and Polande? An act verily utterly
unworthy a christian, and that would not be believed to have bin exercised
amongst the most barbarous nations of the world.

We find, yea in the holy scriptures themselves, that there have bine
reuoultings, discontentme^ts, contradictions, and murmurings, and that in the
end many people have raised wars, against their kings and princes, by reason
of the great subsidies impostes, and heavy burdens, and other charges that
were laid upon their shoulders very h^^^ and uneasy to be borne. But it is
not found that there has an assault and murder ben done nor conspired against
the Sovereign authority.

We read of Solomon who had imposed and laid upon the backs of the people
that were committed unto him by the authority of God, importable burdens
wherewith the subjects felt themselves (...) and wholly ^^ressed. Jeroboam (...)
well-beloved s^r^^imt, albeit he had received (...) by A^^as the ancient prophet
of God that (...) reign (...) ten tribes of Israel, and that (...) but o^^ of
the tribes remain in the (...), yet the said I^^oboam being at (...) had
rather (...) ^^a^omon, and (...) him. Not^ (...), and his (...) the kingdom,
(...) of the people was (...) when he (...) supplication to the king, to ease
them of those heavy burdens that his father had laid upon them. Whereto king
Roboam would not yeilde, and they went there ways very greatly discontenced.
And the said Jeroboam reigned over ten of the tribes of Israeli: who crowned
him king and ruler over them. But they long continued not in that estate, but
the vengeance of God fell upon them after the death of the said Roboam: And
amongst all that is written of this goodly history in the book of
Paralipomenon the 13 and 14 chapters, and in the first book of Kings, the
1.2.3.4. and other Chapters following, there is no mention made (though there
wanted no means of the peacusing amongst them of any other means, nor of any
other kind of assaulting the king (though he were constrained to fly unto
Jerusalem:) nor of Abias his son that reigned after him. We find also that
in the wars many kings have been smitten and slain. Others also by the just
judgment of God have been killed and wounded by diverse strange mortal
wounds. The reverence due to the king as well in the wars, as otherwise, has
been and yet is in so great accoumpt, that there is an observation in the
wars, when the King is there in person) to cry alowde: Save the King: faue
the King.

They will aledge, it was done upon wrath and indignation, for that which was
executed upon Mounsire de Guyse, by his Majesty's commandment.

I aunsweare them, it is not the part of a servant nor of any other whomsoever
to make himself equal and euenlyke, nor to compare himself with the
authority, power, or highness, of an Emperor, King, or Magistrace, who executes
and disposes of his affairs, as pleases himself, and according to his good
counsel. After whose example, and in imitation of him, if particular persons,
should take upon them to make ordinances, and to entermedle in the rule and
government of the civil estate, and the affairs of the kingdom. What order,
what government, what justice, should we have therein* To whom might it be said
that the obedience were due, which we protest to yield in the name of God, to
our superiors, whom he has ordained and established over his people.

There is no question, nor controversy, but that a long time there has been
very secret practicing against the king. For his majesty's own self, has
often discovered very evident tokens thereof, whereby he might easily be
persuaded, of their canckred hearts toward him. As may appear by the serching
and sifting that the house of Guize has made, as being descended from
Charlemaine, upholding the Bulle of Pope Stephen, in the behalf of Pepin king
of France, and of his wife, with their two issues males, one of the which was
the said Charlemaine, the which bull (next after the consecrating and
anointing of the regality in the person of the said Pepin and his wife, by the
same Pope) conteinech a judgment of curse against them that should presume to
enterprise the french scepter and prevail to obtain the same, except they
were such as should descend from the said Pepin, and his race. There have been
other sufficient occasions brought to light, which I will pass in silence.

But I wonder why they laid that so long aside, and opposed not themselves, to
them that have reigned sithencs that time. I wotte well that they have ruled
and governed in France in their time, and that nothing was done, but what they
allowed for the most part.

And to allege at this day, that the king had hardely dealt with them: he
that had brought to light so many sinister dealinges, and enterprises, They
indeuoring and purposing to aid and defend themselves with a league and
association (in a manner) of all the towns and communalties of all France,
where they could get audience. This kind of proceeding was in truth concluded
and determined from the council, of Trent: And being assured of a great number
of people as well Churchmen, as Gentlemen, and of the third estate, under
color of the reuniting of faith and religion, and also of the asswaging and
lessening of the impositions taxes and subsidies that the king demanded by
reason of the necessity of the affairs of his kingdom: and of other prankes,
wherewith I may well say a great number of folk were bewitched, forsaking their
king, who only has power and authority in his kingdom to take order in all
such matters, the which people stayed themselves upon certain particular
persons, that have not any mean to accomplish the same, but only by taking
their swords in hand, and altogether to enforce the king to grant to their
minds, or else to constrain him to yield up his scepter: and intending thus to
win the authority that they seek to have over all France: to bring all
things into confusion and disorder to murder all them that should refuse to be
obeidient to their will: to sease their goods and possessions, to recompense
the heads of these wars, for their good service employed for this league, at
their cos^es. These matters are well enough known to many, by the actions that
they have committed, yea and after what sort they have led the kings majesty
about, who for a certain space distrusted not their hypocrisy and
dissimulation. But they could not so couertlye and cunningly play their game,
but it was espied, how they had deliberated, to shut the king up in a
religious house, there to finish the rest of his days.

Now when this confederacy and league was thus confirmed and settled, and the
time of the execution of their intent drew near, we know how the king was
constrained to withdraw himself from Paris, and all those matters that ensued
thervppon, until the assembly of his general estats at Bloys. At which-place,
in the beginning, the king of Nauarra, and all those of his race, are declared
to be vomcet and incapable to succeed, to the crown (...) France, as men
attainted and convicted of heresy in their only judgment, with confiscation
of all their possessians. In which place they thought verily to have
accomplished and attained to the perfection of their secret intents and
complots. But when matters stirred and turned otherwise then they expected, and
the estates ceased: They must needs open the closet of their hearts, whereby
were revealed their fautors and assuters. And even as there was left but one
tribe of the children of Israel in the house of David, in the hands of king
Roboam, the lawful and natural son, and rightful successor of his father
Solomon: so did the king find himself stripped of all his good towns, noble
men, and an infinite number of men at arms, so that he had no sure access nor
place of retrait, saving in the lesser part of his kingdom, though there were
many of his side in the protestant towns, but the force was not in their
hands. Seeing themselves then thus strong, they cried. God save the League, God
save the League, The which word, beeause it seemed odious, they have changed
into Union.

The king weighing and considering this kind of proceeding, and perceuuing
their demeanors, pride and ambition, settling and tooting in the harles of these
bypocrites, the taking of his towns, borroughes, castles, and strong holds,
with double assuranes of men in pay, and out of pay: it was ^^^sfarie for him
to crave aid else where, and as he was always well assured of the good will of
the ki^^ of Nauarra his brother in Law, toward him, so did ^e not stick, nor
make any difficulty to call him to his aid: Whereto the said Lord would not
in any respect disobey: notwithstanding the rigor of the edicts and
declarations that the said king of France had made against my said Lord the
king of Naurra and his alders, and had caused their goods and possessions both
mouable and immovable to be sold, acording to the desire of his enemies the
leaguers, besides other matters which they caused the said deceased king to
do by force, for the most part, and wherein most often he knew not what he
did. Which matters the said Lord the king of Nauarra has sufficientite set
down at large in all his protestations that he has made to his Majesty.

Now Satan, seeking like a roaring lion who^ be may devour, perceiving this
good and holy ^greement and reconciliation, with the good will of the
faithful protestants of the kings side, he could no longer stay him self in
assurance, forasmuch as his devises went evil forward. For these of the kings
side, taking courage, have brought many sheept back again to their own
fold. Herewithall, he perceived how the stranger took the cause in hand, and
stirred against the disturbers of the tranquillity. They could not other^i^e
judge, for the behoof of the cause, but to persecute the head that the members
might be yt steker

In this judgment and opinion, there be many sorts of folk. For some of them
ought to beeplaine and continent in their wills: Others are hold and
ignorant, led by their own affection without judgment: Other some contrary
to their solitarines, are forerunners: who contrary to their profession,
entermeddle to do things clean contrary to all honest conversation, which
causes them to be evil liked, of such as desire to walk plainly in their
vocation. All the which kinds of folk thus put together, cannot in their
particular passions, which are without all holiness and piety, rightly nor
fitly give any good counsel for such matters as are to be done: for they
prefer their wicked intention which is transported with pride and insatiable
conuetousnes) before all good affection, and the saftie of the common weal.
And all of them so put together, without foresight of that which is to come,
rejecting al manner of knowledge of God, cannot deliverate any other thing
saving only the cutting away of the head of the tree, that the branches might
wither away the sooner.

This Counsel was holden at Paris, whereat were present at that time the
principal heads of this league, in which place, Satan offered one worse then
Judas, for Judas kissed his master after be had sold him, and acknowledged his
offense afterward. But this young man, a Iacobin Friar of religion, has made
no difficulty nor sticking, to wound to death him, that so heartily loved ye
order above all the whole nations of religious persons, who had cherished the^,
as they that were welcome about his person. This will I say, it is no novelty
that they begin to do evil: I will produce an Emperor that was poisoned by a
hallowed ^^ast, empoisoned notwithstanding, which was presented unto him by a
Iacobin. This order of Friars preachers have always been very desirous to be
welcome amongst men of high calling, and to undertake odious offices, as to be
of the inquysition of faith and others. These of the League, upon consideration
thereof, provoke and stir more and more, this poor cursed wretch, within
whose heart Satan lodged; to keep, him always in this cursed mind. Upon the
resolution hereof, they prepared him a knife for this purpose; which they
double poisoned with such kind of poison, that though the party stryken with
this Instrument dye not presently yet it shall not be possible for him to
escape, nor live long after.

Upon tuesday the first of August, very early in the morning, this devilish
person, takes his journey, purpesing to find his Majesty at S. Clou, two small
leagnes from Paris: Attending his vpr^sing, for fear of l^sing the occasion to
speak with him: being well assured to have entrance to him, in respect of the
^auour that the king bore unto them: having in his hand a letter or missiue to
deliver liver unto him from the first president of Paris, as the report goes,
whom they detain prisoner.

As Soon as he was aduercised that he might conveniently speak with the king,
he enters with a bold face, as hardy as a lion, and like a bloody traitor
gave him the Iube with a very low and humble courtesy, offering unto him the
said pretended writing of the same President, and coming near to his Majesty,
he signified unto him how be had another secret to declare unto him. The king
hearing the same, caused two Gentlemen to go out, that served him at his
vprising. Then this Iacobin continuing in his wicked mind, drew this knife and
therewith thrust the king into the little belly as they call it: the which strok
entered not into his body, neither dyed he presently. The king seeing this, and
being moved, laid hold of a dagger that lay near unto him, and therewith
stroke the said Monk, who being hurt with the stroke, and much affrighted,
fell presently down for fear: Howbeit not dead, but as is commonly seen, a
malefactor is never settled and assured in conscience when he goes about to
e^ecute such a cruelty. This wretched Monk, being worse feared, then hurt,
had leisure to speak.

Upon the which noise, the said gentlemen suddenly came in again with others,
who by the kings commandment, slew him not, but took him up. After the king
was dressed, even so far that he had seven stitches with a needle, as the
report goes, he gave commandment for the examination of the said Monk,
which was accomplished, and be declares who set him on, the authors, and all
other informations, with his name, and vocation, and that he was not
counterfayted, but of the said order. Which being finished, through impatiency
he was killed, suffering above a hundred thrusts with daggers, and which is
worthy the maruayling at, it is reported that the said Monks flesh became as
black as a very raven, which is easy to be believed, because Satan dwelt
within him, and then the Judgment of god that appears to men in diverse
sorts: behold here a pytyfull tragedy.

But as God will serve his purpose with men, by many and diverse sorts, the
king being yet of good there, with the hope which he had conceived that his
wound might mend, sent with speed, for his brother in law the king of
Nauarra, the lords of his Court. Governors, Captains that were in his army,
and specially the heads of the strangers that were in his country, to the
intent that if it so fell out that he died, the disorder and misrule should
not be so great, that all the army should be broken up, no^ an unmeasurable
confusion ensue thereupon. When they were all thus assembled, God put into the
kings mouth so steadfast and (...) speech, as though he had felt noe grief, and
began to signify to the assembly: hat the lawful succession of the royal
estate of France, fell not to any other, saving in the person of Barbon, and
declaring at that time the king of Nauarra first successor, he prayed and
exhorted the whole company so to acknowledge him, and to be faith full unto
him: and to protest all with one voice the acknowledging and taking in good
part of this deed, and true obedyence, as to the true and lawful heir, and
to cause the like promise and acknowledgment to be made in the camp by all
true and faithful Captains and soldiers that could not be present at the
said assembly, as well natural frenchmen as strangers, who all with gladness
of heart (though otherwise sad and sorrowful for his majesty's wound) swore to
execute the kings will.

Upon the ordering and disposing of all matters in this sort, the king sent
letters into all places, where he had yet the full government, and especially
to Caan to Mounsyr de la verune Governor and Baylly at Caan, and to the court
of parliament established at the said place, with hope, that there was no
danger of death. As Much was written unto them from Mounsyr de Mountpensier
Governor general for his majesty in Normandy, who was the^ at Andely upon the
river of Seyne, where becaused his whole army to take the like oathe:
exhortinge the heads to maintain the kings will. Which was accorded unto
him, with hope as the said lord governor demed, that there should be no danger
of the kings death, by Gods help.

But the next day following, the said lord governor changed that kind of
language, writing to the said Bailey of Caan, whereby he gave him to understand
how the king dyed the wednesdaye next following the date wherein he was wounded.

An assembly was holden at Caan upon sunday the sixth day of August, of all the
Citizens and Inhabitants of the same place, in the presence of the Bailey of
Caan, and the Court of Parliament, the body of the town, and the gentlemen of
the country, where the skilful person Mounseur de Lisores, President in the
said court of Parliament, did sit as President, and when he had delivered and
showed to all the whole company what matters had happened, with admiration of
the speech of this Lord, as protesting perfect loyalty on his own behalf:
publication of his Majesty's letters and of Mou^tpensiers letters was
publicly made, where all uniformly swear their acknowledgment and fidelity,
every man protesting to maintain the will of Henry de Valoys thus deceased, in
all things that it contains.


