A FRIENDLY TRIAL OF THE GROUNDS TENDING TO SEPARATION; In a plain and modest
Dispute touching the Lawfulness of a stinted Liturgy and set form of Prayer,
Communion in mixed assemblies, and the Primitive subject and first receptacle
of the power of the Keys: Tending to satisfy the doubtful, recall the
wandering, and to strengthen the weak: By JOHN BALL.

ISAIAH 8. 20. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them. PSALM. 119. 105. Thy word is
a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Printed by Roger Daniel printer
to the Universitie of Cambridge; For Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Bible on Fleet-bridge. 1640.

To the Christian Reader, sound judgment, the spirit of wisdom, uprightness
of heart, and sweet communion with GOD.
Christian READER,
IT is commonly professed, though not so well known and observed as it ought,
that Satan is always busy to solicit, and our own deceitful hearts ready to
turn aside from the ways of peace and comfort, either to the right hand or to
the left. To say nothing of the lamentable state of heathen Infidels, Turks,
and Jews, who know not God, nor believe the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; Amongst
them that profess Christianity, some are so deeply plunged into superstition,
that the truth of God and the ordinances of grace are not prized in comparison
of their own vain and fruitless traditions. And others, on the contrary, do so
far distaste all inventions whatsoever (as they speak) in Gods worship, as
they reject that which bears the stamp and image of God, and might be greatly
profitable to their souls. Many come profanely to the Lords table, and pollute
the holy things of God to their own destruction: Others, through groundless
fears of defilement, do withdraw themselves from ordinances Divine, and the
society of the godly, because some unworthy are not debarred. To satisfy this
latter sort, who offend out of weakness and misguided judgment not of
stubbornness and contempt, and to settle them that are staggering, I have
penned this poor and rude treatise, nothing doubting but the truth will be
able to maintein it self, and that the beauty thereof will procure favor and
acceptance, though it come arrayed in a very homely garment.

A stinted form of prayer has been challenged as an image forbidden in the
second commandment, a forged and devised worship, unlawful both in them that
use it, and those that join therein. To remove this scruple, I have showed the
use of a stinted Liturgy, lawful and allowable by the word of God, of ancient
use in the churches of Christ, approved by all reformed churches at this day:
Upon which occasion many things are disputed touching the meaning of the second
commandment, the nature of true and false worship; and what it is to pray by
the Spirit.

Many are the objections which are made against set forms of prayer, and
particularly against our book of common prayer: all which I have endeavored to
answer severally; and not because they are of so great weight, but because I
desired fully to satisfy every doubt, and roll away every stone I met withal.
If one and the same thing be often repeated, I desire it may be considered that
one and the same objection for substance is often brought forth, though perhaps
in new array, and every plain-hearted Reader (for whose use I principally intend
this labor) is not able to apply an answer once given to sundry objections in
color diverse though for substance the same. And I suppose the prudent will
think it more reasonable that the wise in heart be burdened with overmuch,
then that the weak should remain unsatisfied through some defect. Some stagger
at this, that ignorant, profane, notorious offenders are admitted to the Lords
table, and conceive that communicating with such in the ordinances of religion
they are partakers of their sin. And sure it is a thing to be lamented with
tears of blood, that the body and blood of our Savior CHRIST should be
profaned, the house and church of God defiled, the name of the Lord
dishonored, religion blasphemed, and the blind, notorious, profane permitted
to rush upon their own perdition. But it is not for private persons to take
that upon them which belongs not unto their place; nor, being invited by
CHRIST, to excommunicate themselves, because such as are notoriously wicked be
not admonished, kept back, or censured.

The main ground of the former doubt and all others tending to Separation
seems to be this; That the power of the keys is primitively given to the
community of the faithful, as the first receptacle. For then they conceive
that it pertains to them to censure offenders, or else to separate from them.
Then likewise it will more probably be concluded, as they think, That that
society which has not the power of CHRIST'S keys is not the true church of
CHRIST. Therefore to raze the foundation of Separation, and at once to
overthrow their main objections, this question is more largely disputed:
wherein is showed by evidence of Scripture, That the power of the keys is
given by Jesus Christ, the Lord and King of his church, and great Shepherd of
his sheep, to the church governors whom he has appointed to rule and feed his
flock in his name, and to whom they must give account.

If any man shall think these things are small and not to be insisted upon, he
may please to consider; How small soever the things in themselves seem to be,
the evil consequences that follow thereupon be both many and great: It is no
small matter to bury that under the condemnation of false worship, which the
Lord the author of all truth, the determiner of his true, pleasing and
acceptable worship, does allow in his service. It is no small offense to
forsake the prayers of the congregation, to depart from the table of the Lord
when he calls to feast with himself, and to break off society and communion
with the churches of Christ, where he does cause his flock to rest at noon; to
fill the hearts of weak Christians with doubts and distractions, as not knowing
what to do, or which way to take; to spend time in reasonings and disputations
of this kind, which might much more profitably be employed in the practice of
repentance and holy obedience: to expose religion to contempt, and the truth of
God to reproach, amongst them that delight to speak evil: These are sad effects
of this Separation which is here opposed. Is it not lamentable to see poor
Christians, who sincerely thirst after the waters of life, and long to meet the
Lord in his holy ordinances, cast into doubts and fears about the things which
so nearly concern their comfortable walking with God and salvation of their
souls? May not this tend to the discouragement of diverse that are coming on,
and turn them who are halting clean out of the way? The rents and divisions
which have been in the church have evermore been one advantage which the
enemies of the truth have taken to speak reprochfully. And if the credit of
religion, the glory of God, and the souls of our brethren be dear unto us, what
can we do less then by a just and mild defense of the truth seek the
reclaiming of such as are gone astray, the establishing of them that be weak in
judgment but zealously affected to the ways of God; stop the stream of
seducing, free the godly from unjust imputations, and settle peace and unity
in the truth amongst brethren? I heartily wish we had not so much experience to
lesson us, that when men have once begun to neglect the public exercises of
religion, and to separate from the churches of Christ, they have run from one
error into another after the fond imaginations of their own seduced hearts
until they have dashed themselves upon the rocks.

They that break off communion in the particulars mentioned, have not proceeded
to a total Separation from our congregations and assemblies, as no churches of
Jesus Christ: This rigid Separation they condemn, as that which was never
approved or blessed of God. But they have gone further then the word of truth
does warrant them, or they have the Lord Jesus for their guide: whereas it is
the duty and safety of Christians to follow after but not to go before their
Lord and Captain. The first entrance into an erroneous way is dangerous: for in
the track thereof there is no stop, unless God of his infinite mercy do
prevent. Errors are lapped up together in a bundle, and many times the least
only appear, which yet serve to bring on and usher in the greater. At once men
fall not into strange and monstrous opinions, no more then into outrageous
evils: but by degrees they insensibly are drawn from bad to worse, until they
come to a great height. At the first sight many a man's conscience would have
been affrighted with that error which after some tampering he highly admireth
and is bewitched withal. How many of great hopes and excellent parts have been
overthrown hereby, is too evident by lamentable observation in all ages. Rents
and divisions are the disease, Separation the wound of the church, unto which
of long time she has been obnoxious; but it is the sin of them who either
lay stumbling blocks of offense before their brethren, or separate rashly or
unjustly, being carried away rather with prejudice then strength of argument,
and commanded more by the examples of others then by the authority of the rule
of righteousness. There is but one body, the Church; and but one Lord, or head
of the body, Christ: And whosoever separateth from the body the Church,
separateth from Christ in that respect. And if we withdraw our selves from
Christ where he graciously inviteth us to feast with him, may we not justly
fear that he will withdraw himself from us, and make us seek, when we shall not
find him? Voluntary Separation from the Lords table and prayers of the
congregation, what is it but a willing excommunication of our selves from the
visible tokens of the Lords presence and love? And if it be a grievous sin in
church governors, to deprive any member of the church of all communion with
the visible church upon light and unnecessary occasions; is it not a greater
sin in the members, to deprive themselves of the same communion upon the like
or less occasions? Zeal and tenderness of conscience must be nourished by all
good means; but they are not to move alone without their guide, that is, the
word of God.

Perhaps this kind of writing may occasion more disputes. If so, it is contrary
to my hearts desire, who intend only the satisfaction of them that stagger,
the reclaiming of them that are gone too far, and the maintenance of peace,
truth, and communion in the worship of God, as it furthereth communion with
Jesus Christ. If I may obtein this end, I have that which I beg of the Lord.
Willingly I would not offend any that fear God, but endeavor only to remove
the blocks at which I see some stumble, and to further the more comfortable
walking of others, who desire to please God in all things, but are kept under
in the means of comfort with vain scruples. And happy were it, if, doubtful
disputations laid aside, we might join together with one heart and soul to
advance religion, worship the Lord purely, edify one another in our most holy
faith, and walk unblameably in the fear of God and comfort of the holy Ghost. I
take no pleasure in controversies of this kind, and could heartily wish that,
these matters rightly composed, we might give heed to that one thing which is
necessary: But if it seem good to any man to reply, I earnestly beg that he
would take the word of God truly understood for his warrant, make proof of what
he says, keep himself to the points in hand without impertinent digressions,
and proceed on in love and meekness, as becomes them that profess the truth,
and desire to preserve the peace of a good conscience. A good cause is no way
advantaged by heat and passion. We must so write and speak in controversies of
religion, as that we remember we must give account to God of that which we say.
And if passionate and distempered speeches in common talk be no light offense;
in matters of religion, which are soberly to be debated as in the presence of
God, to give way to humane rashness and distemper is much more disgraceful.
God will not hold him guiltless that tells a lie for the glory of his name.
To bear false witness in civil contentions betwixt man and man, is odious and
abominable: Therefore it behooveth us to fear and stand in aw, lest being
transported with misguided zeal we call evil good and good evil, and misapply
the scriptures, when we speak of our selves. Let us weigh all things, and hold
that which is good. The Lord in mercy look down from heaven upon his poor
church and people, bring his truth to light more and more, dispell the mists of
ignorance, remove all occasions of offense, settle peace and truth, prosper the
means of grace, build us forward in faith and holiness, and unite the hearts
of his people in love, that they may direct their course by one rule (if they
cannot be all of one mind in every thing) and as one man may walk together in
heaven-way, until they receive the end of their faith, the salvation of their
souls.

CHAP. I. Of a stinted form of Prayer.
PRayer is the sweet and familiar conference of a faithful soul with the Lord
his merciful Father: Or, A calling upon God in the name of Christ with the
heart, and sometimes with the voice, according to his will, for our selves and
others. In it (to let pass other matters not pertinent to this purpose) four
things come to be considered: the Subject recipient, Author, Matter, and
Manner thereof. The honor of invocation is due to God only in and through
Jesus Christ: Psalm. 50. 15.
To God only, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
as the chief, best and most perfect good; through Christ, John 10. 23.
as our Mediator, in whom we have access to the throne of grace. Ephesians. 2. 18.
Prayer is not a work of nature but of grace. Romans 8. 26.
The principal author thereof is the holy Ghost. Man indeed does pour out
his soul unto the Lord, but he is first taught, moved, and enabled thereunto by
the Spirit of grace; so that prayer is Gods gift, and man's act. The matter of
our prayer is diverse, according to the sundry occasions which happen in this
life; but ever it must be agreeable to the word and will of God. Understanding,
faith, humility, reverence, fervencie, holiness and love are required to that
prayer which is acceptable unto God, and does procure audience. In prayer with
others, especially in public prayer, 1 Cor. 14. 16, 28. Orig. contra Celsum,
lib. 8.
where the minister is the mouth of the people, the use of the voice is
necessary for the edification of the hearers: for they cannot join in
supplication, Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14. Hieron. ad Heliodor. Epitaph. Nepotian.
and yield their consent unless they hear and understand what is prayed for.
In solitary prayer the voice and words are very useful, August. De Magist.
lib. 1 Idem, De catechiz. rudib. cap. 9. Justinian. De Ecclesiast. diverse.
capitul. Constit. 123. Council. Lateran. sub Innoc. III. c. 9. Innoc. III.
Extravag. de offic Judic. ordinar. Quoniam in plerisque. Decret. Gregor. l. 1.
tit. 31. cap. 14.
but not necessary: useful, to stir up affection and prevent rovings; not
necessary, because it is the soul only that does animate prayer. A man may pray
fervently and speak never a word: but words be of no worth if the heart be
absent. Prayer endited by the Spirit and poured out by a sanctified soul is
ever sweet and pleasant melody in the ears of God, though the tongue keep
silence, and the phrase of speech be rough and unpolished: But let the outward
frame of words be never so smooth and well set together, the prayer is not
pleasing unto God if therein we crave things unlawful and impertinent, if it
be read or uttered without intention of heart, understanding, faith, etc.
Nevertheless, in prayer with others, specially in the public assembly, words
and decent phrase must not be neglected; because all things must be done
gravely and to edification. To place devotion in words, is superstition; to
hunt after quaint terms, is foolish vanity; but to neglect a decent and comely
manner of speech, is barbarousnesse. Seeing then the use of the voice is not of
the essence of prayer, no man of understanding will deny that to be an holy and
acceptable prayer which proceeds from a sincere and upright heart, feeling
its own or others wants, and craving supply thereof according to Gods will,
whether the petitions be put up in the self-same or in other words. Matthew. 26.
44.
And yet because the ordinances of God must be kept from contempt, in the
public assembly it is good neither to be over-neat, nor over-homely, but to
use such a mean as does most tend to the glory of God and good of Gods people.

Here a question is moved, Whether a stinted Liturgy or set form of prayer,
public or private, be lawful in the deviser or user?

A penned or stinted prayer I call Prayer in respect of the matter and
external form (because the matter is delivered in form of a prayer or
supplication tendered to God) though properly it is not a prayer as it is penned
or printed, but as it is rehearsed as our prayer with understanding, feeling of
our wants, humility, confidence, etc.

The controversy is not of this or that prescript form in particular, much
less of one faulty or erroneous, but of a prescript form in general; Whether
it be lawful, especially in the public assembly, to appoint any prescript or
set form of prayer, though for matter never so sound and allowable. For if the
exception be against this or that form in respect of the matter or manner of
imposing, then the question should be, Whether this prayer for matter or manner
of imposing be erroneous; not, Whether a stinted form of prayer or Liturgy be
lawful. It is not questioned, whether a man may ask things unlawful or
impertinent in prayer: for the matter of our prayer must be agreeable to the
word of God and our present occasions. A prayer for matter and external form
holy and fit, may by accident be sinful in the user; viz. when it is repeated
without understanding or intention of the heart. Of this there is no doubt. It
is granted also, that no one prescript and stinted form of prayer or Liturgy
is simply necessary, either in public or private: for then our Savior Christ,
who would not be wanting to his church in things necessary, would by his
Apostles expressly have set down one to be an exact and unchangeable rule to
all Christians and churches to the worlds end, both for matter and form, words
and method, whereunto they should have been tied, and that always. But seeing
our Savior has commanded no such unchangeable form, it is not the Necessity,
but the Lawfulness of a stinted Liturgy or set form of prayer that is pleaded
for; and that as a matter of order, not of religion or substantial means of
worship. For in this sense, there is no means of worship expedient which is not
necessary by commandment. It was never held, that a man should so tie himself
or be tied always to a set form without variation, that he should never offer
up any prayer unto God, as occasion is offered, and necessity requires, but
what he finds in his book. Such use of a set and stinted form of prayer we do
not acknowledge nor seek to persuade: But to read prayer as a prayer upon a
book, or to make known unto God the desires of our heart in a set form of words
devised by others or our selves, when the things we beg are allowable, fit and
necessary, and when it is done with right affection, is contrary to no precept
or commandment directly or by lawful consequence.

Amongst them that oppose a set form of prayer we may observe differences in
opinion. Greenw. Against Giff. page 8, 9. I only labored to show all men this
error of reading men's writings in stead of praying, that they might learn how
to converse, etc.
The ancient brethren of the Separation (as Mr Smith calls them for
distinction) condemn all stinted forms of prayer to be used as a prayer. Thus
they dispute against set or stinted forms of prayer, that it is a devise of
man, an Idole-prayer, a stinting of the Spirit, the substituting of a book in
the room and stead of the holy Ghost, Smith, Differences of the Separation.
Epist. John's. Against Carpent. They communicate together in a false and
idolatrous outward worship of God, which is polluted with the writings of men,
viz st^nted prayers, homilies, catechismes, etc.
a drawing nigh to God with the lips, when the heart is removed far from him:
That if set forms be lawful, then one may make another prayer, buy his
prayers at a book-binders shop, carry them about in his pocket, with many the
like. Which arguments, whatsoever their weight be, strike at all set forms, and
not at this or that only, prescribed in this or that manner. Mr Robinson
hides the matter as much, as well he may, by such like additions as these of
matter and manner. The thing, says he, you should have endeavored to prove,
Robinson, Against Bern. page 456.
is, That your Divine service book framed by man, and by man imposed to be used
without addition or alteration, The stinting, imposing men's writings upon
public assemblies, to have them read over by number and stint, or any other
way, as a worship of God instead of true invocation, is a mere device of man,
and so carnal worship; as also all other reading of men's writings, publicly
or privately in this abuse, for praying to God, Greenw. Answer to Gifford.
Robinson, Justif. against Bern. page 424. Idem, page 419. Idem, page 473.
as the solemn worship of your church, is that true and spiritual manner of
worshipping God which he has appointed. Again, That these stinted and devised
forms do quench the spirit of prayer which God would have them use, stinting
the minister, yea all the ministers of the kingdom, to the same measure of the
spirit, not only one with another, but all of them with him that is dead and
rotten: and so stinting the spirit, which the Lord gives to his ministers for
his church, and that so strictly, as till the stint be out, it may not suggest
one thought or word otherwise, or when it is out, one more then is prescribed.
Nevertheless his drift is, plainly to disprove all stinted forms, as it is
evident by that he writes in answer to some objections. For, Grant, says he,
that these words of Christ, PRAY AFTER THIS MANNER; AND WHEN YE PRAY, SAY, are
to be interpr^ted as these men would have it: yet do I except against their
service book in a double respect: The first is, That the reading of prayers
upon a book has no justification from them. If it be said, that to commit a
certain form of words to memory, and from it to utter them, and to read them
upon a book, be all one; I deny the consequence: and though I approve not the
former, yet is the latter far worse. And in another place; Idem, page 425.
You speak not properly, no nor truly, in saying, you Pray stinted prayers; for
you Read them: and who will say Reading is Praying? or if you so say or do, is
it agreeable either to his ordinance or common reason? And in the page cited
last before, He that reads has another speaking to him as it were, even him
whose writing he reads, and himself speaks not to God but to the people.
Thus also he speaks concerning the Lords prayer, Page 472.
We may use a petition, two or more, or all, in or of it, even word for word,
if so the holy Ghost (by whose immediate teachings and suggestions all our
requests must be put up) do direct us, and that we apply the same words to our
needs. And in the same section, So neither is the reading of this prescript, or
repeating it by memory, praying. Now let the indifferent consider and give
sentence, whether this be not to condemn all set forms of prayer to be used as
prayer. And if more then down-weight be required, his fourth reason against the
stinted form of service in use in our church, will put this beyond all
exception. For thus he disputes; As it were a ridiculous thing for a child,
Id. page 478.
when he would ask of his father bread, fish, or any other thing he wanted, to
read it to him out of a paper: so it is for the children of God, especially
for the ministers of the Gospel in their public ministrations, to read unto
God their requests for their own and the churches wants out of a service book,
wherein they are also stinted to words and syllables. So that all other
respects and considerations laid aside, for what advantage soever alleged,
the simple use of a stinted Liturgy or form of prayer, to be used as a prayer,
is disallowed of them. And if this be once accorded, the other respects will
easily be wiped away, at least in regard of the users and them that join in
prayer and participation of the sacraments. In the copy of a letter lately
published against stinted Liturgies, the Author wills us to consider, Copy
of a letter, page 5.
That the Liturgy he excepteth against was devised by men, viz. other men whom
God has not called to such a work as to invent forms of prayers which should
be used by all the churches in the land for their prayers; and, That it is
imposed upon the minister and the people of necessity; That it is stinted both
in matter and words, to be used without variation; and, That the service is
read out of a book many ways faulty and corrupt. But look to most of the
reasons brought to show the justness of this exception, and they make against
all sorts of stinted forms used as prayers, and not against a form corrupt and
faulty, imposed in such or such a manner: Page* 5.
as namely these; God did never command to use, nor promise to accept such a
worship; in which respect it is the manifest breach of the second commandment.
Page 13.
God has appointed other helps for prayer, which are sufficient without this.
Page 21.
Public prayers offered up by the minister in church assemblies must be framed
according to the present and several occasions of the church and people of God
(as also men's private prayers ought to be ordered) which cannot be done when
men are stinted to forms. If you draw any conclusion from these premises, it
must be, That all stinted forms are unlawful; not, That a form corrupt and
faulty is to be disallowed. But if the foresaid cautions be added. by way of
distinction or limitation, as if all stinted Liturgies were not disliked, but
such only as be imposed as necessary to be used without variation, and for
matter or form corrupt and faulty; then the reasons fight directly with the
conclusion, and hang no otherwise together then if a man should thus dispute;
All stinted forms of prayer are not to be disliked, but corrupt only, imposed
as necessary; because God did never command, nor promise to accept any stinted
service or devised worship. For what purpose therefore these cautions were
added, let others judge; whether by way of aggravation only, or to set the
greater luster upon the position, or for some other advantage. Some others
profess, That they oppose not all nor any set form simply as such; but are
persuaded in many cases there is a lawful use to be made of them: but such a
set form as is prescribed amongst us for matter and manner they affirm to be
against the second commandment, and a sin in the maker and deviser of it to
such an use, and a sin in the user of it according to that devise or making.
But the lawful use of such forms, public or private, they allow only in some
case of necessity, which cannot fall out in a minister of the Gospel, or any
man else who deserves the name of a strong Christian. For they suppose
abilities in all ministers, and in every man else who has his wits exercised
to discern good and evil, and deserves to be esteemed a strong man in Jesus
Christ. Their words be these; Set forms have their proper place and lawful use
only where abilities are not, as a natural means and help to further some
branch or other of that we call Prayer or conceived prayer, as to supply defect
of invention, memory, utterance, or the like: So the lawfulness of it lies
only in a case of some necessity. The difference then betwixt them, so far
as I can gather, stands in this one thing, That these latter allow some
lawful use of a stinted private form of prayer in some cases of necessity,
which the others altogether condemned. But whether they dissent in any other
particulars or no, it is needless to enquire further; or whether the latter
take away again what they seem to grant. In these things they consent: First,
that all public Liturgies and stinted forms of prayer be unlawful, a breach
of the second commandment both in the deviser and user. Secondly, that private
forms of prayer, if lawful for weak Christians and babes in Christ, are
unlawful for strong men in Christ, or Christians that have received some
growth in godliness. Thirdly, that a Christian, weak or strong, may not
lawfully be present at the prayers of the congregation read or rehearsed out of
a stinted Liturgy, nor at the sacraments administered in a stinted form of
Liturgy as it is with us. The Question then has three branches: First,
whether a set form of prayer, sound and pertinent for substance of matter,
grave and simple for the order and manner, not prejudicing, abbridging or
hindering by the length thereof the preaching of the word and prayer fitted to
the special occasions, may in any sort be tolerated in the church, or read by
the minister of the word in the public assembly and congregation of Saints.
Secondly, whether it be lawful, specially for a strong Christian, to use a set
form of prayer as prayer; or upon any occasion to read as prayer a prayer upon
a book. Thirdly, in case it should be unlawful for the minister or master of
the family to read or use a prescript form of prayer, whether it should be
unlawful also for the people, children, or servants to be present at such
assemblies where the said prayer is read or used. To these a fourth may be
added, to prevent all exceptions, whether it be lawful for a Christian to be
present at that service which is read out of a book in somethings faulty either
for matter or form. In the affirmative the assertion is, That a stinted
Liturgy or form of prayer both public and private is lawful, and in some
respects necessary, both in the congregation, family, and closet; That a
minister godly, learned, and faithful, may sometimes stand in need of the help
of a public Liturgy or stinted form of prayer in public, and may make use of
a stinted form at other times when it is not necessary in respect of
inabilitie or indisposition; That though it should be unlawful for the
minister or governor of the family to use such stinted forms, yet may the
people in the congregation and inferiors in the family be present at such
prayers without sin or scruple of conscience, yea though the prayers be read
out of a book in somethings questionable for matter or form: So that voluntary
and willing Separation from the prayers of the congregation and ordinances of
worship for that cause only, is sinful in many respects. Thus I have labored
plainly to state the question, that I might neither be misled my self, nor lead
others into any by-path, whiles they take their aim amiss. And these
particulars I purpose to discuss in the fear of God, with the spirit of
meekness, according to the scriptures; and trust by plain, sincere and upright
dealing to make it evident that I seek nothing but the maintenance of the
truth, the purity of Gods worship, the increase and exercise of all holy gifts
and grace in his servants, and the peace and comfort of his people.

CHAP. II. All things essential to prayer may be observed in a prescript form.
THe two former points may be confirmed jointly and severally by these reasons
following. 1. That is a lawful prayer wherein the desires of our hearts are
lifted up or poured out unto God for Divine blessing according to his will, in
the name of Jesus Christ, by the help of the Spirit of grace: But in a set or
stinted form of prayer the desires of the heart may be lifted up or poured out
unto God according to his will, Public Prayer is not made with understanding
and in faith, unless it be in a known tongue. Nor can a man pray in says, and
purely lift up his soul to God, who prays before or unto an Image.
etc. Or, That form of prayer is just and lawful, wherein all things
essential to prayer, or necessarily required in the word of God, may be
observed: But all things essential to prayer, or necessarily required in the
word of God, may be observed in a prescript form or read prayer. What is
required in holy prayer more then this, That the matter be allowable and fit;
the manner holy, reverent, fervent and faithful; our wants laid open, and
petitions forced with as strong or stronger reasons and arguments then we are
able of our selves to press them with? Psalm. 25. 1, 2.
And may not a prayer, Mark 11. 24, 25. Joh. 14. 1^.
holy and meet for the matter thereof, Jam. 5. 15.
be read, Psalm. 145. 18.
or uttered with humility, feeling of our wants, earnestness of desire,
holiness of affection, and faith in Gods promises? In reading the scripture
the eye does lead the heart, and yet it may be read with judgment, reverence,
meekness and joy: why may not the same affections be moved in a prescript form
and read prayer? What necessity is there that the heart and eye should be at
variance in this duty, when they may be conjoined in the other? Asaph and his
brethren could praise God in a form of words set down by the prophet David: And
if a prescript form of words may be allowed in Thanksgiving, 1. Chron. 16. 8.
which is one part of prayer, 1 Samuel 2. 1, 2.
it cannot be condemned in Petition. Jon. 2. 1, 2.
The matter of our requests must fit the occasion; so must the matter of our
thanks and praise: The Spirit of grace teaches us to pray; and the same Spirit
moves us to return praise for benefits received: 1. Cor. 14* 15.
We must pray with the spirit; and we must praise with the heart. 2. Chron. 6.
41, 42.
In the dedication of the temple Solomon used the very words of the psalm
which David vowed to use at the bringing in of the Ark into his house. Psalm.
132. 9.
Jehoshaphat in that excellent thanksgiving which he made, 2. Chron. 7. 6.
appointed the priests and Levites to use a prescript form of words. 2. Chron.
20. 21, 22.
So did Hezekiah, 2. Chr. 20. 30.
Zerubbabel and Jehushua. And if we may sing psalms with the spirit and with
understanding, Ezra 3. 10, 11.
with feeling and joy of heart, 1. Co^. 14. 15.
as it is commanded, Ephesians. 5. 19.
in a form of words stinted and prescribed, Col. 3. 16.
it cannot be thought a thing impossible, to pray with affection in a stinted
and prescribed form. The differences which some put between Praising God with a
psalm and Calling upon Gods name are little to the purpose, do not at all
touch the force of the argument. For thus the reason stands; In singing
psalms penned by the prophet David or other holy men of God, the eye does lead
the heart no less then it does in a stinted form of prayer, and yet they may
be sung after an holy manner with grace in the heart: therefore a stinted form
of prayer may be read or said without book with that affection of heart which
God requires in prayer. And let the differences be as broad as they will in
other things; in this they do agree. This reason may be drawn into another
form, thus; Whatsoever has the true matter and form of prayer, that is truly
and properly a prayer. For where the true matter and form of a thing is found,
there follow all necessary requisites to the true and complete being thereof:
If in the administration of Baptism no error be committed against the matter
or form inward or outward, the worship it self or substantial means of worship
is approved of God and acceptable.
But a prescript from of prayer, sound and fit for matter, grave for the manner
of penning, and read or uttered as our prayer with knowledge, faith, reverence,
and fervencie of affection, has the true matter and form of prayer. For the
matter of our prayers are, those common blessings and special good things
which according to the will and pleasure of God we are to beg of him for our
selves and others. The true form of prayer (I speak of prayer uttered with the
voice) is the outward disposition and frame of words, and the inward elevation
and lifting up of the heart to God by the holy Ghost. Will any man say, that
all these things cannot be observed in a stinted form of prayer? common
experience will confute him. Who knows not the matter of many prescript forms
of prayer to be good and necessary for all men? All our wants and particular
occasions are not mentioned or laid open in the prayers conceived by the
minister or governor of the family; and yet no man judges them for that cause
unlawful, though imperfect. It is not then prejudicial to the lawful use of
a prescript form, that many particulars which we stand in need of are not
therein mentioned. Can it not be read or uttered with right disposition of
heart? A man that reads a form of prayer in a book, may be so affected with
it, as in the desires of his heart to go along with it, and to us^ it for his
present prayer. As it may thus fall out in reading one of Calvines prayers
printed after his Lectures, or the like.
how then can we sing with joy, or praise God with cheerfulness in a stinted
or set form of words. Is it not easier to cry for what we need with feeling,
then to return praise with love and joyfulnesse for what we have obtained? He
that will confess it possible to give thanks aright in a set form of words
devised by others or invented of himself, cannot deny the same in prayer with
any show of truth or color of reason. Ainsworth, touching the use of the Lords
prayer. See Mr Paget his Arrow against Separ. chap. 3. page 63.
Men may read it (viz. the Lords prayer) and humane liturgies with
understanding and feelling, says Mr Ainsworth. Again, If in the ordinary use
of the Lords prayer, public and private, without addition or variation, all
things required in prayer by the word of God may be observed; then a stinted
form of prayer may have the true matter and form of prayer, or all things
required in prayer may be observed in a stinted form: Coronidis vice omnibus
orationibus oration Dominica ad^cienda, quae omnium rerum precandarum Epi^ome a
Cypriano recte appellatur, He^^s^ach. Orandi formula.
But in the ordinary use of the Lords prayer, public and private, without
addition or variation, all things required in prayer by the word of God may be
observed. For the matter, there is no word in the Lords prayer which does not
ordinarily in great measure, and in the main always concern every Christian
man's estate, though he cannot reach unto all things comprehended in this
prayer. And all our wants are contained within the compass of the Lords
prayer, and may be deduced thence, though they be not in ^lat terms expressed.
Infinite things are included in the Lords prayer, which the weak and imperfect
faith of the godly cannot reach unto: but such and so much reach the weak faith
has, that the child of God does and may with comfort and profit use the Lords
prayer as a prayer. Hierom affirms that Christ taught his Apostles to
consecrate the sacrament of the Eucharist by the Lords prayer, Lib. 3. cont.
Pel^g. cap. 5. Greg. l* 7. epist. 63 B. Rhen. in Tertull. De corona militis,
Dominica oration habetur in omnibus Liturgiis.
The Lords prayer is both the foundation of our godly prayers, and the prayer
of prayers. Some weights and measures may be as rules to others, and used as
weights and measures themselves. Concupiscence is both sin, and the cause of
sin. Of ancient times the Lords prayer was used in all public Liturgies, and
was of frequent use among private Christians. Tertullian fitly calls it, The
law of prayer, and breviary of the Gospel: Calvine, The rule. That it may be
used with right disposition and affection of soul, is confessed by them that
dislike all stinted forms, Cyprian De orat. Dom. and August. Ench^rid. cap. 71.
call it quotidianam.
and testified by the experience of all Christians: Therefore the Lords prayer
may lawfully be used as a prayer, both in public and private, by ministers and
people, weak and strong. In Constitut. Apost. lib. 7. cap. 25. Monentur
Christiani omnes ter quolibet die orationem ^anc fundere, Chemnit. Exam. par.
2. tit. De Can. Miss. and De Miss. Pontif. page 273.


But first we are willed to note, Object. 1. Copy of a letter etc. page 5. How
fond and corrupt is the reasoning of these men, from Gods example and authority
unto their own practiced power, etc. Why do not these men also plead, that God
gave a law by Moses, therefore there may be a law given likewise by the
Bishops, Ainsw. Against Bern. page 237.
That the forms mentioned in scriptures of the old Testament are but for some
special occasions, and commanded to the church, not from every ordinary
church officer, priests, and Levites, but only from the Prophets, who had an
extraordinary and immediate calling from God, and who might as well deliver for
scripture-oracles the truth of God taught by them, as any forms of prayers and
praises.

This we have observed, Answ.
and do acknowledge the forms of psalms, prayers and praises given by the
Prophets immediately called and chosen of God, to be parts of the sacred Canon,
to which it is not lawful for particular churches, or the whole church in
general, to add the least jot or tittle. But this is not to the point in
hand: For we do not reason thus, That seeing the Prophets by extraodinary and
immediate calling gave special forms of prayer or praises to the church upon
special occasion, which are parts of the Canon; therefore the church may do
the like: But thus we conclude, and that according to the truth, That seeing
holy men have prescribed and the faithful have used these forms, not by
extraordinary inspiration or special prerogative, but upon grounds common to
them and us, the like forms may be prescribed and used without special
commandment: And seeing the Prophets and holy men of God, by inspiration gave
certain psalms or forms of prayer and praise unto the church, to be use upon
special occasion, which have the true matter and form of prayer and praise,
when they be used as a prayer or thanksgiving, in faith, reverence, humility,
etc. according to the present occasion; therefore prayer uttered in a stinted
form of words, or read upon a book as a prayer, may come from the spirit, and
be tendered to God with right affection. A man may read when he prays, and
the eye may guide the heart, when the holy Ghost does lift up, and make it able
to pour forth its desires unto the Lord. And if those forms of prayers and
praises which are parts of the scripture may have the true nature, matter, and
form of prayer, etc. when they be used in faith, and by the power of the holy
Ghost enabling us to pray or praise the Lord in that form; other forms of
prayers or praises fit for matter, may have the true matter and form of prayer,
or praise, when they be used in faith, by the power of the holy Ghost, as
occasion requires. For the prayers recorded in holy scripture, have not the
true nature and form of prayer in respect of us because they are recorded in
scripture, but as they are used by us in holy manner upon fitting occasion; and
other forms fit for the matter, used in such manner as God commands, in
faith, humility, reverence, etc. by the quickening power of the Spirit, have
the true matter and form of prayer as well as they.

But those forms are not the devise of man, Object. 2.
as be the other.

True; Answ.
as they be part of holy scripture they are of God, both in respect of matter
and form: but as they be applied without special commandment to be the matter
of form of a stinted prayer or thanksgiving at this time, they are the devise
of man, that is, they are so applied by man, without the extraordinary guidance
and direction of the holy Ghost. Let us suppose a stinted form of Liturgy or
prayer to be framed of the very words and sentences of scripture, wherein
nothing is to be read by way of prayer, praise, exhortation, or declaration of
the end and use of the sacraments, but the very text of scripture, if it be
demanded whether this stinted Liturgy be the devise of man or no; I conceive
our brethren will answer, That the matter and form both is of God, as they are
parcells of holy writ; but as they are prescribed and used as a stinted form,
it is the devise of man. This may be concluded from their grounds: for all
stinted forms of prayer and administration to be used in the public
congregation, not commanded of God, be the devises of men, as they hold: But
this foresaid stinted form is not commanded of God, as they affirm: Therefore
it is the devise of men. There is now no form commanded of God, as they
profess; and therefore to prescribe any text of scripture to be read in the
administration of the sacraments, or the Lords prayer to be used as a prayer,
is the devise of man. What is more constantly affirmed by them then this, That
a stinted form of Liturgy is no necessry means of Gods worship; because in
time of the Law God prescribed none to his people when they were in their
minority. In times of the Gospel, Gr^enwood, Against Gifford page 6. and 19.
Johnson, Qu. (...) precib. and lit. page 24, 25. Robins. Justis. against Bern.
page 470, 471, 472.
our Savior Christ, who would not be wanting to his church in the necessary
means of worship, has given no form to be used of all churches throughout the
world, nor tied any one member of the church precisely to this or that form of
words in prayer, and none others. That we are not necessarily bound to the very
words of the Lords prayer; Copy of a Letter, page 18.
because the Evangelists do not tie themselves to the same words, or number of
words, in recording that form of prayer; the Apostles did not bind themselves
to those words, but used others according to their several occasions; nor do
we read in scripture that they laid any bond upon the churches to repeat over
those very words. Though therefore the prayer it self was taught by Christ, the
matter be of God, and the form, as it is canonical scripture; and though it be
left as a perfect and genuine rule of prayer: yet the application and use of it
in such and such manner, Deuteronomy. 5. 29, 32, 33 and 12. 32. Quod praecipitur,
imperatur; quod imperatur, necesse est fieri, Tert. ad uxor. l* 2. Ubi
praeceptum, necessitas est servi^ntis, Ibid.
at such or such times, in prayer, in respect of the words themselves, that is
of men and not of God by particular institution. Thus the reason may be
contracted briefly; the ordinary use of the Lords prayer without variation or
addition is either commanded of God, and so necessary, or devised by men, and
so free and arbitrarie; either it is a natural help (as some speak) to supply
some defect, or taken up upon free choice: But it is not commanded of God, it
is not necessary necessitate praecepti or medii, nor an help natural to supply
some defect: Therefore it is free and arbitrarie, as that which may be done
only; but it is not necessary to be done. Copy of a ^etter, page 1^.
This being observed, it will easily appear how little that distinction of
using forms inspired by the holy Ghost, but not of forms devised by men, will
avail: because there is no form at all prescribed by God, as they maintein.
Secondly, if that distinction be granted, it is here impertinently alleged,
because it cannot be applied to any part of the reason. For forms of prayer
inspired by the holy Ghost, and recorded as parts of the sacred Canon, be not
of necessary use for us because they are recorded, have not the true matter and
form of prayer as they are there registered, but as they are put up in faith to
God, being suitable to our occasions: and a devised form of prayer, fit for the
matter, tendered unto God in holy affiance by the work of the holy Ghost, has
the true matter and form of prayer. God never gave commandment that all our
petitions should be presented unto his Majesty in a form of words inspired by
the holy Ghost immediately: God never disallowed the prayers of the faithful,
because the external form or phrase of speech was devised by man. If the
devised form of prayer before and after sermon be worship acceptable to God,
because it is devised of him who is called of God to devise and endite it; then
all men living are called and commanded to devise the worship of God, and not
for themselves alone, but others in some cases: Then the forms of prayer
public or private, morning and evening: the forms of thanksgiving before and
after meals, is devised worship, but acceptable for the foresaid reason. But
that God has called and authorized every man living, or all in the church, to
devise a worship acceptable to his Majesty, is most strange. And so this first
reason stands firm, That all things essential to prayer, or necessarily
required in prayer by the word of God, may be observed in a stinted from
devised by men.

CHAP. III. A stinted Liturgy or public form of prayer is no breach of the
second commandment.
THat which is the breach of no commandment, 2. Argument.
which is no where disallowed in the word of God either in express words or by
necessary consequence, 1. John 3. 4.
that is no sin: Gal. 3. 10.
For sin is a transgression of the law; and where there is no law, there can be
no sin. But a prescript form of prayer of Liturgy is the breach of no
commandment, is no where disallowed in the word of God. The exposition of the
commandments is to be found in the Prophets and Apostles; but the Lord by his
Prophets and Apostles does in no place restrain us to the use of conceived
prayer, so to call it. Prayer is Gods ordinance, but whether our prayers be
uttered in our own or others words, whether by pronouncing or reading, that is
not appointed. God requires that we lift up our hearts unto him, and ask of
him in the name of Christ whatsoever we stand in need of and is agreeable to
his will: But when spoke he one word of praying within book or without, in this
or that precise form of words? More particularly, a stinted form of prayer, for
matter and external form lawful and pure, fit in respect of our occasions and
the necessities of the church, read or uttered with knowledge, affiance and
intention of heart, is not a breach of the second commandment either in the
deviser or user. All use of images is not condemned in the second commandment:
for carving and cutting is the gift of God; and therefore a lawful use thereof
may be made, etc. Memorative signs or monuments of Gods mercies are not
unlawful. All images simply forbidden must not (as I conceive) be referred to
that commandment, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. but images made to be worshipped, or ad cultum.
And if the special and the general be of the same common nature, not all
inventions, but fained worship or service is forbidden.
For if all stinted forms of public prayer be a transgression of the second
commandment, then in their common nature such stinted forms agree with images
devised for worship: But stinted forms or prayer agree not in their common
nature with images devised for worship. False worship forbidden in the second
commandment is opposite to the true worship which must in special be
instituted by God: But a stinted form of prayer is not opposite to that worshop
which must in special be instituted by God. False worship forbidden in the
second commandment is in common nature, use and end one with that positive
worship which is there commanded: But a stinted form of prayer is a matter of
order, and not for common nature, use and end one with the true and pure
worship of God there commanded. The pure worship of God in spirit and truth is
set against the worship of images: But the pure worship of God in spirit and
truth is not opposite to the worship of God in a stinted form of words. Against
a general negative commandment no special act affirmative is lawful, unless
the same be specially warranted by the Lawgiver. But some stinted forms of
prayer are lawful which are not in special warranted by the Lawgiver; viz.
such as we have liberty to use, but are not tied to use by any necessity of
precept. If a public stinted form of prayer be a breach of the second
commandment, then all public stinted forms whereof there is the same formal
reason and consideration, Semper specialia generalibus insunt, Pandect. lib.
50. tit. 17. reg. 147.
both for persons and things, are breaches of the second commandment at all
times and in all men: (for it cannot be, that a perpetual commandment should
be interpreted to forbid an act to one man, when, if the formal reason and
consideration be the same in all, it does not forbid the same to every man.)
But every public stinted form of prayer whereof there is the same formal
reason and consideration, is not a breach of the second commandment in all men
and at all times. For there is the same formal reason and consideration of a
public stinted form of prayers to Christians now that there was formerly to
the Jews: The same formal reason and consideration, I say, not of this or that
particular rite or ordinance which did peculiarly agree to them in respect of
the special manner of dispensation proper to those times; but of a stinted
form in general, which was proper to them in no consideration, but common to
us with them. As for example, If the priests might bless in a stinted form of
words, the ministers of the Gospel may do so likewise; If the Levites might
praise God in a stinted form of thanksgiving, the ministers of the Gospel may
use the Lords prayer as a prayer without addition or variation. But all use of
a stinted form of prayer and thanksgiving was not a breach of the second
commandment in the priests and Levites. If a stinted arbitrary prayer be the
breach of the second commandment, then is conceived prayer, when uttered, a sin
likewise: For they both agree in the matter, as of God; in external phrase of
speech and words, both are of men: in that which makes stinted prayer a breach
of the second commandment, if it be a breach, there is no difference. Therefore
we conclude, That a stinted form of prayer is not a breach of the second
commandment.

Means of Divine worship not ordained of God be unlawful: Object. 1. See Copy
of a Letter, page 5. and 32.
But a stinted form of prayer is a means of Divine worship not ordained of God.

Means of worship (not to contend about words) are of two sorts. Answ.
Some substantial; which are so means of worship, as they be worship it self;
as the word is used, when we speak of worship taught in the 2. commandment: So
the sacraments are means of worship, and branches of positive worship taught in
that precept. And in this sense all means of worship allowable are necessary by
Divine precept, and we are bound in conscience to apply our selves to them as
Gods ordinance, and not we only, but all the churches throughout the world.
For such ordinances of God pertein to the substance of worship, whereof nothing
can be changed or taken away but the worship is changed, and another made.
Others are mere accidents to the substantial means, See Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c.
10. 14, 30* 31. Jun. Animad. (...) Bellar. contr. 3. l. 4. cap. 16. not. 86,
87. and cap. 17. not. m, 10, 11, 12. Zinch. De Redempt. l. 1. De cult. 4.
propos. Car^wr. Answ. to the Rhe^. Matthew. 15. 4. Whittak. De Pontif. Romans Qu.
7. page 851. 852, 853. Calvin. opuse. De ver^ reform. and necessi^. reformat.
Calvin. Epist. 259. Zepp^r. De sacraments, lib. 3. cap 12, 13.
and deserve not to be called means of worship, and if so called, it is very
improperly, concerning which God has given no particular commandment in his
word, whereunto the conscience is not bound either to apply it self unto them,
or to witness against them: and of this sort are the circumstances of time,
place, order, method, phrase and stinted form of words in the administration of
the holy things of God; which are no parts of the worship, but honest
circumstances of the celebration; consonant to the general rules given in
scripture for the right administration of Divine ordinances, but not commanded
or disallowed in particular. For general rules are not commandments of this or
that in particular, but approbations of any particular, this or another,
agreeable to those rules. The apostle in commanding that all things be done in
order, does not command this or that particular order, nor forbid this or that
in particular because it is not ordained of God. In times of persecution it is
probable that the Deacon gave notice to the faithful when and where the
assembly was to be held, Ignat. ad ^^olycarp. and ad Hieron. or appointed it at
the present assembly, Walafrid. De reb. eccles. c. 5. Rut in times of peace, by
the sound of a bell: which invention some attribute to Sabinian the Pope, anno
Dom. 604. Polydor. Virg. de Javent. l. 6. cap. 12. Others to Paulinus Bishop of
Nola, contemporarie to Hierome, because Hierome mementioneth this use. Hieron.
De regul. monach. cap. 33. and 39.
For if all such means or worship shall be properly worship, then not only
preaching, but the church, pulpit, bells, bell-man, the phrase and method of
sermons, then each particular form of prayer, the hour and order shall be
worship, because they are furtherances thereof. If all such means of worship
must be ordained of God, or they shall be unlawful, God must have no worship
at all from us, in the means which he himself has ordained: because it is
impossible to use the means he has ordained, and not to do many things which
he has not instituted.

Book-prayer is a manifest breach of the second commandment. Object. 2.


The reason, Answ.
I conceive, is, because words are signs of our conceits, and notes of the
things themselves; writing is a sign or picture of the thing signified: and so
words devised by men, and books of stinted prayers, are images or pictures of
our own devising. Smith, Differ. chap. 6.
And in this sense only can a stinted prayer be called a devised worship. For
the matter of the prayer is of God; it is the frame of words and method only
that can be challenged to be of man: and if devised words be not images
condemned, I cannot comprehend how the external form should be an apparent
breach of the second commandment. But if this reason be ought worth, it is a
manifest breach of the second commandment, to preach, pray, administer the
sacraments, or read the scriptures in a prescribed translation, nay in a
vulgar tongue. For in preaching and prayer the matter is of God, holy and good;
but the words and phrases, of men. In translations the matter is immediately
inspired of God; but the words are devised of men. The sacraments are Gods
ordinances by special and express institution: but what shall we say of the
outward form of words used in the administration? If words devised by men be
images condemned by the commandments, do we not make one commandment of God
cross to another, when we say that God requires these things at our hands,
and yet condemns all devised words, without which they cannot be performed?
Particular duties affirmative against a general negative commandment must have
express warrant by way of prerogative and derogation from the general
commandment, In toto ju^e generi per speciem derogatur; and illud potissimum
habetur quod ad speciem directum est, Pandect. lib. 50. tit. 17. reg. 80. Cypr.
lib. 1. epist. 8.
wherein we must not go one jot beyond signed commission: Thus Abraham was
commanded to offer up his son Isaac, which otherwise had been against the sixth
commandment: Thus the sacraments are commanded to the church, which for the
church to devise of her self is against the second commandment; Adulterum est,
impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore instituitur, ut dispo^^io
divina violetur Ambr. in 1. Cor. 11. Indignus est Domino qui aliter mysterium
celebrat quam a Christo traditum est. Non enim potest devotus esse qui aliter
presumit quam datum est ab Autore.
and therefore it is unlawful to institute other sacraments then God has
appointed, or add sacramental signs to them which the Lord has instituted.
But to affirm the same of devised words in prayer, preaching, administration of
the sacraments, and reading of the scriptures; sc. that they were instituted of
God by particular warrant, and by special prerogative and derogation, would be
exceeding strange. Signs religious then are of two sorts: 1. Vocal (if they
may be called signs metaphysicall) under which I comprehend natural gestures,
as they are expressions of the inward affection; and these are not simply
forbidden or commanded in the second commandment, nor do simply pertein to the
second commandment, but to the precept rather which requires the inward
affection it self. 2. Real, and such as in common nature, use and end be one
with the positive ordinances of God; and these are the images forbidden in the
second precept. And seeing for the affirmative part, positive worship, as it is
to be approved, maintained and exercised purely according to the institution is
the object of that commandment, it seems that prayer, as it is directed unto
God only, in the mediation of Jesus, whether inward or outward, conceived in
heart or declared by word or gesture, cannot be referred, as a branch of
positive worship, to the second commandment. When men pray to idols or saints
departed inwardly or outwardly, they sin against the first commandment: If
with carnal imaginations before an image, they break the second; if lightly,
vainly, irreverently, with the lips alone, they sin against the third: But
the method, words or phrase of speech, as such, is neither condemned in the
second commandment, nor does belong unto it.

Men's inventions in Gods worship are forbidden in the second commandment:
Object. 3. Johnson ubi supra, page 33. Greenwood, Against Gifford. page 8. and
18.
But stinted prayer is the invention of man, never instituted nor approved of
Christ in his Testament.

Must this go for current without limitation, Answ.
proof or explication, That all inventions of men in Gods worship are forbidden
in the second commandment? What then shall we say to all devised words and
phrases used in Gods service? What to all set forms of catechismes, studied
sermons, interpretations of the scriptures, the contents of chapters, the
titles of sundry books of scripture? What to the divisions of the^ into
sections, Jun. Animad. in Bella^m. contr. 5. l. 2. cap. 16. not. 18. Rivet.
Catholic. orth. tract. 2. qu. 37.
chapters and verses, the interlineary glosses, diverse readings, marginall
references, the reading of one part this week, another the next? What of the
building and ordering of synagogues for the sanctification of the sabbaths,
Humane inventions forbidden in the second commandment, are for common nature
and use one with the positive worship of God, unlawful because they be not in
particular instituted and commanded of God: and in that respect matters of
order, method and phrase in themselves allowed and warranted, if done as parts
of positive worship are in that respect unlawful. Act. 15. 21. and 13. 27. See
Jun. Annot. in Act. 13. 15. Buxtorf. Com. Masoret. cap. 8. Mercer in Genesis c. 1.
v. 6. page 16. and in Genesis 6. 8. page 149. and cap. 50. 26. page 747. Sixth.
Senens. Biblioth. lib. 3. meth. 4. Rainold. de Idololatr. Admonit. ad lectorem.
Ainsworth on Genesis 6. 8. The Jews under Antiochus devised to read a portion of
the prophets instead of the law. Elias Thisb. in verb. Pat. Hooker Eccl. pol.
lib. 5. 20. Cartwr. Reply, 1. part. page 157, 158. In the christian assemblies
they had lectures out of the prophets and apostles. Justin. Apol. 2. page 162.
Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 4. and lib. 4. Ep. 5. Ambr. l. 1. Offic. cap. 8. and Ep. 75.
Council. Laodic. cap. 16. Grahan. did. 15. cap. 3 The writings of the apostles
are otherwise distinguished by the Russians then by us: For in their language
there is in S. Matthew an hundred and sixteen chapters, the most of them so
little that sometimes there is but three little verses therein according a^ the
sense of the discourse requires; and all that was done by one Cyrillus a
priest of the church of Constantinople: See Cathol. Trad. qu. 9. In times past
the Greeks divided Matthew into sixty eight titles, and three hundred fifty
five chapters: Mark into forty eight titles, and two hundred thirty five
chapters, as Sixtus Sen^nsis has it: John into eighteen titles, and two
hundred thirty two chapters. See Causabon initio suar. in Evangel. Not. In
(...) the Apoc. in distinguished into seventy two chapters, of Andreas
Cesariensis into four and twenty parts, and each of these subdivided into
three chapters. Amongst the Latins the Gospel of Matthew was divided into
ninety four chapters* of Luke, into one hundred an seven; the Epistle to the
Romans, into fifty. The first author of that division which we now follow,
some would have Hugo Cardinalis to be, about the year of the Lord, 1254. See
Rivet, Isagog ad Script. cap. 29. 21. usque ad 3^. No man put the verses in the
latin bibles before Robert Stephan, and for the new Testament, he performed
that first, being helped by no book greek or latin, (...). Stephan. Lector. in
Concordant. Graec. N. T.
the fashion of gathering for the repair of the temple in Joash his time, the
swearing to the covenant under Asia, the ordination of holy feasts and fasts
upon occasion? What of the forms and gestures used in oaths, of conceived
prayer it self, of set forms of worship, studied before, and kept in memory, as
some distinguish; in the same form and with like truth, we may argue against
them; men's inventions in the worship of God are forbidden by the second
commandment: But set forms of catechismes, studied sermons, interpretations of
the scripture, etc. are men's inventions. The conclusion that follows from
these premises is evidently false; therefore some one of them, if not both, is
false also: For of truth nothing but truth can follow. And what they can answer
to the premises of this latter argument, the same will be sufficient to
overthrow the other. Catechizing is Gods ordinance: but this or that form of
catechism in respect of method and phrase of speech is the collection and
composition of man. Reading the scripture is allowed of God: but the division
of the law into fifty three or fifty four greater sections, and the
subdivision of these into lesser sections; the partitions of several books
into chapters, and the division of them into verses; the appointing of this or
that portion of the law, the prophets, and the evangelists to be read
ordinarily upon this or that day, is the invention or devise of man. Preaching
is commanded of God, so is the interpretation of the scripture; but the phrase
and method of sermons is of men. The matter of scripture is the immediate truth
of God, but the words and phrases which are as vessels to convey this truth
unto us (I speak of translations, not of the original text) are humane, and
not of God by immediate inspiration. God commands us to call upon his name
both in public and private; but the words wherein we express our desires are
our own both in conceived and stinted prayer. These are humane in respect of
the word and form; Divine in respect of the matter. And here it must be
observed, that positive worship or means (for these two in this sense are all
one) opposed to humane inventions, Thou shall not make to thy self, s^ without
commandment from God express and particular: As by his commandment Moses made
the C^rubims in the Sanctuary, Ex. 25. 1^. and the brazen serpent in the
wilderness, Numb. 21. 8. If we speak of humane inventions forbidden in the
second commandment, they are such devised worship as is not commanded and
determined by God, and cannot be opposed to such things as have warrant and
allowance only from the general rules of s^ripure.
is that which must be warranted by particular institution, and not by the
light of reason, according to the general rules of scripture. As for example,
the sacraments are positive worship or means of worship, and they have
particular express institution: but the form or manner of administration, as
it respects decency, order and edification, is not positive worship or means
thereof in the sense before mentioned; and therein it suffices, if all things
be done according to the general rules of scripture, the light of reason
directing in particulars what is decent and to edification. So then devised
worship is unlawful: but it is lawful to worship God in a form of words
devised; for the form is not worship, but the prayer tendered in that form. Men's
inventions in Gods worship that be of the same nature and use with true worship
or means of worship ordained of God, be unlawful: but method, order, phrase of
speech devised by man, was never judged an invention unlawful.

Book-prayer in an image or similitude of spiritual prayer, Object. 4. All
(...) for (...) is idolatry, Greenwood, page 8. Johnson, ubisup^^.
which indeed it is not: and the book, as idols, supplyeth the place of the
world and spirit.

The accusation is grievous: Answ.
but if we crave a reason thereof, we shall find them as far to seek as
forward to accuse. Is it only a similitude of prayer, because it has only
the external form of prayer, but wants the soul and life thereof?

They might easily answer themselves; As it is penned or printed it has only
the external form, and so it is not properly a prayer: but as it is rehearsed
with understanding, affiance of heart, and fervency, it has the true and whole
nature of prayer. And by what reason can a book-prayer be called an image of
true prayer which will not agree to prayer first conceived and then uttered?
For if it be uttered with the lips without the intention of the heart, it is a
bare similitude: and if the other be read or uttered after an holy manner, with
that affection which God requires in prayer, it is true and acceptable prayer.
Words without the heart are but empty sounds, whether read, or pronounced out
of the memory, or ex tempore: and if the voice be joined with the heart it is
pleasant melody, though our petitions be read out of a book. But the book then
(says he) supplieth the room of the word and spirit. Nothing less: For the
word of God directs us what to ask, even when we read our prayers upon a
book, so long as we crave with understanding things agreeable to the will of
God: And the spirit does enable and stir us up to desire that which is
according to Gods will and our necessity. We may utter requests with our lips
in conceived prayer without the aid and assistance of the holy Ghost, and so we
may in a penned prayer; but offer up the sighs and groans of the heart we
cannot without his grace.

It is no more lawful to use any strange manner of prayer, Object. 5.
then it was to use strange fire or strange incense in time of the law:
Johnson, (...) God not as himself commands, but after your (...), Ainsw.
Considerat. exam. page* 4.
Psalm. 141. 2. Apoc. 8. 3, 4. But a stinted form of prayer is a strange manner
of prayer.

The proposition we grant, Answ.
if rightly understood: otherwise symbolicall and analogicall arguments, if the
proposition be not rightly taken, are very dangerous. But a stinted form of
prayer is no strange manner of worship; because in it all things required to
the nature of true prayer may be observed. In the word of God we have direction
given, to whom, for what, with what heart and affection, to what end a man
ought to pray: but in what method or frame of speech he is to be a petitioner,
we find nothing prescribed in particular, neither do we judge any thing
necessary, more then this, That order, decency, and edification be observed.
That which has the common nature, definition, use and end of worship, but
wants Divine authority and institution to make it approved and true worship,
that is strange in the worship of God: But the method and phrase of speech has
not the common nature, definition, use or end of worship or prayer belonging
unto it. As conceived prayer so a set form of prayer is for substance and
nature agreeable to the rules of direction delivered in the word of truth,
though for method and words both the humane. Let our brethren set down out of
the word of God what is necessarily and essentially required to the nature and
being of true prayer, and show (if they be able) that some one or other
condition or requisite cannot be observed in a prescript or stinted form. If
this cannot be done (as I think it never has nor can be) how dare they esteem
or style it a strange worship? They tell us, God has not ordained that manner
of worship. But this phrase, the manner of worship, is used two ways: first,
as it notes the substantial means of worship ordained of God by special
institution: secondly, as it is put for the outward order or form how this
worship or means of worship is performed. A third signification might be added,
as when we say the third commandment teaches in what manner the name and
ordinances of God are to be used. Now if it be taken in the first or third
signification, the outward frame of words, order, and method is neither means
nor manner of worship, either in preaching, prayer, or administration of the
sacraments. If in the second, the word of God does not prescribe any particular
form, Aug. in epist. 121. cap. 12.
stinted or not stinted, as necessary, but does warrant both as allowable: For
where nothing is in particular commanded touching the external form of words
and order in which our petitions should be presented to the Lord, Quam libet
(...) verba dicimus, nihil aliud dicimus quam in ista Dominica oratione positum
est, si reet^ and congruenter ^ramus.
there we are left at liberty. And to put religion in reading or uttering words
in a stinted or conceived form, where God has laid no bond upon the
conscience, what is it less then superstition? (...), ubi (...), page 29.
If the phrase of speech be modus or medium cultus, as it is referred to the
second commandment, (...) certum est, Deum ipsum (...) requi^ (...) neque
accepta^e superstitionem (...).
then it is instituted, commanded and determined of God in particular, then
that and none other is lawful and necessary: for so it is in all parts of his
positive worship. Those sacramental signs which God has designed in the
covenant, are necessary, and those only lawful: and if method and phrase of
speech be medium cultus in the same sense, the like must be said of that also.
In substance a prayer read and conceived is all one, and the one is no more a
strange manner of worship then the other. And here let it be observed, that all
these objections are made against all use of stinted or read prayers, public
or private, voluntary or imposed, sound and pertinent as well as corrupt, and
cannot be restrained to a form imposed upon the minister of the congregation to
be used continually, and that corrupt and faulty.

The matter, Object. 6.
if supposed to be alike from God, as being truth and according to sound
doctrine; the manner (in that we call conceived prayer) is the same which
nature teaches and scripture approves, and is the only way in which the
prayers of all holy men recorded in scripture since Christ have been carried,
as the Papists themselves grant. But for the manner or way of book-prayer, we
have not so much as example in scripture for it.

The strength of this reason let us view in the like: Answ.
Mr Smith would prove the originals not to be given as helps before the eye in
worship, Smith, Difference of the church, chap. 10. page 6.
Because upon the day of Pentecost and many years after the churches of the
new Testament did use no books in time of spiritual worship, but prayed,
prophesied, and sung psalms merely out of their hearts, Acts 2. 4, 42. and 10.
44, 48. and 19. 6. 1. Cor. 14. 15, 17, 26, 37. Because no example can be showed
of any man, ordinary or extraordinary, that at or after the day of Pentecost
used a book in praying, prophesying and singing of Psalms: if yea, let it be
done, and we yield. And against the use of translations for the hearers thus he
argues; Idem, cap. 17.
The Prophets and Apostles wrote books, but did never divide their books into
chapters and verses: Seeing therefore that chapters and verses were of man's
invention, hence it follows, before chapter and verse came in, the hearers
could not turn to search their books in time of hearing. The Apostles in
quoting testimonies of the prophets do not quote chapter and verse, but only
say, It is written, The scripture says, The holy Ghost says: thereby teaching
us that there is no use of chapter and verse for searching in time of hearing.
Never was there mention made of any hearer that ever had his book to search in
time of hearing. The reasons be the same, and yet I persuade my self, they that
dislike a stinted form of prayer will not allow of the conclusion which Mr
Smith would infer. As for the reason it self, whatsoever can be truly spoken
of the excellency, profit and use of conceived prayer, we freely and willingly
admit: but betwixt it and stinted prayer there is no such disagreement, that if
the one be praised, the other must needs be cast out of doors; if the one be
allowed, the other must needs be a breach of the second commandment. Nature
teaches, that from the abundance of the heart the mouth should speak: and in
the use of a stinted form, repeated by memory, or read upon a book, the mouth
speaks from the abundance of the heart; else in the stinted use of psalms,
prayers or praises the saints of God recorded in scripture spoke not from the
heart. If no example of any holy man since Christ be recorded in scripture who
has tendered his prayers to God in a stinted form of words, or read them out
of a book, is this any thing against that practice? Is not the approved
practice of the church of the Jews grounded upon reasons common to them and us,
and of perpetual equity, sufficient to justify an act or order, though no
example can be brought for it out of the new testament? I have not heard nor
read of such an exception in a matter of this nature in any writer, old or new,
Popish or Protestant; and consider, I pray, what dangerous consequences would
follow thereupon? I will not press them, because upon second thoughts (I make
no question) it will appear far amiss. If in that particular of stinted
prayer we find not example, will it not suffice if from grounds of scripture we
can prove it lawful, and that all things required in prayer may be observed in
a stinted form? If in that particular there be none examples, will it not
suffice that analogicall examples of things of the same nature and kind may be
produced? And then it will not be hard to find examples since Christ for the
use of stinted prayer, as we shall show hereafter. But what if none example
could be produced of that or the like practice? The scripture does not descend
to give particular commandment or example for every thing perteining to order
or manner of administration of Divine things: It is sufficient that there be
general rules found for that purpose, according to which particulars must be
directed. Nay, which is more, sundry things are not only lawful but
necessary, for which you can bring no example out of the word of God, neither
before nor since Christ. I will spare to mention particulars, because I would
not teach profane men to wrangle.

God may have as much honor or more in our public assemblies, Object. 7.
if a stinted form were not used. And this is a certain truth, That whatsoever
the worship and service of God may spare without detriment either to the honor
of God or edification of Saints, is superfluous, and so but a vain invention.

If all this be granted, it will not follow, Answ.
that a stinted form is against the second commandment, of the same common
nature with an image. For in public administration of Gods service, in the
outward order, method and phrase many things are laid aside by the most, and
might be spared by all men, which are against no commandment. And the like may
be said of sundry observations. The custom of godfathers and godmothers in
baptism, of calling an assembly by the sound of a bell, of burial in
churchyards might be spared, and yet not against the second commandment. When
there be many ways or means whereby a thing may be atteined, it is not an idle
invention ordinarily to choose the one or other, as seems expedient. Mr
Robinson disputes thus against our stinted form of prayer; It cannot be an
ordinance of Christ, because the church may perfectly and entirely worship God
without it, with all the parts of holy and spiritual worship, as did the
apostolic churches for many years before such Liturgy was devised or
imposed. I should think both these reasons carry the same sense, sc. That that
may be spared without which the church may perfectly and entirely worship God
with all parts of holy and spiritual worship. And if that be the meaning, then
I deny that to be a superfluous or vain invention which might be spared without
detriment either to the honor of God or edification of Saints. For set forms
of blessing, catechismes, administration of the sacraments, be not superfluous
and vain inventions, and yet all parts of Gods spiritual worship may perfectly
and entirely be performed without them. It is not from God by particular
institution as a substantial means or help of worship, that this or that
division of scripture be observed, much less that which the Jews used, or is
now observed in our church: But the division is of God, as that which is done
according to the general rules of scripture may be said to be from him: which
is not to the purpose.
The use of a set translation of holy scripture to be read in the congregation
by such or such portions or sections, is no vain invention: the distribution of
it into chapters and verses, the quotation of chapter and verse, the marginall
references, are no superfluous devises: and yet the church may perform all
parts of Gods worship entirely and perfectly without these, as did the
apostolic churches. The prescribing of a set form of psalms to be sung by all
the people jointly together, is no superfluous devise, and yet it may be spared
without detriment either to the honor of God or edification of the people, as
it was in the apostolic churches for many years: Of which more in the next
chapter. Set forms of confessions of churches, set forms of professions of
faith to be used in the public worship of God, be not vain inventions, and yet
you may say of them as you do of stinted forms of prayer, They may be spared,
There is no example for them in scripture since Christ. The word
consubstantiall is not necessary, as without which the doctrine of that truth
of the Divinity of our Savior Christ cannot be maintained; (for that were to
accuse the holy penmen of scripture) yet was it not an idle or superfluous
invention. In some reformed churches before preaching-time the church assembled
has the scriptures read in such order that the whole canon thereof is
oftentimes in one year run through: In others there is no such order of simple
reading, but, besides their set sermons, two chapters are paraphrastically
expounded, The scriptures of God are not all of one sort: some part^ be easy,
some parts be hard: Direction where to begin in reading, and how to proceed, is
not altogether superfluous. ^ustinian the Emperor appoints an order for the
reading of the Laws; what books and titles he would have read the first year,
and what the second, etc. Justinian. in Prooem. Pandect. Calvin. epist. 87.
Quod ad formulam precum, etc. val^e probo ut illa certa exstet a qua pastoribus
discedere in functione non liceat, tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and
imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium inter se ecclesiaru^ consensus,
etc.
with the principal points thereof taken and applied unto their auditors:
Neither of these simply necessary, nor yet superfluous inventions. To kneel in
prayer, yea to prescribe that men shall ordinarily kneel in public prayer, if
with convenience they may, is not an idle invention; and yet men may pray
sitting, standing, falling upon the face. Men may meet together to worship God
at fit time, in convenient place; observe due order, method, moderation in
length, according to the abilities and necessities of the people, without rules
and prescriptions for that purpose: and yet rules, prescriptions and precedents
are not idle inventions. And though it be possible to worship God aright and
further the edification of his Saints as much without as with a set form, yet a
set form of prayer devised and consented unto (if it were possible) by all the
sound, true, orthodox churches in the world, is in many respects expedient;
such a form as being free from all exception, apprved of all, might testify
their sweet harmony and concent. And the like may be said of forms of
catechismes, See Calvin Opuse. epist. catechis. and epist. 87.
confessions, etc. A stinted form then of public prayer is not one in common
nature with images devised for worship, nor opposite to the worship which must
in special be instituted of God; it is no vain or superfluous devise, much
less an humane invention condemned in the second commandment.

It is not strange at all, Object. 8.
that one and the same thing should be a sin in one and not in another; If by
the same thing you mean the same materially only. And if that which was
lawful to all people, priests and Levites in the old Testament, cannot be
unlawful now, then neither circumcision nor any other Jewish rite is now
unlawful to us.

True it is, Answ.
that one and the same thing may be sin in one and not in another, when the
reasons and considerations be not the same: as that which a man is bound to do
by special calling or office, may be sin in another which is not called and
appointed pointed to that service. And many things were lawful in the old
Testament, being according to Gods word, that are not so now, viz. things that
were proper and peculiar to them and those times in respect of the manner of
dispensation Divine. Privilegia quaedam causae sunt, quaedam personae: et id^o
quaedam ad haeredem transmittuntur, quae causae sunt; quae personae sunt, ad
haeredem nontranseunt, Pandect. lib. 50. tit. 17. reg. 196.
But things which have grounds and reasons common to those and our times, in
respect of persons and things, and do not in peculiar respects belong unto them
only, these, if lawful to them, are lawful to us; and, if forbidden to us,
they are forbidden to them. And of this sort is a stinted form of prayer or
blessing, not peculiar to them but common to us with them, not a privilege of
the persons but of the cause. It is given for a rule concerning examples, That
a reason drawn from them does necessarily conclude, See Jun. in Jud. v. 6, 7.
and Append. parall. sacr. par. 11. Rainold. Censur. tom. 2. praelect. 188, 189,
190, etc.
sc. cum unum particulare ab alio particulari probatur vi similitudinis
communis toti generi sub quo ea particularia continentur: But the public use
of a stinted, free, arbitrarie form of prayer, praise, or blessing, is grounded
upon reasons and considerations common to the priests or Levites and the
ministers of the Gospel; the things are like, and this likeness is common to
the whole kind; not material circumstance can be named which should
appropriate it unto them only. Therefore if the public stinted use of prayer
or blessing was not a breach of the second commandment in them, it is not a sin
against that commandment in us. It is objected, that their forms were not as
ours, strictly imposed, ordinarily to be used without so much as the variation
of a word. But this unlooseth not the knot, but rather tyeth it the faster. For
if it be a sin against the second commandment to use such a form, it must not
be done once: If it be no sin, it is not made sinful by this, that it is used
this week, or the next, as occasion is offered. If it be lawful to use the
Lords prayer as a stinted form, it is not made unlawful, that I use it in
these precise words without addition or alteration. And if the priests were not
tied to one precise form of blessing without addition or alteration, yet might
they lawfully use one form without addition or variation; and that which was
allowable in them, is not unlawful in us, upon the same grounds and
considerations. So that we may sum up this reason thus; If public stinted
forms of blessing, prayer, or praise, might be used ordinarily by the priests,
Levites, and ministers of the Gospel without addition or alteration, then all
stinted forms to be used ordinarily without addition or alteration be not a
breach of the second commandment, in common nature one with an image devised
for worship. But the priests and Levites in the time of the Law, and the
ministers of the Gospel in the New Testament, might ordinarily use a stinted
form without addition or alteration. Or thus it may be framed; If a public
stinted form of prayer be unlawful, then either simply and absolutely all
stinted forms to be used in public, or such only as are to be used ordinarily
without alteration or addition, or such only as be corrupt and faulty: But a
public stinted form is not simply and absolutely unlawful: for then this
exception, That it is to be used ordinarily and without alteration, is vain and
superfluous; not only because it is ordinarily to be used without alteration
or addition: for then that consideration taken away, a stinted form should be
just and lawful; as also then it should be lawful at one time to use this or
that phrase of speech, unlawful at another, when yet the same occasion
requires it. If only because corrupt and faulty, then a stinted form is not
an humane invention, a breach of the second commandment, an idole-prayer, a
superfluous devise to be condemned; then the fault and corruption removed, the
form it self is lawful to be used without addition or variation.

A stinted form of prayer is not unlawful to him that needs it, Object. 9.
as not able largely to express his own desires, or lay open his wants
particularly: but to him that is able and needs it not it is unlawful;
because in such case a set form of prayer is an arbitrary help or furtherance
forbidden by the second commandment.

But then a set form of prayer in words devised by others or by a man's self,
Answ.
is not unlawful because stinted or devised, not of it self, nor to all, but
by accident only. Then it is not a devised worship, strange incense, an
idole-prayer, an image of prayer, forbidden in the second commandment: for
whatsoever is verified of a general as general, is verified of all underneath
it. Then they must not say, Humane inventions in Gods worship are forbidden;
but, Humane inventions in the worship of God are lawful to them that need
them, unlawful to them that need them not, because arbitrarie. Then the
exception of using a stinted form ordinarily without alteration or addition is
altogether fruitless: for the form is unlawful because arbitrarie. And for
the thing it self, it is an unwritten tradition, because it has no ground in
scripture. For it is a received rule, That all distinctions in Divinity not
grounded upon the word of God, are unwritten traditions, indeed humane
unwarrantable inventions and additions. But this distinction, That a stinted
form of prayer is warrantable to him that needs it, because of his inability,
unwarrantable to him that needs it not, is grounded upon no text of
scripture, or solid consequence drawn from thence. All arbitrarie helps and
furtherances in Gods service are not forbidden in the second commandment; nor
any help or furtherance, because arbitrarie in this sense; that is, no help or
furtherance devised in Gods worship that is lawful to one because he needth
it, is forbidden to another by the second commandment because he needs it
not. Wille^, Contr. 11. qu. 1. Append. and Cont. 12. qu. 2. Piscat. in Matthew.
28* 19. Schol. M^ldonat. in Matthew. 28. 19. Cham. Panstr. tom. 4. De Bapt. l. 5.
c. 3.. 5. Johnson, De prec. and ^turg. page 28, 29.
The method of sermons and prayers, set forms of catechismes, blessings, and
baptizing are arbitrarie helps and furtherances, as they are called; (as
whether we preach by doctrine, reason and use, or in another method; begin with
confession or thanksgiving; use this precise form of words, I baptize thee etc.
or, Be thou baptized, etc.) but not forbidden in the commandment. Helps and
furtherances in Gods worship (so to speak, because I would not contend about
words) are of two sorts: Some necessary, and in nature and use the same with
the true worship of God instituted by his Highness particularly; and these are
unlawful if devised by men, because devised, Jer. 7. 31. and 19. 5.
neither can any necessity be pretended to excuse them. Col. 2. 22, 23.
For in the point of Gods worship, Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32.
what is of the substance of worship and in conscience necessary, that if it be
not determined of God and instituted by him, is unlawful. Others are mere
circumstances concerning the method, phrase, external manner of celebration;
which are not determined by God, and therefore no particular is unlawful which
is according to the general rules in scripture. Deuteronomy. 12. 8. 9.
Thus for the place of sacrifice, Genesis 8. 20. and 12. 7 and 13* 1^. and 20. 15.
and 26. 2^. and 33. 20.
before it was determined, it was lawfully in any place, because no place was
designed: but after it was once determined, it was lawful in no place but that
alone. ^xod. 17. 15. and 24* 4*
Voluntary and free-will-offerings might be offered at any time, because for
them no time was determined: Deuteronomy. 12* 5, 6, 11, 1^, 14.
but the passover might be celebrated only at one time, Lev* 1. 2, 3. and 2.
1.
because the precise time of it was determined. Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 26, 27.
In all matters of positive worship and determined circumstances, by the word
of God, Ex. 12. 6.
such only are^ lawful as the word of God has enjoined; Nu^a. 9* 3.
and all things are forbidden which are not commanded. Omnia sunt (...)
Con^essa, Gloss.ad D^g. ^o 47. tit. 2j. l^g. 3.
But in circumstances and matters of order not determined, no particular is
necessary, and all such are lawful as be consonant to the general rules given
in scripture; and that, if agreeable to the general rules, (...) sunt
permiss^quae non inven^untur prohibita, Gloss. ad Dig. l. 4. tit. 6. leg. 2^.
is lawful which is not forbidden.

And so in this particular, if God had determined any prescript form of prayer,
either for some time or for ever, to all men or some only, that form to such
and at such times had been necessary, and that alone lawful, because
determined. If God had tied men to conceived prayer without any set or stinted
form devised by themselves or imposed by others, that alone had been lawful,
because determined: But seeing we are enjoined to pray, confess sin,
entreat* mercy, and no set form determined; therefore any fit form is
warrantable, one as well as another. For where the law has put no difference,
it is not for us to distinguish. Let it be demanded of a man when he prays,
why he uses that form he then uses, what answer can he return but this, That
no form is determined, and so any Fitting form is warrantable? Or if he answer
otherwise in effect, he shall answer amiss; as not knowing the true ground of
the lawfulness of that he does. No man has authority to devise any
substantial means of worship, which must be referred to the second
commandment, no more then he may teach new doctrines or institute new
sacraments in Gods church upon his own head. But the order, phrase, or method,
which is devised by man, is no worship of God. And if we put no difference
betwixt the positive worship of God, which he has in particular commanded, and
must not be devised of men, and the order, phrase and method in which his
worship is performed, it is not possible to worship God aright without sin.
But if we shall loo^ more narrowly into the former distinction, we shall find
it flat contradictorie to it self and to the commandment. For by arbitrarie
furtherances we must understand, not devised furtherances, which this answer
grants to be lawful, but furtherances which are not necessary to one man
though lawful to another. And then whereas the second commandment forbids
devised worship, which is unlawful, as contrary to the eternal rule of
righteousness; by this answer arbitrarie furtherances, not devised
furtherances, should be condemned: which is clean contrary to the scope and end
of the commandment. For example, when the commandment says, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, etc. If a man shall distinguish thus,
Devised images are not unlawful to him that needth, but only arbitrarie
images, sc. to him that needs them not, should he not speak contrary to the
commandment? The case is the same in this particular: For the things forbidden
in the second commandment are in general nature one with an image, sc. devised
worship, which carries not the stamp or approbation of God. And when a stinted
or set form of prayer is impleaded as contrary to that royal precept, do they
not speak contradictories that say, A stinted form is lawful to him that
needs it, but an arbitrarie form unlawful, viz. a stinted or devised form,
to him that needs it not? For this is as much as to say, devised worship is
lawful and acceptable in him that needs that help; but arbitrarie worship,
to wit, to him that needs it not, is forbidden*

Actions lawful in case or upon condition only, Object. 10.
the case being amoved, become unlawful: As for David to eat the shewbread:
and in case the woman be not able to bring a lamb for her burnt-offering, then
a young pigeon shall be accepted. Now the lawfulness of a stinted form of
prayer lies only in case of some necessity, as a natural help to supply
some defect.

Many things no question are lawful in case of necessity which in a time free
are unlawful. Answ.
But the things unlawful out of case of necessity, are such as God has
forbidden in his word; as the eating of shewbread, etc. whereas no reason has
been alleged to prove the use of a stinted form unlawful, more out of then in
the case of necessity. Also that necessity which does legitimate an action
unlawful out of case of necessity, Lex cess^t ubi necessitas venit, Gratian.
Decr. p. 2. q. 1. can. 1. cap. 41.
must either free us from the commandment, or is in special dispensed withal
by God himself: But necessity of a stinted form, to free from the obligation of
the second commandment, or dispensation by way of prerogative in that case,
none has, nor can be showed. David did eat the shewbread and sinned not,
Matthew. 12. 1, 2. verse. 5, ^.
sc. in case of extremity: For ceremonial precepts must give place to moral
duties. The priests in the temple profane the sabbath, not simply and properly,
but according to the opinion of the adversaries, if every action of the hand do
profane the sabbath: or they profane the sabbath, because they do that by the
appointment of God which otherwise would be a profanation both of the temple
and the sabbath. If the woman be not able, then in stead of a lamb a young
pigeon shall be accepted, because the Lawgiver has so appointed: otherwise (I
should think) it had been sin for the poor woman to bring a pigeon that was
not of ability to bring a lamb: For her extreme necessity had freed her from
the law, but authority she had none to institute one rite in the place of
another. If we apply these instances to the matter in hand, they will not hold:
For God never forbad a stinted form of prayer; never gave commandment, that
whosoever did offer the sacrifice of prayer should bring a conceived prayer;
nor by dispensation special and peculiar warranted him that wants a
conceived, to bring a book-prayer. And if the cases be like, (I should think)
the Lord would have prescribed a set form for the weak and feeble Christian, as
he has appointed the oblation of the poor woman, and not left him to seek up
and down he knows not where, and to bring an humane invention in stead of
pure and true worship. And if the Lord have determined any set form in that
ca^e, then the weak Christian must use that alone and none other. Let this
distinction pass for current, and what commandment is there which may not be
deluded: For, consonant to these positions, we may say, Images must not be
devised for worship, but in some case of necessity: for they may be natural
helps to teach or stir up affection, as well as a book may be a natural help
to supply some defect in prayer: The minister must not use wine, milk, or
rose water as the outward sign in baptism, unless it be in some case of
necessity, as a natural help to supply the defect of water: The midwife must
not baptize out of the case of necessity, when the minister is at hand; but in
case of necessity she is a natural help to supply the defect of a minister:
The pastor must be apt to teach, unless it be in case of necessity, when an
ignorant man is chosen to supply his room: A man must not defraud or circumvent
his neighbor; it is true, unless it be in case of necessity. This also
seems strange, that a book should be a natural help to supply some defect in
case of necessity, and cease to be natural when voluntarily used as an help
and furtherance by him that needs it not.

The conclusion of all is this; That a stinted public form of prayer is the
breach of no commandment, no forbidden invention of man, either in the deviser
or user, in the case of necessity or otherwise.

CHAP. IIII. It is as lawful to pray unto God in a form of words devised by
others, as to sing psalms to the praise of God in a stinted form of words
prescribed by others.
IF it be lawful to sing psalms to the praise of God in a stinted form of
words prescribed by others and devised by man, 3. Arg.
then likewise to pray unto God in a stinted form devised by others. For as
prayer is an ordinance of God and a branch of his worship, so is singing of
psalms to the praise of God: As God has left no stinted form of prayer for
his church whereunto he has tied all men and all churches, no more has he
prescribed any stinted form of singing as necessary for all times and churches
in the new Testament: As the one must be done with the heart and spirit, so the
other: As in the one the words are devised by men and prescribed by others, so
in singing of psalms: If the one be the invention of man, a strange prayer,
the similitude of a prayer; the other is an invention of man, a strange psalm,
the similitude of a psalm. And if a man be disposed to reason against singing
of psalms in a form of words devised by others, he might more plausibly argue,
That in the infancy of the church, when God saw a set form of psalms to be
necessary, he inspired holy men to pen holy and divine psalms, which might be
of use for that time, when such worship was required: but in the times of the
new Testament no set form of singing is prescribed of God; no authority is
given to the church or ordinary officers to prescribe any set form which might
be of use to all churches; there is neither precept for nor precedent of any
prescript form of singing in the scripture since Christ's time; all essential
parts of Gods worship may be performed without it, as appears by the examples
of the primitive churches: and seeing God never commanded nor promised to
accept any such stinted forms, it is a manifest breach of the second
commandment. These and such like arguments do make as strongly in every point
against a stinted form of psalms as against a prescript form of prayer. But I
have not read, that the singing of psalms in a prescript form devised by
others is unlawful.

Singing of psalms and praying differ many ways: Object. 1. Robins. Justis.
against Bern. page 467.
as, Many psalms are for instruction only; and those psalms which contein
prayers, are written for our instruction. Copy of a Letter, page 7, 8. Johnson,
De prec. and liturg. page 14, 15.
In prayer, the minister alone utters the words, the people adding their Amen
in the end; but in singing, every person in the church pronounces every word
and syllable aloud. Greenwood, Against Giff. page 13. You speak like an
ignorant man to say that singing is prayer, etc.
The psalms are parts of scriptures, wherein God speaks unto us, teaching
and instructing us, and we our selves, and one another mutually. Prayers are
poured forth in prose; psalms in verse. In prayer we beg things necessary for
our selves and others; in psalms we praise God for mercies received, Answ.
etc.

It is vain to examine or allege these or such like differences, because they
make nothing to weaken the force of the argument. For be the differences never
so many in these and other particulars, in this they agree, that they be parts
of worship to be performed according to the will and commandment of God: and
therefore if a stinted form of prayer be unlawful, because not commanded or
ordained of God; a stinted form of psalms, not bearing the Lords stamp, must
come under the same censure, unless they can plead special dispensation for
it. And if a prescript form of psalms not commanded of God be allowable and
may be used in Gods service, a stinted form of prayer is unjustly censured for
that reason. It is a received rule, Quicquid convenit tali qua tale, convenit
omni tal^.
A Quatenus ad Omne valet argumentum. If stinted prayer be unwarrantable
because it is not appointed of God; a stinted form of singing not commanded
must not be used. If a prescript form of singing not commanded of God be
approveable in his sight, for that cause a stinted form of prayer must not be
disliked. One circumstance that puts a material difference in the thing or
person from whence the argument or reason of likeness is drawn, is sufficient
to weaken its force: but twenty particular differences betwixt the branches of
worship weaken not an argument drawn from the agreement of the branches in the
common nature of worship: Of which sort this is. The Anabaptists may put many
differences betwixt circumcision and baptism; and yet the argument is good
against them, Infants of Christian parents ought to be baptized, because the
children of Jews in covenant were circumcised. For let the particular
differences be never so many, in this they agree, That they are both sacraments
of initiation, and so belong to them that be in covenant, sc. the faithful and
their seed. The Papists put many differences betwixt circumcision and the
sacraments of the new Testament; and yet this is a good and strong argument,
Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith, therefore the sacraments
are seals of the covenant of grace. For however circumcision and baptism and
the Lords supper differ in their particular natures, in the common author,
nature and end of sacraments they agree. This is a sound and good reason, that
laymen and midwives ought not to baptize, Because God has coupled together
the authoritative preaching of the word and administration of the sacraments;
and yet it is no hard matter to assign many particular differences betwixt the
word and sacraments. A caviller might easily have found out many particular
differences betwixt the sin of the angels and the Sodomites, and those against
whom the Apostle writes; but that had not infringed his argument from those
examples. It is a superfluous thing to heap up differences which are nothing to
the point in hand. And if we compare this answer with the reasons marshalled to
fight against a stinted form of prayer, it does plainly overthrow and put them
to slight. For thus they must needs run, Means of Divine worship not ordained
of God are unlawful; to wit, in stinted prayer, but not in forms of praising
God. All strange worship is unlawful: But a stinted form of prayer is strange
worship, sc. when the minister speaks alone to God, but not when the
congregation pronounces every word with the minister: for then either a
devised form is not strange worship, or all strange worship is not unlawful.
Men's inventions in Gods worship are unlawful: what all inventions or devised
forms? No, but devised forms in prose, not in verse; when we pray, not when we
praise God; when we speak to God, not when we admonish one another. Because
this answer comes often, I desire our brethren to consider, whether any other
construction can possibly be made of it then this, and whether ought can be
spoken more gross and contradictory to their positions. The discourses that I
have seen against stinted forms of prayer in general need no other
confutation, but an understanding reader to observe how in this answer they
turn the edge of their own weapons against themselves.

The penmen of the psalms were prophets extraordinarily assisted and
immediately by God designed to that work; Object. 2. Copy of a Letter, page 8.
so are not the authors of the Liturgy.

This is not to the purpose. Answ.
For the psalms penned by the prophets are paterns and forms of spiritual
songs, but not set forms prescribed to us as psalms to be sung in those very
words and forms. Though the psalms be parts of the canonical scripture, our
brethren must esteem the use of them as a prescript form to be the devise of
man; because God has not given them to that end, nor by his commandment tied
us and all churches to them and none others, in the precise form of words. When
in the new Testament we are exhorted to sing psalms, Ephesians. 5. 19.
they will not say that we are tied to David's psalms, Col. 3. 16.
or other songs given by immediate Divine inspiration. If therefore a prescript
form of psalms be lawful, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 17. shows out of Philo,
that the first Christians were accustomed to sing prop^ios hymnos. Et hist.
lib. 5. cap. 28.
it must be of such as are devised by men, and not immediately inspired by the
holy Ghost. Besides, we cannot say that the psalms as they are sung in meter
in our churches, or (for ought I know) in any churches in the Christian world,
are the immediate and infallible truth of God, given by inspiration of God, any
more then we can say of an holy paraphrase upon the scripture, The primitive
church had certain hymns composed and sung to the honor of Christ. Theodoret.
lib. 4. cap. 29.
that it is the scripture it self. In the new Testament since Christ we have no
precedent of any stinted form of singing recorded in scripture: and if we look
to the practice of the times after the Apostles, we shall find the church used
other hymns, and not scripture-psalmes only. Ephrem made hymns and psalms
in the Syrian tongue, and the same were sung at the solemn ^easts of martyrs.
And Sozomen says plain, the same hymns and psalms were sung in the churches
of Syria. See Council. Laod. can. 59. Council. Toletan. 4. can. 12.


There is a necessity of having forms of psalms set down in words; Object. 3.
not so of prayers. In psalms there is of necessity required a certain known
form of words, that two or more may sing together, according to the nature of
the ordinance, wherein many joining vocally do make concent or harmony. By
which it appears how unadvisedly these ministers and others do thus again and
again urge set forms of psalms to prove set forms of prayers. Robinson,
Against. Bern. page 46^. Copy of a Letter, page 7.


In the new Testament we have no precedent for the manner of singing recorded
in scripture: Answ.
and in the primitive churches following the Apostles times it was various, Tot
pene psalle^^um chori quot gentium diversit^^es, Hieron ep. 17. ad Marc. cap 6.
Of singing by course, Eusebius. l. 2. cap. 17. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 8. Theodoret.
l. 2. cap. 24. and lib. 4. cap. 2^. Plin. Epist. lib. 10. ep. 97. Basil. epist.
63. ad Cleric. Neocesariens. N^z^anz. Funebr. orat. de Basil. August. Confess.
lib. 9 c. 7. Tertull. ad uxor. l. 2. extr. dicit psalmum inter, duos sonare.
The council of Laodicea, can. 15. forbids any to sing but him to whom the
office of singing does pertein. Hieron. in epist. ad Rustic. Dicas psalmum in
ordine tuo. Hieron. co^. 1^ Ephesians. l. 2. ad cap. 5. Gratian. Did. 92. cap. 1. 3.
Of singing modulation of the voice, Augustine. Confess. l. 9. c. 6, 7. and l.
10. cap. 33. Of (...) together, Ambr. Hexamer. l 3. c. 5. Responsoriis
psalmorum, cantu vir^^um, mulierum, virginum, parv^lorum* consonus undarum
fragor resulta^. And (...) orantis populi consistens quis extra ecclesiam
vocem: spectet celebres hymnorum sonitus. See Conc. Carthag. 4. can. 10. (...)
cap. 132, 133. Harm. Confess confess. Helvet. cap. 23. Zanch. De (...) D^ pol.
eccl. l. 1. cap 15. Bellarm. De oper. in part. cap. 14. 16. (...) carucrint,
nec ab aliis damnatae sunt. Pamel. in C^pr. De ^rat. Dom. no^. 6.
according to the custom of several nations; sometimes by one, the rest
hearing; sometimes by course or quire-wise, as the women answered the men,
Exodus 15. (See Jun. Exodus 15.) and sometimes by the whole multitude; and
sometimes it was but like fair long reading, with modulation of the voice. The
primitive Fathers therefore did not judge it necessary that the psalms should
be sung by the whole multitude that were present. And if it be necessary, yet
is not a prescribed form in that respect necessary. In preaching and prayer
both, before that people can join with the minister, a stinted form of words is
necessary; and this is all can be said of singing. This or that form prescribed
is necessary in neither; a stinted form is necessary in both. The people
cannot sing with the minister, unless what is to be sung be represented unto
them in a set form of words; nor can they join in prayer, or attend to the word
preached, unless the matter of prayer or preaching be conveyed to their
understanding in a set form of words. Is a minister able to express the
necessities of the people or the doctrine of salvation in a form of words
devised and studied by himself, and is he not able by meditation and study to
dictate or compose a psalm to be sung by the people as occasion requires? And
if he be able to compose a psalm, in respect of the form of words and method,
is not a stinted form of singing a devised help, an arbitrary help to him, and
so forbidden, as it was said of prayer? Christ has given gifts unto his
ministers for preaching and prayer; has he not for singing of psalms also?
And if it be a dishonor to Christ (as some affirm) that they should use a form
of prayer devised by others, is it not a dishonor likewise that they should
use a form of singing devised by others, as not enabled with gifts of
themselves to furnish the necessities of the church? When prescribed and set
forms of psalms were necessary in the church of the Jews, did the Lord commit
this office to the priests, Levites, or ordinary officers of the church, or to
the prophets extraordinarily inspired and called of God to this purpose? To
whom has the Lord committed that charge, and given ordinary authority to
prescribe forms of singing in the churches in the new Testament? If thee be
such difference, as is pretended, betwixt the devised forms of praying and
singing, it is necessary that he that denies the one to be lawful and
challenges liberty in the other, should show his commission. Copy of a Letter,
page 11.
Christ fitteth his servants with gifts for the whole work of the ministry, to
pray as well as to preach by their own gifts: for prayer is an ordinance of the
new Testament as well as preaching; and they are made able thereunto, not by
showing the sufficiency of other men whose prayer they read; but their
sufficiency is of God enabling them. Thus our brethren reason against read or
prescribed prayer; and does not the same hold as truly against the use of a
prescribed psalm? To sing psalms is an ordinance of the new Testament, and
the minister of God is enabled to sing as well as to pray by his own gifts;
otherwise he is not enabled for the whole work of his ministry: and if he
read or sing a psalm, whose gifts does he exercise therein? This necessity
being presupposed, I would know, whether that particular form of singing,
devised by man and prescribed by others, be an humane invention or no? If it be
the devise of man, then it is forbidden in the second commandment, as they say:
If it be not of man, then it must be of God by special institution and
immediate inspiration: then the self-same form of words issuing from the same
cause or author should be humane, if delivered in form of prayer; and Divine,
in form of a psalm. Whereas this necessity is only an adjunct to the thing,
and does not so change the nature of it as to make that which is of man by
common gifts to be from God by special institution; as it must in this case,
according to their tenent. I would know further, whether this devised or
prescribed form of singing be an acceptable worship and service of God or no?
If it be, then some worship devised by men is acceptable to God in case of
necessity: which cannot be admitted: If it be not worship, then a devised form
of prayer cannot be condemned as a devised worship. And therefore if there be
any such necessity, as is pretended, it should rather exempt from the practice
of singing then give liberty to a devised form which God has not warranted nor
approved. For it is a rule in Divinity, That against a general negative
precept no particular affirmative can be lawful, unless that particular be
warranted in scripture: For the scripture should not be perfect, to furnish the
man of God completely to every good work, In religion there is no truth, but
grounded upon the scriptures; no error or heresy, but repugnant to the
scriptures; no heretics, but refuted by scriptures, Whitak. Against Rainolds,
chap. 3.
if a particular affirmative not warranted in special might be lawful against
a general negative; seeing in that case a man can have no sure ground to rest
on. But against this supposed general negative precept, forbidding all humane
inventions in Gods worship, all devised helps and furtherances, all strange
worship, there is no particular warrant allowing it in singing psalms. When
all devised worship is condemned, how shall the conscience be assured that this
particular devised worship shall be accepted? No necessity excuses in the
doing, of a thing otherwise unlawful, but that which exempteth from the
commandment in that case. Now whether that pretended necessity of a set form
should exempt from the general negative precept forbidding all devised forms
as will worship (as they expound it) or from the affirmative precept of singing
of psalms, let them judge who put the exception. Necessity which has no law,
in some particular case, presupposes some free time wherein that pressing
necessity has no place; and then what necessity has found out for remedy,
that must cease, the necessity ceasing: But that any necessity which lies
continually upon all churches, as does the singing in a prescript form, if they
sing at all, should warrant them to do that which is contrary to a general
negative precept, is a tradition in Divinity never heard of before. The reason
therefore stands still in force; If it be lawful to praise God in a form of
words devised by man, it is lawful also to pray to God in a stinted form; and
an arbitrary form is altogether as lawful as a devised form. And if Christians
shall not withdraw themselves from the stinted prayers of the congregation
before a material difference be showed in these particulars, and that
destinction of Arbitrary and Necessary devised forms be proved by scripture or
solid reason, the world shall end (I am confident) before they separate. And
thus some other objections made against a stinted Liturgy are answered.

It is Gods ordinance, Object. 4.
that the churches should be edified by their gifts who minister unto them, and
that in prayer as well as in preaching: and Christ ^itteth all his servants
with gifts for the whole work of the ministry: But in reading a stinted
Liturgy a minister does not edify the church with his own gifts.

This reason concludes not against a public stinted Liturgy as a breach of
the second commandment or a devised worship, Answ.
nor as unlawful in it self, but by accident only, as it hinders the
edification of the church by the ministers own gifts. But I desire to know
whether it be not lawful for the minister at all in the public execution of
his office or any part thereof to make use of other men's gifts; or that he must
not make use of other men's only, and not of his own at all. If the former; it
is not proved by any text of scripture: If the later; it makes nothing against
the use of stinted prayer. In every part of his public function, preaching,
prayer, blessing, singing, administration of the sacraments, reading of the
scriptures, a minister may and ought to make use of the gifts of others. In
exposition of scripture he may make use of the diverse readings, marginall
notes, interlineary glosses, marginall references; he may make use of the gifts
of linguists, translatours, paraphrasts, and commentatours to explain hard
phrases, find out the coherence and meaning of the text, etc. In matters of
controversy, of the labors and gifts of them that have traveled most
painfully therein: In application of doctrine he may make use of such as have
handled that matter more soundly, fully, pithily then he is able: and in the
act of preaching, of all these jointly or severally, as he does utter what he
has gathered out of his notes or memory. Calvine, a man of great learning,
admirable dexterity of wit, singular skill in the Hebrew tongue, was yet
pleased in his commentaries upon the psalms to make great use of Vatablus
annotations. Mercer in his exquisite Commentary upon Job was not a little
helped by the sermons of Calvine upon the same book. Mollerus is pleased for
the most part to gather his observations upon the psalms word for word
professedly out of Calvine. See Moller. in Psalm, epist. dedicat.
How many sermons and tractates be extant at this day wherein we may observe
those that follow to have done more then track the steps of them that have gone
before them, and this without rebuke? In prayer a minister may use the gifts of
others, to furnish himself with method, words, matter and arguments; and utter
his meditations, as upon meditation he has digested them, by such helps: yea,
he may use those very expressions and forms which others have used before him,
when they be more fit and moving then of himself he could reach unto. In
singing psalms, though the minister be able to turn them into more grave,
solid, exact meter then usual, and nearer to the original, yet it is not
denied but he may make use of other men's gifts inferior to his own. In reading
the scripture in a prescribed translation, which is a part of Gods public
worship, whose gifts does the minister make use of? what ministerial gift is
exercised or manifested therein? Every child of twelve or thirteen years old,
in respect of the outward act, is as well able to read a chapter as the
stinted Liturgy.

They answer, Object. 2.
that, Copy of a Letter, page 12.
Between public reading of scriptures and public reading of prayers there be
two differences: First, the public reading of the scripture is Gods ordinance;
but stinted prayers have not warrant from the word. Secondly, reading of the
scriptures in the public assembly simply considered in it self, is not the
proper work of the minister.

But this later is not to the purpose: Answ.
For we speak of reading the scriptures as it is done by a minister in the
public assembly and in the solemn worship of God; be it when he reads his
text, being a shorter or larger portion of holy writ. The first is a flat
contradiction to the reason it self, and a plain confession that it is of no
worth. For when they say, Reading the scripture is Gods ordinance, wherein the
minister uses another gifts and not his own; but the introducing of new forms
by men's devise and appointment is not warranted: do they not confess, that
this is no just exception against stinted prayer, because it should condemn the
ordinance of God, no less then it? and, that stinted prayer is not unlawful
because a minister in reading it does make use of another man's gifts, but
because it is unwarrantable? which is the matter to be proved, and imports a
confession that it is not proved by this reason but rather overthrown. For if
they restrain the proposition thus, That stinted form of prayer is unlawful
wherein the minister makes use of another man's gifts not of his own; the
reason consists all of particulars, beggeth only, but concludes nothing. If
the proposition be general, That is not an ordinance of God in the use whereof
a minister exercises other men's gifts and not his own; the exception here
annexed is directly cross thereunto, for the public reading of the scriptures
is Gods ordinance. But seeing this is a matter so much insisted upon, That a
stinted form of Liturgy is not warranted, and so unlawful, let us consider a
little how many ways a thing may be warranted, and in what sense the
proposition holds true, What is not warranted, that is unlawful. A thing is
warranted in the worship of God three ways: First by the light of nature and
reason, according to the general rules of scripture: and so time, place,
method, phrase of speech, and such like, are warranted, though nothing be
determined particularly thereof in scripture. 1. Cor. 11. 14.
For the scripture commands that all things be done in order, but it
determines not this or that to be matter of order. Thus a stinted Liturgy is
warranted. Secondly, a thing is warranted by necessary consequence, when to
some particular duty required this or that particular is necessary or
expedient, though it be not named: and so the translation of the scripture is
warranted, because is must be read to edification; and edify it cannot,
unless it be understood. Thirdly, that is warranted which is by special
institution commanded as a part or substantial means of worship, which should
be unlawful if it was not particularly instituted, as being contrary to the
second commandment. And seeing the word is thus diversely used in different
matters, unless it be wisely distinguished a man shall build false conclusions
upon true principles, if truly applied; and sooner entangle himself then
confute his adversary: as it fares with our brethren in this case. For taking
the word warranted in the strictest sense, when they dispute against a set form
or Liturgy, as an addition to the word, and means of worshipping God by the
devises and appointment of men, they conclude erroneously: For a stinted
Liturgy is no substantial means of worshipping, or positive worship, (for
these two are one) but only a matter of order, or form of words and method,
wherein we present our requests to God, etc. And from the same mistake they
ensnare themselves, while they teach others to argue upon the same grounds and
with like force against singing of psalms and reading of set translations; to
wit, That they are not warranted of God, and that we must be careful, as not
to take away from the word any ordinance of God, so not to add to the word, as
means of worshipping God, the devises and appointment of men. Out of which
snare they can never rid themselves, unless they take the word warranted in a
larger sense, and distinguish betwixt the substantial and necessary means of
worship, and that which is allowed by consequence only, or does pertein to the
worship of God ^s a matter of order. For though singing of psalms be commanded
of God; though God allow, nay command, that the scriptures should be
translated, as that without which they cannot be read to edification: yet the
frame of words in singing, and the translation it self is the work of men, and
the words and phrases the devises of men, not an ordinance of worship. This
knot cannot be untyed but it will cut the sinews of the former objection.

Who sees not, Object. 5.
that the imposing of prayers devised by other men upn the churches, Copy of a
Letter, page 13.
to be used of all ministers ordinarily for theirs and the churches prayers,
Who put this instrument into your ministers hands? Christ in his Testament
appointed none such, Ainsw. Arg. answ. page 59.
does much derogate from the honor, fruit and benefit of Christ's ascension
into heaven, and from the love, care and bounty that he has and shows
continually to his church upon earth, giving gifts to men for the work of the
ministry and the profit of the churches? Ephesians. 4. 8, 13. 1. Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6.
with Matthew. 28. 20. Whatsoever derogateth from the honor, fruit and benefit of
the ascension of Christ, Johnson, De prec^^. and lit. page 36, 37.
that is wicked and unlawful: But to read prayers out of a book derogateth
from the honor, fruit and benefit of Christ's ascension.

What is here said of imposing prayers devised by others, Answ.
is alleged against the use of stinted prayers and Liturgy, and so must be
understood: and till the use of a prescript form of prayer or Liturgy be
proved unlawful, it will never be found derogatorie to the honor, fruit and
benefit of Christ's ascension. Christ ascending up on high has given gifts unto
men for the work of the ministry, as well for prayer as for doctrine and
preaching, added also, for baptizing, administration of the Lords supper,
catechizing, blessing, confession and profession of faith, and singing of
psalms: And if a stinted form of prayer be derogatory to the honor of Christ's
ascension; for the same reason a stinted form in all or any of these is
derogatory likewise. Christ has given gifts unto men for doctrine or
preaching: is it therefore unlawful for the minister of the Gospel to make use
of translations, commentaries, linguists, controversie-writers, etc. to help
and furnish him the better in this work? is this to derogate from the fruit and
benefit of Christ's ascension? Ability to preach is a gift which Christ
bestows upon his servants: but (I hope) they will not say he is unmeet to be
a minister of Christ that does pen his sermons, and ordinarily deliver them
in that method and stinted phrase which he has premeditated; or that his so
doing is dishonorable to the fruit and benefit of Christ's ascension. And it
will be a difficult thing to give a substantial reason why a stinted prayer
and not a penned sermon should be so challenged. Christ has given to his
ministers ability to pray in their measure, but not in such measure as they
should need no help; nor such abilities of speech or utterance, as that every
minister should be so enabled to pray, in fitting words, according to present
occasions, as not to need some help, study and meditation, yea, to digest his
meditations into a stinted form of words. And this stinted form delivered upon
premeditation, out of memory, is a prescript form, in the judgment of our
brethren. But let us grant (what can never be proved) that every minister has
the gift of speech and utterance, that he needs no help or furtherance upon
any sudden occasion, what will follow? If they be so endued, it will be said,
there is no warrant for others to prescribe, nor for themselves to read over
such stinted prayers. What not? An able minister has discretion and wisdom to
know what portion of scripture is meet to be read, and how much: has the
church no warrant then to appoint what books, chapters or sections shall
ordinarily be read? nor the minister warrant to observe that appointment? A
learned Grecian or Hebrician is able to translate a book or chapter in the Old
or New Testament as well, peradventure better, then it is in our ordinary
translations: may not the church then ordain one translation usually to be
read? Let me entreat our brethren to view the strength of this reason in
another of the same form, which I certainly persuade my self they will not
allow; and it is this; Reading of translations in the worship of God is
unlawful, because it does contradict the gifts bestowed by Christ upon the
church for the work of the ministry, and derogateth from the virtue of Christ's
ascension and dignity of his kingdom, and blemisheth Christ's bounty to, and
care of his church, and may be performed by a child perfectly well. For it may
be said, If Christ has given gifts unto men for the work of the ministry, he
has given ability also to translate the scriptures, or else translations are
not necessary: And if Christ has given gifts to his servants to translate the
scriptures, or translations be not necessary, then they have no warrant to
read, nor others authority to prescribe any set translation. It may also be
added, That God will be worshipped with our own, not with another man's; with
that which cost us something, not with that which cost us nothing; with our own
gifts, not with other men's. But for one ignorant of the originals to read the
translations, is to offer unto God that which cost him nothing, to serve God
with other men's not with his own gifts. The conclusion our brethren will not
acknowledge; but whatsoever they can soundly answer to the premises will with
the same labor untie the knot of their own argument.

God is to be served with the best. Object. 6.
But a minister is enabled to pray better, according to the occasion, then
possibly he can be in a stinted form. Cursed be the deceiver, Mal. 1. 14.
Robins. Justificat. against Bern. page 475, 476.
which has a male in his flock, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a
corrupt thing. If these ministers then, and others, have a better sacrifice of
prayer and thanksgiving then their service book, (as their own practice both
public and private, He is accursed that brings not the best offerings that
he has, Mal. 1. 14. Greenwood. page 10. Ainsw. Of the use of the Lords prayer.
See Paget, Arrow, c. 3.
when they have liberty, shows they have, and that so themselves judge) let
them learn to fear him that is a great King, and whose name is terrible, even
the Lord of hosts. The Lord will be worshipped with the best we have; and he is
accursed that having a male for sacrifice does offer a corrupt thing to the
Lord, Mal. 1, 14.

If this be granted, that every minister is enabled to pray better, Answ.
according to the present occasion, then possibly he can be directed in a
stinted form, (which can never be proved by text of scripture, or sound reason
drawn from thence) in like manner a man may, and some have argued against the
reading of translations; God will be served with the best we have: but there is
no one translation the best we have; for a minister may be able to render a
chapter, sentence or verse more significantly then the translation has it: And
yet (I suppose) no minister will refuse to use a sound and good translation,
though it be here and there less significant; nor take liberty in reading to
alter it at pleasure, lest liberty herein should teach graceless and ungodly
people to wrangle against the scriptures themselves. In preaching and disputing
men may and do note the significancy of the phrase, which cannot so fully be
expressed in a translation; and more fully interpret what is not so plain and
full as might be desired: but in reading the scriptures in the congregation
great wariness is to be used, lest boldness to correct occasion doubts in the
weak, and embolden the ungodly to carp against religion. And if a minister may
be tied to the use of a sound and good translation, though not in every jot or
tittle the best that may be, this reason has lost its sinews. Universal
propositions duly limited may be of great use, whereas if extended too far,
they are dangerous in application. It is true, if we speak of Gods
incomprehensible goodness, excellency, glory and dominion, that more love and
service is due to God then he requires in his word, or possibly can be given
by men or Angels: It is true, we are bound to whatsoever duty the Lord
requires in his law, for matter, manner and measure; to whatsoever he obliges
us unto upon special occasion, or inciteth us unto by the heroical motions of
his Spirit, which must not be resisted: It is also most true, that the creature
cannot merit of the Creator; much less can sinful man, who fails
continually in his best duties, and offends in many things, supererogate by
doing some outward act not required, or forbearing somewhat in it self
allowable, when outwardly and inwardly he comes short in many things
commanded. But in every external act, which is neither work of piety, mercy,
nor justice, but only an appertenance thereunto, or an outward prerogative
only, a Christian is not bound by the law of God evermore to do that which is
best. There is a latitude and extent of the commandments, which God gave in
bounty, wherein he requires not all that he might, but what he pleases: and
if we keep our selves within the bounds prescribed of God, we sin not. 2. Sam.
7. 7.
David did well in taking care for, and purposing to build the house of the
Lord; but seeing the Lord never spoke word to David, saying, Build me an house,
if that resolution had never come into his heart he had not sinned. Acts 4. 37.
and 5. 4.
They that sold their possessions, and laid the price at the Apostles feet, did
very well; whereas they might still have retained their possessions without
sin. 1. Cor. 7. 37, 38, 39.
He that has the gift of continency does best if he marry not, says the
Apostle, in respect of the present occasion, and his own freedom: But if he
marry, he ^inneth not. The Law required a sacrifice without blemish: Lev. 1. 3,
10. and 3. 1. and 4. 3, 23.
but simply the best in the flock it did not require. He is accursed that
having a male for sacrifice does offer a corrupt thing: but no such heavy doom
is denounced against him who does not offer simply the best male in his flock.
The churches of God sin not in reteining their ancient confessions of faith and
forms of catechismes, being sound, plain, and full in matters fundamental,
concerning faith and obedience, though some more exact, methodicall or perfect
might be framed. If the excellency of one form exclude all others which have
not the same measure or degree of exactness, it will not be easy for our
brethren to resolve, how either to preach, or pray, or perform any other
service to God at all. How shall a minister resolve himself, whether this be
simply the best sermon that he can make, for matter the fittest, the exactest
for method, most proper for phrase, profitable for composure? How shall a
Christian resolve himself, whether it be best for him to pray ever so long as
he shall be enabled, or to contract himself as occasions shall require? If a
scrupulous Christian should enquire, whether he might use the Lords prayer at
all, or use it only and none other, he could expect no satisfactory answer
from them that oppose a stinted form of prayer by this argument: For first they
will tell him, He may use a petition, two, or more, or all in the Lords prayer,
even word for word, if the holy Ghost directs him: Ainsw. ubi supra.
then, That the heads themselves in those petitions are so general as no man
can well for himself or others use them aright without some special relation
or application to his or their particular estate or occasions; neither can any
man's or churches case or understanding reach unto all things needful for all
occasions, times and persons, as those heads do comprehend: That our Savior
gives us a rule and direction how to pray, Johnson, page 24.
but tyeth us not to that form: That the prayer cannot be ours properly if
rehearsed, because we are to say, Our father, and all things necessary for our
selves and others, for past and future times and conditions are comprehended in
it: and, Page 22.
That if we ask all things comprehended in those petitions at one and the same
time, we shall ask things contrary; which cannot be done in faith: Lastly,
seeing it is a most perfect prayer, wherein is no want or superfluity, Ainsw.
ubi supra.
if it were Christ's meaning to enjoin the saying over of these words for our
prayer to God, Greenwood, Against Gifford, page 19.
then ought we to use these only and none other; because it should be but
babbling and presumption to join or put other prayers in stead of that which is
so absolute and sufficient: for the Lord will be worshipped with the best we
have, etc. Lay these things together, and what resolution can be gathered to
that question but this, He may use it, He may not use it; He may use other
prayers with it, When he uses it, he may use none other, because it is most
perfect and sufficient. For answer it might be added, That in public prayer
the capacity and edification of the people is more to be respected of the
minister then his own ability of conceit or utterance: The phrase and
disposition of words used in prayer in the assembly should rather be grave and
simple then strained to the highest degree of fervency that the messenger of
God is able. It is also to be considered, that what is simply best, is not best
in relation to this or that circumstance or end: what is best in a time free,
is not best in a time not free. And if a stinted form of Liturgy be not
necessary to help the inability of the minister, it may be expedient upon other
grave and weighty considerations, concerning the good of Gods church, both
ministers and people.

The imposition of set forms, Object. 7.
so to be used for matter and manner by our ministers, has a variation from, I
may say, an opposition unto the law of fear and service, sc. That we should
love the Lord with all our souls, all our strength, etc.

That which is said of our form to be used for matter and manner, is altogether
impertinent, or turns the edge of the argument. For either all public forms
of prayer wherein a minister makes not use of his own but other men's gifts be
unlawful and derogatorie to the honor, fruit and benefit of Christ's
ascension; and then it is impertinent to urge this of our form for matter and
manner: Or some forms be lawful notwithstanding a minister makes not use of
his own but other men's gifts; and then this is no just exception against the
use of our Liturgy. For if any public stinted form of prayer be lawful, then
ours is lawful so far and in what it agrees with that lawful form for
matter and manner: And what reason soever disproveth the use of ours for
matter, manner, or what else soever can be objected, that disproveth the use of
all set forms that be of the same nature and use for matter or manner. Thus
therefore you may take the Argument, If some set or stinted form of prayer be
lawful ordinarily to be used without addition or alteration, though therein
the minister make use not of his own but others gifts; then our stinted form of
prayer is not unlawful because it is to be used ordinarily without addition or
alteration, though therein the minister make use not of his own but of others
gifts. For whatsoever makes our form unlawful, that makes all forms agreeing
with ours in that particular unlawful: But the former has been proved already.

Why may they not as lawfully command to preach by reading of Homilies, Object.
8. Johnson, ubi supr^, page 37. Copy of a Letter, page 11.
as to pray by reading of the Liturgy? both which are contrary to the
institution of Christ, and the holy scriptures. Greenwood, ubi supra, page 28.
The two feet upon which the dumb ministry stands, like Nebuchadnezzars
image upon the feet of iron and clay, Read prayer mainteineth superstition and
an Idole-ministery.
are the book of Common prayer, and of Homilies: the reading of the former
(which is the right foot) serving them for Prayer; Robinson, Justific. page 47.
4.
and the other, for Preaching: Which feet if they were smitten, as were the
other, with the stone cut without hands, the whole Idole-priesthood would fall
and be broken a-pieces, as that other image was.

This objection presupposes that there is some great affinity betwixt a
stinted Liturgy and an idle ministry; Answ. Johnson, p. 30.
which is a bare conjecture. For in the Primitive church the abettours,
mainteiners, and in part devisers of stinted Liturgies have and for ever shall
be renowned in the church of God for their constant, continual and unwearied
pains and industry in preaching the Gospel. See Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 3, 4, 5,
6, 27, 28, 31. etc.
It is a thing notoriously known and confessed, that Cyprian, Ambrose,
Chrysostom and Augustine did all of them allow and approve and some of them
devise, stinted forms of Liturgies; August. Tract. 9. in Joh. Hesterno enim die
etc. in hodiernum diem distulimus. and Tract. 12. Ex eo quod hesterno die
intentam fecimus, etc. Et Tract. 16. Hodi^rna Evangelica lect^o hesterni diei
sequitur lectionem quae nobis proponitur ad disputandum. Tract. 21, 29, 35, 37,
50. Possidon. in vita August. cap. 21, etc. Aug. De verb. Dom. in Evang. sermon.
15. De verb. Apost. sermon. 5, 6. Literis carens Sacris non potest esse aptus
officiis. Gratian. Did. 36. can. 1, 2. Haec duo sunt Pontificis opera, ut aut
a Deo discat, legendo scripturas Divinas, and saepius meditando; aut populum
doceat. Origin. Hom. 6. in Levit. Gratian. Did. 36. can. 3. Sacerdos namque
ingrediens vel egrediens moritur, si de eo sonitus non auditur; quia iram
contra se occulti Judicis exigit, si sine praedicationis sonitu incedit. Great.
Did. 43. 1. Oves proculdubio tacendo pastor occidit. Greg. l. 1. epist. 33.
Gratian. Did. 43. can. 4, 5. Episcopus lectioni, and orationi, and verbi Dei
praedicationi tantummodo vacet. Council. Carthag. 4. can. 20. Great. Did. 88.
can. 6. See Council. Antioch. can. 17. 18. In omni sacerdotali convivio lectio
Divinarum scripturarum misceatur. Per hoc enim and animae aedificantur ad
bonum, and fabulae non necessariae prohibentur. Council. Toletan. 3. can. 7.
Gratian. Did. 44. can. 11. Quia nequaquam lectioni studeas, nequaquam
exhortationi invigiles, sed ipsum quoque usum ecclesiastici ordinis ignores;
hoc est in testimonium, quod eis sub quibus es positus servar^ reverentiam
nescis. Greg. Natal. episc. l. 2. reg. ep. 14. Great. Did. 44. can. 5. Council.
Moguntiac. can. 25. Si forte Episcopus non fuerit in domo sua, aut infirmus
est, aut aliqua causa exigente non valuerit, nunquam tamen desit diebus
Dominicis etc. Chrysostom. conc. 3. de Lazar^. Ho^. ^, and 5. in Matthew. and Hom.
10. in Joh. Hom. 6, 8. in Genesis Et Hom. 5, and 6. ad populam Antiochen.
Theodoret. De corrigend. Graecor. affect. l. 5. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paul.
August. in cap. Jejun. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Coloss. Hom. 9. and in Genesis ^9.
See jewel, Against Hard. art. 15. div. 15. Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. Sanct. l. 6.
annot. 152.
and yet who almost for diligence and labor in teaching the people in the
ways of salvation to be compared unto them? Of their learning and zeal it is
needless to say any thing. For three of them there is plentiful testimony
that they preached every day in the week and year, at least once or twice,
without fail: Ye heard yesterday, Ye shall hear to morrow, is common in their
tractates and homilies. Augustine even to the extremity of his sickness
preached the word of God in his church cheerfully and boldly, with a sound mind
and judgment, without any intermission at all. The like diligence is noted in
others who lived before and about those times: in all which a stinted Liturgy
was in use. And generally the Fathers in the primitive church press the
knowledge of the scriptures, residence upon his charge, diligence in reading,
meditation, prayer and instruction of the people, as duties requisite and
necessary, and by no means to be neglected or omitted of the minister. They
also exhort the people, not only to hear the word of God, but to learn it by
heart, to instruct and warn one another, to sing psalms, confer religiously,
begin and end their feasts with solemn prayer, read the scriptures in their
houses and discourse thereof one with another for their mutual profit and
edification; and to call their families, children, wives, servants, friends and
neighbors together, and to repeat the sermons they hear at church-together,
after the sermon ended. Such exhortations are common and ordinary in them who
approved stinted Liturgies: Let one of you take in hand the holy book; and by
the heavenly words, having called his neighbors about him, let him water and
refresh both their minte and his own. See Jewel, Apol. def. part. 5. chap 3.
div. 4. Cham.
Being at home we may both before and after meat take the holy books in hand,
and thereof receive great profit, Panstr. tom. 1. lib. 10. cap. 4, 5, 6, 7.
etc. Gregor. l. 4. Epist. 44 Gratian. Did. 91. can. 2. Phil. More. De Euchar.
lib. 1. cap. 4. Conc. Coloniens. can. 12. Willet. Synops. Contr. 13. qu. 7.
and minister spiritual food unto our souls. Gregory disalloweth that such
should attend to singing and modulation of the voice who should apply
themselves to the office of preaching. Hierome cut short the lessons (when
whole books were read in order before) that so there might he time for
preaching. Durantus himself misliketh the men that extra modum and ordinem
orationes multiplicant, unde auditores sibi ingratos efficient, and populum Dei
potius fastidio avertunt quam alliciunt. Duranti Rational. l. 4. cap. 15.
And Petrus de Aliaco counsels quod in Divino officio non tam ^nerosa
prolixitas quam devota and integra brevitas servaretur. Petrus de Aliaco, lib.
De reform. Eccl. cap. De reformat. Praelator.
A stinted Liturgy then in it self does not abridge nor hinder the liberty of
preaching or prayer according to the special present occasions, nor ought it
so to do. 2. Tim. 4. 3.
For when the minister of the Gospel is bound to be instant in season and out
of season, to teach, exhort, reprove with all long suffering and patience,
these necessary and wholesome functions of the holy ministry must not be trust
out or hindered. Whitak. in Dur. lib. 8.. 10. 2.
And it is not hard to show the wisdom and moderation of the churches in
their prescribed catechismes, stinted prayers and exhortations, in the
administration of the sacraments, etc. to be such, that they have allowed time
convenient both for preaching and prayer, according as God has enabled his
messengers. In these times of this reformation, the pains of such whom God
stirred up first to preach the Gospel, Council. Vasens. 2. An. Dom. 444. tom
conc. 2. page 19.
and instruct the people in the ways of salvation was almost miraculous, and
yet generally they approved and devised a public stinted form of Liturgy. Si
presbyter aliquis infirmitate prohibente per seipsum non potuerit praedicare
sanctorum Patrum homiliae a diaconis recitentur. Caranz. Sum. Council. Council.
Vasens. cap. 4.
As for Homilies, they were first allowed in the church, not to uphold or
maintein an ignorant ministry, or to supply his defect that should take pains
but would not, much less to shut out preaching; but to supply the casual
defect of preaching through the weakness and infirmity of the minister.

CHAP. V. A stinted form of prayer does not quench the Spirit.
THe Spirit of Grace enableth us to pray, 4. Arg.
and makes requests for us, but works by means: Isa. 59. 21. Romans 8. 26.
It instructs us what to ask, not in what phrase of speech: It stirs up in
us holy desires, but gives not ability suddenly and without help to express
and lay open our hearts in fit method and words significant. As the Spirit does
persuade and assure the heart, that the scripture is the word of God, not
witnessing of the letters, syllables and words, but of the matter and saving
truth therein contained: So the Spirit instructs us to pray, by opening our
eyes to see our misery, and inflaming our hearts with a longing desire of mercy
and relief, in the mediation of Jesus Christ; but it gives not ability
evermore to utter and express these our desires in fit and decent phrase of
speech. Ability of speech is a common gift of the Spirit, which the Lord
bestows upon good and bad: Yea, many times graceless persons are herein
preferred before the most sincere and upright: and many an honest heart can cry
aloud for mercy who is scarce able to utter one distinct and perfect sentence
in fit words and order. Let no man except, that ministers have better
abilities: For when the Apostle says, the Spirit is given to help our
infirmities, who know not how to pray as we ought, he speaks of all
believers, as well others as ministers, private prayers as well as public: And
whosoever is enabled or provoked to lift up any one sigh or groan unto God, or
to make apology for himself in the mediation of Christ in any manner, it is by
the holy Ghost. These things considered, I suppose all men will grant; 1. That
it is lawful for a man beforehand to meditate on his own particular wants and
the necessities of others, and that he may more fully understand and more
sensibly be affected with them, to read good books, which unfold the
particular sins against the law of God, the state of man by nature, and the
condition of the Saints, and of the church, as also to think upon the works of
Gods providence, and how he is pleased to deal with his people in all places.
2. The better to stir up confidence and affection, and to furnish himself
with words and matter, it is not unlawful nor unprofitable to read the
prayers of the godly, registered in holy scripture, or published in other godly
books; to observe the matter of their prayer, their ferventnesse in praying,
and the arguments wherewith they pressed their suits and contended for
audience. 3. After a man has collected matter for prayer by meditation and
reading, he may study to digest it into due order and method, and to express
his requests in fit and decent speech; and the same so conceived he may utter
as a prayer, according as occasion shall offer it self. The reason may be thus
contracted, If the Spirit of God does work by means and stir up good desires,
but gives not ability to express our desires in fitting significant words,
(...) it is lawful for us to use all godly means to stir up the graces of God
in us, and premediate how we may utter our requests in such form and manner as
may best serve for our quickening and the edification of others. And if the use
of a premeditated form of words in prayer do not stint the Spirit in a sinful
manner, a set form of prayer cannot be condemned as injurious to the Spirit.

The Spirit of God is the only sufficient help which God gives us to help our
infirmities in the time of prayer, Object. 1. Copy of a L^tter, page 3 14.
Robins. p. 469. Johnson, u^i supra, page 37. Answ.
Romans 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6. Zech. 12. 10.

We confess most willingly, that prayer is not a work of nature, wit or
learning, but of the Spirit of grace. True desire or ability to pray is not
bred in us by nature, nor procured and gotten by our study and industry, but
proceeds only from the holy Ghost, as the author and efficient: and this is
proved by the places quoted. But ability to pray stands in the lifting up of
the soul unto God, not in the ample expression of our desires, according to the
various occasions in fit words, and pressing them with forcible arguments.
Prayer is the immediate work of the Spirit: But no text of scripture does in
such sense make the holy Ghost the author of prayer, or helper of our
infirmities, as that it should be unlawful to make use of outward means to
furnish the soul with matter, stir up the graces of God in the heart, and
blow the coals of the spirit: For then we must not read the scriptures, nor
other godly books; we may not meditate, or confer, the better to fit us for
prayer. Peradventure it will be said the Spirit of God is our only helper in
the time of prayer; Greenwood, Against Gifford, pa. 3, 4. It is the Spirit of
God in the very action of prayer that helps our infirmities.
so that at other times we may use helps to stir up the graces of the Spirit,
but not in the time of prayer. And if this distinction be found in scripture,
or by sound reason may be deduced out of scripture, we must hearken unto it:
but if it be of our selves, whiles we plead against the devises of men, we
maintein devises. The Spirit of grace is at all times the sole mover and
enabler of us to pray: and the use of lawful helps, and such as suite with the
nature of prayer, are at no time unlawful. As it is fit to meditate and read
before we pray, so in prayer it is lawful to kneel, lift up the eyes and
hands, use the help of the voice, and the benefit of a Christian friend, to
stir up affection. Therefore for the lawfulness of book-prayer we may
dispute thus, If it be lawful to use external helps in time of prayer the
better to stir up affection, then book-prayer is not to be condemned for
this, that the Spirit of God is the only or sufficient help that God gives to
help our infirmities in the time of prayer: But it is lawful to use external
helps in time of prayer.

The Spirit alone either immediately, Object. 2. Copy of a Letter, page 14.
Robins. page 472.
or by means sanctified and ordained by himself, makes requests for us: yea,
it is by the immediate teachings and suggestions of the Spirit that all our
requests must be put up, Greenwood, Against Giff. page 2.
no other helps are mentioned, or can be collected in the present action of
prayer.

I will not stand to enquire how these things can agree together; Answ.
what is meant by the immediate teachings of the Spirit; or how the Spirit
makes requests, either immediately, or by means. The Spirit alone, and that
immediately, is the author of prayer; but by means he ministers variety of
matter, order, and words. But what are we to understand by means sanctified and
ordained by himself? If means ordained by special institution, it is too
strait and hard to conceive what they be. If means allowed by God, as those
whereby we may furnish our selves with words and matter for prayer, as reading
godly books, conference, meditation on the works of God, etc. a stinted form of
prayer is a means sanctified. And here I desire it may be noted, in what sense
a form of prayer is called a means or furtherance; not as a means or form of
worship properly so called, but as in fit words and phrases it presents to
our minds or memories what we ought to beg agreeable to the word of God: as the
frame of words and matter kept in memory may be called and is reputed a stinted
form.

A stinted form of prayer quenches the Spirit. Object. 3. Greenwood, page 21.
It is a quenching of the Spirit, to read another man's prayer upon a book.

That quenches the Spirit which is as water to cool or allay or exstinguish
the heat of that holy fire; Answ.
which cannot be imputed to a set form of prayer, either by authority of
scripture, or sound reason. Reading godly books is an exercise profitable to
stir up the graces of Gods Spirit in us: were it not a wonder, if reading a
godly prayer should produce the contrary effect? As in the ministry of the
word the corruption of man's heart and the heinousness of sin may more lively
and fully be discovered for his humiliation then he is able of himself to set
it forth; so in prayer penned by a goldy andwell experienced Christian the case
of a distressed soul may more pithily and amply be deciphred and anatomized
then he of himself is able to lay it open. And in such case to deny this
lawful help, is to take away a crutch from the lame, and bread from the
hungry. In the very act of prayer it is lawful to use outward helps, whereby
we may be enabled to pray better; and shall it not be lawful for a burdened
soul perplexed with doubtings, overwhelmed with bitter anguish, to use the help
of a book, that he might the better unfold and lay open his misery into the
bosom of his loving Father? The ample and particular laying open of our
necessities does ease the heart, and move affections: and when this may be done
better by the help of a book in prayer then of our selves, how can the use
thereof be accused as the quenching of the Spirit? It is the Spirit indeed that
does help us in our infirmities; but we must use means to stir up the graces
of the Spirit in us. He quenches not the Spirit who labors to blow the
coals of grace, and uses all helps afforded in most ample and particular
manner to unburden his heart before the Lord. He does not substitute his
Christian friends in the place of the word and Spirit, who not able to lift up
his own soul by reason of gri^vous straitness and pressure of heart, does
crave his help and assistance in prayer: And may not a godly book supply the
lack of Christian companion? When we are dull and out of order, we may join
with others in prayer for our relief and quickening: why then should it be
intolerable to make this benefit of a godly book? A set form of prayer may be
committed to memory and uttered from it; does that also quench the Spirit? Copy
of a Letter, page 15.
It is not safe (they say) for a minister to limit himself always to one form
of prayer though devised by himself. But if it be a quenching of the Spirit, an
humane invention forbidden in the second commandment, if it cannot be made by
the Spirit, if it be not that true and spiritual worship which God requires,
it is not lawful ordinarily nor once, for minister or private christian, in
public or private, in case of distress or otherwise: for the objection is
general, That all stinted forms of prayer do quench the Spirit: and these
mitigations of safe, always, and for a minister, are a plain concession there
is no force in the reason.

These stinted forms do quench the Spirit of prayer, Object. 4.
in that they deprive the church and minister of that liberty of the Spirit of
prayer which God would have them use; Robinson, Against Bern. page 429.
stinting the minister, yea all the ministers of the kingdom, to the same
measure of the Spirit, not only one with another, but all of them with him
that is dead and rotten.

Nothing is here objected against our stinted form which may not with like
truth be alleged against the reading of a prescribed and set translation, Answ.
the use of the Lords prayer, a set form of blessing, singing of psalms, and
baptizing in these precise words, I baptize thee, etc. For in these things it
may be said, The minister, yea all the ministers in the kingdom are stinted to
the same measure of the Spirit, etc. And if in those particulars that form of
reasoning be of no weight, in this it is but an empty sound. A stinted form
depriveth not the minister or church of that liberty of the Spirit which God
would have them use, seeing they may use that notwithstanding, as the several
occasions of the church or people shall require. If all ministers throughout
the Christian world should put up the same holy and just petitions to God, in
the same phrase of speech as in the words of the Lords prayer, they should
neither stint the Spirit to one measure, nor deprive the church of the liberty
of the Spirit, seeing the measure of the Spirit stands not in words and
forms, but in fervent sighs and groans; and they have time and liberty to pray
besides, as God shall enable them, and the present occasions of the assembly
require. And if it must needs be that in a stinted form the Spirit is stinted
to one measure, then all stinting of the Spirit is not quenching of the Spirit:
For the minister does not quench the Spirit if he stint it, in respect of time
and occasions. Suppose sundry private Christians in the assembly do excel
their pastor in the gift of prayer, the wife excel the husband, the child or
servant excel the master or governor; is the Spirit quenched in them, when it
is stinted for the time to their measure in prayer? Suppose, diverse Christians
meeting upon occasion, the weakest in gifts be put to pray for the rest; is the
Spirit in them quenched because it is stinted to his measure?

The question is not of prayer devised by a man's self, Object. 5. Copy of a
Letter, page 15.
or of limiting the Spirit in the people; but of prayer devised by others and
imposed, and of limiting the Spirit of the minister: the first is lawful; the
second sinful.

The question is of a public stinted form of prayer or Liturgy, Answ.
Whether it quench the Spirit in the minister or the people; and, Whether it
quench the Spirit because it stinteth it. Whether the form be devised by others
or by a man's self, imposed or voluntarily taken up, that is nothing to the
matter in hand: but, Whether it quench the Spirit, because for the time it is
limited to that form of words. And if we look into the matter it self, the
Spirit of God may be quenched in a man's self no less by the rude customary use
of a form devised by a man's self then by a form imposed by others, and it may
be as prejudicial to the comfort of Gods people. And if we consult the
scripture, where shall we find this distinction, of limiting the Spirit by
prayer devised by a man's self or devised of others; of stinting the Spirit in
respect of time, occasion, form of prayer, uttered out of memory or read upon a
book? But the distinction it self has been confuted already, together with the
assertion, That a stinted prayer does quench the Spirit. Idem, ubi supra.
It cannot properly be said, says one, that the Spirit is limited by his own
ordinance: but when the Spirit of the minister is straightened by forms prescribed
to him by men without Gods ordinance and appointment, then the Spirit is
limited and stinted indeed. But this is a bare repetition of what was said
before, without proof or reason: and besides a strange description of limiting
the Spirit, is nothing but a proof of one thing by the same. And here I desire
two things may be noted. First, though many reasons in show be brought against
the use of stinted prayer, yet when the matter comes to the upshot, they are
barely one, and that nakedly affirmed; Stinted prayer is unlawful, because in
reading book ^prayer he does not exercise his own but another man's gifts. Is
this reason good? No; for in reading scripture out of a translation he
exercises another man's gifts. But stinted prayer is the devise of man. A child
of twelve or thirteen years old may read a stinted prayer as well as the
minister: The same may be said of reading the Scriptures. But stinted prayer is
the devise of man. It is unlawful to stint the Spirit: Yet this is done in
praying with others. But stinted prayer is the devise of man. So that all
hangs upon this string, for the confirmation whereof nothing is alleged.
Secondly, they take that for granted evermore which should be proved, or prove
the same by the same: as, Stinted prayer does quench the Spirit. Why so?
Because the Spirit is straightened by forms devised by men: which is as much in
plain terms as to say, It is stinted in our sense because it is stinted. And
the like might be noted in other arguments.

Where is the consideration of the people had, Object. 6.
when the forms now are the same for matter and manner that they were almost an
hundred years ago, and at the first dawning of the Gospel, the same for the
Court, Universities, and the meanest congregation in the Country?

Might not the same be objected against the use of a set translation, Answ.
singing of psalms, the use of the Lords prayer for this fifteen hundred
years without alteration? for these are the same now that they were many
years agone, or at least may be: the same for City, Country, Court,
Universitie, and the meanest villages? There are some common blessings which we
and others daily stand in need of, and those it is lawful to ask daily in a
set form of words. Thus we may pray every day for increase of faith, patience,
love, meekness, the forgivness of sins, the continuance of those outward
blessings which we enjoy, freedom from or victory over temptations, etc. Thus
there is no petition in the Lords prayer which does not always, in the main,
concern every Christian man's estate. And if the matter of our prayers may be
the same daily, in the City and the Country, Court and Universitie, in this
and former ages, the same phrase of speech, method and form external may be
lawful, fit and expedient. For it is not the repetition of the same words in
prayer every day that displeases the Lord, but the ignorant, rash, cold,
customary, superstitious and irreverent pouring out of words before him, that
is distasteful to his Majesty. Variety of phrase does not delight the Lord:
neither will he reject the desires of an humble and contrite heart because they
are tendered often in one and the same phrase of speech. And if the matter of
prayer be the same in places of greatest wealth and poorest condition, and the
same form of blessing, baptizing, singing of psalms and putting up their
petitions to God be fit and decent for them all; it can be no prejudice to a
stinted Liturgy that it is the same in all places, and throughout all ages, if
the language be the same. For this does argue it to be the more not the less
fit, and that the greater not the less regard is had to the people. The reason
in brief is this; It is lawful to ask the same common blessings of God every
day, in all assemblies and congregations, both of the City and Country, Court
and University, met together to call upon God: therefore the same stinted form
of prayer or Liturgy may be lawful in the greatest city and meanest village,
in this and the ages following, whether read or uttered out of memory: for
pronouncing cannot make an evil matter good; nor reading simply make prayer
good and holy to become sinful.

Public prayers offered up by the minister in the church assemblies must be
framed according to the present and several occasions of the church and people
of God: Object. 7. Copy of a Letter. page 21.
which cannot be done when men are stinted to those forms. Greenwood, Against
Giff. page 24.


Occasions are ordinary and common, Answ.
or more special. In a stinted form prayers may be offered up by the minister
according to the common and ordinary occasions of the church and people of God
assembled, though not according to the special occasions, which may happen now
and then, or more particularly concern this or that person. For if the same
blessings are daily to be craved, he prays according to the present occasions
that asks the same blessings of God. If it be said, There be many occasions
of particular use for the congregation and others, which are not mentioned
expressly: that proves not, That a man cannot in a stinted form pray
according to the several occasions; but, that some stinted forms do not meet
with all and every particular occasion: which is easily granted. But if a
stinted form meet not with every man's occasions, or not so particularly as it
ought, does it hence follow that in a stinted form a man cannot pray according
to the present occasions at all? If this be the conclusion, I fear we shall
find few conceived prayers which must not come under the same sentence. It may
argue the imperfection of a stinted form, not the unlawfulness; it makes
somewhat against the sole use of a set form at all times; Object. 8. Johnson,
ubi supra, page 28.
against the simple use it makes nothing.

It is found by lamentable experience, that when men began to observe that
custom, Greenwood, Against Giff. Preface to the reader.
there was great quenching of the Spirit, and very few there were who did know
and observe the true nature and the manner of prayer. Answ.


How is this confirmed by experience? If ever the Christian church had no
stinted form of prayer, lamentable experience will testify what great coolings
and decays there was in the church before a stinted form was in use. If ever
the faithful did by the Spirit of adoption cry, Abba, Father, they have
learned to pray by the Spirit since the use of a stinted form as well as
before. Whatsoever may be thought of the two first ages; for the space of
fourteen hundred years the churches have had their stinted Liturgies: The
reformed churches, since God was pleased to restore light again to the world,
have approved a stinted Liturgy: Was there none or few in all this tract of
time who did know or understand the true nature or manner of prayer? none or
few that in spirit or truth did call upon the name of the Lord? The security
of all ages has been lamentable both before and since the use of a stinted
form: but, that a stinted form was the cause of security and dullness, can
never be proved.

CHAP. VI. In scripture there be prescript forms of blessing, prayers,
salutations, etc. which may lawfully be used.
IN scripture we find prescript forms of blessing, Argum. 5.
prayers, Number. 6. 22, 23.
and thanksgiving, both ordinary and extraordinary, Psalm. 22. 1. and 102.
approved of God, which might be used by the priests, Hose. 14. 23.
Levites, and Saints or faithful people, Joel. 2. 17.
and that upon deliberation, usually, constantly, Deuteronomy. ^6. 5, 10
as occasion was offered, and not by the immediate motion of the Spirit. Psalm.
92. 1.
I say not, Ezra 3. 10.
that the priests in blessing, Rev. 15. 3.
or the Saints in prayer, were necessarily bound to those very words and
syllables: But they might lawfully use them and without sin. We find also
stinted forms of salutations, valedictions, 2. Chro. 29. 30.
and blessing, Isa. 12. 1.
which have been often used, Romans 1. 7.
and may lawfully be used still without variation; 1. Cor. 1. 3.
though we be not necessarily obliged thereunto. 2. Cor. 1. 2.
Our Savior also prescribed a set form of baptizing, Gal. 1. 3.
which we observe constantly without addition or variation; Ephesians. 1. 2.
though we be not tied by absolute necessity to rehearse the same words in the
same syllables. Phil. 1. 2.
No substantial change is to be admitted which may alter the sense: 1 Thessalonians.
1. 1.
but the very form of speech, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2.
as whether we say, Romans 16. 24.
I baptize, 1. Cor. 1. 16, 23.
or as the Greek church, Phil. 4. 23.
Be thou baptized, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 28.
etc. is not of like necessity: 2 Thessalonians. 3. 18.
nevertheless we may and do constantly use this form, Matthew. 28. 19.
I baptize, Willet, Synops. co^tr. 12. qu. 2. and contr. 11. qu. 1. Append.
Whitak. De sacr. Bapt. qu. 1. page 221, 222. Chamier. Panstr. tom. 4. De Bapt.
lib. 5. cap. 3.. 5. Piscator, in Matthew. 28. 19. Schol. Maldonat. in Matthew. 28.
19.
etc. without addition or variation at any time. Our argument from these places
is this; If a set form of blessing, thanksgiving, salutaion, and administration
of baptism be lawful to be used ordinarily without addition or variation;
then a stinted form of prayer, to be used ordinarily without addition or
alteration, is not unlawful: But a prescript form of blessing, thanksgiving,
salutation, and administration of baptism, to be used ordinarily without
addition or alteration, is not unlawful.

There is apparent difference betwixt prayer and blessing: Object. 1.
For prayer is expressed from men to God; Copy of a Letter, page 6.
but blessing is pronounced from God to men. Robins. Against Bern. page 466.
Prayer may be performed by one equal to another, by an inferior to a
superior, yea by a man to himself: Johnson, page 12.
but blessing is always from the greater to the less. And Solomon used a
different gesture in praying and in blessing the people.

Let prayer and blessing differ in these and other particulars as many as they
please; Answ.
in this they agree, that they are both parts or branches of worship: And if a
stinted form be disallowed in the one, it is unlawful in the other: if it be a
devise of man to be condemned in the one, it cannot be approved in the other:
And therefore seeing a prescript form of blessing is lawful, a stinted form of
prayer is not to be condemned.

Moses did not prescribe unto the priests a form of words whereunto they must
be tied in blessing of the people, Object. 2. copy of a Letter, page 6.
Johnson, ubi supra, page 12, ^4.
but only gave them a rule of direction according to which they should bless
them: For otherwise the priests had sinned, whenever, pronouncing the
blessing, they had used other words. Greenwood, Against Giff. page 7, and 16.
And the particle, Thus, So, or In this manner, denotes the form or similitude
of the things whereof there is mention, Robinson, Against Bern. page 469, 470.
etc. It is a troublesome thing that these ministers thus urge the letter of
the scriptures, as if the question were not about their sense and
interpretation; which they should prove to be for their stinted service, etc.
but the question is, whether Moses tied and stinted the priests to that form of
words in blessing the people. Johnson, page 28, 29.
The like they say of the form of baptism.

It suffices, Answ.
that these forms of blessing, prayer, and thanksgiving, and administration of
baptism, might or may be used; though in conscience neither the priests then
nor we at this day are necessarily tied unto them in so many precise words: For
the lawful not the necessary use of a prescript form of prayer or Liturgy is
now in question: which is proved by the places above rehearsed, and not
gainsaid at all by this answer. 2. Chron. 5. 13. with Psalm. 131 1.
For if the Saints in former times might pray unto or praise the Lord in a
stinted form of words invented by themselves or indicted by others* Jer. 33. 11.
with Ezra 3. 10, 11.
as we find they might and did; if the preiests might use a stinted form of
words in blessing the people, whereunto they were not tied; Luke 10. 5.
if Christians may salute one another in this stinted form of words, Ruth 2. 4.
Peace be unto you, The Lord be with you, The Lord bless thee, though they be
not tied thereunto, nor can reach every particular comprehended in those short
sentences recorded in scripture; then a stinted form of prayer or blessing, in
words invented by themselves or indicted by others, is lawful to us: for in
that particular the ground and reason is common to them and us. Apply this
answer to the reason, That the priest might use that form without variation,
but was not tied unto it, That we may use the Lords prayer without alteration,
and the form of baptism without addition and diminution, but are not
necessarily obliged to use the very words and syllables precisely; and I know
not how they should tie the knot faster. For is not this in plain terms to
confess, Fulc. in Rhem. in 1. Cor. 14.. 14. Calvin. in Matthew. ^. 9. Noluit
praescribere fil^s Dei quibus verbis utendu^ sit, ut ab ea quam dictavit
formula deflectere non liceat.
That an arbitrarie stinted form is lawful but not necessary? If God had
commanded a form, it only had been necessary; if God had determined one
precise form, that only and none other had been lawful: but seeing he has
commanded none, determined none precisely, but left us free to use those
recorded in scripture, or some others in the selfsame or other words, a stinted
form is apparently warranted of God though not commanded.

It follows not, Object. 3. Johnson, p. 14. Greenw. page 14, 15.
that a prescript form devised by man is lawful, because a form prescribed of
God is good. Moses was a prophet, and had an immediate commission from God for
what he appointed in the house of God: Copy of a Letter, page 8, 9, 17.
which the imposers of the Liturgy cannot plead. Robinson, Against Bern. page
473.
Christ's ordinance can make the writings of the Apostles a rule of faith: can
men make another scripture? etc.

A form prescribed and determined by God is not only lawful and good, Answ.
but necessary and only lawful, as it is prescribed: which prerogative no
form devised or prescribed by man can participate. But when God is pleased to
give a form for direction only, and neither to command it precisely nor to
determine it as the only allowable for words and syllables, in that case this
reason is good, That seeing the forms set down in scripture may lawfully be
used though not prescribed, therefore a stinted form is not unlawful. And thus
we conclude from these passages of holy writ, The stinted forms of blessing,
prayer, thanksgiving, and baptizing set down in scripture are lawful to be
used, though not prescribed of God as necessary; therefore a stinted form of
prayer is not unlawful. For that form of words which is neither determined nor
commanded of God as necessary, but left at liberty to be used or not, that is
not in point of conscience absolutely more lawful then another sound and
grave. If no form of words be determined or commanded, any form just and good,
one as well as another, is free in conscience. Gods commandment makes a thing
necessary; his determination makes it only and none other lawful: but a form
not tying to the words precisely, but given for direction only, does authorize
any other for matter the same and different only in words or phrase of speech.
Every stinted form of prayer or blessing, etc. not prescribed of God or
ordained of him, is an humane devise, though the matter be good and the words
be gathered out of the scripture; because whatsoever is not from heaven, is of
men; what is not of God by his institution prescribed or appointed, that our
brethren conclude to be humane: But no prescript form of blessing, prayer, or
praise, etc. is appointed of God and commanded as necessary to be used of all
or any man at all times, as they confess and labor to convince: Therefore it
necessarily follows, That if one godly form of prayer or blessing may
constantly be used, another for matter the same, though different in phrase of
speech, may be used also as occasion shall require: For none is absolutely
commanded; and all things required by the word of God in prayer may be observed
in the one no less then in the other. In this whole answer therefore, which
comes so often in the second branch, they strengthen our reason as much as can
be desired against themselves: In the other they look not to the point in hand
nor the force of the reason.

Those forms mentioned 2. Chron. 29. 30. are in the same place expressly said
to be composed by those that were Prophets and Seers, Object. 4.
as in other places, of purpose as it were to prevent imitation, an ordinary
rise to imagery.

The forms mentioned were given no question by the inspiration of the Spirit;
Answ.
and so is the Lords prayer, the form of baptizing, and other psalms registered
in holy scripture: But the application of those particular forms to this on
that purpose was not by an extraordinary motion of the Spirit, but upon grounds
common to others with them, upon like occasion, or in cases analogicall. And if
in that respect it be not lawful to imitate their practice, I would gladly
know by what warrant we sing the psalms of David or other holy prophets
inspired of God, or use a set translation, etc. Upon what grounds may they
compose a catechism for the edification of the people of their particular
charge, or gather together and allege scriptures in their studied sermons,
either for instruction, exhortation, rebuke or comfort? If they have not
warrant from these and such like practices of the people of God, it will prove
in their construction but the precept or devise of man. The composure of those
psalms was by the immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, wherein no man not
immediately inspired may presume to imitate them: but forms given by
inspiration are thus far for our imitation, that we may use the same words or
other words devised of our selves to the same purpose, sc. to express and lay
open the conceits and desires of our soul. Hezekiah did not compose that form,
but commanded the Levites to make use of it being already composed. But how
imitation herein should be a rise to imagery I cannot conceive. To add unto or
detract from the word of God or his ordinances, is great presumption: to
imitate the Saints in that particular which they did by immediate inspiration,
and could not do without such inspiration, is intolerable boldness: But where
God has given a pattern of prayer, thanksgiving, or administration of the
sacraments, to imitate our samplar in the selfsame words or other words devised
by our selves or others, is no rise to imagery. If this be a rise to imagery,
every time a Christian makes use of the Lords prayer in his prayers, or the
prayers of holy men recorded in scripture, he sets up an image; he that
devises a set form of prayer for one that needs, and he that in case of
necessity uses such a devised prayer, sets up an image; and every time they
pray, preach, catechize, administer the sacraments, or meditate of holy things
with reference to the scripture, they set up images. These consequences, I am
assured, they detest: let me entreat them to consider whether they do not
follow necessarily upon their premises.

Those that mean to defend the imposition of a stinted form of prayer to any
purpose, Object. 5.
do what they can to bear us in hand that these prayers are of like nature with
those in scripture, and speak of them as if the composition and framing of them
were by some prophetical or apostolical Spirit, or at least (which will be
all one in effect) by a Spirit or gift extraordinary.

What opinion the true church of God has had of a stinted Liturgy, Answ.
we shall see in the next argument: But that she has ever or at any time born
us in hand that those prayers were of like nature with those in the scriptures,
that is, given by immediate inspiration, or parts of canonical scripture, is
an unjust imputation. For they know that all reformed churches, since the light
of the Gospel began to shine forth unto the world until this day, do allow and
maintein the use of stinted prayers, catechismes, confessions and professions
of faith, a stinted form of singing psalms, etc. did ever any of them bear the
world in hand that their prayers or composures are prophetical or from an
extraordinary spirit? Diverse godly and learned ministers have soundly and to
purpose maintained the lawfulness of a stinted form against them of the
Separation in former times; did they ever write or speak, that the prayers or
Liturgy was framed by an Apostolical spirit? I have not seen all men that
have written upon this subject upon any occasion, and therefore cannot say that
never any man did so speak of them: but sure I am, if any man have so written,
he is neither the only man, nor the chief, which has set his hand to maintein
the expediency of a stinted Liturgy. If any one has spoken unadvisedly, the
cause has no credit by his defense, nor can it receive prejudice by his
weakness. It has been objected against some dislikers of a stinted form, that
they conceit their extemporany prayers to come from the immediate inspiration
of the holy Ghost; and if a man should rake into every writing, and set every
speech upon the tentours, he might say as much for it as can be said in this
particular. But at the best this is but to go about the bush. This is that
which I hold and plead for, That by the word of truth a stinted Liturgy or
form of prayer is allowable and in some respects expedient.

CHAP. VII. The churches of God have both used and approved a stinted Liturgy.
THE Jews before the coming of our Savior Christ used a prescript form of
prayer and praise or thanksgiving in the celebration of the passover; 6.
Argum. See Paul. Burgens. in Psalm. 112.
and that which they used was (as it is probable) approved of our Savior
Christ himself. Joseph. Scalig. De emendat. tempor. l. 6. Beze Annot. ma^or. in
Matthew. 26. ^0. Drus. Praeterit. lib. 1. in Matthew. 26. 30. Answ. Annot. in Exodus
12. v. 8.
The Christian churches of ancient times, for the space of this fourteen
hundred years at least, if not from the apostles times, have had their stinted
Liturgies: and all reformed churches at this day do not only tolerate but
approve, as very expedient, Muscul. in Psalm. 95. Apparet hunc psalmum
ecclesiasticae congregationi, praesertim frequentiori, destinatum: qualis erat
apud Judaeos die Sabba^. Moller. in Psalm. 95. 1. Apparet autem ex verbo (...),
psalmum hunc non in privatum usum scriptum, sed sacris couventibus destinatum
fuisse, quando populus frequens ad templum conveniebat. Fulc. in 1. Cor. 14..
12. It is not certain whether they had any set form of Liturgie^ and if they
had any, the same ought to have been in one tongue ordinarily. Fulc. 1. Cor.
11.. 10. Petrus Diaconus and the rest that were sent from the East to Rome in
their book to Fulgentius and other Bishops of Africa, cap 8. do rehearse a
prayer of Basils Liturgy, which they say almost the whole ^ast frequented.
These words, LIFT UP YOUR HEARTS, and, WE LIFT THEM UP UNTO THE LORD, were
anciently in use, if not from the age of the apostles, Clem. lib. 8. Constitut.
apost. cap. 16.
a set form of prayer or Liturgy.

There is no mention from Moses to Christ of any Liturgy devised by man:
Object. 1.
Which might not have been concealed, Copy of a Letter, p. 5, and 12.
if it had been for the edification of the church to set up such means of
worship, as Liturgy read publicly for the prayers of the church.

That there was no prescribed Liturgy particularly ordained and determined of
God, Answ.
is freely confessed: but, that there was none in use, is not proved by the
silence of the scripture. For the scripture was given to be the perfect rule of
faith and manners; but sets not down particular customs or observations,
according to the general rules of religion. To let pass many, take this one
for instance, The ordinary reading of the Law in the assemblies upon the
Sabbath is not commanded by Moses either to the priests or Levites; Deuteronomy. 31.
9, 10, 11.
no mention is found of any such practice for a long time together: Act. 15. 21.
We find not for a long time that the Jews had any synagogues for the ordinary
assembling of the people; Psalm. 74. 8.
and the Law could not be read in their synagogues until they were built:
Synagogas, id est, domo^ conventuum sacrorum, ubi legebatur lex, Pisc. scholas
and synagogas, quae passim in u^bibus erant constitutae, Moll. Herisbach.
Will our brethren hence conclude, either that the scriptures were not read in
the assemblies, or that it was a devise of man to read them in their
synagogues? It is not good to lay grounds for such conclusions.

If Mr Ainsworths testimony be of any value, Object. 2.
then mark what he testifies from the famous Jew Maimonie (in Misneh treatise
of prayer) That the church of the Jews had no stinted Liturgy, Annot. on Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Our wise men have said (says Maim.) What service is this with the
heart? It is prayer. And there is no number of prayers by the Law, neither is
there any set form of this by the Law, etc.

If Mr Ainsworth be not cross to himself, Answ.
he cannot deny the use of a stinted form amongst the Jews in the celebration
of the passover; of a stinted form free and voluntary, not necessary, as
prescribed of God. And that which is here cited out of Maimonie is no way
repugnant thereunto: For he speaks not of the passover, or any observations
in the celebration thereof; but of prayer, and that private by one alone, and
not public in the assembly or congregation. Now the Jews might well use a
stinted form in the celebration of the passover, when yet by the law there was
no number set nor form prescribed for private prayer. These two may well agree.

After long search no copy can be found of any stinted Liturgy in use among
the Jews till they ceased to be the church of God: Object. 3.
which is a poor and weak proof of the lawfulness of a stinted Liturgy
amongst Christians.

It follows not, Answ.
that they never had or used a set form because it is not to be found at this
day: For many monuments of antiquity are perished. Again, though forms, which
now are extant, were not entire as now they be until they ceased to be a
church; yet many things contained in them might be in use before. So it is in
the counterfeit Liturgies which go under the name of James, Mark, Basil, and
Chrysostom: they contein many things which show the whole composure to be late
in comparison, whereas diverse things in them mentioned were of more ancient use
in the church of God. And if this do not please, though there never was any
stinted Liturgy or form of prayer to be used in all their synagogues and
assemblies, yet that is no reason to question the truth of that which the
learned have observed touching the stinted form used in the celebration of the
passover, and the probabilities (at least) they bring to show that our Savior
Christ approved the same: which is all that is affirmed in the argument, and
makes more for the lawfulness of a stinted form of Liturgy, then any thing
that has been objected, against it.

As for the reformed churches, Object. 4. Copy of a Letter, page 21. Shall I
in your heat be pressed with the multitude of churches? Greenwood page 17. then
hear what the Lord says, Thou shall not follow a multitude, etc.
we are not to consider what they do, but what they ought to do.

It is most true: Answ.
but we must consider wisely, and not censure unadvisedly. The churches of God
are companies of men called out of this world, in part only enlightened,
subject to error: they have erred, they may err: their sole testimony cannot
be the ground of divine faith and assurance: Nevertheless the constant
judgment of the churches of God for many ages in a matter of this nature, in
the times of reformation, when clouds and darkness are expelled, when the
sun is risen, and great light given to the scriptures by the benefit of
languages, translations and commentaries; I say, the judgment of the churches
at these times, and in a matter of this nature, is not lightly to be regarded.
A man should try and examine his grounds and reasons and mistrust himself
rather then so many wise, learned and godly sweetly consenting in a matter of
this nature, unless his evidence be very good. He had need be well advised
before he charge them to maintein a worship not allowed, an idole-prayer for
the spiritual worship of God, a strange form of prayer, which was never
approved, whereat a Christian may not safely be present, against which he is
bound to witness. Be it that the churches do err herein; yet I hope they be
not obstinate, and such as will not give consent to the truth when it is showed
and manifested: How comes it then to pass that none of them hitherto have
subscribed to their opinion and practice? Either their arguments are not
sufficient to convince, and then their Separation is unjust; or they generally
want eyes to see the light (for they will not say they want conscience to
acknowledge what they cannot but see) and then in meekness they are to be born
withal, if upon well tried grounds a man be assured, that they all, and not he
himself, is in the error. The testimony of the church then is not infallible;
because it may err, and has erred, and some members of it at this day do err
in the particular differences that be amongst them: but yet the constant
testimony of the whole church in the times of light and reformation is of great
weight; Acts 15. 22, 28.
otherwise the Apostles would never allege the practice and consent of
churches, 1. Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 33.
to confirm the faithful, and stop the mouths of the contentious.

We must look to the primitive churches planted Object. 5.
by the apostles, who are patterns to them and us: Copy of a Letter, ibid.
But the apostolic churches for many years had no such Liturgy devised or
imposed: And therefore it is no ordinance of Christ, because the churches may
perfectly and entirely worship God without it with all the parts of holy and
spiritual worship. Robinson, Against Bern. page 474.


We freely confess it to be no ordinance of Christ by special institution,
Answ.
nor part of his worship: It suffices, that it is allowable in the worship,
and consonant to the general rules given in scripture, but not of absolute
necessity. Whether any stinted forms of prayer were in use in the apostolic
churches, is more then can be affirmed certainly or denied. That the apostles
prescribed none as necessary, that is easily believed, because no mention of
it: That none was in use, our Divines will neither peremptorily affirm nor
deny. But if that be granted, it is no prejudice to a stinted Liturgy, nor to
the churches apostolic, who are to be our patterns. At the first preaching and
publishing of the Gospel certain barbarous nations received the faith of
Christ, had neither books nor letters, Iren. lib. 3. Advers. ^aer. cap. 4
Jewel, Against Hard. art. 15. div. 4.
For it is more then probable, that many assemblies had not the scriptures read
in a known tongue at their first planting: it is more then can be showed by
precedent or example, that they were read in any Christian congregation. Some
churches converted by the preaching of the Gospel had neither books nor
letters. It may be others received the book of the Old Testament from the
apostles at their first conversion: but suddenly they could not be translated
into every language; and till they were translated they could not be read in
the congregation unto edifying. The books of the New Testament could not be
delivered until they were written: but they were not written all at once: and
when they were all written, being sent to several churches, it must be some
time before they could be gathered together and translated. And if nothing be
allowable in the church but what was found in the primitive churches planted by
the apostles by record of scripture, I fear the reading of the scriptures in a
known tongue must be cast out of the congregations. I go not about to equalize
stinted Liturgies with set translations of the holy scriptures: Arias Montan.
in Isa. 28. 20.
but I would entreat such as oppose a stinted Liturgy by these reasons, to
consider whether they do not put weapons into the adversaries hands to fight
against the scriptures. Quae oration ut clarius exponatur, observationem
postulat consuetudinis Judaeorum, qui breves arts sive catechismos conscribere
consuevere: quibus tota Legis summa in sexcenta and sex praecepta breviter
divisa continebatur. Quorum libellorum exempla adhuc exstant, Erat (ut videre
etiam atque expetiri licebit) in libellis istis verbum frequens Tsau, quod non
rato apud Mosen invenitur. Hoc voluit Esa. populum illum in nudis and brevibus
atque jejunis elementis and rudimentis haerentem, etc. The Prophets and the
Apostles are not found to prescribe set words for the minister to teach, or the
people to answer being examined, Ainsworth, page 238. See Calvin. Opusc.
Praefat. Catechism.
Again, set forms of catechismes public or private, composed by the minister
or devised by others, used with liberty to add or alter as occasion requires,
are no more commanded of God then set forms of prayer, nor no more in use in
the apostolic churches: Christ our Savior, the Prophets or Apostles have no
more appointed the one then the other: if all parts of holy and spiritual
worship may be performed without a stinted Liturgy, they may be performed also
without a stinted or set catechism: and if a set form of prayer must be
disallowed, a set form of catechism, public or private, composed by the
minister or devised by others, must be condemned also: But the antiquity,
excellency and necessity of catechizing is known to them who are exercised in
the building and governing of the house of God: the use and profit of a set
form therein is both manifest by reason, and confirmed by experience, at home
and abroad, in public and private, to them who have labored to lay the
foundation of Christian religion, and train up the people committed to their
charge in sound wisdom and understanding. And in these things we swerve not
from our pattern, because we teach and profess the same doctrine, and worship
God with the same worship and substantial means of worship that the primitive
churches and Christians did.

There is the same reason of reading the Apocrypha, Object. 6.
books of Maccabees and those that follow them in the congregation, and of
reading a stinted form of Liturgy: See Robinson, page 476.
and the same reasons that silence the Apocrypha will silence stinted prayers
as well and as much.

When we prove the lawfulness of a stinted form of prayer by the stinted forms
of psalms and blessing mentioned in scripture, Answ.
it is thought answer sufficient to say, There is great difference betwixt
blessings or psalms and prayer: and yet here it is enough to match things
unlike together, and to say of them without all proof, There is the same reason
of both. But if it have any sinews, it will silence the singing of psalms,
sermons, professions of faith, and conceived prayer no less then stinted,
especially the use of notes to help memory, and forms of catechism by
whomsoever and howsoever used: For there is the same reason of reading and
uttering by heart in the congregation. And if nothing but the canonical
scriptures must be read in the congregation, nothing must be uttered by heart
or strength of memory but the scriptures alone: But sermons, professions of
faith, conceived prayer, are not canonical scripture. The reason is one; and
whatsoever can be answered truly in the one, will put the other to flight. If
it be said, That it is the prerogative of the scripture to be the rule of faith
and manners, and therefore nothing is to be read in the congregation as the
ground undoubted and immediate of faith and manners but the scripture alone;
this opens way for stinted prayer as well as for sermons or conceived prayer.
The substantial means of worship both public and private are determined of
God. It is unlawful to set up an image for worship either public or private.
The scripture must be acknowledged the sole rule of faith and manners both in
public and private. It is unlawful to devise sacramental signs in private
as well as in the congregation. And if it be unlawful to read any other book
in the congregation, because the reading of the scripture is the only approved
medium cultus, by the same reason all forms of catechismes, and singing of
psalms, and reading or use of stinted prayers in the family are unlawful. And
if the one be an image in the congregation the others are so in the family.
Copy of a Letter, page 18.
When the Lord had devised and appointed a perfume (says the author of the
Letter) all men are forbidden to make a composition like that perfume, Exodus
30. 35, 37. So if it could be proved that Christ had made a form for the
churches and believers always when they pray, then the offering up of any
other prayers, Mr Greenwood perceiving the weakness of this objection, frames
it thus. No Apocrypha must be brought into the public assemblies; for there
only Gods word and lively voice of his own graces must be heard, Greenwood,
page 10. But this limitation is groundless, propounded without warrant of
^^ripture, and may be rejected as (...) devise. For the phrase of speech in
(...), prayer, professions of faith, (...) of psalms is of man as well as in
stinted prayers devised by others; and (...) may not be heard in the
congregation, neither may the other be uttered or (...) most certain it is,
that neither the one nor the other is to be received as the undoubted rule of
faith or manners.
made by others or of our own devising, would seem to be as unlawful as the
offering of strange incense, Exodus 30. 9. Where it is employed, that seeing God
has determined no certain form, therefore forms devised by men are not
necessary, but lawful. In the same manner they may be answered from their own
grounds; That seeing God has sanctified and set apart the canonical
scriptures, given by immediate Divine inspiration, to be the sole and perfect
rule of faith and manners, therefore the scripture alone must be read and
acknowledged as the sole ground of heavenly instruction: But seeing he has
determined no certain form of prayer or sermons, professions of faith, or
thanksgiving, therefore either none at all must be made, or forms devised by
men are lawful to be heard in the congregation; yet not as immediate and
undoubted grounds of faith, (for that is proper to the scripture) but as
instructions and exhortations builded upon, or petitions framed according to
the scripture, as present occasion does require. In sermons who does not put a
difference betwixt the text whereupon the discourse, instructions,
exhortations, rebukes and comforts be grounded and deduced, and the
exhortations, rebukes and comforts which are propounded in method and phrase of
speech devised by men? The first is and ought to be canonical scripture; the
other not so. But it would argue great ignorance, if not perverseness, if a
man should cavil in this manner against the preaching of the word, That the
scriptures alone are to be read in the congregation, therefore the minister of
the Gospel must simply read the scripture, but never give the meaning, Council
Laodic. can. 59. Council. Carthag. 3. can. 47.
nor make application. In the Primitive church sundry councels have forbidden
the reading of any books as parts of Divine worship but canonical scripture
only of the Old and New Testament: Council. Hippon. can. 38.
but no council ever condemned the use of a stinted Liturgy. See Jewel, Def.
Apol part. 5. cap. 3. div. 10.
Those churches which forbad the reading of any books which be without the
canon, Council. Laodicen. can. 15, 16, 59. Council. Carthag. 3. can. 23.
did first receive a stinted form of prayer: and the councels themselves take
order touching the reading of the scripture, and the singing of psalms, and
other things which pertein to a stinted Liturgy. Jewel, art. 3. dit. 2.
So that those Fathers and churches had not learned, that the same reasons
which silence the Apocrypha in the congregation will silence all stinted forms
of Liturgy as well and as much.

As it were a ridiculous thing for a child, Object. 7.
when he would ask of his father bread, etc. to read it to him out of a paper:
so it is for the children of God, Robinson, Against Bern. page 475.
especially for the ministers of the Gospel in their public ministrations, to
read unto God their requests for their own and the churches wants out of a
service book, wherein they are stinted to words and syllables.

It is a common saying, Answ.
Similitudes agree not in all things; and a rule as general, That to argue
from a bare similitude is the loosest kind of reasoning: which may be applied
to cover or countenance any error or abuse whatsoever. Therefore this
objection might well have been passed over (as it is omitted by the most that
have written of this subject, that I have seen) but that colors and shadows do
often take more with some then that which is substantial. If a man would set
himself to plead for superstitious abuses and idolatrous practices, errors and
unwritten traditions, is it not an easy matter by some similitude to cast a
fair gloss upon them? And it is a strange thing, that such as with so much
earnestness set themselves against all humane inventions and devises in Gods
worship, should by their form of reasoning open the floud-gates wide for all
superstitious, idolatrous, antichristian devises and impieties, as this reason
does. I need not instance: every man that knows what is principally alleged
in defense of any popish, vain, unprofitable, superstitious or idolatrous
practice or custom, or will take pains to look, must needs see this to be so.
But to look upon the objection it self; If a child being to ask many
particulars of his father for himself and others should write them in a paper
for the help of memory or some other reason, and having committed them to
memory as they are registered in his paper, should in that form of words
digested and written down present his requests before his father without
addition or alteration; what moral evil or incivility should be committed in
this case? why should this be esteemed a thing ridiculous? And if similitudes
do please so well, may we not say with more reason and upon better ground, That
as a learned orator being to make an oration in an honorable presence about
diverse matters of weight and importance, will not only study and digest but
pen his speech, and deliver it word for word as it is contrived and penned;
so the minister of the Lord of hosts in his public ministration is not only
to consider what requests he is to make to God in his own and the peoples
behalf, but to digest them into fit method, and to pen or write them down,
and to utter them in the congregation as he has contrived them. Let the
indifferent judge whether of these two be the most reasonable.

Book-prayer is generally laid aside in the families of best Christians:
Object. 8.
And in all reformed churches generally the use of a book by every able and
godly minister is left off; Rovins. ibid.
and at home it is accounted and complained of as a burden by the better sort
of them that use it.

Many things are disused, Answ.
and that by the best Christians, which are not unlawful. Where there be many
ways to the wood, ordinarily men may make choice of one or two, not
disallowing the other. It is lawful for Christians when they pray in their
families, daily to read the ten commandments, the profession of faith, etc.
which is generally laid aside without sin. Many things also may be decent in
the congregation which are not so expedient and requisite in the family. And in
one congregation a thing may be lawful and of use which is disused in another
without sin, where yet it would not be unprofitable. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2. ad
These. Quand^ enim qui lectutus est, surgens dicit, Haec DICIT DOMINUS; and
diaconus (...) omnes indicto silentio compescit.
The deacons in Chrysostomes and Basils time used to call upon the people with
these words, Oremus, Attendamus, Let us pray, Let us give ear. The deacon at
the holy mysteries stood up and thus spoke unto the people, Oremus pariter
omnes. The manner was, that before every lesson or chapter the minister should
say unto the people, Let us attend. If this custom be disused either in the
congregation or Christian families at this day, it does not argue the thing it
self to be indecent or unprofitable. Chrysostom. hom 3. in Epist. ad Ephel. Jewel.
Def. art. 3. divis. 16.
And if by Book-prayers all stinted forms, whether read or repeated by help of
memory, be understood, they are not so generally rejected in the families of
the best Christians nor in the ministry of the most able and godly ministers
as the objection imports. Chrysostom. in Act. hom. 19. Stat minister, and communis
minister, and alta voce clamar. Post illam vocem incipit lector prophetiam
Esaiae. Isidor. Hispalens. l. 1. De eccles. offic. c. 10. and l. 2. c ^. St.
Egerton Practic. of Christ. Certain advertisements touching prayer, etc.
Synops. turior. Theolog. disp. 3^. these. 33. Quaeri hic soler, utrum conceptis
precationum formulis public aut privatim uti liceat. Nos, si modo cum debita
animi attentione pronuncientur, non tantum licitas sed and valde utiles esse
contendm us, quia novas (...) concipere cuivis Christiano datum non est, and
attentio auditorum in magnis conventibus per usitatas formulas non parum
juvatur, etc. Imo Christus ipse in cruce pendens, deprecationis forma, a Davide
tanquam typo antea observata, usus est, Matthew. 27. 46.
Let us hear the testimony of a godly, learned, and well experienced minister
now at rest with the Lord: When as, says he, the question is made by many of
the lawfulness or at least of the expediency of praying by the help of a book,
or of using a prescript and set form of prayer, it is to be considered, that
there be diverse degrees and measures of gifts, both natural (as wit, memory,
utterance) as also of grace (as knowledge, faith, zeal) given to diverse men;
besides that some have been more trained and exercised in this holy duty then
others: Now they that are better gifted, either by nature or else by grace and
custom, may use the more liberty. Which difference I have observed not only
in diverse private Christians, but also in some most reverend, faithful and
worthy ministers; some using both in their public ministry and in their
private families a stinted prayer and set form of words, with little alteration
at all, except some extraordinary occasion have happend: and yet both sorts so
furnished with piety and learning as I could hardly prefer one before the
other. And a little after, For the public congregation, for the most part it
is expedient to keep a constant form both of matter and also of words; and yet
without servile tying of our selves to words and syllables. If the judgment of
reformed churches abroad, or of the godly, faithful, learned and reverend at
home, be of any weight, they are so far from complaining of a stinted form as
burdensome, that in many cases they judge it expedient. Rain, in 2. Tim. c. 1.
verse. 13. It is good to have a set form of doctrine. God gave this sum to
Adam. The seed of the woman, etc. The ten commandments, the prophetical
sermons abbridged, Heb. 6. 1. They had the principles of the doctrine of
Christ. And when religion was restored, new forms, institutions, catechismes,
were appointed in the church.
A set form of prayer and administration of the sacraments, not only devised
by the minister himself, but agreed upon by the churches, is approved by
general consent. Is there any reformed church established which has not their
book of common prayer? The ministers at home to whom the use of common prayer
has been thought most burdensome, Council. Laodit. can. 59.
have from time to time professed their liking and approbation of a stinted
Liturgy; Council. Carthagin 3. can. 23.
That they like well enough of that council that forbad vulgar psalms in the
service of God, Council. Mil^vitan. can. 12.
and those forms of service which are not antea probata in concilio, vcl cum
prudentioribus collata, African. can. 70.
lest happily some things against faith, either through ignorance or want of
consideration, should be composed; That they never sought a razing of the
communion-book, but a filing of it after the pattern of that care which former
examples set them, wherein they thought some things retained which might well
have been spared: See Regers 7.
They have evermore condemned voluntary Separation from the congregations and
assemblies, Treatis. 3. treat. chap. 4.
or negligent frequenting of those public prayers: They have ordinarily and
constantly used the communion-book in their public administrations; and still
maintained unity, peace and love with them who in some particulars have been
of another judgment. All this is so notoriously known that it is wast labor
to produce testimonies herein. As for the reading of a stinted form, it may be
it is not constant in all reformed churches, exacted of every minister at all
times; but, that it is not used at all, is more then I can credit: and if they
exact not the use of the same form continually, the thing it self they greatly
approve. If any man desire an instance of their doings, See Zepper. De polit.
eccles. lib. 2. cap. 4. Calvin. Opusc. Precum ecclesi^st. formula. Beza in
Cantic. Hom. 1.
let him compare the prayer which Beza constantly used before and after sermon
with the Geneva-book of common prayer. And if they impose not their forms upon
all congregations to be used of necessity, but leave it free to use them or
some other in substance one and the same; yet this is certain, they disallow
their opinion who condemn all stinted forms and Liturgies as vain, superfluous,
humane inventions, a strange worship, and breach of the second commandment.

CHAP. VIII. The people may lawfully be present at those prayers which are put
up unto God in a stinted form of words, and partake in divine ordinances
administered in a stinted Liturgy.
THe author of the Letter formerly cited tells us, That against our
prayer book diverse men have pleaded after a different manner. Copy of a Letter,
page 4.
First, some arguments, says he, are proper to the Separatists, qua tales;
viz. 1. That it is offered up in a false church. 2. With a false ministry. 3.
In the behalf of the subjects of the kingdom of Antichrist. These are properly
theirs, being the grounds whereupon they make a total Separation from all the
churches in this land, as no churches of Christ. These I approve not: yet note
them, that you may see upon how different grounds the same position is
maintained by several persons, and that you may be delivered from the
prejudice which hinders many from receiving those truths, because they fear
the reproach of Brownisme. Secondly, there are other grounds which are common to
all that plead for the purity of Christ's ordinance; and which do not
necessarily infer such Separation, but only serve to show the unlawfulness
of that practice, and of communicating therein. Thus far the Letter. Wherein,
to let pass other things, we may take notice of a twofold Separation from the
worship of God amongst us acknowledged: the one total, as from a false church,
false ministry, and subjects of the kingdom of Antichrist; the other
partial, from the stinted Liturgy, and ordinances of worship dispensed in a
stinted form. And this latter only is approved by this author, but not the
former, of which we make no question. But whereas he says, his grounds upon
which he builds his last Separation are common to all that plead for the
purity of Christ's ordinances, therein he is much mistaken. For his grounds are
one and the very same with the Brownists, whereby they condemn all stinted
Liturgies, acknowledged by no reformed church in the world, nor by particular
pastors in any church but themselves. And if they take not themselves to be
the only pleaders for the purity of Christ's ordinances, they cannot show that
these reasons have been approved, or positions allowed, by any pleaders for
reformation in any time or age of the church. The reasons brought to confirm
the unlawfulness of communicating in the ordinances of worship amongst us
administered in a stinted Liturgy, are of two sorts: Some condemn all stinted
forms and Liturgies devised by men: others concern our book of common prayer
more particularly, as it is charged with sundry faults and corruptions. The
first, as they concern the ministers who make use of a stinted Liturgy, have
been examined already: Now I come to examine them both as they concern the
people; and therefore lay down this proposition, That in case it should be
unlawful in some respects for the minister of the Gospel or governor of the
family to read or pronounce without book a prescript form of prayer devised by
another, yet no reason can be showed why it should be unwarrantable for the
people, child, servant, wife to be present at such prayers in the congregation
or family. I speak not of prayer for the matter erroneous and naught, but
stinted and read. For if the matter be faulty, the prayer is not good because
conceived: and if good and pure, it is not made evil and hurtful to the
hearers because it is read.

First, Argum.
what lets why the hearers heart may not follow a prescript form of words
holy and good, either in confession of sins, request, or thanksgiving? What
lets, I say, that the hearers hearts may not profitably go with the same,
both to humble, quicken and comfort? The people, child, servant are commanded
to examine and prepare themselves before they draw nigh into the presence of
the Lord: But where are they commanded to look whether the minister or
governor do pray by the Spirit immediately, or out of his memory; in a set
form of words conceived beforehand, or suggested without premeditation; in the
same form of words ordinarily with little or no variation, unless it be upon
special occasion, or in different order, method and phrase every day; whether
he read his prayer or pronounce it only? And if God have laid no charge upon
their conscience to inquire into these and such like particulars before they
join in prayer, voluntarily to withdraw our selves from the ordinances of
worship in these respects, what is it but to add unto his word? When things
agreeable to the will of God are begged of God every day in the same form of
words, as the things begged are the same, it is not either the stinted form of
words, or the presenting of requests by reading them upon a book, that can make
the prayer unprofitable, much less abomination in respect of him that joyneth.
If the minister in that case pray coldly or without affection, his sin cannot
hinder the blessing of God from the people. If the governor be weak in
natural gifts, as memory or utterance; or spiritual, as knowledge, etc, the
lawful use of a stinted form in that case is not denied by some as a needful
help to supply defect. And if the governor, to help his weakness, make use of
a stinted form, whether may the servant, child, or wife, who conceit they need
no such furtherance, join with him in prayer or no? If not, I desire to know by
what authority they may withdraw themselves: If they may join, then the heart
prepared may follow a prescript form of words devised by others.

To read our prayers out of a book, Object. 1. Johnson, ubi supra, page 35.
is to draw nigh unto God with the lips when the heart is removed far from
him; because it is not to draw and pour forth our prayers out of the heart by
the holy Ghost.

A man may both read his prayers out of a book and pour them forth out of his
heart, Answ.
as has been formerly proved, and is confessed by them that allow a prescript
form in case of need: For they will not say, It is lawful to draw nigh unto
God with the lips when the heart must needs be removed from him. But if this be
granted for the present (which is most false) I demand whether it be a drawing
nigh with the lips only in respect of him alone that reads the stinted form,
or of all present? Not of all present: For how can it be said that their hearts
are removed from God who in sincerity and truth of heart desire the obteining
of what is prayed for, agreeable to the will of God? Hypocrisy has lost its
ancient nature, if it be hypocrisy to draw nigh to the throne of grace in the
name of Christ with understanding, confidence and uprightness. If it be a
lip-labor in respect of him that reads it only, it can be no sufficient
ground of Separation in others. For in conceived prayer the minister or
governor may pray with the lips and voice when the heart is absent: and they
that join may pray in truth when the prayer is uttered or pronounced in a
prescribed form. An hypocrite cannot call upon God in uprightness at any time;
and yet they will not say it is unlawful to join in prayer with such a man.
Put case a particular man did know his minister to be an hypocrite by more
certain evidence then possibly he can know read prayer to be lip-labor; yet he
is bound in conscience not to separate from the public prayers or ordinances
of grace administered by such a man. For Christ has commanded us to come unto
him, has promised to be present with them that assemble together in his name,
to hear them that in truth call upon his name: and though an hypocrite shall
not be heard for himself, he may be heard for others. A minister he is, not for
his own goods, but his administration is effectual to the heirs of salvation:
Formally, as some speak, he has not pardon of sin for the comfort of his own
soul; but ministerially, instrumentally, he has it for the benefit of others:
that is, he possesses not the promise of pardon for his own comfort, but he
brings it for the good of others. A Christian may not absent himself from the
public prayers of the congregation and ordinances of grace unless Christ has
given him leave or commandment so to do: but when he may call upon God purely
and sincerely, he has not given a Christian leave to separate or withdraw
himself because he conceiteth the minister to be an hypocrite. But of this more
hereafter. Let us then imagine (if fancy can be so strong) that the use of a
stinted prayer is but lip-labor in the minister or governor; what else can
follow, but that the service is lawful, the lip-labor being corrected? which
is done, not by Separation, but by conjoyning the service and affection of the
heart and inward man with the exercise of the outward.

Reading is not prayer: Object. 2. Johnson, ubi supra.
For in prayer we pour out desires and supplications from the heart; in
reading we let into the heart the things that are read. Robinson, Against Bern.
page 425, 473. Greenwood, Answ. to Gifford, page 2.
A blind man may pray, but he cannot read. He that reads speaks not to God
but to the people.

To read is not to pray: but in reading a man may pray agreeable to the
ordinance, Answ.
with right affection of soul: As to pronounce is not to pray; because a dumb
man may pray, who cannot speak: but when a man utters his prayer for the
edification of others, he himself may and does speak unto God. But if this be
presupposed, that a man cannot both read a prayer and pray himself, what
hinders that others cannot lift up their hearts unto God, and join in requests
according to the prescript form of words? Is not the matter fit because it is
prescribed? cannot the heart desire or lift up it self because the requests are
read? does the very act of reading pollute the whole action? If all things
essentially required in prayer may be observed of them that join in prayer with
such as read them, then the simple act of reading is not sufficient cause why
Christians should withdraw themselves: But all things essential to prayer may
be observed of them that join in prayer with such as read: the matter may be
fit, sound and holy; the affections, goods; and so the work, acceptable unto
the Lord.

The monuments of antiquity show that the Jews used a stinted form of Liturgy
and prayer in their synagogues, 2 Argum.
and at the celebration of the passover, See Paulus Fagi^^ in Chald. Paraphr.
Lev. 16. Idemin Chald. Paraphr.
before the days of our Savior Christ: But our Savior Christ never taught
the people to absent themselves from the prayers of the synagogues, Deuteronomy. 8.
Fr. Jun. Annot. in Act. 13. 15.
or from the passover: rather he commanded them to frequent the assemblies,
and observe the passover, wherein he himself did give example, Luke 4. 16* 31.
and 13. 10.
ordinarily resorting to the synagogues upon the sabbaths, and observing the
passover at the time appointed. Mark. 1. 21, 23.


It is not certain that the Jews had or used a stinted form of Liturgy or
prayer in their synagogues, Object. 1.
or the celebration of the passover.

It is not certain by certainty of Divine faith; Answ. See Gerhard, Harm. in
Matthew. 26. cap. 1.
for it is not testified in the holy scripture: but by humane testimony it is
so probable, that even such as deny all lawful use of a stinted form do give
their assent hereunto, as has been showed before.

The Jews did not prescribe and set apart their prayers for public use,
Object. 2.
as our Liturgy is: neither were they tied to them as we are, but left to use
or not use them as they saw most fit for edification.

Bring this answer to the light, Answ.
and it yields the cause as fully as can be desired. For if the Jews had or
used a stinted Liturgy in their synagogues and celebration of the passover,
devised by others, when the faithful did lawfully resort to the synagogues,
and observe the passover administered according to that form; then the
faithful may and ought to join in prayer or participation of Divine
ordinances, though administered in a stinted Liturgy devised by others. It is
to no purpose to allege that that form was not set apart for public use, nor
they necessarily tied unto it, when the simple use of such a stinted form
devised by others is condemned as unlawful in respect of minister and people,
the imposer and user. Plain dealing is a jewel. Moreover (to take away the
ambiguitie of the word) a stinted form may be set apart for public use two
ways: Either as sanctified to be the immediate and infallible rule of prayer,
a substantial or proper means of worship, holy by institution and necessary in
conscience, in respect of Divine commandment: and in this no public Liturgy
is or ought to be set apart, because none is prescribed of God, none such can
be devised or appointed of men: Or it may be set apart, The word in scripture
signifies I. in a large (...) to separate or set apart to some use lawful,
but natural or civil, 1. Tim. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 7. 14. Isa. 13. 3. II. To
prepare, appoint, proclaim. Exodus 19. 10. Sept. (...), Targ. praepara. Jer. 12.
(...) 51. 27. 2. Reg. 10. 20. Sept. (...). Joel. 1. 14. Jer. 6. 4. Sept. (...),
(...). (...)* John 10. 36. III. To set apart to an holy use: as God is said to
sanctify persons, things and times by his institution and appointment: Jer. 1.
5. Gal. 1. 15. Genesis 1. 3. and that, either to sanctify but not to appropriate,
or to sanctify and (...): Exodus 30. 31, 32, 33. and 30. 23, 26, 27. and 29. 44
1. Reg. 8. 10. (...) IV. Of profane or polluted to make holy by infusion of
holiness or increase thereof. 1. Cor. 6. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Joh. 17. 17. V.
To profess and confess holily, o^ to glorify, Lev. 10. 3. Isa. 8. 13. Isa.
5. 16. Sept. (...).
where no one being determined by God, one is freely chosen and agreed upon for
public use, as consonant to the general rules of scripture for orders sake,
to testify consent in matters of faith, and for the help of them that may
stand in need, not as the immediate and infallible rule of prayer, nor as a
proper means of worship, nor as holy above others, nor necessary in point of
conscience: and in this sense a Liturgy or stinted form may be set apart; and
it cannot well be conceived how it should generally be used unless it be set
apart, that is, unless one be chosen amongst many and agreed upon, to testify
consent. In a stinted form or Liturgy two things are to be considered: the
matter it self; which, if holy and good, is of God, as in conceived prayer: and
the external method, order and phrase of speech; which is not determined by
God, as, whether it shall be in these and these words, suddenly conceived or
more solemnly composed, devised by others or invented by our selves. And seeing
neither of these is determined, it is the devise of man to place opinion of
worship, holiness, or necessity in either of them simply considered.

Our Savior never joined with them in their prayers, Object. 3.
though he came often to their synagogues and meetings, but always either to
preach unto them, or reprove them for their humane inventions, taking the
opportunity of their meetings for this very end.

A stinted Liturgy is challenged to be an humane devise condemned by the
second commandment, Answ.
because it is not prescribed in the word: The like exception upon just grounds
do I make to this answer, It is an humane devise, a corrupt addition, because
it has no warrant from the scripture. Why did our Savior go up to the feast
of the passover according to the custom, Luke 2. 42, 43.
when he was twelve years old, only to preach unto them, and reprove their
humane inventions, and not to keep the passover? Did he ordinarily resort to
the synagogues, and was he present at the lectures of the law and prophets, and
did not join in prayer? Luke 2. 21, 27.
He himself tells us, it behooved him to fulfill all righteousness: and was
not this one branch of that righteousness he was to fulfill? It is true, he
resorted thither to preach the Gospel, and reprove the corrupt glosses of the
scribes and Pharisees: but to preach the Gospel and join in prayer with the
people of God in covenant, are things that may well stand together. Our Savior
reproved the humane inventions of the scribes and Pharisees: but did he ever
reprove them simply for their stinted Liturgy, or teach the faithful not to
join with the rest in their synagogues in any part of their stinted Liturgy?
If he came to the synagogues merely to take the opportunity of their meetings,
did he celebrate the last passover with his disciples merely for that end
likewise? And if any man will be so unadvised and rash (to say no more) it will
not avail: For unto their custom of finishing the passover with certain
psalms, there is not any thing more probable, then that the holy Evangelist
does evidently allude, saying, that after the cup delivered by our Savior to
his apostles, Matthew. 26. ^0.
they sung an hymn, ^^od. 15. 1, 21.
and went forth to the mount of Olives: Psalm. 136. 1, 2.
And some add; ^sdr. 3. 11.
as the nature of some hymns require, it may be there was a common foot of the
song wherewith the disciples answered unto our Savior Christ first singing.

If they did use such without good warrant, Object. 4. We must do nothing in
the worship of God without warrant of his word: But read-prayer has no warrant
in his word, Greenwood, Against G^fford, page 12.
it will be no warrant to us: and if they had warrant from God for any forms
they used about the passover, etc. if we have warrant from God we may do the
like. And we know we must go by rule and not by unwarranted example in all
things about Gods worship.

Warrant is twofold: Answ.
One of precise institution, determination, and commandment: and thus all
substantial parts and proper means of worship must be warranted. But this
warrant is not necessary to a stinted Liturgy, unless it be determined of God
in special. And if that be true which some confidently affirm, that reading
cannot be prayer; or, that in reading a man cannot speak unto God; Bellarm. De
Bapt. cap. 24. objecteth that the reformed churches add the Lords prayer and
the Creed, etc. to baptism. Neque his repugnat (says he) quod oration Dominica
sit in scripturis, and symbolum quoad sensum. Nam in scriptura non habetur ut
reci^etur in baptismo. Our Divines answer, we have for addition of the Creed
and the Lords prayer the general warrant out of the word, which wills
decency in the administration of the sacraments; and these things suite with
the nature of the sacrament. See Cham. tom. 4. De Bapt. l. 5. cap. 15.
or, that read-prayer is an idole-prayer: either it cannot be that by special
institution a stinted prayer should be prescribed to be read, or special
institution is not sufficient to make it warrantable. This I note here once
again, to persuade men more considerately to view over their positions, and
show to how little purpose they ofttimes answer, that this or that form is not
the invention of man. Another warrant there is according to the general rules
of scripture, where nothing is particularly determined: and thus a stinted
Liturgy is warranted both to the Jews and Christians; which is sufficient.
Also the example of our Savior Christ resorting ordinarily to the synagogues,
and never speaking one word either to his disciples or other faithful to
beware of joining with the rest in any part of their stinted Liturgies, is to
us warrant abundantly sufficient not to withdraw our selves from prayer or
other ordinances of God because administered in a stinted Liturgy.

The spirit of the people should join with the ministers spirit in prayer, 3.
Argum. Copy of a Letter, page 15.
according to the ordinance of Christ, who orders no more to their parts in
that case then to join with him, and to testify it by saying, 1 Cor. 14. 16.
Amen. And if the prayer be sound, fit and holy, what hinders why the people
may not testify their consent by saying, Amen. If the governors neglect to
stir up the graces and gifts of the Spirit in themselves, and so deprive the
people of the benefit of their gifts, must not the people make use of such
gifts as they use, if not their own, then others?

The worship it self is vain, Object. 1.
fruitless and unwarrantable.

No branch of Gods worship consists in this, Answ.
That our prayers be presented to God in this or that method, order or phrase
of speech, in a form of speech devised by others, or invented by our selves;
suddenly conceived, or premeditated long before; varied every time we pray, or
one and the same often reiterated as occasion requires. And if the worship it
self be vain and unwarrantable, it must be either because the form of prayer is
devised by himself, and uttered in a stinted form; or devised by others and not
by himself. If the former; then no prayer is Gods ordinance which is not
uttered without premeditation settled and digested, or at least which is not
immediately suggested by the Spirit in respect of words and phrase of speech:
If the latter; then devised worship is not forbidden in the second commandment,
but worship devised by another: For that prayer which should be pure worship if
devised by a man's self, is unlawful worship when devised by another: And so
devised worship or prayer is not condemned, but worship or prayer devised by
another man. And if this be not the devise of man, I know not what is. Can this
alter the nature of the worship in the hearer, or him that joyneth, that the
words in prayer are invented by another, studied by the governor, or more
suddenly conceived? In the judgment of some Divines the three first
commandments are thus distinguished each from other: That the first commandment
contains all those our duties toward God which are natural; The second, all
those duties in Gods special worship which are instituted: and either of these
is both inward and outward. The third commandment requires the well using of
both these, See Henr. Jacob, Exposit of the second commandment, 7. rule.
and of all other things which come of God. If this distinction be allowed, a
stinted form as such does not at all belong to the second commandment: Henr.
Jacob, ibid.
For instituted worship, and not the order or manner of performance, is the
matter of the second commandment.

Stinted prayer is unlawful, Object. 2.
because a man in devising it does not exercise his own gifts.

Though he exercise not his gifts in devising it, Answ.
in reading or uttering it as a prayer he may set his understanding, judgment,
faith, hope, love, humility, fervency and other graces of Gods Spirit on work.
And if the minister do not, may not the people exercise their gifts in hearing?
and so though it be unlawful to him, it is not so to them.

Stinted prayer voluntarily taken up upon a man's self is not so much unlawful;
Object. 3. Copy of a Letter, page 16.
but prayer imposed upon men, because in such case they subject themselves to
man's ordinance in Gods worship.

This is a strange description of man's ordinance in the worship of God, Answ.
or of worshipping God after the ordinances of men. For thence it will follow,
that the same devised worship voluntarily taken up has some allowance, as the
ordinance of God, and cease only to be of God when it is imposed. Whereas
the ordinances of men in Gods worship condemned in scripture are not mere
matters of order, forms of words and phrases, circumstances of time and place
determined by men according to the general rules; but matters of worship
devised besides and against the word of God; and are unlawful whether
voluntarily taken up and devised of our selves, or imposed by others.

A prescribed set form is not agreeable to the word of God for circumstance;
Object. 4.
because the prescribing of it is to set apart or sanctify it for such an use
without Gods command, Superstition is not only laid to their charge who offer
to God for worship that which he has not commanded, but their^ also who assume
in Gods worship the help of any thing as sacred or holy which himself has not
ordained. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 95. art. 2. Quaecunque observatio quasi necessaria
commendatur, continuo cens^tur ad cultum Dei pertinere, Calv. De vera Eccl.
resorm. page 367. Of the signification of the word Consecrate or dedicate, see
Deuteronomy. 20. 5. Psalm. 30. 1. Neh. 12. 27. Gaspar Sanctius. Alia dedicatio est non
solum inter prophanos sed etiam inter Hebraeos usitata, quae nihil habet
sacrum, sed tantum est auspicatio aut initium operis ad quod destinatur locus
aut res, cujus tunc primum libatur usus: Sic Nero Claudius dedicasse dicitur
domum sum cum primum illam habitate coepit, Sueton. in Nerone.
and so to idolize it above other prayers.

In what sense a stinted form of prayer is or may be set apart, Answ.
has been showed before: But this description of setting apart or prescribing
is a mere devise, barely affirmed without any show of reason. What is here
objected against a prescribed form, may be affirmed of a prescribed place, time
and order for the celebration of Divine ordinances, which are of the same
nature with it, and no more determined by the word of God. And suppose the
minister or governor maintein some erroneous conceit touching the prescribed
form of prayer, are the people, children or servants hereby authorized to
withdraw themselves from such prayers? or the prayers themselves made
unacceptable to such as know how to use them aright? One man is of opinion,
that a prescribed form is better then another; another, that a prescribed form
is unlawful: one, that it is best ordinarily to use a stinted form; another,
that he is to pray always according to the present occasion in a different
order and phrase of speech: In these cases if the least error do stain the
prayers to others that they may not lawfully join together, with whom shall the
faithful join at all? Is not this to fill the conscience with scruples and the
church with rents? Errors and abuses personal, they rest in the persons so
erring, and stain not others.

It is harsh to affirm, that such has been the estate of the church ever since
the death of the apostles almost, if not before, that a Christian could not
without sin join with any public assembly in prayer or participation of the
sacraments, that he must either separate from the prayers of the assembly and
depart from the sacraments, He that but considers what monstrous errors and
corruptions sprang up in the churches of the new Testament whiles the apostles
lived which planted them, will not think it strange though all almost were
o^^rgrown with such bricis and thorn^ in a few ages following, Robin on,
Against Bern. page 3.
or derogate from the authority of God, and worship him after the ordinances
of men. For if such was the state of the Christian church from that time, what
is become of those great and precious promises made to the church in the times
of the Messiah? Did the church begin to draw and give up her breath both in one
day? Many things were amiss in the church, many corruptions did begin to bud
in the apostles times, and after their departure did put forth with greater
vigor: and the saints of God, I doubt not, offended many ways through
ignorance and infirmity, which God in mercy was pleased to pardon unto them:
But that the state and condition of the church was such that a Christian could
not hold communion in prayer and the sacraments with the churches of God, is
contrary to the many promises in scripture made to the churches of the New
Testament. It is true, the scripture does forewarn us of an apostasy from the
faith, and the mystery of iniquity began to work in the apostles days, and
after their death things declined more and more: But that within an age or two
after the apostles departure out of this life things were so corrupted that the
godly might not hold communion with the church in prayer and participation of
the sacraments, Synops. purier. Theolog. disp. 36. These. 33. speaking of the
Lords prayer used as a form, says, Sicuti quoque tota ve^ust a ecclesia id
semper extra controversiam habuit.
is more then an advised Christian will dare to affirm or think. But if a
stinted form of prayer be unlawful both to minister and people, to him that
administers according to it and them that join, a Christian might not safely
join in any church-assembly or congregation in prayer or participation of the
sacraments, within few ages after the death of the apostles, if at all.

Unlawful commands in matters of religion especially, Object. 1. Copy of a
Letter, page 26, 27.
cannot be obeyed without sin; Hos. 5. 11. and it is a sin to walk after
them many ways.

In matters of religion, Answ.
if the commands of men be contrary to the commands of God for substance or
matter of the thing commanded, we must obey God rather then men: But if the
command of man be for substance of matter agreeable to the rules of scripture,
pressed only with too great strictness or severitie, it is not evermore
against God, nor our superiors, nor the present age and posterity, nor
ourselves, to yield obedience. If it be an holy form of baptism, voluntarily
to baptize into the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, it does not
become an unhallowed ordinance, if the church shall take order that the
minister shall baptize in this and none other form, in these and none other
words. When God calls a man forth to bear witness to the truth, he must not
draw back but give testimony thereunto: But when Christ calls us to worship
him according to his will, we must not absent our selves for the sin of
others, under pretense of bearing witness to that we are not called unto. We
must not violate the ordinances of the Lord, to partake in his ordinances: But
if the matter of prayer be just, holy and good, a Christian shall violate no
ordinance of Christ by his presence, but by his absence.

It is not enough to prove our vocal prayers to be good because the words be
good and express good petitions; Object. 2. Copy of a Letter, page 23.
but it is further required, that it proceed from ability which the Spirit of
God bestows on him who utters the words, to fit his request to the present
occasion: John 4. 24. 1. Cor. 14. 15, 16. 1. Pet. 4. 7.

Is it their meaning, Answ.
that he that prays acceptably has ability to fit his words according to
the present occasion, or only that he discerns in some measure the words of
prayer to fit the time and occasion of the people with whom he prays? If in
the first sense; the passages of the scripture cited will not bear them out. If
in the latter; it is nothing against the use of stinted prayer. Besides, when
we speak of joining with others, is it necessary to the acceptance of prayer,
that he which is the mouth of the rest to God should be able by the guidance of
the Spirit to utter request fitting the present occasion, and in fitting words?
Suppose he be destitute of the Spirit, or of that measure of the Spirit, may
not the good and holy requests which he puts up by the direction and help of
others be accepted in behalf of them that pray in the Spirit and pour out
their prayers before God in holy affiance? To join with the people of God in
prayer and participation of the sacraments is not a matter arbitrary which may
be done or left at pleasure, but necessary when God calls and gives
opportunity. And if God has promised to hear such prayers, and by his
blessing some good may be gotten by them, a Christian must be well advised how
he withdraws himself, least whiles he pleases himself too much in some
scrupulous conceits he prejudice his soul. Prayer is Gods ordinance, whereunto
all Christians are bound to apply themselves: a stinted Liturgy is allowed of
God, provided it be sound, holy and pure both for words and matter: And if any
sin be committed in the reading or use thereof, a Christian may perform
whatsoever office the Lord requires at his hand, as a private or public
person, without Separation.

The reading of service and the tedious length thereof does even tire attention
to more quickening ordinances. Object. 3.


A stinted Liturgy is so to be moderated that Answ.
(...) ordinance of God may have its fit sea^^^, and the length give place to
edification. For what ordinances God has conjoined, (...) and ^. 20.
they must not be rent asunder; nor one so advanced, as others be neglected.
Without controversy their profaneness is to be condemned, who out of a
loathing of the holy things of God distaste the length of a Liturgy, and cry
out of tirednesse, when indeed all holy ordinances are distasteful. Let us
therefore consider a little what time the churches of God have taken and
allowed for their public service, and what exercises have been there
performed, that we may truly judge, whether the length of a Liturgy is justly
to be taxed, or the blame of tirednesse to be laid upon our security and
carelessness. Upon extraordinary occasion on the day of a solemn fast the
Levites read in the book of the law one fourth part of the day, Neh. 9. 3. See
Jun. Annot.
and another fourth part of the day they confessed and worshipped. Their
ordinary assemblies for public worship continued for the space of three
hours, Acts. 3. 1.
sc. from the third hour until midday, and from the ninth hour until the
evening. Neh. 8. 3. Joseph. lib. De vita sua, Hora sexta, quae sabhaus nostros
ad prandium vocare solet, supervenit
It was not ordinary to begin their assembly in the morning, but not to break
up until midday was ordinary. Herein, with prayer and exhortation, they had
their lectures or sections of the law and prophets so large, Luke 4. 18.
that to read them distinctly (as without question they were) would take up a
good space of time. Acts 13. 15. and 15. 21.
And if that very service of God in the Jewish synagogues, Buxdorf. Ab^reviat.
Rab^in.
which our Savior did approve with the presence of his own person and
preaching, had so large portions of the law and the prophets together with many
prayers used day by day, we must not allege tirednesse, when it is but sloth.
August. De doctr. Christ. l. 4 cap. 15. Priusquam exserat proserentem linguam
ad Deum, levet animam sitientem, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De incomprehens. Dei
natura. Sermoni oration debet anteire: sic Apostoli dicunt, NOR IN ORATIONE ET
SERMONIS DOCTRINA PERSEVERABIMUS. etc. Quintil. Instit. lib. 4. Proem.
In the primitive church it may be no certain time is noted how long the
assemblies continued: we must guess at the length by that which was done in
their solemn assemblies. When they met together for the worship and service of
God, the Fathers prayed before and after the sermon, wishing to their hearers
eternal blessings, and entreating of God the pardon of sins, etc. The
scriptures of the prophets and apostles were read, quamdiu hora patitur: and
after the reading of such portions of scripture followed the Sermon or word of
exhortation, which failed not on the Lords day. Their Sermons (or as they are
called Tractates, Disputations, Doctrines, Homilies, Conferences) were confined
ordinarily to a certain space or time, that they might not alienate or weaken
the minds of their hearers. Hence are those frequent excuses of longer speech,
and daily complaints of the straits of time, Justin. Apol. 2. ad Antonium.
Rossensis art. 33. Fuerant ante haec tempora sanctissimi Patres, qui singulis
Dominicis homilias ad populum declamitarant Council. Moguntiac. can. 25. Tert
Apol. ca. 3 Chrysostom in Genesis Hom. 27. Sermonem hesternum, quia prolixius se
extenderit etc. and Hom 39. Ne multitudine dictorum etc. Origin. in Genesis Hom.
2. quae nunc adducere in medium vel pro brevitate temporis vel pro auditorum
labor non possumus. Et Hom. 21. in Number. Priori quiden lectione tempore exclusi
sumus. Cyrill Hierosolym. Catech. 13. August. Hom. 23. lib. 50. Hom. and Sermon.
De tempore, ser. 237. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 57. Cyrill. in Catech. 13. Et
tempus horae perbreve. Et Catech. 14. Propter horae brevi^^tem his crim^s
contenti. Chrysolog Ser. 112. Horae unius vix momentum obscura (...). August.
Sermon. 11. De verb. Do^. in Matthew. and Sermon. De tempore, 143. quantam ho^a
sermonis per (...).
that they could not finish what was begun, or entreat thereof so fully as was
expedient. It may probably be thought, the usual time they took for the Sermon
was the space of an hour or thereabouts. Clem. Constit. Apost. lib. 2. cap.
54. Post lectionem and cantum psalmorum, ac post doctrinam de scripturis. Et
lib. 8. cap. 5. Post lectionem Legis and Prophetarum, and Actorum atque
Evangeliorum, salutat ecclesiam ordinatus dicens, Gratia Domini Jesu Christi,
and charitas Dei Patris, etc. Et post salutationem alloquantur populum sermon
hortatorio. Justin. Martyr, Apol. 2. Deinde, ubi is qui legit destitit, is qui
praeest admonet and hortatur ut ea quae lecta sunt bona imitemur. Tert.
Apologet. cap. 39. Fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam
figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus. Orgenes
Hom. 15. in Jos. Apostolos ordinasse testatur, ut libri Veteris Testamenti in
ecclesiis legerentur. See Socrat. l. 5. cap. 21. Amb. lib. De offic. 1. cap. 8.
Pulchre dum legimus hodie Evangelium, Spiritus sanctus obtulit nobis lectionem,
etc. Audivistis lectionem Evangelii. See Ambr. epist. 75. and 33. and lib. De
cleem. and j^jun. cap. 20. Aug. Sermon. 237. De Tempore. Lectionum omnis auditor
quod recentius lectum est magis meminit, etc. ut inde aliquid a tractatore
dicatur exspectat, etc. Et Sermon. 10. De verb. Apostol. Has tres lectiones
quautum pro tempore postumus pertractemus, dicentes pauca de singulis.
Chrysostom. Sermon. Carnis concupiscentias ne sectemur, Dic mihi, quis hodierno die
vel Propheta vel Apostolus praelectus est; aut quibus de rebus verba (...). And
sometimes some special or peculiar lecture was read, which might fit and agree
to the matter of the sermon: August. Sermon. 121. De diversis. In memoria
retinentes pollicitationem nostram, congruas etiam ex Evangelio and Apostolico
fecimus recitati lecti^ones. Et Sermon. 23. De verb. Dom. secundum Matthew.
Hesterno die, qui (...) promissionem nostram tenetis, etc. veruntamen secundum
ea quae continet ipsa lectio quam charitate vestri etiam volui recitare, etc.
Et Tract. 12. in Johan. Quam lectionem vobis iterum legi fecimus, ut quae tunc
non dicta sunt in Christi nomine, adjuvantibus orationibus vestus, impl^amus.
Chrysolog. Sermon 66. Du^s hodio a duobus Evangelistis editas ita recitati
fecimus lectiones, ut sermons nostro vester intellectus occur^eret. Aug. Tract.
15. in Johan. Et Sermon. 121. August. Tract. in epist Johan. praefat. Memuut
sanctitas vestra, Evangelium secundum Johannem ex ordine lectionum nos solere
tractare: Sed quia nunc interposita est solennitas sanctorum dierum quibus
certas ex Evangelio lectiones oportet recitari, etc. ordo ille quem
susceperamus, necessitate paolulum est interm^ssus, non omissus. Chrysostom. in
Concion. 4. in Lizar. Chrysolog. Sermon 122. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis ^3.
Before the sermon they read some portion of the Old and New Testament, as did
the church of the Jews in their Synagogues out of the Law and the Prophets: And
the lessons which they read did usually yield texts for the Preachers: so that
the reading it self of the Law, the Psalms, the Epistles and Gospels,
reverently used, did not prejudice preaching, but further it rather. The manner
was at the first to read and interpret whole books before them in order,
unless it were on the feasts of the Nativity, Easter, Pentecost, etc. when
special texts were wont to be chosen for the solemnity of those times: But
those feasts being past they returned to their accustomed task. And beside the
ordinary exposition of whole books in order, it is observed by some, that they
read the whole Bible from the beginning to the end within the space of one
year, specially in great congregations, which were held every day, which
custom continued until the year of Christ DCCCVI, or thereabouts. In those
frequent congregations which assembled every day the word was preached every
day. Bucer. ad Ephesians. Basil. ad Caes. Patric. ep. 289. Cypr. epist. 56. Zepper.
De pol. eccl. lib. 2. cap. 8. August. Sermon. 82. De Temp. Propter pauperes qui
ad opera sua festinan^, melius est hoc ut vobis in die crastina reservemus.
August. Tract. 46. in Johan. Eadem lectio recitabitur. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. ad
popul. Antioch. Vestram heri charitatem consolata fuit. Etsi enim heri and
nudius-tertius de hac vobis locutus sum materia, etc. Et Hom. 6. Facite igitur
quod and (...) admonui, and hodie dicam. Et Hom. 7, and 12. Et heri dixi,
BENEDICTUS DEUS; and hodie hoc ipsum rursus dicam. August. Tract. 8. in Johan.
Sunt sort (...) multi qui propter solennitatem diei non propter audiendum
sermonem venerunt: C^^stino qui venerint, venient audituri, etc. Chrysostom.
advers. Judaeos; Quamadmodum enim homines vino and potionibus dediti singulo
quoque die simul ac surrexerunt obambulant, etc. sic and vos quotidie, simul ac
surrexeritis, curiose perquiritis, ubinam futura sit exhortatio, ubi salubris
admonitio, ubi doctrina, ubi sermo, etc. Et Hom. 13. in Genesis Quotidie tamen
inopem and tenuem hanc mensam vobis proponere (...). Et. Hom. 37. Hanc ob rem
quotidie spiritualem hanc apponimus mensam, ut admonitione continua and multa
Divinatum Scripturatum exercitatione, etc. See Hom. 41, and 54. But where the
Gospel was preached more frequent, there were some days in the week more
specially appointed when the people were to hear: See Chrysostom. ad cap. 3.
Joh. Hom. 24. Non enim singulis diebus, sed duobus tantum, and brev^ eorum
part, ut vos labor levemus, hortamur ut orationi nostrae aures adhibeatis. Et
Socrat. l. 5. cap. 21. Clemens Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 59. Die Domini ^
qui dies est resurrectionis, studiosius templum Domini adite, ut Deum laudibus
celebretis, etc. In quo etiam adhibeatur lectio prophetarum, evangeli
praedicatio, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Matthew. Legem hanc nobis statuamus
immobilem, nec nobis tant um sed conjugibus etiam liberisque nostris, ut unum
hunc totius hebdomadis diem, quo ad audiendum concurritur, totum in eorum quae
dicuntur meditatione po^^mus. And a little after, Nimia enim omnino indevotio,
and prorsus extrema est, ut qumque and sex dies quidem in rebus carnalibus
consumentes, unum spiritualibus diem, uno exiguam diei partem, nolitis
impendere. August. Consess. lib. 6. cap. 3. speaking of Ambrose, says, and eum
quidem in populo verbum veritatis recte tractantem omni die Dominico audiebam.
Et Sermon. 28. De verbis Apost. Nunc cum die Dominico, debito reddendi sermonis
recitaretur eadem lectio, Divinitus mihi inspiratum esse credidi, ut inde
tractarem. Synod. in Trull. can. 10. Oportet eos qui praesunt ecclesiis, in
omnibus quidem diebus, sed praecipue Dominicis, omnem clerum and populum
docere. Upon which words Zonaras writes thus, Apostolici decreti autoritatem
secuti Patres hoc edito canone, cum aliis quoque tum Dominicis diebus, Episcopi
oratione populum ad pia religionis studia informari ac institui jubent. Cum
enim per cos dies vacationem a laboribus nacti homines in ecclesiam conveniant,
ib^que tempora Divinarum scripturarum auditione traducant, erit a populo long
fruct^ofior industria, quam in eo erudiendo ac instituendo iis praecipue diebus
Episcopus adhibuerit. And Balsamon; Episcopi ecclesiarum Doctores
constituuntur, and propterea dicit canon, eis omnino necesse esse, eum cui
praesunt populum semper docere, and multo magis in diebus Dominicis, in quibus
omnes fere solent in ecclesiis interesse, ut quia suis artificiis operibusque
cessent. Cocil. L emovicens. act. 2. Omnes sacerdotes quibus parochia commissa
est omnibus Dominicis and festis diebus admonere praedicando populum debeat,
secundum illud, ARGUE, OBSECRA, INCREPA: quia sacerdos, si sine praedicationis
sonit^ incedit, interminatione Divina mortis reus est. Episcopus autem quos
doctos viderit and ad hoc officium idoneos, non tantum j^ssu sed etiam (...) ad
tam sublime opus incitare debet. See Council. Arclatense can. 10. and Vasense 2.
can. 4. and others cited before. Tert. De anima, cap. 9. reckons up these
things inter Dominica sole^nia, sc. Scripturae leguntur, aut psalmi canuntur,
aut allocutiones proscruntur, aut petitiones delegantur.
And in the congregations which assembled every Lords day, after the reading of
the lessons, psalms and evangelists, the word was preached constantly before
they were dismissed.

The time specially appointed or taken for the sermon was the morning, (...)
sermon. 43. Dom. in E^^ng. (...) vobis, matut^^a coep^mus, hora p^andii non urget.
after the reading of the prophets and psalms and evangelists. In the
afternoon as assemblies so sermons were frequent; August. in psalm. 88.
Re^icim^^, and infecti a c^bis redit^. Ad reliqua (...) in matutino loquuti
sumus animum intendite. Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Genesis Nu^quid tempus obfuit, dic
quaeso, sobrius auditor etiam pransus spirituali comentu dignus est.
Chrysostom. Hom. De Lazaro, Novi fore multos, qui damnent ea quae nunc
dicuntur, veluti qui novam quandam and miram consuetudinem inveh^^ concion
^ndi: at ego magis damnabo pravam consuetudinem, quae nunc obtinuit. Etenim,
quod post ci^um ac mensam non ad somnum oporteat ire, nec ad cubile, sed
oporteat cibo pr^ces ac Divinarum scripturarum lectionem succedere, manifestius
declaravit ipse Christus, etc. Idem, Hom. 10. ad populum Antioch. Arbitror enim
multos jam pransos hodie adesse, and pulchram hanc nobis implere concionem. Et
Hom. 28. Quando, quaeso, vos dilecti melius fecistis, etc. an nunc, cum post
mensam ad Divinas leges audiendas convenistis? Beatus Gauden. Tract. 4. Bis in
vigiliis allocuti su^ us charitatem vestram. Chrysostom. Hom. in dictum Apost.
OPORTET HAERESES ESSE; Quod hodie diximus admodum simile and cognatum est ei
quod hodie adhuc dicere decrevimus. Ut enim quae dicta sunt hodie, ad
reprimendam vitae desidiam, etc. ita quae nunc dicenda, etc.
and two or more sermons were made in one and the same congregation, sometimes
by one, sometimes by diverse ministers.

After the sermon ended, followed the prayers of the congregation, as the
testimonies before alleged plentifully confirm. Clemen. Constit. lib. 2. cap.
57. After the exhortation of the Presbyter and the Bishop, all pray unto God.
Justin. Apol. 2. ad Anton. Then we rise all and pray together, sc. after the
exhortation ended. Origin. Hom. 3. in Isa. Idcirco surgentes oremus Deum, and
Hom. 36. in Luc. Surgamus, precemurque Deum. Chrysostom. Hom. 50. ad cap. 14.
Matthew. But now it is time to conclude our speech with prayer; orate igitur
universi nobiscum. In all which we see the wisdom of the church so moderated
the length of the Liturgy that each ordinance of God had its proper season;
that reading and prayer did not thrust out preaching, The common people of
Armenian Christians in the forenoon stay about four hours in the church^ and
in the afternoon, from two of the clock until six, Job. Ave diowite. Relat. of
the religion and customs of the Armenian church.
nor preaching eat up prayer; that the weak were not tired and burdened, nor
the sluggish fostered in their security. And if a Liturgy be only burdensome
for length, it is not altogether to be cast off: For the thing it self is
thereby justified as good and allowable, that which burdeneth being taken away.
And it is much better to wrestle against bodily tirednesse with spiritual
fervor, then deprive themselves of the comfort and profit which is to be had
in the ordinances of God.

The worship of God by that stinted form whereof our question is, Object. 4.
is the devise of Antichrist, Copy of a Letter page 22, 23.
it being never prescribed or used in the primitive churches planted by the
apostles and recorded in scripture: A treatise of the minist. of Engl. p. 12.
The book of common prayer taken out of the Popes Portuis, etc. H. Ainsworth,
Considerations exam. page 4.
But as the mystery wrought to a greater height in declining times of the
church it was received by little and little, till at last it came to be
completely framed, strictly enjoined, and every where used in the papacy, as
serving to maintein superstition and a dumb idole-reading ministry, Another
cause why we refuse communion (...), for that you (...) God, not as himself
commands, etco. Cant. Necessit^e of (...) 78, 79
and to nourish people in ignorance of the nature and right use of prayer. The
Masse-book is in Latin, this Liturgie-book is in English; the Masse-book has
all the prayers this Liturgy has, and some more: other differences I know not
between them. Therefore king Edward the sixth in his letter to the
Devonshire-men, to convince them that their Liturgy was our service, tells
them that it was no other but the old and the self-same words in English which
were in Latin, save a few things taken out, which were so fond that it was a
shame to hear them in English. And king James in a speech of his in Scotland
said, that their English Liturgy was an ill-said Mass. Cambde^, in anno 1560.
Pope Pius the fourth sending Vincentio Parpatia Abbat of S. Savior to Qu.
Elisabeth, Greenwood, Against Gifford, page 18
offered to confirm the English Liturgy by his authority, if she would yield
to him in some other things. Indeed this Liturgy pleased them so well, that
for the first eleven years of Qu. Elizabeth Papists came to the English
churches and service, as the Lord Cook shows. And when the Popes
intelligencers had seen service solemnly sung and said in Canterbury and London
with all their pomp and procession, they wondered that their master would be so
unadvised, Id. page 80.
as to interdict a Prince or State whose service and ceremonies so symbolized
with his own. The whole form then of the church service (a few gross things
taken out) is borrowed from the Papists, culled and picked out of that popish
dunghill, the Portuis and vile Masse-book. But that form of prayer by which
God is worshipped after the manner that idolaters worship their Gods, swerveth
from a rule of prayer prescribed in scripture, Copy of a Letter, page 23.
Deuteronomy. 12. 3, 4. and 30. 31, 32. And this is made the first of the exceptions
against the common prayer book, which were briefly added to in the
Abbridgement, That it appointed a Liturgy which in the whole matter and form
thereof is too like unto the Masse-book.

The main challenge in this objection (which I have set down more at large,
Answ.
because it is much insisted upon) against our communion-book is, That it was
taken out of the masse-book. But in the manner of propounding there be diverse
great mistakes, to say no more. It is a great fault, that they put no
difference betwixt the substance of worship and the external form or order of
celebration. The substance of worship in that stinted form of prayer, is, That
we call upon God in the mediation of Jesus Christ, according to his will. Is
this the devise of Antichrist because the form of words was taken out of the
masse-book? Suppose a minister of the Gospel should borrow some expressions or
phrases of speech from heathen authors, is his sermon forthwith the invention
or devise of an heathen? It is as far wide that they say. Can. ubi supr^.
Not only the form of it taken from the church of Antichrist, but surely the
matter also. For the matter of our Liturgy is the reading of the scriptures in
a known tongue, the calling upon God in the mediation of Jesus Christ, and not
upon angels or saints departed; for the living, and not for the dead: the right
administration of the sacraments for substance, and singing of psalms: are
these the devises of Antichrist? Is the administration of the Lords supper in
both kinds in remembrance of Christ's death and passion, who by one oblation of
himself once offered has made a full perfect and sufficient oblation and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; (...)
is this taken from the church of Antichrist? These imputations are not so
gross, as their reasons weak upon which they are built. If our stinted Liturgy
be the devise of Antichrist because it is not prescribed by the apostles or
recorded in scripture, then every stinted Liturgy must fall under the same
censure; Greenw. Against Gifford, page 28. Read prayers were devised by
Antichrist. An apology or defense of such true christians, etc.
for none other is prescribed in scripture, or recorded by the apostles: And so
either every stinted Liturgy is part of that mystery of iniquity which began
to work in the apostles days, or our Liturgy is not Antichristian because it
was not prescribed or used in the primitive churches planted by the apostles.
If it was received by little and little till at last it came to be completely
framed, a posit. page 67.
then the first beginning of it was no more from Antichrist then was the
beginning of other Liturgies. The worshipping of God by read prayer is part of
the worship of Antichrist, used and ca^ joined in the Papacy, etc.
Antichrist sits in the Temple of God; and antichristianisme is a filthy and
loathsome leprosy which by degrees did infect the pure worship of God: If
therefore our Liturgy was sowred in aftertimes with that old leaven, it might
be pure and free in its first original. Is it for matter taken from the church
of Antichrist because it was culled and picked out of the popish dunghill,
Cann. ibid.
the popish and vile masse-book full of all abominations? A Treat. of Minist.
of Engl. page 3^
Who knows not that many precious truths may be culled and picked out of the
masse-book? H. Ainsworth Considerat. examined, p. ^.
Good gold may have some dross; and amongst an heap of dross it is possible
to find some good gold. A true man's goods may be found in a thieves den or
cave; and the goods of the church in the possession of Antichrist. Antichrist
has either by violence broken in upon, or by secret insinuation, before his
cunning was spied, gotten the rich treasures of the church into his hand, which
the right heirs may lawfully require and take back again, not as borrowed from
him, but as due to them. I scarce know how a man should more honor Antichrist
or wrong the true church of God, then to grant that all the good things that
Antichrist does usurp do of right belong unto him and are borrowed from him:
For they are the rich legacies which Christ has bequeathed unto his church, to
whom properly they pertein. The matter then of our stinted form may be from
God, and proper to the church, though picked and culled out of the Masse-book.
If therefore our stinted Liturgy be Antichristian, it is so either in respect
of the matter or of the form. Not of the matter: for that which properly
belonged to Antichrist, the soul and gross errors, are purged out. Not of the
form: for order and phrase of speech is not properly Antichristian; of which
more hereafter. The Papists cannot sincerely approve our public service but
they must condemn and detest their own; their prayers in an unknown tongue,
their praying to saints departed, much more to feigned saints, their receiving
in one kind, their unbloudy sacrifice, their real presence, their satisfaction
for venial sins, and temporal punishment of mortal sins, their blotting
out of the second commandment, or at least confounding it with the first, with
others the like. And if for the first eleven years of Qu. Elisabeth the
Papists came to our churches and service, what can we think but that the hand
of the Lord was with us at that time for good, when without division we sought
him, and he was pleased so to honor us, that our adversaries should at least
feignedly submit themselves. Miss^m audire dicitur qui liturgiam auscultat.
Missis tenere est e^clesiasticos conventus agere. Hence miss^rum solennia
celebrare, Great. De Consecrat. did. 1. can. 12. and 50. auditis missarum
solennibus, etc. and 54. ex Council. Tol 4 can. 12. Ambros. epist. 35. l. 5.
Council. Mil^vit. can. 12. See Gentillet. Exam. Council. Trident. lib. 4. sess.
22.
The Lord grant all estates and conditions wisely to consider the true cause
why they are fallen from our assemblies since that time and hardened in their
perverseness every day more and more. But to come to the thing it self
objected, to wit, That our book of common prayer is wholly taken out of the
Masse-book, we are here to note that the Mass in former times did signify the
worship of God, which consisted in public prayers, thanksgivings, confession
of faith; singing of psalms, reading and interpretation of the holy
scriptures, and receiving the sacrament of the Lords supper: and so the ancient
Mass and Liturgy were the same. But now the Roman Mass is put for the
unbloudy sacrifice of the body of Christ which the priest does offer up for the
quick and dead: And in this sense the word is to be taken when they say our
service book is taken out of the Masse-book. Bellarm. De Missa, lib. 1. c. 1
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Lactantiu^, Hierome, Augustine never used the word
MASS, Jewel, Against Hard. art. 1. div. 5. M^ Gifford says there were
Liturgies in the church before Antichrist was lifted up into his throne (which
I will not deny.) I would have all men understand, that I do not go about to
prove the church no church that has a Liturgy, Greenwood, ubi ^^pra, p. 28.
But it should rather be said, that the Mass was in time added to our
communion-book, and by the purging out of the Mass it is restored to its
former purity. Popery is as a scab or leprosy that cleaves to the church;
and the Mass an abomination annexed to the Liturgy. Before ever the Mass was
heard of in the world, or began to be hatched, there were stinted Liturgies in
the church for substance much-what the same with ours; and these at first more
pure, after stained with more corruption, as the times grew worse and worse.
The Eastern churches (as it should seem) had their stinted Liturgies first, and
the Western borrowed many things from them: but as the times declined they
brought in more and more dross into the church until the canon of the Mass
was completely framed. See ^ivet, Crit. sacr. specim. l. 1. cap. 3. and l. 4.
The ancient Liturgies attributed to James, Basil, Chrysostom, etc. are
counterfeit, as our Divines have largely proved, and the Papists cannot deny:
But diverse things contained in those Liturgies were in use in the primitive
church without question. Col. censure. page 10. Jewel Against Hard. art. 1.
div. 5.
In the primitive times they had their appointed lessons out of the Law, and
the Prophets, and the Psalms, and the Evangelists; their stinted prayers and
forms of celebration with some variety, Gratian. Decret. did. 15. cap. 3.
Bell. De Missa, l. ^. cap. 17, and 20. Polydor. Virg. De inventor. ver. l 5.
cap. 10. See Gentillet. Exam. Council. Tr^d. l. 4 sess. 22.
but in substance all one in a manner. This is evident, if we compare the
genuine writings of the Fathers with those counterfeit Liturgies before
mentioned; whereof some particular instances are given in the chapter
following. The stinted forms at first were more brief, afterward they were
enlarged, and (as often it falls out) by enlargement corrupted and defiled.
Corruption by this means as a disease cleaving to the Liturgy, Trasat. ad
(...) 3. in B^er^i^r. Romans Ex (...) potissi^^m scriptura and prob^t^s (...)
con^ectum. (...). l. 1. ^ap. 1.. 4.
it is necessary it should be corrected, and thereby recovered to its first
integrity or foundnesse. Thus Cardinal Quignonius by the commandment of Clement
the seventh so changed the Roman Breviarie that for a great part it was more
like the English book of prayers than the Roman Breviarie. And the English
Liturgy gathered according to the module of the Ancients, the purest of them,
is not a collection out of the Masse-book, but a refining of that Liturgy
which heretofore had been stained with the Mass. And if those things were
unjustly added to the Liturgy, they might be and were justly cast out. If it
was wholly taken out of the Masse-book, I should desire further to know how the
Masse-book came to have those things in which are found in the book of Common
prayers, sound and holy for matter, and directly contrary to Antichristianisme.
If these things were in the book before, then all things therein were not of
Antichrist, but he had usurped them; and it is lawful for the true man to lay
claim to his goods wherever he find them. If they were not in the Masse-book,
then all things are not taken out of it, but somethings restored out of purer
Antiquity, which the man of sin had wickedly expunged. See Act. and Mon. vol.
3. page 1631. Of Dr Taylours testimony concerning our service book. Mr Decrings
testimony is well known.
The ministers of Lincoln never judged the use of the Book unlawful, never
thought it lawful to separate from the prayers of the congregation, never
refused to use the book, though in some things they desired to be excused. The
churches of God have been evermore taught to prize and esteem these main and
fundamental truths and ordinances of worship at an higher rate then that some
petty dislike of this or that in the external form, when the matter is sound
and good, should cause Separation. The conclusion in brief is, That our
Service Book is not a translation of the Mass, but a restitution of the
ancient Liturgy, wherein sundry prayers are inserted, used by the Fathers,
agreeable to the scriptures.

Causeless separation from the external communion with any true church of
Christ, is the sin of schism. But to separate from the prayers of the
congregation simply because a stinted form is used, is causeless separation
from the external communion of the church. Weigh all the reasons brought to
prove it lawful, and they will be found too light. If we look to our guide and
captain, Christ does not go before us therein. Dare any man affirm that they
be not met together in the name of Christ, or that he is not present in the
midst of them that join together in a stinted Liturgy? Is there any duty
public or private which God requires of people holding communion together in
ordinances of worship which may not be performed of each to other when a
stinted form of prayer is used without Separation? But by that unwarrantable
course of voluntary separation they make an unlawful rent in the church,
deprive themselves of the comfort of Gods ordinances, weaken the faith of many,
cause divisions among brethren, and advantage the adversaries of true religion.

CHAP. IX. It is lawful for a Christian to be present at that service which is
read out of a book in some things faulty both for form and matter.
ONe reason alleged to prove the lawfulness and necessity of Separation from
our public service in particular is this, That the prayer book in question is
corrupt in many things: Copy of a Letter, page 24.
which is thus amplified; The matter of some petitions is such as we cannot say
Amen to it in faith; as in the collect on the XII. sunday after Trinity it is
prayed that God would forgive us those things whereof our consciences are
afraid, and give unto us that our prayers dare not presume to ask, etc. To omit
diverse others, the very ^itting of Collects to certain days, for holy fasts
and feasts not sanctified by God, savor of superstition; as special prayers
for Lent, serving to countenance the keeping of it as a religious fast, etc.
the manner of praying, vain repetitions, as the often repeating of the Lords
prayer, and GLORY TO THE FATHER, and LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US, etc. disorderly
responsories, Apology or defense of such true Christ (...). page 68. (...).
the clerk taking part of the prayer out of the ministers mouth, etc. Moreover,
the book perverteth the right use of the scriptures, dismembreth and
misapplieth them for making of gospels, epistles, lessons, and collects
appointed for feasts of men's devising, and derived from the Papists; and it
reteineth a corrupt translation of the psalms, and brings into the church
Apocrypha writings and the errors contained in them. To them that look at all
humane Liturgies as images forbidden by the second commandment, this objection
is of small force; because the thing it self, and not the corruption cleaving
to the Liturgy, is disallowed. But lest this accusation should breed scruple
in the minds of some not altogether disaffected to stinted forms of prayer or
Liturgies, I will examine not the quality of the exceptions whether justly or
unjustly taken, but the weight of the reason, if the particulars should be
granted. For this objection it self does free the Liturgy from gross errors,
either fundamental or such as border thereupon, respecting faith or practice,
in the prayers themselves or that which concerns the administration of the
sacraments. For the corruptions objected, are Misapplication of some text si of
scripture, Frequent repetitions of the same things, Disordered responsories,
and Breaking petitions asunder, etc. and these not dispersed throughout the
whole book, but in some passages only; which concern not the main grounds and
chief heads of Christian religion, but are such faults or slips as may
peaceably be tolerated amongst brethren. Therefore not to insist upon any
particulars mentioned, I lay down this proposition, That a Christian may
lawfully and with good conscience be present at such service and prayers which
are read out of a book, though somethings therein are or may be supposed to be
faulty for form or matter, in things not fundamental nor bordering thereupon,
not pernicious or noxious, but such as may be tolerated amongst brethren; and
these not dispersed through the whole body of the book, but in some passages
only. It is one thing to allow corruption, another to be present at the
service of God where something is done corruptly. For the Lord charge us to
keep our selves free from all pollution; but allows not to separate from
abuses, unless he be pleased to go before, and as he goes before us. It is
one thing to approve of abuses in a Liturgy, another to tolerate what we
cannot reform. For a Liturgy should be framed so, not that things may be
construed well, but that they cannot be construed amiss. But many things may
be suffered which are not so well ordained, when it is not in our power to
redress them. The Lord needs not man's lie, neither does he allow us to do
evil that good may come thereof: and therefore I must not subscribe to an
error against conscience, though never so innocent, nor profess approbation
of that which in conscience I cannot allow, though never so small, to the
intent I might enjoy external communion with the church of God in the
ordinances of worship. But I must tolerate many things for the maintenance of
peace and unity, and the preservation of Gods worship: For if there be not
mutual toleration and forbearance, but each man will rigidly stand upon his
own opinion and press others to be of his mind and follow his practice in all
things and every tittle, of necessity all things must fall into confusion, and
the church be rent almost into as many pieces as there be men.

The proposition is proved, Argum. 1.
first, Because they that allege the foresaid faults or corruptions against
communicating with us in our public Liturgy or stinted prayers, do themselves
put small strength or none at all in this reason. For suppose a chapter be
somewhat unfitly divided, and break off in the midst of the matter, or now and
then separate verses which should go together, or a verse be ill distinguished,
or the preacher misalledge a text of scripture, or something be found amiss in
his prayer when he exercises his own gifts, must I of necessity separate from
that ordinance of God, or reject the good for that which is amiss? Hereunto
this answer is returned; When the minister exercises his own gift, Copy of a
Letter, page 26.
Gods ordinance is observed, wherewith I may communicate in praying as well as
preaching, notwithstanding his infirmities in either, which are but personal:
and in such cases the rule warranteth men to try all things and to hold that
which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. But when the Liturgy is read, an ordinance
which is not of God but of man is introduced into Gods worship contrary to the
second commandment, and therefore I must reject it, and have no communion with
it. Is not this in plain terms to grant, that the corruptions alleged can be
no cause of Separation, but this only, Because it is the devise of man. The
corruptions alleged are not the cause, because they may be found in
translations, the distinction of chapters and verses, the preaching of the
word, and the prayers of the minister, when he exercises his own gifts, from
which we must not separate, Treatise of the minist. of England, page 34. The
second way whereby they profane Christ's intercession, is by offering up in
Christ's name and mediation their devised stinted popish worship and
ministration, which being never appointed by Christ but devised by man is an
abomination to God.
and where presence is not approbation. But whatsoever is objected touching
abuses, the whole building leans upon this foundation, and this alone, That
stinted prayer is the devise of man. And this objecting of abuses in this
question is the devise of man, because it is brought in to ensnare the
simple-hearted Christian when other grounds will not hold, and yet in plain
terms it is disclaimed as soon as it is alleged.

Whatsoever worship is offered up to God by the minister, Object. 1.
is in their name, and so the action of the assembly then present, who are to
declare their assent by saying Amen if it be lawful, if otherwise, to call
upon their minister to fulfill the ministry which he has received of the
Lord, Col. 4. 17. and, as occasion shall require, to proceed further, to
declare their dislike, in such a manner as is meet, either by absenting
themselves from it, or otherwise declaring their dislike, so as the whole
church may take notice of it.

Whatsoever worship is offered up to God by the minister, Answ.
whether in prayer conceived by himself or devised by others, it is in the name
of the congregation: but every phrase, petition or branch of petition is not
approved by their presence, silence, or saying Amen to the prayers in general,
as in the former passage is acknowledged. The presence of the people was never
deemed interpretatively a consent to every thing that was there done. The
prayers which for matter God disalloweth we ought to disallow, but as God
disalloweth them, and as he calls us forth to bear witness to his truth. But
it is one thing to tolerate, another to approve; one thing to disallow the
method or form, another the matter; one thing privately to dislike, another
openly to witness against a thing as in no wise to be born withal; one thing
to speak when we are called forth, another to thrust our selves forth
unadvisedly. Some things are to be born with in brethren whereof we are not
bound so much as to admonish them, unless we be entirely familiar and of
intimate acquaintance: Some things we must bear with though upon admonition
they be not amended. The people must bear with some infirmities in their
minister, both in preaching and prayer, as he must with some wants in them,
without so much as taking notice of them to admonish by way of censure: Sins
are either controvertible or manifest: If controvertible and doubtful, men
ought to bear one with another different judgment; if they do not, but any
for this make a ^reach of Separation, they sin. (Ainsw. Against Mr Bern. reas.
removed, page 17).
And if upon admonition he cannot be of their minds in every thing, they must
not reject and cast him off, no more then he is to cut them off because in
every point they conform not to his pleasure. If the parties be stubborn, and
will not hear admonitions, but rather grow more perverse and desperate, even
to rent and tear in pieces such as seek to reclaim them, we are not bound to
make known our judgment and profession unto them, unless we be lawfully
called of God thereunto. And if the greater part be in error and so stiff that
they would sooner persecute the better then reform, if it be not in matters
fundamental or bordering thereupon, or noxious and pernicious to be concealed,
I know not that either that innocent is allowed to separate from the exercises
of religion for that cause, or bound to admonish them of their error. Matthew.
13. 29.
He that taught to suffer the tares rather then to pluck up the wheat with
them, has showed a reason for this judgment. See Calvin. Epist. 117.
This I do infinitely grieve at, (says Augustine) that many most wholesome
precepts of Divine scripture are little regarded, and in the mean time all is
so full of many presumption, August. Epist. 119.
that he is more grievously found fault with who during this Octaves touches
the earth with his naked foot then he that shall bury his soul in drunkenness.
And after, I cannot approve them, and I think they are to be cut off
wheresoever we have power. Many of these things, for fear of scandalizing many
holy persons, or provoking those that are turbulent, I dare not freely
disallow. That every private Christian should in public manner question the
doctrine of his minister or the prayers of the congregation, and declare his
dislike in whatsoever is not agreeable to his particular opinion, in such
manner as is mentioned, is neither commanded of God, nor consonant to right
reason, is not agreeable to order, peace, love, or Christian moderation, and of
necessity must fill the church with confusion, disorder, rents, and schisms.

If reading the Liturgy be the praying which Gods word allows, Object. 2.
we are bound in conscience to apply our selves unto it as Gods ordinance;
Copy of a Letter, page, 32. Aplog. or Des. of such true Christ. Pet. 3. page
^8. reas. 5.
and not we only but also all the churches throughout the world: If not, we
are bound to witness against it.

Here the reason taken from the faults of our Liturgy is plainly dismissed out
of the field: Answ.
For our Liturgy is to be witnessed against by this objection, not because it
is erroneous or faulty, nor for the matter or manner of imposition, but simply
because it is not the Liturgy appointed by Christ in the New Testament. And
many things are here confounded which should have been distinguished. Prayer is
the ordinance of God, and all Christians are bound in conscience to apply
themselves unto it: But the forms of prayer may be diverse; all allowed, because
none is necessary or determined: and therefore though allowed, no man is bound
in conscience precisely to apply himself unto any one and none other; much
less all churches. And as they are not bound unto any one, so neither to
witness against it, a stinted Liturgy being of the number of things lawful
but not determined by God.

Though all presence where sin is acted contracteth not guilt, Object. 3.
yet the danger is greatest when we are in the use of Gods ordinance.

It is one thing to be present where that which is sin in it self absolutely
and simply is acted, Answ.
another to be present at the doing of some necessary duty wherein by accident
somewhat is amiss. Now to join in prayer or participation of the sacrament, is
to communicate in the necessary duties of piety, not in sin; and if ought be
done amiss, it is by accident, not by it self. And presence there, though
sin be committed by one or other, is less dangerous, because it is not free
and voluntary but necessary and enjoined. We are not left at liberty to come or
not, as please our selves, but commanded under pain of sin to be there
present: and he that calls will preserve from danger, and accept of our
service which he commands. And if presence was dangerous, yet it is not
unlawful: for by watchfulness the danger might be prevented, and not by
separation or withdrawing our selves from the worship it self. If there be
danger, I must be vigilant and circumspect, but I must not shut the door
against Christ when he knocks, nor refuse to come unto Christ when he
inviteth to sup with him. And if all be granted, nothing is here alleged but
what might be said against communicating with ministers who have their
weaknesses, or use a stinted form of their own devising ordinarily, or be of
different opinions, either in prayer or sacrament: and if we must hold
communion with none who dissent from us in any jote or tittle, we must never
join or not long continue in any congregation.

The personal miscarriages of private persons are not so perilous as the evil
acts of the minister whom I make my mouth to God in prayer. Object. 4.
Neither do the errors of individual men tainted with corruptions,
voluntarily broched in prayer or sermon, cast that defilement upon them who
join together, as do the unwarrantable opinions of the church, and the
ministration upon such public commandment.

It is a good rule in Divinity often to be thought upon, Answ.
That every distinction in matters of faith or religion not grounded upon or
warranted by the scripture is an humane devise. For is not this to add to the
word of God, to lay down an opinion as from God which is not to be found in his
word at all? Now to apply this to the present matter in hand, I desire to know
from what scripture this distinction can be warranted, That the personal
errors of the minister in his voluntary administration of the sacraments or
prayer do not defile, though I do not publicly testify dislike, or absent my
self; but error committed in the administration by public commandment do
pollute all that be present. Reason why presence should pollute in one case
more then the other none can be given. If this were a good ground, that every
one approves of the evil done in matter or manner where he is present, none
could live with good conscience in any society of men on earth. Persons so
minded are best live alone; for with others they will keep no peace, Robins.
Treatise Of the lawfulness etc. page ^1.
Calling from God to testify dislike it may be I have in neither, but least in
the latter: It being more tolerable for private persons to rebuke the slips and
errors of their minister in voluntary administration, then for a man to
control the order established by public authority and common consent, when he
is not in special called thereunto. If this distinction be of weight, it would
go best with the church to have no settled order amongst them: for so long as
the faults and corruptions be only personal they defile not them that be
present at the ordinances; but personal they are until they be established by
common consent or public authority. Moreover, by this rule one member may
sooner cast out the whole church then the whole church can cut off one member:
For the church must not cut off a member but upon weighty consideration and
apparent just cause, and that after conviction, with much long-suffering and
patience; but if this objection hold true, one member must openly rebuke the
church, or withdraw from communion with the church, for a stinted Liturgy, or
for some slip or fault there committed, perhaps questionable, at least
tolerable among brethren.

Is not my joining with them that sin to be reputed an appearance thereof,
Object. 5.
when I profess not dislike thereof?

It is one thing to join with men in sin, Answ.
another to join with them necessarily in the worship of God, though for the
manner of administration something be done amiss. If I profess not dislike of
what I judge amiss, having no calling thereunto, my joining in prayer is no
appearance of evil to a right-discerning eye, because I am necessarily called
there to attend upon the Lord in his holy ordinances. Necessary attendance upon
his master excuses the servants presence in many companies where he sees and
hears much evil which he cannot amend nor reprove: and shall not necessary
attendance upon Jesus Christ justly and truly excuse the faithful? To say
nothing, that this exception is cross to the former; and if these exceptions
be laid together, we shall find nothing but going backward and forward, one
denying what the other affirms.

If the faithful by the approbation of our Savior Christ and his Apostles
were present at Divine ordinances as much or more corrupted then they can be
supposed to be with us, Argum. 2. There were in the Jewish Church in Christ's
time, and in diverse of the Apostolical churches afterward: more and greater
errors taught then are in any or all the churches of England, Robins. Treat.
Of the lawfulness of bearing, ^ c. page 16.
then for such corruptions we are not voluntarily to withdraw our selves: For
defilement is feared without cause by simple presence, where Christ requires
and approves our presence, and has promised to be present with us by his
grace. But the faithful by the commandment and approbation of Christ have been
present at Divine ordinances as much or more corrupted then they can be
supposed to be with us; For the scribes and Pharisees sinned grievously in
corrupting the law with false glosses, Matthew. 5. 18, 19. 20.
in so much that they neither taught nor practiced what was necessary to
salvation: Loqui^^r hic Dominus proptie de justitia inhaerente, quae consistit
in bonis operibus, ut patet tum ex collatione cum justitia Pharisaeorum, tum ex
sequen^^^ (...) prorum D^calogs, Pisc. in Matthew. 5. 20 ^chol. Sculiet ^xer^it.
l 2. cap. 19. Rainold, (...). with (...) 7. (...). 15. 5, (...) with Heart, chapter
7. div. 4. p. 268, 269.
They taught many things directly contrary to the law; as, if a child had vowed
not to relieve his parents, he was bound to keep his vow, and neglect them:
They defiled the worship of God with their vain inventions: And it may well be
thought their praying was answerable to their preaching, cold, fruitless,
corrupt and rotten many ways: Nevertheless the faithful held communion and
fellowship with them in the worship of God, not in their corruptions, and that
by the approbation and commandment of Christ himself. Our Savior does not tell
the faithful they were to call upon the Pharisees to fulfill their ministry
which they had received, and, as occasion should require, proceed further to
declare their dislike in such manner as is meet, either absenting themselves or
other ways declaring their dislike, so as the whole church may take notice of
it: But his commandment is, they should hear them so long as they sit in Moses
chair. It is true our Savior does not approve their corrupt glosses and
sinful inventions, Matthew. 23. 12, 13.
but does sharply reprove them himself, Chrysostom. in Hebr. Hom. 34. Augustine.
contra lit. Petil. l. 2. cap. 6.
and admonish others to let them alone, and beware of their leaven, but not to
forsake the assembly or absent themselves from the ordinances of worship.
Matthew: 15. 13, 14.
From which it follows evidently, Matthew. 16. 6.
that simple presence at Divine ordinances is not consent or approbation of the
corruptions therein practiced; and that we must leave and forsake some in
respect of familiar conversation, with whom we may hold outward communion in
the exercises of religion. The sin of Eli's sons in profaning the holy
things of God was exceeding great; 1. Sam. 2. 17, 18, 19, 20.
but Elkanah, 1. Sam. 1. 1, 2, 3.
Hannah and Samuel did not partake with the sins of the priests, in that they
did not abstein from the Lords sacrifices. 1. Cor. 11. 20.
The behavior of the Corinthians in their unreverent, scandalous, and almost
profane coming to the Lords table was foul and corrupt, yet the faithful did
not forbear, nor the Apostle charge them to absent themselves from the Lords
table. The famous church of Rome was so weak and feeble in the duties of
government as they did not or could not separate from them such as preached
Christ contentiously and with spiteful minds against the Apostle, Phil. 1, 15.
and the greater number of that church did corruptly demean and carry
themselves therein; Phil. 2, 20, 21
and yet the Apostle never taught the rest to separate and have no communion
with them in the ordinances of worship. Object. 1.


Knowledge beforehand that such corrupt administration will be used makes our
joining with the assembly sinful to us; whereas if the evils were unexpected
the danger would not be alike. And thus it was with them who congregated to
hear the scribes and Pharisees.

It is not for them that earnestly oppose all humane inventions to ward off a
blow by humane devises. Answ.
When God commands my presence at his ordinance, why should the corruption
foreknown in the manner of administration, Our knowing of it makes not our act
the more or less an act of approbation. It I do an act wherein I do indeed
approve of a thing, if I know the thing, I really approve of it upon knowledge;
if I know it not, I really approve of it, but ignorantly, Robins. Treat. of the
etc page 30.
without my consent or approbation, any more defile, then that which falls
out unexpected? Or if it should, nothing can be alleged more impertinently.
For the corruptions of the Pharisees in perverting the law were ordinary and
common, well known to all men, and so reproved by our Savior as a thing
notorious. And the like may be said of the disorders in the churches of
Corinth, and Rome: for if the knowledge thereof came to the Apostle absent and
at that time in prison, by the information of the brethren, of necessity it
must be known to the members of the churches. The faithful therefore when they
joined in the ordinances of worship with these assemblies, neither did nor
could pretend ignorance of these things.

There is a broad difference to be put betwixt the sin committed by persons
with whom I communicate, Object. 2.
and the corruption put upon the ordinance in which I communicate.

If the sin of him with whom I communicate be manifest and known, Answ.
the ordinance of God is corrupted by it one way or other. And if I be defiled
with all known corruption whatsoever, it is not material to the point in hand
how those corruptions differ in their specificall nature. The question is,
Whether all presence at the ordinances of God in some respect corruptly or
disorderly administered, contract guilt in him that is only present in
obedience to Gods commandment, and has no calling from God to testify
peculiar or special dislike. It may be of some use here to show what
corruptions be fundamental and what not, what pernicious to be tolerated and
what not, when a man has a calling to testify against abuses and when not:
But to speak of the specificall difference betwixt abuses of the same kind or
degree, is quite wide of the mark. This will easily be yielded, because
communion in the ordinances of worship is as well denied when wicked men are
admitted to the sacrament as when it is administered in a devised or stinted
Liturgy, as it is called.

It was never questioned by right-believing Christians, Argum. 3.
but the faithful by Gods approbation might hold communion with the churches
in the ordinances of worship, for some ages after the death of the apostles.
Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. cap. 32. and l. 4. cap. 22. Gr. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Hom.
36. Vere tum coelum Ecclesia fuit, Spiritu euncta admin strante, cuncta
Ecclesiae capita moderante, etc. Nunc vero vestigia tantum rerum illarum
tenemus. P. Ramus Epist. ad Carolum Lotharingium, an. 1570. de quindecim a
Christo seculis primum vere esse aureum; reliqua quo longiu abscederent esse
nequiora ac deteriora. Isidor. Pelus. l. 3. Epist. 408. Florente Ecclesia and
nondum morbo laborante, Divinae gratiae circa eam velut chorum agebant, sancto
Spiritu ies administrante, atque antist^tum unumquemque incieante, ac Ecclesiam
in coelum convertente.
The church continued a virgin all the days of the apostles, as Hegesippus
notes: But immediately after their death innumerable evils crept in and began
to spring amain: nevertheless, the faithful might, did, and ought to hold
communion together in the proper and substantial means of worship. That many
things were amiss in the churches, is not denied; and that the faithful
through ignorance did offend in many things: but in this, that they held
communion notwithstanding such abuses amongst them, they are blameless. For a
time the faithful did lie hid in Babylon by Gods approbation, until the
exhortation was given from heaven to come out of her and touch no unclean
thing. Not that they might touch any unclean thing at any time, that is, either
in practice or consent and liking stain themselves with the corruptions of the
world: But that they might lie hid in the midst of much confusion, and neither
like nor consent unto the evils which they did bewail, but could not reform.
That exhortation from heaven, Come out of her my people, come out of her, Apoc.
18. 4.
etc. some interpret of a local departing out of the city of Rome, Brightm.
in Apoc. 18 4.
as Lot went out of Sodom: and that interpretation the text seems to favor,
because the very outward destruction of the place is in that chapter menaced;
and therefore the removing out of the very place, in avoydance of the mischief
coming upon it, forewarned: 2. Cor. 6. 17.
But most commonly it is applied to a spiritual coming out of Babylon, Hebr.
13. 13.
in separating from the society and communion of that church wherein they
could lie hid no longer without defilement. 1. Joh. 2. 19.
And hence some conclude, that this departure was to be made at a certain
definite time, See Symonds Pisga Evang. cap. 11. p. 209. 220. and cap. 13 page
246.
when God was pleased to go before the faithful and furnish them for this end
and purpose: But until the time of freedom was proclaimed, the faithful did
and might so lie hid in Babylon as not to be partakers of her sins. Cameron.
Praelect. de Eccless. de Schismate.
For there is a certain order of the Revelation, fitted to the order of times:
And as there is a time to speak, Carleton, Consens. Eccl. cathol. de Script.
cap. 1.
and a time to keep silence, but no time to lie; so there is a time for the
church to figh and lie hid, but no time to dissemble or defile her self. And as
the Israelites offended not when they removed not out of Egypt before Moses was
sent thither of God, so neither did the faithful transgress, in that they
departed not out of Babylonish captivity before they were called of God, the
time of liberty was proclaimed, and God showed them whither to fly. To live in
captivity until freedom be published, is a misery, not a sin. In that
condition care must be, to keep pure and undefiled, but not to run away without
leave or license from God. Whatsoever is to be thought of this application of
the text, herein all orthodox interpreters consent and agree, that after the
church was stained with manifold abuses, the faithful did and ought to hold
communion with her in the means of worship. But if simple presence be
approbation of every thing that is judged to be done amiss in the worship of
God, a Christian could at no time that can be named, in no age since the death
of the apostles, hold communion with the church of God in the ordinances and
means of grace. For it is as lawful to be present at the worship, prayers or
administration which is read out of a book in some things faulty, as to be
present at that service where the scriptures are read out of a translation in
many things faulty and corrupt, in which many things are added, diminished,
altered and changed. But in the primitive churches the faithful must be
present, if at all, at the worship of God when the scriptures were read out of
a faulty translation: For to say nothing of the corruptions of the Seventy
Interpreters, Bellarm. De verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 6.
which (as Bellarmine confesses) had gathered many stains and blots in three
hundred years, August. De civ. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 43. and De doctrina Christ.
lib. 2. cap. 11.
of necessity the translations which were derived from it, of which sort were
most in the primitive church, can be no less corrupt. For no man before
Hierome ever translated the books of the Old Testament out of the original
into Latin, See Chamier. Panstrat. tom. 1. lib. 12. cap. 1. and lib. 13. cap.
3, 4, 5, etc. and lib. 14. cap. 2, 3, etc.
but out of the Seventy: And the same may well be thought of most vulgar
translations, where the Greek or Latin were not in use. And if the Septuagint
was corrupted in many things at that time, Platina De vit. Pontif. Damas. 1.
Hieron. in Isa. 4.
the translations drawn thence cannot be pure. Amongst many and diverse Latin
translations, which Augustine says cannot be numbered, The worst translation
that this day is commonly used either in the English, or in the French, or in
the Dutch tongue, is far better and truer then that old Common translation in
the Latin, Jewel. D^f. of the Apol. part 1. cap. 1. div. 1.
there was one more common then the rest and better esteemed, by Hierome called
the Vulgar, who disliketh it, and prefers the translation of Symmachus and
Theodotion above it. If we give credit to ancient writers, we shall find that
there were diverse customs in the church, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 24. Socrat.
l. 5. cap. 21. Sozom. l. 7. cap. 19. Cypr. epist. 48. Graf. De consecr. did.
1. can. 2. Hieroin Mart. cap. 14. Cypr. De lapsis. Nec derelicto cibo and
poculo Domini, ad profant contagia spo^^^ properavimus, etc. accipientibus
caeteris locus ejus advenit. August. epist. 23. ed Bonifac. and 107. ad
Vitalem. Ansegis. in leg. Franocari capit. lib. 1. cap. 155. Osor. lib. 9. De
gest. Eman. In modo Baptizandi Aethiop. Bruxelin edito, An. 1550. Just. Martyr.
qu. 155. Basil. De Spirit. S. cap. 27. Council. Nieen. can. ^0. Tert. De coron.
milit. cap. 3. Hieron. Advers. Lucifer. cap. 4. Ambr. lib. 3. De Sacram. cap.
1. Cypr. De spectacul. Tert. De Oral. and lib. 2. ad uxer. Hieron. Apol. ad
Pamma^^. Council. Caesar. august. can. 3. See Whitak. De Script. contr. 1. qu.
6. cap. 12. Balthas. Lydiat. Waldens. tom. 2. page 37, 38. Cham. Panstrat. tom.
4. lib. 5. cap. 1^. whitak. De Sacram. page 332, 333, etc.
and rites in the administration of the sacraments, not mentioned in scripture,
and some of them savouring more of superstition then of devotion, which the
Papists themselves have not only laid aside but condemned, though of ancient
and long continuance.

The particulars are many and well known: Michael Medina, lib. 5. De sacror.
hom. continent. cap. 105. Ex quatuor and octoginta Apostolicis canonibus, quos
Clemens Roman. Pontifex and eorundem Apostolorum discipulus in unu^ coegit, vix
sex aut octo Latina ecclesia nunc observat. Martin. Paris. De Tradit. part. 3.
cap. de autoritate canon. Apostolicor. In illis continentur multa quae temporum
corruptione non plene observantur, aliis, pro temporis and materiae qualitate,
aut obliteratis, aut totius ecclesiae magisterio merito abrogatis. In the Greek
Liturgies not before any other public prayer, but immediately before the holy
ministration, the Priest says, (...). Cyprian. in orat. Dom. Sermon. 6. Sacerdos
ante orationem praefatione praemissa parat fratrum mentes, dicendo, SURSUM
CORDA, ut dum respondee plebs, HAEEMUS AD DOMINUM, admoneatur. Chrysostom. ex
variis locis in Matthew. Hom. 9. Clamamus in conspectu sacrificii, SURSUM CORDA.
August. in Psalm. 39. and De done persever. lib. 2. cap. 13. See Jewel, Defen.
part 2. chap. 14. div. 2. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. Hom. 18. The priest and the
people at the ministration talk together: The Priest says, THE LORD BE WITH
YOU: the people answers, AND WITH THY SPIRIT. Of the Lords prayer, Hieron.
lib. 3. Contra Pelag. Apostoli Dominico praecepto ad celebrationem Eucharistiae
adhibuere Dominicam precationem. August. in epist. 59. ad Paulin. qu. 3. Quam
totam petitionem fere omnis ecclesia Dominica oratione concludit. In Liturg.
Chrysostomi; chorus, PATER NOSTER: alta voce Sacerdos, QUONIAM TUUM EST REGNUM.
See Cham. Panstrat. tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 9.. 11, 12, 13, etc. Of the
Constantinepolitane Creed, see Council. Toletan. 3. can. 2. Of HOLY, HOLY, HOLY,
etc. Council. Vosens. An. 444. can. 6. Of CHRIST HAVE MERCY, Council. Vasens.
can. 5. Basil. epist. 63. August. epist. 178. Of ALLELUIA, or PRAISE THE LORD,
Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 19. Of GLORY BE TO THE FATHER, Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Council. Vasens. can. 7. Platin. De vit. Pontif. Damas. 1. Graecis usitatum
preces terminare aliqua Doxologia. Hinc psalmis addere solitos, GLORIA PATRI;
Salutationi Angelicae, (...). Cham. Panstr. tom. 1. lib. 12. cap. 13. 32, 33.
Of the abrenunetation in baptism, Cyrill. Hierosolym. Catech. mystag. 1.
Chrysostom. Hom. 21. ad popul. Antioch. Renuncio Satanae and omnibus operibus
ejus, and pompis ejus, and omni cultui ejus. Consist. Apost. lib. 7. cap. 42.
Tert. De Spectacul. cap. 4. and omnibus inventis ejus, and omnibus qui sub ipso
sunt. Ambr. Hexam. lib. 1. cap. 4. and mundo ejus. Ambr. De iis qui myster.
initiant. cap. 2. Cyrill. Alexandr. lib. 7. contr. Jul. Daemoniorum turbis
valedico, omnem pompam little and cultum respuo. See Cham. Panstr. tom. 4. lib.
6. cap. 14.. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Of Sureties and Godfathers, see Cham.
ibid.. 20, 21. 22. Zepper. De polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 2. cap.
10. Balthas. Lyd. Not. in disp. Taborit. tom. 2. cap. 5. De Patrimis. The
Brethren in Egypt, says Augustine epist. 121. are reported to have many
prayers, but every of them very short, as if they were darts thrown out with a
sudden quickness. Not only the books called Apocrypha, but Clements epistles
(Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23.) and the lives of the Martyrs were read. Council.
Carthagiz. 3. can. 47.
so that ancient custom is not plea sufficient to prove a thing good, nor some
abuse crept into and continued in the church cause sufficient why we should
voluntarily absent our selves from the Lords ordinances. In the second
primitive church (as some distinguish) if not the first, they had a stinted
form of Liturgy, not only for lessons, psalms, epistles and gospels, and
professions of faith, but in prayers, for matter and manner not much unlike to
ours. To the praise of God be it spoken, our Liturgy for purity and soundness
may compare with any Liturgy used in the third and fourth ages of the church:
And if in those times the faithful might lawfully hold communion in the
ordinances of worship, we cannot at this day lawfully withdraw our selves by
reason of such faults as be objected. This I mention, that we might learn to
acknowledge Gods mercy, walk worthy of what we have received, and strive
forward toward perfection by all lawful means. Long before the Lord called
his people to come out of Babylon, what faults soever can be objected against
our Liturgy were found in theirs. The faithful therefore may lawfully be
present at our service, notwithstanding the faults objected against it. For the
Lord did not only wink at his peoples weakness and ignorance for the time,
but approve of their nonseparation until he was pleased to call them forth.
Neither can it be imagined, that they might hold communion in other ordinances
but not in their stinted Liturgies: for in those times of all other parts the
stinted Liturgies were most pure, God of his endless mercy so providing for
his church and the comfort of his people in those hard and evil times when the
doctrine was miserably and dangerously corrupted, Collectae antiquae nihil
habent de intercessione aut meritis, ne Apostolorum quidem, etc. Balth. Lyd.
Not. in disput. Taborit. page 133. In the Liturgy of Basil there is no mention
made of the Offering of the body and blood of Christ by the priest, nor of
Redeeming the living or dead by this work. In the Liturgy attributed to James
there is no propitiatory sacrifice to be made by the priest, but a mystical:
no private Mass, but all must communicate: a confession against merit: The
sacrament is to be administered in both kinds. Jacobus Pamelus scriptor
Pontificius ingens volumen Liturgiarum Latinarum edidit Coloniae excusum Ann.
1571. in quibus frequens mentio communionis laicorum sub utraque specie, nulla
missae privatae, vel sacrificii propitiatorii, vel aliarum superstitionum
impiarum, quae postea irrepsorant, si quis praesertim secula post tempora
Apostolorum observet. Illyric. Caralog. test. lib. 1. page 70, 71. I am
assured, says Masius, Praesat. in Anaph. Basil. they are free and exempt from
that wicked doctrine of that infamous heretic Nestor: For having read a great
volume of their solemn prayers which they make to God, I have found nothing
that might offend any man of sound opinion in our religion: if it be not this,
that I suspect them, because that they in many places call not the Virgin Mary*
Mother of God; but in stead of this title they call her, The Mother of Light
and Life.
in respect of Merit of works, and Invocation of Saints, etc. the Liturgies
were long preserved pure and free, whereby the faithful might be present with
more comfort and freedom of conscience. This one thing duly considered would
put an end to many scruples, and might serve to stop them who out of overgreat
heat and forwardness are ready to except against the means of their own
comfort, and to cast off what God offers because they cannot enjoy what they
desire.

The snares of superstition are warily to be declined, Object. 1.
because we are apt and prone to take infection thereby, it being a work of the
flesh, and agreeable to our nature.

All sin is to be shunned, Answ.
and that at all times; but the danger of sinning only is to be shunned by
watchfulness and circumspection, For the practice and performance of duties
simply moral and commanded in their kind, we ought to strain to the utmost,
and to go as near the wind as may be: seeing nothing but apparent sin in the
way can excuse the withdrawing from it, when occasion of enjoying it is
offered, Robins. Treatise Of the lawfulness of hea^ing etc. page 6.
not by omission or neglect of any duty that God calls us unto or requires
at our hands. In a free state and condition the occasions of sin must be
avoided, because no man is safe who is next to danger, and it is no point of
wisdom to fish with a golden hook: But when God casts a man upon the
occasions of sin in the duties of religion, justice, or an honest calling, he
must not omit the duty because of the occasion, but resist the occasion and
watch over his heart that he be not hurt thereby. If a sour herb or two grow
in a good pasture, is it not better to heed the flock there then to suffer them
to starve? The sheep of Christ are wise to discern betwixt things that differ,
and know where to feed, and what to leave. And if superstition be dangerous;
partial, indiscreet, misguided zeal is sinful, turbulent, and pernicious.
Whence have most schisms arisen in the church, but even from hence, that some
in place have been over-eager and peremptory to press the members of the
church to profess their belief or approbation of some errors, perhaps in
themselves small and to be tolerated, which they could not profess with a good
conscience, and not allow them communion in the church but upon such condition?
Also the frequent drawing out of the sword of excommunication to cut off
well-deserving members from visible society with the churches of God for small
and trifling matters, is a great occasion and cause of schism. Whatsoever man
or church, Chilling. Answer, part 1. chap. 4. paragr. 13.
says one, does for any error of simple belief deprive any man so qualified
as above either of his temporal life, or livelihood, or liberty, or the
churches communion and hope of salvation, he is for the first unjust, cruel and
tyrannous; schismatic, presumptuous, and uncharitable for the second.
Wherefore such as have power in their hands, they are always to remember that
this power is given them not for destruction, or to show their own greatness,
but for the edification of others, and therefore never to be used but upon
special and weighty considerations and occasions. Dr Jeckson. Of the church.
He that strikes fiercely with his spiritual sword at feathers, does always
either wound himself or wrest his arm. And of particular private persons it
has ever been most true, that a partial, rigid, irregular adhering to some
branches of holy doctrine has been no less pernicious to themselves then
troublesome to others: For the fond admiration of their zeal and forwardness
in this one particular breeds neglect of Christian watchfulness and constant
uniform walking with God, disregard of Gods ordinances and of the good which
may be gotten thereby, Great zeal they have against the false church, ministry
and worship so being, or by them conceived so to be, and against any appearing
evil in the true, but little for that which is true and good, Robins. ubi
supra, page 10.
disesteem (if not contempt) of others who will not comply with them in the
same way: and what can follow hereupon but contentions and jarres, surmises,
censurings and uncharitableness, rents and divisions in the church? This
danger is the greater, because it stops the ear against advise and counsel:
For being once persuaded that they and they only do maintein the truth and
rightly affect it, no reason will enter, no persuasion take place to the
contrary, be it never so evident and apparent. And this is most preposterous,
when the truths wherewith they are so enamoured and which they zealously affect
be matters of small or least importance: for then the great and weighty truths,
concerning the very life and soul of religion, and the substantial means of
grace, are undervalued in comparison of the other. We must therefore labor and
watch so to keep our selves from the infection of superstition as not to foster
indiscreet and partial zeal, which admiring that which is of less importance
thrusts into over-vehement contentions, and lesseneth the due esteem of the
great mercy the Lord has showed unto his church.

No particular member of a church may voluntarily Argum. 4.
break off external communion with the church, or refuse to communicate in the
public service and worship of God, unless the Lord Jesus go before him
therein and be his warrant; that is, unless Christ has withdrawn the presence
of his grace, or the party cannot be present without the guilt of hypocrisy or
approbation of somewhat that is evil. For the members of the visible church
must hold fellowship in faith and love, not only one with another, but with
all other visible churches, and all others entirely professing the faith of
Christ, so far as they hold communion with Jesus Christ. And therefore no
member can lawfully break off external communion with the true church of
Christ but in that only wherein and so far as it has broken off fellowship
with Christ: For where Christ is, there is his church; and where two or three
are met together in his name; Matthew. 18. 20.
there is he in the midst among them. Ezekiel. 46. 10. See Lavater in Ezekiel. 46. 10.
He is that Prince that is in the midst of his people, who goes in when they
go in. And when Christ calls his free voluntaries to assemble in prayer, or
to partake at his table, and promises to be present with them, to hear their
prayers, and refresh their souls with grace, it is not lawful for a Christian
to withdraw himself. But in a congregation where a stinted form is used, and
that in some respects faulty here or there, Christ may be and is present in the
midst among them; Christians are called to come, and may be present without
guilt of hypocrisy or approbation of the least evil. To leave communion when
we be obliged by God to continue in it, is no less then schism according to
the nature of it. Obliged by God we are to hold communion with the true
churches of Christ in his true worship and service so far as it may be
without sin and wickedness on our parts: So that though there be some errors
or ignorances in the public administration, yet if our belief of some error
or approbation of disorder be not required to that communion, it is not lawful
to depart from the society of that church which professes the saving truth of
Christ entirely for substance, rightly mainteineth the dispensation of the
sacraments, soundly calls upon God in the mediation of Jesus Christ, and
plentifully enjoys the means of grace. When corruption and external
communion be so involved that it is simply impossible to leave the corruptions
unless we leave the external communion of the church, a necessity of
separation from that external communion then lies upon us: Romans 3. 8.
But though errors or corruptions of some kind be not only tolerated but
established, He who would have us receive the weak in faith, whom God has
received, would not have us refuse the fellowship of churches in that which is
good, for weakness in them of one sort or other. And this we have so plainly
and plentifully commended unto us, both by the prophets, yea by Christ himself
in the Jewish church, and apostles and apostolical men in the first Christian
churches (in which many errors and evils of all kinds were more then manifest,
and the same oft-times both so far spread and deeply rooted as the reforming
of them ^as rather to be wished then hoped for) as that no place is left for
doubting, etc. Robins. ubi supra, page 15.
maintained, and pressed, yet if we can hold communion without approbation of
the said errors or corruptions, Separation in that case is unjust, rash and
unadvised, because the Lord therein does not go before us. The sin of
Separation, if unjust, is so great and heinous, the ill consequences and
mischiefs, so many and fearful, that all Christians should be well advised
neither to lay stumbling blocks before the feet of others, which might occasion
their turning aside, nor to seek or catch occasions of departure, but rather to
wait and tarry till they be assured that the Lord goes before them. Zuingl.
tom. 2. De Bapt. page 70.
For the first, when the Anabaptists in Helvetia opposed humane inventions as
unlawful, they were by public authority and with common consent abolished.
And that of Irenaeus is well known, Variety of ceremonies commend the unity of
faith. For the other part, the faithful have ever tolerated weaknesses and
infirmities in each other, and abuses in the church, so long as the foundation
was held, and they agreed in the main. In the primitive church not only some
persons but whole congregations have doubted of many books of scripture, and
yet lost not their dignity of true churches of Christ. How long did the
faithful wait and bear before they departed, or rather were driven by
excommunication, sword, and sire out of Babylon? This has been the judgment
of the godly learned in all ages of the church. De haeres. lib. 4. cap. 62.
They that for trifling and small causes, says Irenaeus, divide the body of
Christ, etc. these can make no reformation of such importance as to countervail
the danger of a division. Contr. Parm, l. 2. cap. 1^.
When good men tolerate bad men, says Augustine, which can do them no
spiritual hurt, to the intent they may not be separated from those who are
spiritually good, then there is no necessity to divide unity. And in another
place, Cap. 21.
These two things retained will keep such men pure and uncorrupted, that is,
neither doing ill, nor approving it. Although faith be one funiculus
colligantiae, Cusan. Catholic. concord. l. 1. cap. 5.
yet variety of opinions without pertinacy stands with unity: but nothing is
so contrary to the church as schism and departure. See Calvin. epist. 379. and
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 22. Damian a Goes, De moribus Aethiop.
This matter I will shut up with the saying of Zaga Bishop of Aethiope, and
ambassador of Prester John: It is a miserable thing that Christian strangers
should be so sharply reproved, as enemies, as I have been here; and other
things which concern not the faith. But it should be far more convenient to
support all Christians, be they Grcaeians, be they Armenians, be they
Aethiopians, be they of any one of the seven Christian churches, with charity
and love of Christ, and to permit them to live and converse amongst other
Christian brethren without any injury, because that we are all infants of one
baptism, and do hold truly the true faith. The conclusion is, That the
external communion of the church in public worship is not to be forsaken for
some faults, neither fundamental nor noxious, which may be espied in her
Liturgy.

Though the bearing and forbearing not only of small but even of great sins
also must be for a time, Object. 1.
yet it must be but for a time, and that is whilst reformation be orderly
sought and procured. Robins. Against Bern. page 16.
Lev. 19. 17. But what time has wrought in the church of England all men see,
growing daily by the just judgment of God from evil to worse, and being never
aforetime so impatient either of reformation or other good as at this day.
Moreover, a man must so bear an evil as he be no way accessory unto it by
forbearing any means appointed by Christ for the amending of it.

Errors or faults be of two sorts: Answ.
Some gross, notorious, There are corruptions which eat out the very heart of
a thing, as well as such as hinder the working only, and stain the work,
Robins. Against Berr. page 67.
manifest, such as a man cannot but see to be amiss unless he will shut his
eyes against the light, and must amend, or there can be no hope of salvation:
Others of quotidian incursion, frailty and infirmity, ignorance or mere
weakness, such as godly men are not convinced of, or if they see them at some
times to be amiss, yet in ordinary course they be overtaken with them, from
which the most holy be not altogether free. In these latter though Christians
must labor the help, As in a true church in respect of outward order there may
be many false doctrines taught, so in a church false in respect of outward
order there may be many sound and seasonable truths taught, Robins. Treatise Of
the lawfulness, etc.
cure and support of each other by all means lawful, yet they must bear one
with another, not for a time only, but continually. For such are the
ignorances and frailties of all men, that if they bear not one with another, of
necessity they must break off all society one with another. If all that dissent
in opinion in any circumstances of religion, if all that be judged too remiss
or overzealous, or if every one that is waspish, rash, stiff in his own
opinion, or labors under such like infirmity, must be cut off, I know not
where we shall find a church upon earth. The printers to the Christian reader.
Besides, it is one thing to bear with faults for a season, when we have power
in our hands to reform them; another, to hold communion with the church in the
worship of God where such abuses are continued. Such as have power in their
hands to reform should tolerate abuses for a time only, sc. until there be
opportunity of reformation: But such as have not power in their hands to
redress abuses may and ought to hold communion with the church of God in the
public worship of God, notwithstanding such abuses continued: for the
continuance of such corruptions is not the sin of him who has used all good
means for their removal, but cannot obtein it. The Lord never gave commandment
to his people to depart from and forsake his ordinances because such as ought
did not reform but maintein abuses in his sanctuary. If they abode still in
that corrupt society, and joined in the public worship of God, because they
had not authority to redress them; then it follows, that communion in Gods
ordinances is not sin to them who mislike the corruptions that are allowed and
practiced, pray, desire, and by all other good means seek reformation, but
break not off society, because the Lord has given them no authority so to do,
goes not before them therein: they should walk by their own light, and not by
Gods commandment, nor the approved examples of the Saints recorded in
scripture. For one or a few private Christians to break off society with the
church in prayer or participation of the sacraments, because they are
administered in a stinted Liturgy, or the corruptions pretended therein, is a
greater disorder and corruption then any they can allege in the Liturgy
concerning prayer or administration of the sacraments: because in so weighty
business they challenge that authority which Christ never committed to them,
and go directly cross to the order established by our Savior Christ. But of
that more at large in the chapters following.

CHAP. X. It is lawful to communicate in a mixed congregation where ignorant
and profane persons be admitted to the sacrament.
THis is made an exception against communicating in our assemblies, that we are
a mixed congregation, and that ignorant and profane persons are admitted unto
the Lords table. To try the weight of this reason the better, we must remember
that sinners which may come into question, are either secret, that is, not of
public note, though one or other, perhaps the minister himself, may know them
in their course scandalous, or else notorious, such as are commonly defamed and
known for evil, by evidence of fact and course, if not juridice. The first sort
sin in coming profanely unto the Lords ordinances, and they pollute the holy
things of God unto their own destruction, if they come without repentance and
purpose of amendment: Deuteronomy. 19. 15. Epiphan. in Ancorato.
But they are not to be repelled, if they offer themselves, because though one
know them to have sinned thus and thus, Nihil sine duobus tribusve testibus
get^ potest, Joseph. Antiq l. 4 c. 8.
it is unknown to others, and so the sin is private and not openly known.
Christ knew Judas his fetches, yet he suffered him: and though his treason was
hidden and there were no witnesses of his intendment, yet his theft was acted,
and not purposed only. De secretis non judicat ecclesia: Et privata scelera
non habent vindictam. When it is not notorious and manifest that such a man
has lost his right to the sacrament, See Aquin. Sum. 3. qu. 81. art. 2.: and
qu. 80. art. 6. Hieron. lib. 2. contra Ruff. Uni testi, ne Catoni quidem, est
creditum.
it ought not to be denied unto him in the face of the congregation: otherwise
liberty should be granted to wicked ministers to punish with this punishment
whomsoever they please. The law of God in all ecclesiastical and civil
punishments requires either confession by the party of the fault which is
committed, or else proof by witnesses. Augustine, tom. 9. lib. De medicin.
poen. cap. 3. is clear of this opinion, Nos a communione quenquam prohibere non
possumus, nisi aut sponte confessum, aut in aliquo judicio ecclesiastico vel
seculari nominatum atque convictum; as he is cited by the gloss ad 1. Cor. 5.
and by Aquinas in the place above mentioned. Justinian. Novell. 123. c. 11.
Omnibus autem Episcopis and Presbyteris interdicere aliquem a sacra communione,
antequam causa monstretur, etc.
It is requisite for the common good and convenient order both of church and
commonwealth, that all common favors which are publicly to be disposed and
distributed according to the dignity of private persons, should be dispensed by
public ministers designed thereunto, not according to the private knowledge of
this or that man, neither of that minister, but according to a public and
notorious cogniscance. And whosoever does by his offense against God lose his
right and interest to the holy things of God, he must lose it in the face of
the church before it can be denied him in the face of the congregation: And he
is to be judged (as in all other cases) not by any man's nor by any ministers
private knowledge, but according to proofs and allegations. For the common good
necessarily requires, that such public actions of this nature should be
regulated by a kind of public and not private knowledge, which once admitted
into judicature, would soon fill up the church and state with a world of
scandals, injuries, and inconveniences. Gross, notorious, scandalous sinners
should be excluded from the sacrament, but yet according to the order and
appointment of the Lord. Matthew. 7. 6.
Cast not pearls before swine: give not holy things to dogs. Therefore the
primitive church about to administer, the Deacon cried out against flagitious
persons, (...), with which the charge in our Liturgy well suteth. Amongst the
heathen some were accounted (...), and (...), who were admitted into the
entrance, but not into the temple: Whence among the Latins they are called q.
porro a fano, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. cap. 3. Trebatius profanum id pro pry dici
ait, quod ex religioso vel sacro in hominum usum proprietatemque conversum est.
Capta ab hostibus loca, sacra vel religrosa esse desinunt.
profane, because they stood before but might not enter the temple. Hence also
was that question amongst the Heathen in their services, (...); that is, Who is
here? to which it was answered of the assembly, (...), that is, Many and good.
Hence that of Callimachus in hymnis, (...), which Virgil expresses thus, --
Procul o procul este profani, Aeneid. 6.

Conclamat vates.
And amongst the Grecians (...) are thought to have their name (...), Claudian.
De rapt. Proserp. Gressus removete, profani. Ovid. Met. 7. Procul hinc jubet
ire ministros. Haec autem sacra dicebantur (...); Plinio, Operanea.
that is, because they did restrain ar drive the profane from them. And if the
heathen had such care of their idolatrous services that they should not be
profaned, what conscience should Christians make, neither to profane
themselves, nor suffer, so far as lies in them, the supper of the Lord to be
profaned? It was a worthy saying of Chrysostom, Animam prius tradam meam,
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 83.
quam Dominicum corpus alicui indigno: sanguinemque meum effundi potius patiar,
quam sacratissimum illum sanguinem praeterquam digno concedam. Nevertheless it
pertains not to every man to debar the impenitent from the Lords table, but
it must be done by them, and in such manner as the Lord has appointed. For
private Christians may not usurp the authority of the church, nor the church
execute her authority in undue manner. That is necessary to them that have
received commission from God which is unlawful to them that want authority. In
the commonwealth the execution of justice is necessary: but private persons
must not challenge the sword of the magistrate. In a corporation no one must
take that upon himself which belongs to the common council. Holy things must
not be given to profane persons: but every one at his pleasure must not deny
holy things to unholy persons; but unholy persons must be debarred from holy
things in such order as God has prescribed. It is a thing illegal altogether
and unreasonable, that a Christian man laying open claim to his right in the
sacrament, should by the mere discretion of a minister or private Christian be
debarred from it. Men would be loath to put their lands, nay their goods and
cattels, and shall we think the Lord has put their interest in the body and
blood of Christ to a private discretion. So should it fare ill with the
deserving members of the church, and such as most deserved should least feel
the severity of this censure. The precept then of debarring scandalous
offenders binds them to whom God has given this power, and them only so
far as God has put it in their power. Galvin. epist. 178. Ut unus, altis in
consilium non adhibitis, quiequam tents, author esse non audeo. Add, quod
nunquam utile putavi, jus excommunicandi permitti singulis pastoribus.
But God regularly does not leave that power in the hand of one singular
steward, or some few private Christians, to discommon one from the Lords table
by public censure: And therefore the steward may not by any means keep back
the fat ones of the earth from his masters table, but warn them fairly of the
danger ensuing, as Gratian notes out of Augustine. And if one or few private
Christians cannot debar the unworthy from the Lords table, it is manifest the
ordinance of God is not defiled to them by the presence of the wicked, Great.
part. 3. De consecrat. did. 2. c. 67.
whom they desire to reform or expel, but cannot, because power is not in
their hand to do it lawfully.

For if it be lawful for the faithful to hold spiritual communion together
in the ordinances of worship, Argum. 1.
where the wicked and ungodly are tolerated as outward members of that society,
and have external society with them in those ordinances, then the presence of
scandalous men does not defile the sacrament to the worthy receiver. The
consequence is evident from the reason given to dissuade communion in the
sacrament, sc. because they that partake are one body. Now if the same
communion for substance be in other ordinances, and yet it is lawful for the
faithful, notwithstanding the wicked be permitted, to hold communion in those
ordinances, then it is lawful to partake at the Lords table though the
scandalous and profane be received: But it is lawful for the faithful to
hold spiritual communion and fellowship together in the ordinances of worship
where the wicked and ungodly are suffered as outward members. For Moses calls
Israel a chosen people, Deuteronomy. 14. 2, 3. and 29. 10, 11, 12. and 7. 6, 7.
an holy nation, the peculiar people of God; whom he calls a stiff-necked
people, foolish, Deuteronomy. 32. 5, 6.
and unwise. The Lord protests that Israel did rebel against him, Isai. 1,
2, 3, 4, 10.
that they did not understand, Lam. 4. 6, 22.
but were a most sinful nation, Ezekiel. 16. 46, 47.
yea, as Sodom and Gomorrah; and yet he calls them his children and people:
yea, passing Sodom in iniquity, and yet the daughter of his people, Isa. 5. 1,
2, 3, 5.
and daughter of Sion, his pleasant plant, Jer. 2. 21.
and a noble vine. Israel then was the true church of God, and the people true
members of that society, and yet many of them not truly sanctified nor true
Saints. And if the priests and Levites were set over a people unconverted for
the truth of sanctification, though holy by external covenant, which they for
their parts had broken by their iniquities, but on Gods part was undissolved,
and the faithful had spiritual communion together in the ordinances of
worship, when the unwise, foolish, perverse, uncircumcised in heart and life,
sinful and laden with iniquity were admitted as members of the same body or
society, then the faithful are not defiled with the presence of the ungodly at
the sacrament, though they that communicate together make one body in external
communion. As the commonwealth of Israel consisting of men uncircumcised in
heart, perverse, rebellious, obstinate, as well as faithful and obedient, was
separated into covenant, and so one body in external communion, and might
lawfully have fellowship together in the ordinances; so the faithful and
scandalous received into covenant, and living in society, do partake in the
same ordinances without tincture or infection to the better part. As the
rebellious and perverse in Judah, so the scandalous in the church are separated
into covenant: and though in course of life they be dogs, yet in public esteem
they are not to be reputed dogs, nor used as dogs, till the church have so
pronounced of them. Peter calls the Jews that had crucified Christ, Acts 2.
29. and 3. 17, 18, 19, 25.
Brethren; not according to the flesh, because his kinsmen, but as children of
the prophets and of the covenant. And if the Apostles might hold spiritual
brotherhood with them who were impenitent, perverse, rebellious, yea murderers
of the Lord of life; why should it be unlawful to hold external communion in
the participation of the sacraments with persons scandalous and offensive in
course of life?

The commonwealth of Israel was a religious polity, Object. 1.
and God established them a people unto himself by covenant without exception;
Robins. Against. Bern. page 101. and 82.
and so long as the covenant stood undissolved on Gods part, though broken on
theirs by their iniquity, they might hold communion one with another.

Religion ever since the fall of Adam is one and the same for substance, Answ.
though different in the manner of dispensation: the church from the beginning
one and the same in common nature and essence, though different in the manner
of government and measure of gifts fitted to several ages thereof. Robins
Aga^^^st (...). page 284.
The mysteries are varied according to the times; but the faith whereby we live
is in every age invariable. As God is unchangeable, so is his covenant one and
the same, that excepted which was peculiar to the manner of dispensation; the
confederates or members of the church by Gods approbation one and the same; and
so the common nature and essential constitution of all true churches, from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof. Robins. Against Bern. page 114, and
211.
In all ages of the church the members of the church ought to be saints and
holy; must be such as they ought to be in some measure, or they shall not be
approved of God. They are saints, Psalm. 50. 5. verse 1^.
who have made a covenant with God by sacrifice: But as for the wicked, they
have nothing to do with the covenant. The end of the calling of the church is
holiness to the glory of God, Luke 20. 26.
at all times: Genesis 4. 26.
and it is true in one age as well as another, Matthew. 5. 16.
that they who are utterly unanswerable or 1. Pet. 2. 12.
clean contrary affected to the ends of the true Acts 2. 47.
church, which are holiness and the glory of God, they are not called into
covenant or communion with God. If in one age of the church the scriptures
asscribe not holiness to a people for some fews sake, Lev. 14. 46, 47. and 15.
4, 11, 12.
if the rest be unholy and profane, it asscribeth it to them in no age. Hagg.
2. 12, 13, 14.
If in one state of the church unclean persons and things do pollute and
unhallow clean persons and things; 1. Cor. 5. 6, 7.
and a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; it must hold true in every age
in its proportion. And therefore if ignorant, unwise, impenitent, uncircumcised
in heart and life, rebellious and obstinate in course and conversation, might
be in external covenant with God, and in that respect a separated, holy and
chosen people, with whom the faithful might hold communion external in the
ordinances of worship, then it is lawful for Christians to partake in the
ordinances of Gods worship though scandalous livers be admitted, with whom in
partaking we must have external communion. For if the scandalous were in
covenant then, they may be so now: If communion with the wicked defile now, it
defiled then: If the godly might then communicate because they could not cast
out the ungodly, the same reason is good at this day: If the faithful be bound
to reprove their delinquent brother, Lev. 19. 17.
and not suffer sin to rest upon him, the same duty did concern them in former
times: If the sacraments be now available and of use, Ger. 17. 7. 26. 4.
according to the covenant of promise which God has made to the faithful and
their seed, and none otherwise; as the sacraments are one in their common
nature, so in their use, available only to the children of the covenant at all
times: If it be contrary to the main ends for which the Lord gathers and
preserves his church upon earth, that wicked and ungodly men should be
received into covenant, or permitted to continue in the society of the
faithful, it was unlawful in the Jewish as well as in the Christian churches.
And therefore if the church of the Jews, all this notwithstanding, continued
the true church of God, when it was corrupted in doctrine and manners, in
officers and ordinances of worship; Jer 5. 31.
when the teachers were dumb dogs and blind guides, Jer 9. 2, 3.
the prophets prophesied lies, and the priests received gifts, and the people
rebellious, adulterous, oppressors, an assembly of rebels; John 2. 16.
when the priesthood was bought and sold, Matthew. 15. 7, 8. 9.
the temple defiled and made an house of merchandise, the law corrupted with
false glosses, Isa. 57. 3. and 1. 4.
and made void with false and sinful traditions; Jer. 11. 14.
when error, heresy, idolatry, oppression, rebellion, Isa. 50. 1.
stubbornness, Jer. 3* 11. and 13. 11.
and all manner of sin was exceeding rife among them: If when all these things
were amiss and greatly out of order, they yet continued the sheep of the Lords
visible flock, and the Lord was pleased to own them for his people, his flock,
his inheritance; if they retained still the holy law of God and the seal of his
covenant, and the prophets and faithful servants of God held lawful communion
with the church in the ordinances of God: then the covenant of God is not
disannulled with his people because ignorant and profane persons are tolerated
in the assembly, nor the godly defiled because scandalous persons are suffered
to communicate.

The word may be preached to heathen and infidels for their conversion. Object.
2.
Paul preached the word to the scoffing Athenians and to the blasphemous Jews,
Acts 17. 22, 23. 32.
and yet had no external communion with them as with members of the same body.
Acts 19. 8, 9.


The word may be preached to them that are without, Answ.
for their conversion to the faith; to them that be within the church by
baptism and external profession, for their found conversion unto God,
conversion from particular sins, and building forward in grace and holiness.
The word is preached to heathens and in^idels, but no communion with them is
had thereby, because they are not of the Christian society: But to scandalous
persons, first received into the church by baptism, and not cast out by
public censure, the word is preached as unto members, and not as unto bare
hearers; and they are admitted to the prayers of the congregation as well as to
the hearing of the word, and that as members in outward covenant. Therefore it
is an act of communion in some men's opinions. Robins. Against Bern. page 79.
To use one ordinance and not another, is to make a schism in the church: And
as the preaching of the word, not the bare tender of the word, but the giving
of it to dwell and abide with a people, is a note of a true church; so is the
hearing of the word an act of communion with the church.

If the presence of the wicked does not defile Gods ordinance to the worthy
receiver, Argum. 2.
then it is lawful to receive the sacrament in a mixed congregation where
scandalous persons are admitted: (For what but pollution or defilement can
warrant voluntary Separation and departure from the Lords ordinance?) But the
presence of the wicked does not defile Gods ordinance to the worthy receiver.
One of the church commits some notable sin known to me alone, which (being
dealt with by me) he denies, and without two or three witnesses the church may
not proceed against him: I must therefore still communicate with the church,
and so with him as a member of it, Robins.
The simple presence does not defile: For then the presence of close hypocrites
and secret dissemblers, who are in truth unworthy though they appear not so to
us, should pollute and defile. Not his knowledge of their unworthiness: For
then Judas his presence had stained the ordinance of God to our Savior
himself, to whom the unworthiness of Judas was well known: then one man should
be bound in conscience to excommunicate another, or himself rather, before the
matter be brought to the church; yea, for that which in conscience cannot be
brought unto the church. Not the notorious knowledge of their unworthiness;
seeing he has no power to repel them, nor leave from Christ to withdraw or
separate himself from the society. Treat. etc. page 437.
It is the duty of a godly man to withdraw himself from all private familiarity
with the wicked, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16.
and by no voluntary friendship to ensnare himself with them: Heb. 10. 25.
But it is one thing to avoid the private society of wicked men; Jude 19. verse
Phil. 2. 4.
another, for the hatred of the wicked to renounce the public communion of the
church, See Lanch. De Eccl. page 129.
and so of Christ, who is present with his people. The duties which I ow to a
brother in this course I must perform; but privately excommunicate him, or
separate my self from the congregation for his sake, I must not, because I have
no charge from God no pattern from the godly so to do. My communion with the
scandalous in that case is not free and voluntary upon mine own head, but
necessary in respect of duty enjoined of God, through the enforcing law of
meeting the Lord in his holy ordinances, and preserving the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace and love. If therefore the life be corrupt, not
from corrupt doctrine, but contrary to the doctrine received, we must do as the
prophets and holy servants of God did in those corrupt times, pray, mourn,
exhort, reprove, threaten, give good example, but we must not depart or
separate from the society where Christ is present by his grace and holy
ordinances. If because some members of the body be broken, lame or diseased,
the rest that are sound should forsake the unity of the body, that were to
destroy the whole and not to strengthen it, utterly to overthrow, not to seek
its recovery: One contagious sinner let alone, not punished, not reclaimed, may
infect the whole congregation: and therefore every member must look warily to
his own soul that he take no harm by such bad example, and do his endeavor
that such incorrigible persons be cast out of the assembly: But the ordinances
of grace are not defiled to the worthy receiver by the presence of such as
should be censured, nor must he withdraw himself from the holy things of God
because such as ought not are suffered to partake, so long as Christ is pleased
to bear with their manners, and to continue amongst them for their refreshing
who in truth of heart draw nigh unto him.

If a brother be a fornicatour, Object. 1.
the Apostle exhorts us not to eat with him: 1. Cor. 5. 11.
Which place does not only forbid private and voluntary familiarity but
religious also, Robins. Against Bern. page 258.
and that both public and private. Neither is there any reason, whether we
respect the glory of God, or our own safety, or the avoiding of offense in
others, or the shaming of the parties, why we should avoid civil communion with
any and yet hold religious communion with them. Neither is voluntary society to
be opposed to religious: for no society is so voluntary as that which is
religious

All civil and private society or commerce with a delinquent brother is not
forbidden, Answ.
but familiar only. The Apostle teaches not Christians to be uncivil, but to
abstein from familiarity with such, that they might be ashamed. Ephesians. 5. 6, 7,
11.
For to eat bread together is a token of love and friendship in phrase of
scripture: Psalm. 41. 9.
not to partake of, or be shut from the table, a sign of familiarity broken
off. But there is not the same reason of breaking off private familiarity with
an offender, and separating from the Lords ordinances if he be admitted,
whether respect be had to the glory of God, our own safety, the avoiding of
offense, or the good of the party fallen. For in coming to Gods ordinance we
have communion with Christ principally, who has called us thither, is there
present by his grace and Spirit to bless his ordinance; and with the
faithful, who are there met together at Gods commandment, in the name and by
the authority of Jesus Christ: With the wicked we have no communion, unless it
be external and by accident, because they are not or cannot be cast out.
Internal and essential communion we have with Christ and the faithful only,
external with the wicked. Our communion with Christ and his faithful people
is not free and voluntary, but necessary; enjoined by God, not left to our will
or pleasure: Our communion with the wicked in the ordinances is unwilling on
our part, suffered not affected, if we knew how to hinder it lawfully. God
requires our attendance upon him in his holy ordinances, and to join with his
voluntaries assembled, where he is present in the midst among them: if we
cannot appear before him, as duty binds, but we must have outward communion
with the wicked, which should be expelled, Our Savior commands us to let the
Pharisees alone, Matthew. 15. 16. and yet to hear them, and do as they say,
while they teach the truth
but cannot be kept back by us, in this case our communion with God is free and
voluntary, but our communion with the wicked is suffered only, or held in
respect of the will and commandment of God, who requires that service at our
hands. And if civil commerce with the wicked be not unlawful when it is
necessary, why should external communion in matters of religion defile, Matthew.
23. 1, 2.
when it cannot be avoided but the worship of the most High must be neglected?
Rainold, Cons. with Heart, chapter 7. div. 4.
God is not dishonored on our part when we obey his commandments: It is an
offense taken and not given; seeing the thing is in it self good, and in its
kind commanded by God, and in that particular by men in authority, and
directly tending to mine edification, Robins. Treat. page 20.
the godly cannot justly be offended with that communion which God has
established, and ratifieth with his own special presence: there is no danger
in spiritual communion with Christ and his faithful people, if we come to the
ordinances in affiance, fear, humbleness of mind, etc. as we ought: And as for
the wicked, they can take no encouragement, if according to our place and
office we exhort, admonish, rebuke and tell them plainly of the danger of their
sin; or if any be hardened thereby, his blood shall be upon his own head. We
have received commandment from God to exhort, admonish, rebuke, watch over one
another according to our place and calling: but to excommunicate our selves
because such as should be cut off are suffered, or to withdraw our selves from
the ordinances and to depart from Christ because such as hate to be reformed
take the covenant into their mouths, or to usurp power to censure and
excommunicate, which God has not put into our hands; these things are neither
commanded nor allowed of God. The wicked usurp in that they intrude unto the
Lords table: and the faithful usurp, if without authority they take upon them
to expel the wicked, or depart themselves: And if we search the scripture, and
move only as the Lord is pleased to go before us, we shall not find that a few
private Christians have authority in this case to do either. And hence
appears an apparent difference betwixt external communion with wicked men in
the exercises of religion, and private familiarity: For familiarity is merely
arbitrary, not enjoined but forbidden; affected, not admitted only in case of
necessity or necessary attendance; nor suffered only that we might have
fellowship with Christ and his Saints in his ordinances of worship; nor by
accident only, as we cannot expel them, or withdraw our selves by the Lords
leave and approbation. Draw this argument then into form, and it runs thus;
It is not lawful to have private, needless, arbitrary familiarity with
ungodly men, who are called brethren: therefore it is not lawful to repair to
the ordinances of grace when the Lord calls, nor there to have communion with
Christ and his faithful people, because the wicked are permitted to be
present, when yet we have neither power to repel them, nor leave of Christ to
depart our selves. How loose this consequence is who does not see?

A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: Object. 2.
One scandalous sinner not reclaimed or cast out polluteth the whole
congregation: 1. Cor. 5. 6.
And men must not be blamed if they dare not dip in their meal, Robins. Against
Bern. page 16.
lest they be sowred with their leaven.

The comparison of the leaven used by the Apostle is to be understood in
likeness of nature, Answ.
not in their equality of effecting: Gal. 5. 9.
For leaven sowreth naturally, and cannot but sour the meal: the godly may be
hurt by the wicked, but it is not necessary. Therefore every member must look
warily to himself, and do his endeavor to reclaim other, or that he may be
cast out, if notorious and incorrigible, but not withdraw himself from the
ordinances of grace. The doctrine of the Gospel is compared to leaven in
respect of its efficacy: Matthew. 13. 33.
but all that hear it are not seasoned by it, though it be a good means of
seasoning. The corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees is compared to old leaven:
Matthew, 16. 6, 12.
but every one that heard it was not necessarily tainted with it. It is true,
if the whole church shall bear with scandalous, notorious offenders, and do not
their endeavor to bring them to repentance, or to have them cast out, they are
polluted and stained by their remissness and indulgence: and this is that
which the Apostle presses upon the Corinthians, that they should give all
diligence to clear themselves, If the church see not that to be sin which I
see to be a sin, I having informed the church thereof according to my place, I
have discharged my duty, and the sin lies upon the church, if it be a sin,
and not upon me, Robins. Treatis. Of the laws. etc.
and prevent the danger which might come by their negligence. But if the church
be remiss or slack, the private men who mourn for what they cannot amend, and
labor conscionably to discharge their duties, may not separate from the
communion or withdraw themselves from the Lords table. For the Apostle, who
blames the Corinthians because they suffered the incestuous person, does never
blame the faithful for communicating with him before he was cut off, nor
intimate unto them, that unless he did amend they must absent themselves from
their assemblies and holy exercises, or depart away being come together. They
that have authority to debar men from the sacrament, The printers to the
Christian Readers.
sin, if wittingly or negligently they allow such to approach as worthy guests
to the Lords table who are known unto them notoriously to be unworthy: but if
authority be wanting, if we have done the office of private Christians, or
public ministers, to communicate with the wicked outwardly in the worship of
God is none offense. I partake not in the ^ins of any, how great or manifest
soever the sins be, or how near unto me soever the persons be, except the same
sins either be committed or remain unreformed by my fault. Otherwise Christ
our Lord had been inwrapped in the guilt of a world of sins in the Jewish
church, with which church he communicated in Gods ordinances, living and dying
a member thereof, Robins. Treat. page 18. I answer to the examples of Christ
and his Apostles; who as they abstained from corruptions in the Jewish church,
so were they quite separated from all false churches, as the Samaritanes and
others, Ainsworth, Consid. exam. page 8.
And thus the minister may reach the sacrament to an unworthy communicant, and
yet be innocent. For he does not so much give it him, as suffer his communion,
because he has not power or authority to put him back: He reaches him the
signs, as that which he cannot withhold, because he is held in by the most
prevailing power, without which he cannot be debarred. In this case the
minister is neither actour nor consenter in his admission, because he does it
not in his own name, but according to the order established by God, who will
not have any member of the congregation publicly denied his interest and right
to the holy things of God by the knowledge will and pleasure of one singular
minister. If a minister know a man to be unworthy, he must yet receive him,
because he cannot manifest it to the church: And for the same reason, if his
unworthiness be notorious, if it be not so judged by them that have authority,
he must administer the sacramental signs unto him, not as unto one worthy or
unworthy, but as unto one as yet undivided from them.

A man is not only bound in his place to do his best for the reclaiming of his
brother, Object. 3.
but to see his place be such as wherein he may orderly discharge the duties of
admonition: Robins. Against Bern. page 246.
otherwise both his practice and place are unlawful. This is not sufficient,
that we labor by the best means to have manifest evils amended, except our
places be such, and we in such churches, as wherein we may use the ordinary
means Christ has left for the amendment of things: Idem, page 16.
otherwise our places and standings themselves are unwarrantable and must be
forsaken.

If all places and standings be unwarrantable wherein we may not use the
ordinary means God has left for the amendment of things, Answ.
then all places are unlawful, wherein the greatest part of the church at
least do not conscionably discharge their duties, and of them which have
greatest authority: Then the Levites might not abide in their standings when
the priests neglected their office; nor the prophets when the priests and
Levites had corrupted their ways: 1. Sam. 2. 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Then the people might not sacrifice nor receive spiritual blessings by their
hands when Eli's sons had notoriously corrupted their ways, Our Savior
provided beforehand, that we should not refuse good doctrine because it was
delivered by wicked men,
nor the faithful remain in society when the priest and people both had
corcupted the law, worship, offices, and manners. To speak no more of abuses;
if this rule hold, no place or standing in the church is lawful, wherein three
or more private persons, who can make Peter's confession of faith, have not
power of the keys to receive into and shut out of the church, Aug. Epi. 165.
and Tract. in Joan. 46. and De doctr. Christ. l. 4. cap. 27.
to censure and determine authoritatively. And so it may well be questioned (to
say no more) whether ever there was any lawful standing in a constituted
church: Since the death of the Apostles, if they be put unto it, according to
this position, The followers of Mr Robinson complaining of some four or five
who left their society, write thus; Which proceeding of theirs if it were
approved of and followed, no church could long continue together in peace: For
what these four or five men have done, that may any other man do, so that if
any man do conceive any of his brethren to walk in any such sin which he
judges does deserve excommunication, if the church will not thereunto consent,
he may rent himself from the same, Robins. Treat. Of the lawfulness etc. The
printers to the Christian readers.
they must confess there was never any. And considering the ignorance,
infirmities, diversities of opinions that be amongst the godly, passions,
distempers and corruptions, how is it possible but that the church must fall
into as many schisms almost as there be men, if each man must renounce others
standing as unlawful, wherein he conceiteth he is restrained of some power or
hindered of some ordinary means which Christ has left for the amendment of
things.

No church in the world now has that absolute promise of the Lords visible
presence which the church then had till the coming of Christ. Object. 4.
It was simply necessary, Robins. Against Bern. page 248.
that Messiah should be born in the true church, wherein he might have
communion and fulfill the law. The Lord did afford the Jews, even in their
deepest apostasy, some or other visible signs of his presence, and those
extraordinary when ordinary failed; thereby still declaring himself to remember
his promise. There was that only visible church upon the face of the earth,
tied to one temple, altar, sacrifice, priest hood, in one place; Idem, page 250
and no man could absolutely separate from that church but he must separate
from the visible presence and from all solemn worship of God. Moreover, the
Jewish church had not that distinct ecclesiastical ordinance of
excommunication which we now have; but that the obstinate or presumptuous
offender was by bodily death to be cut off from the Lords people; the same
persons, namely the whole nation, being both church and commonwealth according
to that special dispensation.

These observations rightly applied do manifestly overthrow what has been and
is by others objected against communion with us in the worship of God. Answ.
For if it was absolutely necessary that the Messiah should be born in the true
church, wherein he might have communion, then a church corrupted in officers
and offices, doctrine, worship and manners, may be a true church, wherewith the
faithful may hold communion without sin; or at least the faithful may lie hid
in such a corrupt society, and hold communion with them in the exercises of
religion without sin. And if the Jews had not power to cast out an offender,
the material part of that church was not visible Saints, whom God was pleased
to take into covenant, but the whole body of the Jewish nation, ignorant;
impenitent, profane, obstinate, even all that were not cut off by bodily
death; the sacraments must not be dispensed according to the promise made to
the faithful and their seed, but promiscuously to all that came of the loins
of Jacob according to the flesh; the faithful might and ought to have
communion, as one body, with the wicked and profane, who remain in unbelief,
and both revile and persecute the truth; Then a company of impenitent sinners
might and did remain the true church, being to the judgment of men
irrecoverable, then such as are altogether averse to the end of their holy
calling, may be received into covenant; and though the society be never so much
sowred with the unclean conversation of the ungodly, yet the faithful may dip
in their meal, and live in that society without fear of pollution, dishonor to
God, encouragement to the wicked, or scandal to the brethren. And what then is
become of the heaps of quotations whereby they would prove that the members of
the church must be holy, visible saints, a people converted, in covenant,
separated to the Lord, and that the church is only true whiles it continues
such, and false when it degenerateth from this disposition? and of their
confident arguing, That if it were the will of God that persons notoriously
wicked should be admitted into the church, then should he directly cross
himself and his own ends, and should receive into the visible covenant of grace
such as were out of the visible state of grace, and should plant such in his
church for the glory of his name as served for none other use then to cause his
name to be blasphemed? That all true churches, from the beginning to the end of
the world, are one in nature and essential constitution, and the first the
rule of the rest: and if it was not lawful for the godly to contract with the
wicked in the civil covenant of marriage, how much more in the religious
covenant of the church? That God gave unto Abraham and to his family the
covenant of circumcision, which the Apostle calls the seal of the
righteousness of faith. And to affirm that the Lord would seal up with the
visible seal of the righteousness of faith any visible unrighteous and
faithless person, were a bold challenge of the most High for the profanation
of his own ordinances? These and many the like are broken to pieces by this
observation, That the whole nation of the Jews, sinful, laden with iniquity,
corruptours, revolters in course of life, were Gods separated people by
covenant, and might lay claim unto and could not be debarred from the visible
seals of the righteousness of faith, though in themselves faithless and
unrighteous. And if it was no pollution to the Jews, to suffer notorious wicked
ones amongst them, so they discharged such other duties as were enjoined them
by the Lord, because they had not power to cast them out; it is no pollution
for private and particular Christians, who have not the power of
excommunication in their hand given unto them by Christ, to suffer such as be
ignorant and scandalous to communicate in the ordinances of grace with them, if
they perform all other duties which God requires at their hands. Moreover, if
the Jews had not power to cast out a wicked person, they had power to cut off
the presumptuous; and the neglect of the one is as inexcusable as of the other:
And so the whole controversy turns upon this one hinge, Whether one or two
or some few private Christians have power to cast out and excommunicate whole
societies and churches for some remissness or abuse in bearing with or
admitting scandalous offenders in the societies, so long as the doctrine of
grace is purely taught, the sacraments rightly administered for substance,
Christ is pleased to tolerate and bear with their manners, continues the
visible signs of his presence among them, and is present by special grace to
bless his ordinances to the worthy receiver. A few words one would think might
suffice in this matter: but seeing the strength of the cause lies therein, in
the chapters following it shall be handled more at large.

In the church of Corinth there were divisions, Argum. 3.
fects, 1. Cor. 3. 3.
emulations, contentions, and quarrels, and going to law one with another for
every trifle, 1. Cor. 6. 1, 2.
and that under the infidels; Paul's name and credit was despitefully called in
question there, 2. Cor. 10. 10.
whom they should have honored as a father; 1. Cor. 15. 12.
the resurrection of the dead (which is the life of Christianity) was denied;
1. Cor. 5. 1.
that wickedness was winked at there which is execrable to the very heathen;
1. Cor. 11. 19, 20.
the Lords supper was horribly profaned, 2. Cor. 12. 20, 21.
in that some came to it drunken; there was fornication and such like sins not
repented of; things indifferent were used with manifest offense, and idolatry
committed in eating at the tables of idols meats sacrificed to devils:
Notwithstanding all which abuses that society is called and was the church of
God, 1. Cor. 1. 2, 4* 9. and ^. 23.
and the faithful did and might communicate with others without pollution. The
Galatians had so far adulterated the Gospel of Christ that the Apostle
tells them they were removed to another Gospel, pronounces that they were
bewitched, Gal. 1. 6. and 3. 1* and 5. 4.
and if they still persisted to join circumcision and the works of the law with
Christ, they were fallen from grace, Gal. 1. 2.
and Christ could not profit them: and yet they are called churches of Galatia.
Ephesus was extremely decayed in her first love; Revel. 1. 4.
she was not only cooled a little, Revel. 2. 14, 15*
but had left it: In Pergamus there were some that held the doctrine of Balaam,
and of the Nicolaitanes: Revel. 2. 20.
In Thyatira the woman Jezebel was suffered to teach and seduce the servants of
Christ: Revel. 3. 1, 2.
Of Sardis the holy Ghost says, she had a name to live, Revel. 3. 20, 21 and 4.
but was dead; her works were not perfect before God; there were but a few
there who had not defiled their garments: Of Laodicea it is recorded that she
was neither hot nor cold, and then it is not hard to conceive how she was
overgrown with disorders; and yet Christ was present with her by his grace, and
the faithful are exhorted to repent, or beware of her sin, and not to
forsake her society. Col. 2. 11, 16, 18.
Of the abuses in the church of Rome something has been noted before: Of
corruptions and disorders in other churches the scriptures give plentiful
testimony: 3. John 9, 10.
But you shall never find that the faithful are warned to separate from the
worship of God in these assemblies, Jam. 2. 1, 2. and 3. 1, 2. and 4. 1, 2, 3.
but to keep themselves pure and undefiled, Jude 12, 13.
and labor the reformation of others by all means lawful. In the primitive
church after the apostles, the discipline of the church was in some cases very
severe, partly to prevent the abuse of Gods ordinances, partly to maintein the
dignity and authority of the censures: nevertheless the godly were compelled
to tolerate many disorders, which they could not redress, not in doctrine and
worship, but in manners and conversation. Ius^b. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 1. Cypr. De
laps.. 4.
For as soon as Christians began a little to breathe from the fear of bloody
persecution, they fell into dissolute idleness, and began to nourish debate,
Quia traditam nobis Divinitus disciplinam pa^ longa corruperat, jacentem fidem
and pene dixe^^m dormientem censura coelestis erexit.
strife, hatred, emulation, pride, etc. to heap sin upon sin, as might be
proved at large by the complaints of the Fathers made of the sins of the
times, in all sorts, ministers and people, men and women. But it was and ever
has been the judgment of them who did so grievously complain of the sins of
their times, that the godly did not communicate with others in their sins
although they did continue with them in the communion of the sacraments. Cypr.
De laps. studebant augendo patrimonio singuli, etc. Cypr. Epist. 51. ad Maxim.
Etsi videntur in Ecclesia esse zizania, non tamen impediri dedet aut fides aut
charitas nostra, ut quoniam zizania esse in Ecclesia cerni^^^^, ipsi de
Ecclesia recedamus. And Epist. 52. Nobis autem secundum fidem nostram and
Divinae praedicationis datam formam competit ratio versicatis, unumquemque in
peccato suo ipsum teneri, nec posse alterum pro altero reum fieri, cum Dominus
praemoneae. and dicat, Justitia justi super eum erit, et scelus scelerati super
eum erit. Aug. lib. 2. Contr. Crescon. Gram. cap. 32. Non est Ecclesia
deserenda, tanquam frumenta propter paleam vel zizania, sicut nec domus magna
propter va^^ in honorata. and cap. ^7. August. Contr. Donatist. cap. 20.
Toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quo volumus, ^tentes cautela praecepti
Dominici, etc. August. lib. De fide and oper. Perniciosa est audacia, stultaque
praesumtio, se ab Ecclesia separate ob exempla quorundam male moratorum, etc.
And lib. 3. Contr. Par. cap. 2. Si contagio peccandi multitudinem invaserit,
non est illa excommunicanda, sed Dei correctio exspectati debet. Nam
separationis consilia sunt inania, perniciosa, sacrilega, impia, superba, plus
perturbant infirmos bonos quam corrigunt animosos mal^s. See whit^k. De Eccl.
qu. 1. cap. 10, 11. See August. Brevicul. Collat. And Aug. lib. 3. Cont. lit.
Parmen. cap. 1. AUFERTE, inquit, MALUM EX VOBIS; ut si forte non possent
auferre malos a congregatione sua auferendo, malum ex seipsis, id est, non cum
ipsis peccando, nec iis ad peccandum consentiendo aut favendo, integerrimi
inter eos and incorruptissimi versarentur.


If a church depart from the Lord by any transgression, Object. 1.
and therein remain irrepentant after due conviction, and will not be
reclaimed, it manifests unto us, that God also has left it, and that as the
church by her sin has separated from and broken covenant with God, so God by
leaving her in hardness of heart without repentance, has on his part broken
and dissolved the covenant also. The Lord Jesus threatens the churches for
leaving their first love and for their lukewarmnesse, Robins. Against Bern.
page 248.
that he will come against them speedily, and remove their candlestick, that
is, dischurch them, except they repent, and spue them as loathsome out of his
mouth.

It is true, Answ.
the Apostles mention corruptions in the churches with utter dislike, Romans 16.
17.
severe reproof, and strait charge of reformation: 1. Cor. 5. 1, 4, 5.
and the Lord Jesus threatens the churches for lukewarmnesse and leaving their
first love: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
But neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever blame the faithful for holding
communion in those churches in the ordinances of worship, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
or give them charge to depart if disorders and abuses were not forthwith
corrected and amended. 1. Tim. 6. 5.
Not to enquire what is due conviction, Rev. 2. 14, 16, 20.
Not to enquire what is due conviction, or when a church is to be deemed
obstinately impenitent, it is most untrue, that the toleration of disorders or
maintenance of corruptions of some kind by some, yea by many in the church, is
to us a manifest token that God has left it. The history of the church from
the very first plantation thereof unto this very day does evidence, that many
and foul abuses, disorders and corruptions have continued in the churches of
God; when yet the Lord did not utterly take from them all tokens of his visible
presence. This is confessed of the church of the Jews: And if they continued
the church of God when they had broken covenant for their part, so long as the
Lord continued the signs of his visible presence among them; how dare any man
think or say that God has utterly left or forsaken that people amongst whom he
dwells plentifully by the means of grace, and unto whom he imparteth the
graces of his Spirit, though for their sins they deserve to be cast off? The
Lord is God and not man, therefore the sons of Jacob are not confounded. The
Jews at first were chosen to be the people of God, not for their
righteousness, but of the rich grace and mercy of God: They continue to be his
church, not for their righteousness, but according to his free and gracious
promise: And so long as Christ does of his mere grace and love bear with the
manners of his church, and gives her not a bill of divorce, it is not for men
to say or judge that he has utterly left and forsaken her. And seeing the
faithful must follow Christ, dwell with Christ and abide with him, so long as
Christ does dwell in the assembly by his presence and plentiful means of grace
it is not lawful for them voluntarily to depart and break off communion.

CHAP. XI. Of holding communion with that assembly in the worship of God, where
we cannot perform all duties mentioned Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17.
Whosoever neglects Christ's rule in proceeding with his minister or others
of the church, Object. 1.
both partaketh in their sin, and sins against Christ's command, Matthew. 18.
If he be ignorant of Christ's rule and order, yet he sins: but if he know it,
and do it not, then his sin remains. Now the rule prescribed by Christ is,
That one brother offended should warn any member of the same church whereof he
is a member, if he offend him, yea though it be his minister: And if he reform
not, he must proceed to warn him more solemnly, taking two or three with him,
doing it in the name of Christ: If this admonition take not effect for
reformation, he must tell the church: If the church then will not do their
duty, he must clear himself, protesting against their neglect therein, Hos. 2.
12.

The brief and plain meaning of this objection is, Answ.
That every Christian is bound to perform all those offices mentioned to every
delinquent brother in society or communion; and that it is not lawful to abide
in society or communion where a man cannot perform all those duties without
defiling or undoing himself. And therein is employed, that seeing the Jews had
no such order for excommunication established amongst them, therefore they
might hold communion not withstanding the corruptions that were found amongst
them. To try the strength of this argument, let it be granted, that our
Savior speaks not of private managing of civil affairs and private injuries,
whereby we might recover what we lost by the injury of our brother, (for that
is an indulgence or benefit, no commandment of rule and duty; yea sometimes it
is a fault not to suffer wrong) but of church-admonitions and censures, 1. Cor.
6. 1, 7.
and that order which he has set for the winning or punishment of offenders.
But then by a delinquent brother we must not understand only one of the same
particular society or fellowship, but any one, of what country or condition
soever, with whom we have religious fellowship: Theophylact. ad Matthew. 18.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 62.
If thy brother, If any man that is called a brother; thy brother, that is, a
Christian. For our Lord has appointed no such course to be taken with them
that are out of the church. Jansen. Harm. Evang. cap. 72.
Suppose Christians of distinct societies living remote one from another do
trespass one against the other, is not the innocent party bound to hold the
course here prescribed with the delinquent brother? The rule of our Savior is
not, That one brother offended should admonish any member of the same church
whereof he is a member (that is an addition which the text will not
acknowledge) but, If thy brother trespass against thee. John 6. 59, 60.
Talmidim lingu^ Hebraea iidem sunt qui lingua Graeca (...), auditores.
Christ speaks here unto his Apostles, but not unto them simply as Apostles,
but as disciples, Christians, and followers of Christ; because the things here
commanded are common to all Christians, and not peculiar to the Apostolical
function. It is further to be enquired, in what cases we are to hold the course
prescribed. If thy brother sin against thee. This cannot be meant of secret
offenses known unto one only: For wisdom and piety both forbid us to bring
into light the private sins and offenses of brethren, whereof they cannot be
convinced: for this is to be a revealer rather then a healer of our brothers
infirmities. If I know an offense committed by another whereof I can make no
proof, Gratian. Decret. part. 2. c. 2. qu. 1. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 19.
in love I must admonish him privately, mourn and pray for him, and so leave
him to the Lord, to whom the judgment of secret things does belong. This is
acknowledged by them who interpret this text of sins secretly committed
against God. Beza, Annot. in Matthew. 18. 16.
In those sins which are so hid and secret that he who should deny them can
be convinced with no witnesses, there is none or very little place left to this
saying of Christ. Matthew. 3. 6. and 9. 2. and 12. 31. and 26. 28. Robins.
Against Bern. page 180.
Some would have it, that Christ speaks of secret offenses against God;
because the word is most properly used for sin, and another for wrong and
injury: but this will bear no weight. For the word is general, but the phrase,
To sin against thee, is spoken of wrongs and injuries against men. 1. Sam.
19. 4. Sept. (...).
As, Let not the King sin against David his servant: that is; Do not evil
unto him; Plot not evil or death against him: because he has not sinned
against thee: that is, He has hurt thee in nothing; He has offended thee in
no matter. Did I not say unto you, Genesis 42. 22. Sept. (...). Ar^b. Erpen. Ne
peccetis.
Sin not against the lad? that is, Hurt him not; or, Kill him not: for so
Reuben spoke unto his brethren when they thought of killing Joseph. When any
one has sinned against his neighbor; Genesis 37. 21, 22.
that is, has hurt or offended him by any means. What have I sinned against
thee or against thy servants? 1. Kings 8. 31. Sept. (...).
that is, Wherein have I done wrong or injury to thee? And so in this passage,
If thy brother sin against thee: that is, If he hurt or wrong thee; Jer. 37.
18* Sept. (...);
not, If thou be privy to his sin. This is plain, if it be compared with that
of Luke, If thy brother sin against thee seven times a day: Luke. 17. 3, 4.
and the question of Peter, If my brother sin against me, how often must I
forgive him? till seven times? and our Saviors answer, Matthew. 18* 21. Rivet.
Orthodox. tract. 1. qu. 8. page 126.
I say not unto thee, Till seven times; but, Until seventy times seven times.
Neither is our brother to be accused for every light fault or trespass against
us, but for that which is scelus or affine sceleri, or for that which is an
argument (unless the rest of his life be known and approved) of a profane
man, a contemner of God and his neighbor. Eccl. 7. 20, 21, 22.
There are some faults of men as it were natural, and of no great moment:
there it is not always necessary that complaints should be doubled. Pol.
Lyser. Harm. Evang. cap. 92.
Some faults are to be wrapped up in silence, and covered with the cloak of
charity. Beza, De presbyt. page 46.
Not all sins are meant, but such as are stumbling blocks to men's
consciences, and such as are manifest to be sins, and to be committed, Gal.
6. 1.
in case they should be denied. But though sins against God be not expressly
intended in this place, Lev. 19. 17.
by analogy they must be understood; because the principal end why our
brother offending is to be admonished, and complained of if he do not repent,
Bellarm. De verbo Dei, l. 3. cap. 5.
is the salvation of his soul, which has place in sins against God no less
then in offenses against our selves. But herein Christian moderation requires,
that many ignorances, errors, infirmities, and weaknesses of quotidian
incursion, which overtake the godly, be covered in love, and not made the
matter of complaint and censure. Some errors and frailties be of that nature,
that if by admonition of love I cannot cure them, I must cover them in love,
yea though the party, out of a false persuasion that he is in the truth when he
does err, should be obstinate. It must also be remembered, that this duty first
by one, then by more, and lastly by the church upon complaint made, is
affirmative, and binds only when occasion, season and opportunity is
offered, or a Christian in special is called thereunto. An oath is one branch
of Gods worship; but he dishonors not God who never swears, if he be never
lawfully called thereunto: and the like may be said of the duty of admonition
by way of censure. It is the office of a chirurgian to launch and cut when need
requires: but it is no impeachment to his skill or office, if he was never
enforced to that service. If the occasion of admonition be just, a Christian
must further wait for the season, when it may be fit to administer it best, and
in what manner. For admonition must be used as physic, which is not like to
work kindly unless the patient be in right temper to receive it. And for
complaint to the church, if private admonition first by one then by more
prevail not, a Christian is not ordinarily bound unto it when he cannot perform
it or do it with good success. Robins. Treat. page 189.
If the Jews had not the distinct ordinance of ecclesiastical excommunication,
yet the Lord took order then as well as now that no sin should be suffered
unreformed, no obstinate sinner uncut off. And therefore if a man committed a
sin, whether of ignorance or otherwise, for which he was not to die without
pardon, he was to be told and admonished of his offense, Lev. 19. 17.
and to manifest his repentance: Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
But the obstinate and presumptuous were to be cut off. Numb. 15. 30, 32, 34,
36.
So that the godly amongst the Jews were first to admonish the transgressour,
and if he did not repent, then to proceed further, according to the Lords
ordinance. But now suppose the guides temporal or ecclesiastical, to whom the
matter must be brought, be so corrupt that they would countenance the offender,
punish the complainant, establish the disorder rather then redress or amend
it, in this case what should the innocent do? must he complain to his undoing,
or leave his standing in the church as unlawful, because he cannot do the
duties which God calls for at his hands? Isa. 57. 2.
The shepherds of the church of the Jews were many times blind, Ezekiel. 34. 3.
wicked, Zech. 11. 17.
vain persons, John 10. 10, 21.
such as Christ calls thieves, robbers, hirelings. The scribes and Pharisees,
what were they but blind guides, Matthew. 15. 5. and 16. 6. and 26. 65.
corrupt teachers, who caused the people to err: If the disciples or faithful
had sought to them for reformation of abuses, or redress of offenses, what
could have been expected? If by the church we understand either the guides and
governors, or the whole society and faithful: we know the guides of the
church are many times remiss, idle, partial, corrupt. 1. Cor. 3. 10.
The Corinthian Pastors built hay and stubble upon the foundation which Paul
had laid: amongst them were false Apostles, deceitful workers, 2. Cor. 11. 13.
who did transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ. Gal. 1. 6.
In Galatia the Pastors troubled the church with corrupt doctine. The Angels
of Thyatira, Apoc. 2. 20. and 3. 15. and 2. 14. and 3. 1.
Laodicea, Pergamus and Sardis are all reprehended. What then must the
faithful do? leave their standings, and depart from the ordinances of grace,
whilst God is pleased to dwell amongst them? or neglect the duty which God
calls them unto, and so partake in other men's sin? The community or
congregation it self is often divided, remiss; the greatest part many times the
worst, so that the best cannot be heard amongst them, 1. Cor. 1. 11.
truth cannot take place. In Corinth there were so many sects and divisions
that the house of Chloe was constrained to complain of them to the Apostle: 1.
Cor. 5. 1, 2.
most of them were puffed up in the case of the incestuous man, that it had
been in vain for the better sort to seek his casting out if the Apostle had not
sharply admonished them of their duty: And their disorder in coming to the
Lords supper was general, so that the better sort might bewail but could not
redress it. In the primitive church there was such contention oftentimes about
the choice and election of ministers, the Pastors divided from the people, and
the people one from another, to the committing of many outrages, that if the
godly must not hold any place in the church but where they could perform all
offices enjoined in the text of scripture before alleged, they must welnigh go
out of the world. In this and such cases then what should the faithful do?
Tell the church they cannot; for that is divided, and it may be the greatest
part holds the worst cause: Depart they must not, for the Lord does not go
before them; and if they depart without him, they depart from the Lord himself.
What remains then, but that with merciful affection they dislike, reprove,
and correct as much as in them lies what they find to be amiss; what they
cannot amend, that they should patiently endure and suffer, and in loving sort
bewail and lament, till God do either correct and amend it, or make way for
their enlargement, as they may see the Lord to go before them. But in the mean
space it will be said they do not their duty in telling the church: Nay rather,
the Lord requires not that particular duty at that time, because they have no
opportunity or means to do it. The rule prescribed concerns visible and
particular churches, as a solemn ordinance of Christ, for the humbling and
saving of an obstinate sinner: but a Christian may be a true member of a
visible church when he is hindered and cannot do the thing that is there
prescribed. For our Savior speaks of a brother that does justly, truly, and
according to equity reprehend, admonish, or complain; and of them who being set
in office do rightly and lawfully perform the office whereunto they are
appointed of God; of the church who does what becomes her, keeps herself
within the bounds prescribed of God, and rightly executes what is committed to
her trust. But in the true church of God, which Christ is pleased to grace with
the visible tokens of his presence, all things may fall out clean contrary;
that such as be in office do not truly discharge their office, that the church
does not keep herself to the rule, nor fulfill the trust committed unto her.
Lev. 7. 20. and 22. 2, 3.
In the Law they that were thought unclean were to be restrained from the
sacrifices, Number. 19. 13, 20.
the eating of the passover, entrance into the temple. And not only legal
pollutions, 2. Chron. 23. 19
but sins of all kinds, Lev. 4. 2, 13, 22, 27. and 5. 4, 17.
whether by error or ignorance of the law or fact, Number. 15. 22, 23, 24.
or voluntarily committed, were to be expiated according to the prescript of
the law, which does necessarily presuppose uncleanness, and that accompanied
separation from the altar, and the participation of the holy things. The legal
ceremonies, which were outward and carnal, did represent spiritual and
internal to the minds of the faithful, as the uncleanness of the body did
the inward filth of the soul. Psalm. 50. 13, 14, 15, 16.
The wicked are oftentimes upbraided, Isa. 1. 15, 21, 22, 23.
that they durst come into the presence of God. The scriptures testify, that
the Lord acceteth the sacrifices of righteousness, Psalm. 51. 18, 19.
of a broken and contrite heart; Hos. 6. 6.
that he is not pleased with the sacrifices of wicked men, Amos 5. 22.
whose hands are full of blood: Genesis 17 14.
And the Lord often gives commandment, Number. 15. 30. and 19. 13.
that he which shall do so or so, or shall not do this or that, shall be cut
off from his people. All which, whether they conclude the use of
excommunication amongst the Jews, let the learned judge. But howsoever, this is
most certain; Many things were required which the wicked altogether neglected,
the godly could not redress, nor complain of to them that should; or if they
did, no regard was had thereunto, no reformation followed: and yet the godly
left not their standings, as unlawful; nor the society, as left and forsaken
of God because they had broken covenant with him; nor the ordinances of God, as
if external communion with the wicked as one body had polluted and defiled
them. Put case a brother offended make a complaint to the church of some
private injury or wrong received by one of the same or another socity, and the
church to whom the complaint is brought deal remissely, either through
ignorance, partiality, carelessenesse, or the like; must the innocent party
stand to the decision of the church, although they do not see right exactly
restored, and the delinquent brought to repentance? or must he protest against
their neglect, and depart from the society as not to be communicated with,
because they tolerate a wicked and ungodly person among them? If the first,
then simply to be present at the worship of God where wicked men are tolerated
is not to partake in their sin: If the latter, then the accuser may be judge in
his own cause, and not only hold him an heathen whom the church esteems holy
and honest, but hold the church it self heathen, then, because they account him
not so blameworthy whom he accuses: then which what is more contrary to the
rule of our Savior? And so if true examination be made, they that leave our
societies because they cannot observe the rule prescribed by Christ, do of all
others most neglect it in their separation; because they challenge that
authority which Christ never gave them, and wait not upon him to go before them.

If iniquity be committed in the church, Object. 2.
and complaint and proof accordingly made, and the church will not reform or
reject the party offending, but will on the contrary maintein presumptuously
and abett such impiety, then by abetting the party and his sin she makes it
her own by imputation, and enwrappeth her self in the same guilt with the
sinner; and remaining irreformable, either by such members of the same church
as are faithful (if there be any) or by other sister-churche, wipeth herself
out of the Lords church-rolle, and now cease to be any longer the true church
of Christ. Robins. Against Bern. page 247, 248.
And whatsoever truths or ordinances of Christ this rebellious rout still
reteineth, it but usurpeth the same, without right unto them or promise of
blessing upon them; both the persons and sacrifices are abominable.

This peremptory censure is as directly cross to that which follows
immediately in the same author as any thing that can be spoken. Answ. If my
brother sin a scandalous sin, and I by just order make complaint thereof to the
church, I have done my duty. It apperteineth to the church to excommunicate him
if he repent not, but not to me, except (Pope-like) I would make my self the
church. I am guilty of the evil in the commonwealth and family for the
redressing whereof I do not my duty in my place, which if I do in the church as
I can, I am free from the sins done and suffered thee: which sins and evils
I can no more be said to suffer (wanting power to reform them) they to suffer
it to blow or rain because I hinder it not, Robins. Treat. page 18.
For if the toleration or maintenance of one sinner against reproof and
conviction do necessarily dischurch a society, how then did the church of the
Jews continue the true church of God, wherein sin was generally, impudently,
impenitently committed, and that by such as should have censured it in others;
where the offenders were countenanced, and the reprovers persecuted,
imprisoned, put to death? If no church in the world now has that absolute
promise of the Lords visible presence which that church then had till the
coming of Christ, if the Messiah must be born in the true church, and the Lord
did ever afford the Jews some or other visible signs of his presence in the
greatest apostasy; this is nothing to the purpose. For if the maintenance of
one wicked ungodly wretch wipeth a church out of the Lords churchroll, then the
Jews, who did both countenance offenders, and commit wickedness themselves and
that with greediness, had blotted themselves out of that book. And if the Jews
continued the church of God notwithstanding their great impiety and
obdurateness, because the Lord continued the visible tokens of his presence
among them, then if a church or some in the church shall tolerate or
countenance iniquity in others, or practice it themselves, so long as God shall
be pleased to bear with their manners, and vouchsafe unto them the signs of
his gracious presence and holy ordinances, it is to be reputed the true church
of God, wherewith the faithful may hold communion in the branches of worship.
If therefore the author had well pondered his own words, or consulted the rule
of our Savior, this labor might well have been spared. But more fully to open
the weakness of this objection; Errors; as in doctrine so in practice, are of
two sorts: some fundamental or bordering thereupon, which concern the very
heart and life of religion, and cannot stand with faith and holiness; others
not fundamental, which strike not directly at the soul of religion, though
they hinder the working somewhat, or stain the work. In matters fundamental,
as the profession of faith must be entire in all points of simple belief, so
must the doctrine of the church in all things concerning practice: but errors
of inferior alloy, wherein godly men dissent pardonably one from another, both
concerning faith and practice, may be found and maintained in the true church.
Again, sin and iniquity is maintained either by teaching, or by doing in our
own persons, and tolerating in others whom we should reform but do not. If the
church by doctrine maintein fundamental evils, as the worshipping of angels,
murder, adultery, etc. she is to be esteemed heretical: But if the life be
corrupt, not from corrupt doctrine, but contrary to the doctrine received, the
church is not to be accounted false, because wicked ones, which should be cast
out, are nourished in her bosom. It is true, the service which wicked men
tender unto God is abomination, as were the sacrifices which the Jews brought
when their hands were full of blood; but the worship which the faithful offer
unto God in that corrupt society is pleasing and acceptable unto his majesty:
The prayer of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of a wicked
minister in respect of his office, as the prayer of the congregation, is
effectual and accepted for the faithful who seek unto God with lips unfeigned.

The prophet commands us, Object. 3.
Plead, or, Contend with your mother, Hos. 2. 1, 2.
contend with her, because she is not my wife, nor I her husband; that she take
away her whoredoms from before my face, etc. therefore if the church be
remiss in her duty, the children of the church must protest against her.

The meaning of the prophet is, Answ.
That the godly, whether in Judah or Israel, should contend with the ten
tribes, We are sure they called the people out of the church of Israel when it
was idolatrous, and forbad them to come at their assemblies, Hos. 2. 2. 314.
and 4. 15, 17. Amos 5. 5. Ainsw. Consid. exam. page 8.
who by their idolatry had fallen from the conjugall covenant which God had
contracted with them, and had deserved to be put away with a bill of divorce,
because they had transgressed their matrimonial troth, and forsaking the true
God had sought them other Gods, whom they did love and worship. And in like
case, no question but the faithful may publicly and sharply rebuke the
abominable idolatries of a false-claiming church, such as Israel was at that
time. But if this be applied to the true church, in respect of every abuse or
remissness, we shall pervert the words of the prophet, and run our selves
upon the rocks. True it is, all abuses may and ought to be reproved in the time
and place, according to the nature and quality thereof: but for every offense
we cannot say truly in the name of God, The church is not the spouse of Christ,
nor Christ her husband: Every abuse in worship is not the adultery of the ten
tribes. If this had been the meaning of the prophet, the prophets had gone most
contrary to their own rules of all others: for they sharply rebuked the
personal sins of Judah, as they received commission from the Lord; other
sins they touched but sparingly, if at all: but they never protested against
her as no church of God; they never charged the faithful to depart from all
communion with her, lest they be partakers of her sins. Here the Lord goes
before the faithful in their contention with their supposed mother, they must
say what the Lord puts into their mouths, and behave themselves toward her
as the Lord is pleased to give them precedent by the tokens of his presence.
But they that take liberty to break off communion with their true mother and
spouse of Christ because of some abuses, sport and blemishes, they speak of
themselves, when they charge her to be an adulteress and not the spouse of
Christ, to maintein an idolatrous antichristian, devised worship; and they run
of themselves without commission or authority, when they voluntarily withdraw
themselves from the ordinances of grace and communion with Christ in the same.
Therefore, to conclude this point, as corrupt and unworthy members can be no
cause why those that are whole should forsake the body or neglect the offices
perteining to the body, though they be hindered in their working, so no open
gross communicants can be any cause why the faithful should forsake the
church or communion with Christ, or neglect the duties which in particular
concern themselves, though they cannot do all things that pertein to them with
the whole body, as being overborn or restrained by others without whom they
cannot work.

CHAP. XII. The community of the faithful, much less two or three separated
from the world, and gathered together into the name of Christ by a covenant,
are not the proper and immediate subject of power ecclesiastical.
POwer, Power and authority differ as potentia and potestas.
might, or efficacious force is not all one with authority or power. Matter,
Sense, Understanding, Will, are called faculties or power: Magistracy,
Principalities, Governments we call powers or authorities: which import not
only might or power to an action, but preeminence, jurisdiction, authority and
government. Ecclesiastical power or administration of government is twofold:
proper to Christ, and communicated to his church. The proper government is that
which Christ has reserved only to himself, as not being shut up within any
bounds of laws or orders revealed unto the creature, but is executed according
to his infinite wisdom, In Christo fuit potest^s excellentiae, quam tamen non
tell quit in ecclesia. Harm. Cons. Helvet. cap. 18. Nunc est potestas absoluta,
quae and Juris dicitur, Joan. de Paris. cap. 10. De potest. Act. 1. 17.
by the secret hand of his Divine power, and that both extraordinarily and
ordinarily: And this power is Lordly and Regal, power absolute and of
excellency, which is called Power of right. Communicated government is that
which being limited within the compass of certain laws and canons of his holy
word, he has committed to be outwardly executed by the hand of his ministers
and churches designed and appointed thereunto: This power is ministerial
only, which consists in the outward using of the word, 1. Tim. 3. 1.
sacraments, etc. and in the political guiding of the church, Matthew. 20. 26,
27, 28.
concerning both the manners and necessities of all and every of them. Acts 20.
24. Papa non est Dominus spiritualium, sed minister tantum, Joan. de Paris. De
potest. cap. 20.
Though this latter part only of the communicated government, which is the
political guiding of the church, is that discipline which generally all
ecclesiastical writers speak of, yet is not that all nor the principal of his
authority. And though Christ uses it many times as a chariot for his holy word
to ride upon, to subdue rebellious spirits, 2. Cor. 1. 21.
yet it is neither the chief nor the most ordinary means: 2. Cor. 10. 4.
but the simple preaching of the word is his continual sword and scepter, Isa.
11. 4.
whereby he saves his people and conquereth his enemies, John 3. 5, 6.
beats down strong holds, Acts 2. 38. and 24. 25. and 26. 28.
and judges the very thoughts and conceits of the heart. And this he does by
his word, when it is not assisted by the discipline strictly taken: for the
word may stand without the discipline; so cannot the discipline without the
word. But this ordinary power of the keys or government, with the execution
thereof, is not given to the community of the church, or whole multitude of the
faithful, much less to two or three separated from the world, and gathered
together by covenant, so as they be the immediate and first receptacle thereof,
receiving it from Christ, and virtually deriving it to others.

For no power agrees to the multitude of the faithful, Argum. 1.
virtuall or formal, but that which is given them of the Lord by his positive
law. John 3. 23.
The whole spiritual power for the gathering and government of his church is
given to Christ as Mediator, Hebr. 5. 4.
and has Christ our Lord, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
the King of Saints, Rev. 13. 13.
Savior of Sion, Isa. 62. 11.
the head of all principality and power, Col. 2. 10.
the sole author, Ephesians. 4. 7.
which he received not of the church, Psalm. 2. 6.
but from the Father. Hebr. 5. 5.
And if the power of the church be derived from and communicated by Christ unto
his church, Revel. 1. 1.
of necessity it must draw its original from Divine positive law, Psalm. 45. 1.
and can agree to none but as it is communicated. For although the light of
nature teach that God is to be worshipped, yet in substantial things reason
teaches not how this worship of God is to be administered, nor the house of God
to be governed, but in all this we must depend upon the mind and pleasure of
Christ, the King of his church, and Savior of his body. The Apostles had none
other authority but what was given them from Christ, and the church is to
derive all her authority from the same fountain from which the Apostles
received theirs. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
But the communicated power of the keys with the execution thereof Christ has
not given immediately to the whole multitude, but to some persons and officers
designed and appointed thereunto. Peruse the several passages of scripture
wherein the power and authority of preaching the Gospel, administration of the
sacraments, binding and loosing is given unto the church, and it is apparent,
distinct several persons are spoken of, and not the whole community. Matthew.
28. 19, 20.
Go teach all nations, John 20. 21, 22 and 21. 15, 16.
and baptize them: Whose sins ye remit they are remitted: and Feed my sheep;
Feed my lambs: were these things spoken to the whole community, or to special
persons? If Christ gave this power to the community or society, I desire to
know the date of this commission: whether was it universal from the very
beginning of the church, or took it effect aftect churches were planted and
established by the Apostles themselves? Not the first: for then the Apostles
themselves should derive their power from the community and society of the
faithful, which they did not, Matthew. 28. 19, 20 and 18. 17, 18.
but immediately from Christ, John 20. 21, 22.
and that both in respect of gifts and graces, their calling it self, and
designation of their persons. What Paul says of himself, That he was an
Apostle, Gal. 1. 1. Bellarm. De Pontis. Rem. l. 4. cap. 23.
not of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, that is
true of all the Apostles, who were sent of Christ, as the Father sent him, and
are called Apostles of Jesus Christ, not only because they were to preach
Christ, but because they received their commission from him. Not in
aftertimes: for then they must show where Christ committed the power of
government first to the Apostles, and afterward to the community of the
faithful; for which they can bring no record out of holy scripture. The
ministers and guides of the church are immediately of Jesus Christ, from whom
immediately they derive their power and authority, by whom they are set over
their charge, in whose name they must execute their office, unto whom they must
give an account, Act. 20. 28.
and whose ministers they are. Take heed to your selves, and to the whole
flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers: the Apostle speaks
unto the Presbyters of Ephesus, and says they were appointed overseers of the
holy Ghost, that they might govern the church of God. They were chosen and
ordained of men, Ames. tom. 1. Bellarm. enervat. cap. 3. cap. 8.. 14. Th.
Aquin. 1. did. 12. qu. 1. a. 3. and Contra Gentes, l. 3. cap. 70.
and so by immediety of person were not of God; Bellarm. De Pont. Romans lib. 2.
cap. 17.. Observandum est.
but their gifts, office and authority was immediately of God. In conferring
those offices God uses the ministry of men; but the office or authority it
self is not from men but from God alone. God only in regard of authority does
ever apply all power ecclesiastical unto every particular person: his sole
authority does all in it, though sometimes, as in ordinary callings, the
ministry of others does concur. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11.
When Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers. The Pastourship is
the gift of Christ no less then the Apostleship; and that the more, because it
is perpetual in the church. Every Pastor is not immediately called, but the
office and order of Pastors is immediately from Christ and not from the
church. The person is not immediate, but the calling or vocation, and so the
order and authority and all the jurisdiction. But if the calling, order and
authority be immediately from Christ, then it is not derived from the community
of the faithful as the immediate receptacle. Christ has given some to be
Apostles, and some to be Doctors; not all to be Apostles, nor all to be
Doctors: But if the power of ordinary ministers be in the church, and the
power of ordinary teaching be given to every believer, all should be made
Doctors, though not to continue so in excercising the power. 1. Cor. 12. 28.
God has set some in the church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that miracles, etc. Teachers in respect of their function,
verse 29.
office and jurisdiction are immediately from God, as well as the Apostles: and
God has set some only to be Teachers, not all. The steward is appointed of
the master of the family alone, and has all his authority and jurisdiction
from him: but the ministers of the Gospel are the stewards whom he has set
over his house. Tit. 1. 7.
The harvest is the Lords, Matthew. 24 41.
and to him it belongs to send forth laborers into the harvest. Matthew. 9. 38.
There be differences of ministeries, 1. Cor. 12. 5.
but the same Lord. But if they have their order, office and authority from God
immediately, they derive it not from the community of the faithful. Every
ambassador in the cause of his embassage does immediately depend upon him from
whom he is sent, both with the incorrupt and indelible instrument of
commandments or mandates: But the ministers of the word are the ambassadors,
2. Cor. 5. 20.
not of men but of Christ: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.
they are the ministers of Christ, as having received power, office and gifts
from him, and not of the church, as if they derived their power from the
faithful. Phil. 1. 1.
The Pastors may be called the ministers of the church, 2. Cor. 6. 4.
as the Lords ministers or servants and the churches ministers or servants are
taken indifferently: Romans 1. 1.
but they are the Lords ministers, 2. Cor. 4. 5.
as they receive their authority, Col. 1. 24, 25.
office and gifts from him, which they are bound to exercise and employ to the
glory of his name; the ministers or servants of the church, because they
minister to the church, or in the church, and are instituted by the head of the
church for the use and profit of the body. Ezekiel. 34 6, 8, 31.
The people are sheep and not the ministers, but the Lords and for the Lord:
and the ministers are servants for the church, but the Lords and not the
churches in the sense above named. And so they are and ought rather to be
called the ministers of Christ then of the church: 1 Cor. 4. 1.
for all power spiritual and ecclesiastical is a gift of God, supernatural,
given to the church, because it is first given to certain persons in the
church, and by them agrees to the church; as faith, prophecy, etc. is in the
church, Heb. 3. 5, 6.
not primo and immediately, Gal. 6. 10.
but agrees to particular persons in the church. 1. Pet. 2. 5.
The officers are part of the house and household, All the faithful are the
Lords servants, but ministers are his servants in office after a special
manner.
and they are the Lords servants in his house also: and the people are the
Lords servants in his house, and not only his house or household; but they give
not authority to the officers, neither be they servants peculiar to do the
things which belong to servants in office by peculiar right. Power
ecclesiastical both of Order and Jurisdiction (as it is usually called) is
signified by the power of the keys, or the power of binding or loosing: But
the power of the keys is immediately given to the ministers and guides of the
church from God, and not from the church or community of the faithful. For the
keys contein not only order, but power, exercise, and all ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, which the guides of the church received immediately from Christ.
As Peter received the keys of the kingdom of heaven, so the rest of the
Apostles: and as the Apostles, so all their successors received them from
Christ. The Apostles had extraordinary power, and might in some cases exercise
it singularly and personally without concurrence of others; and their
commission was of larger extent then the charge of ordinary Pastors or
church governors: but the spiritual power to bind and loose, remit and retein
sins, open and shut the kingdom of heaven, is communicated to all officers,
from the hand and by the mandate of the same Lord and Master. One ministerial
power may be in degree of dignity above another: for the power of one may be
about more noble acts then the power of another; or in the same kind, the power
of one may be more extended, and the power of another more contracted. Thus the
Deacons had for the object of their power and care not so excellent a thing as
that of Pastors, Evangelists and Apostles: thus the power of ordinary Pastors
was not so universal as the Apostles: even as in the orders of servants
domestical, some are employed about lesser, some about greater and more
honorable subjects: But all power of the servants must be derived from the
same master of the family, upon whom they depend, and unto whom they ow
service: and the whole power of the Lords ministers is derived immediately from
Christ; and not from the faithful knit together in covenant.

The church cannot convey what she never had: Object. 1.
But the church may choose her ministers; Gratiam. Docret. did. 79. can. 8.
Quem universitatis consensus ^legerit. ^r. de Zabar. Car^. Florent. tract. De
schism. Nomine universitatis debet intelligi universitas totius Christianitatis.
as the Papists say, The church does choose the Pope: for the Cardinals do not
choose the Pope by their authority, but of the church: Therefore the church
conveyeth authority to her ministers.

The church cannot virtually or formally convey what she never had, Answ.
but ministerially she may, sc. as ministering to him who has power and virtue
of deriving it. Nothing can give that which it had not formally or virtually,
unless it give it as an instrument to one who has it; but so it may give what
it never had, nor is capable of. A man not having a penie of his own, may give
an hundred pounds, if the King make him his almoner: A steward may give all
offices in his masters house, as ministerially executing his masters pleasure.
Thus the church deriveth, as taking the person whom Christ describes, and out
of power will have placed in this or that office in the church. The persons of
the ministers are not immediately separated by Christ to that function, as were
the Apostles: but their gifts, calling and authority is immediately from him.
In respect of their graces and office there interveneth to midst betwixt Christ
and them: but the appointment or designation of them to this or that place is
from the church. The office is not given of men but of God only, although in
conferring and special applying that power and exercise he use men as
instruments or ministers. The church is in setting out or ordaining this or
that man, as the college is in choosing, when she takes the man whom the
statute of her Founder does manifestly design: And therefore though the church
have power to elect their minister, it follows not that the power of the
keys is immediately in the whole multitude or society of the faithful. For
electours have not evermore authority over him whom they elect; but authority
and power only to apply that power to him whom they choose. The power of the
Imperial dignity is not in the electours of the Emperors; nor the power of
that office and authority whereunto a minister is elected, in the church who
chooses him to that office. Chamier. tom. 2. lib. 11. cap. 19.. 11.
If we consider what men give or give not, universally it must be denied that
any men can make ministers; because they do not give the office, gifts or
authority, which is from Christ alone. And therefore as they receive their
office and graces from God, so they execute their office in the name of Christ,
and not of the church: whereas if the church did virtually and out of power
make an officer, he should execute his office in her name, as we see with those
whom the king makes in the commonwealth. But the church deals in the
election of ministers in a steward-like manner, ministering to the sole Lord and
Master of the house; and receives them into the house, not in her own, but in
the Lords name, and to do their office not in her name but in the name of their
Lord and Master, who only out of power did confer that office upon them.
Whence it follows, that ordinary power of the keys with the execution
thereof is not given to the community of the faithful or the whole multitude,
much less to two or three knit together in covenant.

The keys of the kingdom of heaven were promised and given to Peter as to a
faithful man, Object. 2.
and so to all the faithful, Matthew. 16. 17.
or to the community of the faithful. By the keys is meant the Gospel of
Christ, opening a way by him and his merits as the door into the kingdom: and
we must take heed of this deep delusion of Antichrist, Robins. Against Bern.
page 149, 150.
in imagining that this power of binding or loosing sins is held to any
office or order in the church. Whereupon it follows necessarily, that one
faithful man, Idem, page 150.
yea or woman either, may as truly and effectually loose or bind both in heaven
and earth as all the ministers in the world.

Either this is not to the purpose, Answ.
or the power of the keys, and so all communicated power ecclesiastical with
the execution thereof, is committed to every faithful man and woman as truly
as to the Apostles. That private Christians, yea women and children, may
exhort, rebuke, or comfort ex officio charitat is generali, out of the general
office of charity, we confess; that by such exhortations people have been
brought to the faith, we also believe: But that power to preach per modum
legationis, by way of embassage, or power of the keys has been committed to
them, we never find: rather, this power was proper to the ministers ex Divino
instituto speciali, by special Divine institution, and established upon
special promise. Unto Peter making confession was the promise of the keys
made, but not to him as a confessor, but to him and the rest as they should be
Apostles sent forth with authority and commission to preach the Gospel, plant
churches, bind and loose, etc. Otherwise not only the community of the
faithful, but every faithful man or woman, might exercise those acts of
feeding, binding and loosing, and ruling, employed in the power of the keys. In
phrase of speech to deliver the keys unto a man, Isa. 22. 23, 24.
is to make him an officer, steward, or dispenser in the house under his lord
and master, to give him authority to open and shut, bind and loose. When our
Savior said to his Disciples, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; As my
Father sent me, so send I you; Go, teach all nations; Whatsoever ye shall bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven: does he not appoint them to chief offices in
his house? and what does he give them more then the keys of the kingdom? A
legate or messenger is not sent without authority, power and jurisdiction; nor
the keys of the house committed to his trust and care who is not in office.
The keys of the kingdom import not only authority and jurisdiction, but
power of exercising: and for that reason some have thought Peter to be a
sociall type of the whole church, because the church does exercise the keys.
But the community of the faithful are not officers in the house, to exercise
the power of the keys, to open and to shut. And if Peter received the keys
from Christ as a faithful man, then the Apostles and their successors
received their order and jurisdiction, their authority and power of exercising
from the faithful and not from Christ immediately. Thus Protestant Divines
dispute against the Papists, If Bishops receive their authority and power of
exercising immediately from Christ by mandate, mission and commission, then
they derive it not from the Pope. And by the same reason, if the power of the
keys be the immediate gift of God to the Apostles and their successors, then
they derive not their power and authority from the people or faithful in
covenant. There is a key of supreme Authority, proper to God alone; a key of
Excellency, given to Christ, and proper to him; a key of Ministry, given to
the Apostles and their successors; and (if any be pleased so to call it) a key
of Charity, given to all the faithful, who are able to exhort, rebuke,
comfort, and instruct. For every Christian may admonish, rebuke, comfort,
exhort, and so convert a sinner from the error of his way, and cover a
multitude of sins: The office of teaching is laid upon some few chosen and
ordained thereunto. Into this office may no man intrude, nor usurp it without a
lawful calling, Ainsw. Mr Bern. reas. dispr. 176.
but this is only an act of love and charity, an office or duty which by right
of brotherhood every one owes unto his neighbor without any special calling
or authority. Whereas the matter we speak of is the spiritual power which
Christ has given for the preservation and government of his church, the
exercise whereof consists in acts of order, office, ministry, or function,
whereunto they are in special designed and called. And so if the matter of the
exhortation, rebuke or admonition be one for substance, the order, function,
authority, commission, power of exercising, and calling to exercise is not the
same. And therefore the power of the keys promised to Peter, which does note
power and authority of function, was not promised nor given to the community
of the faithful, much less to every faithful man or woman.

The power of the keys given to the Apostles, Object. 3.
was given to the church, intuitu ejusdem tanquam finis and totius. The flux of
ecclesiastical authority from the church is two fold: per intuitum, as in them
that be immediately called of Christ: and per interventum, as in them that are
called mediately.

It is true, Answ.
the Apostles were given to the church intuitu ejusdem tanquam finis, and the
power they received was for the good of the whole: but this is not enough that
power may be said to be received immediately by the church as the first
receptacle of it, and from it derived unto others, but this power must be in
the community as the first subject from whom it comes to the officers. As the
power of seeing is not only given intuitu hominis as the end of it, and the
totum to whom it agrees, 1. Cor. 3. 22. and 4. 1.
but is in homine as the first subject from whom it comes to the eye. 1. Tim.
3. 15.
The Apostles and other governors were given of Christ for the church, as for
the end; and all their authority was given unto them for the church, as for the
whole: but the authority it self was immediately derived from Christ, and is
not in the church as the immediate subject thereof. The authority of the
Apostles and other guides was for the church, given for the good of the whole
society, and so may be called the authority of the church: but the authority is
not immediately in the church as the subject, nor derived from the church, but
from Christ the King of the church. The authority of governors is given of
Christ, for a gift to the church, but not for a gift absolute, that it may
reside in the power of the whole church to whom it is given, but for a
conditional gift, that it may be communicated to the governors themselves for
the edification of the whole. It is one thing then to ask for what end or whose
use the keys are given; 1. Cor. 12. 7.
another, to whom. To every one is given the declaration of the spirit for
profit, that is, the good of the church. But was this gift given to the
community of the faithful first, and immediately? 1. Cor. 3. 12.
No; 1. Tim. 3. 15.
by gift and possession it was given to some, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
but for use and profit it was public.

As the Saints are not priests only for themselves, Object. 4.
but for their brethren, for whom they offer up the spiritual sacrifices of
prayer and thanksgiving; so neither are they kings for themselves alone,
Robins. Against Bern. Page 226, and 133.
but for their brethren also, having the power of Christ whereby to judge them,
1. Cor. 5. 4, 12. the keys of the kingdom to bind and loose them, Matthew. 16.
19. in the order of him prescribed. The order of kings is the highest order or
estate in the church: Idem, page 217.
but the order of Saints is the order of kings, and we are kings as we are
Saints, not as we are officers, Exodus 19. 6. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 1. 6.

Christ makes every believer a king, Answ.
priest, and prophet, to teach, exhort, reprove, comfort, offer up spiritual
sacrifices of prayer and praise, and to guide and govern in the ways of
godliness: But this belongs not to the spiritual, ministerial power and
authority which Christ has given for the conservation and government of his
church. For every Christian man and woman is made a king, priest and prophet
unto God to perform all offices required in that relation: but the spiritual
power of government with the execution thereof is not committed to every
believer in particular, nor to any one. The officers of Christ do neither feed
and teach as prophets, nor govern as kings, nor offer sacrifices as priests.
The word it self teaching and feeding is one thing, which flows from Christ
as Prophet: the administration of the word, whence also flows the act of
governing, is from Christ as King. It is from internal communion with Christ,
that the sound, sincere, faithful, and they only are made spiritual kings
and priests unto God: but it is from Christ as King, governing externally, as
be bears the similitude of a political head, that his servants do feed, rule
and censure in his name. They only are made true kings and priests unto God
who have received from Christ the life of grace: but they have received
authority from Christ to do service in his church who have not received life of
grace nor are made kings or priests unto God. The Kingdom, Priesthood, or
Prophecy of Christ does make no man politically either priest, or king, or
prophet: for then all believers should exercise the office of political
priests, kings and prophets in the church; which is opposite to the nature of
Christ's kingdom. Christ according to his Person is neither external King nor
Pastor; but does govern his church externally by pastors and ministers, yet
not as by kings or priests political, but as servants only. Pastors and
teachers are but officers in the church, and in no kingly authority by
participation of Christ's kingly office, neither are they as civil governors,
though the Lords servants, yet the peoples lords and masters. But it is one
thing to be a spiritual king or priest unto God, another to be a pastor or
teacher in Gods church: for that is common to all Christians, this peculiar
unto them that have received authority of function from Christ. The Saints
therefore as spiritual kings have not received power from Christ by function
or authority to censure their brethren, or externally to rule or govern; but
this belongs to them who are designed of Christ the King unto this office.
Every Christian woman may exhort or reprove without any designement of the
church: is every woman made a prophet externally in the church? Is power to
administer the sacraments, and authoritatively to censure offenders, (se.
autoritate muneris not officii generalis or charitatis) committed to every
member of the society, because every believer may exhort and admonish, not
only his brother of the same or another society, but even them that are
without? By the keys of the kingdom, power and jurisdiction is noted, and not
the bare duty of instruction or admonition. The power of the keys is given by
Christ, Matthew* 28. 19.
as the King of his church, Ephesians. 4. 11.
as is evident by the general institution of ecclesiastical polity, and the
particular narration of polity instituted: but that every Christian was sent
forth with authority and commission we never read. And if this reason be of any
force, every believer man or woman is of equal authority to the Apostles in
matters of ecclesiastical government, because the order of saints is the order
of kings, and that is the highest: which is directly corsse to the holy
scripture and the order appointed by Christ the King and Head of his church.

They that have received Christ, Object. 5.
have received the power of Christ, and his whole power: for Christ and his
power are not divided, nor one part of his power from another: But every
company or communion of faithful people have received Christ, Robins. Against
Bern. page 131.
John 1. 12. Romans 8. 32. Isa. 9. 6. and with him power, and right to enjoy him
(though all the world be against it) in all the means by which he does
communicate himself unto his church.

This objection is not to be understood of the essentially Divine power of
Christ which is proper to him as the Son of God, Answ.
nor of the uncommunicated power of Christ given to him as Mediator, nor of
that communion and fellowship which every sincere Christian and faithful soul
has with him in his death and resurrection; but of the communicated power of
Christ which he has given to his church or certain officers in the church for
the good government of all and every memeber of that society: And in this sense
it is not true, that Christ has given his whole power first and immediately to
every person, or every company, John 1 12.
two or three gathered together, who receive him. Romans 8 32.
Every believer, man or woman, has received Christ, Isa. 9. 6.
as well as every company or communion of people: has every one received power
to preach the word, administer the sacraments, feed, rule, bind and loose,
censure and absolve? women and children as well as men? two as well as two
hundred? private persons as well as guides? John 15. 1, 5.
with or without consent of the rest? Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and 4. 15, 16. and 5.
2, 3.
as well out of as in case of necessity? Every sound believer is knit to
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 25, 29, 30.
as a branch to the Vine, as a live-member to the Head, or a wife to the
Husband, Revel. 21. 2.
and receives the sap of grace, sense, living and motion immediately from
Christ the true Vine, and Head of his church: But every believer or company of
believers must not challenge that power and authority immediately which Christ
does communicate to his ministers and guides for the right managing of all
things in his church, or to the church with the guides and officers for the
edification of the body. All power of the natural body must be together,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
but it is not so in the spiritual. And if it was, the society must grow up
into a perfect body, complete in all parts, before it can have or exercise the
power of the whole: which two or three gathered together ordinarily cannot be
in political order, as may be showed hereafter

The church is a Queen, Object. 6.
a Mother, a Lady, a Spouse, and to whom should Christ first commit his power
but to his Queen? Robins. Against Bern. Page ^23. and 133.
we know well the church is the wife and spouse of Christ, and the Ministers
stewards. Cant. 8. 9. Ephesians. 5. 29, 30, 32. 1. Cor. 4. 1.

To let pass, Answ.
that this title of Spouse or Queen may be applied to one believer as well as
two or three; and that the guides and officers are known by those titles and
relations as well as believers not in office. Considering this power is not a
Lordly power, but a power of doing service to the church for Christ his sake,
and his kingdom: therefore it is fit it should be committed to some persons,
and not to the whole community, which is the Queen of Christ. For Christ the
King of his church has not committed power to his Church or Queen to serve her
self properly; but to have persons, who in this relation should stand
distinguished from her, who are in his name to do her service. The power of
priesthood was not first in the church of Israel, and so derived to the
priests; but immediately from Christ seated in Aaron and his sons. The
community of the faithful have neither the power of government, nor the use of
that power. Not the power: for it is immediately from Christ seated in such
officers or principal members as Christ himself the King of his church shall
authorize, and not in the body considered apart from the officers. Nor the use
of that power; because that cannot be enjoyed without officers. And if it may
stand with the honor of the church to want the exercise or dispensation of
that power or authority, it derogateth nothing from the prerogative of the
faithful to want the power it self. For it is as much for the welfare and good
of the church, that Christ out of respect to his Spouse has given her
commandment, as his steward, to elect and choose officers according to his
appointment who should receive power and authority from him for such and such
offices and services in the church, as that he should seat the power it self in
a few or many believers, to be derived from them unto others according to
pleasure. For though their authority and power be from Christ and not from the
church, yet the service and authority is for the church in the name of Christ:
and in that sense they are subject to the church. 2. Cor. 4. 5.
In the church the officers are the ministers of Christ, to execute and
administer the judgments and censures of God against the obstinate, but for
the church. They are for the people, but not ministers of the people, as if
they drew their authority from them, and were to execute their judgments. But
though the community has not power given unto them, yet such estate is put
upon them by Christ the King and Husband of his church, that all power is to be
executed in such manner as stands with respect to their excellency.

If spiritual and ecclesiastical power be in the church or community of the
faithful, Argum. 2.
the church does not only call but make officers out of virtue and power
received into herself, and then should the church have a true lordlike power in
regard of her ministers. For as he that will derive authority to the church
makes himself Lord of the church, so if the church derive authority to the
ministers of Christ she makes herself Lady or Mistress over them in the
exercise of that lordlike authority. For, as all men know, it is the property
of the Lord and Master to impart authority. Did the church give power to the
Pastors and Teachers, she might make the sacrament and preaching, which one
does in order, no sacrament, no preaching: for it is the order instituted of
God that gives being and efficacy to these ordinances: and if the power of
ruling, feeding, and dispensing the holy things of God do reside in the
faithful, the word and sacrament in respect of dispensation and efficacy shall
depend upon the order and institution of the society. If the power of the keys
be derived from the community of the faithful, then are all officers
immediately and formally servants to the church, and must do every thing in the
name of the church, rule, feed, bind, loose, remit and retein sins, preach,
and administer the sacraments; then they must perform their office according to
the direction of the church, more or less, seldom or frequent, remiss or
diligent: for from whom are they to receive direction how to carry themselves
in their office but from him or them from whom they receive their office, whose
work they are to do, and from whom they must expect reward. If their office and
power be of God immediately, they must do the duties of their place according
to his designement, and unto him they must give account: But if their power and
function be from the church, the church must give account to God, and the
officers unto the church, whom she does take to be her helpers. If it be said
that God will have the church to choose officers to execute the power committed
unto her, the answer is, Either God will have her elect officers of his
designement, to do his work, according to that power he shall give them, and by
his direction; and then they are Gods servants and not the churches, and
receive their charge and function immediately from God, and not from the
people: or he leaves it to the arbitrament of the church to choose according to
pleasure such as must receive charge and authority from her; and then they must
execute their office in her name, so as shall seem good unto the church, and
neither longer nor otherwise. For if the ministers of the church be subject to
God and Christ by the intervention of the faithful only, that they preach or
administer the sacraments, rule or feed, they have it from the people and not
from God. And if they depend immediately upon the faithful, to wit, two or
three gathered together in covenant, they must derive and draw from them what
in order they are to preach unto men in the name of the Lord: For from him must
the ambassador learn his errand from whom he receives his commission.
Moreover, if the power of the keys be given first and immediately unto the
community of the faithful, what reason can be given why in defect of officers
the church might not rule, govern, feed, bind, loose, preach, and administer
the sacraments; or if any fail in any office, why she might not supply that
want by her power? For the power of the keys does contein both authority and
exercise; power being given to this end, that it might be exercised as it is
vouchsafed. But the church, when she is destitute of officers, cannot execute
those acts of rule, nor by her power supply the want of any office: only she
has a ministry of calling one whom Christ has described, that from Christ he
may have power of office given him in the vacant place.

In the church of Christ the officers are called servants, Object. 1.
and in that relation the church may be called a Lord: 2. Cor. 4. 5.
And if Christ truly call the Son of man Lord of the Sabbath, because the
Sabbath was made for man, Robins. Against Bern. page 215.
and not man for the Sabbath, we may also call the church in a respect Lord of
the officers, for the officers are for the church, and not the church for them.
Idem, page 214.
The church officers are the church-servants; and it is strange men should have
no command over their servants.

If the officers of Christ be both of and for the church or people and
community, Answ.
the people may not only in some respects be called their Lords, but indeed
they have a true lordlike power over them. But the church has no lordlike
power over the ministers of Christ, whom he has set over his house to rule and
guide it by authority received from him and according to his direction, 1. Pet.
5. 4.
whose ministers properly they are, who is the Prince of Pastors. The object
about which the ecclesiastical ministry is exercised is the church, and their
function is for the good of the church: but the principal cause and Lord of
the ministers upon whom they depend is Christ and not the church. When our
Savior says, The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12. 8.
he speaks of himself alone, Mark 2. 27, 28.
rather then of man in general: For to be the Lord of the Sabbath, that is, to
have the Sabbath in his power, so as he might dispense or do contrary to the
law, is proper to the Lawgiver. Chemn. Harm. cap. 48. Pisc. in Matthew. 12. 8.
Schol. Beza, Annot. in Marc. 2. 2^.
But not to insist thereupon, the ministers are appointed for the good of the
flocks committed to their charge in the name of Christ, but the flocks neither
are nor ought to be called Lords or Masters of their Pastors or Teachers.

As in the natural body all power is first in the community or totum, Object.
2.
and afterward in a particular person or part, so it is in the body
ecclesiastical.

All that is true in the body natural or politic cannot be applied to the
mystical body of Christ: Answ. Parabola and analogia non oport^t, nec potest
per omnia esse similis; alias non jam parabola, sed ipsa eadem res esset, Th.
Aquin. 3. part. qu. 8.
For analogum is not in omni simile; for then it should be the same with the
analogatum. All the power of hearing, seeing, etc. are in the whole man, which
does produce them effectually, though formally and instrumentally they are in
the ear and eye: and the reason is, because these powers are natural; and
whatever is natural, does first agree to the community or totum, and afterward
to a particular person or part: But all that is in these bodies cannot hold in
Christ's mystical body. In a natural body the power is first in the community;
in a particular person, from it: but all ecclesiastical power is first in our
King, before any in the church from him. In natural bodies the power of seeing
is first immediately in the man; and for the man, in the eye: In the mystical
body the faith of the believer is not first immediately in all, then in the
believer, but first of all and immediately in the personal believer, for whose
good it serves more properly then for the whole; every man being to live by
his own faith. One man is capable of grace, which cannot agree to the whole
community immediately. The power of Apostleship or of ordinary ministry was
not first in the church and so derived to the Apostles and ministers, but
immediately from Christ seated in the Apostles and ordinary Pastors and
Teachers. For seeing power ecclesiastical was first in Christ, as in a prince,
not subject to the church, or dependent upon her, consequently it pertains to
him as prince to take order concerning his ambassadors and substitutes, whose
power is derived from him, not from the church, who of her own nature is not a
mistress in spiritual things, but the servant of Jesus Christ, redeemed by
him. Christ is the first author of this spiritual power, upon whose will and
institution all things depend: as for the church, she can give no spiritual
power, to few or many, one or more, as please herself, for what time she will,
but must submit to that which Christ has left for her spiritual good and
comfort.

The words are as clear as the sun, Object. 3. Robins. Against Bern. page 170.
Tell the church, that is, the congregation or assembly whereof the offender is
a member: which rule concerns all the visible churches in the world, since
the power of excommunication is an essential property, Idem, page 227.
one of the keys of the kingdom, the only solemn ordinance in the church for
the humbling and saving of an obstinate offender, and as necessary as the power
to receive in members, without which a church cannot be gathered or consist.
But what are we to understand by the church or assembly? A company consisting
though but of two or three separated from the world, whether Unchristian or
Antichristian, and gathered into the name of Christ by a covenant, made to walk
in the ways of God made known unto them, Idem. page 125.
though they be without any officers among them, which company being a church
has interest in all the holy things of Christ within and amongst themselves
immediately, under him the head, without any foreign aid or assistance. Idem,
page* 126.
For a set company of believers must needs be a constituted visible church.
Acts 19. 32, 40. and 11. 26.
Two or three or more people making Peter's confession, Matthew. 16. are the
church. There were churches before olders ordained: Acts 14. 2^.
and a company of faithful people without officers may be in covenant with
God, 1. Cor. 12* 28. (...) page 128.
and have him dwell amongst them, and may have communion one with another, and
their children have right to baptism. Idem, page 130.
And it must be considered that two or three gathered together have the same
right with two or three hundred. By two or three having this power of binding
or loosing, Idem. page 181.
cannot be meant two or three ministers considered severally from the body
(which alone are not the church for any public administration, but the
officers of the church) but by two or three are meant the meanest communion or
society of Saints, whether with officers or without officers. This then is that
which he would clearly evince out of this text of scripture, That spiritual
power is essentially and primarily given to the society of the faithful, few
or many, though but two or three; to the faithful without their guides or
officers, who are added to the church, and derive their authority from the
church, to whom it agrees secondarily and by accident: and so by the church
understand any collection of the faithful united in covenant, great or small,
few or many, with or without guides or officers.

The church is sometimes put for believers, Answ.
few or many; But to the making up of a visible distinct society or
congregation properly so called, or body political, furnished with the power
of Christ for government, and the exercise of all religious duties and
ordinances of worship, a competent number is requisite and necessary. At first
Adam and Eve were the church, when there were none other persons in the world,
and might perform all the officers of a church at that time required of them:
But two or three are no sufficient number to make up that society which now we
speak of. There is a twofold church, Romans 15. 6.
as the society of Christians is twofold; Col. 4* 11.
public, or private. The private society may be in one family, though small:
The public society is a convenient number of such as do in one uniform agreed
course of outward joint worship of God profess that righteousness which is by
the faith of Jesus Christ. Acts ^. 38, 41. and 8. 5, 6, 7, 12, 13. and 9. 31.
The number of men worshipping God aright is a church, Romans 1. 17. and 3. 21.
be it few or many: Philipp. 3. 9.
be it few or many: but two or three cannot make up an entire society,
consisting of all its parts, fitted to the execution of all substantial
offices perteining to the body or corporation. A competent and fit number there
must be to make up this body; but no precise number is or can be determined: it
may be more or less according to the circumstances of time, place, and other
occurrences. Therefore for our direction in this case it is good to look at
their pattern who first planted the churches of God, according to the wisdom
of God, and by the direction of his Spirit. And to begin with the Apostles,
because we speak of Christian churches, first by comparing passages of holy
scripture together we shall find, Tit. 1. 5.
that to ordain elders city by city, Acts 14. 23. and 16. 4.
and to ordain elders church by church, are used as phrases adaequate and
aequipollent; not that the whole multitude of the one and local bounds of the
other should make but one congregation, but because the Christians or believers
within those bounds or limits were framed into one Christian society or church.
For Presbyters were not given but to Disciples and Christians now converted out
of the multitude and local limits wherewith cities were bounded. Now though
the Apostles framing the cities with their suburbs and territories into one
church or society on the present occasion does not exclude the constituting of
any other society or congregation within the same local bounds, Revel. 1. 11.
(...) is put for (...), as is evident by like places. The church in Ephesus,
Ephesians. 1. 1. Revel. 2. 1. in Philippi, Phil. 1. 1. in Corinth, 1. Cor. 1. 2. in
Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. and 11. 22. in Ant^o^th, Acts 13. 1. (...) in Smyrna,
Rev. 2. 8, 12, etc.
when the multitude of believers should be increased; yet it does evidently
confirm, that the number of believers requisite to the making up of a perfect
or complete church in all parts and offices must not be small. The Apostles
never comprehend the multitude of citizens unconverted to the profession of the
faith under the name of the church; neither can it be imagined, that the whole
multitude within those local circuits, united in civil society, was linked by
any spiritual bond or tie: but the city had the reason of an ample continent,
the church of a thing contained. Nevertheless the blessing of God considered,
Acts 2. 41, 47. and 8. 12. and 9. 35, 42. and 11. 21, 24. and 13. 48. and 14.
21. and 17. 12. and 18. 8.
which did extraordinarily accompany the labors of the Apostles, according to
the prophesies foregoing touching the calling of the Gentiles, the number of
believers, we may well think, within that circuit was very great. But if we
take a view of particular churches, the matter will be more plain. Acts 8. 1.
and 15. 4.
The Christian church at Jerusalem was one distinct society, which did
congregate upon occasion, Acts 2. 42, 44, 46. and 5. 12. and 6. 1. and 15. 22.
and 21. 22.
and held communion in the ordinances of worship: But it grew and increased;
first to three thousand, then to five thousand; afterward multitudes of men and
women were added, Acts 2. 41. and 4. 4.
and then it came to millions. Acts 5. 14.
It may be in this last number such believers are reckoned as had no fixed
habitation in Jerusalem, Acts 21. 20.
but came thither upon occasion, and were there in transitu, and not as fixed
members of this church: viz. such as came up by occasion of the Passover or
Pentecost or other like feast, and were only there for the present. It may be
the Apostles tolerated them, though more then could fitly meet together
ordinarily in one congregation, because they foresaw such times to ensue,
wherein many of them should translate themselves, and be dispersed hither and
thither. It may be also, God let it grow more rank and abundant then ordinary
churches, because it was ecclesia surcularis, many of whose branches were to be
translated in their time. But whatsoever might be the reason of this great
number, this is certain, the multitude was great: for after it was grown to
five thousand, and multitudes of men and women were added, Acts 6. 1.
it increased daily: The number of disciples increased greatly in Jerusalem,
Acts 6. 7.
and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith. The Syriack
Interpreter has it, of the Jews, sc. inhabiting Judea: but the Greek, Arabic,
Ethiopick, Vulgar, and Chrysostom approve the former. And the number of Priests
was not small, Ezra 2. 36, 37, 38, 39.
as the scripture witnesses. Acts 6. 2. and 8. 1. and 15. 2, 4.
And when all the Apostles, or the greatest part of them, remained at
Jerusalem, continuing in the ministry of the word and prayer, and that they
might do it the more earnestly and diligently, left off the care of the poor
to others, Acts 6. 2, 3, 4.
how can we think that the whole church did not multiply and increase? It is
most probable, that the whole city of Samaria in a manner embraced the faith.
Acts 8. 6.
The people gave heed with one accord unto those things which Philip spoke. As
the whole city from the least unto the greatest had given heed to Simon Magus
before, Acts 8. 11, 12.
so to Philip now, when he preached Christ. It is said also that Samaria
received the Gospel, Acts 8* 14.
which argues that it had universal enterteinment among them. In other
churches we shall not find the number of believers mentioned precisely: Acts
13. 1. and 14. 27.
but without question it was not samall in Antioch of which it is said, Acts
11. 21.
a great number believing, turned unto the Lord, verse. 24.
as that Barnabas by his preaching added a great multitude unto the Lord; and
that Paul and Barnabas continued there teaching and preaching with many others
the word of the Lord. Acts 11. 26, 27. and 15. 30, 34, 35.
The like may be said of Corinth, Philippi, Acts 13. 44, 45.
and the seven churches of Asia, which are all spoken of as particular churches
and societies. ^. Cor. 9. 2. and 11. 10.
They stretch the limits of the church of Corinth too far that extend it to
all the Saints in Achaia, because the Apostle names the rest of Achaia with
them, as he does all Saints in all places. For he might speak of them as of
diverse churches in one province, Acts 15. 23.
as he does in other places: And it is too gross to think that all in Achaia
came to Corinth to be instructed, and make their contribution, every church
using the first day of the week when they assembled, 1. Cor. 16. 1, ^.
to make their collections within themselves. Neither can it be well conceived
how all Achaia should assemble together for the service of God and the
execution of discipline, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
as it is noted of the church of Corinth. 1. Cor. 11. 17, 23.
It will easily be credited that the number of believers was great in Ephesus,
1. Cor. 14. 23.
if we call to mind, that when Paul had been there but two years all they
which dwelt in Asia had heard the word of the Lord, Acts 19. 10.
both Jews and Graecians, those that had used curious arts came and burned
their books in the sight of all men, Acts 19. 19.
(which could not be done without great danger unto the church, unless a great
part of the city had believed) the art of making shrines and Diana's temple was
in danger to be set at nothing, verse. 26. 27.
and that a great door and effectual was opened unto the Apostle at Ephesus.
1. Cor. 16. 9.
And that the multitude of believers was great in all proper, settled,
political societies, appears in this, that the Apostles appointed diverse
overseers, Phil. 1. 1.
elders and deacons to teach and govern the people and take care of the poor:
Acts 20. 17, 25.
which they would not have Acts 6. 3. and 14. 23.
done, Til. 1. 5.
nor could the church have born the charge thereof, Jam. 5. 14.
if the number had not been large. Two or three making Peter's confession cannot
be the church in this passage of scripture: for the party complained of is one
member, and the complainant another; and he is to take with him one or two, if
he be not heard, before he bring the matter unto the church: and how then shall
any two or three separated from the world and consenting together in an holy
covenant be the church in this place. If any two or three consenting in an holy
covenant serve to make up this community or church, what hinders but it may
consist of women and children only? and so the spiritual authority of
teaching, exhorting, binding and loosing, remitting and reteining sins, shall
originally and executive agree unto a community of believing women whereof
every member is regularly incapable. For the Apostle teaches plainly, 1. Cor.
14. 34.
that a woman may not speak in the congregation. 1. Tim. 2. 14.
And though he speak particularly of prophesying and teaching, yet lays he
down a more general rule, Robins. of the lawfulness etc. page 76, 77.
forbidding all such speaking as in which authority is used, that is, usurped
over the man, which is done specially in judgment. And if a woman may not so
much as move a question in the church for instruction, how much less may she
give a voice or rather a reproof for censure? And if women be debarred by their
sex as from ordinary prophesying, Robins. Against Bern. page 206.
so from any other dealing wherein they take authority over the man, how can
two or three believing women be the church, with power ministerial, publicly
to bind and loose, remit and retein sins? And if two or three gathered
together have the same right and power with two or three hundred, or two or
three thousand, let the society without officers be never so great, it cannot
be the church that is here meant. For those Divines which hold power and
authority of binding and loosing to be delivered by Christ to the whole church,
that is, to every particular church collectively, because it pertains to them
to deny Christian communion to such wicked persons as add contumacy to their
disobedience, and to remit the punishment again upon repentance, they generally
with one consent maintein, that the execution and judicial exercising of this
power pertains to that company and assembly of officers or governors in
every church which the Apostle calls a presbytery. 1. Tim. 4. 14.
But our Savior in that text of Scripture speaks of the execution and
exercise of the power of binding and loosing, which was never committed to the
community of the faithful without officers. If the joint consent of orthodox
Divines move not, let it be considered, that the exercise of ecclesiastical
censures external and authoritative was never committed to the community of
the faithful without officers, never exercised by the faithful in any age of
the Christian church. Let such as plead for this power bring forth either
commission for it or precedent of it, if they be able. The external and
authoritative power of binding and loosing, as the greatest power in the
church, does comprehend under it all matters subordinate and of the same
nature, power to preach the word autoritatively, and to admit unto or put from
the sacraments: but the exercise of this inferior power was never committed to
a Christian society or church without officers. And if we will not make one
text of scripture contrary to another, we cannot think the exercise of that
power is here given to the community of the faithful, few or many, without
officers, which in all other places is given to the governors, never to the
faithful without guides. By the church the whole multitude of believers,
whether with officers or without, cannot be understood. For that power agrees
not to the whole body in actu primo or in esse (as they speak) whereof many
particular members regularly are not capable; as the faculty of speaking or
seeing should not first belong to man as the principium Quod, if the whole in
all parts were not capable of that power. But the power of binding or loosing
cannot regularly agree to many particular members of that community sc. women
and children. And if women and children though believers be here excluded, the
word church, must not be taken in the largest and most ordinary signification
in the new Testament: for so it comprehends all believers, disciples,
faithful linked in society. If the authority of binding or loosing pertein to
the whole church in actu primo sive in esse, and to the Presbytery alone in
actu secundo sive in operari, as the act of speaking pertains to a man as the
principium Quod, but to the tongue alone as the principium Quo, yet the church
cannot be taken for the whole community: for our Savior speaks of the
actual execution of this power, (and not of the power it self) which only
belongs to the governors. And if the church be the Christian Presbytery as
it exercises discipline, and not the multitude of the faithful, then is this
text in vain alleged to prove all power Ecclesiastical to be originally and
by way of execution in the community of the faithful: then the power of
hearing, examining, determining, and censuring does primarily belong unto the
Presbytery and not unto the faithful in common. God is the God of order and
not of confusion: But if the hearing and determining of all causes which may
fall out in a society consisting of three or four, six or eight, ten or twenty
thousand persons (for so many may be in one society) must be referred to the
whole community (and that upon the Lords day to be joined with the
administration of the word, Robins. Against Bern. page 230.
sacraments, alms, and the rest; yea, in these cases to go before the other
parts of worship, lest the holy things of God be polluted by notorious
obstinate offenders) disorder and confusion cannot be avoided. When shall
controversies be decided? How shall the community have sufficient intelligence
of the state and quality of matters? Either businesses must be determined
rashly, or infinitely protracted, before they can be heard of every man, and
they agreed together. In so great a multitude it cannot be conceived how things
should be done seasonably, moderately, in order, without partiality and
dissension, where every one may walk according to his own rule, and no man to
be guided or directed by another, but as pleases himself. And if spiritual
power originaliter and executive be given to every member of and to the whole
community of the faithful, then is every member in some sort a ruler and
governor. And if we search into the records of the church, we shall find none
example, either in the holy scriptures or the histories of the ancient church,
where the universal multitude of the faithful, none directing or governing
the action, Psalm. 82. 1.
did lawfully proceed in the determination of spiritual matters of this kind.
Numb. 35. 12, 24, 25. with Deuteronomy. 1. 16.
In the old testament not only (...), when it is rendered Synagoga, Numb. 27.
1, 27. with 36. 1, 2 Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12. and 21. 20.
but (...) when it is translated Ecclesia, signifies an assembly of princes
and elders of the people, and so of prophets likewise: for when the words are
general, Josh. 17. 5, 6, 7. and 26. with 4. v. Exodus 12. 3.
to note any assembly of men met together, whether civil or sacred, it is not
strange if the congregation of princes, (...) 8. 3. with 9. 1. 3.
nobles, elders, and prophets assembled be known by the same name. 1. Chron.
13. 2, 3. and 29. 1, 6. with 28. 1, 2.
In the new Testament the word church is sometimes an assembly or company
howsoever gathered together; but ordinarily it notes a society of faithful
Christians, 2. Chror. 1. 2, 3*
as all and every siant are called saints. Deuteronomy. 31. 28, (...).
But as the Apostle, when he does grievously reprehend the Corinthians that
they had not brought the knowledge of their contentions to the saints, 1.
King^. 8. 1, 2. with (...). v. (...). Deuteronomy. 23. 1. 2, 3.
he understands not the promiscuous multitude, (...) 4* 14.
but some special or chief amongst them: 2. Chron. 20. 5. and 6. 12, 14.
So by the church, Acts 19, 40.
which notes a multitude or society of believers, 1. Cor. ^. 1, 2, 3, etc.
we must understand some and the chief of the church, a church in a church. For
when it commonly signifies a multitude with relation to religion, the
church governors set over the flock by Christ, assembled to hear and
determine matters that may fall out amongst the faithful, is not unfitly nor
obscurely called the church. And those things are rightly said to be brought to
the church which are brought to them that guide the church by the authority and
appointment of Christ. As the body is said to see, when the eyes alone see; so
the church is said to hear that which they only do hear who are the ears of
the church. Not that the guides are substitutes of the multitude in that
respect; for the eye is not the deputy of the hand or foot: but that the power
which they have received, they have received it from Christ for the whole body,
and must execute it to the good and profit of the whole. They are the stewards,
deputies, ministers of Christ, but for the whole body and every member thereof.
From all this it is apparent, that the word church in this text of scripture
cannot be taken as it is commonly in other passages of the new Testament. For
in other texts it notes the multitude of believers, without distinction of
sex, age, or condition: but here women and children are excluded, as regularly
incapable of that power here spoken of. In other places the church signifies a
multitude of believers, Acts 11. 26. and 14. 23.
saints, faithful, or disciples, as they are distinguished from their officers
and guides, Robins. Against Bern. page 126, 127.
which are set as stewards in the Lords family and officers in his corporation:
but here the officers of the church are necessarily included. If the word must
be interpreted according to the circumstances of the text and the matter
entreated of, the matter here insisted upon is no where else touched in all the
new Testament (for here and no where else is a rule left by Christ how
offenders are to be dealt withal, and by whom the sentence is to be
determined) and if the matter be peculiar, it is no marvel if the words be
taken in a sense restrained. The Syriack interpreter uses three words to
express the greek (...). First, (...), Acts 7. 38.
Synagogue or Assembly, which is used for the Hebrew, (...), and (...), in the
old Testament; and for (...) and (...) in the new. Psalm. 22. 17. and 88. 31.
and 106. 17, 18.
But Matthew. 10. 17. he translateth (...) which Tremellius renders, Psalm. 1. 5.
in Concilia; Boderian, in domum judiciorum; Psalm. 22. 23. and 26. 5.
De Dieu, in domum judicum. For as among the Hebrews (...), so among the
Syrians (...), Jam. 2. 2.
is (...), and put for (...), Matthew. 10. 17.
James 2. 6. and (...), Acts 25. 23. The second word is (...) congregatio,
Matthew. 5. 22.
Acts 19. 32, 39, 40. and is used in the old Testament for (...), Acts 6. 15.
when it signifies the assembly of Judges, Psalm. 82. 1. and in the new for
(...), Judge. 5. 10. sit in judgment, Sept. (...).
Acts 5. 27. and 6. 12. and 23. 1, 20, 28. In other passages they translate it
(...), Matthew. 16. 18. and 18. 17. Acts 2. 47. and 5. 11. and 8. 1, 3. and 9.
31. Romans 16. 1, 4, 5, etc. which they use for (...), Psalm. 7. 8. and 74. 2. and
for (...), Psalm. 22. 26, 27. and 35. 12. and 40. 10. and 89. 6. and 149. 1. The
Arabic Interpreter uses four words in the new Testament; First of all
Gamhon; See Philem. 1. 2.
Acts 19. 31, 39. which in the old Testament they use for (...), Phil. 4. 5.
Psalm. 35. 18. and 74. 2. Psalm. 1. 5. and 82. 1. and (...), Heb. 2. 12.
Psalm. 22. 26. and 26. 5. and 149. 1. and in the new for (...), Col. 1. 18, 24.
Matthew. 10. 17. Jam. 2. 2. and (...), Acts 6. 12. The second, Gamahaton; Acts
7. 38. and and 11. 22. and 15. 3. Romans 16. 4, 5, 16. 1. Cor. 1. 2, etc. which
is used in the old Testament for (...), Psalm. 22. 17. even when it signifies
an assembly of princes, elders of judges. Number. 35. 12, 24, 25. and 27. 1, 2.
and 36. 1. and for (...), Psalm. 22. 23. and 68. 27. and in the new Testament
for (...), Matthew. 5. 22. The third, Kanisaton; Romans 16. 1. Acts 11. 26. and 12.
1, 5. and 13. 1. and 15. 4, 22. 1. Cor. 14. 19, 33. and in the Revelation every
where. The fourth, Bihaton; Matthew. 16. 18. and 18. 17. Acts 2. 47. and 5. 11.
and 8. 1. and 14. 27. and 18. 22. and 20. 17. 1. Cor. 6. 4. and 11. 16. Ephesians.
1. 22. and 3. 10. which is put for (...), Psalm. 40. 10. In the Arabic
Pentateuch they put Gawkon, for (...), Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3. and 31. 30. Lev. 4.
14. which word is not found in the new Testament. The Ethiopick interpreter,
Matthew. 18. 17. for, Tell the church, has, domui Christianorum, and so Matthew.
16. 18. domum Christianorum meorum, as De Dieu observes: And if all these
things be laid together, it will appear, the words used by the Syriack and
Arabic Interpreters will easily admit the former interpretation. And if we
compare one text of scripture with another, when the church spoken of in this
passage of Matthew has power to hear and determine controversies, and censure
offenders by public authority, which agrees to no spiritual society which
has not received power ministerial from Christ to preach the Gospel, and
receive unto and debar from the sacraments by public authority; it cannot be
that the community of the faithful in any particular society should be
understood by the church, seeing Christ the Lord of the church has not
communicated power to them to do such things themselves, nor to deliver it over
to the governors to have such things done in their name, but has immediately
given power to his officers and ministers to do such acts or service in his
name for the good and benefit of the society, and as it may stand with respect
to the honor, and estate which Christ has put upon the society, as his flock
and people.

Two scriptures are so plain, Object. 4.
clear, evident, and perspicuous for excommunication, Robins. Against Bern.
page 170.
the former Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. for the order and degrees of proceeding, the
other 1. Cor. 5. 4. for the persons interessed in the business, as that to
bring in other scriptures for the expounding of them, is in truth as needless
and lost a labor as to light the sun and moon a candle. They among whom the
fornication was, out of the midst of whom he was to be put, and which were
puffed up when they had rather cause of sorrowing, to them the Apostle writes,
them he reproves, they were to be gathered together for the excommunicating,
purging out and judging of the offender, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And therefore the
duty here enjoined as well concerns the brethren as the officers, except we
will say the fornicatour was only among and in the midst of the officers, and
to be put from among them, and left among the people still, and that the
officers only were puffed up when they should have sorrowed, and not the
brethren with them. It concerned the people as well as the priests, in the type
and shadow, to put away leaven out of their houses, and to keep the passover
with unleavened bread; and so in the truth and substance, to purge and put out
this leaven Paul speaks of, namely the incestuous person, verse. 6, 7. The
Apostle admonishes them that they were not to be commingled with fornicatours,
nor to eat with them, verse. 9, 10, 11. and this duty as well concerned the
people as the officers. They with whom Paul deals are commanded to put the
wicked man from among themselves, verse. 13. So that the same persons from among
whom he is to be put are to put him away, which are both officers and people.
They whom the Apostle by his letter made sorry for their failing in the casting
out of the incestuous man, and that with sorrow to repentance, manifested with
great indignation and zeal, they were to reprove and censure him, and so did
for his reformation and their own clearing: which, that it was not the case of
the officers alone, but of the brethren with them, appears in these
scriptures, 1. Cor. 5. 1, 2. with 2. Cor. 2. 5, 6. and 7. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Paul writes not only to the officers, but to the brethren as well as to them,
to forgive or loose, to comfort or confirm their love toward the same person
upon his repentance, 2. Cor. 2. 7, 8. therein plainly witnessing, that the
brethren as well as the officers had bound, rebuked, and manifested their
indignation against the sin and the person for it. The conclusion inferred
is, That the rule prescribed by Christ, Matthew. 18. and the practice of the same
rule by Paul, 1. Cor. 5. do severally and jointly couple and combine together
the elders and the people in the censuring of an offender; Robins. Against
Bern. page 242, 243.
the officers going before, the brethren following in their order, and the
women lastly by silent consent: wherein the scriptures distinguish them from
the men, 1. Cor. 14. 34. 1. Tim. 2. 12.

But this conclusion fights with it self, Answ.
reaches not to the point in hand, follows not from the premises, if
understood according to the Authors meaning. It is cross to it self: for if
women may not authoritatively excommunicate, then every one two or three
amongst whom the fornicatour was, whom the Apostle reproved because he was not
cast out, whom he admonishes not to be commingled with fornicatours, whom he
made sorry for their failing, and to whom he writes to loose and forgive him,
etc. had not equal power with the officers to cast him out, or to forgive him.
For all these things were written to the church of Corinth, to the women as
well as the men, unles we shall say the incestuous person must be left among
them, or they might company with fornicatours, etc. In scripture they are
distinguished from men, it is said, and therefore in some cases that which is
said to the whole congregation does not equally concern every one in the
congregation, but in their order. 1. Cor. 9.
And if women be not comprehended in those exhortations and rebukes as equal
to the brethren, we cannot say the brethren are comprehended as equal to the
officers. But each thing must be expounded according to the nature of the
argument, and conference of other scriptures. In general the whole society may
be blamed when every particular member is not in fault: as here we may well
think, some in Corinth mourned, and endeavored to have the incestuous person
removed (who else should inform the Apostle, now far absent, of this abuse and
their gross security?) but could not prevail: and yet the Apostle rebukes the
whole society. And the same may be observed in the Prophets; they rebuke the
common sins of many as if all had corrupted their ways. Again, the Apostle
might rebuke the whole society, that he was not cast out, when yet the
authority to cast him out perteined to some only. Some he might rebuke,
because they were puffed up and did not sorrow, nor admonish governors to do
their office: others, because they did not cast him out, or rebuke him
earnestly to bring him to repentance. Both the brethren and the officers might
be remiss, the one to stir up by grief and just indignation, the others to
do the duties of their place; 1. Cor. 5. 9. (...) (...) conversa^ionem cum
fr^tribu^.
and so both sorts worthily incur rebuke. So he might admonish them all not
to be commingled with fornicatours, but every one according to his place: not
the brethren, by private familiarity and conversing; not the guides, by their
remissness, suffering him to abide in the society whom they ought to expel
and cast out. He might decree and command, that when they were assembled
together in the name of Christ, they should deliver him to Satan, some by their
authority derived from Christ, whereunto the rest must give free and willing
consent. It perteined unto them all to endeavor his casting forth, but to
every man in his order: to the officers, to cast him forth by their authority;
to the faithful, by admonition, sorrow, free consent, and just indignation, if
upon rebuke he did not testify repentance. It concerned the people as well as
the priests to put away leaven out of their houses, and so every man was to put
leaven out of his own house, and every Christian man and woman is to purge
sin out of their hearts, and do their endeavor to reform others: But if this
be applied to the purging and casting forth of the incestuous man, then it must
be remembered, that similitudes hold not in every thing: For otherwise every
prticular man and woman in Corinth, being a member of that society, had
authority of himself actually to thrust out the incestuous person, which is
directly contrary to the Apostles admonition. For when they were assembled
together in the name of Christ, the Apostle wills them to deliver up to Satan
him that had done that wicked deed. He designeth none other author of this
sentence but the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose name, that is, by whose authority
and commandment received from him, he would have it to be administered. For
nothing can be done prosperously in the church unless all things we undertake
be ordered according to the prescript of the chief and supreme Lawgiver. But
God never gave authority to every particular believer, two or three, to thrust
every notorious offender out of the congregation, as he charged every master of
a family to put away leaven out of his house. By the power of Christ is
understood the incommunicable power or virtue of Christ, whereby he works
powerfully by his Spirit in the ministry of the word, and confirms the
sentence of the church rightly pronounced, according to his promise; Matthew. 28.
19, 20.
That virtue or efficacious power by which he is with his church to the end of
the world, Luke 24. 49.
and promises to be in the midst of two or three that should be so gathered
together in his name. Acts 1. 5, 8.
And Paul encourages the Corinthians to minister the discipline of
excommunication upon the incestuous man, arming them thereunto by the mighty
presence of Christ, by which it should be made effectual. Or if by the power
of Christ we understand both that which is proper to Christ and that which is
communicated to his officers for the good and benefit of the church (which is
less probable) yet there is no syllable, that this power is given immediately
to the whole community, and from them derived to the officers; much less, that
it is given originally and executive both to a small company of believers
without officers. For the Apostle speaks not of the power but of the
execution of that power which God has given, and that by a church completely
furnished with officers for that purpose. The principal cause of that casting
forth was the power, that is, the commandment and authority, of Christ, who is
the author of ecclesiastical power; the near cause, the commandment of the
Apostle, Let him be delivered to Satan; the next cause, the authority of the
governors to whom Christ has committed the care of his flock. But as the
authority of Christ does not take away the judgment of the Apostle, nor the
judgment of the Apostle the authority of the governors, no more does the
authority of the governors the due regard and respect which must be had of the
people in the execution of that dreadful sentence. To this purpose is the
distinction of a twofold excommunication or power of the keys used by Divines:
The first concionalis, per modum doctrinae, which is the first part of the
power of the keys; and so the pastor alone may excommunicate the impenitent
according to the commandment of Christ: The second judicialis, per modum
sententiae, which is not in the power of every pastor, but of the church, sc.
of the rulers or officers in respect of authority derived, but to be exercised
with due regard had to the community, as the flock and sheep of Christ. 2.
Cor. 2. 8. (...) significat non tam, comprobare, quam, cum autoritate
discernere, and legitime rem transigere, ut ratum and authenticum sit quod
actum fuerit. It comes from (...), authority, whence also comes (...), a
lord, or one having authority. Chemnit: Exam: part. 4. De indulgent. page 89.
Significat (...), communibus quasi sufl^agus and publica autoritate aliquid
comprobare, confirmare, ratum facere and habere.
When the Apostle writes to the Corinthians in behalf of the incestuous
person, to confirm their love toward him, he says it is sufficient that he
had been rebuked of many; thereby understanding, not the whole society, but the
chief or governors to whom the care of ecclesiastical discipline was
committed. And if the congregation was freely and deliberately to consent to
his excommunication, the authority of many was sufficient for his rebuke, by
whom it was performed, to whom belonged the authority of binding and loosing
ministerially. It is true the word many is now and then put for all, when the
subject matter requires it be so understood; but there is no reason so to take
it in this passage: and if all had received authority immediately to rebuke by
way of censure and ministerially, we can give no reason why the Apostle should
not rather have said, of all, then, of many. The question then is not, whether
all due regard should be had of the congregation or church in a matter of such
weight and importance before the governors proceed to the sentence of
excommunication; but whether the power of excommunication and exercise thereof
be primarily in the people, and from them derived to the ministers: which is
not proved by this nor any other text of scripture.

Two or three met together in the name of Christ are the church that has power
to excommunicate: Object. 5.
But that agrees to the whole community, Matthew. 18. 19.
and not to the officers alone. Moreover, the power of excommunication is an
essential property, Robins. Against (...). page 227.
one of the keys of the kingdom, and as necessary as the power to receive in
members, without which a church cannot be gathered or consist.

Every society consisting of two or three believers met together to pray is not
that church which has power to excommunicate: Answ.
for then in many Christian congregations, and in diverse families, there should
be many churches invested with this authority. No one example can be alleged
out of scripture or ecclesiastical story of the ancient church, in which the
multitude of the faithful, no guides or officers moderating the action, did
lawfully excommunicate or judge (as the Apostle speaks) any member of the
society. No promise can be showed in holy writ wherein any such authority is
bequeathed to two or three private believers, disciples or brethren. The
sentence of excommunication is to be concluded and denounced by men met
together in the name of Christ, that is, by the commandment and authority of
Christ, and with the power of Christ: but it will never be proved, that Christ
has authorized two or three Christian people, without officers or guides, to
meet in his name, and by his power to denounce that grave and fearful
sentence. The church, to whom this power pertains, is an assembly gathered in
the name and by the power of Christ for such a purpose, which agrees to them
only who have received power from Christ to do that service, and not to every
society, nor to every one in any complete society of believers. And thus the
words of our Savior must be expounded, if they have such reference to the
precedent matter. But they may contein a reason drawn from the less to the
greater, thus; If Christ be present with two or three gathered together in his
name to ask things agreeable to his will, he will much more confirm in heaven
whatsoever his officers and servants assembled in his name shall determine and
conclude, and what sentence they shall denounce upon mature deliberation
according to his will. If we speak of complete churches, such as the Apostles
planted, it has power of excommunication, which is one part of the power of
the keys: but the execution of that power is not essential to the church,
either constitutively, or consecutively: It is neither the matter nor form of
the church, nor that which does necessarily flow from them as an inseparable
property. The moderate use of excommunication is necessary to the well-being of
a church: but there may be a true church where there is no discipline of
excommunication, and where that censure is not put in practice. He may be a
good physician who never used section; a good chirurgian, who has no saw; and
the body sound which never suffered the cutting off of a member. The conclusion
is, That all spiritual power is immediately derived from Christ, to be
exercised by his direction and appointment for the good and benefit of the
whole church. The power of preaching the word authoritatively, and
administration of the sacraments, pertains to the Pastors and Teachers
only; which power they have received from Christ, and must exercise for the
edification of the flock. The power of excommunication formaliter and
exsecutive is proper to the company or assembly of guides and rulers in the
church, derived from Christ, to be exercised as Christ shall go before them,
but with the notice of and due regard had unto the whole society.

CHAP. XIII. An examination of sundry positions laid down by Mr Jacob in his
Exposition of the second commandment, tending to Separation.
TO know the true sense and meaning, the just scope and purpose of the second
commandment, is of continual and necessary use; and rightly conceived, might
be a means of unity and peace amongst brethren in matters of worship. In this
regard Mr Jacob (as he says) compiled a brief exposition of that commandment,
and with a mind desirous to maintein and keep the people of God within the
bounds of truth and peace. I purpose a brief, plain and modest examination of
his exposition in some particulars, concerning the special object of the
commandment, and positions, taken by some to be just grounds of Separation.

By the second commandment we stand bound to embrace all the instituted holy
doctrines, To the Christian reader.
means and ordinances, both inward and outward, appointed of God to bring us
life: to believe that we have (to bring us to eternal life) a Mediator and
Savior given us, Exp^sit. the 7. and (...) rule.
and that he is a Priest, Prophet and King: These things are not in the first,
but in the second commandment, although they be inward actions of the mind and
inward worship.

This is a private conceit, Answ.
affirmed without ground or reason to support it, cross to the commandment and
Mr Jacob himself. Contrary to the commandment? for the first commandment
enjoyneth us to take the true Jehovah to be our God, as in covenant he has
bound himself unto his Israel: But God is not our God in covenant but in and
through a Mediator: And therefore the first commandment binds us to take the
true God in and through a Mediator, that is, Jesus Christ, to be our God.
Exposit. the 1. rule.
Mr Jacob holds the tables of the law to be the Lords testimony and
convenant, wherein all duties whatsoever, Exodus 31. 18. and 32. 15, 16.
even the Evangelicall, Deuteronomy. 9. 9, 10, 11, 15.
as faith, hope, and repentance, are commanded. But in the covenant of grace,
in what commandment the Lord has bound us to know, believe, hope or call upon
him, in the same he has obliged us to know him in Christ, to believe in him
through Christ, and to call upon him in and through a Mediator. For God in
Christ, or God and Christ, is the object of Christian religion: and since the
fall of Adam there is no throne erected unto which man can come, no way
prepared, no liberty granted for man to come, no good success to be expected,
but in the name of a Mediator. It is impossible to conceive, how Christians
should believe that God is, or that he is a rewarder of them that seek him
diligently, but according to his covenant of mercy; how they should believe in
his free grace and mercy for the remission of sins, but in and through Jesus
Christ our only Savior. The selfsame precept which binds Christians to take
the true God to be their God, King, Father, Judge and Savior, binds them
also to take Jesus Christ to be their sole Mediator, Redeemer, Savior, King
and Priest and Prophet. Not to believe in or worship Jesus Christ, is a breach
of the first commandment: so the profession of Turcisme is against the first
commandment. To believe in or pray unto Angels or Saints departed as
mediators, is a breach of the first commandment. All honor and service
whatsoever, inward or outward, which is due unto God by virtue of the first
commandment, it must be done unto God in and through Jesus Christ: and not to
give that honor unto Jesus Christ, or to give it unto any other, is a breach
of the first commandment. It is true, that inward and outward worship both,
when they are both of one nature or kind, are required in the first precept:
as, if I must pray unto God in the mediation of Jesus Christ, or pray unto
Jesus Christ mine only Savior, I may kneel or prostrate my self, or bow my
body in the exercise of religion; and these actions must be referred to the
same commandment. It is also true, that the second commandment reaches to the
heart, and requires that we rightly conceive of, allow, approve and affect the
ordinances of instituted worship appointed of God as well as exercise and
maintein it: but seeing the worship it self commanded is instituted, it is also
outward. Besides, there be some things of mere nstitution which pertein to the
third and fourth commandments: as the institution and observation of the
seventh day from the creation, in time of the Law; and of the first day in the
week, in time of the Gospel. Exposit. the 1. rule.
Mr Jacob himself says, The fourth commandment (in the word, Sabbath) sets
down one particular, even the ordinary seventh day of rest, but understands
all holy days instituted of God, that they are likewise to be sanctified. By
his own confession then all instituted doctrines and ordinances are not
referred to the second commandment.

The just and true general matter of the second commandment is, Exposit. the
^. part, tit. The exposit. of the second commandment.
a free and voluntary institution (or matter instituted) only or specially in
the exercise of Gods worship, wherein it has no way any necessary use of it
self. This is the general matter or full extent of the second commandment,
even in the mind and purpose of God himself the author of it: And it is
likewise the just and full definition of Gods instituted worship in general,
that is, whether true or false.

This is obscure and doubtful. Answ.
If the meaning be, that all instituted or positive worship of God which
carries the Lords stamp and approbation must be referred to this commandment,
and that all worship devised by men, for nature, use and end one with the
worship instituted of God, is a breach of the second commandment, it will be
granted freely, and might have been delivered plainly. But if the meaning be,
that all free and voluntary institutions whatsoever must be referred to the
second commandment, if of God, as just and allowable, if of men, as sinful, it
has no ground of truth or probability. For many free institutions cannot be
referred to the second commandment: and concerning the instituted worship of
God, God has left many things undetermined, wherein the church may take order
and give direction without sin, unto what commandment soever in general the
things may be referred. The Lord forbidding to bow down unto or serve an image,
does therein forbid all approbation, liking or reverence, though never so
small, showed toward any institutions and inventions of men, set up in the
room of or matched with the Lords own instituted worship: But an invention for
nature and use one with the true worship of God, and an institution in the
exercise of religion are not one and the same.

There ought to be very clear and plain proof in Gods word to warrant every
visible church, Exposit. the third part, tit. The exposit. of the second
commandment.
if the members thereof desire to have comfort to their own souls; because this
is even the first and weightiest matter in religion that can concern us, viz.
to be assured that we are in a true visible and ministerial church of Christ:
For out of a true visible church ordinarily there is no salvation; and by a
true visible church (and not otherwise ordinarily) we come to learn the way of
life. Therefore above all things it is necessary that every Christian do
rightly discern of the diverse kinds of outward ordinances in this behalf,
chiefly of visible churches; and withal to understand which kind or form
thereof is the true visible church of Christ, or kingdom of heaven upon earth,
which is the only way, and in it the only truth ordinarily leading to
eternal life hereafter. For the true visible church of Christ is but only one
(questionless) in nature, form and constitution.

There are express and pregnant texts of scripture which show what is the true
visible church of God, Answ.
whereunto Christians may and ought to join themselves in holy fellowship in
the ordinances of worship: As, where the covenant of God is there is the people
of God and the visible church: Ephesians. 2. 12.
For communication and receiving the tables of the covenant is a certain sign
of a people in covenant. Romans 9. 4.
For what is it to be the flock, sheep, or people of God, but to be in covenant
with God, to be the church of God. The word makes disciples to Christ: and the
word given to a people is Gods covenanting with them; and the peoples receiving
this word and professing their faith unto God, Lev. 2. 13.
is their taking God to be their God. Deuteronomy. 29. 11.
Those assemblies which have Christ for their Head, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. and 26. 17.
and the same also for their foundation, are the true visible churches of
Christ. It is simply necessary, that the assemblies be laid upon Christ the
foundation by faith: which being done, the remaining of what is forbidden, or
the want of what is commanded, cannot put the assembly from the title and right
of a church. For Christ is the foundation and head-corner-stone of the church.
The form is coming unto Christ, and being builded upon him by faith; the matter
is the people united and knit unto Christ, and so one unto another. Now where
the matter and form of a church is there is a church. Every society or assembly
professing the int^re and true faith of Christ, and worshipping God with an
holy worship, joining together in prayer and thanksgiving, enjoying the right
use of the sacraments, and keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, is the true church of Christ. The Gospel may be preached to Infidels;
some supernatural truths may be professed by heretics; the use of the
sacraments may be in adulterate churches: but the entire profession of all
fundamental articles of faith to be believed, and main precepts and moral
laws for practice to be acknowledged, the dwelling of the truth amongst men,
and the right use of the sacraments, which is ever joined with true doctrine,
and to be esteemed by it, is proper to them that be in covenant with God. The
laws and statutes which God gave to Israel was the honor and ornament of that
nation, a testimony that the Lord had separated them from all other people,
even the Gentiles themselves being judges. Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
This is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the people. Psalm.
147. 19, 20.
He gave his law unto Jacob, Neh. 9. 13.
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. Thou gave them right judgments and
true laws, ordinances and good commandments. Acts 7. 38.
Who received the lively oracles to give unto us. Luke 16. 29.
They have Moses and the Prophets. Sound doctrine and entire profession of the
truth is to be found in the church alone, and is contained in the belly of the
church as light in an house, Isa. 2. 2, 3.
whereby it may be discerned. The law shall go forth of Sion: it is not
elsewhere to be found. Isa. 59 21.
My word shall not depart out of the mouth of thy seed, See John 8. 31.
etc. The sacraments are seals of the covenant of grace, 2. Cor. 5. 19.
and symboles or testimonies whereby the people of God are distinguished from
all other nations. The sacraments when for substance they be rightly used are
tokens and pledges of our admittance into and spiritual enterteinment in the
Lords family. Genesis 17. 10, 11.
This is my covenant that I make with thee. Exodus 12. 1, 2, 3.
Go teach all nations, and baptize them into the name of the Father, etc. Amend
your lives, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
and ^e baptized. The sacraments do necessarily presuppose a church
constituted, Acts 2. 38.
unto which they are committed, as the oracles and ordinances of God unto
Israel. Baptism rightly used is within and not without the church: Ephesians. 4.
4, 5.
It is a seal of the covenant (which is the form of the church as some call it)
to the faithful and to their seed: Acts 2. 41.
It is the sacrament of initiation, whereby members are solemnly admitted into
the body of Christ. To have Pastors which feed with spiritual knowledge and
understanding, is a gift of matrimonial love, which God vouchsafes unto his
church: Jer. 3. 15.
And I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart. And though all that
hear do not receive the love of the truth, yet where God gives his word it is
a sign that some in those places belong to the kingdom of heaven. The
Apostles first gathered churches, and then ordained elders in every city: So
that it is proper to the church to be fed and guided by true spiritual
Pastors, who do both teach and bless in the name of the Lord. The true
worship of God is an inseparable and infallible mark of a people in covenant
with God: Psalm. 48. 1.
For where Christ is there is (...) church: Matthew. 18. 20.
but Christ says, Where two or three are met together in my name, there am I
in the midst among them. This is the privilege of the saints: Ezekiel. 46. 10.
that Christ, the prince of his people, is in the midst of them, See Lavater
in Ezekiel.
and goes in when they go in. And for certain, they are gathered in the name
of Christ, who being lawfully called do assemble to worship God and call upon
his name in the mediation of Jesus Christ. In times past the church was
acknowledged by these signs; of continuance in the apostles doctrine and
fellowship, Acts 2. 42.
and breaking of bread, Josh. 24. 14.
and prayer, of true fear, entire service, Romans 10. 14.
holy profession, and religious prayer. The weightiest matter therefore in
religion that concerns a Christian, is to know God and Christ, to repent
heartily and believe unfeignedly, which is ever accompanied with holiness of
conversation, if God give time and opportunity: because without these there is
no salvation to men of age and discretion. It is a matter of weight and
importance also, to know where and how God is to be worshipped, and the right
use of his ordinances, as of prayer, and the sacraments; because otherwise we
cannot know how to join our selves in holy communion with the people of God in
the ordinances of worship, which is a necessary duty if God give opportunity.
But to know the external order or constitution of a particular, ministerial,
political church, is not a matter of weight or importance, to be matched with
either of the former. And if Mr Jacob comprehend all these things under the
name of the church, his speech is false, deceitful, and confused, because he
distinguishes not things that be of different kinds. If the latter, it is most
inconsiderately spoken and weakly proved. For out of the catholic invisible
church or society there is no salvation; but out of a particular, visible,
ministerial church salvation is to be had. Internal society with the members
of Christ, and communion with Christ himself which is invisible, is necessary;
external not so. Christ is the Savior of his body, and saved he cannot be by
Christ that is not a live-member of his body. Noah's ark builded by Gods
appointment for the safety of all such as were obedient to his preaching, was a
type and figure of this only holy catholic church, not of a visible,
particular, ministerial church: for as none of the sons of men besides such
as entered into Noah's ark were saved from the deluge, Gen 7. 11. and 8. 12.
so whosoever entered into the ark were saved from the deluge: Heb. ^1. 8.
And so Noah's ark was a type of that church into which whosoever enters he
shall be saved. But this cannot be affirmed of the visible church. 1. Pet. 3.
20, 21.
Peter speaking of the ark, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by
water, he says, The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save
us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience inwards: Gods) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. His meaning is,
that Noah^ ark was a type of that church out of which there is no salvation, in
which there is most certain salvation; and the waters by which such as entered
into the ark were saved, a type of baptism. But of what baptism? External?
No: External baptism and the ark of Noah were types of the same rank, both
types and signs of that internal baptism which is wrought by the holy Ghost,
by which we are incorporated into the body of Christ, and become more
undoubtedly safe from the everlasting fire then such as entered Noah's ark were
from the deluge of water. If the ark which Noah built did save all such from
the deluge as entered into it, how much more shall that holy and catholic
church which Christ has built and sanctified by his most precious blood, give
eternal life to all such as in this world become live-members of it? Such
members they are made, not by becoming members of the visible church, but by
internal grace or sanctification. There is not the same reason of external
and internal communion with the church. The inward is and was ever necessary,
the external necessary when it may be enjoyed. Some may be of the church in
respect of the profession, participation of the ordinances and other inferior
privileges, who are not of the invisible church, that is, do not communicate
in the most perfect work, force and effect of saving grace. And some that be
not full members of the true, orthodox and visible church, may notwithstanding
be found and live, members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ. For all that
truly believe are in the state of salvation; and all that be in the state of
salvation be members of that church out of which no salvation is to be hoped
for or can be obtained, which does comprehend all the faithful and them that
shall be saved. They are in act and in deed both in and of that church, and not
in desire and wish only; because they are actually in the state of salvation,
the heirs apparent to everlasting blessedness, actual partakers of the
benefits of Christ's death which accompany salvation. They are given unto
Christ, set into him as branches into a vine: and they that be such, be in deed
and act, not in desire alone, members of Christ's body. All that were not in the
ark perished in the waters: No member does live but that which is actually
joined to the head, and draws life from it. Baptism is the seal of our
solemn admission into the church: but it is not the gate of our setting into
Christ, but the seal of that admission we have received by grace and are
partakers of by a lively faith. True believers the^ are in the state of grace;
actual members of the militant church, but of a visible, particular,
ministerial church or congregation they may be members in desire only. For it
may so fall out many times, that he who is joined to Christ by a true and
lively faith has not means and opportunity to unite himself unto a visible and
ministerial church. The Catechum^ni who did truly (...) unfeignedly believe in
Christ were live-members of his mystical body, and in respect of full,
effectual and saving participation of Christ's benefits, actual members of the
church invisible, when in respect of solemn outward and sacramental admission
they were not members of any visible congregation. If a Christian be unjustly
excommunicated, he still reteineth all those things which the best parts of the
church have, inward or outward: and though he be cut off from the meetings and
assemblies of particular churches, so that he may not bodily be present when
the people meet together, yet still he has the communion which only is
essential, and makes a man to be of the church, in that he has all those
things which the best that remain not ejected have, as faith, hope, love and
profession of the whole truth of God: He is the friend of God, an heir apparent
of the new Jerusalem, a living member of the mystical body of Christ: And if
he be not cut off from Christ, from hope of salvation, and fellowship of the
saints triumphant, neither can he be cast out from the fellowship of the church
militant: for the church militant and triumphant is one. The performance of
holy duties is an action of them that be already of the church, and does not
make a man of the church: yea, the performance of these duties is a thing of
that nature, that by violence and unjust courses, holden by wicked men, we may
be hindered from it without any fault of ours. Now that it often falls out
through the prevailing of factious, August. De vera relig. cap. 6.
seditious and turbulent men, that the best part is unjustly and undeser^ (...)
cast out of the visible church is a thing so plain and confessed that it
needs no proof. In times of grievous and hot persecution, under which the
church has labored, the faithful have been compelled to meet in woods, dens,
and caves, some in one place, some in another, as opportunity was offered;
their societies have been broken, and set congregations dispersed and
scattered; when yet they continued the true church wherein salvation was to be
had, and enjoyed the ordinary means of salvation. And if we speak of a visible
ministerial church, as it is here meant by you, the faithful who professed
the truth of the Gospel entirely, and did communicate in the ordinances of
worship for the space of this fourteen hundred years and upward had not means,
or at least did not unite themselves into a visible ministerial church of
Christ: And if out of this your church ordinarily there be no salvation, no
means leading to everlasting life, the Christian world for these many hundred
years has wanted ordinary means to bring them to life and salvation, and been
in that state in which no salvation ordinarily can be expected. If we detest
the consequence as dreadful, not standing with the promises made to the church
of the Gentiles and the tender mercies of God vouchsafed to his people, we must
acknowledge the position from whence it follows undeniably to be most rash
and inconsiderate.

Out of doubt this kind of the visible church is now under the Gospel only
lawful for us, Exposit. the third part, ubi s^pra.
even a particular ordinary congregation only. And whatsoever kind or form of
a visible church is instituted or ordained by men, the same is contained
manifestly in the negative part of the second commandment, that is to say, it
is simply unlawful and by God himself here forbidden unto us.

In the new Testament the church does signify a multitude of believers, Answ.
whether assembled or dispersed: and whether they be met in one place or
separated in place they retein tho same name still. The church is a society of
the faithful, not an assembly, if we speak properly. When the word is put
absolutely, it notes the multitude or society of the faithful, which is
distinguished from their assembly or meeting together for the worship of God.
Heb. 12. 23.
For we shall read, the church of God or Christ, and so the church of the
firstborn; but never, the church of these or them, or you or us, but assembly
or assembling of your selves. Jam. 2 2.
Now the society may be one, Heb. 10. 23.
when the congregations be diverse in respect of place where they do assemble.
It is not opposite to the unity of an ecclesiastical society, that the
members should ordinarily assemble in diverse places for the worshipping of God,
so long as they be united by the same laws, have communion in the same
ordinances, and be linked under the same spiritual guides and officers. When a
church did comprehend a city with its suburbs and the country circumjacent, I
mean the believers who professed that faith within that circuit, it might well
be that the number did so increase through the extraordinary blessing of God
which did accompany the preaching of the word in those primitive times and
first planting of that heavenly kingdom, that they could not well meet
ordinarily in one place, and yet might and did continue one society. For when a
number is gathered in small villages, or some added to the number already
gathered, it is not meet they should be neglected because small, nor yet
divided from the body because the number not competent to make an entire and
perfect body of it self. The increase of churches does require an increase of
ministers, and if they grow to bigness more then ordinary, an increase of
places for their assembling, when the essence of the visible church is not
changed, nor one multiplied or divided into many. And it is more available for
the good of the church, and further removed from all ambition, if the society
shall assemble in diverse places as parts and members of one body, then to
constitute a distinct free society consisting of some few believers, not fit to
make up an entire body, contrary to the precedent examples of the apostles. In
times of hot and grievous persecutions the churches of God could not assemble
in any great numbers in public places, but have been compelled to meet in
dens, and caves, and woods, one and the same society in diverse places, yet so
as the society was not broken, though their meeting together in one place was
interrupted. To meet together therefore in one place is not so essential to
the church, but it may continue one in laws, ordinances, government and
communion, though in respect of multitude, distance of places, and many other
occurrences they be constrained to assemble and hold their meeting severally.
And that it was thus in the churches planted by the apostles, it is most
probable. May we not well think that the Christian church at Jerusalem, for
whom Christ had prayed particularly, to which some attribute the first
miraculous conversion by Peter's preaching, and amongst whom, being now ascended
into glory, Acts 11. 19, 20. and 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23. and 16. 4. and 21. 18.
he did more abundantly display his power, and more conspicuously swallow up
the scandal of his Cross; which had the labor of all or many of the apostles
for a time in it, whose care and industry we may guess at by their ordination
of Deacons, that they might not be distracted; whereunto much people did resort
daily, who though explicitly they did not believe in Christ, yet had they in
them the faith of the Messiah, and so were nearer to the kingdom of God then
the common heathen; which was to send out light to all other churches, and be a
common nursery to the world: May we not well think that this church did quickly
rise to such bigness that they could not well assemble in one congregation, as
we call them? And the same may be said of other churches before mentioned. For
at that time the regions were white even unto the harvest; the time was come
when that heavenly kingdom was to be planted amongst all nations: and at the
beginning God did reveal his arm more extraordinarily; and things which have
their set period of growing do in their beginnings come on the fastest. And
seeing the apostles were extraordinarlly furnished for the work, and had a
great and wide door set open unto them of God, seeing they were diligent and
industrious in their work, and God was pleased mightily to accompany their
endeavors, is it not more then conjecturall, that within short time the number
of believers in those great and populous cities, with their suburbs and
circumjacent villages, did exceed the capacity of one congregation? The
officers also which the Apostles ordained for the use of those churches, were
in number more then one ordinary congregation could bear, or were necessary for
the service thereof, unless it were exceeding great, and could not long
continue together with edification, but of necessity must assemble in several
places. It was not the apostles practice to ordain pastors in those places
where as yet no sheep were to be seen or very few: and it had been inconvenient
to tie the faithful to one congregation, when by reason of multitude they
could not meet in one place to their edification. What then remains, but that
they might assemble in diverse places, and yet hold communion in laws,
ordinances, government and officers? When presbyters were first assigned to
their particular cures, it is not certain. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 15, 16.
Eusebius reports, Rain. censur.
that many churches were gathered in Alexandria by Mark: Apo. pra^. 2^. Scalig.
De Emend. temp. lib. 6.
But what he alleges out of Philo, as if it was to be understood of
Christians, is misapplied by him. The first (as it is commonly received) that
divided churches into parishes, and assigned presbyters distinctly to take care
of them, Platin. in Euarist. Onuphr Pauvin, lib. De Episc. tit and Diacon.
Cardin. and interpr. vocum obscur.
was Euaristus Bishop of Rome. But Platina reports this upon the credit of
Damasus, and that supposititious: for the author of the book carrying the
title of Damasus was Anastasius Bibliothecarius, an Abbot of Rome, who lived
about the year DCCCLVIII. Tituli, etc. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. cap. 27. Russ. 32,
33. Er. and lib. 4. cap. 9.
And what probability is there, that under the reign of Trajan, who moved the
third persecution from Nero against the church, Plin. epist. l. 10. ep. 97.
and that most violent, there should be place to divide parishes, and place
singular presbyters over their peculiar charges? Tert. Apol. 2. Polyd. Virg. De
invent. l. 3. cap. 8.
Some think with more probability, that Dionysius, who was bishop of Rome in
the year of Christ 267. did ordain parishes, Platin. in vit. Dionys. and
Onuphr. Annot. in Platin. ibid.
and commit them so ordained to Presbyters: For in his days the church had
peace, Galienus by public edict granting liberty. But if it be yielded that
there were some parochial divisions about those times, they were not many, and
within the city, and were but as chapells of ease, the church holding and
continuing the same communion. And whenever Presbyters were assigned to their
special cures, we may conceive the multitude of believers, though within the
cities only, necessarily required their assembling in diverse places before.
For though the number of Christians was sometimes greatly wasted with hot and
fiery persecutions (as Platina in vita Xisti. 1. who followed Alexander the
successor of Euaristus, about the year of Christ 120. writes by reason of
the frequent slaughters there were few found at Rome which durst profess the
name of Christ. And Onuphrius Annot. in vit. Hig. says, Although all Popes in
those times suffered not martyrdom, yet they endured many things for the
confession of Christ, of the raging common people and wicked magistrates, who
retained perpetual hatred against Christians) nevertheless at other times the
number of Christians did greatly increase; as the Ecclestasticall story notes
a most remarkable growth of the faith in the time of Fabian before Cornelius.
Euscb. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 36.
Neither must we think that an Emperor, Gr. cap. 28.
as Philippus, favoring the faith, Lat. 25. Ruff.
did not bring on multitudes to the like profession. Cornelius reports, that
in the church of Rome there were seven Deacons, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. cap. 35.
Lat. 43. Gr. 33. Ruff.
seven Subdeacons, two and forty Acolyths, two and fifty Lectours, Porters,
Exorcists, six and forty Presbyters, a thousand and five hundred widows, poor
and sick: And from hence he does amplify Novatus his pertinacy, that none of
the numerous clergy nor yet of the people very great and innumerable could turn
him or recall him. This was one visible ministerial church, wherein all the
members had union and communion together for the mutual edifying and restoring
one of another; but it was too great and abundant ordinarily to assemble in one
place. So that the church might remain one when the multitude was too great to
meet in one place ordinarily, and when particular Presbyters were assigned to
particular cures: For that was not a division of the society into societies
distinct, but an assignement of some particular officer to the oversight of one
part or branch of the society, for the more fit and commodious government of
the whole, as it was conceived: and they so attended that branch of the society
or church, that their care and oversight reached to the whole. And out of doubt
this form or kind of a visible and ministerial church is much nearer to the
patterns and precedents set by the apostles in the first plantation of
Christian churches then that two three or few believers, uniting themselves in
covenant, should be reputed the only visible and ministerial church,
independent, from whom the officers should, as their servants, derive their
authority. This kind or form of a visible church is so far from being the
only lawful and allowed form of a church in scripture, as if we speak of a
church complete in respect of the inward substance and external order,
furnished for all duties and offices required of the church, it is not so much
as warranted in scripture. To the constitution of a visible distinct society or
church there is required, First, an entire profession of one and the same faith
and holiness, entire in all fundamental articles of faith to be believed as
necessary to salvation, and main precepts and moral laws for practice to be
acknowledged. A lively operative faith makes a man a true member of the church
invisible; and the profession of faith and holiness, a member of the church
visible. Profession of Divine verities revealed in Christ, whom only the
companies and societies of Christians acknowledge to be the Son of God and
Savior of the world, does distinguish Christians from Jews. The entire
profession of faith, according to the rule left by Christ and his first
disciples and scholars the holy apostles, does separate the multitude of
night-believing Christians, which is the sound part of the Christian church,
from all seduced heretical combinations. Secondly, there is required an union
and communion in the true worship of God, and ordinances belonging thereunto,
appointed of God himself, sc. prayer, administration of the sacraments, and
dispensation of the word. But the time may fall out, that the preaching of the
word may be omitted, and reading or meditation may possess the place thereof,
nay, mere desire conjoined with manifold sighs. So the administration of the
sacraments may be left off, as it was in the church of the Israelites for the
space of forty years in the wilderness. But though the being of a church is
not absolutely destroyed by the want or omission of these exercises for a time,
yet they are actions necessary to the well-being of a church, and such as flow
from the very nature of a church if they be not hindered. Thirdly, there must be
subjection to lawful guides, officers, or pastors appointed, authorized and
sanctified to lead and direct the flock in the happy ways of eternal life.
Companies of believers were gathered before elders were ordained amongst them,
and the church may continue when guides are wanting (as in case they be taken
away by death, persecution, banishment) but it is not complete or perfect
without them, neither can it hold communion in many ordinances of worship, nor
execute many offices which belong to the church consisting of all its parts.
Fourthly, to the making up of an entire, visible, distinct society, orders,
laws and discipline is required for the perventing of abuses and scandals, the
preservation of the holy things of God from contempt, the recovery of them that
fall, and suppression of profaneness. Discipline is needful in every
society, without which it cannot long continue but all things will run into
confusion. It is necessary the members of the church should live Christianly,
otherwise the profession of faith and administration of the holy things of God
must needs be polluted. Discipline, put for the censures, has no practice but
in an united body or church, which must needs have a being before it can
exercise its power: But the exercise of that power in a body complete is
necessary, not simply to the being but to the well-being of the whole. As a
city, so the church cannot be without those things which belong to the
necessary being thereof: but it may be without those that belong unto her
safety alone, though not so well. Fifthly, the members of a visible church must
hold fellowship in faith and love, not only one with another, but with all
other visible churches, and all others entirely professing the faith of Christ
and walking in holiness, so far as they hold communion with Jesus Christ.
For all visible churches, though distinct societies; be sisters, one in
profession, fundamental laws and ordinances, and should be one in hearty love
and affection: And no particular church can be called or be the true church of
Christ but as it holds union with the catholic. From the relation whereby
Christ is referred to his members, these things flow, sc. That Christ does
expound to them his word for the food of eternal life, and does hang seals to
his word whereby he does confirm and ratify it. From the relation whereby the
members of Christ are referred to him their Head, these things flow, That
whosoever would be accounted for true members of Jesus Christ they must
acknowledge and receive that food and those seals appointed by Divine
institution. If the faithful must assemble to hear the word of God, call upon
his name, and receive the sacraments, then there must be some to preach the
word, administer the sacraments, and bless in the name of the Lord, and that
by authority from God. If they must receive the word, and avouch themselves to
be the people of God, then they must walk before him in holiness, and maintein
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. If the temple of God must be kept
from pollution, and the holy things of God from contempt, then there must be
authority communicated from Christ to censure such as offend, to repel the
notorious, to comfort the afflicted, and receive the penitent. If all
promiscuously may not meddle with the dispensation of the holy things of God to
that purpose, then there must be order for their election and admission into
that office, and for the execution thereof being admitted thereunto. Where all
these things are to be found purely, the church is excellent for degree, pure
and famous: Where any of these are wanting or impure, the church is so much
defective or impure, though it may be pure in comparison of others. Wheresoever
we see the word of God truly taught and professed in points fundamental, and
the sacraments for substance rightly administered, there is the true church of
Christ, though the health and soundness of it may be crazed by many errors in
doctrine, corruptions in the worship of God, and evils in the life and manners
of men. Profession of the true faith alone in matters fundamental, and holy
prayer, with exhortation to obedience, is a mark of the true church, though the
sacraments upon occasion be not there administered so that they be not neglected
upon any contempt or erroneous conceit of their not being necessary. Where most
of these notes are wanting or impure, the church is of less account, in
dignity, excellency and credit coming short of others, according to the degrees
of impurity in the marks, the deficiency of some marks, and the nature of the
marks themselves in which the impurity is: As impurity in doctrine or
administration of the sacraments is worse then disorder in matter of government
only. Therefore to the full complete constitution of a visible church many
things are required, and that of diverse kinds in themselves, and of diverse
degrees of necessity, all which cannot be referred to the second commandment;
but many, and they most necessary, to the first; some to the third; some to
all: And though in things essential and unchangeable, belonging to the being
of the church, and matters positive determined by God, nothing must be done
besides the rule; yet in things not determined, concerning external order, and
the better exercise of that authority which Christ has committed to his
servants, some things are permitted to the wisdom of the church, according to
the general rules of scripture. And if the church, holding the true faith, as
it has formerly been said, shall exceed or fall short in some particulars, for
such superfluity or defect she is not to be rejected as no true visible church
of Christ.

Every church-ministery made and devised by the policy of men, Exposit. of the
second commandment.
and not instituted of God, is against the second commandment, etc. And all
offices and ministeries in the church which are found in the scripture as
instituted by God, are in the affirmative part of this second commandment.

The church-ministery, Answ.
in respect of the main and substantial duties belonging thereunto, does
pertein to the second commandment in part, not wholly or only: but in respect
of things circumstantiall annexed to the ministry, it belongs not to the
second commandment. And if we consult scripture, that is a new or devised
ministry which for substance of the office is not of God, be the outward
calling never so orderly or legal; and that ministry is not new or devised
which for the substance of the office is of God, though the entrance was
disordered in the person admininistring many things be amiss, and in the
execution many defects or superfluities. If a minister orderly chosen and
ordained shall preach false and corrupt doctrine in points fundamental, or
administer false sacraments, his ministry is new, devised, false,
notwithstanding his lawful entrance. If a minister enter unlawfully, either by
the tumult of the people, partiality of the overseers, or corruption of
patrones, if he preach Christ crucified soundly, and rightly administer the
sacraments, his ministry is true and of God, though his entrance be of men. If
a minister preach sound doctrine in the main, though mixed with some errors,
and administer the holy sacraments, though with some superstitious rites, his
ministry is not to be esteemed new or devised for these weaknesses. If some
things humane be mixed with Divine, a sound Christian must separate the one
from the other, and not cast away what is of God, as a nullity, fruitless,
unprofitable, defiled, because somewhat of men is annexed unto them. In the
body we can distinguish betwixt the substance and the sickness which cleaves
unto it; betwixt the substance of a part and member, and some bunch or
swelling, which is a deformity, but destroys not the nature of that part or
member. Which of the prophets does not cry out against the pride, oppression,
covetousness, tyranny of the priests in the time of the law? Their offices
were bought and sold; they themselves despised knowledge, opposed the prophets
of the Lord, strengthened the hands of the wicked, and were enemies to all
piety, and yet their ministry was not false and devised for the main substance
of it. Cann. Necess. of Ref^rre. cap. 1. 3.
It is objected by the rigidest Separatists, with great confidence, That to
communicate in a false ministry, is certainly a breach of the second
commandment. For what do they else but set up an idol, yea and bow down unto
it, which serve God in and by a devised ministry? But if first they would
consider what a false or devised ministry is, and then what it is to
communicate in the worship of God with them, they would soon forsake this fort,
wherein they trust. For the ministry may be true and of God, when the election
is disordered, and the person unmeet, and the execution maimed. If this be not
granted, there was neither church nor sacrament nor ministry in the world for
many hundred years: yea, if every superfluity or defect make a nullity of the
ministry, they that think themselves the only ministers will be found none at
all; because they derive their authority from the community of the faithful,
it may be two or three only united in covenant, which has none authority to
communicate it, as has been proved before. For so we may reason as they do,
That is no ministry which is derived from them and executed in their name who
have none authority to give it. What is it to communicate in a false ministry?
Is it to communicate in the worship of God with them whose calling is not in
every respect appointed and approved of God? I might entreat them to look to
their own standing before they accuse others, and justify their own calling
before they seek to draw others from the communion of the church upon such
pretenses. But if that be their meaning, the proposition is weak, it can
neither stand alone nor be underset with any props. For when the prophets
prophesied lies; Mic. 3. 11, 12.
and the priests bare rule by their means, Jer. 5. 31.
was their ministry true or false? Isa. 56. 10.
When the priests were dumb dogs that could not bark, Ezekiel. 44. 7, 8.
and greedy dogs that could never have enough, was their ministry true or
false? John 2. 16.
When the priests bought and sold doves in the temple, or took upon them to
provide doves and such like things for them that were to offer, was their
ministry true or false? When the scribes and Pharisees corrupted the law by
false glosses, taught for doctrine men's precepts, made the commandment of God
of none effect by their traditions, and set themselves against Jesus Christ,
was their ministry true or false? If true; then an ignorant, idol, profane,
idle ministry, which despises knowledge, opposes godliness, prophaneth the
holy things of God, corrupts the law, polluteth his worship, strengthens
the hands of the wicked, leads the blind out of the way, may be a true and
lawful ministry. If false; then to communicate in a false ministry is not a
breach of the second commandment: For the true prophets forbad not the people
to hear the priests, nor our Savior his followers to communicate with the
scribes and Pharisees in the worship of God. He charged them to beware of their
leaven, to let them alone, because they were the blind leaders of the blind:
but he never laid his commandment upon the faithful, not to communicate with
them in the worship of God. And therefore to communicate with ministers no
better then Pharisees in the true worship of God, is neither a vain worship,
nor an abetting of the party in his sin, nor to rebel against the Lord, nor to
commit spiritual whoredom: but on the contrary, it is to worship God aright,
to reverence his ordinances, to rely upon his grace, to hearken unto his
voice, and submit unto his good pleasure. If their ministry was true in some
respects and false in others, then the ministry is not absolutely false which
in some respect is not pure as it ought and is to be desired; then also it is
no sin to communicate in a false ministry in some respect, so far, to wit,
as it has truth in it, and does carry the stamp of God. The priests, scribes
and Pharisees, were of the tribe of Levi, which was set apart for the
ministry, John 10. 5.
yet might they be strangers, thieves, robbers, murderers, which the sheep of
Christ will not hear, that is, follow or be led by them. For the ministers
whom our Savior charge as thieves and murderers, were of continual
succession of Levi and Aaron especially: and it is to be understood of them who
teach false doctrine, and not of them who enter without a lawful outward
calling. And to enter by Christ the door, teaching him alone to be the only
Savior and Mediator, is the note of a good shepherd. To hear them, is not
simply to communicate with them in the ordinances of God, which the godly and
faithful among the Jews might not refuse to do with the Scribes and Pharisees,
who were thieves and robbers; but to receive their doctrine, and embrace their
errors, which was evermore unlawful. The thieves and murderers in the church
of the Jews sprung up with them, and continued amongst them, and neither
departed themselves nor were cast out by others that had authority. Acts 20.
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
In the Christian church diverse false teachers, ravening wolves, Antichrists,
rose up, not from among the Heathen or Jews, but in and from themselves:
whereof some went out from the church and separated themselves; 1. John 2. 19.
others were cast out by excommunication, and delivered up unto Satan, Tit. 3.
10.
that they might learn not to blaspheme; 1. Tim. 1. 20.
others were tolerated in the church, either because their heresies were not so
pernicious at the first, or the better side had not power to cast them out, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.
or they preached fundamental truths but of evil minds. Phil. 2. 5.
These in respect of outward order were lawfully chosen or called, and yet
false prophets, discovered by their doctrine not by their calling, and some of
them continuing in the church, the faithful are warned to beware of their
errors that they be not infected by them, but not forbidden to partake at the
ordinances of worship because they are present. And if we look into the
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, we shall never find the prophets
called true or false in respect of their outward calling, but in respect of
their doctrine. A man may have a lawful outward calling to the ministry and
yet be a false prophet, because he preaches the lying visions of his own
heart. But we shall never find him called a false prophet who teaches the
truth as he has received it of God, because in some particular his calling
might be excepted against. And seeing he that speaks the truth to
edification, exhortation, rebuke and comfort of Gods people, according to the
command of God, is a true prophet, he that speaks the dreams of his own heart
is a false prophet: Robins. Tre^t. Of the lawfulness etc. page 47.
It were good, if they in whose mouths the challenge of false prophets is
rifest, would better weigh how they themselves expound and apply the scriptures
in their writings or prophesyings, lest notwithstanding any outward churchstate
(or calling, as they pretend) they be deeper wounded by the rebound of their
accusations this way then their adversaries. For whosoever will be pleased to
try and examine the matter unpartially, shall find their quotations of
scripture to be many, impertinent, forced, wrested, miserably abused, without
all fear or reverence. Let no man therefore be dismayed at their great
confidence, big words, multitude of scriptureproofs, or pretended grounds from
others whose principles they put in practice: for if they be particularly
examined, they will either disclaim the cause, or put weapons into thy hands
truly to fight against and put them to flight. But for the present I forbear to
enter into particulars, because I desire the satisfaction of the more moderate
sort, who though they scruple communion in some particulars above handled, do
yet dislike that total Separation which others make, and that bitterness of
spirit wherewith they prosecute their cause. The Lord in tender mercy look down
upon his church, make up the breaches which sin has made, remove the
stumbling blocks and occasions of offense, recall such as are gone astray,
cause his truth to shine more and more in our hearts, and teach them that fear
his name to walk in love, and by an holy unblamable conversation in all things
to approve the soundness of their faith and sincerity of their religion before
all men, for the comfort of their souls, the edification of others, and the
glory of his great name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.
The general heads contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. OF a stinted form of prayer. page 1. CHAP. II. All things essential
to prayer may be observed in a prescript form. page 12. CHAP. III. A stinted
Liturgy or public form of prayer is no breach of the second commandment. page
23. CHAP. IIII. It is as lawful to pray unto God in a form of words devised by
others, as to sing psalms to the praise of God in a stinted form of words
prescribed by others. page 54. CHAP. V. A stinted form of prayer does not
quench the Spirit. page 83. CHAP. VI. In scripture there be prescript forms of
blessing, prayers, salutations, etc. which may lawfully be used. page 97. CHAP.
VII. The churches of God have both used and approved a stinted Liturgy. page
106. CHAP. VIII. The people may lawfully be present at those prayers which are
put up unto God in a stinted form of words, and partake in Divine ordinances
administered in a stinted Liturgy. page 122. CHAP. IX. It is lawful for a
Christian to be present at that service which is read out of a book in some
things faulty both for form and matter. page 157. CHAP. X. It is lawful to
communicate in a mixed congregation where ignorant and profane persons be
admitted to the sacrament. page 187. CHAP. XI. Of holding communion with that
assembly in the worship of God, where we cannot perform all duties mentioned
Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. page 216. CHAP. XII. The community of the faithful,
much less two or three separated from the world, and gathered together into
the name of Christ by a covenant, are not the proper and immediate subject of
power ecclesiastical. page 231. CHAP. XIII. An examination of sundry positions
laid down by Mr Jacob in his Exposition of the second commandment, tending to
Separation. page 282.
FINIS.
October. 9. 1639.
Imprimatur Cantabrigiae.

Ra. Brownrigg Procan.


