A Declaration and Protestation, published by the King of Navarre, the L.
Prince of Conde, and the L. Duke of Montmorency, concerning the peace concluded
with the house of Lorrayn, the Captains and chief aucthors of the league, to
the prejudice of the house of France.

Also two Letters written by the said King of Navarre. The one to the
Parliament, the other to the Masters of Sorbonne.

More an Epistle written by Philipp de Morney to the French King:

Hereunto, for the playner declaration of the innocence of the said Princes,
are inserted the Articles agreed upon between the King and the Lords of Guyze.

All faithfully translated out of French,

Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas.

The Declaration and Protestation.
IT is not unknown to all men, and they may soon call to mind in what estate
the affairs of this Realm stood, and of what mind the King was, when the
house of Lorrayn under the title of a Holy league began to raise Wars against
his Majesty and to trouble the quiet estate of this Realm. For through Gods
grace Peace began to take root in the depth of men's hearts, and thence to
expel all hartburning and mistrust: Justice under the wings thereof gathered
strength by the exerci^e of laws: Religion on both parts crept into credit in
men's consciences, whence the licencious liberty of wars had almost expelled
it: Nobility grew into familiarity and gave over partialities and factio^s:
The Commons after so many mischiefs and calamities, began to enjoy the
fruits of their labors, and through such good order as the King had taken,
were in possibility speedely to be freed from the pillage and insolency of
the Soldier. To be brief, the miseries and calamities incident to wars grew
into oblivion, and were almost buried under the commodities of peace, which was
mightily prosecuted and daily cherished through the Kings wisdom, to whom
nothing was in such recommendation as the continuance and establishing of the
same. For if on either side there remained any scarre of the ancient miseries,
which the peace (that yet had not been of so long continuance or force as the
war) could not clearly deface, the King, who had both noted the mischief
and found out the remedy, through that daily care that he took for the
affairs of his Realm, was surely entered such a path as would not only have
ended the calamities of this Realm, but also in short time have restored her
to her ancient dignity, prosperity, and brightness. But this necessary
path that should have led al things to wealth, quiet, and ease, is now broken
up and disturbed by the house of Lorrayn, who are utterly impatient and not
able to abide the tranquillity and peace of this Realm, as finding the same
repugnant to their purposes, which they know them selves utterly unable to
compass by the prosperity, but rather through the confusion, ruin and
subertion of this estate.

It is needless here to rehearse such their purposes as by the effects are
sufficiently discovered: For it may be evidently known to all men what the
pretenses and practices of those of that house have been as also what means
they have from time to time used, especially since the reign of Francis the
second, for the contriuing of their devises: which, to be brief, do te^d to the
extinguishing of the house of France, and intruding of the^ selves into the
place thereof. And for the easier atteyning to such their drifts and
enterprises, how they have sought to set division in the Realm, to nourish
troubles, to weaken the power of the Nobility by the loss and shedding of
their blood, to abase under sundry prete^ces the credit and authority of the
Princes. In the mean time themselves to take weapon in hand, to gain
partakers, to overthrow all that stand in their way, and finally so far as
in them lies, to encroch the strength and power of this Realm into their own
hands. This course have they ever since the reign of Frances the second taken,
still gathering ground by little and little and employing every occasion. They
laid to the Princes of the blood that they had practiced against the person of
the young Prince, and under pretense thereof procured the apprehe^ding and
detaining of the chief Princes of the blood, sequestring the rest from about
his Majesty, and bringing into mislike the most ancient and faithful
officers of the Crown, yea even then, had not God prevented them, they had set
foot upon the very throat of this estate. This being most manifest, can not be
attributed other then to their ambicious practizes: For at that time no Prince
in France openly did profess any other then the Catholic Romish Religion,
neither was there any such question of controversy in Religion, which as yet
was not much spoken of in this Realm* No, the quarrel which the house of
Lorrayne then had and yet has against the house of France, tended under
shadow of the King to reign, until fitter opportunity, the whiles, under his
authority and by his power to rid their hands of the chief Princes of the
blood, who were any stumbling blocks in their way, and of the officers of the
Crown, as those that could not brook their usurped authority.

Upon these and such like beginnings we are to judge of their actions ensuing:
according to these originalles must we consider of the effects, that since
they have endeavored to disguize to the end diversely to procure them favor,
as soon after they did, and still they endeavor to do: but the nature of water
is never better known then at the Spring while it is yet pure and unmingled,
as likewise all human actions are naturally discerned at their first
beginnings, before the inconveniences that we find have gathered any
sleights, and learned to use any cloked dissimulation. This also was the reason
that moved the^, immediately upon the decease of King Francis, under whose name
they ruled, because he had married the Scottish Queen their niece, finding
themselves thereby excluded from all means of government, to alter their
former pretense: For when they perceived that the general estates lawfully
summoned and assembled did call them to accoumpt for their administrations and
dealings, they began to cloak their ambition with the veil of earnest zeal to
the Catholic Romish religion. They, who but four days before had put the
Germain Princes in such hope of joining with them in the confession of
Ausbourg, beginning with the murder of many persons of all sorts, ages and
kinds at Vassy, did violate the laws and infringe the peace and public
tranquillity of the Realm, for the continuance whereof, the said general
estates had found it expedient to grant the exercize of both Religions, and to
the same end had published a solemn edict verefied in all the Courts of
Parliament: which could not be attributed to force, fear, or other unlawful
pursuit, but only to the sole consideration of the benefit and tranquillity
of this estate: With arms during the Kings minority they seized upon his
person together with the Queen his mother, who in wisdom had consented to
the said edict, and through just fear of their forces, was compelled (not
without manifold reclayming the aid of the Princes of the blood against their
tyranny) to yield and in the end to auctorize them for her patrons. All this
they did to the end to entangle the Princes youth in malice, hatred and
wars against his own blood, thereby to weaken the Realm, and to lay it open
to their invasions, and to draw to themselves both the authority and force,
(which indeed they brought to pass) so living and reigning in and among
arms, which, as opportunity should serve, they might abuse to their own
pretenses. This foundation did they lay so firm, that for the space of these
25. years this Realm has flowed with civil wars, under the support whereof
they have exercized their malice, satisfied their revenging affections, and
labored their ambition with the price of the King and his estate, yea, even
with the price (through their accursed and execrable counsayles) of the honor
of the French nation, unto whom are imputed all the mischiefs and calamities
that through the counsel of this fatal house of Lorrayne has been
contrived, until the King now reigning by his wisdom found out that the
zeal of Religion by the^ published as a shield, was but a pretense: that the
true spirit of Religion, whereof him self has more apprehension and feeling
then they, does not persuade or counsel the violation of public laws, the
breach of oath, or the tainting of a whole estate with blood and murder: so
that he perceived that undoubtedly it was but a practice to climb higher: for
the preventing whereof it was requisite to end the troubles of his Realm by
an equal and indifferent peace convenient for the present time, referring to
God (who only reigns in the consciences) all operation in the hearts of his
subjects, for the reuniting and bringing them all to one Religion.

Howbeit this peace being made, not by force, but of the Kings mere motion and
free consent, which also in respect thereof he would have called his peace:
this famely could not brook it, as men that could never find any peace in
peace, and therefore did continually cross it by all means and subtilties
possible, yea, they procured their partakers by all kind of injuries,
violences and wro^gfull attempts to drive the professors of the Religion into
despair and impatiencie, and to force them to take arms, whereby the King
might justly leauie war against them. Again, on the other side they
solicited the said professors of Religion to join with them, alleging the
benefit of the Commonwealth, and promising them liberty of religion under
whatsoever cautions or assurances that they could desire, leaving no device or
policy unpracticed, that might return this estate into trouble, as knowing
that the quiet and peace of the land fights against and overthrows all
their devises and purposes. Finally, finding the King more and more resolved to
maintain peace, and the professors of the Religion craving nothing more
heartily the^ quietness under the benefit of the edicts. Especially my Lord the
Duke of Anieowe deceased, and the King without issue, who^ by an imagination,
which cannot spring but out of desire, they assure themselves to out li^e, and
unto whom, as all men know, they have prescribed and limited but a short
time, they resolved to rise in arms and to seize upon their Majesty's persons
(had they not been discovered) together with the most part of the Realm, so to
be the better provided against the time of their imagined alteration: Also for
the drawing of the greater number of partakers to this conspiracy, they have
published sundry titles and pretenses, as true the one as the other, thereby to
accomodate them selves to the diverse minds and several affections of men,
still cloking their poison and venom under a gorgeous title of a counter
poison, the rather to abuse and confirm their adherents. The pretenses and
titles published are these. The Common wealth: The discharge of the third
estate: The reintegration of the Nobility in their pristinate dignity: The
reestablishing of the Church in her liberties and privileges: The suppression
of certain persons Whom the King has exalied: The restitution of such as they
pretend to have been evil en(...) and hardly dealt with: The nominatio^ of a
Catholic Romish successor to the Crown, for the defense of the Romish Church:
The extirpation of heresy and rooting out of those who^ they pretend to be
heretics.

All these things have they promised to bring to pass before they cease, and
yet how they have accomplished it, I leave to all men's consideration. The true
cause yet remains unspoken of, and is the same that only has already
produced some effects. Viz. To be armed to the end to prescribe laws to the
King under color of rooting out of Heretics: and to make away the chief
Princes of the blood, and such as are their principal stumblingblockes: that
is, those that profess the religion wherein they were borne and bread up, so
the easelier to attain to the rest, and this has the King very well marked,
even from the beginning of their broils hitherto: For in sundry his Letters to
the King of Navarre he has confessed, that he knows well enough that this
their zeal of Religion is but a pretense: and that their drifts do tend
against his own person, his house, and estate.

And in the mean time, because under this pretense they had abused many of his
subjects, he requires the said king of Navarre to have patience, until he
might evidently discipher the colors from the causes, and the pretenses from
the purposes, assuring him that he finds the enterprise directly against him
self, and so the offense to appertain properly unto him. Moreover, upon the
same judgment and foresight his Majesty has by his express Letters,
commanded al governors and Lieutenants general, in their Provinces and
particular chardges, to assail their troops, and has proclaimed and declared
them Rebels, Traitors, perturbers of common peace, and enemies to the Estate:
Upon the verfication of these his Majesty's commandments in all the Courts of
Parliament, there have ensued many decrees, yea some have been executed,
besides that the like messages have bin sent to all Princes allied and
confederat to the Crown, with express commandment to his Majesty's
Ambassadors, to direct their speeches conformably thereunto, Viz. That his
Majesty finds by the effects as well past as present, and understands by
the demeanurs and testimonies aforesaid, that the insurrection of those of
this house, notwithstanding whatsoever their pretenses, is one of the fruits of
their first attempts, that is, of their conspiracy to root out the house of
France, whereof none need to plead ignorance that list but to look back
unto, and call to mind their behauiours these 25. years and more, and at once
to consider well of the same.

At the same time also that his Majesty proclaimed them Rebels, he revived the
publication of his Edict of pacification throughout all parts of his Realm,
as a testimony to al, but chiefly to those of the Religion, that he in no wise
meant to incline to the demands of these men, but did rather condemn them, for
that they sought to abolish the said Religion by force of arms, his Majesty
knowing that to be no meet or lawful mean, as also by sundry letters he
assured the King of Navarre that he would do nothing prejudicial either to the
said Edict or him, whose cause he acknowledged to be his own.

All the premises notwithstanding, it so fell out, that upon a sudden a peace
was concluded with those of this famely and league, whereof proceeded an Edict,
whereby the former Edict of pacification, so deliberatly confirmed, and so
solemnly sworn unto by their Majesty's: the Princes of his blood: all the
Courts of Parliament: and the chief Lords and officers of the crown, which
also had been so freshly reiterated and again confirmed, was now utterly
revoked, all exercise of religion under pain of death prohibited: all
professors thereof condemned within the term of six months to depart the
realm: the towns for assurance, which likewise of his own accord, and for
diverse considerations concerning the wealth and quiet of his estate, he had
proroged to those of the said religion, they should now speedely haba^don, to
the end to buy peace at the hands of the said Rebels and traitors, so
proclaimed and acknowledged by his Majesty, with the hinderance of his nearest
kinsemen: and, which is worse, the weapons committed to the hands of those men,
to the end to put the same in execution, a matter utterly repugnant to all
laws, which do merely forbid the execution of any decree to be committed to
the adverse party, nay more, that he shall not assist thereat, notwithstanding
it were to maintain the execution of Justice.

Hereupon therefore does the King of Navarre desire all good French men in
France to consider what cause he has, to to lament. In their public
protestations, the conspirators opposed themselves directly against him, and
yet he* to the end to satisfy the Kings mind, and to avoid all occasion of
the peoples oppression, remained peaceable, and never would arm himself,
although he see them in arms round about him. He see the Kings mind inclined
to peace, and that evil and ruin which they openly procured him, might have
moved him by all means to cross them* and yet for the benefit of the realm
he offered to the king some entry to quietness by the declaration which
expressly he published, yea such as he trusts all Christiandome will allow
of, and the veriest barbarous nation would have aceapted of.

They spoke of the rooting out of heresy, and the Christian authors fought
against it with general Counsels: he submitted himself to a counsel, and
declared himself to be ready to be enstructed thereby and to yield thereto.
They craved reformation and alteration in some matters of estate: such
controversies and differents are by the ancient statutes of the land to be
determined by the general estates, to the assembly whereof, whenever it
should please the King to summon them, he offered to refer, and submit
himself. They requested that the King of Navarre and the professors of the
Religion should immediately habandon and depart the Towns of assurance,
notwithstanding the Kings prorogation of the tenor of the same to them
granted: for the eschuing of al mistrust he offered without delay to yield
the^, yea, which is more, to dispossess himself and to render into the Kings
hands, both he and the Lord Prince of Conde, al governments that they hold
within this Realm, conditionally, that the others might do the like,
notwithstanding such inequality as all men may easily perceive: for it is not
meet to make strangers equal with the household children. Moreover, if there
were any further controversy, the decision whereof might touch or any way
concern him, for the exempting of the King (whose person would be too dear a
price to this Realm) from all danger and care thereof, the said King of Navarre
besought his Majesty not to mislike the determining of any such quarrel,
either by his power against theirs, either else, for the preventing of public
calamity, by his person against the Duke of Guyze, or by more to more, as he
should think good, within the realm or without, in whatsoever place of free
access: adding moreover that if his Majesty could conceive any more
convenient remedy for the pacifying of the estate of the Realm, the said
King of Navarre would gladly yield thereto and not to spare his life therein,
most humbly withal beseeching his Majesty so far to honor him as to let him
understand the same. Howbeit, nothing respecting all these his so reasonable
offers, they have in the mean time proceeded to a treaty of peace, to the great
prejudice of the estate and house of France, yea, of the King himself. A
peace, to speak indifferently, unworthy any such title, as being to be
rather accounted a summons of war, yea, and unless God of his great mercy
do prevent it, such a war as will be an entry into the ruin and subuertion
of the whole estate. A peace made with strangers for the rooting out of the
home borne children: with Traitors for the spoil of the obedient Subjects:
with conspirators, to the end to commit to their hands the sword against
himself, to abuse at their pleasures. A peace that has not so much as the
taste of any thing appertayning to peace; A black peace* A woeful and funeral
peace, and of an unfortunate aspect: A peace which the King signed not but with
a quaking and shiuering hand: A peace whereto the Princes of his blood and
Peers of this Realm, yea, the most Catholic, have refused to swear, as being
the decree of their deaths and the small overthrow of the estate, which
moreover procures no comfort either to the Country or Towns, but has
filled all the good Frenchmen of this Realm with horror, and rejoiced only
those that nourish them selves and feed upon their deaths. A peace to say the
troth, which the said Lord King of Navarre acknowledges not to be imputed unto
the King, a courteous and just Prince, from whose nature the same is too
odious, neither to the Queen his mother, who in all her endeavors have sought
no other but the tranquillity of the Realm: but partly to the dastardlinesse
of some of the Kings Counsel, and partly to the treachery of other some, who
are either servants or of kindred and alliance with those of this league, who
also, as it is sufficiently known, in the beginning lessened and deminished
the mischief, propounding it unto him to be easily appeased, least he should
have provided remedies necessary there against. But afterward even at once when
they see the power of the league wax great, did so enlarge it to his view that
he was easily persuaded that himself might soon be by them oppressed if
speedily he satisfied not their minds: and for such persons it is well known
that a number of them which under color of her service accompanied the Queen,
did advertise those of the league of her chief secrets: some h^ld their
conuenticles so soon as they came forth of his Chamber, what counsel they
should give him: other some to the end to astonish him, disciphered unto him
such armies to the succors of the league, as never appeared, nor had any other
substance then air. These were the counsels whereby the King was turned from
using his nearest kindred, who would not have spared the shedding of their
blood for his quiet, and who had both will and opportunity, and now for
recompense are sold to the stranger, and so far as may be, payment is made
with their blood and lives. Upon these counsayles has he refused the offers
of his princely Neighbors, the loyal confederates of the Crown, while by
means of the league the Spanish coin trotted through out France, and found
entry into the Towns, into the Counsel, yea, into the priuiest part
thereof. Finally, and all men know it, the King was deluded by those to whom
be had as great occasion to commit himself, if benefits received might amend
men's minds. And the said Lord King of Navarre fully assures him self that
though by their (...) and violence they have been able to arm his arms
against him, yet at the least his sobbes, sighs, desires and vows shall fight
in his quarrel, which he has well found and cannot possibly forget to be his
own.

The said Lord King of Navarre hops that the most part of men of judgment
in this Realm, especially such as have had nearest familiarity with their
actions or been entangled therein, have been able to enter into consideration
of the depth of the entents of those of the league, and therefore he will so
far assure himself of the^, that they will not so blemish their honors as to
bear arms against the house of France, under the shadow of this edict, as
also they should proceed too far against their own knowledge if they should
but think to have taken them under the said pretenses, yea, were it for the
assurance of their Religion.

Those of this league alleged diverse pretenses, as they dealt in one so it is
like they do and will do in the rest.

Of this Common wealth whereof they made so great boast and which had provoked
sundry, even of the Nobility, such as were farthest from ambition, and least
partakers of the corruption of these times, in this edict there is no word of
it, even the first day thereof they gave it over.

Concerning the discharge of the third estate which they promised, in this
treaty there is no mention thereof, but contrariwise by this peace it has
begun to be surcharged and more and more brought into ruin. For, where in
their declarations they promised that their Soldiers should live in order and
pay all men, it is well known that during all the troubles of this Realm
there have been none more unruly or disordered in all sorts, as likewise that
which they protested that they would not attempt against the kings Towns, or
therein place any Garrison without the consent or liking of the Inhabitants,
has been no whit better observed by such as have seized upon the same. For in
some by force, in others that voluntarily received them, under color of good
meaning they have built Citadelles and brought in Garrisons.

The Nobility have had no better amends: for in this treaty whom have they
provided for but themselves, or those of their house? either whom have they
restored to the dignities whereof they pretended them to be unworthily deprived?
To be brief, all their doings have stretched only to the parting and dividing
of France to those of their famely according to their platform laid for the
atchieuing thereof in time to come, causing by this peace the government of
sundry Towns of importance and Provinces both upon the frontiers and in the
heart of the Realm to be committed to them, whereupon the Nobility of this
Realm is to consider what advancement they may expect at their hands when
24. Princes of Lorrayne must be contented and satisfied before any of them may
by their means attain to any dignity.

As for the due promotions unto Ecclesiastical functions and dignities, they
have in this Edict had no more respect (witness the Bishopric of Authum,
whereunto the D. of Main has by force promoted his Son in Law) then to the
prerogatives, franchizes and liberties thereof, notwithstanding, that seeking to
take a pretense for Religion, the same should have been a principal article
and of greatest recommendation. But contrariwise, entering into information of
their lives, it will be found that they have ransomed the Priests and clergy,
profaned the Monasteries, embeseled the Chalices and Crosses, with all other
the Church goods, all have been to them Wars, even in making their peace. To
the end to be paid their expenses, following the steps of the late Cardinal
of Lorrayn their uncle, they have propounded and extorted a promise to
alienate Rentes to the value of 100000. Crowns, and to procure the Popes
consent thereto. Provided always, that the said coin may be employed in the
reembursing of them: Besides it is evident to all me^ that in any matter
touching the three Estates, without instance or pursuit they discharged
themselves at the beginning of the Parley of this peace.

Touching the great favor about the King, whereof they complain of some
gentlemen whom they term in their Declaration (The bloodsuckers of the
people) whom also they say they will abase and reduce into order, it is most
manifest that they have most vildly in all sorts sought their amity, that
they have gone about to buy the same by remitting into their hands the towns
of their governments, which by Wars they had seized upon and taken away: but
to their great shame those men have taught them the path to Generositie and
courage, by giving them to understand that they regarded not their amity
further then the commodity of this Realm did require.

With the Cardinal of Bourbon, whom they had brought into the field upon
promise of procuring him that right which they persuaded him he might pretend
to the Crown, they have played the same parts according to their usual
manner, which is to draw every man's interest into their own particular
profit: For having him once entangled among them, they made so small account
of his imagined right, that coming to parley with the Queen, they were even
ashamed to open their mouths therein: But in case there were any grievous
question, or any difficult or thorny point, they used him as an instrument. It
was my Lord the Cordinall that motioned it, and so reserved them selves still to
mollefie matters, to appease parties, and to wrest all the thanks and profit of
the treaty unto themselves.

In the mean time one principal point, whereupon they laid the foundation of
the Catholic Romish Religion, was to provide that the King should name a
successor that professed the same, and under that pretense (as also under the
former concerning the common wealth) they drew to their faction many of the
Nobility, which thought they had been in earnest, but their pretense was only
to atchieue that point which by this peace they have obtained, which was the
same only that they were so earnest for, viz. to sease upon the Frontiers and
Kayes of the Realm, which had been kept, even from the late Monsier, also
under shadow of Religion to have weapon in hand, so to become arbitrators of
the counsayles* to prescribe Laws to the king during his life: to make away
the Princes of his blood, and loyal servants of the house of France, and after
his decease, which they imagine to be at hand, violently to usurp this poor
estate.

To think they either can, or do suppose them selves able to compass the
rooting out of Religion, the proof that for these 25. years or more they have
made is quite repugnaunt thereto. Our Kings have not spared them selves either
by policies of peace or rigors of Wars. The authors of this league have
employed both force and craft. The name League has nothing increased their
means: has not bred up any new soldiers in the Realm, neither has made
them greater Captains then before they were, still it is France part whereof,
yea the best part will not help to spoil and destroy France. It is even the
house of France which the house of Lorrayn does assail, for their pretenses
are sufficiently revealed to all men. This it is that will strengthen the K. of
Navarre with the ancient officers of the Crown, with the Princes of the
blood. with the wishes of the King, with ye sighs and sobbes of all good
Frenchmen without respect of Religion, and so much diminish and weaken the
enemy. Besides that it is no longer to any purpose herein, as against the old
Albigeois, to imagine the publication of a croysade, for there is not one Town
of France that consents to this party. There is no member, no part of the
body, no there is not scarce any one synew but complains hereof. Neither is
it France only that has prosecuted this reformation in Religion, but it has
been a common motion in all Estates and nations of our Europe: Hole kingdoms
have sequestered them selves from the Pope. Empires have been more then half
touched, scarce is there any estate, but have stirred herein (as all men know
and do grant) and feeling it can plainly find out and eschew their own ruin
by that of their neighbors.

On the other side, there is no Prince in Europe of whatsoever Religion, but
thinks it strange to pretend the excluding of a Prince without audience or
teaching, no other trespass against the laws of the Country committed, from
an estate or succession unto him due. But in Histories it is evident, what the
effects of an ambicious or envious passion can compass, even upon the least
occasion to the urging of an heresy, as for example. Philipp the fair was
denounced an heretic for that he would not hold this Realm in homage of the
Pope, and so was cut off from the Church: but such Popes both before and since
as have pretended more modesty, and were not led by the like passion have held
an other opinion and otherwise decided it. A counsel must order all, and who
so eschueth a counsel, eschueth the light, and refuses reason, as showing
himself to seek darkness, and to use the title of Religion in vain.

In the mean time, such is the mischief, the King our Sovereign, partly
through the violence and conspiracy of his enemies, and partly by the malice
and collusion of some of his Counsailors has been forced and brought to
conclude a peace, whereof undoubtedly, without speedy remedy, will ensue his
own overthrow, the destruction of the house of France and the subuertion of
this estate. Wherefore the King of Navarre, as first Prince of the blood and
chief Peer of this Realm, the Lord Prince of Conde his Cousine a Prince and
Peer of France, and the Lord Duke of Montmorency a Peer of France and the
chief Officer of the Crown, together with the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Provinces, Towns and Communalties as well of the one as of the other Religion,
united for the preservation of this estate, do protest and declare as ensues.

First that their intent neither is, neither ever was other then to see the
King well served and duetifully obeyed of all men, every one in his place
according to his calling and estate, and themselves to become an example to
all, which was to be seen in these late dealings. Namely, that their desire
te^deth only to see the Realm peaceable and quiet, as it was in a good
forwardness at the beginning of these broils, and to the same end have
withal their hearts endeavored them selves against such as sought to molest
the prosperity of the King and Estate, and to the like intent will willingly
employ whatsoever they are able in life or goods.

Also because heretofore there have bin sundry means propounded unto the King,
whether for deciding the controversies in Religion, or of the Estate, which his
enemies used for a pretense, either (...) for ending such quarrelles as
particulerly they pretended against the Princes of France, among whom the
King of Navarre has the peeminence: the said King of Navarre, does most humbly
desire his Majesty to call to mind the aforesaid offers contained in his
declaration, bearing date the 10. of June 1585. which he sent to his Majesty,
written and signed with his own hand. Also if himself have conceived, or
there be to him any other motion made for the contentation of his Majesty and
the wealth of the Realm, the said Lord King of Navarre would crave to
understand thereof and accompteth himself happy, in case it be such as before
God and man he may accommodate himself unto.

But perticulerly, because these of the league, to the end to find
opportunity presently to assault him, have for their argument thought good to
require the delivery of the Towns of assurance, and upon refusal thereof,
with open force to set upon him, he does most humbly beseech his Majesty to
remember that in December last, Anno 1584. it peased him during the full peace
voluntarily to grant the prorogation theru^of at the humble petitions to him
made in the behalf of his subjects: that then he so thought it most convenient
for the peace of the Realm* that since by mere force of arms and upon less
occasion he has granted greater and more Towns to those of the league, who
rise against his person, against his house and against his estate, as being
content not only to leave to them such as they have seized upon, but also has
given them others, yea more then in two years Wars with prosperous success
they could have gotten: whereupon the said Lord King of Navarre, as also al
other the good subjects and servant of this estate have occasion to desire
the King to grant the^ new assura^ces against those of the league, and that
the rather because those men have in their hands the chief frontiers as well
on the Sea coasts as on the la^d, whereby to draw the stranger into the Realm.
All which notwithstanding, the said Lord King of Navarre once again offers
to dispossess himself of the said Towns of assurance unto him by his
Majesty's free consent proroged, conditionally that the said house of Lorrayne
and other their adherents of the league do likewise effectually depart from
those that they hold: That all weapons may be laid aside: That the strangers
be returned, and themselves withdrawn into their own houses.

That if notwithstanding so reasonable offers any forces do march against the
K. of Navarre, the Lord Prince of Conde, and the Lord Duke of Montmorency, or
any of them or their adherents, they do most humbly require his Majesty not to
mislike that they follow the counsel both of nature and necessity, which do
teach to repel force by force, either that they employ whatsoever their friends
or means therein, and the rather because now they are not to fight in Guyen
for Guyen, in Languedock for Languedock, in Daulphine, Province and other
places for the estate of the said Lo. K. of Navarre, the Lo* Prince, or the
Lord Duke of Montmorency, but undoubtedly for the Estate and liberty of the
King himself, with the Queen his Mother: for the preservation of the laws,
and for the defense of the Estate, as also they are assured (which increases
their courage) that though the enemy has proceeded so far as to seize upon
his Majesty's Weapons, yet he has kept and reserved his heart for them.

They pray the Queen the Kings Mother, to call again to mind how those of
that famely entreated her, when under K. Frances the second her Son, they
ruled all, as also what from time to time she noted in them, touching the
driftes of their ambition. Even she, who was the first that to the Kings her
children displayed them for such as they are. But chiefly that she, who has
won to her self the name of Mother of the Realm, would not now leave an
opinion in the hearts of the posterity of the leading of the same to ruin, by
delivering it into the hands of strangers, by enfringing the public peace
for the conte^ting of the particular desires of the public enemy, and
forcing her nearest and most obedient subjects to encurre the pain due to the
Rebels and perturbers of the estate: Whereas at the least there might be some
general peace concluded upon, if in her wisdom she judges it expedient for
the peace of this estate to abolish and pardon their offenses.

The said Lo. K. of Navarre, Lord Prince of Conde, and Lord Duke of
Montmorency, do adjure the Lords Princes of the blood, earnestly to consider
that the same imports their house and blood: The Peers and principal
officers of this Realm, that it concerns the oath and duty which they have
taken and owe to the Crown: All Parliaments, that it touches the foundamental
laws of this estate whereof them selves are the preseruers and guardians.
Generally, all estates and degrees of this Realm that it tends to the
subuertion and confusion of their famelies: For who can ever assure himself of
a particular quiet in a public uproar, of a calm in a tempestious Sea, of a
certain estate in an alteration of all estates, or of a private assurance in
an universal spoil. Also all Princes and estates our neighbors being
likewise in league and alliance with this estate to assist them in their
undertaken defense, and not to suffer such a conspiracy to take effect, in
respect of the consequence wherinto it might draw all estates Christian.

They do declare before God who sees their hearts and before men whom they
chose Judges of their actions, that they do bewail the Kings estate, who
abroad is besieged and at home entangled by and in the practices of his
enemies: that their weapons are vowed only to his liberty and service, and
would to GOD he had, vouchsafed to have employed their affections, for so could
they soon have delivered him out of all these perplexities.

Concerning Religion, the said Lords King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, do
from their hearts and on their faith and honor declare that they entende not
any way to molest the Catholics or prejudice their Religion which they do
profess, as being always of opinion that the conscience ought to be free, and
as concerning their own that they are ready to submit themselves to a
Counsel. That they do accept of all good and true Frenchmen, both temporal
and spiritual, and of al (...) without acception or exeption of Religion:
equally taking into their protection and safegarde, them, their consciences,
honors and dignities, their goods, lives and famelies, to the end, so far as
in them shall lie, to warrant and defend them against all oppression and
violence.

They do exhort each one particulerly according to his ability and calling,
in token what they are, to draw to them, to succor and assist the^ against
those of this league, whom the King has openly declared atte^pters against his
person, Crown and estate. To the end also to take from them all doubt and
mistrust, the Lord Duke of Montmorency, whose Religion was never mistrusted,
and whose wisdom as sufficiently known to be such as can well find the
entents of the said Lords King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, shall be their
loadesman and serve them as a guide. He being a Peer of France and chief
officer of the Crown, to whom belongs the first place in leading of the
armies. Besides, that through Gods grace they have already the assistance and
company of a good number of Catholic Lords, Knights, Captains and
Gentlemen, such as have found out and perceived their good right, together with
the necessity of their defense.

As for the Captains of the league and those who to the same intent shall
stick unto them, the said Lords King of Navarre, Prince of Conde, and Duke of
Montmorency, do declare and acknowledge them to be enemies to the King, the
house of France, and the weal of this estate, even such as the King has
already declared them, and as his Courts of Parliament in the verification of
his letters have aduouched them. Also according to the tenor and contents of
the said letters, together with the Kings commandments therein contained,
they will with their whole power prosecute war against the^ and by all means
procure the rooting of them out.

Howbeit, for as much as diverse there are that by the pretenses of the league
may have been deceived and abused, so many of them as shall within the space
of this present year depart therefro and withdraw them selves to them, or
into their own, they will admit and receive into their protection and
safegarde as before, meaning that conformably to his Majesty's former
ordenances they shall in no wise be molested or called into question for having
been seduced by the persuasions of those of the league aforesaid.

The said Lords King of Navarre, Prince of Conde, and Duke of Montmorency, do
desire al those that shoot not at the same mark with the leaguers which they
should sufficiently know, and yet do remain in their holds, armies or
troops, to withdraw and get thence so soon as conveniently they may, least
to their great grief they should not be able to discern them from the rest,
for that they intend not to make such partakers of the like pain as are not
comprehended in the same crime.

Further, in as much as the said Lord King of Navarre, Lord Prince of Conde,
and Lord Duke of Montmorency, do sufficiently acknowledge all War to be one
of Gods scourges, but especially domestical War, wherein the poor innocent
people are in greatest danger, whose calamities and miseries they do even
already bewail, they do withal their hearts beseech the almighty to open
his merciful providence over the miserable estate of this Realm and people,
to the end the mischiefs may by some means be turned away, either else
prevented through some good peace: that it may also please him to touch the
hearts and open the eyes of the King and of the Queen his mother, that they may
conceive the necessary(...) means for the same: also to mollefie the
hardness and obstinatie and to suppress the ambition of those of this league,
making them capable of better counsel, and such as may be more convenient to
the quiet of this estate. If otherwise, and that their prayers can not avail
or obtain this success* yet do they heartily desire every oue to judge
whether there were ever defense more natural, more necessary, or more just.
Also to lay the blame and cast the curse upon such as have brought them into
this extremity, and left them no other choice but either the rooting out of
the house of France together with the subuertion of the estate, or else a
lawful and necessary defense. Consequently, they assure themselves that God
will bless the right, and bring upon the authors of this league, the very
ringleaders of our calamities, that destruction which they purpose against the
King, his famelie and estate.

Given at S. Paul of (...), the 10. of August 1585. Signed Henry. Henry of
Bourbon. Montmorency.

A Letter written by the King of NAVARRE to the presidents and Members of the
Court of Parliament for the French King at Paris.
MY Masters, of all things pa^^ed sense the last broils, I crave no other
judges then your selves: For you may have seen how many ways the (...)mies
of this Estate and mine have tempted my patience: neither can you be ignorant
what sway the respect of the King and weal of this Estate have borne in me,
whereby I have been detained in my just grief. In the mean time it has so
fallen out (and I am assured your selves do all know what wrong I do herein
sustain) that the enemies of the King and Realm are aucthorized and and armed
against me. Whereon it must necessarily ensue that my patience and obedience
must bear the penance of their rebellion, and the stranger be rewarded with
the goods of the household servant, the servant with those of the home borne
child. It is in truth a matter unto me very hard, but I have God for my
protector, France for my judge, your selves for my witnesses and my Lord the
King (for I can not doubt thereof) for the allower of my sincerity. I bewail
the mishap of this estate: But God knows in whom the fault is, and can there
lay the punishment. I moan the calamities of the people: but it is evident
who, even of pleasure, brake the peace, and how necesarily I am forced to take
heed to my self. It is in vain to report to you what conditions I have
propounded, you have seen them and can tell whether they deserve to be looked
upon. I have therefore no more to say, but to require you, even by the oath
that you owe unto France, with your authority to withstand the co^spiracie
which you see does tend to the subversion thereof, or at the least assist not
with your authority so pernicious a practice: even with your vows favor
those that purpose to employ their lives for the preventing of such misery and
overthrow of this Estate. I desire and crave no more of you, but the judgment
of your own consciences. If my cause be just, I desire you to allow thereof,
if wrongful, determine my ma^^ers what you shall think in duty for the weal
of this estate. God I take to witness that I am and have been faithful to
the King: that I love France: that I honor such verteous persons as do
defend it, and that I bewail the misery and calamity which I see ready to
take hold of all Estates. I beseech him to assist you with his grace, you
whom always I have accounted the Pillars of this Realm, to the end that in
these broils you may (as many times heretofore) reap the commendation of the
susteyning and underpropping of the body of this estate: and I trust that he
will give me grace so to serve the King my Lord, also to be so well served of
all good French men, lovers of his Crown, that shortly I may present to his
view the end of his enemies and quiet of his Subjects, for the compassing
whereof I will not spare either my blood or life Whereupon my masters I end,
praying God to have you in his holy grace and protection.

From Mont de Marsan this 11. of October. 1585. Your most affectionate and
assured friend. Henry.

A Letter from the King of Navarre to the Masters of the Faculty of Deuinitie
in the College of Sorbonne.
MY Masters, unto you I have recourse for matters now in question, as unto
those whose particular profession te^deth to provide that the Church encurre or
suffer no detriment. You have considered these late broils of those of the
house of Guyze founded upon many and very diverse pretenses, but finally reduced
and al formed into one: namely, to restore the Catholic Church to her
perfection, and to that end, to root out me and all other whom they pretend
to be heretics: To which purpose, such has been their force and violence,
there have ensued an edict almost to their minds. Now I will not doubt but
through your wisdoms you do know that they purpose an other matter then
they speak of. That is, under the shadow of Religion to have weapon in hand
wherewith to oppress the chief of the house of France* and so to prepare the
way to the usurping of this estate. But I pray you even in these matters of
Religion judge whether they or I have opened the better way to reunite the
Church and to take away the scisme which so long have troubled us.

I have been brought up in a Religion which I think holy and true, neither need
there any testimony whether in heart I do profess the same. For otherwise I
could have eschued so many mischiefs as I have been forced to suffer, wherein
naturally man can conceive no great delight I could otherwise also have
purchased the Kings favor, and love of his people, which next after Gods
favor I account most profitable and requisite for me. The case being such, it
is over hard and so I suppose your selves will think, to desire that without
any other form or order I should forsake my Religion and force both my
conscience and soul: yea, if I should be so wretched as in such sort to
offend, your selves might justly mistrust me in all other matters. Me that
should sail in that which in the judgment of my own soul I think to be my
duty to God, a matter that reasonably none can require at my hands. This is
it that as I think I have voluntarily offered and which daily I do still
offer: Namely, to be instructed in a free and lawful Counsel, wherein the
controversies of religion may be thoroughly dobated and decided, and so to yield
to whatsoever shall be determined. A way, as your selves are not ignorant, at
all times practiced in the Church in like cases, and that by the wisest Kings
and Emperors in the world: A way, whereunto you my Masters have often
counsayled the Kings predecessors, and whereby you have always been able to
maintain the privileges and rightes of the French Church against many
usurpations: To be brief, such a way as the Church in her greatest force
never refused for reducing into her bosom even mean persons, yea, sometimes
one man only. And therefore much less ought she now to reject or flee from the
same, now I say, when it stands upon millions of souls, upon whole Tounes
and large Provinces, upon an infinite number of qualified persons, even of the
chief Princes of the blood and nearest to the Crown, who can not easily be
forced, neither rooted out without subuertion of the estate, and yet being by
reason persuaded to change, may be a cause of firm peace in this land, of a
steadfast revnio^ of ye Catholic church, with the foreiudgement of their
persons and of a more happy world, not to this Realm only, which were an
inestimable gain, but also to all Christendom and Europe, which necessarily
must have some feeling of the miseries and calamities of so puissant an estate.
This my Masters, is the offer that I have made to the King my Lord, which now
I do repeat unto you, and whereof I call you to witness among all to whom it
may appertain, to the end it may be manifest both to those that now live and
to the posterity, that I was not the cause of disquiet in this estate, either
any hinderance that the Church was not reduced into her former union, peace and
tranquillity.

Where as it is objected against me that I am an heretic, you are to show
unto the world and of you have I learned it, that there is great difference
betwixt heresy and error. That all that hold an heresy are not nevertheless
heretics. That heretics are they who do proceed either upon ambition or
obstinacy, whereof neither can have place in me whom no man ever went about to
teach, and whom contrariwise they have by all means endeavored to cast of,
alleging no other reason then a strong ambition. Besides that I have
renounced the large path to that greatness that by the Catholic Romish
Religion lay open unto me, and have taken the contrary way, viz. the way of
persecution and contempt, constantly perseuering in that which usually is
called and I do account reformed.

But admit it were so. It is against error and heresy that the Church calls
Co^sailes, and consultations are houlden to cure the diseased, the Surgeon
uses neither Iron nor fire, but where his plasters are to weak. It it an
evident argument of passion, when they begin conversion with subversion, and
instruction with destruction: With rooting out and War, when they should
begin with brotherly admonition and gentleness.

Neither is is enough to allege the holding of the Counsel of Trent, wherein
was condemned the religion which I profess, and they term Heresy: you all
my my Masters do know what manner of Counsel that was, neither did you ever
allow thereof, yea, there against have the whole Estate, Clergy and
Parliaments of this Realm often protested. You know also that in case it had
been lawfully called and holden, yet had that been no prejudice to the
summoning of an other. Especially since it concerns the salvation and
reestablishment of such persons and so great an estate. Contrariwise, I am
given to understand that in the general Counsel holden at Basil, it was
ordained that from ten year to ten year there should be a Counsel holden, to
the end to cut off such errors as might spring in the church. Much more
needful then were it for the rooting out such as already are grown up.

Judge now therefore my Masters which of us is in the right, whether of us in
this case is most to be respected, either who propou^deth the meetest remedy
for this estate. The stranger craves that the home borne child be cast out
under color of heresy. Even the stranger who long have practiced to have his
room. Me, truly notwithstanding far unequal with them, upon whose
behauiours they can take no hold. I neither have nor do desire but to have my
cause heard: by a Counsel to be taught the best way: to do better if I be
better instructed. Which then will you judge most right, either what need the
whole Realm to be kindled herewith? For who doubts whether you will sooner
choose, either civil War or a Counsel? either the subuertion of the one
half of this estate by the other, or rather the reunion of both parts of this
Realm into one, which undoubtedly will be of great consequence to all
Christiandome.

Now therefore, I do finally declare unto you that I crave and am ready to
yield to a Counsel: that I am ready to hearke^ to the Church therein. And
therefore can you not account me either an Ethnicke or Publicane. I do
moreover give you to (...), that in default of a general Counsalle for the
pacifying of matters I do not refuse a national, which often has been
practiced in this Realm, yea, and that by your own counsel and consent. But
if notwithstanding any these my offers and request, they do contrary to all
order of the Church proceed by banishme^ts, murders, and other rigorous
barbarousnesse, I am resolved to oppose my self in my just defense against
such horrible banishments and violences. And the curse be upon those that do
trouble this estate under the false pretense of the Church. You therefore do I
call to witness of the reasonable conditions whereto I submit my self. Also
God for my defender, who is able to debate my right against my aduers^ries, and
I beseech him my Masters, to have you in his holy protection.

From Mont de Marsan this 11. of October. 1585. Your affectionate and assured
friend. Henry.

An Epistle to the King.
SIr, great Captains, Kings, and Emperors in old time sought to take their
surnames of those Countries, that they conquered. And so came the surnames of
African, Asian. etc. Your predecessors, who wanted no conquestes whereby to be
famous among the posterity, chose for them selves and you, and left as an
inheritance the surname Most Christian, therein seeking to declare to al men,
that the true honor of man consists in being truly Christian, and the very
triu^ph of Princes whom God has established over man rests in the defense
and advancement of Christian religion. Whereupon I agree with those that say
that your Majesty's scope should tend to reunite the Church, a work meet for
you, a labor incident to your Diadem, yea such a labor as you ought to have
in no less jealousy then your estate. But it may be that in the means we may
somewhat differ, wherein your Majesty's judgment ouerruling both you are to
choose the most expedient.

They propound the restoring of the Church to her perfection by arms: but who
can better judge of the unprofitableness of arms in matter of Religion then
your Majesty, who having so fortunatly used the^ against those whom by all
means they endeavor to overthrow, could nevertheless in the end reap no
other profit thereby, then to learn that the happiest success avails not
against the conscience. Also that weapons have no more force over the soul,
then the Surgeans Raser over the man's understanding and affections that guides
it.

The remedies ought to have an* Analogy and proportion correspondent to the
mischiefs and diseases. Fear naturally overcomes the body, sound mastereth
the ear, and reason rules the soul, bnt to use force against the soul, it
works as small effect as reason over the ear, or sound over the mass of a
man's body.

Arms therefore are a means not to reunite the Church, but to subvert the
state of the Realm, not to instruct or convert, but to subvert and destroy,
and as nothing in this world can breed mischief, but it must also feel part
thereof, so the destruction of the one side will cost the overthrow of the
other. The ruin and rooting out of those of the religion (how easy so ever it
be accounted) will prove to be the confusion and desolation of the whole Estate.

These great Catholics that have endeavored to compel you to force your
subjects: who with open force have required your Majesty by force to reduce
your subjects into the Romish Church, I would feign learn what they hope for,
whether more power, of better success then your Majesty? They commanded over
your armies, armed with your will, depending upon your authority, guyded with
your good hap, and favored with your own presence, and your presence I
account a great part of the strength of a mighty army. If your will be not
present, as undoubtedly it can not be, who sees not those wills that depend
thereof very cold and quailing? But especially since your person can not be safe
among their armies, who does not evidently see that the gre^^ body of this
army, how gross or strong soever, will shortly shrincke asunder by peecemeale,
in that it is not holden together with any respect of your Majesty, or kept in
awe with your presence. The child naturally bears at the fathers hands, and
how good soever his cause be, is nevertheless content to shun the stripes,
to hold his hand before him, or to get out of the way until the choler be
over. In the servant or stranger, he shall find as much stomach and force
as may counteruaile all reverence, yea, sometime indignation will double: and
that is it which naturally is to be expected of a Prince, the first of your
blood, whom servant and strangers do endeavor to exclude out of your
famelie with a million of your natural Subjects, brought up under your wing
and under the clemency of your commandments, whom I say the strangers would
make you root out and drive to seek foreign Countries. Whereof to be brief,
such a despair may spring as may teach great indignities and indignations, and
so consequently the most extreme Counsels that despair can conceive or
bring forth.

In old time the laws condemned in great fines such Carpenters as, to draw a
man to enterprise a building, deceiptfully persuaded him that the charges would
be but small, and yet that tended to building, the greatest commodity whereof
redounded to the benefit of the Master of the house, and to the ornament of
the Common wealth. What pain then may be sufficient for those who to the end
to stir up your Majesty to the destruction of your Realm, are not ashamed
to auow the enterprise to be very easy. An enterprise whereof the loss will
redounde to you, the misery to us, and the benefit to themselves.

Let us therefore here speak of reuniting, not of subuerting. The mischiefs
now in question are ancient, and our elders knew the remedies for the same:
which remedies are the safest, so as we shall not need these practitioners
corosiues, that have replenished all France with murders, mournings,
funeralles and lamentations, and yet the disease they cry out of, and the
division that they complain of, is now in worse case then eue^ before.

Dissentions in Religion molested the Primitive Church, sundry heresies were
fostered among the people: yea, even Emperors the defenders the Church were
infected with them. The histories of such are plentiful. The Fathers found
that heresy was an opinion, that al opinion consisted in the head, and that it
was a false Image of reason which could not be defased or rased out but with
the presence of reason it self. They did therefore gather Counsayles, they
called a sufficient number of people out of all places, every one quietly
propounded his opinion, in the end opinion gave place to knowledge,
likelihoode to truth, and Sophistry to reason.

Let us not think Christian Religion so darck, but that truth may be found
out, where a Counsel has her assured principles, steadfast maximees,
inviolable consequences (...) reason her self which if it be sufficie^nt to
decide the difficulties in laws, can well determine those in deuinitie, and
that the better, because it is the law of one GOD which admits no
contrarieties, neither can bear any Antinomy, but man's laws do often suffer
either the inequality of the Lawmakers among themselves, or of one only.

To be brief, it is a manifest injury to this law which is called the true
light, to believe that it can not light or lead men, yea which is worse, to
persuade that without fire it can not shine, that such as they pretend to be
darkness, must be burned rather then produced into the daylight, either to
take this light from under the Tubbe.

Some will show you that there shall need no Counsel, that we must follow
the Church, and she can never err.

Books are sufficiently furnished with replications thereupon: the old and
new Testament are full of the great errors of Gods people: It was the Chuch and
the Counsel of Jerusalem that condemned Jesus Christ and his Apostles: It
was therefore the Church that condemned her salvation. And S. Paul tells us
that Antechrist shall sit in the very Church of God. What is there the^ but
perdition worshipped in ye Church? These are but subtelties whereby to eschew
a Counsel. Man is dark, and the Church an assembly of men, the Church
therefore is a misty and darck body, and has no light in it but from God, and
is no farther, then it gathers light at Gods word, thence therefore take it.
The Church may at every strain stumble, and therefore we see our forefathers
from world to world groan after reformation, and therefore also did the
counsel of Basil decree, that from 10. years to 10. years a Counsel should
be called, to the end to cut of such errors as might spring up in the Church.

But some will reply and say, they have already holden one Counsel against
the doctrine now in question. Admit it be so, yet were it to soon to give over
well doing. The ancient fathers were not so sone weary against those of their
time, against the Arrians, who were heard in their disputations with all
liberty, yet being condemned in three counsels they were not debarred the
forth. But if we may be weary of reiterating the self same remedies, how much
rather of retourning to war which so often has been practiced in vain: to
war, whose best success is more dangerous and hurtful then even the worst
of any Counsel: or how much more expedient were it to call an other
Counsel, rather then to hazard a battle: to lose a conference to some
purpose, or to shed so much blood in vain.

The truth is, that upon the very differents now in question, there have been
two Counsels holden. The first through the diligence of the Emperor
Sigismund at Constance, where contrary to public faith the disputers of the
one part, John Hus and Hierom of Prague were burned quick, and then followed a
decree, that there was no faith to be kept with Heretics, a monstrous decree,
and the cause of all disorder and excess since fallen out in Christendom.

The other at Trent in the chief heat of the French troubles, where by the
judgment of the former decree could be no safe appearance. Where also your
Ambassadors might not be heard in their Christian propositions for the
quietness of the Church. And where they protested nullitie against the acts
of the Counsel which since all your Courts of Parliament have confirmed and
rejected the said acts, yea even Sorbonne it self, notwithstanding whatsoever
instance the Pope has from time to time made. Think therefore sir, whether
they have cause to allege the fore judgments of these Counsels: and judge
whether these two Counsels may debarys of al hope of goodness or fruit that
might spring out of one free and lawful Counsel, called under your
authority. The difficulty rests only upon one poinct, and that is that the
Pope of late days has encroched to himself the authority of calling of
Counsels, which before belonged to the Emperors: for by all histories it
appears that they have summoned the most famous. And now because he fears
the reformation of the abuses of the Popes Court, and especially the question
so often harped at. viz. Whether the Pope be above or under the Counsel,
whereof there are contrary decrees, it is manifest that he will so fair as in
him lies avoid the calling of any, but principally at the suite and request
of the French Church, which always have auowed him to b^ under the Counsel.
And for example, for the assembling of the Couns^ile of Constance the Emperor,
Sig^s(...)und was to traualle from state to state, to solli(...) all Princes,
because the Popes striving among themselves, would not stoop to a Counsel,
and there it was decreed that the Pope should be subject to the Counsel.
Since again for the calling of the Counsel of Trent, it is well known what
protections were feign to be made, what practices the Pope wrought among all
Christian Princes, whereby to shift it of. What ado there was to keep them
together after they were assembled, and what (...) the Popes used to the end
to yield it unprofitable to the Church, but commodious to them selves* where
also, contrary to the former, they caused it to be determined that the Pope
was above the Counsel.

Hereby they your Majesty have a bar (...) the Pope and shut up his mouth
whereby he dare no more presume to solicit you to the overthrowe of the
estate, even he that shall have refused the lawful means to reunite and
restore the Church. Besides, in such a necessity of your estate and during
such the Popes default, the Kings your predecessors by the counsel of your
Clergy, yea, of your College of Sorbonne, have long since trod you a fair
path: namely, by your own authority, for want of a general, to summon a
national Counsel within this Realm. A course taken by the most Christian
Kings, yea, even the deuoutest among the most Christian, to the great benefit
of the Church and estate. For na^ionall Counsels being well ordered, and
proceeding of the Princes zeal have often done more good the^ the general,
bribed and labored by the Church of Rome, as histories do testify. For if
you tarry until the Pope provide, paradue^ture it will be so late, and your
estate already being in combustion, that it were requisite to make more speed.

If any man allege that this assembly will be in vain, also that in such
contentions, were it but for honor, neither side will give place to reason,
every one defending his part to the end: also that it will be hard to agree
upon Judges and such like, wherein undoubtedly I can see no great difficulty,
I answer, that God will bless your Majesty's holy zeal and earnest
affection to the peace of so many consciences: also that he will hear the
sobbes and cries of so much people who of such a convocation do attend their
weal and the quiet of their souls, besides that God by his Prophet said not
in vain that the rain never falls from heaven without fruit, either his
holy word upon earth without some notable effect: But admit matters should
grow to that pass, yet dare I assure my self to motion to your Majesty a
mean that shall satisfy and agree both parties, yea such a one, as any
reasonable man that willingly would not be deceived, may thereby easily
discern the truth from falshoode and false doctrine from true. And therefore,
if the eye of your Majesty's reason be free from blemish, there is no doubt
but your self shall both find and know the truth: for truth will shine forth
and lighten you and naturally is clear enough to spread it self abroad. Only
God give us grace to leave all our passions at the threshold of the door and
to enter in in a full desire to see and find the truth, as being freed from
all particular* interest except of our souls.

Consider Sir what contentation your self in your life time shall reap, and
what honor with the posterity you shall atchieue* if in your days and through
your wisdom and example, you may determine a Scisme of so many years
continuance, and procure throughout all Christendom the singing of that song
of the Angles, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace. When in this duty
you have prevented the Popes* Emperors, and Catholic Kings, yea even exeded
your most Christian forerunners, therein showing your self in deed most
Christian for your self, Christian for France and Christian for the whole
church.

God I take to witness, that from my heart I do write unto you all that I
seek* which is, to see in our time the Church pourged, and the Temple swept,
to the end we may be conversant together. All men do agree and long have, that
there are abuses among us. Let them be taken away and cleansed, and let us not
set our selves against our selves, neither let us search starting holes to our
loss, or show our selves skillful contrary to our salvation Way^ing for this
benefit at your Majesty's hand, let us one bear with another in modesty and
gentleness, suffering your Edicts of Peace to rule, and men's consciences to be
in rest, and as for those which in the mean time do counsel to surcease or
forbid the exercise of the soul, they show them selves to have no great
feeling of their own, since they suppose the souls can live without their
action or food: yea, those that think it so easy a matter for others to
neglect the serving of GOD according to their consciences, do by that law
which they prescribe to others, sufficiently show what them selves are. viz. of
themselves co^temners of God, deuoyde of Religion and Conscience.

Sir, your Majesty are to excuse my boldness. In great inconveniences great
men have not despised the meanest voices. The barking of one Dog has preserved
many a house from spoil, and the gagling of one Goose was sufficient to keep
the Capitol. Duty and danger must iustefie my presumption Duty, for it
were an offense in danger to hold my peace. Danger also, for it is plain
deceit in seeing to seem not to see. I beseech sir, the Creator with his holy
spirit to assist your Majesty, to give you the same for counsel and
conduct, and after so many trauayles to see his Realm flourish in yours, to
prosper under his, to his glory, your praise, and the peace of your people. So
be it.

Your most humble and most obedient servant and subject. P. D. M.

A Declaration of the Articles agreed upon between the King and the house of
Guyze and their adherents: commonly called. The holy League.
THE Princes, Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, towns, comminalties,
and other the Catholics of this Realm united, being the King most humble
subjects and servants, vnderstandihg by the Queen, that his Majesty's intent
is to embrace the cause of Religion, as being holy and just, and to root out
all heresies out of this Realm, praising God for inspiring him with so good
and holy a mind, do most humbly beseech him to assist the^, and the Queen to
continue her wonted affection to whatsoever concerns the benefit and
preservation of the state, to the end to provide for the same.

They do therefore desire his Majesty to set forth an Edict which may be
perpetual and irreuocable, whereby all exercize of the new Religion may be
abolished, and the Ministers expelled the Realm.

Also, in as much as liberty of conscience tolerated among subjects may
breed much contempt and (...) against the service of God: It may be enjoined
to all his subjects of whatsoever calling or condition to profess the
Catholic Apostolic and Romish Religion within (...) after the publishing
thereof, otherwise to depart the Realm, and no way to sell or dispose of
their goods, (...) the same to remain to their Catholic heirs in direct
line, if they have any, p(...)ing the just valewe and estimate of the ^owerth
part of the said goods: But if their heirs be other then in (...)
collateral* the to pay the estimate of the third part, according to the
valewation that shall be^ made by the Commissioners thereunto appointed: and
the money hereof arising to be committed into the hands of certain persons
thereto deputed to be employed upon the execution of this enterprise.

That all Heretics of whatsoever state or condition may be declared,
according to the Canonical Sanctions, perpetually incapable of all public
charges, offices, estates and dignities, and those that now have any to be
forced to forgo and resign the same unto Catholic persons such as are
capable, and not to keep them, notwithstanding they would abjure their error,
except for the space of three years after the said abiuration they continewe in
Catholic life, so as there may be no further doubt of feigned repentance or
dissimulation.

That his Majesty declare* al whatsoever have been done by the Catholic
Princes and Lords and all other as well particular persons, as Tounes and
Communalties that have taken their parts, and suc(...)oured and favored them,
either in the seazing upon Towns, fetching of Coin out of his receiptes,
taking up of victualles and Munition, or leauying of Soldiers either within
the Realm or without, and generally all whatsoever have been done, wrought or
dealt in until this present touching the effect and execution of the premises,
notwithstanding the same be not particulerly specified or expressed, to have
been done for his service, with the assurance of Religion, to the
preservation whereof he acknowledges himself to b^ bound, both as a most
Christian King, and also by that solemn oath that he took at his annoynting.

To the end the Catholics may not quail or reenter into any fear, judging
the sequel hereof by others that are already past, that is, that this
enterprise should be but couldly prosecuted, and finally determined by some
other Edict contrary to this, by means whereof there were no other fruict to
be hoped for the^ the common mischief and domages ensuing of War. They do
most humbly beseech his Majesty to ordeyne that this said Edict may presently
be published without any restriction or qualification upon the secret
records or otherwise.

It may also please his Majesty with the Peers and other officers of the
Crown to assist the publication thereof in the Parliament of Paris, and the
same being read, to declare that as a most Christian King, being bound as well
by the oath that he toooke at his Coronation, as also by that zeal which
always he has borne to the service of GOD, together with the request and
supplication to him made by the general estates of his Realm assembled at
Bloys, he has consideratly and with great deliberation by the advice of the
Queen his mother, the Princes of his blood and other Peers, Princes of
France, Officers of the Crown, and many other notable persons of his Counsel
made the said Edict. That he swears and protests inuiolably to observe and
cause to be kept the same, and never to permit it to be infringed, promising
hereafter in any wise not to make any other repugnant or derogatory hereunto in
whole or in part, also that if any such should be made, his intent and meaning
to be, that no regard be had thereof, as being directly contrary to the service
of God, whereto he acknowledges him self and his subjects to owe the chief
duty, and to be principally and especially bounden.

That he shall likewise cause all Princes, Peers of France, officers of the
Crown, Knights of the holy Ghost, Counsaylers of Estate, Governors, and
Lieutenants general of his Provinces, Presidentes and Counsailers of his
sovereign Courts, all Bayliffes, Sen(...)sehals, and other his Officers, all
Majors and Sherifes, also all bodies and comminalties of towns, to swear to
the same. And all the said oaths and cautions aforesaid to be set in order,
and committed to the registers of the Roules of the Courts of Parliament, to
the end^ to have recourse thereto as need shall require.

Further, to the end to show forth a more evident testimony that he
entendeth to keep his said Edict, and according to the tenor thereof to
procure the moring out of heresies out of this Realm: It may please him, if it
be not very contrary and prejudicial to his estate, to give over the
protection of the Town of (...), that to the great grief of his Catholics
he has taken upon him, because that out of that spring do slow al heresy
throughout Christendom, and therefore so long as the said protection remains
in force, his said subjects cannot but fear that this enfectious disease will
never be cured.

Also because the said Edict will be to no purpose if in every point* without
remission it be not put in execution, which cannot be brought to pass without
force, because those of the new Religion do show no token that they purpose
to yield their do obedience, it may please his Majesty to employe that power
which they have made of people to him most affectionate, and his faithful
subjects* such as will hazard themselves in the execution of his
commandments, and thereupon do most humbly desire him to declare his intent.

As for the means to compass the said expedition, the adversaries being weak
and withdrawn into one corner of the Realm, all the rest remaining very
duetifull and zealous to the Catholic Religion, they presume that his
Majesty is resolved to put too his last helping hand and not to return to the
former counsayles, which have* but nourished and increased the mischiefs: that
al his good Catholic subjects will assist and aid him to their abilities.
That to the same effect (provided that the money be not otherwise employed)
the Clergy can find in their hearts voluntarily to grant the sale of their
te^poralties to a reasonable valewe, considering what great charges aforetime
they have been at. Also that our holy Father the Pope will not stick to permit
and auctorize the same.

Moreover* they know that his Majesty is not without other good and able
means, but it is not for them more particulerly to enter into the search
thereof, besides that they have been so smally employed in matters of his
treasury, notwithstanding some of them be honored with the chief places and
principal charges of this Realm, who are thereto mere winterlings.

For their own parts, together with their lives which they will venture in so
holy and necessary an enterprise, they do also offer whatsouer their means or
habilities and upon their credits to advance the pay and enterteynment of and
to be content to take it up again in the space of one whole year*
conditionally that it may please his Majesty to give the^ assurance thereof,
also to give his word to to the Captains of the strangers that shall receive
it upon their caution, that so they may be assured and have good and
sufficient assignation of the said payment, and satisfaction within the time
limited, as also of that which already they have advanced toward the
chardges of this war which is leuyed for his service, for it is for the
preservation of the Catholic Religion, whereto his Majesty as a most
Christian King has always showed himself most affectionate.

Moreover, as he has testified his zeal and piety to the honor and service
of of God in this enterprise, so it may please him, showing him self a good
father to his subjects, to ease them. And although the effect of this good
will can not be so ready by reason of those expenses whereinto through this
war he shall be forced to enter, yet in ye mean time that he would discharge
them of the leauy of the country upon the sault of the new increase and
imposition of Wine, also of the imposition of Cloth, which his said Majesty
had already purposed upon the petitions unto him diverse times made by his
subjects, to abolish and take away. More-ouer it may please him to cause the
verbal Process of the Commisioners by him lately deputed throughout the
Provinces, which do contain the complaints of every one together with the
remedied for the preue^ting and ceasing of the mischiefs, to be perused and
considered upon, so shall his subjects pray to God for his prosperity and
greatness, and them selves perticule^ly shall not tend to any other, but with
heart and affection to yield to him that most humble service which they do
owe.

They do also most humbly beseech his Majesty, in consideration of those
perils whereof until the execution of this Edict they shall daily be in
danger by reason of former enmities which those of the new religion do bear
them, and are now greatly increased through this their resolution under his
Majesty's authority to aid and assist the Catholic Religion in this Realm,
whereupon their lines do depend, and themselves are as it were miserably
thereto conjoined, to grant unto them the means of assurance hereafter
ensuing, whereby they may live in safety and out of danger, yielding to him all
obedience as his most humble subjects.

First, that it may be lawful for them, in eace the execution of this Edict
should be given over, or those of the new Religion should work any enterprise
against them, to call to their aid the Catholic Suitzers, to whom it may be
lawful to do that service whereto they shall be required, touching the
observation of the Edict only, and to no other purpose: so as by their so
doing, they shall not enfringe their alliances with the Crown, this Edict
being made for the safeguard and greatness of the estate thereof.

That all Governors and Lieutenants general of the Provinces, also al other
particular governors and Captains of Towns, Holds and Fortresses that have
followed this party may be maint^ined and defended in their governments,
charges and estates, also in those Holds that presently they have and possess
and not to be put from the same.

That such Towns as have taken their parts may remain in liberty as before
the wars without any Garrisons placed in them.

Because also the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon has no place of assurance and
safety, and that he ought ordinarely to be resident at Room, that the said
Town and Castle be left him, with authority to put in Captains that may be
thereof provided, as also in the Town and Castle of Diepe depending of the
demaynes of his Archbishopricke.

To the Lord Duke of Mercure in his government of Britain two places, such as
he shall nominate to his Majesty, with the Admiraltie over all Seafaring
places within the said government, according to such instructions as heretofore
have unto him been made.

In as much also as throughout all the Towns within the government of
Champagne, there is never a Castle sufficient for the assurance and safegarde
of the Lord Duke of Guyze, who is governor thereof, it may please his Majesty
to grant unto him the Town and Citadell of Metz.

To the Lord Duke of Main governor of Bourgondy, together with the Castle of
Digeon which already he houldeth, the Castle of Beaeune or the Citadel of
Chaalon.

To the Lord Cardinal of Guyze the Town of Rheimes, together with some
reasonable extent which may be to that end taken out of the government of
Champagne.

To the Lord Duke of Aumale authority to command in the Holds and
government of Picardie, being of the fame party.

To the Lord Marquise of Elboeuf the government of Anieow.

To the Lord of Antragues the government of Orleans in chief together with
whatsoever thereupon depended at the time that the late King provided him of
the Lieutenancy general of the said government.

To the Lord of O. the government of the Bayliwickes of Caen and Constance
according as heretofore he has enjoyed them.

To the Lord of Brissac the Lieutenancy general of the government of
A(...)cow, also the state of Coronell general of Piedmont to enjoy as others
have done before him and in time past it was accustomed.

To the Lord Cou^tie of Saux the Lieutenancy general of the government of
Province during the absence of the Lord great Pryor of France.

To the Lord of Mandelot as Governor of Lions the Citadell thereof.

To the Lord of Chastre, his government of Bourges with his company maintained
upon the first leauy of the receipt of Bourges.

To the Lord of Vaillac the Capteynship of Castle Trompet in Bourdeaux.

Also upon the vacation of any the said Governments, Lieutenancies, or
Captenships, if any happen before the full execution of the said Edict, it
may please his Majesty upon the humble supplication which unto him shall be
made on the behalf of the Princes and principals of the said party, to
provide for the same accordingly.

That all Garrisons necessary for the defense and keeping of the said places in
his Majesty's assurance and to the preservation of those of the said party,
may monthly be paid with the appointments by order of the Governors and
Officers out of the treasury of the general receipts of every the said
governments, by whose order the same shall be deducted out of the receipt at
the beginning of the year.

That the compagnies of men of arms in the Provinces, governments and general
Lieutenancies of the Provinces, may in every of their governments have their
pay out of the leauye of the fines or amercements in their general receipts
established which shall expressly be thereto reserved and not to be converted
to any other use. Also the duties and pensions of the said Provinces,
Governors and Lieutenants, to be raised upon other the coin of the said
receipts, whereof quarterly there shall a certain be left for that use.

The said Holds and Castles of the which, the parties to who^e his Majesty
shall leave them for their safegarde, were not provided of before, they shall
hold under his authority, and for his service, and of the same shall be to
him accomptable.

They shall also promise jointly together and each one severally for himself,
also the principal Captains of the said party in the name of all to restore
the same into his Majesty's hands so soon as the said Edict which it shall
please his Majesty to make, be put in execution and observed. And this shall
they swear upon perrill of their lives and honors faithfully to perform.

FINIS.
depiction of dragon and crown


