The Order of Ceremonies observed in the anointing and Coronation of the most
Christian King of France and Navarre, HENRY the IIII. of that name, celebrated
in our Lady Church, in the City of Chartres upon Sunday the 27. of February
1594.

Faithfully translated out of the French copy printed at Roan, by
commandment of the said Lord. by E.A.



LONDON Imprinted by John Windet, and are to be sold by John Flasket, at the
great North door of Paul's.

The Printer to the Reader.
Friendly Reader, this discourse of the anointing and coronation of the King
was written by a notable personage, who was assistant at the said ceremony, one
that gathered it at the hands of those that were chief Actors therein, which
nevertheless he would not commit to the press before he had showed and
imparted it unto them. Whatsoever other discourses of this argument that may
peradventure come to thy hands are false, counterfeit, and rashly published,
but this is true, perfect and written at leisure, with all order requisite.
Thus much I thought good to give thee to understand, least otherwise, where
thou seek for truth, thou might be abused with falsehood. Farewell.

The order of ceremonies observed in the anointing and coronation of the most
Christian King of France and Navarre, Henry the IIII. of that name, celebrated
in our Lady Church, in the City of Chartres upon Sunday the 27. of February
1594.
ALmighty God who gives and preserves all Scepters and Crowns, and disposes
of them as seems best to his pleasure, who in his hands holds the hearts of
kings, having miraculously guided and advanced the king to the lawful
succession of this Monarchy etc. which was still quarrelled at, and challenged
by certain rebels, supported by the capital and ancient ennemies of
France, etc. He was entreated, desired and advised by the Princes of his blood,
the Officers of his Crown, the Lords of his Counsel, and the most notable
personages of his Courts of Parliament to frame himself to his anointing, in
like manner as other kings his predecessors have always used to proceed to
their anointing and coronation, soon after their coming to the Crown: which
said anointing is the token of their Royalty and of the public approbation of
the French nation.

His Majesty therefore resolved to be anointed, and could have wished that the
said ceremony might have been performed in the Church of Rheims, the rather
for that of long time, the kings have never been other where anointed but
there, albeit they be no way tied or bound to the said Church, either to the
Archbishop of Rheims, as many examples and reasons do evidently testify. And
his Majesty, who seeks to preserve all the ancient and laudable customs of
his predecessors, and the Realm, could have been contented not to break
this, in case the Rebels that possess the same town, would together
therewith, have given him opportunity to have been there anointed and crowned.
Heerevppon for the effecting of the resolution of his annoynting, it was
advised and determined, that in as much as Rheims was still inclined to persist
in her rebellion, the same should be performed at our Lady Church in Chartres,
a Church famous throughout the whole Realm, as also in diverse parts of
Christendom: the town being situated in place commodious, and as it were in
the navel of those parts of the Realm, from whence his Majesty had called
the Princes, Lords, and principal personages of his Courts of Parliament, to
be assistant at this solemn ceremony.

The preparatiues for all things necessary to the said annoynting, being set
forward in the said town and Church, his Majesty arrived there, upon Thursday
the seventeenth of February last, without any triumphant entry, which the
French kings do use to make, at the town where they are to be anointed,
the day before the solemnization thereof: but in respect that at the reduction
of the said town into his Majesty's obedience, he had already there made his
entry, as also that since he has many times gone thither, and there soiourned
a long time together, he now needed not to do it again.

Upon Saturday the nyneteenth of the said month, the Holy Voyalt, (so termed
there) preciously preserved in the Abbay of Marmoustier near the city of
Tours, ever sense that miraculously it wrought Saint Martins health, was
brought to the city of Chartres, being thither conducted, from the ancient
dwelling place thereof, by the Lord of Souure, Governor and the Kings
Lieuetenant General in the land and Duchy of Tourayne, accompanied with four
Friars of the said Abbay, who had the custody thereof, And being arrived at
Chartres, it was there with great ceremony, carried by one of the said Friars,
from the gate of the town, to Saint Peter's Abbay, being attended by the
Clergy, and a great number of people, the streets being all the way hanged,
in honor and reverence of so precious a rellike.

From the day of his Majesty's arrival, until Saturday the six and twentieth
of the said month, they finished all the preparatiues for the ceremonies of
the annoynting, before begun. Thither was brought the Imperial close Crown,
the middle Crown, the Royal Scepter, the hand of Justice, the cloak Royal,
the Shirt, the Sandalls, the Spurs, the Sword, the Tunicle, and the
Dalmatike, with all other the ornaments Royal, all which were to be new
made, as fair and rich as might be, by reason that the fellonious minds of
the rebels had molten, defaced, and wasted the others, which time out of
mind had been reserved in the Church of S. Dennis in France to serve for the
kings annoynting. Howbeit by this particular and so execrable a deed, they
have declared that they meant to root out as well the tokens, marks, and
ornaments of royalty, as the effect and name thereof. And as most accursedly
they found means to murder the sacred person and Majesty of him that before
held it, so have they sense his death diversely attempted the like against the
person of him that now holds it.

Upon Saturday the sixeteenth of the said month about eight of the clock at
night, the king came to the said Church of our Lady, there to do his devotions
and to be shriuen, he would have heard Euensong according to the ancient
custom, as other kings did use to hear them in the Church appointed for
their annoynting upon the Eeue, if the rule of the holy time of Lent could so
have permitted: After his prayers devoutly made, he entered into his Oratory,
erected under a tent of two fadome and a half square of purple damask, with
a border above of violet velvet, set full of Fleure de Luces, and there was
shriuen by his Confessor Monsieur Benedict, Curate of Saint Eustace in Paris,
and nominated bishop of Troy. After shrift, he returned to his lodging in the
Bishop of Chartres Palace.

Furthermore forasmuch as all the Carpets, Tapistry for clothes of Estate, for
Chayres, Pillowes, Cushions and other like kept to serve at the ceremony of the
kings annoyntinges, had likewise been stolen, pilfered, and purloyned by the
rebels, as were the ornaments royal, they were driven to make new, not so
stately as the former, but such as the shortness of time, and time it self
could permit.

First the Quier of the said Church, was all decked and hanged with rich
Tapistry.

All before the said Altar unto the stepp whereupon stood the Holy water
stock, was covered with Carpets and above and near to the said high Altar
was set and placed the Chair wherein the Bishop of Chartres, then subrogated
in steed of the Archbishop Duke of Rheims, first Peer Ecclesiastical was to
execute, being covered with a rich Carpet. Where, note that hence forth
throughout this discourse, we will term the said Lord Bishop of Chartres
Archbishop of Rheims, in respect that he took his place and executed his
Office.

Over against the said Chair, some nine or ten foot behind, was erected a
high Cloth of estate of half a foot deep, and two fadome and a half square,
covered with rich Tapistrye, where was placed an other Chair richly adorned
and covered with a Cloth of estate: Also between the Kings Chair and the
Archbishops was placed an oratorie Deske covered with Cloth of silver all
Damasked with red leaves, and two Cushions of the same, whereof the lowest was
some five quarters long, to serve both for his Majesty and for the said Lord
Archbishop, when he lies groueling with his Majesty during the Letanie
according as by the ceremony is expedient and hereafter shall be showed.

Behind the King was there placed a stool covered with blew Satin pouldered
with flowers de Luce, whereupon should sit (as afterward he did) he that
supplied the place of Constable: And about some three foot behind that, was
there an other stool adorned as the former, for the Lord Chaunceler. And
again some three foot behind that was there an other seat so covered for
the Lords great master, great Chamberline, and chief Gentleman of the Chamber.
And thus were they afterward placed as hereafter shall be showed.

On the right side of the high Altar was there a great seat covered with
Carpets, whereupon were set the Peers Ecclesiastical, except the Archbishop
of Rheims, who was to be sometimes at the Altar, sometimes elsewhere,
according as by the ceremonies to execute.

Behind the said Peers Ecclesiastical upon an other seat were placed other
Clergy men who were not to be employed about the mystery of the anointing,
and behind upon an other form, the Counselors that were of the law, the
presidents and Counselors of the Court of Parliament, translated to Tours,
whom the King had sent for to assist this ceremony.

In the Bishops and ordinaries seats on the right side of the Altar were
placed the Secretaries of estate.

Between the foresaid forms and the Bishops seat stood the Singing men of
the Kings Chapel, among whom were also some of his Chamber, ready to sing as
time should require.

On the left side of the high Altar stood an other long form, furnished as
that on the right side for the Peers lay.

Behind the same upon a little form close to the Pauillion of the oratorie
sat the Venetian Ambassador alone, being the only Ambassador resident about
his Majesty. And in the same row upon an other form sat the Lord Duke of
Montbason son to the Lord Prince of Guemene, the Lord of O, and the Lord of
Requelaure. The first being appointed after the Communion to receive the Kings
Crown, and to carry it before him into the hall of the palace Royal, where
the dinner was to be kept: The second to ease the King at the offering, at the
Communion and at his departure from Church of the Scepter Royal: The third
likewise of the hand of Justice.

Behind that form upon two other forms sat certain knights of the holy Ghost
with other Lords as well of other callings as of the Counsel.

There were also round about the quiere scaffolds whereto they ascended on the
out side by four pair of Timber stairs.

Upon nearest on the right hand were placed the Ladies, Princesses, Ladies of
the Court and sundry Lords, Gentlemen and Gentlewemen.

On the said side near the Princesses stood my Masters of the great
Counsel and of the Treasury, with other notable parsonages that then were in
the town both men and women, who were thither admitted by the Captain of the
Guard and the Masters of the ceremonies.

In the other Galleries and almost up to the highest Glass windows both in
the quire and body of the Church, stood such others as could thrust in or
find any place.

At the end near to the Tribunal were placed the hundred Gentlemen.

On the stage of the quire under the Crucifix was erected and placed his
Majesty's throne Royal in manner following. In the midst of the said stage
was made a platform of seven or eight foot long and five foot broad,
whereto from the said stage they ascended by four steps, upon this platform
stood the Kings Chair in such sort that being set, such as were in the
quire might see him from the stomach upward and such as were in the body from
the wast upward as indeed they did when he was gone up and set. Over it was
there a Cloth of estate of Violet velvet, pouldered with flower de Luces of
Gold.

Before the said Chair was placed an oratorie Deske under the which and upon
the plain of the said stage was there a seat provided for him that supplied
the Constables room.

At the right hand upon the platform was erected a seat for the Lord great
Chamberline, and at the left hand upon the first and lowest step of the said
platform was a place for the chief Gentlemen of the Chamber. Before his
Majesty upon the flat of the said stage at the right side was the seat
prepared for Lord Chaunceler, and the left side for the Lord great Master, all
who shall hereafter be called by their names and Offices. At the Kings right
hand near to the rail of the said stage that looks into the body of the
Church were seats for the Peers Ecclesiastical, and at the left hand for the
Peers lay. And all the throne, seats, footepases and sides of the said stage
were decked with rich Tapistry.

And between the bar of the said rail of the stage, and the seats provided
for the said Peers stood some of the hundred Gentlemen.

At the end of the said stage on the Kings right hand was erected an other
Altar, whereon to sing Mass before his Majesty.

To ascend to the said throne there was in the quire two Timber stairs, one on
the right hand, an other on the left of the high Altar, furnished on each side
with rayles, pillars and bars all hanged with Tapistry and Carpets.

Upon Sunday the seven and twenty of February being the day of ye ceremony
of anointing. the Lord of Rhodes, great Master of the ceremonies, together
with the Lord of Surenne, steward ordinary of the Kings house, came to the
Church at three of the clock in the morning to take order for all things
necessary: Also the Lord of Chasteau-vieup, Captain of the Scottish guard for
the Kings body, came soon after to provide against the disorder and press of
such as sought to get into the Church, and unto the scaffoldes, and to place
every one according to the prescribed order, or as the best knew the desert of
their parsons.

About six of the clock in the morning the King sent four young Lords,
Barrons to the Abbie of S. Peter, where was kept the holy Vyall that was
brought from Marmoustier, to desire the aforenamed Friars of Marmoustier that
kept it, to bring it into our Lady Church, thereout to take of the holy Oil,
which was to be employed upon the anointing of his Majesty. Which four
Barrons according to the custom observed about the ceremony of the holy Vyall
in the Church of S. Remy of Rheims did bind them selves to restore it in the
said Abbay of S. Peter, and to the said Friars after the end of the
anointing: As also the Lord of Souur had before bound him self to the Abbot
and Friars of S. Peter for the restitution thereof. These four Barrons were
the Earl of Lausun, eldest son to the Earl of Lausun of the house of
Caument: The Earl of Dinan, second son to the Lord of Pienner Duke of
Hallioin. The Earl of Cheuerny, eldest son to the Earl of Cheuerny,
Chaunceler of France, and the Lord Barron of Terms, younger brother to the
Lord of Bellegard, great Esquire of France.

These four at the Kings commandment departed from the palace Royal with
their Esquires and Gentlemen, each of them having borne before him upon the end
of the spear the banner of his arms in perfect coullours leading with them a
white Hacnie, whereupon should ride the Friar that was to carry and recarry,
and indeed did carry and recarrie the said holy Vyall, with a Canapie of white
Dammaske, which still should be carried over the said Friar both going from
the Abbay, and returning after the end of the anointing. Then the said Friar
accompanied with the said four Barrons departed from the said Abbay with a
Cannapie borne over him by four Friars apparelled in white Albes, all the
streets from the said Abbay of S. Pere to the great Church were hanged, and
the people with great respect and devotion reverenced the said holy Vyall.

Soon after the departure of the four Barrons, departed also from the palace
Royal the six Peers lay, three Dukes, and three Earls, apparelled in
Tunicles of Cloth of silver Dammasked with read leaves, coming almost to the
midde leg, and upon the same a cloak or short gown of Cloth Searge dyed
Violet upon Scarlet, open upon the right shoulder with a round collar turned
down with the garnish, and turning down Furred with powdered ermins.

Every of the three Dukes had upon his head his Ducall hat of gold, and every
Earl his Circle of gold.

Howbeit in as much as of these three Dukes and three Counties ancient Peers
lay, represented by these six, five of the Payryes are annexed to the Crown,
and the County of Flaunders is out, the French Kings has since this annexion
vouchsafed to represent the six Peers and Payries by so many Princes and Lords
attendant about their parsons. And those that at this ceremony of anointing,
representing the said six dignities are these that follow.

The Prince of Condy, representing the Duke of Burgondy Deane of the Peers.

The County of Soyssais, representing the Duke of Normandy.

The Duke of Montpensier, representing the Duke of Aquitaine.

The Lord of Lupembourg, representing the County of Tholouze.

The Duke of Rays Marshall of France representing the County of Flaunders.

The Duke of Vantadon, representing the County of Champagne.

The six Peers lay, thus apparelled and clothed, came to the Church about
seven of the clock in the morning, and entering into the Quier, having
performed their due reuerences, came to the high Altar, where was the
Archbishop of Rheims, accompanied with the other five Peers Ecclesiastical,
who were come a little before with their Myters upon their heads, and great
Coapes, sitting already on the right side of the said Altar, upon the two
large seats before mentioned, in order following.

The five Peers Ecclesiastical always assistant at the kings annoynting, or
in whose absence, or when any of the Seas be void, the kings do surrogate
others, as these.

The Bishop Duke of Laon.

The Bishop Duke of Langres.

The Bishop County of Beauuais.

The Bishop County of Chaalous.

The Bishop County of Noyen.

And because the Bishops of Laon, Langres, Beauuais, and Noyen were not
present, also that the Bishop of Chaulous who was in the city of Chartres was
so sick, that he could not assist at the said ceremony, there to take his
place, The Kings pleasure was, that these five dignities should be represented
by five other Bishops, that then were at the Court, namely these.

The Bishop of Nantes, representing the Bishop D. of Laon.

The Bishop of Digne, representing the Bishop D. of Langres

The Bishop of Maillesais, representing the Bishop County of Beauuais.

The Bishop of Orleans, representing the Bishop County of Chaalons.

The Bishop of Angiers, representing the Bishop County of Noyon.

The said eleven Peers being thus set, and the said Lord Archbishop of
Rheims making the twelfth, sitting in his chair with his back to the Altar.
They altogether, according to the custom, did appoint the Bishops of Nantes
and Maillesais representing the Bishop of Laon and Beauuois, who with the
Relliques of Saints hanging at their necks, and accompanied with the Cannons,
Vicars, and Chaplens of the said Church, the two Crosses, the Holy water, and
the Encensers going before them, and accompanied with the said Lord of Surenne,
came processionally into his Majesty's outward chamber. In the said chamber was
prepared a bed, whereupon the king was laid clothed in a shirt of holland,
slit before and behind to the end thereby to receive the holy ointment, and
therevppon a dublet of crimson satin for the same cause likewise slit before
and behind, and a gown of cloth of silver, with sleeves coming to the mid
leg.

And when the said Lords Bishops of Laon and Langres came into the sight of
his Majesty, the Bishop of Laon said the prayer following.

Oremus. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus etc.

This prayer ended and done, the said Lord Bishop of Laon on the right side,
and he of Langres on the left side, reverently and kissing their hands,
lifted the king from his bed, and processionally brought him to the Church in
order following.

First marched the Lord of Surenne, who caused the Archers of the great Provost
to march first.

Then the Clergy that had accompanied the said two Prelates Peers.

The Switzers of the kings guard.

The Trumpets.

The Herehaults.

The Knights of the holy ghost.

The Vshers of the kings chamber, with their maces.

The Archers of the Guardes in manner of a hedge.

The Scotts near to the kings person.

Then marched before the king, the Lord of Matignon, Mareshall of France,
representing the Constable, clothed in a tunicle of cloth of silver, damasked
with violet: the cloak and circle upon his head like to one of the Peers
Counties lay, bearing in his right hand a naked sword the point upward.

After the said Lord Constable, marched alone the Lord County of Cheuerny
Chauncelor of France, apparelled in a tunicle of red Crimson velvet, coming
down to the feet, with a cloak or half gown, foulded and furred with
Ermines, two limbs of the same, each shoulder covered with gold lace: and the
mortar of cloth of Gold upon his head.

After him marched the Lord County of Saint Paul, representing the Lord Great
Master, with his staff upright in his right hand, on the right side of him,
the Lord Duke of Longueuille, Great Chamberlayne, and on the left side, the
Lord of Bellegard great Esquier, and taking his place as chief Gentleman of
the Chamber, all three apparelled in tunicles and cloakes as Peers lay. The
Duke of Longueuill having upon his head his Ducall hat, as a Duke Peer, the
other two with circles as County Peers, and two limbs upon their cloakes.

In the mean time after the aforenamed prayer, the Cannons and singing men
sung the Respons. following:

Responsorium. Ecce mitto Angelum meum etc.

Then the Clergy staying a little at the Church door, the Lord Bishop of
Beauuais said the prayer following:

Oremus. Deus qui scis humanum genus etc.

The mayer done, the Cannons entering into the Church, and coming into the
Quier door, sung this Antheme:

Antiphona: Domine in virtute tua laetabitur Rex etc.

The Antiphony ended, and the king being come before the high Altar, he was
by the foresaid Bishops, presented to the said Archbishop, who then began to
say the prayer following.

Oremus. Omnipotens Deus caelestium etc.

This prayer as also the kings being ended, he was by the said Bishops of
Laon and Beauuais, brought to his chair prepared as is aforesaid, over against
the Archbishops chair. At his right hand stood the Lord of Chasteau-vieux,
Captain of the Scottish guard of the kings body with the said Scotts near to
his Ma. person. At his left hand was the L. of Praslaine captain of the French
Guard, and two foot before the king, at his right hand stood, the Lord of
Chauigny, Captain of one of the Companies of a hundred Gentlemen, and at the
left, the Lord of Ramtouillet the Captain of the other, and the said hundred
Gentlemen confusedly near unto their Captains.

Behind the king sat the said Lord Constable without any sword: for, coming
toward the high Altar, he had delivered the sword into the hands of one of
his Esquiers, to the end to take up that which served for the mystery of the
Coronation, as shall hereafter be showed: The Lord Chauncelor behind him, both
upon the stool before described, Also behind the said Lord Chauncelor upon
an other seat, sat the Lord Great Master, and the Lord High Chamberlayne in
the midst, and the chief Gentleman of his Chamber.

The aforesaid prayers being ended, and taryeng the coming of the holy Vyoll,
the Archbishop gave Holy water to his Majesty, and to the said Lords Peers
both Spiritual and Temporal, and then the Quier beegan to sing the Thirdes.

Understanding that the Holy Vyoll came, the said Lord Archbishop pontifically
apparelled, came in Procession to meet it, being accompanied with certain
Prelates and Cannons of his Church, both the Crosses marching before him unto
the great Porch of the church, and so it was brought into the Chapel of
Vandosme, where the said Lord Archbishop took it and brought it up into the
Quier, and at the receiving thereof, was sung this Antheme.

O preciosum munus, O preciosa gemma, cuius visibili and inuisibili dono,
inuisibilia percipimus.

Versus. Inueni David seruum meum etc.

Responsio. Oleo sancto vnxi cum etc.

Oremus. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus etc.

Then came the aforesaid four Barons into the Quier, each bringing in his hand,
the Staff with the Banner of his Arms, and sat down in the Cannons seats,
on the left hand.

This done the Lord Archbishop went into the Vestry provided for him behind
the High Altar, there to put on his Pontifical habites, as it were to sing
Mass, assisted by the Abbot of Saint Genouieue of Paris, and the Deane of his
Church of Chartres, the Deane to read the Epistle, and the Abbot the Gospel,
with twelve Canons in the habit of Deacons and Subdeacons, then returning to
the High Altar, the king rose out of his chair to do him honor, and the king
sitting down again, the Archbishop came to him to make his requests, and to
take his Oaths and promises, in the name of all the Churches to him subject as
follows.

A nobis perdonari petimus etc.

The kings aunsweare and Promise.

Promitto vobis and perdono etc.

After that his Majesty had made this Promise, and taken this Oath, the said
Bishops of Laon and Beaunais, lifted him out of his chair, then as he so
stood, they asked the people and assistants, whether they accepted him for
their king, and having as it were taken the consent of the people and the whole
assistance, the said Lord Archbishop caused him to take the Oath to the Realm,
with his hand upon the Gospels, which, after his promise he kissed in this
manner.

The kings Promise and Oath.

Haec populo Christiano etc.

After this Oath and promise being made, the said Lord Archbishop went toward
the habits and ornaments Royal, which as is aforesaid, were prepared and laid
upon the Altar, before whom the king was brought by the Bishops of Laon and
Beauuais, and there by the chief Gentleman of his chamber, he was unclothed
of his short gown of cloth of silver with sleeves, and standing in his satin
dubblet, the said Lord Archbishop said over him, this that follows.

Versus. Adiutorium etc.

Oremus. Deus inenarrabilis author mundi etc.

This prayer ended, the Lord great Chamberlain put him on his boots or
sandalls before mentioned, and the Lord Prince of Conty, keeping the state of
the Duke of Burgondy, put him on his spurs, and presently took them off
again.

Then did the Archbishop bless the Sword within the scabbard in this manner.

Oremus. Exaudi quaesumus Domine praeces nostras etc.

This prayer ended, the said Lord Archbishop girt on the kings sword, and
straight ungirt it again, and took it naked into his hand, leaving the
scabbard upon the Altar, and holding it naked, said the prayer following,
delivering the said sword into the kings hand, who in all humility received
it, and held it upright with the point upward, until the end of the prayer and
Antheme following

Oremus. Accipe hunc gladium.

Then was sung this Antheme.

Comfortare and esto vi^ etc.

Oremus. Deus qui prudentia tua etc.

The king having kissed the Sword, with all humility offered it, and laid it
upon the Altar, and immediately the said L. Archbishop took it, and returned
it into the kings hand, being upon his knees, who immediately delivered it
to the Lord Constable, who always carried it naked before him, throughout all
other acts that were done, and all dinner time, the said Lord Archbishop
proceeding in the prayer over the said Lord still kneeling.

Oremus. Prospice omnipotens etc.

Another blessing.

Oremus. Benedic Domine etc.

Oremus. Deus pater aeterne etc.

The said prayers being ended, the Archbishop turned to the High Altar, to
prepare the holy Ointment in manner and form following.

He took a plate of gold, whereupon he laid the holy Cresme, so much as was
requisite for the anointing of a Bishop. Then out of the said Holy Vyoll with
a golden needle, he took the quantity of a peaze of the Holy Oil, which with
his finger he mixed with the said holy Cresme

While the said Archbishop thus prepared the holy ointment, the Chanter of the
Church began the Respon. following, which the kings Chapel did prosecute.

Responsorium. Super gentem Francorum inclitam, simul cum rege suo nobili,
Christus Oleo exultationis etc.

Versus. Emitte spiritum tuum Domine and creabuntur.

Responsorium. Et renouabis faciem terrae.

Oremus. Deus a nobis etc.

After this prayer, the king came to the Deske of his Oratory, and the
Archbishop with him, there to tend to their devout contemplations, during the
which, the said Prelates began the Letany, and the Quier aunsweared, as
follows.

Letania. The Prelates began. Kyrie Eleyson.

Here the King did arise and the Archbishop likewise, who turning to the said
Lord, and holding his Cross in his hand, sung the three verses following, the
Quier aunswearing him.

Vt hunc praesentem etc.

This verse thrice repeated, and aunsweared by the Quier, the said Lord
Archbishop returned to his Deske near to the King and the Bishops proceeded in
the rest of the Letany as follows.

Vt regibus and principibus etc.

The Letany being ended, the King and the Bishops fell groueling upon the
earth, and the said Archbishop standing up with a loud voice said.

Pater noster etc.

Then the Archbishop said these prayers following over the king before he
anointed him, and sat as if he should have consecrated a Bishop.

Te inuocamus etc.

After the prayers the Lord Archbishop, holding the plate whereupon lay the
holy ointment, began to annoint his Majesty.

First upon the Crown of his Head.

Secondly having put off his dubblet and shirt, upon the breast.

Thirdly between the two shoulders.

Fourthly upon the right shoulder.

Fifthly upon the left shoulder.

Sixthly in the bowing of the right arm.

Seauenthly in the bowing of the left arm.

And at euer^y of the said annoyntinges the said Archbishop said.

Vngo te in Regem etc.

And they all aunsweared Amen.

And during these annoyntinges the singing men sung this Antheme.

Antiphona. Vnxerunt Salomonem Regem.

After which Antheme, the said Lord Archbishop said the prayer following.

Oremus. Christ perunge hunc Regem.

The prayers said and ended, the Lord Archbishop with the Prelates assistant,
took him up and closed the slittes of the dubblet and of the shirt: and then
the Lord great Chamberlain delivered to the king the garments that he was to
wear above the said dubblet: that is to say, the tunicle, or the same which
represents a Subdeacon. The Dalmatike, or the same that represents a
Deacon, and the cloak Royal, representing the Chasuble.

The king being thus clothed, the Archbishop took again the plate whereupon
lay the holy ointment, and laid some upon the palm of the kings right hand,
for the right annoynting. Then in the palm of the left hand for the ninth
anointing, saying:

Vngantur manus istae de oleo etc.

The kings hands thus anointed and hallowed, he lays them close upon his
breast, and then delivers him a pair of hallowed gloves, wherein he puts
his hands, and this is the blessing of the gloves.

Oremus. Omnipotens creator qui homini etc.

The said Lord Archbishop having blessed the said gloves, and putting them upon
the kings hands, says:

Circunda domine manus etc.

Then the said Lord Archbishop blessed the Ring, and said as follows.

Oremus. Deus totius creaturae etc.

After this blessing, the said Lord Archbishop put on the Ring, wherewith the
king marries the Realm, upon the fourth finger of his right hand, saying:

Accipe anulum signaculum etc.

This prayer said, the Lord Archbishop took the Scepter Royal from the
Altar, and put it into the kings right hand, saying:

The delivery of the Scepter. Accipe sceptrum regiae potestatis etc.

Immediately the said Lord Archbishop delivered him the hand of Justice into
his left hand, saying:

Accipe virgam virtutis etc.

All things thus ended, the Lord Chauncelor standing against the Altar, and
turning his face to the king and the assistants, with a loud voice called the
twelve Peers according to their orders and dignities. First beginning with the
lay, as follows.

My Lord Prince of Conty, who serve for the Duke of Burgundy, present your
self in this action.

My Lord County of Soysons, who serve for the D. of Normandy, present your
self.

My Lord Duke of Montpensier, who serve for the D. of Aquitaine, present your
self.

My Lord of Luxenburg, who serve for the County of Toulouse, present your self.

My Lord Duke of Rayz, who serve for the County of Flaunders, present your
self.

My Lord Duke of Vantadour, who serve for the County of Champaigne, present
your self.

As for the Peers Ecclesiastical, they were likewise called according to the
former prescript, and according to their callinges, both of the representers
and of the represented.

The said convocation ended, the Archbishop did rise out of his chair, and
turned to the High Altar, from whence he took the close Crown, and held it
over the kings head, without touching the same, whereto immediately all the
Peers both temporal and spiritual set their hands to supporte it, and the
said Archbishop said thus:

Coronet te Deus corona gloriae. etc.

This prayer ended, the said Archbishop set and placed the Crown upon the
Kings head, still staying it with his left hand, whereto all the other Peers
likewise set their hands, and the Archbishop said the prayer following

Accipe coronam regni etc.

After the coronation, he said this prayer.

Oremus. Deus perpetuitabis etc.

The blessing, Extendet omnipotens etc.

The second blessing over the king.

Benedic domine etc.

All these prayers finished and ended, the said Archbishop took the king by
the sleeue of his right arm, and the said Lord still held in his hands the
Scepter, and the Hand of Justice: and the said Peers both temporal and
Spiritual, were round about the said Lord, and as much as in them lay, did put
their hands to the Crown: Before him marched the Lord Constable, with the
Sword naked in his hand: then the Lord Chauncelor alone: then the Lord Great
Master, on his right hand the Lord great Chamberlain, and on his left, the
chief Gentleman of his chamber.

Then did the Archbishop bring the king to his throne and High Seat, prepared
upon the stage as is aforesaid, the train of whose cloak royal was carried by
the Lord of Saint Luke: and as the king was above, and his back turned to the
body of the church, the said Archbishop still holding of him, said as follows.

Sta and retine a modo statum quem huc vsque etc.

Then the said Archbishop holding the king by the hand caused him to sit down,
saying:

In hoc regni solio confirmet te etc.

This prayer ended and the king being set in his throne the said Archbishop
took off his Mitre, and after great reverence and honor by him done to his
Majesty, he kissed him, and then said.

Vinat rex in aeternum etc,

After him all the other Peers kissed him, the Peers Ecclesiastical first
beginning, saying thus.

Viuat Rex in aeternum etc.

Then the people gave a great shout, crying, God save the king: and immediately
the Harguebuzes shot off, and after them the great Ordinance, and the Trumpets,
cornets, hautbois, drommes and other instruments sounded, and the said Lord
Archbishop began.

Te Deum laudamus, being accompanied with the Organs and other Music.

During all this joy and acclamation, the Herrauldes cried a Largess,
whereupon were cast forth a great number of pieces of Gold and Silver, some
money current, others coined purposely and marked with the kings picture.

After the said Lord Archbishop had inthronized the king in his seat royal,
and performed every thing as aforesaid, he went down and returned to the high
Altar, there to solemnize the High Mass, and in the mean time, was the kings
Ordinary low Mass said at the Altar provided upon the stage, at the right
hand as is aforesaid, the Scepter and Hand of Justice being laid upright at
each side of the said Lords Oratory Deske: And when they came to the Gospel of
the High Mass his Majesty arose, and the Prince of Conty, representing the
Duke of Burgundy, took off his crown and set it upon the cussion that lay
upon the said Deske or leaning pew.

Here we are to note that so often as the king returned never so little to the
body of the church, the people being an infinite number, cried, God save the
King. And the church rung with their cries, and with Harguebuze shot.

Upon the top of the stayre, on the right hand, descending toward the Quier,
upon the first step, stood upright and bare head, the Lord of Rhodes, Great
Master of the ceremonies, with a staff in his hand, bending downward: upon
the left stayre stood the Lord of Surenne with his staff down.

Upon both the stayres from step to step stood the Harroulds bareheaded in
their coats of Arms: And lower upon the staire on the right hand stood the
Lord County of Mauleurier captain of the guard of Suitzers.

The Deane of our Lady Church of Chartres red the Epistle, and the Abbot of
Saint Genouese of Paris read the Gospel, which done, the Harrouldes first
came down from the two stairs, then the Lord of Rhodes, after him the
Archbishop Patriarcke of Bourges, the Kings great Amner, apparelled in his
pontificals of Violet coullour, attended upon by diverse notable Clergy men,
came to the Altar, where the foresaid Abbot took the book of the Gospels and
carried it from the said Altar up to the stage between his hands, the said
Archbishop of Bourges still following him. In this order and with all this brave
ceremony they all ascended unto the stage, and there the said Lord of Bourges
caused the King to kiss the said Gospells. Which done, the said Archbishop
of Burges with other Clergy men aforesaid came down the stairs the same way
they went up, and in like ceremony as before returned the book of Gospels to
the Altar, where the Abbot still remained by the Lord Archbishop of Rheims to
serve him as a Deacon, and the said Archbishop of Bourges returning up sat him
down near the King in the accustomed place of the great Amner.

When they came to the offertorie, four Lord, knights of the holy Ghost, who
during the whole ceremony aforesaid had sit upon the right side in the Cannons
seats, departed from their places in manner following.

The first, who was the Lord of Sourdis carried the wine in a vessel of gold,
chased.

The second, Lord of Souure who carried a silver loaf upon a Cuishion.

The third, Lord of Antragues carried a loaf of gold upon a Cushion.

The fowrth Lord County of Escars carried a rich Purse, garnished with
thirtene pieces of gold, having the Kings stamp and portraiture, every of them
waying five and twenty Crowns, which purse lay upon a Cushion.

Before these four Lords marched seven kinghts at arms and Harroulds, who
not omitting any of the reuerences requisite in such a case, ascended even to
the Kings throne, and being come thither, returned again in order following.

First marched the seven Harrouldes, and with them two Hushers of the Kings
Chamber, with their Maces, next the four Lords carriers of the offerings.
After them, the Lord Chaunceler, the Lord Master and Lord Counstable bearing
the sword naked in his hand. Then came the King environed with all his Peers,
bearing the Scepter in his right hand, and the hand of Justice in the left: And
there remained at the said throne as it were to keep it, the Lord great
Chamberline and the chief Gentleman of the Chamber. The King thus accompanied,
being come to the high Altar, the Harroulds and Hushers, then the Lord
Counstable, Chaunceler, and great Master took sides and made way for the
Lords of O, and Roquelord, who very reverently to ease his Majesty, took at
the Kings hands, the one the Scepter, the other the hand of Justice. Then the
Lord County of Escars, who carried the purse after a low reverence, delivered
it into the Kings hands to offer: The like did the Lord of Antragues with the
loaf of gold, also the Lord of Souure with the silver loaf and the Lord of
Sourdis with the vessel of wine.

The offering in this manner ended, and the King taking again the Scepter and
the hand of Justice, returned to his throne and high seat, accompanied as
before, the quire singing God save the King, and the four Lords that carried
the offerings returned to the seats where they sat before.

The Mass being ended unto Pax Domini, before the Archbishop of Rheims had
ended it said over the King and people this prayer following.

Benedicat tibi Dominus etc.

The said Lord Archbishop proceeding and having sung Pax Domini, the Archbishop
of Bourges, great Amner with the Clergy aforesaid, and the Kings amners, the
Lord great Master of the ceremonies and the Harroulde, went to the Altar and
taking the Pax at the Archbishop of Rheims hand, kissed him on the cheek. That
done, he returned up to the Kings seat and throne, and presented him the Pax
and after the King had kissed it, all the Peers first the Ecclesiastical, then
the lay did the like.

In the mean time the Archbishop of Rheims, proceeding in the office, blessed
the banner Royal, saying as follows.

Inclina Domine aurem tuam, etc.

Here follows the Collect or first prayer said at Mass upon the day of
this solemnity.

Collecta. Quaesumus omnipotens Deus etc.

The second prayer, said in screte.

Munera quaesumus Domine, etc.

The last prayer of the Mass, or past Communion.

Post Communio. Haec Domine, etc. Oration salutari, etc.

The Mass thus ended the said Lord of Rheims leaving upon the Altar, tarieth
until the other Peers both Ecclesiastical and lay, brought down the King to
the Altar. The King being come thither, entered into his pauillion before
mentioned, there to reconcile him self, with his confessor aforesaid, then
coming forth again, he kneeled down before the high Altar, and having said
the Confiteor, and received absolution, which was given him by the said
Archbishop doing the office. The Prince of Condy took of his Crown, and the
other Peers lay took off the attire off his head, and he received the
precious body of our Lord, under both forms of bread and wine in great
devotion and perfect humility, and then took again his great Crown.

This done the said Lord Archbishop of Rheims took of that Crown and set him
on a lighter and meaner, and then was the great Crown delivered to the Duke of
Montbason, who was to carry it before the King to his palace and he carried it
upon a rich Cushion.

The Scepter was delivered to the Lord of O, and the hand of Justice to the
Lord of Requelore. Then the King thus arrayed in his garments Royal,
accompanied with the foresaid Peers, in like ceremony and order as he came to
Church returned to his palace.

The people with great acclamation and signs of joy, cried, God save the King,
the Cannons and small shot played their parts, the trumpets, drumms and other
instruments sounded and played, and at the same instant was the holy Vyall
brought out of the Church and returned to the Abbay of Saint Pere in like
ceremony as it came before to our Lady Church.

The King being returned to his palace took his Chamber, where he stayed a
good while, and shifted him self into an other shert, delivering that to his
great amner to use according to the custom of that shert. Then he came into
the great hall of the palace, at the upper end whereof hung a high Cloth of
estate of some six fadome and a half square and three foot deep, and under
the same a Table nine foot long, whereon the King did eat.

On the right hand stood an other Table and on the left an other. At that on
the right hand sat the Lord Peers Ecclesiastical in their Copes and Miters,
and at that on the left the Peers lay in their Peers attire. Somewhat beneath
sat the Ambassadors of England and Venice, the Lord Chanceler, the officers of
the Crown and they that had carried the honors.

The Lord Counstable all the while stood at the end of the Kings Table, with
the sword naked and upright in his hand.

The County of Saint Paul served as great Master, bearing his Staff up.

The Lord of Rohan as pantler.

The County of Sauuerre as taster.

The County of Torigny as caruer.

The Gentlemen of the Chamber carried the meat, every course being accompanied
with trumpets, cornets and haultbois, and the Harroulds and stewards of the
household marching before the Lord great Master with his staff down.

Between the Service the Music sung.

Grace was sung in Music in manner as the late King caused to be said
before him, and then every man with drew himself.

At night his Majesty supped in feast Royal.

At his Table under the Cloth of estate sat Madam his sister, with a distaunce
between him and her.

On the right hand was the Lady Princess of Conde, the Lady Duchess of
Niuernois and her daughter the Lady of Neuers.

On the left beneath Madam sat the Lady Princess of Condy, the Lady of Rohan
and the Lady of Raiz.

The Lord County of Soissons kept his estate of great Masters.

The Lord Prince of Condy served as high pantler and carried the first dish.

The Duke of Longueuill as high taster.

The Lord of Rohan as caruer.

To Madam served the Lord Countye of Mauleurier as pantler.

The Lord of Mirepoix as taster.

The County of Lude as caruer.

At every service the trumpets, cornets and drums did sound, and the
Harroulds and Stewards marched before the Lord great Master, to whom the Lord
of Gois of Tillet presented the Towell. The said Lord great Master delivered
it to Madam the Kings sister, who as already set, but she arose from her seat
and delivered it to his Majesty, to wash his hands.

After supper grace was sung in Music, and then the King withdrew him to his
Chamber, accompanied with Madam, his sister, the Dukes, Duchesses, Princes,
Princesses, Lords and Ladies that were assistant at supper, and having stayed
there half an hour Madam desired to depart, whom the King accompanied to the
great Chamber door, and then every one withdrew to their rest.

The next morning on Monday the twenty eight and last of February, the King
would take the collar and order of the holy Ghost according to the purport of
the Statutes of the said order founded and made by the late King Henry the
third.

The same day at three of the clock in the afternoon he went to our Lady
Church in like ceremony as by the Statute is ordained, causing his officers to
go before him, then the prelates, commanders and knights of the same order,
apparelled in their long robes and their great collers about their necks, and
after Compline ended the Lord Bishop of Chartres in this ceremony also
retaining the place and calling of the Archbishop of Rheims caused him to take
the Oath required and appointed by the said Statute. After the said Oath taken
upon the book of the holy Evangelists which the Lord Chaunceler of the order
did hold, the Lord of Rhodes put upon him the great robe of the said order and
the said Lord of Chartres the collar.

This done he went and sat down in the Chair of estate where all the said
Prelates, knights, commanders and officers one after another kissed his hands.

This ceremony ended, his Majesty returned to his palace causing the
aforenamed to march before him in like ceremony and pomp as they came. God
give his Majesty grace to plant peace in his Realm and parson and long to
enjoy the same, Amen.

FINIS.

