An Advertisement to the KJNG of NAVARRE, to unite him self with the KING and
the Catholic Faith.

Being in truth a very slanderous, false, and seditious Libell, against the
said KING o^ NAVARRE, and other Christian Princes made as an answer to his
Book entitled: The Declaration of the KING of NAVARRE, a^ touching the
slanders published against him etc which is here extant in English. But this
being subtly conuayed, under pretense of winning him to the Romish Religion,
is therefore the rather set down in the same nature as it is written: to show
a wicked mind against GOD, the King, and the sincerity of true Religion.

Truly translated according to the Copy Printed in French.

To the Reader.
BEfore thou enter into this discourse (Gentle Reader) I am to admonish thee of
certain special points, whereof I would desire thee to have some regard.
First as concerning this Pamphlet, it is made as an answer to a very modest
and dutiful declaration, written by the KING of NAVARRE, to the King his
sovereign Lord, as concerning the slanders published against him etc.

And heerin, by many needless shifts and palpable cauilles, he laboreth to
inueigh against the said King, because of his Christian Religion, and for that
he will not stoup to the man of Room. In all which windlasses, he does but
waste time, with high words and terms of disgrace, against those who with
all humility, are content to bear the heavy yoke for their masters sake,
which the aduerssenes of the time lays upon them, and God has appointed to
make trial of his Children.

Secondly, for the contempt he makes of Religion, and aduauncing of the
inventions and traditions of men, flatly condemning the Christians, who lean
only to the word of God, contained in the old and new Testament, and who will
believe no other doctrine, though an Angel should reveal it from Heaven: I
doubt not but his childish, gross and absurd reasons, will be very easily
perceived, and specially of the learned, who know that better wine never comes
from such vessels, nor greater reasons from such senseless cauillers, therefore
rather to be pitied for their folly, then envied, because we will show more
Christian charity.

Lastly where he inuaieth against our Cuntry of ENGLAND, and enters into
matters above my reach: I must leave them to the Judgment of such, who are
better acquainted with such high points, albeit I believe them to be mere
false, and uttered upon a mallicious stomach. What else is in this lewd and
slanderous Pamphelet, of bad nature (as it is all) or hurtful to any, as I
^ould be loath, I leave it to the good consideration of such, who daily behold
the malice of Satan and his ministers, against the godly and well inclined,
and therefore to join with me in prayer, that God will either soon amend them,
or end them.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the KJNG of NAVARRE, to unite him self with the KING and
the Catholic Faith.
SIR, I do not think that it were sufficient for you, to flatter your own
humor with ye succession of a young Prince, healthful, and well-beloved of his
Subjects, as our King is, except (considering the state wherein you now stand)
it were expedient and auailable for you, to follow the council which many
take occasion to give you, upon the chance which now of late has drawn you
nearer to this Crown. But because that God often sendes us many likelyhoods of
some prosperity near at hand, not to the end that we should assure our selves
of the end thereof: But the rather, that upon the doubt of the event, we may
change the present condition of our life. Thereupon I hope, that the King our
Lord will not mislike, if I set before your eyes, how near you are to his
succession, to prevail therewith so far as it will extend toward you, in the
estate wherein you are: and not as a thing to be hoped for of you, neither to be
wished for by any other.

Now it is credible enough, that (you being such a great Prince) in a Realm,
where the people are seen to be divided by the contrariety in religion and
belief (as God has suffered this to be) your Majesty has on both sides many
servants, who are all desirous of your prosperity, and do embrace by a common
vow, the establishment of your good fortune. But in respect of things present,
and those which may be judged to happen hereafter: it is not hard in
deliberation to to know, which of them bears most good will to your
service. Those (Sir) who most of all have respect to the welfare, and benefit
of their Cuntrie, and evermore have cleeued to the fourmes, ancient
institutions, and faithful obedience to their Master, cannot be in any wise
suspected, to wish maliciously any mutation or change in this estate, wherein,
all things are to them peaceable and happy: for so much as they know them
selves to be in ye favor and good grace of their Prince, respected, and
bearing the good will of the people, and esteemed of them who (under the Kings
authority) have the government of the Laws, and policy of the Realm.

Furthermore, no more hope to be reposed in you, then in any other, cannot make
them desirous to see you wear this crown: for if you had upon the chance of
a Dye lost your part, their good behavior past, and the remembrance of their
fidelity, will nothing deminish their hopes (whosoever shall be lawful King) to
find all favor and good countenance. But if amongst those that have taken in
hand to give you council, there be some, (which for the bringing in of
novelties, whereby they have made the estate their enemy) have not their own
estate in good assurance, it is your part (Sir) to Judge, which of them you
esteem to give you the soundest council: either of such as in danger of
shipwreck hold you fast, as it were to the Mast, or some other sure hold, yet
deluding you with imagined hopes, but beneficial to their interest: or of such
who having no occasion of fear, do expect of your good Fortune no better
condition, then that they enjoy at this present, and make account of ^he same
hereafter, whosoever shall lawful^y succeed in this estate.

As for the one, we need no better proof to ^howe you, that they give you no
other coun^el, but that which they think beneficial for them selves, and not
for you. If you would consider and mark what they tell you, that your return to
the Catholic Religion should be but in vain, because it will neither be
acceptable to the King or profitable to the Catholics: thereby they
sufficiently discover the consequence which they will infer, which is, that
you ought not to have any other consideration of what Religion you be, saving
for the profit which you may bring unto them that do likewise embrace the same.

This I will grant them always, that neither the King nor the Catholics his
good Subjects, are drawn by any other respect to call you again into the
Church, wherein you received ye first mark of a christian: but only by the
common compassion, which every honest and good natured man feels to have in
him self, on such, as either through error in judgment, or by seducement and
imposture of others, do forsake first the right way to their salvation, and
afterward do deprive them selves of all the good and happy success, which
might happen to them during this life. Although the rigorous punishments, which
the Laws of all Nations have ordained against the Miscreants, does render us
a clear and sufficient testimony, how natural it is for men to abhor, such
as they judge to hold any perverse opinion, in that which concerns the belief
and the service of God. So that if it be true, that each one has grounded and
established in him self the same opinion, which they suppose and judge to be
in all other: it is to be thought and verily believed, that he which esteems
that so few people do little care, that others should be different in Religion
to them, except they have some particular interest therein, that man may be said
to be very little religious.

And to speak to you freely of the desire which the King may have, that you
were become Catholic: it cannot be attributed to any commodity whereof he
should live in hope, neither that he should think, that your favor and
friendship might be to him of any importance. God has given him so great
authority over you and your hability: yt whatsoever you were, he knows very
well, that since you be borne his subject, you neither ought nor can do
otherwise, but yt you should be obedient to his will and commandment. As
concerning if he do not love you: it is for you to seek by humble service,
that he would admit you again into his good grace and favor.

You are too well brought up Sir, and you have too much interest to know, what
is the greatness and authority of a King of France, to believe, that he may
desire, that one of his own Subjects should be of one self same, opinion,
rather then of an other, thereby to make him his better friend. If he had no
other consideration then this only, in truth he has no need greatly to care
whether you were an Huguenot or a Catholic: and if he should see any
inconvenience therein, he should be but a beholder of the imminent danger to
fall upon your own head. But in respect yt he is a Prince, who even by nature
is good and gracious, it is not to be doubted, but that he could wish that as
well you, as all other his Subjects, were brought into such an order and
condition of life, wherein he might trust that God should find your actions
more confirmable, but yours most especially. Sir, you ought to persuade and
assure your self, more then any other may, of his good and kind affection
toward you, in that you are (as things are now come to pass) the very nearest
successor unto his Crown, and in that (besides this) you have his only Sister
to your espouse and wife.

To set before your eyes, that he would take this your sudden change in
Religion, for a demonstration of the desire which you have, that he might yield
you his place quickly: that is as much as to speak of a thing, wherein there is
no likelihood at all. For if he might be persuaded, that such a vile or wicked
intent could inter into your heart: you must hold if for a certainty, that he
would believe, it would sooner creep into your mind being a Huguenot, then a
Catholic.

Furthermore, who ever heard say, that one to make him self worthy to succeed
into an estate, should for that cause desire ye death of him that is in
possession thereof? It would follow by consequence, that in all the degrees of
Fortune, the most nearest kinsmen should be the most mortal and deadly
enemies one to another: and that the Parents should never regard their
Children more respectively, then when (by their behauiours) they cause them to
perceive, that they are indifferent whether they be their inheritours or no.
Contrariwise, the King will attribute this your conversion to a particular and
wonderful grace of God showed unto you, by reducing you again into the lap
of the Church, and into the way of our salvation, by a more meek, gentle and
human means, then those which men have used heertofore to bring you to the
same.

As touching the other Catholic Subjects of the King, I rest in this mind,
that they desire not your return to the (...) Religion of your Auncesters, for
any advantage they hope to have thereby: whereby you may Judge, that they are
better affectioned unto you then those, who for their greedy hope of
Covetousness, go about to keep you in their pretended Religion. And this should
be (Sir) properly to deceive you, that you should persuade your self, that the
Catholics are moved by some kind of fear least the Crown should fall
upon the head of some Huguenot. That man may be thought very weak in
judgment, and that his senses are very much troubled, who does not perfectly
persuade himself: that no other (in this our age) but a Catholic shall be
admitted unto the Crown of France, and we do not think that any man did ever
imagine the contrary.

As touching the rest, they have good reason to persuade you, that the
catholics do not wish you to be on their side, that by this mean it might be
easier for the^ to extinguish the Huguenots Religion: for we are so fully
satisfied of that, which hitherto we have done unto them under the
commandment of the King: that hence forward we judge them not to have any
hability of continuance, except it be only through our meeknes and (...).

I cannot very well conceive what these Catholics should be, which your
discoursers and aduisers do call pollitique: but this I know, that we are al
indifferently affectioned for the defense of our Religion, the conservation of
our Laws, and the rest and quietness of our Country. But if they give that name
to those which are amongst us, and which have some particular bond and devotion
to do you service, as it is not to be doubted, but that there are many in this
Realm: Yet for all that they are greatly deceived, if they hope that these
have in smaller estimation the ancient fourmes of the estate, the quietness of
their consciences, and commodities of their lives, then the other have. I am
persuaded Sir, that if you should appeal upon your own particular interest,
they would adventure their lives very willingly, to do you service: but in
this matter that concerns Religion, which is such a zeal and affection, as
nature has imprinted in the hearts of al men, it passes all bo^ds and duties
which one man has gotten over an other.

But that which we esteem more necessary to do, is, to pray to God, that it
would so please him to inspire you, that you might rather follow those means,
whereby (...) the general plauditie and rejoicing of the people) you may be
received and honored: rather then that by sword and fire, you should offer to
make a conquest of that, which God will have obtained by just and peaceable
means.

And though you were lawfully anointed and Crowned King of France (Sir) truly
we would grant to the Huguenots that which they say, that in opposing our
selves against your will and ordinances, (were it for the mistrust of our
Religion) we would be disobedient and rebellious, for since that we have
always accused them, to have carried Arms against their Prince, and laying
upon us the like reproach, they do condemn them selves in that behalf: it is
good reason that we suffer the self same law, which we our selves have made
against others. But there is too great a difference, between to be a King, and
to carry pretense to the royalty: for the first, true it is, that we are
forbidden to resist the King, but not him that would make himself King against
the Laws of the Realm, and it is to be noted, that for to succeed in a
royalty, the law is much more to be considered then nature, pardon me (sir)
if I speak somewhat liberally, for I should (...) betray you, in using
disguisings and dissimulatio^s, in affairs yt are of such co^seque^ce.

If we should have regard but to ye near alliance in blood, those which
within these fifty years are issued of the Daughters of France, should be
much more near then you, and if you answer that the Law does exclude the
daughters from the succession of the Realm: you are to consider, that the
self same law does likewise exclude those which are separated from the
Church. And albeit that such exclusions are not there expressed, the belief
which at all times we have reposed in God, and the usage and form of his
service: are universal Laws which God has planted in the hearts of men,
against the which there needs not the Caveat of any particular law, for they
have force and authority sufficient for their part, which the Salicque law
cannot have.

What Sir? If God had permitted that the Prince which should next succeed in
this Crown, were a Jew or a Mohammedan: would you think that it were reasonable
to admit him? Now if we were driven to show, that neither the Turk nor the
Jew are more odious and contrary to our Religion, then the Huguenot is, I
would bring forth no other proof, but the proper discourse of your Ministers:
at least we might avouch that there could be no greater wunder, then to see a
Huguenot wear the Crown of France.

Truly Sir, those do very much deceive you, who go about to put in your
head; that you shall find forces sufficient, to such an unjust partaking, for I
wish you to consider, that there are in France other princes of the blood,
beside you: of the which the most nearest to the Crown, which should be found
to be a Catholic, by the consent and approbation of all the Estates, and of
the Parliaments of this Realm, should in this case be esteemed and taken for a
lawful successor, and yet none should be able to say, that any thing were
changed in the lawful and ancient succession: because neither you nor any
other might be esteemed to be in the order of succession, so long as they
should judge you incapable for that calling.

What could you do then with those imagined forces propounded unto you, but to
attempt in vain, against the right, justice and all the observations of this
Monarchy? therefore henceforward (Sir) you are to know, that reason is a
mighty and puissa^t enemy, I confess and grant to those pretended religeous
men, that the Switzers and the Venetians are ancient friends, and allied with
the Kings of France: but whom (to their Judgments) would these Nations hold
for a King, then the first Prince of the blood, capable, anointed and
consecrated, according to the ordinary customs, and to whom all the Estates
have sworn their fidelity, and the commons their true obedience. These
Nations are (saving fews) ancient Catholics, and your perswaders will make
you believe, that they will take Arms to put the Scepter of France, into the
hands of a Huguenot, against the laws of the Country, and Christendom: but
contrariwise make your account, that all ye Nations allied with this Crown,
would be against you, as to him that fights in an evil cause, and an unjust
title.

But to bring this to pass, France should have no need to make any leuey of
foreign forces, neither should Spain nor Italy he solicited to come to our
aid: what need we the^ but keep our selves in our own estate? what mean have
you the^ whereby to enforce us? laing al vanity and flattery aside, let us
acknowledge our selves what we are. What hope can you have to bring to your
bow, so many great towns, so many strong holds, and a people so warlike as
the Frenchmen are? Do you not think, that though you had all England, and
Germany with you, and we should stand but upon your own defense: yet should
not you be able in ten such ages as yours is, to get the maistership of Guyenne
only, for what other men can you hope does favor you, but only the Germains
and the Englishmen? As for the Flemings besides that they are but of little
account, yet they have work enough to do at home.

Does it please you to consider a little, what help you may expect of
England? It is a Nation in an Island, and which cannot come to you but by Sea:
where will you land all this Army? All the Havens in France be against you.
If you trust Rochell: you have seen with your eyes heertofore, that by the
means of a defense made with Pales upon the mouth of the Channel, and placing
certain vessels of War before, we have driven back five and fifty English
Sail which came in sight, and yet durst approach no nearer then the Cannon
shot. We have yet the self means that we had then, and you have none at all
whereby to let us: now, to hazard a battle of Frenchmen to Frenchmen, to open
them the free passage, I am assured that no man will give you such council. You
have seen hitherto, yt we need but four companies of men of Arms, with the
Catholic Footmen of the same cuntry where your greatest forces lie, to keep
you enclosed within your own Garrisons. And although you might join with the
English Army, how great do you think it would be? the Realm is little, and
peradventure not to free from partiality and division: so that they cannot
forgo any great number of their men, without giving a fit occasion to the
contrary part, to rise and take their own advantage.

You know how great the succor has been, which they have sent to the
Flemings their neighbors, though it was to favor so great a Prince, as
Monsieur the only brother to the King, who had as it seems a greater and more
particular intelligence in that Cuntry, the^ you can have in this. Therefore,
you ought not look for any greater aid from that Cuntrie, then he: and with so
small a number, there is no great likelihood that you should much prevail in
your affairs. For if they could convey into this Realm so great forces, that
they were sufficient to establish you in the Royalty, the taking of New Haven
has given us to understand, and it is to be presumed, that they which do
uphold the Crown of France, both in their hearts and titles: would not use
such Charity toward you, as to travail rather for you then for their own
proper selves. I will not here discourse what woork we might give them at home,
whereby we might withdraw them soon out of France, and so drive them to
regard their own Cuntry: for you know very well the greatness and power of that
Cuntry.

And as touching the Germaynes, call to your remembrance Sir, that when the
Huguenots were in their best strength, and (as on might say) in the very flower
of their age, and that all things seemed to smile on them, and that many years
before (by the crop they made in France) they had laid up great tresures, they
called to their succor so many Ruitters as they could: and yet for all this
they cannot make any reckoning of any on victory on their side. So that if the
Ruitters remember themselves: they ought to be more afraid to approach near
the Frenchmen, then the Frenchmen should de discouraged to see them in their
Country.

But now at this time, wherein the Huguenots are upon their deelining: and (as
it were) upon their graves (as commonly we see that feeble things are of no
long continuance) and that their shoulders do bow with the blows we have
given them, yea, that they have not one teaster, because they can find nothing
more to gleane in this Kingdom: whereupon then can they ground this their
imagination, to cause the Germaynes to rush forth into France, to strengthen
you? If we should make any account of the affection which they do bear to the
cause: do you think (Sir) they will be more pricked with devotion to make you
King, then they were before to establish the Huguenot Religion?

As touching the general grounding of ones Religion, it seems that all men
are provoked thereto by a natural affection: but what occasion have they so to
love your person, as in making you King, they would forgo their own commodity
and quietness? what manner of importance is it to them, who were King of
France? If therefore you have made trial, that to cause the^ mount on
horseback, you must have your pursse to be heard Iyngle, and not speak deafly,
and that since the declining of the Huguenots forces, they would not stir,
being never so often called by them: by what reason do you hope that they
would come to you gratis, to rule an Estate wherein they have nothing to do?
Put the case that these things were so desperate, as they must be called, under
the condition to use France, as a Cuntry already gotten: should this be any
other thing then heertofore has been offered them? and when ye likelyhoods did
promise some success to the enterprise? and besides this they know, that the
accomplishment of this condition depends not on the conuention made, but on
the victory. And if you take them for such as in deed they are, that is
hirelings, and serving them that offer most: what greater assurance can you
give them now for their pay, when you shall find your self in like terms of
dispute for the Crown of France, as in times past? Where are your new
treasurs? where are your demeanes in France? would you not then seize upon
them? what if they would no more to your commandment then, than they do now?

As for that you might recover by way of borowing in England, you would be but
little the richer thereby, For when you have gotten fifty thousand Crowns upon
Jewels of ye value of two hundredth thousand as the Queen your mother did, that
would be the vttermoste in all the world: yet this suffizeth not to make three
musters, of the two least Garrisons which you have. I leave aside the small
commodity you should find, to send forces to meet the Ruitters, to back them
when they enter the Realm, if in case you had made leuey of them.

But admit that all things should fall out according as you do hope for: do
you not think that he which shallbe consecrated and proclaimed king of France,
who should have in his hand all the Towns and forces of ye Realm, who shall
dispose of the treasure and riches of the same at his own pleasure, and who
shall maintain the ancient alliances of this Crown: do you not think I say
that for a hundred of your Ruitters, he will cause that ten thousand shall come?

Then since you know Sir that this nation is accustomed to let out to him
their hardines and blood: why do not you persuade your self, that he which
gives most, shall have most of them? Have we not seen that the King has
had more of them, and more often then ye Huguenots have, and such have taken
the Kings part against them, who first were with them against the King?

Furthermore, are we not able to break your determinations with the Germains,
in giving them more money to tarry at home, then you can give them to come
hither, to have their heads broken? Are not we able to sow and maintain such
divisions amongst the^ (which are already partly brought to effect) which will
bridle them so short, and (...) them so nearly at home, that they shall have no
leisure to think upon their neighbors affairs? Behold here Sir, the great
effects which by all discourse of reason, you may expect as well of England as
off Germanye.

They tell you (to put you in comfort) that ye Huguenots make the third part of
France. If you have registered in ye book of your household, such Calculators
for your instructions in Arithmatique, that betime you will cross them out
again: otherwise I forsee that you are in danger to become a very bad
Arithmaticion. But to the end you should not rely on such rediculous and
fantastical presumptions, what do it avail to you how great soever the
number of Huguenots are in this Realm, seeing when it coms to handiblows they
are not on your side, neither will strengthen your cause. And where upon can you
ground this opinion, that if you were in that point, even to strive for the
Kingdom: that they will show them selves rather to be on your side, then they
have done heertofore when you strove for Religion? can one possibly believe,
that they will be more hardly to make you King, then they have been to
authorize their own belief? surely it should not seem true.

Now I come to the inconvenience whereunto you may run, (as they allege) if
you forsake the Huguenots part. In case (say they) you should fall into any
disagreement with the King, you should behold the support which hitherto has
maintained you against him: or if any stranger should meddle with you, you
should hardly find any where else, such a faithful and an assured force, as you
have tried in them of the reformed Religion. What Sir? will they infer, that
whatsoever you do, you may at least be always assured, to be able to wadge
war with ye King when you please? Dare they well confess, that the Subject
has no mean to rebel against his Prince, except the Huguenots be the
instrument for the same? I leave this talk, because it is too proper for an
Inuectiue. But this I will say Sir, that in respect of the quarrels which you
might have strangers, you need not doubt to become a Catholic, for fear
least your force would be diminished thereby: the power of the King (which is
not much less then that of the Huguenots) would be employed for your defense,
for if you do not refuse the^ to strangers who have put them selves under his
protection, what likelihood is there that he will deny them to you, being a
Prince of his blood, his Subject, and his Brother in law?

For the resolution of this discourse Sir, I do say unto you, that you
becoming a catholic, you make your possessed of the Kings favor, convert to
you the affection of the Nobility, assure your self of the good will and
force of the estate, do establish your authority, and win again the hearts
of all the people: Contrariwise, remaining and Huguenot, you do estrange your
self from the King, with the most odious seperatio^ of all, do cause that
the whole estate do not only mistrust you, but also abhor you, and which is
not to be a little considered, you prepare your self a continual greef for
the remainder of your life, and after your death a perpetual spot to your
house, that by embracing an opinion, and a new conceit of a Preacher, you
deprive your self of such a rich and an honorable inheritance, as the Crown
of France.

How can you think that the posterity will let pass in silence, the reproaches
which they are to object against you, when it shall be told them, that Henry
the Second, King of Navarre, did rather embrace the hope of ability, to
Kindle fire in this Realm, and make it ruinate by war, then the council
whereby he might easly be a peacable successor thereof: and though your
perswaders have like hope, yet is their want of good council, and let your
Majesty pardone me for using these speeches. For it is not credible, that
continuing still in this pretended Religion: you can thereby make greater sture
for yt Crown or assemble greater forces then those which you have at this time:
but rather in so doing you shall make them the lesser.

Now I leave it to your Judgment, if in this present estate of your affairs,
it were expedient for you to enterprise war against the Catholics: or if
their were any occasion whereby you might esteem, yt your enterprise should
prosper ye better. As for me if I were on your side, as God forbid, I see what
better counsel on might give you the^ (for all your Armor) to have a recourse
to the virtue of patience and to comfort your self with the fair discourse of
the contempt of the world, and shortness of this life, a noble and
Philosophical resolution in deed: wherein^o your Ministers labor to bring
you. Ne^erthelesse I grant them that to forsake God and change religion, for
great riches and high calling, is a most abject and dam^able thing: but to
whom may we better ^^ue this reproach, the^ to such as are depar^^d from the
Catholic Church, the Religi^^ of their forefathers, and the faith wherein ^^ey
received their Baptism.

Let al those of the pretended Religion examine their consciences, and utter in
good sooth, by what means each of them has been induced to renounce the
ancient belief, and receive ye new: if there be any one whom God (by
particular communication) has inspired so to do, he has very great reason to
keep him self firm and unchangeable. But if the ignorant people perceive, yt
they have been induced thereunto only by the entisings of a sweet and eloquent
language and by the inclinations which naturally all men have to new
inventions, which I cannot tell what bait of liberty of their consciences, by
the means of a few learned me^, who forsaking ye great number and multitude of
others, have gotten in amongst you, to get a particular fame to themselves,
while they beheld that the prosperous wind and favor of the people did aptly
serve their turn, and that the Princes, and great Lords were drawn here to by
other worldly considerations, and not for Religion: wherefore the^ (in knowing
that this is through our weakness that we have taken on that part) do we not
come again to him who has been our nourisher, by the institution of our
Auncesters, and to whom God has evidently declared, that all things should be
to us happy and prosperous? what see we in this Religion here, which we have
not beheld in all other new sects and opinions? have not the Albigeois in
their time drawn so many of the people to their opinion, that they could make
a whole Army of them? And it is not so easily put in proof, as with a simple
people, if one have but only yt mean, to tickle them in the ears with sweet
and pleasing words. Do you not doubt, but if the self same entrance were
permitted to a Mahometane, as has been given to a Huguenot: it should not be
long before he would put his Alcharon in credit, and to carry sway through all
France.

You Sir, to whom the consequence of this matter is of greater moment the^ to
any other: ought to examine your own self, and to know what occasions have
induced you to it, and when does keep you therein. Has God heerin
extraordinarily inspired you, or else the deep knowledge which you have in
Divinity? has it brought you to this new ^ight of verity? If you
acknowledge that it ^s neither of them, how is it possible that you should
consent to depart from the universal (...) leefe: to follow the fantasies and
inuenti^ns of a Man borne in our age? Are you so ^asily persuaded to such
opinions as they ^lease? will you suffer your self to be bewitched with
words? Do you think you shall not be judged very weak, and of slender
resolution in all your other actions? If you will be miss-led on this fashion,
in matters which concern your salvation and Religion: what shall be said but
thus? That a Prince of high and noble understanding, leaft the law and faith
of his Auncesters, to take an opinion at the first sight, without having in him
self any other ground of reason, wherefore he should do so.

Those that do follow the Religion and fourmes of their predecessors, have
evermore reason so to do. For we will hold it for certain, that God being
come for the redemption of the world, did ordain by his own mouth to such men
as then were, those things which he would that they should believe and observe:
and we do try every day that it is natural for us, to teach and deliver to
our successors, the same things which we have received of our Ancestors. But
to reprove and condemn the ancient traditions by the impression and opinion of
others, and not to have in our own selves some inward knowledge, wherefore they
ought so to do: this seems to me of all other inexcusable, in the
continuance of so many ages, by universal observation.

Have we nothing wherwithal to confirm our belief, against a new sense or
meaning, which some Scholar (desirous to show his skill) will apply to ye holy
scripture? has it been error which men have believed hithertoo? and when God
has sent us most of his blessi^gs, has it been a sign that our service has
been less acceptable to him? Or else are we so blind that we will not
acknowledge, how God gave us all things more prosperously, when (without any
trouble) the Catholic faith was most religiously observed?

The Kings your predecessors Sir, who have left so many fair foundations, so
many and holy ordinances, and illustrious Conquests: have they ever been any
other then Catholics? If the Kingdoms have had any splendor and increase:
has it been at any other time, but when the people continued steadfast in the
belief, which they would now cause you to reject? And if they have had any
decay or ruin: has it been at any other time then when novelties have carried
authority?

Each one knows, that Clouis the first Christian King of France, reigned
five hundred years or there about after the death of our Savior, at which time
the primitive Church did yet floorish. If the Church then had some holy and
sincere observations: do you think she did hide or spare them, at the
consecration of that King of France, who of a Pagan became a Christian? Oh
what a likely thing is it to believe, that the fourmes at this present day
observed, at the Coronation of our Kings, are not the self same that were
instituted for the Crowning of ye said Clouis? If I should admit, that in the
common Ceremonies, and which are indifferently used of each one, there might
some abuse creep in, what then? As for the Ceremonies used at the consecration
of our Kings, an act whereto all the world at all times have born like
reverence, and an act both singular and religious, whereof (since Clouis) but
threescore persons have been partakers, successively one after an other: who
will believe that in them there has been any alteration or change? And if it
be so, that the Ceremonies used at the Coronation of the Kings of France, be
the institutions of the primitive Church: how can one give ear to the
Ministers of the pretended Religion seeing those things which they judge
woorst in the Catholic Church, are therein entirely observed.

Let us know a little by what proves they can show us, that the institutions
and Ecclesiastical orders, which at this day are used amongst the Catholics,
be other then they were in the primitive Church: it must follow necessarily
(as I believe) that they shall be the books and writings of the Bishops of the
same Church. But without entering into dispute of ye depth of this matter, where
it is most certain yt they are abused: what will they answer if they were
demanded, how they know that such Books and writings are ancient and not
supposed? What other answer could they make, but that since the time they were
made, the Church has evermore held them for the true writings of the Authors,
of whom they bear the name, and that from hand to hand she has conuaied them
unto us, for such If then to prove the truth of a writing, they think that the
universal and continual allowa^ce for many years, is an argument which no one
ought to gainsay: why do they not hold the self same allowance and universal
approbation, for a most certain proof of the verity, of the ancient
observations and institutions of the Church?

Where have we found that men will admit less abuse and corruption to enter,
then into their belief, and the laws whereon they judge) depends their
salvation? has the Huguenot found the Catholic Church, so ready to receive
those novelties, which he went about to bring in? do they think that although
a Pope would cause us (as it were to morrow) to change our belief, yt we
would therefore believe him? and those things which we our selves will not do,
is it to be presuposed that our predecessors have done them? they were more
religious, and better obseruers of godliness, then we are. Do they not see,
that in the fourmes which only concern the pollicye and government amongst
men, and the Laws made for their contracts and particular affairs: ye
successors do not lightly change yt which has been established (at the first
foundation of the estate) by their predecessors, as it is easy to be noted in
all pollitique estates, but chiefly our France, which at this present day, is
the most ancient Monarchy of all? If then it be apparent that the people
have always been constant, in observing the civil and human laws: what
ought they to have done in the conservation of those, which have been given
the^ for their duty to God, and to the Church?

Is it not known how long time ye Jews have kept without any change, the
fourmes and ceremonies of the old law? Why shall we not say that the
Christians have done the like? The Huguenots Do think, that they have given a
fair show and precious title to their Religeon, when they say they will admit
nothing else, but the simple and pure word of God, as it is contained in the
books of the old and new Testament, and from thence drive out and exclude all
human traditions. Permit me Sir, to demand of them here, if their scope be
not to maintain all kind of men, in the knowledge and belief of God: and if
in conscience they think that this may be always done, by the only hearing of
the word?

As for those that have been so happy, as to hear the lively voice of God, or
of his Disciples: I will grant that they needed no other instruction. But as
human kind has been far distant from that lively and speaking light,
which did ravish the people with their brightness and piercing speech: so
undoubtedly there has been a great decay in zeal and belief: for there is
great reason between the words pronounced by the mouth of God, and those
uttered by the mouth of a man.

Not long after, when this word was but written, some were found, who would
enterpret the same according to their sense and meaning, which was an evident
testimony, that the only preaching of these men, was not a band strong enough,
whereby to restrain the brains of men in godliness: the Church therefore
perceiving this want, brought in ye remedy, framing her self to the weakness
of men, set forth (in time which she thought needful) by visible and ordinary
things, that which the Christians ought to observe and believe, as in a painted
table, to ye end, that the sight and exercise thereof, might fortefie and
represent to them at each time, that which might easily slide from their
soul, being received but by hearing only.

From thence sprang the original, of the fourmes and Ceremonies of our
Catholic Religion. It may be, that in one time or other there have been more
or less. For as at the first establishing and foundation of common wealths,
men made but few laws, and afterward the malice and fraud of men increasing:
it was necessary that many other laws should be made, as obstacles and lets to
many vices and perverse qualities of men. Likewise the Church in her first age,
wherein impiety had less power, had no need at her beginning of so many
ordinances. But as new years brought us new vices: by her institutions she met
with the prograce of our frailty, to stop his passage. Yet for all this, she
has been one self same Church, though the occasions to ordain more or less
ordinances, have been diverse.

The laws and statutes which she was driven to command, to let our negligence
or carelessenes of holy things, or our unbelief: are those which the Huguenots
will fight aagainst. Does it not seem (Sir) that they have reason? They say,
that there are abuses, that may be: but what? is it likely that the Law should
be rejected, because (peradventure) it has some rust over it?

Will it please you (Sir) a little to consider, the birth and forwardnes of
this pretended Religion? mark well these things, which they that have brought in
this, demand to be cut off from our Religion: and you shall find yt they
would annihilate those fourms, whereby the people are holden in the fear of
God, or the deminishing of the credence we have in his omnipotency, or else they
would induce us to ye disobeying of our superiors, or condemn the orders and
pollicye of the Church, or make us less devout, and less charitable one to an
other, or else they would pluck out of our hearts the affection and memory of
our Auncesters, and the honor and reverence of those, whom we judge that God
ought to have better accepted their lives. And afterward regard, what they
will have those men to study, whom they would send into ye world to preach
their doctrine: you see that it is nothing appertaining to divinity, but a
pleasing language, affected, entising, and inuecting, because that science is
contrary to their artificial determinations, but elloquence is proper to
withdraw and seduce. Consider also what Nations have embraced this, and you
shall find that they are such, who are noted of the people to be prompt,
inconsiderate, and loouers of new fa^gled things, as are the Germans,
Flemings and Englishmen, and we also yt are of the North part. And in the
nations more stayed and judicial, as are the Italians and Spaniards, it could
never find an entrance there: where it behooves now a little to judge
without affection, of the manners of the most part of them have received it,
and do follow it. Consider withal the sudden decrease, or rather
annihillating of this Religion: scarsely is she born, but she is destroyed in
the beginni^g: she makes a fair show of her forces, and al at once behold she
is fallen, and brought down to the ground: and to show us her pride in the
fall wherein she is, she boasts that she is victorious: all that remains with
her, and she has not lost, she counts for a gain and victory.

What say they? there are but few years that we were kept prisoners and
persecuted, but now notwithstanding all the battles you have gotten against
us, it is nevertheless free for us to praise publicly our God, and to
reprehend aloud and openly in your ears, the abuses of your Church: is not
this to have vanquished? But what else is the argument of the Jews, when they
do uphold, that the Prophecies of ye coming of Christ is not as yet
accomplished, and yt the Scepter is not as yet taken away from the Tribe of
Judah? They do not consider, that now a days it is no more their Religion that
stands, but their factions in her leagues: so we were driven to agree with
them, as with people that defend their part with Arms.

Their Religion is condemned for such as never was: but the desire to pacify
the estate, and take away the miseries which divisions does bring, is the
cause that those do live in liberty, whom we leave not to hold as guilty.
If with only patience they had overcome those afflictions laid upon them,
there were found some likelihood of yt which they say, that their faith has
been victorious: but since it is by Arms, that little liberty which they
have, is due not to their godlynes but to their swoords, because in an estate
divided in two factions, it is hard that one should so soon get the victory
over the other. This must go by degree and foot by foot: and then they may
perceive what decay their own has had hitherto.

Since then (Sir) that they have tried, how our Kings neither can nor will
forbear and maintain them, neither give them the liberty which they could
wish in this Catholic Realm, because (in so doing) he cannot be King of
France: it seems unto me (Sir) that they avail nothing for themselves, and
do you but very ill service, to dissuade you from reuniting to ye Catholic
church, considering that if it should so happen, that God would call you to
this Crown, they ought with better reason expect more gentle usage at your
hands, then of any other. As touching us, the examples which we see in those
places, where the Hugenotes have the sovereign authority and force: what can
we else expect at their hands, but our whole ruin, if we have a King, who will
suffer him self to be persuaded by the Ministers.

I will conclude with this word Sir, that it is peradventure tolerable to al
other persons, when the feebleness of their souls causes them to go astray
from their duty to God, by the means of men: but this can in no wise be to
you, who have this particular favor, to be issued of the blood of the most
Christian Kings, who hold such a great and high place in Christendo^e, by the
highness they have gotten you, being Catholics: you are at least for this
bound to their memory, not to reject the Religion which they have ever
followed. Set before your eyes the deceassed King your Father, and call into
remembrance, that he always has been ye most assured stay, and faithful
protector of this crown: do you think then yt it shall be honorable for you, to
maintain and fight on that party, against whom so willingly he employed him
self, and lost his life?

FINIS.

