THE FAITH OF THE Church Militant, Most effectualie described in this
exposition of the 84. Psalm, by that reverend Pastor, and public Professor of
Gods word, in the famous university of Haffine in Denmark, NICHOLAS
HEMMINGIVS.

A treatise written as to the instruction of the ignorant in the grounds of
religion, so to the confutation of the Jews, the Turks, Atheists, Papists,
Heretics* and al other adversaries of the truth whatsoever.

Translated out of Latin into English, etc. by THOMAS ROGERS.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton for Andrew Maunsel. ANNO. 1581.

To the right honorable, and virtuous Lady, the Comitisse of Sussex, etc.
Grace and favor both with God and man.
INfinite, and unspeakable are the benefits of our God to us ward, right
honorable, among which his gracious and miraculous revealing of the eternal
truth from time to time, is, as diligently, so gratefully to be recorded. For
many, and those mighty adversaries has it had in all ages. Satan the prince
of darkness in Paradise; Kaine with his posterity before the flood; after
the drowning of the world Cham and his seed until the promise unto Abraham;
from that time until the Law was delivered by Moses, the Ismaelites, the
Chaldeans, the Persians, the Egyptians blemished, and to their powers banished
the same.

In the time of Ahab through the priests of Baal, 1. Kings. 1^. 21. 22. etc.
and the false prophets; in the time of Nebuchad-nezzar through extreme
captivity; 1. King. 22. 6.
and in our Saviors time what through the tyranny of wicked Magistrates, and
through the heresies of ungodly teachers, small tokens of this truth in the
world could be seen of man.

Furthermore, consider we the time after our Saviors death when the Apostles
yet flourished; and the ages after that until this very day, and we shall
find that very fiercely it has been assalted; and is come unto our hands
with no small ado.

For in the Apostles time Simon, Act. 8, 9. 10 etc.
and Elymas sorcerers; false-apostles, and false brethren (whereof some at
Coloss^, Act. 13, 8. 9. etc.
gave out that the traditions of men were necessarily to be observed; that the
superstitious affliction of the body was a religious serving of God; Coloss. 2.
that differences should be set between meats, and drinks, and da^es,
according to the Jewish custom; and that the son of God, Christ, was not the
worker of man's salvation, but that by Angels we have an open access prepared
unto the Father: others at Jerusalem, Acts 15.
taught that circumcision was so behooueful unto salvation, that unless men
were circumcised it was impossible for them to be saved; and that freely, or
by faith alone we are not justified, but by works also; others, at Corinth,
were of opinion that there was no resurrection at al; others, that it is
already past, 1. Cor. 15.
as Hymeneus, and Philetus: and others, (to o^it the ungodly opinions both of
those which inueighed against Magistrates, 2. Tim. 2, 17. 18.
whom Peter and Jude wrote against, and of those which mingled the truth with
vane fables, 2. Pet. 2, 10.
and genealogies, as many did in Asia, and in Crete, Jude, ver. 8.
and of those who thought how such as believed might live as theie would in all
licentiousnes, 1. Tim. 1, 34
for so much as freely without good works they were justified, Tit. 3, 8. 9
which imps of Satan by the Epistle of Jude are worthily consuted, Jude, verse
4,
and finally of Antichrist then arising in his members) utterly denied
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 4. etc.
yea and God too, Jude ver. 4.
as Athe^sts) did what in the^ was to seduce men from this truth.

These being dead, others arose, both in number more ple^tifulie; and for their
abominable errors more hurtfulie to ye Church of Christ. As under the Emperor
Adrianus, the Gnostikes, a pestilent company whereof some were called
Barborians, some Barbolites, some Cod ^ans, some Stratio tikes, some
Phibionites, and some Zacheans; under Antoninus Pius not only the
Valentinians, of whom did spring the N^asinors, the Phenionites, the Setheans,
the Kainites, the Orphites, the Antitactars, and others: but also the
Marcionites, the Cerdomtes, the Eucratites, and Hydroparactites, with the
Seuerians; under Antoninus Verus the Montanistes, the Cataphrygians, the
Artotyrits; under Philip the Ariabans, and Helchesaits, the Nouatians, and
Catharans under Decius; under Gallus the Noetians; Patripassians, Hermogenians,
the Millenaries, and the Nepotians, under Galienus the Samosatenians, under
Probus the Manichies etc, the cursed errors of al which I mind not either for
brevity, or for modesty sake to recite. To conclude, so did the seed of
heresies in a short space of time take root, that Augustine in a certain
place confesses how in his days they were grown unto fourscore and eight
principal, famous, and several sects.

Which enemies to this truth decreased not, but daily more and more forcibly
increased in such wise, that their errors were neither in corners taught, nor
defended by a few, private, and obscure fellows, as many of the former; but
both publicly professed over the whole world, and also stiflie maintained
against al men by the greatest tyrans that ever governed, I mean the Pope, and
the Turk, whereof this by force, and he by fraud, and both most wretchedlie
for these 900. years have desperately addicted themselves to the utter
abolishing of this eternal truth. But al in vane. For as God in times passed
raised up against Kaine, Habel; against Cham, Sem; against the Ismaelites, the
Israelites, Abraham against the Chaldeans; Joseph against the Egyptians;
against the Priests of Baal, Elias; Micheas against the false Prophets; Daniel,
and his fellows against Nebuchad-nezzar, Christ against the Pharisees etc:
Philip and Peter against Simon Magus, Paul against Elymas, the disciples of
Christ against false-apostles, against heretics (to say nothing at this time
of the blessed Martys which unto the death stuck unto this truth) Irenaeus,
Cyril, Tertullian, Augustine, and other Godly fathers, by whose learning,
zeal, and constancy the truth maugre the heads of al adversaries was
maintained: So he has, and daily does stir up his servants to withstand
them.

How the one, D. Chytraeus Ora* de sta^^ Eccles.
namely the Turk, prevails over this truth, not only the manifold
companies of Christians in Grecia, Hoc tempore in Graecia Asia, Africa etc.
Mysia, Bulgaria, Thracia, Russia, Muscouia etc; but also the Patriarchs of
Byzantie; of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Jerusalem, al which are Christians;
and the public service of Christians day by day, in more than twenty temples,
even in the chiefest ci^^e of his empire, at this very instant, al which
countries and persons notwithstanding being tributarie unto the Turks, do
witness.

And how the other, I mean the Pope his holiness does prosper, by the present
state of England, of Scotland, of Germany, France, Denmark, Bohemia, besides
other nations and kingdoms, for all his bloody inquisition in Spain, and
Massacres in France, and murders in Scotland, and wars in the low countries,
and rebellions in Ireland, and conspiracies in England, it is apparent to ye
view of the whole world. Whereby it may be gathered that great is the truth,
and it will prevail.

It is the parts therefore of us which are partakers of this truth, first to
be thankeful unto almighty God for preserving the same from perishing; for
gathering to himself a Church wherein his truth is sounded, and showen from
age to age; and for admitting us into that company, which both in this world
do profess his Name, and in the world to come shall everlastingly extol his
goodness.

And secondly it is our duties by all the gifts and means which God has
imparted upon us to advance, and promote this truth. Which they among others
do worthily that by preaching; but they, as I think, best of al perform,
which by writing publish, and spread-abroad the same, and that not only
because for ye time present they do greatly profit, but especialie for that
they provide both for the instruction, and comfirmation of the posterity to
come. For books will teach, and strengthen, and testify, and consute when men
happily cannot. In which respect we are much beholding to the Prophets, much
to the Apostles, to the Fathers much, and much to the Godly learned of our
age. For by their books and writings we know the truth, which otherwise
smallie, or not so perfectly could be understood.

Of which truth I do now present unto your Honor, noble Comitisse, a most
singular description, drawn out of the pure fountanes of Gods holy word, and
to the overthrow of al adversaries of the same, whether theie be Jews, Turks,
Papists, Atheistes, or whatsoever heretics, written in the Latin tongue by
that learned, and paineful Pastor in the Church of Christ at this day, Nicholas
Hemmingius, public professor of divinity at Haffine a famous University in
Denmark.

Which treatise I have translated into English for these causes. One is, that
the ignorant sort of people may see, how Protestants are not so, as the
Papists give out, at variance among themselves. For this work, with infinite
other good books of foraine writers in our English tongue, does show, that
touching the substance of Religion we vary not, neither will by Gods grace,
though Satan gladly would bring it so to pass.

another is, that it may be known from time to time that the Religion which
all the Protestants in the world do maintain, is not a service of God newly
found-out by Luther, Melancton, Calvin, and others, as the Papists untruly
report; but is very ancient, and grounded altogether upon Gods holy word. For
this truth here described, is builded not upon the weak in ^entions of man,
but upon the holy scriptures, as may easily appear.

The third, that it may be more known, and common then hitherto it has bine.
For this is proper to true Religion, which thing is not proper either to
Popery, or to any sect of heretics, that the more it is known, the more it
is desired; and the more common, the more commended.

The last is, seeing how good Christians do both studiously read, and also
gratefulie accept good Books in our vulgar tongue at this day, to give them an
occasion, when either for the ignorance, negligence, or Non residence of their
Pastors, or for other causes they can not hear ye word preached, to inflame
their zeales by the reading of this Book, which in all respects is so
necessary and singular, as in mine opinion, though there be many good, yet
but few better Books. And that it may be read with more pleasure, and
understood with more ease. I have not only illustrated the same with the
places of Scripture, but also divided the Book into Chapters, the one shows
the integrity of the doctrine, and the other opens the excellency of the
method.

And these my labors I am bold now to publishe under your name, Noble
Comitisse, moved thereunto partly by the good report generalie given of your
Honor, as one which makes no small account both of Christian religion, and of
them, who are Christianlie religious; and partly by that favor which my
self have found at your hands, the which I beseech your goodness, accept well
in worth.

God almighty, even for his sons sake, confirm your Ladieship in that truth
until your lives end, whereof now you are not, neither need to be ashamed;
and grant to your Honor, and to the Right Honorable your husband, both the
perfect felicity of this life to your hearts desire, and in the world to come
those things which he has prepared for such as unfeignedly do love him,
Amen. The fourth of November, Anno 1581.

At your Honors commandment Thomas Rogers.

TO THE HONOrable, and for wisdom, godliness, and virtue, the renowned Lord,
Peter Ox, Lord of Gisselfelde, Master of the Palace both of the King, and also
of the Kingdom of Denmark, etc. his most gracious Lord and worthy Pation,
NICHOLAS HEMMINGIUS, wishes al peace, safety, and prosperity in his godly
enterprises.
HOW great the darkness of man's mind is concerning God, and his providence,
right Honorable, not only the infinite sects in a manner of Philosophers;
but also the lamentable security of very many men, who by their life and
conversation, do show that either they acknowledge no God at al, or think
that God (as it is in Homer) does so dallie-out the time among I know not what
Ethiopians, that he has no leisure to see unto the state of mankind, do
witness. Such is the darkness, and the vanity of men is such, ever since the
fall of our first Parents, and mightily has it been confirmed, partly
through evil education, and partly by the examples of those, who do seem to
excel others both in wisdom and virtue.

This loathsome darkness none other way ca^ be depelled, tha^ by the torch of
god his world. Hitherto keth that question and answer of David; Psalm. 119. 9
Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? Pro. 22. 6.
In taking heed to thy word. Now seeing that as youthis, such is age, as
Solomon says, it follows, that without the word of God which is the only
remedy for wickedness, the whole life of man, is altogether unclean. And
that uncleanness which cleaves in all men, until it be through God his word
washed-awaie, is not so much a bodily, as a spiritual and inward blot,
consisting of many parts. Whereof the first (which is the spring of others)
is theignorance both of the truth and of goodness; and is compared unto gross
darkness, and unto blindness, wherebie the whole soul of man, as it were an
ouglie monster, gropeth in the dark.

The second is, to have an erronius opinion of heavenly matters; and to embrace
and love the same as the most evident truth. As many Philosophers, and
heretics had, who by stiff mainteining opinions touching heavenly mysteries,
rushed-headlong into damnation. Tha^ which nothing could be more lamentable.

The third is, in thought to yield unto wicked affections. For as the mind
is wickedlie informed: So the affection of the mind, raised-vp by sinister
judgment, is carried-awaie into that which is worst.

The fourth is, to consent unto sin: after which ensues an horrible swarm
of al manner wickedness (as Paul in his first chapter unto the Romans disputes)
until man be utterly drowned in everlasting misery.

From these lamentable spots the soul of man is purged by the clear fountanes
of our Savior, Effects of Gods word.
that is by the word of God. Touching the efficacy of which word of God,
Psalm. 19. 7. 8.
David speaks to this effect: The Law of the Lord is undefiled, refreshing
the souls; The testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the
simple; The statutes of the Lord be right, and rejoice the heart; The
commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. This
commendation of Gods word, although it be but brief, if you respect the
words; yet is it very large, if you consider the lessons, and consolations
comprised in the same. Which commendation may of right be opposed against all the furious judgments of Epicures, Politians, Hypocrites, and Sycophantes.
The parts of which commendation are eight, al marvelously discerning between
the word of God, and philosophical or humane doctrines.

The first; says he, The Law of the Lord is undefiled, that is, the word of
God both in it self is pure, as that which proceeds from God himself the
most pure fountane; and also makes those to be pure, who give credit
thereunto. But man's doctrine, seem it never so neat, and so clear, yet is it
not in all respects clean, neither can it make men clean. The Philosophy of
Socrates, so bewtified by Plato, may seem of right before al other
Philosophical doctrines, to be the best. (For it contains very many good
and right sentences concerning God his providence, and end of man:) yet is it
foulie defiled, when Plato by laws allows an unclean community: and by
deed confirms more horrible wickedness, than is of us to be uttered. And
therefore both Socrates and Plato when they endeavor of one side to purge the
soul of man, on the other theie defile the same with an abominable wickedness.
But the word of God, or the sound of the Gospel, as it is in all respects pure:
so it makes the soul of him, who by a lively faith embraces the Gospel,
pure and perfect; it delivers him from erroneous opinions; it replenisheth
him with sound judgment; and by the Spirit of Christ raiseth-vp pure
affections to which when the will does assent the actions both internal and
outward, as most clear rivers from a most pure fountain, do issue-out.

The second, It refreshes the souls, says David. The souls of men are
withered with a most grievous thirst, neither can theie be comforted or
refreshed before theie have drunk of the healthful springes of Israel, which
is the word of the Gospel. For the conscience of sin does evermore augme^t
the thirst, which nothing but the liquor of the Gospel does mitigate or
take-awaie. Of this water the Prophet Zechariah speaks, when he says: And in
yt day shall there waters of life go-out from Jerusalem, Zech. 14, 8.
that is ye word of the gospel which is, that to the soul of man, which the
most fresh and clear water is to him that thirsts. Of this speaks our Lord
in ye fourth of John: whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
Ioh. 4, 14.
shall never be more a thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him
a well of water, springing-vp into everlasting life.

The third, The testimony of the Lord is sure, that is, the word of god is no
deceiteful testimony concerning the will of god to man-ward. For, as the voice
of the law does witness that God without respect both of persons, and of
nations, will throw together with the devils his enemies, al obstinate and
impenite^t sinners into everlasting darkness, and torments: So the voice of the
gospel does testify how God, for his Sons sake, will receive al men, be theie
never so egregious sinners, into his favor again, that the^e may be nu^bred
among the heirs of eternal blessedness, if so be that they believe the gospel,
and with a lively faith rest upon the Son of God, who has given himself a
ra^some for the sins of the world. In respect of this unchangeable rule of God
his will commended to us in his word, the word of God is caled, Sure, and the
word of the gospel, Ioh. 8, 32.
Truth; as when it is said, The truth shall make you free. For the gospel, which
is the word of truth, does offer Christ the deliverer, of whom it is written,
36.
If ye son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed The 4. it gives wisdom
unto the simple. The wise me^ of this world know nothing of God his will as they
should; they understand not thoroughly his works, which are, to recite the
chief, his wisdom in creating of man; his justice in the fall of man; his
mercy in repairing of man, his merciful goodness in converting of a sinner;
theie are ignorant of the difference between the houshoulde of God and other
sects; theie are ignorant of the way both to avoid eternal misery, and to
obtain everlasting happiness; and they be ignorant of the manner how to serve
God, which for the most part does consist in the fear of God, whose wisdom
is infinite. But even simple ones through the sound of the gospel attain this
wisdom: whereas the greatest, and most mighty of the world do miserably
overthrow themselves by their self wisdom. For the word of the Lord spoken
by the Prophet Iremiah shall stand for ever: Iere. 8. 9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

The fifte, The statuts of the Lord be right. This saying is to be opposed
against the destinies fained out of Zeno his schole. For it gives to
understand how God is no accepter of persons, bu^ indifferent to al according
to the rule of his decree. He will doubtless the salvation of al men, but
through the knowledge of the truth. As it is written, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
(God) he will have al men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the
truth. He will also that al impenitent persons, without respect of any, shall
utterly perish.

The sixth, They rejoice the heart. This effect of the Gospel is the chiefest
good thing which can betide mankind in this life. No doctrine of man can tell
how to heal the wounds of conscience. For he which is guilty in his mind of
any grievous crime carries about with him day and night a witness and an
accusing conscience, which can be helped by no Philosophy at al. But the
sound only of the gospel it is that applies the good plaster, and the most
present remedy to the wounded conscience while it testifies how Christ died
for our sins, Romans 4, 25.
and is risen-againe for our justification; Romans 10, 4.
how Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that
believes; Mat. 11, 28.
And how Christ calls those which labor unto himself, as unto the
Physician, to which he promises help, and that gratis. For he as Augustine
both godly and rightly does say, has made our offenses his offenses, that
his righteousness might be our righteousness. So that when our consciences be
sprinkeled with the blood of Christ, as theie are when we believe in him, then
are theie purified, Psalm, 84. ^.
whereof a wonderful joy of heart does ensue. that with David we may say,
Mine heart and my flesh do rejoice in the living God.

The seventh, The commandment of the Lord is pure. This is to be opposed to
the Papists, who by certain devilish subtilties, do entangle the word of
God, therebie to terrify men from the reading of the same. They say the
letter, that is, as they falselie expound it, the literal or gra^matical sense,
whereas for all that, it is most true, does kill; and the spirit that is the
allegorical interpretation approved of the Pope, does quicken. But the holy
Ghost here by David does affirm the contrary, while it pronou^ceth the word
of God to be clear, bright, and pure: which indeed is very true as touching
those things belonging unto the foundation of Christianity, and be altogether
necessary unto salvation.

The eight, It gives light unto the eyes. This decareth how ma^s nature
without the word of God inlightning is altogether blind, as that which
carrieth-about with it darkness, to wit doubting of God, carnal security,
distrust, false prayer of the mind doubting, and flieng from the Lord with
infinite other motions swaruing from the law of God. But the world perceives
not this blindness, but rather has it in admiration, and price for the small
shadow of outward discipline whereas the Church admonished by the voice of God
his word, does acknowledge and bewail her offenses, and beggeth of God new
light, righteousness, and life. In this prayer and meditation of the Gospel,
the eyes of the mind be more and more enlightened, so that the Son of
righteousness it self, even Christ does gloriously arise in their hearts;
by whose brightness we are led from endelesse misery unto eternal life and
blesseenesse. David casting an eye unto this most comfortable fruit of God his
word, not without good cause cried-out in this very Psalm on this wise: Psa.
19, 10.
More to be desired (is the Law of God) than gold, yea than much fine gold;
Sweeter also than honey, and the honey comb. Psa. 119, 14
And in an other Psalm, I have had as great delight in the way of thie
testimonies, as in all riches. Here he runs feeling the burden of his sins,
that he may be unloaded of them, as it is in a certain Psalm, Out of the
deep place have I called unto thee, Psa. 130, 1.
o Lord, etc. Hereunto in his troubles he betaketh himself, according unto
this sentence, In mine affliction it is my comfort, that this word does
quicken me. In prosperity also he flies here unto: Psa. 119, 32
I will run, says he, the way of thie commandments, when thou shall enlarge
mine heart. At his need it counsaileth him, Psa. 119, 24
as in these words, Thie testimonies are my delight and my counsailers; In
matters of great importance with Kings, and mighty men of the world, it
ministers wisdom unto him, so says David; Psa. 119, 46
I will speak of thie testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed. Aainst
the stumbling block of the cross, it strengthens him from falling, when he
considers the prosperity of the ungodly; My feet were almost gone; Psalm.
73, 2. 3. 16. 17. 18.
my steps had welneere slipte. For I freated at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of ye wicked etc. Then thought I to know this, but it was too
paineful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I
their end. Surely thou have set them in slipperie places, and castest them
down into desolation. At the point of death he seeks life from thence, Psa.
119, 93*
as witness these words, I will never forget thie precepts; for by them thou
haste quickened me. Psa. 119, 89
O Lord, thi^e word endures for ever in heaven. Because life and happiness
promised by the word, shall endure for ever. To be brief, out of this word
David learneth the manner both how to escape everlasting misery, and also to
obtain the eternal felicity and blessedness, whereunto man at the first was
created, and afterward redeemed by Christ.

Seeing now the purity, the necessity, the commodity, the glory, and the
fruit of God his word is so great, and so sweet, that it can join us to God,
the sovereign good thing, in whom, we shall everlastingly be blessed, at what
time as we have atteined the end of our condition; doubtless theie highly
are to be commended which bestow a portion of their goods and riches to the
maintenance and propagation of Gods word in the Church. For theie do well
consider that this end to al and every man according to his condition and
state, is proposed, namely to advance the glory of God. Which thing theie
before others, do best accomplish, who study to uphold the ministry of the
word in schools, and temples. Now what diligence you, noble Sir, have
bestowed on this behalf, many do know and theie confess, whom at this
day you liberally bring-vp both in this University, and also in other
foreign schools, to the end that in these Churches of Denmark there may
be fit ministers from time to time, which may sounde-foorth the pure doctrine
of the Gospel. And assuredly this is truly to love our country, not only
while we live to adorn the same: but after we are dead also to leave it the
better to our posterity. Wise me^ do greatly commend the Attike oath, in
which, these words among other were, I will fight both for religious, and for
profane causes, and that alone and with others; and will leave my country not
the worser; but the better and more ample to the posterity. How much more are
we bound so to do, that are counted the Citizens of the Church of Christ,
the most noble country of the righteous, whose honor is more glorious, than
was that of Athens, which the Turks now possess. And therefore a far
greater glory it is to leave this most worthy country, I mean the Church of
God, not the worser, but the better, and amplified to posterities: which theie
do, who by their wealth do maintain, and promote the studies of true
doctrine, and of good arts. Such an endeavor was in David, when in a song he
said how he loved his country because of the Church that was therein. Because
of the house of the Lord, Psa. 122, 9.
says he, I will procure thy wealth. This house which is the Church of God, he
preferred before the most glorious Palaties of earthly Princes, Psalm. 84, 10
when he said, A day in thie courts is better then a thousand other-where. I
had rather be a doore-keeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the
Tabernacles of wickedness. Which Psalm, whereout these words are taken,
because it contains a notable commendatio^ of God his Church, stirreth-vp
unto the love of the word; lays before our eyes the benifites; depainteth
the glory of the Church; and shows the scope proponed thereunto, which is
eternal blessedness, I thought good the last year publicly in our school
to expound the same, therebie to inuit the youth unto the love, reading, and
meditating of the heavenly word, which is as a burning torch to guide us in
this darkness into the wonderful light of God, and unto eternal life.

Now the cause that imboldened me to dedicate this mine Enarration, written the
year immediately past upon the 84. Psalm, unto your Honor, was not only
the great and singular good will you bear toward learning and littered men
generalie, which I desire that the whole world should know; but also your
benefits conferred upon me and mine particularly, for which I thought good to
give some token of a grateful mind to your Honor. The which I earnestly
beseech you, to accept in in good part. If the quantity of our work be only
respected, I know well it is far unmeet for your Magnificence: but if the
mind of the giver, and the argument of the matter be waied, I think no man
will find fault with me for this my dedication. Wherefore, regard these
things, my good Lord, and as hitherto I have had, so hereafter let me not want
your favor; and for my self I will endeavor to be worthy of the same.

Thus fare you well both in mind and body, together with your wise the L. Metta
Rosenkra^tz that most noble and chaste woman; daughter of the right honorable
Sir Olaus Rosenkrantz Knight, Lord of Wallo, sometime a most prudent Senator,
of this Kingdom of Denmark, a man both for justice, uprightness,
liberality, clemency, humanity, courtesy, and many more virtues
everlastingly as to be remembered, so to be praised.

From our study this 25. of March, in the year 1569. Which from the creation
of the world is the 5539. year, wherebie it is manifest that we are fallen
into the last part of the age of the world, signified by the sixte day of
the creation of things. For seeing six thousand years, wherbie the worlds
age, according unto the tradition of the house of Elias, is measured, do
answer to six days of the creation (for a thousand years before God are as
one day, 2. Pet. 3, ^*
) and of the sixth thousand 539. years be passed-awaie; it is evident that we
are lighten into the afternoon tide of the last day of the world. Which
time doubtless ought of right to put us in mind of greater watchfulnes,
especialie seeing that after the most bright Sun of the glorious Gospel, (and
that at the very noone of the last day of this world, at which time the
doctrine of the Church was by Luther, Philip, and other godly and learned men,
purged) the night and darkness is nigh at hand. And therefore earnestly from
the heart with the disciples of the Lord let us pray, The night does come,
forsake us not,
o Christ, we humbly pray;
Ne suffer thou thie glorious light
To darken, or decaie.


And listen we unto the Prophet, Iere. 13, 16.
which says, Give glory to the Lord your God before he bring darkness, and
ere ever your feet stumble in the dark mountains.

The Lord keep us in true godliness, that at the length that long wished
Sabbath which we lookefor, may be seen of us unto our welfare, bliss, and
everlasting rest, through Christ our only mediator, to whom with the Father,
and the holy spirit be al praise, honor, and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

AN ANTITHESIS Between the vane glory of the world, and the true glory of
the faithful.
CAPNION.
The worldly pomp by proof I find
Does fleet and come like snow by wind.
Why trust ye then in vanity?
HEMMINGIUS.
The godly joy does aie endure,
And as the Liban tree is sure.
Then trust we in the Deity.
PSALM 84. 1 O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles!

2 My soul longs, yea, and faints for the courts of the Lord; mine heart,
and my flesh have reioiced in the living God.

3 For the sparowe has found an house; and the swallowe a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young: even thine altars, o Lord of hosts, my King,
and my God.

4 Blessed are they which dwell in thine house, evermore they will praise thee.

5 Blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee, and in whose heart be thy
ways.

6 Who goes by the vale of tears, and diggeth a well: doubtless with blessings
shall the teacher be crowned.

7 Theie go from strength to strength, that God in Zion may appear.

8 O Lord God of hosts hear my prayer: hearken, o God of Jacob.

9 Behold, o God our protector; and look upon the face of thine Anointed.

10 For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand else where: I had rather
be of no reputation in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of
the ungodly.

11 Because the Lord God is a sun, and shield: the Lord will give grace and
glory: and no good thing will he deprive them of, which walk innocentlie.

12 O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man which trusts in thee.


CHAP. 1.
The argument, disposition, occasion, and auctor of this 84. Psalm.
THis Psalm contains a singular commendation of the Church of God; The
argument.
the which, as God most dearly does love the same, so for her part, she
depends upon him alone; him she praises, confesses, and calleth-vpon. That
she may enjoy him is al her desire. In him she is most highly blessed and
happy.

Of this Psalm there may be made four parts, The disposition.
every of which contains many good

Moreover, The occasion.
the occasion why this psalm was written, may seem to be the banishment of
David, through the persecution of his own son Absalon. The which exile or
banishment was one of those ten plagues, whereby the adultery, and murder
which David committed, Punishments of David.
was punished. For as in that one offense of David many sins were couched: so
was it punished not with one, 2. Sam. 13, 14.
but with didiuers plagues: As namely, 1, with the loss of the holy spirit;
2. Sam. 13, 28. 29.
2, with a most grievous wound of conscience; 3, with the deflouring of Thamar
his daughter, 2. Sam. 15, 1* 2. 3. and
by his own son Amnon, 4: 5, with the rebellion of Absalon his son; 6,
with double banishment, from his kingdom, and from the Church; 7, with
pollution of holy Matrones his wives; 2. Sam. 15, 14. 15. 16. and
8, with disobedience of his subjects; 9, with a woeful end of his son; 10,
and with infamy. With these plagues was David's reuolting from God; 2. Sam. 16,
21. 22.
yelding to Satan Gods enemy; betraying of Gods army; 2. Sam. 15, 4. 5. 6.
murdering of an innocent subject; rauishing; defiling of him self; abusing
of an others body, with the shipwreck of a good conscience; dissembling;
giving of offense; 2. Sam. 18, 9. 10.
and exercising of cruelty in his office committed to him of God, most
righteouslie punished.

Now David being in banishment, and having no power with other good men at the
high feast to come unto ye tabernacle, wherein the Ark of the Lord was, and
there to pray, and offer sacrifice; with a troubled and pensive heart he
calls into mind the difference between the Church, wherein God publikelie
is worshipped, and called-vpon, and other companies of men what so ever without
the fear of God: and withal by a prophetical spirit is carried more aloft into
the contemplation of the Church of Christ under the New testament, a certain
shadow whereof was the old tabernacle, as the Epistle unto the Hebrews does
witness. In this exile and in this cogitation enlightened with ye spirit of
prophecy he is carried by great force of mind, both into admiration of ye
felicity of ye true Church (wherein God freely is called-vpon, and worshipped)
and also into consideration of his own wretchedness, as one to whom there
was no entrance into the Church of God, and company of good men. As if any of
us lived among the Turks, or other profane people, he would out of doubt more
deeply think upon the felicity of the true Church, and also deem them of
all others to be most happy, which might at certain, and appointed times,
come with other good men unto the hearing of Gods word, unto prayer, and to the
receiving of the sacraments.

Wherefore, being admonished by the example of David, a banished man for his
wickedness, let us learn to be more circumspect through an others harm; let
us beware that we shut not our selves from the gathering together of the
Saints by our sins: by earnest and unfeigned repentance turn we away the
wrath of God, which warlike tumults, dissension in religion, and infinite
wickedness reigning every where, does plainly show l^angeth-ouer our
necks. Two special things to be considered in this Psalm.


So often then as we read this Psalm, let us call these two things into mind,
first, the felicity of the Church, wherein the word is purely preached, and
God syncerelie worshipped; and then the miserable case of such as may not with
other good men glorify God in the congregation of the Saints. Auctour of this
Psalm.


Last of all, whether this place be written by David him self, and so
delivered to the sons of Korah to be song; or whether the sons of Korah in
the name of David did write, and sing the same, as the Hebrews are uncertain
thereof: so leave we the same in doubt. For it is enough, for us to acknowledge
the spirit of Christ, to be the true auctor thereof, and to be written for our
instruction, and consolation.

CHAP. 2.
The principal points contained in the first part of this Psalm.
THE first part of this Psalm, comprehended in the four first verses,
distinguishes the true Church from other companies of men; shows whence it
springs; how dearly God loves the same; also how entirely on the
otherside it loves God; where it may be sought; what marks it has; how
happy it is; with what service it worshippeth God; and finalie how it shall
continue everlastingly, and be immortal.

Now in order let us consider the verses of this part; and seueralie unfold,
which confusedly we have noted.

CHAP. 3.
1. The sum of the first verse of this Psalm; 2. who is the Lord of hosts;
3. what is his army, and victory.
Verse. 1. O LORD OF HOSTS, HOW AMIABLE ARE THY TABERNACLES!
IN these words the Psalmist principalie does show, Sum of the first verse.
both which is the true Church; and whence it is; and how precious in the sight
of God. The true Church is yt, whose maker is the Lord of hosts, the which he
loves most entirely. But for the better discoursing of al these points, we
are in order to open which is mentioned in this place. Then, for so

Who then is the Lord of hosts? The Lord of hosts who;
why does he call him self the Lord of hosts? And what is the use of this
matter being known? Out of certain places of the Scripture we will gather who
is the Lord of hosts, whereof the Psalmist here makes mention. In the second
of Samuel it is said, 2. Sam. 5, 10*
David prospered and grew, for the Lord of hosts was with him. Psalm. 59, 5.
And Psalm 59. Even thou, O Lord God of hosts. These two testimonies do
show, if we mark the Hebrew text, The whole Trinity the Lord of hosts.
how that God which is one in essence, and three in persons, is the Lord of
hosts. For in the former place, the proper name of God taken from his essence,
namely Jehovah, is put; in the latter the plural number Elohim, whereby a
plurality of persons, as the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, is
signified. But that we should not think there be any more persons than three,
the Prophet Esaiah teaches us, when he says, Isa. 6, 2. 3.
And the Seraphims cried one to an other, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of hosts.

So that this title is proper to the whole Trinity. Notwithstanding, because
the second person in the Godhead, namely ye everlasting word, or Son of God,
was sent to break the strength of Satan, and for ye redemption of mankind,
Our Savior Christ is the Lord of hosts.
this great title is given to him in many places; as in the 24. Psalm, Who is
this King of glory? The Lord of hosts is the King of glory. Here doubtless
Christ, Psalm. 24. 10.
a figure of whom was the arc of the covenant, is signified to be that
glorious King. And in the Prophet Esaiah, the Lord of hosts is said to dwell
in Zion, Isa. 8, 8.
which certainly must be understood of Christ.

Now, Why our savior Christ is called the Lord of hosts.
the Scripture ascribes this glorious name to Christ, because he is the chief
captain in the city of God against the city of Satan, that is, in the Church
against the world, and the devil. For he alone is, as the most mighty, so the
chiefest head, and captain of al armies both celestial and earthly. And
therefore in the forementioned psalm he is called, Psalm. 24, 8.
The Lord mighty in battle. For he is not idle, but fights courageously;
he yields not, but overcomes; he flees not, but triumphs; and that not
for his own cause, but for the whole city of God. And therefore in the 72.
psalm, the chiefest honor is ascribed to him, Psalm. 72, 19.
Blessed be his glorious Name for ever; and let all the earth be filled with his
glory. Yet gathers he an host to him self, not because he is weak of him
self, and of small power: but for that he will communicate his own glory after
a sort with his soldiers. The s^ldiers of Christ in his spiritual warfare.


But what be those armies? In the first place and order are placed those
celestial spirits, which, in respect of their service which they do to their
King, 1. The 1. order of heaue^lie warriars.
are called Angels. For they are al ministering spirits (says Paul) for their
sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1, 14.
Because while this world does last there shall be Angels, attending upon the
business of the kingdom of Christ; which notwithstanding is not the end of
their nature, but a temporal service: But after the general judgment with the
elect of God, having attained a perfect conquest, they shall everlastingly
triumph-together. The number, and office of those Angels no man has more
plainly expressed, than Daniel did, who beheld them, Dan. 7, 10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood
before him.

The fight, and victory which the Lord of hosts and his Angels have got, is
described in the Revelation on this wise: Revel. 12, 7.
Michael, and his angels fought against the dracon, and the dracon fought, 8.
and his angels. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any
more in heaven. And the great dracon that old serpent, 9.
called the devil and satan, was cast out, which deceives all the world: he was
even cast into the earth, and his angels were cast-out with him. 10.
Then I heard a loud voice, saying, Now is salvation in heaven, and strength
and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of
our brethren is cast-downe, which accuses them before our God day and night.
11.
But they over come him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony.

Touching Michael, Michael what signifies.
which is said in this place to be the captain of the war, it is the Son
of God our Lord Jesus Christ, as mai^ be gathered both out of Daniel, and also
from the etymology of the name. For Michael is as much, as Who is like God?
The Angels therefore following the conduction and standard of Michael, that is
the Lord of hosts, are celestial spirits.

In the second order of these armies, 2. Order of spiritual soldiers.
are godly teachers, waging battle with the kingdom of the dracon, that is,
of the devil, and with his angels, yt is, with defendors of idols, and
blasphemies. Such in times passed were Moses, Joseph, Daniel, the Prophets, and
the Apostles; and many godly Ministers of the word in the Church afterward.
Whose weapons are not carnal, but spiritual. For so does Paul say, 2. Cor. 10,
3. 4. 5.
We do not war after the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare be not carnal,
but mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations,
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, Ministers
weapons.
that is, the weapons of godly teachers in the Church, be the very word of
God; the power of the holy Ghost in the word; and earnest prayer.

In the third order of the Lords host be godly hearers of the word, 3. Order
of spiritual soldiers.
who for Gods glory, and their own salvation fight against the flesh, sin,
the world, and the devil. Their war, and weapons in the Epistles unto the
Ephesians be described on this wise: Ephesians. 6, 12,
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, and against the worldly governors, the princes of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in the hie places. 13.
For this cause take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day, and having finished al things, 14.
stand fast. Stand therefore, and your loins gird about with verity, and
having on the breast plate of righteousness, 15.
And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above al take
the shield of faith, 16.
wherewithal ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, 17.
and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, 18.
which is the word of God. And pray alwaie with all manner prayer and
supplication in the spirit. 1. Tim. 1, 18. 19.
Or in fewer words, as Paul in an other place writes, Fight a good fight,
having faith, and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as
concerning faith, have made shipwreck.

In the fourth place be every particular man in his vocation. 4. order of
spiritual soldiers.
Exodus 38. it is said, that the women did assemble, Exodus 38, 8.
and came together at the door of the Tabernacle, that is, they did those
things which were enioined them to do. Every man therefore fights under the
banner of Christ, when stoutly in ye fear of God he does those things, which
in respect of his calling, he is bound to do. Then both teachers, and hearers
also be the good soldiers of the Lord, when they do their duties godly, and
diligently. After which sort we may judge of all other callings, warranted by
the word of God.

Hereunto, 5. order of celestial soldiers.
if you think good, you may ad a fifth order, namely ye celestial army, or
host, as the Sun, Moon, and the Stars: the which are therefore said to be
the host of the captain Christ, because, after their facion, they reprove
darkness, declare the glory of Christ, and provoke both Angels, and men, by
their example as it were, to glorify God evermore.

Now of those things which hitherto we have spoken of ye Lord of hosts; The
use of al contained in this chapter.
of his fight; armies, and victory, there is a double use. For as they
confirm, comfort, and encourage the godly fighting under Christ the captain:
so do they throw down, terrefie, and confound the wicked. Wherefore being
admonished, let us join our selves through faith and obedience to Christ the
captain, and with true purity of mind to these unspotted spirits, being
thoroughlie persuaded, that he which fights an honest fight in faith and a
good conscience, 1. Tim. 1, 18
shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory, which Christ our Lord,
capitane, and champion has promised to us. For as true victory consists in
the blood of the Lamb, and word of the testimony: so they who are sprinkled
with this blood, which is then done when we believe in Christ according to the
word of the testimony, shall truly obtain victory.

CHAP. 4.
1. Against those which will be counted, and yet are not the true Church; 2.
particularly against the Jews, that what soever things were written of the
Messiah by Moses, and the Prophets, are fulfilled in Christ.
Now, for so much as many assemblies of men usurp ye title of the Church
(for that was it which we proposed in ye second place Above. chap. 3. page 9
) we are diligently to consider, who be they which will needs be called, and
yet be not the Church; and also which is the true Church of God: that al other
congregations avoided, we may join our selves to the true Church.

The Jews supposing the Messiah, The Jews.
whom as yet al in vain they look for to pertain unto them alone, do
proudly contemn al other congregations, and hoast-abroad how they are the
true Church of God.

The Mahomets, The Turks.
or Turks, because their dominion is very great which they have in the world,
challenge the name of the Church to them selves, and think that none but they
are ye Church. The Muscouites.
The Muscouites likewise brag that they are the Church. The Pope of Rome and
his favorers defend with fire and sword, Papists.
how the Catholic Church is with them. Epicures they pass for no religion,
Epicures.
but that which serves for their pleasure, and idleness.

Between many Jews and us there is great controversy about the Messiah, Of
the Messiah Christ the Savior of the world.
of whom who so conceiueth amiss, without al doubt he is not of the true
Church, but under the kingdom of Satan. We for our parts having learned the
same out of the word of God, do acknowledge and confess Jesus the son of
Marie the virgin, borne at Bethlehem a city of David, according to the
foresaiengs of the Prophets, in the years after the worlds creation 3962.
Augustus the Emperor then reigning, and afterward put to death under Pontius
Pilate, this Jesus, I say, we confess to be the true Messiah, to be very God
and very man, the true mediator between God and man, and the only Savior of
al mankind, in which respects we serve him, and worship him.

This Jesus did many Jews both acknowledge and worship, at such time as he
lived in this world, Josephus lib. 18. cap. 4.
which thing Josephus does testify in these words: Then lived Jesus, a wise
man, if yet we may call him a mere man without sin, he was a worker of
strange miracles, and a teacher of those which gladly do receive the truth, and
had many followers, as well Jews as Gentiles. This Christ was he, whom
notwithstanding that Pilate had judged him to the cross, being accused by the
chief of our nation, yet ceased they not to love him, who from the beginning
had so done. For the third day he appeared quick unto them, in so much that
by the inspiration of God they foretold this, and other things of him, and
even til this day the stock of Christians, so called of him, decaieth not.
But very many Jews as at that time, so now, even of mere envy, do not
acknowledge as we do, this Jesus to be the Messiah. Opinions of Christ.
Of which some do utterly deny that the Messiah is yet come; others co^uicted
by the scriptures, and prophets, about the time of the coming of the Messiah,
do in deed confess that the Messiah is come, and was borne under Herod: yet
(say they) he is hid for the sins of the people, and that, as some report,
in Zion with the Angels; as others beyond the Caspion mountains; and as
others, that he goes a begging about the world, and shall manifest himself, at
the pleasure of God. For seeing so many prophecies of the Prophets do agree
together upon that time, the learneder sort of the Jews of that age were
thoroughly persuaded that in their time the Messiah should come. Whereof it
came to pass, that many by occasion of the time professed themselves to be
the Messiah, when before that time no man went about the same. Judas the
Galilean. Joseph Benzara.
Among which was one Judas the Galilean, Joseph Benzara, who was bold under the
name of the Messiah, to rebel against Adrian the Emperor, whom very many
Jews did follow: but the end declared his vanity. Barcozibas.
So was one Barcozibas a skillful captain, by reason of his often victories,
supposed to be the Messiah. In which opinion many stood a long while, til at
last he also was punished by Adrian for his wickedness. I ouerslip those whom
Foelix the governor of Judea punished. For it was a common thing at that time,
the which the Prophets assigned to the birth of Christ, to seduce the people,
especialy, seeing they believed the Messiah should come for none other intent,
than by force of arms to bring other nations under his subjection. By which
means they should abound in all kind of pleasures, and store of al things, the
Israelites then living being brought again into their native and promised
country.

Seeing now the Jews have so gross an opinion concerning the end of the
coming of the Messiah, they do nothing differ from the very swine, and Lions:
whereof those delight to wallowe in the mire of filthy lust: and these
mightily to suppress other beasts, that theie alone may seem to bear the
swaie. Whose pestilent error is condemned through-out the whole Scripture. For
the whole scripture does testify how the Messiah shall appear, not to wage
battle with men, like some Hercules, or great Alexander: but, according to the
first promise, to set-vpon the old serpent; to abolish sin and death; to
repair the image of God in man, which through sin was putout; and to reward
his own, that is, the faithful with everlasting righteousness, and
immortality, that so, being joined to God in perfect love, theie might be
happy and blessed: wherein the true and proper end of man doetli consist.

But, the better to arm our selves against the deceiptfull Jews, obey we the
words of our Lord Christ, saying, John. 5, 3^
Search the Scriptures, there are they which testify of me. And Peter says,
2. Pet. 1. 19.
We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place.

But that we may the more soundly and substantially refel the Jewish error,
let us include the whole matter within the compass of one argument, on this
four me:

He alone without all controversy, Mayor.
of certain truth, yea, and by the confession of all men is the true and only
Messiah, to whom all the prophecies of the Prophets do point; and to whom
properly whatsoever by Moses and other holy Prophets of God has been
foretold of the Messiah, does agree.

But the prophecies of all the Prophets do point unto Jesus the son of Marie
the virgin; Minor.
and to this Jesus alone, whatsoever by Moses and other holy Prophets has
been foretold of the Messiah, does agree.

Therefore none but Jesus the son of the virgin Marie, Conclusion.
is the true and only Messiah.

The Mayor none will deny. The Minor is in controversy between us and the
Jews; which if we once shall prove, both the error of the Jews will be
manifest, and our faith confirmed.

And seeing, as Augustine says, The strength of religion consists in this,
how al things which fel-out in Christ, have been foretold, we will show in
few words, how all the oracles of the Prophets do agree to Jesus Christ
alone, and to none other: and then afterward we purpose to refute such things
as the blinded Jews do object unto us.

Jesus Christ in the reign of Augustus the Emperor was borne of the unspotted
virgin, in Bethlehem a city of David. Here (as Luke records) both the time,
the place, the mother, and the stock of the Messiah borne, are declared; and
all these do answer unto the fore-saiengs of the Prophets.

The time was signified by Iaakob the patriarch, The time of Christ his birth
foretold by Jacob the Patriarch: and by Daniel the prophet.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his
feet, until Siloh come, and the people shall be gathered unto him. Furthermore,
Daniel in his 9. Chapter says: Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people,
and upon thine holy city, to finish the wickedness, Genesis 49, 10.
and to seal up the sins, Dan. 9, 24.
and to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and
to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. 25.
Know therefore and understand, that from the going-foorth of the commandment
to bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the prince,
shall be seven weeks, and three score and two weeks, and the street shall be
built again, and the wall even a troublous time. And after threescore and two
weeks, 26.
shall Messiah be slain; and his people that will deny him, shall not be at al.
27.
And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week; and in the mids
of the week, he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.

This prophecy of Daniel is very notable, which most evidently puts the
very time of the coming of Messiah before our eyes. One week does comprehend
seven years. Therefore 69. make 489. years. For so many years there came
between the going-out of the word touching the building-againe of Jerusalem
until the Baptism of Christ. Then in the middle of the week Christ both
preached, and was crucified. Then, about 40. years afterward, followed the
utter abrogation of Moses government according to the words of the Prophet.
The computation whereof read in the commentaries of Philip Melancton upon
Daniel, in Functius, and in Galatine.

Bethlehem, The place.
the place where Christ was borne, Isai. 5. 2.
was long before pointed at by the Prophet Micah. And thou Bethlehem Ephrathah
art little to be among the thousands of Judah: yet of thee shall he come forth
unto me, that shall be the ruler in Israel, whose goinges forth have bin from
the beginning and from everlasting.

That he should be borne of a virgin, The mother Isai. 7, 14.
Isaiah did foretell, when he said, The Lord himself will give you a sign.
Behold, the Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and she shall call his name
Immanuel. Ier. 31, 22.
And Jeremiah, The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall
compass a man, That is, Marie the virgin shall compass Christ perfect for
wisdom in her virgins womb. That which Isaiah calls a sign, is to
Jeremiah a new thing. For it was an uncouth thing for a virgin to bear a
child.

The stock whereof he should be borne was signified in that they went unto
Bethlehem to be tasked. The stock, or kindred of Christ.
For every man went into his own city. Seeing then Joseph, and Marie went
into a city of David, he showed how they were of David's kindred. For so it was
promised to David, that of his seed Christ should be borne. Psalm. 132. 11.
Of the fruit of thi^ body, will I set upon thie throne.

Christ being borne, Wisemen.
wisemen coming from out of Persea, brought with them Gold, Frankincense, and
mirthe, according to the prophecy of Esaiah, Isai. 60, 6.
From Sheba theie shall come, they shall bring gold, and incense, and show
forth the praises of the Lord.

Through the direction of a star the wisemen came unto the place where Marie
the mother, and Joseph with the child Jesus were: of which star Balaam in
the Book of Numbers long before prophesied, Number b. 24. 17.
There shall come a star of Iaakob, and a scepter shall rise of Israel. It is
very likely the wisemen knew this prophecy, and seeing the star, thought
how he was come whom it figured.

The child ye eight day was circumcised. Circumcision of Christ.
For his will was to be under the Law, yt he might redeem such as were under ye
law; and was called Jesus, which signifies a Savior. Wherbie the office of
the Messiah is declared, as by Immanuell both his divine and humane nature. The
name and type whereof we see went before in Joshua the son of Nun. For as
Joshua the son of Nun brought the Jews into the corporal and temporal land
of promise: so Jesus Christ, the true Joshua, that is the Savior, shall bring
all the godly into that eternal and heavenly country, that the truth may
answer to the shadow.

After 40. days he was offered in the temple, Hag. 2, 8.
as Haggaie had promised, And the desire of al nations shall come, and I will fill
this house with glory, 10.
says the Lord of hosts. The glory of this last house shall be greater than
the first. Simeon perceived the event to answer unto this prophecy, Luke 2, 32.
when he said, A light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel.

The child was carried by his parents away into Egypt, Flight into Egypt.
the better to avoid ye cruelty of Herod, where he continued until the death
of Herod; yt as the child-hod of corporal Israel, that is, of ye people of
Israel borne there, was consumed in Egypt, so the spiritual Israel might be
spent. And as the corporal Israel was caled out of Egypt unto the land of their
bodily freedom: so the spiritual Israel might be called unto the liberty of
the mind. In Hosea the Prophet it is thus written, Hos. 11, 1.
When Israel was a child then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt.
If this now be spoken of the true Israel, he is Christ: if meant of the
carnal, it is a figure, having the force of a Prophet. Hitherto that also of
Isaiah belongs, Isa. 16, 1.
Send a Lamb to the ruler of the world from the rock of the wilderness, unto
the mountain of the daughter Zion.

Jesus and his parents being returned, Christ a Nazaris.
dwelt with them in Nazaret of Galile. Whereof he was called a Nazareth. Wherein
he fulfilled the figure of Samson: Samson a figure of Christ.
which Samson both by his life and deeds, did represent our Savior Christ to
ye Jews. Hence ye Angel of the Lord being sent unto his parents before he was
borne, said, Judges 13, 5
he should be a Nazarit unto the lord. And in Isaiah, Isai. 11, 1.
There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow
out of his roots. So that the Lord would have him dwell in Nazareth, that we
might understand how he was the true Nazar, or the most holy and righteous
Nazarite, the flower and seed of David, which sanctifies the faithful.

Being twelve years of age at the feast of ye Passover, he with Marie and
Joseph ascended unto Jerusalem, sat among the Doctors, whom he heard teaching,
and proposed questions to them, in so much that such as heard him, marueiled
much at his wisdom, and answers. Here would ye Messiah being yet in his
childhood, spread abroad some beams of his divinity, thereby that the Jews
both might conjecture, that in him there lurked something more than men
commonly have, and also call into mind the Prophetical office of the Messiah
Whereof Esaie among others on this wise speaking of the Messiah, Isai 61, 1.
does say, He has sent me to preach good tidinges.

And for so much as the Passover was instituted, Passover why instituted.
not only that the Jews might call into remembrance the passage of their
Elders through the red sea by the conduction of Moses, but also that the
Teachers might admonish the people of the spiritual Passover, to wit from the
kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of God, by the conduction of the Messiah,
there is no doubt but this question was handled between Christ and those
doctors, where-of sprang that admiration and wondering. Again by this deed of
his yet in his childe-hoode Christ would teach what their duty is who have
determined to follow Christ. For as he sat in the Temple: so his will is that
such as follow him should rest in holy things, and bring if they would
profit in his school, a mind void of worldly cares.

Then from the 12. year until the 30. year of his age he was subject to his
parents, Luke 2, 51. 52.
Increasing in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and with man. Isa.
61, 1.
And thus the whole time of his life, The poor most ready to embrace the
Gospel.
was consumed among the poor and simple men of heart; and this was it which
Esaiah said, He has sent me to preach good tidinges unto the poor. For they
always were most in the favor of God, that is, theie have bin more apt to
receive the law and commandementes of the Lord, than such as are swollen up
in respect either of their wealth, or of their power, or of their learning, or
wit.

Now when he was entered into the 30. year of his age, John the son of
Zacharias, having received a commandment from the Lord concerning baptism of
repentance, went forth as a forerunner, Luke. 3, 1. 2. 3.
and cried, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; prepare ye the way
of the Lord. And this was it which the Prophet Malachie fore-tolde, Matt. 3, 1.
2.
when he said, Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before thee; Mal. 3, 1.
and the Lord whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his Temple: even the
messenger of the covenant whom ye desire, behold he shall come, says the
Lord of Hosts.

Afterward he was baptized of John, Baptism of our Savior Christ.
and the holy Ghost descended and lighted upon him like a dove. For so it
went before in the figure. Matt. 3. 13. 14. and
Moses tells how the dove sent out of the ship returned in the evening with
an olive leaf in her bil, Luke 3, 21. 22.
which was a token of atonement. Genesis 8, 10. 11.
For Noah therebie knew that the wrath of the Lord was appeaced, and that the
waters were abated from of the earth. After which manner the Dove here does
testify how he was present, by whom the wrath of the Father was peaced,
according to the words of the Father, Matt. 3. 17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.

His tentation of the devil answers at the lest wise to that which was
prophesied in general, Tentation of Christ.
And thou shall bruise his head, Matt. 4. 1. 2. and
that is, the heel of the seed of the woman. He fasted forty days, Genesis 3,
15.
and forty nights: but the figure of the same went before in Moses, Matt. 4.
2.
and Elias. Exodus 34, 28


In the three years following he began his reign by teaching, 1. King. 19, 8
and working miracles, His preaching.
according to the fore-saieng of the Prophet Esaiah, Isai. 61, 1.
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me: he
has sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor, to binde-vp the broken
hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and to them that are bound, the
opening of the prison, 2.
to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God, to comfort all that mourn, 3.
to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, and to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit
of heaviness, that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting
of the Lord, Isai. 35, 4.
that he might be glorified. And again, Say unto them that are fearful, Be
you strong, fear not: behold, your God comes with vengeance, even God with a
recompense, he will come and save you. 5.
Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be
opened. 6.
Then shall the lame leap as an heart, and the dumme man's tongue shall sing. What
plainer thing could be spoken of the doctrine and miracles of the Messiah? The
Prophet as it were with a finger, points to the very person of the Messiah by
most evident tokens. Yet do not the miserable Jews, carried-awaie by the
storms of their affections, confess the truth. Unto these tokens declaring
the true Messiah, he sends the two disciples of John, who demanded of him,
saying, Luke. 7, 20. 22.
Art thou he that should come, or shall we wait for an other? Go your way
(says he) and show John what things ye have seen and heard, that the blind
see, the halt go, the leapers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead
rise-againe, and the poor receive the Gospel. Hence came that wondering in the
blind man, John 9, 30.
Ioh. 9. Doubtless this is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence he is,
and yet he has opened mine eyes.

The time of his punishment, His riding roialie into Ierusalam.
which was appointed for him by the Father, drawing nigh, he entered into
Jerusalem upon an ass, whom much people met, Matt. 21, 1. 2. 3. and
and received with roial pomp, whereof Zachary does say, Rejoice greatly,
Zech. 9, 9.
o daughter Zion, shout for joy, o daughter Jerusalem, behold, thy King
comes unto thee, poor, and riding upon an ass. As he came the people
shouted, and strawed bows of palm trees in the way for a sign of an
everlasting kingdom, Matt. 21. 9.
and cried, Hosanna the son of David, blessed, be he that comes in the Name
of the Lord, Hosanna thou which art in the hiest heavens. The which we read
was foretold also in a certain Psalm, Psa. 118, 25 26. 27.
O Lord we pray thee save now, blessed be he that comes in the Name of the
Lord, bind the sacrifice with cords unto the horns of the altar.

The day before he should suffer, Supper of the Lord.
having eaten the Paschal lamb according to the Law, he instituted the supper
of his body and blood, 1. Cor. 10, 3. 4.
a figure whereof, as Paul witnesses, went before in the Manna, and in the
rock wher-out flowed water in ye wilderness.

Then after a long sermon in the presence of his disciples, Christ betrayed.
and prayer, as Adam in the garden departed from God, so Christ in the garden
was betrayed of his own disciple Judas for thirty pieces of silver: Luke 22.
47
which thing the Prophets kept not secret. 1. Sam. 21. 7.
For as Doeg the bewraier of David, 1. Sam. 22. 9.
was a type of Judas the traitor: Psalm. 52, 1.
so Zecharie speaks of the wages that was paid, Zech. 11. 12 13.
So they weighed for my wages thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto
me, cast it unto the potter: a goodly price, that I was valued at of them.

Straight-waie being taken, Christ forsaken of his very disciples.
all his disciples forsook him, whereof Zecharie in his 13. Chapter, thus
writes, Arise, o sword upon my shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts; Zech. 13. 7.
smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

Then followed scoffinges, Christ afflicted in his body.
spittinges, buffets, contumelies, and much vexation after he was taken, Mat.
26. 67 68.
of which Isaiah in his 50. Chapter, I gave my back unto the smiters, and my
cheeks to the nippers: Isai. 50, 6.
I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

After that he was hanged on wood, Christ crucified.
or upon the cross. For many times among the Fathers salvation has come by
wood. Genesis 7, 1. 2. and
The image and prophecy of this wood was in the arch of Noah; Exodus 15, 25
and in the wood which Moses threw into the most bitter waters, Eccle. 38. 5
wherebie they became most pleasant. By this figure the virtue of ye cross of
Christ is notably depainted. For as the most bitter waters by the wood thrown
there-into were made most sweet, and pleasant: so nothing is there, but will
be most comfortable to us, if the wood of Christ his cross, namely faith on
Christ crucified be added as a sause. But a more excellent figure is in the
wood, whereon the brazen serpent was hanged. Number, 21. 8. 9.
For as Moses at the commandment of God in ye wilderness set-vp on high to ye
view of all the Israelites the brazen serpent which hong upon wood, yt such as
were wounded to the death of serpents might be healed thereby: So Christ was
lifted up upon the wood, and shown as it were to al nations, that as many as
were wounded unto the death by the old serpent the devil, might be saved,
looking and trusting on him. Gal. 3, 13.
So then Christ hong on the cross, and was made a curse for us, to redeem us
from the curse of the serpent, which he through sin brought upon mankind.
Therefore it is written, Deuteronomy. 21, 33
Curssed is every one that hangs on tree. Gal. 3, 13.
After this manner Paul unto the Galathians applies the type to ye truth. Here
ye humanity of Christ seemed most vile, and worser than the basest sort of
men, in so much as his very friends and familiars did fly away, Matt. 26. 56
being dismayed and abashed. Whereof it was prophesied in a psalm, Psalm. 22, 6.
But I am a worm, and not a man, a shame of men, and the contempt of the
people. Psalm. 88, 8.
And in the 88. psalm. Thou have put-awaie mine acquaintance far fro me, and
made me to be abhorred of the^. Yea, at that time he which was the fairest
among men, so lost al grace of beauty, that it was a very hard thing to know
him, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, Behold, my servant shall prosper,
Isai. 52, 13.
he shall be exalted and extolled, 14.
and be very hie. As many were astonished at thee (his visage was so deformed
of men, and his form of the sons of men) so shall he sprincle many nations,
the Kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told
them, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they understand.
Isai. 53, 2.
And afterward, He has neither form nor beauty, when we shall see him, there
shall be no form that we should desire him. 3
He is despised and rejected of men, he is a man full of sorrows and has
experience of infirmities; we hid as it were our faces from him, and was
despised, and we esteemed him not. Lo how playnlie the Prophet has fore-tolde
how it should come to pass that the Jews in respect of his vile punishment,
whereof themselves were the autors, should contemn the Messiah.

The high Priests and the princes of the people spoke il and rayled of him,
Christ railed upon.
nodding their heads at Jesus fastened to the cross, as the Prophet Hosea
prophesied, Hos 7. 13.
I have redeemed them, Psalm. 22 13
yet they have spoken lies against me. And Psalm 22. They gape upon me with
their mouths, 16.
as a ramping and roaring Lion. Again, Doges have compassed me, and the
assembly of the wicked have enclosed me. Psalm. 35. 15. 16.
And again Psalm 35. They had me in derision, and gnashed their teeth at me.

Zecharie also prophesied of his hands, Christ nailed to the cross.
and side that were pierced, Chapter 12. They shall look upon him whom they
have peirced, Zech. 12, 10
And Psalm. 22. Psa. 22, 16.
They peirced mine hands and my feet.

In his extreme torments he cried, My God, Matthew. 27, 46.
my God why have thou forsaken me? Which thing long before was foretold by
David in ye 22. Psalm; Psa. 22. 1.
which Psalm is as it were a certain Epitome of ye passion of Christ. When he
was about to yield up ye Ghost, he used ye words of David, Luke 13, 46.
who carried a type of Christ himself, Into thine hands, Psalm. 31, 5.
Lord, I commend my spirit, as it is in the 31. Psalm.

His hanging between thieves was also foreshewed by the Prophet Isaiah in his
53. chapter, Isai. 53, 12.
where he says, He was counted with the transgressors.

How Christ prayed for his crucifiers Isaiah in the same chapter fore-telleth,
Isai. 53, 12.
He bare the sin of many, and prayed for the trespassers.

As Jesus was upon dieng, Mat. 27, 45 51. 52. etc.
there was darkness over all the land, as though the sun would have lost his
light, when as notwithstanding the Moon was at the full. The earth also
terriblie did quake, according to the prophecy of Joel, Joel. 3, 15.
The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall with-drawe their
light. 16.
The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and
the heavens and the earth shall shake. Amos. 8, 9.
And Amos in his 8. chapter does say, And in that day, says the Lord God, I
will even cause the sun to go down at noone: and I will darken the earth in
the clear day.

The Lord was crucified without the gate, Place where Christ was crucified.
even as the sacrifice that was brought without the camp for the purgation and
sanctifiing of the people, by the whole multitude of the sons of Israel, Number.
19, 2.
as may appear Number. 19. For the red kowe in the sight of all was killed, Heb.
13, 11.
and of the blood thereof, and of the ashes, and water, purgations were made.

Unto the speediness of the Lords punishment (who was taken about night and
led unto the hie Priests, Christ with sped executed unto death.
the next morning early carried unto the judgment hal of the president, and
at noone crucified) belongs the figure of the paschal lamb, John. 1, 29.
whereof Christ also is oftentimes called a lamb.

But that it may the better appear how the body answers to the shadow,
Relation between Christ and the Paschal lamb.
and the truth to the figure, let us compare one thing with an other. For that
paschal lamb does much resemble our Savior Christ, yet as the shadow the
body, and the type the truth.

1 As therefore that Jewish lamb was a male of a year old, Comparison between
the Paschal lamb and Christ.
and that without spot: so Christ, a full and perfect man, was without sin.

2 As the houses which were sprinkled with the blood of the paschal lamb
preserved the inhabitor from destruction: Exo. 12, 5.
so they, Exo. 12, 13.
whose consciences are sprinkled with the blood of Christ the immaculate
lamb, 1. Pet. 1, 19.
shall be free from the punishment of sin, which is damnation.

3 As nothing of the paschal lamb might be eaten that was either raw, Exodus
12, 9.
or boiled, or sodden in water, but that which was roasted with fire: So there
was no part of the Lords body but was roasted with great flames of sorrow.

4 As the children of Israel consumed ye paschal lamb with speed and that
with unleavened bread and sour herbs: Number. 9, 11.
so with most sharp and sower minds the Jews put Christ to death, and that
with all possible speed.

5 As the paschal lamb was offered of the whole multitude of the sons of
Israel: Exodus 12. 6. 47.
So that which through the counsel and will of the chief Priests, and rulers
was done to Christ at Jerusalem, may seem doubtless to be done of al Israel
very few excepted.

6 As by the commandment of God there was a caution that no bone of the
paschal lamb should be broken: Exo. 12, 46.
So albeit the hands and feet of our Savior were fastened to the cross with
nails, Ioh. 19, 37. 36.
and his side peirced through with a spear, yet not a bone of him was broken.

7 As none that was either unclean, Number. 9, 7.
or uncircumcised did eat of that lamb, Exo. 12, 44
but the circumcised only: so he alone that is purged in mind, and received
into the family of God eats unto his salvation the flesh of the pure lamb
which is Christ.

8 As that lamb through the commandment of God was offered the tenth day of
the first month: Exodus 12, 2. 3.
so Christ the true lamb of God, Ioh. 1, 29.
the same day of that month, Mat. 26, 18 19.
his father so appointing it, was sacrificed unto the Lord.

9 As once in a year that paschal lamb was killed: Exodus 12, 3.
So once, Heb. 9, 7.
and not often ought the son of God to be offered, which thing also was
prefigured by that entrance of the chief priest into the holy place, and
that once in a year.

10 Last of al, 1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
as the sacrifice of the paschal lamb pleased the Lord, and after it the
people came out of Aegyt: So through the sacrifice of Christ mankind is
reconciled to God, and brought out of bondage into liberty. The figures or
prophecies rather of this great sacrifia^e, of this sanctification, and
atonement were the sacrifices of the fathers, as of Abel, Noah, Abraham, and
afterward al those Aaronical sacrifices: albeit some more cleerelie than others
bare the similitude of this great sacrifice of propitiation.

Being taken from the cross he was laid in the grave, Christ buried.
of which mention is made in the 88. Psalm, Psalm. 88, 3.
My soul is filled with euiles, and my life draws near unto the grave; I am
counted among them that go down unto the pit, 4.
and am as a man without strength: free among the dead, like the slain lying
in the gr^ue, whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut of from thine
hands. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, and in the deep.

The body of Christ aboade in the sepulcher that part of the sixth day wherein
now the Sabbath began, Resurrection of Christ.
at what time the Jews cessed from their labor: and from thence the whole
Sabbath, which finished very earelie in the morning he arose, that he might
make it evident how he had with himself buried the Jewish Sabboath, and was
returned unto a new life having overcome death, and left the old synagogue in
the grave, Law of Moses when abrogated.
and raised-vp a new Church. And therefore the Lord before his death abrogated
not the law of Moses, for so much as yet he had not carried the Sabboath with
himself unto death and the grave. And that the Lord should not abide long in
the grave, David prophesied in the 16. Psalm, Psalm. 16, 9. 10.
My flesh does rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in the grave:
neither will thou suffer thine hol^ one to se corruption.

As soon as the first day of the week, which we call the Lords day appeared,
he brought himself unto the light, John. 11, 25.
and life, which was our light, and our resurrection from everlasting death. A
figure of this resurrection also of the Lord went before in the Prophet Jonas;
and an evident prophecy is in Hosea, chap. 6. Hos. 6, 1.
where in the person of Christ it is said, Come, and let us return unto the
Lord: for he has spoiled, and he will heal us; he has wounded us, 2.
and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us, and in the third
day he will raise us up, 3.
and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we have knowledge and endeavor our
selves to know the Lord.

Having proved his resurrection after sundry and many ways to his disciples,
Caling of the Gentiles.
he gave them in charge to baptize, Luke 24, 47.
and to teach al nations repentance, and remission of sins in his name. And
so the prophecy of Iaakob concerning the vocation of the Gentiles was
fulfilled, who says, Genesis 49, 10.
The people shall be gathered unto him. And for this cause the nations are so
often invited to laud, and to glorify GOD, both in the psalms, and Prophets:
as in the 117. Psalm, Al nations praise ye the Lord: Psa. 117, 1. 2.
al ye people praise him. For his loving kindness is great toward us, and the
truth of the Lord endures for ever.

This commandment being given to his disciples, Ascension of Christ.
the 40. day after his resurrection he ascended into heaven unto his father,
Act. 1, 3.
at whose right hand he sits for evermore. Romans 8, 34.
From whence he sent both to his disciples, Act. 2, 1. 2. etc.
and to the Church following the holy spirit to instruct, and teach them. Of
this ascension sings the Psalmist in the 68 psalm: Psa. 68. 18.
Thou art gone-vp on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men. And of his sitting at the right hand of the Father the same
Psalmist says in the 110. Psalm. 110, 1.
Psalm on this wise, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footestoole.

By the right hand of the Father is meant his principal gifts, The right hand
of the father what,
as happiness, mercy, goodness, liberality, wherein Christ sits as a
dispensor, and bestower; and his kingdom, and liberality of such good things,
is upon the holy, and blessed souls both angelical, and humane, Psalm. 16, 5.
6.
whereof it is said Psalm 16. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup thou do maintain my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places, that is, I have gotten a goodly inheritance. For mine
inheritance is noble.

Furthermore as touching the holy Ghost, this is to be noted, How the holy
Ghost is with the Church.
The holy spirit abides evermore with the Church, albeit invisible. But unto
the Apostle the 10. day after his ascension, Act. 2, 3.
that is 50. days after the resurrection of Christ, he appeared visiblie in
fiery tongues, that the Lord of hosts, which is Jesus Christ might confirm
the infallible truth of his Gospel to the whole world, as it were with this
seal of his majesty. Which thing was long foreseen by ye prophet Joel, Joel.
2, 28.
who in his 2. cha. says on this wise: And afterward (that is after Israel
has received the teacher of righteousness, that they may both remember and
understand those things, which he shall teach) I will powre-out my spirit* upon
al flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall
dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. The 50. day after the
resurrection of the Lord the event most evidently answered unto this
prophecy. For the spirit of the Lord was powered upon al flesh, not
particularly, but generally upon Jews, and Gentiles; young and old, men and
women; bond and free; Isai. 54, 13.
rude and learned etc. And Isaiah 54. And al thy children shall be taught of the
Lord, and much peace shall be to thy children. What the opinions of
philosophers were you shall find afterward in this first part, chap. 42.
In times passed man made himself an author, conductor, and teacher of
godliness, as appears in the Philosophers, whereof diverse set diverse ends
of the felicity which man should seek after: but now, although man teach man
the service of God; yet professes he not his own, but the wisdom of God.

The Apostles now having received the holy Ghost, through the heavenly
doctrine at the commandment of Christ they gathered a Church, and by wonderful
miracles confirmed ye same their doctrine according to ye promise of our
Savior: which thing Isaiah prophesied of 600. years before it came to pass.
For in his 8. chapter thus he says: Behold I and the children whom the Lord
has given me, Isai. 8, 18.
are as signs and as wonders in Israel by the Lord of hosts which dwells in
mount Zion. What wonder I pray you, is greater? what sign more evident, than
that the Apostles by their works, being for number few, for power weak and
frail, for knowledge simple, should work miracles, and turn both the tongues
and the will of men unto them, and to their religion? These are the children
that are given to the church instead of the ancient fathers, as the Psalmist
does say, In steed of thy fathers shall thy children be: thou shall make them
princes through all the earth. Psa. 45, 16.
When he names princes, we must have respect to a kingdom. Therefore for
so much as the kingdom of Christ is governed by the word, Kingdom of Christ
how governed.
they are princes which by the word and heavenly doctrine do rule the realm
of Christ. And although the Church was first builded of the fathers and princes
of the Jews: yet principalie it is gathered from the Gentiles, even from that
barren, and altogether unprofitable flock. Whereof Isaiah in his 54. chapter
speaks after this manner: Rejoice o barren that did not bear: Isai. 54,
1.
break forth into joy and rejoice, thou that did not travel with child:
for the desolate has mo children than the married wife, 2.
says the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tents, and let them spread out the
curtains of thine habitations: spare not, streach out thie cords, and make
fast thy stakes. 3.
For thou shall increase on the right hand and on the left, and thie seed
shall possess the Gentiles and dwell in the desolate cities. Isai, 60, 15.
Again in his 60. Chap. he says: whereas thou have been forsaken and hated,
so that no man went by thee, I will make thee an eternal glory, and a ^oie from
generation unto generation. And afterward, Isai. 60, 22.
A little one shall become as a thousand, and a small stone as a strong nation.
I the Lord will hasten it in due time.

Christ fore-telled how the kingdom of God should be taken from the Jews,
Reiection of the Jews.
and should be given to a nation that should bring forth the fruits
thereof. Mat. 21, 43.
Which thing as we now see it come to pass: so was it long before prophesied
by the Prophet Isaiah in his 65. chapter, where he says: I have been sought of
them that asked not: Isai. 65, 1.
I was found of them, that sought me not. 2.
I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that called not upon my name. I
have sprede out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, 3.
which walked in a way that was not good, even after their own imaginations:
a people that provoked me even unto my face. And more plainly yet in an other
place: Though thy people, o Israel, Isai. 10, 22.
be as the sand of the sea: yet shall but a remnant of them be saved. Read the
9. 10. 11. chap. of Paul unto the Romans.

By this, I think, we have sufficiently confirmed the Minor of the proposed
argument, and both briefly and plainly proved how all things are
accomplished in Jesus ye son of Marie, which were fore-spoken both of Moses
and the prophets concerning the Messiah; and this is it which in John is
written, The Law was given by Moses, Ioh. 1, 17.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, that is, the things which Moses by
figures shadowed, and the prophets fore-tolde by prophecies, Christ in truth
has fulfilled. The sum of al is this, how Jesus the son of Marie is the
very Messiah, Christ a Prophet, a king, and a Priest.
that is, a prophet, a King, and a Priest. A prophet, whereof Moses in the 18.
Chapter of Deuteronomie did speak: Deuteronomy, 18, 15
The Lord thie God will raise-vp unto thee a Prophet like unto me from among
you, even of thie brethren, unto him ye shall hearken: Psalm. 2, 6.
A King, of whom it is said in the second Psalm, I have set my King upon
Zion mine holy mountain: Psa. 110, 4.
A priest, according unto the 110. psalm, Benefits coming by Christ.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchi-zedek.

The benefits of this Messiah, and the application of the^ are proposed in
this verse of the 2. Psalm: Psalm. 2, 12.
Blessed are all that trust in him.

CHAP. 5.
A confutation of the objections which the braine-sicke Jews do allege for
their parts.
NOw for so much as the obstinacy and malice of the Jews is such, that rather
they will stop their eyes against the clear light, tha^ admit the truth of
God, concerning the Messiah our Lord and Savior Christ already come into the
world, I purpose briefly to confute such things as theie falsely,
maliciously, and furiously do object. Theie not without great railing
speeches utterly do deny the Minor of our foundation: and even against their
own consciences very untruly do say, that the prophecies of the Prophets
touching the Messiah promised were not fulfilled in Jesus the son of Marie.
Arguments of the Jews
For they obiecte four things. The first is touching the time of the Messiah:
the second of the form of

And, The Jews deny the resurrection of Christ.
that these seducers may persuade miserable men, especialie they assault the
head of al, and deny that our Lord and Savior Christ is risen from the
dead, which reprochful lie when I have answered, I will in order confute these
four things which they object together with the slanders that unjustly they
lay upon our Lord.

Let these enemies of GOD cry til their hearts ache again that our Lord Christ
is not risen from the dead: Resurrection of Christ by what testimonies
confirmed.
but who is so foolish, that will believe his enemies before his friends? who
so childish that will give credit to many evil rather than to a few good? who
are soonest to be believed, they which of mere malice heap slanders and lies
together, which are defiled with all manner wickedness, or they rather that being
famous for their holiness and innocence of life have sealed the truth of God
even with their very blood? who more worthy of credit, the spirit of Satan
in the hardened Jews; or the spirit of Christ, who the 50. day after the
resurrection of the Lord by a visible testimony bare witness of the
resurrection, kingdom, and power of Christ? What madness is it sooner to
believe the forged lies of the Jews, than the divine works of Christ, whereby
the Apostles did confirm the resurrection of the Lord? To be brief, the
sepulcher, the disciples, the Angels, the holy Ghost, the power of Christ in
the hearts of the righteous, and the preservation of the Church against the
marvelous rage of devils and Tyrants, do plainly prove yt our Lord Jesus
Christ is risen from the dead. And therefore abhore we the most impudent lie of
the Jews; and let us look for the coming of our Savior, from the clouds,
even for Jesus Christ whom we worship as our redemer.

Now let us come unto these four things, which they say are not fulfilled in
Jesus, who^ we acknowledge and serve as ye true Messiah: which four things we
confess were foretold concerning the Messiah by ye holy Prophets of God, who
without great sin are not to be suspected of untruth in their words.

The first thing therefore which they object, The first argument of the Jews.
is concerning the time of the coming of the Messiah.

The true Messiah, The mayor.
say they, shall come in the last days. The minor.
But yt Jesus, who^ ye acknowledge to be ye Messiah, did much prevent he last
dais. For it is above 1567. years since he was borne. Therefore that your
Jesus, The conclusion.
is not the Messiah.

The mayor they prove by the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, who in his second
chap. speaks after this form of the time of ye Messiah: It shall be in the
last days, Isai. 2, 2.
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared.

Lo how shamefully ye blind Jews do offend here contrary to the very and
right rule which they make themselves, The answer.
and yt is this, Who marketh not what is written both before and after in books,
he peruerteth the words of the living God. For had they here compared ye
prophecy of Isaiah with yt prophecy of Daniel, wherein as it were with a
finger by most evident words ye time of the coming of the Messiah is
pointed-vnto, surely far otherwise theie would have defined the last days.

A day is understood three manner of ways. A day taken diversely.
First for the time wherein the sun is over our Horizon, An artificial day.
which the Astronomers call an artificial day. Secondly, it is taken for the
space of 24. hours from ye rising of the sun unto the rising-againe of the
same, A natural day.
and that is called a day natural. Last of all some certain time ordained,
decreed, and appointed for some special thing: in which sense the Prophets
understand it many times. Therefore when the Prophet says, In the last days,
he notes the last times, that is the last age of the world, distinguished from
the other ages not so much by a certain, and described number of years, as by
a separation of things done in the same. So did Elias distinguish the world
into three times or ages, when he said: Two thousand void; two thousand the
Law; two thousand the Messiah: And therefore according to the computation of
Elias, the last time of the world is the space of two thousand years. Read
the Chronicles of Philip Melancton.

Again, the last days are oftentimes taken by the prophets for the last time
of the Jewish kingdom, and nation in Palestine. So that the sense of the
Prophet is this: it shall be in the last days, not of worldly time (for who
should have reaped any benefit by favor so long put of? surely very few.)
but in ye last days of prophecy, of ye kingdom, and of ye Priesthod, which
three things ceased when ye sacrifice of Christ was finished. A vain fiction
therefore is it of the Jews which they make about the time of the Messiah
invented contrary to their very conscience. But this they feign to delude
such as are ignorant of the manner of the scripture in distinguishing times.

The second thing which they object, The 2. Argument of the Jews.
is about ye form of the kingdom of ye Messiah promised, which they very
impudentlie contend agrees not with our Messiah. The Mayor
Under the Messiah, say they, shall be no wars neither among men, Isai. 40, 4.
nor among the beasts of the feelde, but sovereign peace, the mountains
being made low, and the valleys exalted, that al things may be straight and
plain. The Minor
But this we see not hitherto come to pass. The conclusion.
And therefore the Messiah is not yet come.

To prove the Mayor they bring forth these and such like places of the
Prophets: Isai. 2, 4.
They shall break their swords into mattockes, and their spears into sithes:
nation shall not lift-vp a sword against nation, neither shall they learn to
fight any more. Isai. 11, 6.
And in the 11. chapter of the same prophet Isaiah: The wolf shall dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the calfe, and the Lion,
and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them. 7.
And the kowe and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie together: and
the Lion shall eat straw like the bullock. 8.
And the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the aspe, and the wained
child shall put his hand upon the cokatrice hole. 9.
Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of mine holiness: for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Micah. 4, 1.
as the waters that cover the sea. To which effect the Prophet Micah cap. 4.
entreats. Isai. 40, 4.
Isaiah likewise adds: Every valleie shall be exalted, and every mountain
and hill shall be brought low. By these and many more such like prophecies
concerning ye manner of the government of the Messiah, the blind and foolish
Jews do conclude yt Jesus the son of the virgin Marie is not ye true
Messiah promised by ye Prophets.

But against these let us oppose an immovable foundation, The answer
whereof we will conclude, that such things as corporaly be ascribed, ought
spiritualie to be understood through comparing earthly with heavenly
things. The foundation is this, Kingdom of Christ what.
The kingdom of the Messiah is not an earthly but an heavenly and spiritual
kingdom: which may be gathered by the first promise made of ye Messiah to
come. For the Messiah was promised that he should come to destroy the kingdom
of Satan. For thus it is in the first promise: Genesis 3, 15.
The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, that is, the Messiah
shall destroy the works of the devil, namely sin and death, and restore to
man ye image of God; which through sinning he had lost, that is, as Daniel does
interpret ye same, Dan. 9, 24.
shall bring-in everlasting righteousness, and blessing upon such as acknowledge
him to be King. Genesis 22, 18.
And therefore it is written, In thie seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. Of this ground we do firmly conclude, that whatsoever by the holy
Prophets of God is fore-tolde touching the reign of the Messiah after the
similitude of an earthly kingdom, Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual kingdom.
ought to be applied by way of comparison, according to the manner of a
spiritual kingdom, to signify that in the kingdom of Christ there should be
equality, concord, and wonderful peace, peace I mean agreeing to the
kingdom of Christ, namely a spiritual peace, and that in and among such as by
true faith receive Christ into themselves. Which spiritual peace is signified
by the concord of the beasts, whereof the Prophets do speak. Office of the
Messiah.
For it is too too foolish to think yt the office of the Messiah is to change
the natures of things, as to make the Lion laie-awaie his cruelty; or the
Aspe, and Cokatrice their poison. So then under these figures the Prophets do
signify, how men that are fierce, bold, and cruel, as Lions, if once theie
take upon their shoulders, the easy and light yoke of Christ, Mat. 11, 29 30.
that is, do embrace the doctrine of Christ, and through faith depend upon
him, must needs laie-awaie their lionish nature and conditions, and so dwell
peaceably and lovingly with sheep, that is, with mild and simple ones,
having on each part through faith of Christ, put-on love; and how the
Mountains, namely the chief among the people, laying-aside hautinesse of
mind, must suffer themselves to be made equal to them of lowest degree. And
that there should be no such worldly peace, as the Jews dream of, Psalm. 110,
2
the 110. Psalm, which was written of the Messiah, does testify, where among
other things it is said: Be thou ruler in the mids of thine enemies, which
thing we see to have come to pass in Christ, who even among his most extreme
and cruel enemies has a Church, the which he protecteth, and defends against
the rage of all tyrants, and devils. For this prophecy does firmly abide:
The seed of the serpent shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3, 15.
that is of the Messiah, and of the Church.

The third thing which the Jews object is the place of his scepter, The 3.
argument of the Jews.
that is of his kingdom, or court of the Messiah.

The Messiah, The Mayor.
say theie, shall have his Palace in mount Zion.

But that Jesus whom you take to be the Messiah, The Minor.
possesses not one foot of ground there.

Therefore that Jesus is not the promised Messiah. The conclusion.


The Mayor theie confirm by a saying in the second Psalm: Psalm. 2, 6.
I have set my King upon Zion mine holy mountain. And in the 4. of Micah:
Micah. 4, 1.
The mount Zion shall be the house of Jehovah, the people shall flow unto it.

Here again the miserable Jews do understand that carnalie, The answer
which the state of the Messiahs kingdom does prove, ought spiritualie to be
taken. The mount Zion mysticalie does signify the Church: Mount Zion the
Church.
which is therefore called mount Zion, because the kingdom of the Messiah
there begins, according to the words of Isaiah in his second chapter: Isai.
2, 3.
For the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
For it is the phrase of the Scripture to name the whole from the original: as
the Jewish people is called Israel in respect of their beginning. After which
manner Zion is said to be the palace of the Messiah, because the Messiah began
there his kingdom.

Again as Jerusalem may two ways be understood spiritualie and earthly:
Jerusalem, what it signifies.
so may the earthly Zion, wherebie the heavenly is figured, which is the
palace of the Messiah our Lord Jesus Christ. And that the prophecy either of
David or of Micah, concerning the mount Zion, and earthly city Jerusalem,
may not carnalie be understood, the Prophecy of Daniel in his 9. Chapter does
plainly show, where it is said: Dan. 9, 26.
And the people of the Prince that shall come, that is the host of the
Emperor Vespasian, shall destroy the city and the sanctuary, and the end
thereof shall be with a flood: and unto the end of the battle it shall be destroyed
by desolations. Now for so much as the event does answer to this prophecy of
the utter destruction of the city Jerusalem, the vanity of ye Jews is
manifest enough, which place ye palace of the Messiah in the earthly mount
Zion.

The 4. The 4. argument of the Jews.
thing which the brainsicke Jews do object, is about the people of the
Messiah, which, theie say, can be none other, than carnal Israel: That theie
think to be the proper inheritance of ye Messiah; to it only, theie will
stand in it, that the promises were made.

But miserably theie both are deceived, and do deceive. The answer.
I confess, the very carnal Israelites were chosen before al other nations,
and was called the peculiar people of God. But wherefore I beseech you? For
their merits and worthiness? Not so. But that there might be a people that
might keep the law of God, in whom and from whom the Messiah might be borne.
In consideration of which excellency of God, David says in the 147. Psalm,
Psa. 147, 20
He has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his
judgments. But what? Has God, changing his mind, taken to him self the
idolatrous Gentiles and refused the Jews? The Jews, why rejected.
Surely the counsel of God is unchangeable, for he is faithful in his
promises: but he has a condition of faith and obedience annexed. And therefore
because of their incredulity the Jews are castawaie. For they have despised
the word of God, and rebelliouslie rejected the Messiah sent unto them for
their welfare: which thing doubtless the Prophets concealed not from us. What
is that which the Prophet Isaiah in his tenth chapter does say? Isai. 10, 22.
Though thy people, o Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet shall the remnant
of them return. What is more evident than this prophecy? Has not the event
plainly agreed to these words? But how comes it about that they are not
converted? Whose fault is it? The same Prophet shows wherein it lies, whose
words let us hear: I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people. Isai. 65, 2.
But whence came that rebellion? Surely from nothing else, but even because
they were offended at the baseness of the person of the Messiah. Which thing
the same Prophet foresaw would come to pass. For thus he says: Behold I
lay in Zion a stumbling stone, and a rock to make men fall: Romans 9, 33.
and every one that believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Who is the true
Israel.
Mine answer then unto the objection is: Israel is the people of the Messiah;
which is very true being understood of the true Israel which is not of the
flesh, but of the promise. But Israel of the promise is every one which
believes: which thing in holy scripture is declared by sundry types and
figures. Ishmael, and Izhak were borne of one father Abraham: Esau and Iaakob
of the same father Izhak. But as Izhak and Iaakob for the promise sake are
reputed for the seed, without any respect had unto the prerogative of the
flesh: so every one which believes the promise is counted for the seed, as
Paul in the 9. 10. and 11. chapters unto the Romans does at large and
evidently prove. For in these three chapters the Apostle handles the same
argument which we do in this place. And therefore I send-backe the hearers
unto Paul, who by strong arguments refuteth the erroneous definition of
Israel, and confirms the true, which in times passed was shadowed in the old
Testament. Whereof the Apostle concludes, Rom 10, 12
how there is none ods, how there is no difference between the Jew and the
Grecian. For he that is Lord over al, is right unto al, 13.
that cal-vpon him. For whosoever shall calvpon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved.

Therefore without any respect had either unto nations or persons, the Lord
without acceptance of persons is liberal unto al. For he is the God not of the
Jews only, Romans ^. 29.
but also of the Gentiles, who, as he rejects al disobedient ones: so of his
mere mercy he receives such as fly unto him according to the unchangeable
rule of his eternal decree. As touching the vocation of the Gentiles into the
place of the disobedient Jews, the Prophet Hosea in his 2. chapter did
fore-tel, Hos. 2, 23.
I will say to them which were not my people, Rom 9, 25. 26.
Thou art my people: and her, beloved, Hos. 1, 10.
which was not beloved. And it shall be in the place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my people, that there they shall be called, The children of the
living God.

And touching that which the Jews object of the ignominy of ye cross, whereby
they are offended, it is by the testimonies of the Prophets sufficiently
confuted above In the 4. Chapter of this first part.
where we entreated of the passion, victory, resurrection, and ascension of
our Savior into heaven.

Now the cause why the incredulous Jews do detract from the authority of
the Evangelists, For the authority of the Evangelists.
and say that they write contraries, springs out of that very puddle of
impiety whence their other toies do arise. For in the ground, and sum of
matter they differ at no time, but the difference appears in circumstances
only. Iud^^^cus Viues lib. 2. de veritate fidei.
But the more plainly to answer unto ye objection of the Jews, I will adioine
to this place ye words of Ludouicus Viues, which are these: But, says he, do
these four, to wit Evangelists, differ at any time among themselves? To this
question John Chrysostom answers on this wise. Small disagreeing in the
Gospels sometime do offer argument of the truth, least otherwise they might
seem to have written of composition, if in all respects they should agree.
John the Apostle was at Ephesus at that same time when Paul was, yet neither
makes mention of other in their Epistles, neither did they meet much and
talke-together, seeing they were sufficiently enough taught, instructed, and
armed as it were of the spirit of God, that they might not be thought after
they had communicated-together one after an others counsel to have preached
Christ: but according to the doctrine of Christ himself, and revelation from
heaven: so that in the principles and sum they disagree no whit, as that
Christ is the son of God, borne of the virgin Marie, and that he worked
miracles, taught to contemn this world, to believe, to love both God and man;
that he called all men unto everlasting happiness, and suffered, died, rose
again, ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of his father, and
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. These things with one voice, and
with one mind they do constantly report and teach. Albeit in circumstances
which the Grecians call Perestaseis, the which alter not the substance of
matter, they differ sometime. One shows a thing briefly, another more at
large. One tells how two were healed, another how three: One at the coming
out at the gate, another at the going in. Which thing falleth-out manie-times,
because the miracles of Christ were so many, that those things which in deed
were diverse, we think are the same by reason of some resemblance which they
have together: and so it falleth-out in the words and sentences of doctrine.
Christ uttered the same things in diverse places diversely. One tells what
he said on this wise, others what he said in that place after another form,
to speak plainly they gather pieces of the sermons, and words of Christ
which may make for our instruction, and welfare.

CHAP. 6.
How, and wherein the Jews do blame our Lord and Savior Christ: with a
clearing him from the same.
HEre follows how the Jews inspired of the devil, the father of all
untruth, do most impudentlie and cursedlie blame our most holy and innocent
Christ; that which they lay against him is this.

First, as theie say, because he made himself the son of God equal to the
Father. John. 10, 30


Secondly, for that he adhorted men to the worshipping of another God.

Thirdly, for abrogating the law of Moses.

Fourthlie, because he spoke against the traditions of the fathers.

Fiftlie, Luke. 6, 1. 2. and
for violating the Sabbath.

Sixtlie, for saying he could destroy the Temple of God, Matt. 26, 61
and build it in three days.

Last of all, Luke. 11, 14. 15.
because he cast-out devils thorough Beelzebub the chief of the devils.

See what envy, lo what a mind perverted can do, when men are drowned in
the gulf of malice! Who sees not that these miserable wretches, which dread
not to contend against God himself, are to be pitied rather than confuted?
yet briefly let us answer to every particular crime.

Touching the first, Answer unto the first crime.
we may confess that he acknowledged himself to be the son of God equal to
the Father. But what wise men will say it is a lie to confess the truth? For
if this be a fault, then shall a lie be a commendable thing: which no man will
grant that makes account of the law of nature. Do not the Prophets in many
places of the scripture ascribe the name Jehovah to the Messiah? says not
Isaiah in his sixty chapter. Isai. 60, 2.
The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee?
Hitherto belongs the saying of the prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 33, 16.
wherein he is called the Lord our righteousness. And the Lord himself out of
the 110. Psalm declares how the Messiah should be nor only a man, but also
a God, when he said, Psalm. 110, 1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand. Office of the Messiah.
But the error of the Jews does here-of arise, because theie marked not how
the office of the Messiah was to pacify the wrath of God, to bear the
punishment of the sins of all mankind, to be present in all places, to
behold the heart, to hear the groans of such as cal-vpon him: which things
doubtless are not the works of any pure creature, or finite nature. But of
this matter we have spoken more at large in another place.

The second, Answer to the second crime.
concerning the worshipping of another God, as it is a new invention of the
Jews: so it is most false. For both by word and example he invited to the
praieng-vnto, and worshipping of that God alone, even the only and true God,
which had both given a law and ceremonies to the people, and also brought the
Jews out of the land of Egypt. John. 5, 17. 18. etc.
But this was it which troubled ye Jews for that he caled God his Father, whom
had he denied, he should have bin like to them, that is a liar. Answer to the
third crime.


The third thing which theie object, is the abrogation of the law, wherein
they make a loud lie. For he alone both fulfilled the law himself, Matt. 5,
17. 18. etc.
and corrected the abuses of the Pharisees, yea and always even to the death
of the cross was subject to the law.

The fourth whereby they say how he spoke against ye traditions of ye fathers,
Answer to the 4 crime.
is most untrue. But what fault is it, I pray you, to reprehend impiety? to
condemn superstition? and to speak against such things as are manifestly
against the word of God? Is it such a crime to blame the perverse opinion of
the Pharisees whereby they place the traditions of men before the
commandments of GOD? especialie when the Lord himself does say, Ier. 20,
18. 19.
Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, walk in my statutes? Says
not the Lord by the Apostle, Mark. 7, 7.
They worship me in vain teaching for doctrines the commandments of men?
But this was one, and a principal cause of crucifieng Jesus the Messiah,
fearing, traditions being abolished, least they themselves should come into
contempt among the people, and leese not a little of their authority, and so
by little and little come into decaie.

The fifth crime is, Answer to the 5. crime
that our Lord should violate the Sabbath, the which also is most untrue.
What is it to keep the Sabbath aright.
For as the true rest of the Sabbath is to cease from sin, and to rest in
God: so the true works are they which make unto the abolishing of sin, and
promoting of Gods glory: as were the deeds of healing which he wrought upon
the Sabbath. And in very deed there can be no more excellent a work than to
help man at his extreme necessity. If it be not lawful upon the Sabbath to
heal, shall it therefore be lawful to kill a man? Is it lawful to draw out an
Ass falen into a pit, and shall it not be lawful on the Sabbath by the word
and power of God to heal a man? But this people have neither end, nor measure
in slaundering.

The sixth crime which they lay to his charge is, Answer to the 6. crime.
I can destroy this Temple, and build it again in three days. John. 2, 8*
The occasion of which his words was this. The Jews had required a sign of
Christ of his zeal, and power, he therefore according to the manner of the
Apostles, and of his own too, shows them no frivolous, temporary, or base
sign, as they required, but a great, a wonderful, and an everlasting sign of
the resurrection of his body, which should be the third day after his death:
which body of his was more truly and aptly the Temple of GOD, than that
stony one of Jerusalem. For therein dwells a more proper, Against the 7.
crime.
and present God.

The seventh crime which theie object to our Lord is, that he cast-out devils
in the name of Beelzebub the chief of the devils. Which fault by strong
arguments he remoueth from himself, Matthew. 12, and Luke 11.

But before I show how the faithless Jews do blemish the miracles of Christ,
Of miracles in general.
I will in few words declare what is meant by divine miracles. Next I will
briefly show ye marks, wherebie the divine miracles of Christ, and of the
saints are distinguished from fained miracles of magicians, and devils. For
the devil as one that hates God, and would gladly turn us from God by all
possible means, both by himself, The Devil an inuitator of God, and his
works.
and his ministers the magicians, does emulate the works of God, and
especialie miracles, because he sees how that thing comes nearest unto the
divine power which is above nature. And therefore as by his own natural force
he is mightier, so in the knowledge of the virtues and operation of things
more skillful than man, he easelie beguileth our senses to deceive, and bring
us from the truth.

Divine miracles are such as God works: Divine miracles wha^;
which are therefore called miracles, because Effects of divine miracles.
For first theie bring men into the admiration of Gods power wherebie miracles
are wrought.

Secondly through the power of God men yea and also have evident examples
wherebie the matter is painted out as it were.

The reason why Christ and good men would confirm their doctrine to men by
miracles, The reason why miracles were wrought.
is this. It was very meet that faith, which is of matters that exceed man's
understanding, should be confirmed by such things as are above nature, and
contrary unto the usual course of the same, that men with their outward eyes
beholding such things to be brought to pass as exceeded the power of nature,
might be stirred-vp to the beholding with the internal eyes of the mind, that
is, to the believing of those things which are beyond reason. As therefore
the things which are subject to reason need no demonstration, that an
undoubted faith may be given to them: so divine and celestial, by miracles, as
by certain heavenly proofs, do deserve credit.

Now the cause why at this day miracles are not wrought in ye eyes of men,
Why miracles are not wrought.
as they have bin, Augustine shows when he says: Neither be these miracles
permitted to endure unto our days, that the mind may not always seek after
visible things, and so by the long use of them mankind would wax cold,
which through their novelty was inflamed. Neither ought we in these days to
doubt that theie are to be credited, who, when theie preached those things,
which few attaine-vnto, could for all that persuade the people how theie were
to be followed.

Hitherto generalie have we spoken of heavenly miracles, How to know the
true from false miraces.
now come we unto ye marks, wherebie divine are distinguished from devilish,
and true from from fained miracles. The notes are six, namely the truth of
the nature, the power, the manner of doing, the efficient cause, the cause
moving before it be wrought, and the end. By these notes as it were by a
touchstone miracles as well of Christ and of the Saints, namely divine, as
fained and diabolical as of Magicians, and inchanters, are to be examined.

For the first therefore. The 1. note.
The truth of the essence is to be considered. All the miracles of Christ have
the truth of the essence, that is, are such in deed as theie seem to be.
Lazarus Lazarus.
had lien four days in the grave, John 11, 17.
and stoonk again, therefore without doubt he was dead. Therefore Christ
raising him from the dead, wrought a true miracle in deed. For being raised
he lived truly, he eat and drank, wherebie many Jews, that knew him
marueled much at the miracle. Neither was there wanting which sought to kill
Lazarus, that so theie might either blemishe, or deny the dead.

And therefore it was a true miracle. But the miracles of the devil, Miracles of
the devil how wroght
and of magicians are done by iuggling and deluding the eyes, as those were in
times passed that happened in Epidaurus and else where, or by secret, and
natural philosophy. For the devil who exactlie and perfectly knows both the
nature and power of things, can secretly apply either herbs or stones, the
effect whereof is counted of ignorant men for a miracle, albeit it be the work
of nature.

The second note, The second mark.
whereby true miracles are known from false, is the power whereby theie are
wrought, the which if it exceed the power of nature, is doubtless divine, and
the miracles so done have God for the author of them. How to know by what
power a miracle is wrought.
This divine power may diversely be seen in the miracles both of the Saints,
and of Christ himself. First in ye very action, as for ye su^ne to stay his
course, or to return from the west unto the East; Ios. 10, 12. 13.
for a man to walk upon the waters, as upon dry land, which thing we read
our Savior to have done. Mat. 14. 25
Secondly in the subject upon whom the deed is done, Matt. 9, 27. 28. 29
as to give to the blind sight, and life to the dead. John. 9, 1. 2. and 32.
34. and
For nature may give both light, and life too, but not either to the blind or
to the dead, as our Savior did. Thirdly by the order also and manner whereby
they are done, Mat. 8, 26.
as suddenly to cease a tempest, Matt. 14, 32
and the troubled sea, suddenly to heal the sick. So do we read our Savior
Christ to have commanded the winds and the sea, and the tempests which
forthwith obeyed him, Luke. 5, 12. 13.
and manietymes even with a beck, and suddenly to have healed leapers and
others. Mark. 9 33 34.
Fourthlie by the worker, as to behold the hearts of men, which thing
belongs only unto God. Luke 9. 46. 47.
How often I pray you do we read that Christ saw the very cogitations,
sometime of his own disciples, John. 9, 6. 11.
sometime of his adversaries? Fiftlie by the instrument wherwithal the miracle
is done, as with claie to restore sight to ye blind, whereas claie naturalie will
make blind rather, but the Lord used claie in healing the blind, that the
curing might seem to proceed not from nature, but from the God of nature. And
so Christ did work al sorts of miracles, that if any man, as the minds of
men are very diverse, should suspect or not be thoroughly persuaded in some one,
so many and so diverse were added, that now al matter and occasion of doubting
is quite removed: so ye none may dout whether ye miracles of Christ were done
by the power of God. But neither the devil, nor any other power that is finite
can work such miracles. Devils can work no miracles.
And although many things do seem to be miracles: yet in truth theie are
not, because they be wrought by the power of nature, as by herbs or some other
thing, which the devil secretly can apply. And therefore many things are
done which are known to the skilful in the nature of things, that ye rude
people accounte for miracles: as are those things which are done by Art
magike, as above also we have noted.

The third note follows, The 3. note.
to wit the manner of working miracles. Matt. 8, 26, 27
Sometime Christ by only commanding, showed miracles, to declare how he was
the Lord of nature; John. 11, 41.
sometime he did so by invocation, to give men to understand from whom he had
all things, and also to meet with their slander who said that in the name of
Beelzebub, the chief of the devils, he cast-out devils; sometime by ye use of
one thing or another, John 9, 6.
as by clay or spittle, to show that God works sometime by means, and sometime
without means, sometime contrary to the nature of the means, sometimes
thorough the touching of his garment, sometime by his only pleasure being
absent. Matt. 9, 20.
But the illusions of devils which have likeness of miracles, Mat. 14, 35. 36.
are done after foolish and very ridiculous means, Mark. 7, 29 30
whereby it may easelie be perceived who is the author of them. Luke 7, 6, 7,
and 10
For ye devil, that no man may suspect them to be done by the power of nature,
commands words to be used that agree nothing at al to the matter, as if an
horse be to be healed, these words are to be said, The sea is salt, and frosen
in the Winter, and some such thing more absurd. Sometime yt woulfe puts on a
lambs skin, and will have the words of the holy Scripture to be used, as some
verse of the Psalter to be recited; or a sentence out of the Gospel to be hung
about ye neck; or a Mass or more to be said, and sometime he will have beans or
other things to be put under an holy clout of lynen. But who can bring al his
toies into remembrance, the which are better known to the bond-slaues of
Satan, than to the godly.

The 4. note is the efficient cause. The 4. note.
Christ at no time sought occasion to work miracles, but always used ye
occasion offered. He took neither time nor place to show his cunning: but
suddenly always, and according to the matter ministered. But ye devil, and
deluders of the simple seek both time and place convenient for their iuggling,
and have their certain preparations. Again Christ who excelled in true holiness
wrought miracles both by him self, and by his good and godly disciples: but
Satan does his fained miracles by wicked, by naughty persons, witches,
unclean men, by wisemen, by fairies, by the reprobate, who no man can doubt,
do work by guile, and fradulentlie.

The fifte note, The 5. note.
is the cause moving before the thing be don. The Son of God, and other good
men at no time respected their own commodity, but the profit of others; yt it
might appear how in their miracles they sought not their own glory, but were
brought thereunto through the approbation of their faith, who required them,
that men might use to believe God, and them* but wisemen, the ministers of
Satan, either seek profit, or vain pleasure, or either to move foolish men
to laughter, delectation, and admiration; or to terrify them.

The sixth note is, The 6. note
the end. Christ at no time wrought any corporal miracle, but it had many
spiritual significations, whereof the books of divines entreat at large: but
the illusions of the devil are comprised within the bounds of vain ostentation.

These things I thought good briefly to touch concerning the marks of true
and false miracles, that all the world might see how great the vanity of the
Jews is, that blush not by il words, against their own conscience, to
impair the credit of Christ his miracles.

CHAP. 7.
How it was fore-tolde by the Prophets, that the Jews should set themselves
against the Messiah.
AND that the Jews, of old looking-for the Messiah, should take offense at
his person, and so stumble thereat, that they should not acknowledge him, no
not when he was present before their eyes, it was long before also fore-tolde by
the Prophets, that, when we see the event to answer to the prophecies, we
might fence our minds against ye slanders of the cursed Jews, and utterly
abhor their detestable contumacie.

When Isaiah said, Though the number of the children of Israel were as the
sand of the sea, Isai. 10, 21. 22.
yet shall but a remnant be saved, Romans 9, 27.
showed he not in plain words, that the Jews should revolt from the Messiah,
or more truly should not acknowledge him, in whom alone salvation does
consist?

When the same Prophet in his 5. Chapter does say, Isai. 5, 1.
My beloved had a vine-yarde in a very fruiteful hill, and he hedged it, and
gathered out the stones of it, 2.
and he planted it with the best plants, and he built a tower in the midst
thereof, 3.
and made a wine press therein. Now therefore, o inhabitants of Jerusalem
and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me and my vine-yarde: do not
these words of the Prophet manifestly set-foorth both the goodness of God
toward the Jews, and also the contumacie of the Jews toward God? By both
which places it may be gathered how their election and state was
conditionarie, as that which might not depend upon the prerogative of the
flesh, but of the condition of faith.

Again when the same Prophet in his 8. chapter does say: Isai. 8. 13.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let him be your fear, and let him be your
dread, 14.
and he shall be as a sanctuary: but as a stumbling stone and as a rock to fall
upon, to both the howses of Israel, and as a snare, and as a net to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15.
And many among them shall stumble, and shall fall, and shall be broken, and shall
be snared, and shall be taken; does not the event answer also to this
foresaying? And when he adds, 16.
Bind up the testimony: seal up the law among my disciples; does he not
expreslie speak of the disciples of the Lord, whom afterward he says should
be as signs and wonders in Israel? 18.
And again when he says, To the law and to the testimony if they spoke not
according to this word, 20.
it is because there is no light in them, does not the Prophet here propose
the condition of getting salvation, the which all the Prophets do testify most
of the Jews should neglect?

But wherefore comes this about? Surely not of the counsel of God sending the
Messiah, The cause of the reprobation of the Jews.
and by him inuiting al men unto salvation; but through the malice of them,
who, offended at the person of the Messiah, have refused to accept him, because
he was not such a one as theie are, What the Jews misliked in Christ*
to wit covetous, ambitions given unto voluptuousnes (for evermore vices are
enemies to virtues, and the best men are envied of the wicked) that he
glittered not in his silks, velvet, gold, silver, and jewels; yt he had not
his guard and gentlemen attending upon him; that he promised not pleasure and
bodily delights; that by force of arms he vanquished not their neighbors
about them; that he made none of them Dukes, and presidents of the nations of
the world; finalie because they acknowledged not the spiritual glory of his
spiritual kingdom.

Thus hitherto we have sufficiently proved the vanity of the Jews, The
conclusion of this treatise against the Jews.
who given to worldly pleasure, acknowledge not the true Messiah, enen Jesus
Christ the son of Marie the virgin, and therefore falsely name themselves the
people of GOD, and challenge the title of the Church. Wherefore let us, seeing
that we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12, 1.
cast away every thing that presses down, 2.
and the sin that hangs so fast on: let us run with patience, the race
that is set before us, loking unto Jesus the auctor and finisher of our faith.
2. Tim. 4, 1.
From heaven let us look for him who will judge the quick and the dead, Phil.
3, 20. 21.
and change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue al things
unto himself.

To this only Messiah ye son of God, together with the father and the holy
spirit, be honor, might, and glory worlds without end, and for ever more amen.

CHAP. 8.
Against Mahomet, or the Turks, who take upon them to be the true Church, and
yet are not.
ALthough the madness of the Turks does sufficiently prove the auctor of their
sect to be the devil: yet both because more and more daily their sect does
increase, and godliness decrease in many, who had rather be counted than be
godly indeed; and also because Epicures fondly do reason of religion, I
think it good to admonish the younger sort concerning the Turkish sect, yt
understanding what it is, they may abhor it the more, and shun the same even
as they would the devil himself.

And that the more distinctlie we may entrete hereof, I think it not amiss
to examine these points; 1. What prophecies have gonebefore of this sect; 2,
What was the occasion thereof; 3, Who was the auctor; 4, What companions he
had; 5, How it increased and was confirmed; 6, What laws it has; 7, what
fables are mixed to their guile and deceitfulnes; 8, What manner of Paradise it
promises to ye favorers; 9, By what arguments the impiety of Mahomet may be
refuted; 10, And finalie, how the minds of men may be comforted against the
rage of satan ranging so in ye world. 1. Prophecies of the Turks.


And although diverse Prophets have foretold of the wickedness and tyranny of ye
Turks: yet in this place we will only recite the prophecy of Daniel which he
has in his 7. chapter, the which is very notable, and agrees especialie unto
the time when this impiety and tyranny did begin. Dan. 7. 7.
After this, says Daniel, I saw in the visions by night, and behold, the
fourth beast, was fearful, and terrible, and very strong: It had great iron
teeth; it devoured and brake in pieces and stamped the residue under his feet:
and it was unlike to the beasts that were before it: for it had ten horns.
Hitherto spoke Daniel of the fourth, that is the Roman Empire, and of the
cruelty of the same, and of the ten kings in subjection thereunto: Now
follows the prophecy of ye Turkish kingdom in these words: 8.
As I considered the horns, behold, there came up among them another little
horn, before whom there were three of the first horns pluckt-awaie, and
behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking
presumptuous things. 23.
And afterward, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom in the earth,
which shall be unlike to all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, 24.
and shall tread it down and break it in pieces. 24.
And the ten horns: out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall rise: and
another shall rise after the^, and he shall be vnlik to the first, 25.
and he shall subdue three kings. And shall speak words against the most high,
and shall consume the saints of the most high, and think that he may chang times
and laws. Hitherto Daniel, whose prophecy the event has proved to be true.
For in the year of Christ 623. Heraclius being Emperor, Mahomet moved
sedition, and foorth-with the Saracens or Arabians joined together these three
dominions Egypt, Syria, and Africa, which are the three horns plucked from
those ten horns of the fourth beast. And Daniel ascribes to this little
horn, that is to the Turkish Empire, three notes, whereby it may be known.
The first whereof is a new law contrary to the law of God. For the eyes do
signify a law subtillie invented. Marks of the Turkish Empire.
The second mark is, Blasphemy against the most high, which is Christ. For
the mouth speaking words against the true God, signifies blasphemies against
the son of God. The third note is, cruelty toward the Church: And he shall
consume, says he, the saints of the most high. The fourth is, an endeavor to
abolish ye Gospel, and the Church. He shall think says he, that he may change
times and laws. God would have this prophecy to be extant for a strengthening
of ye godly against the cruelty of the Turks: yt when they should see the
event to answer to ye prophecy, they might not offend at the stumbling-blocke
of so great persecution, and of such reuolting from the true Church. And
therefore being thus forewarned by the Prophet, let us take heart to our
selves against this Turkish tyranny, and wickedness, especially seeing how
the event has answered to the prophecy. For there have four Monarchies bin
one after another. Now reigns a people which are enemies to God, that openly
does abolish the Prophetical, and Apostolical scriptures.

But how sprang-vp this new kingdom? 2. How the Turks began, etc.
who was the author? who took his part? Mahomet in his youth by reason of his
poverty lived by theft and robbery, afterward having heaped much riches
together, he was a soldier among his contrie-men the Arabiansvnder Heraclius.
In yt war he found occasion of principality, and power. For when the Arabians,
being offended with Heraclius for denieng the^ their pay, and for his
religion, had severed themselves from him, Mahomet joined himself to the angered
soldiers, and stirred-vp their minds aaginst ye Emperor, and encouraged the^
in their defection, wher-vpon by a certain company of soldiers he was chosen
to be their captain (as they co^monlie are extoled in every commotion which
favor the wicked enterprise of the rebellious people, and set upon the
mighty and governors.) In this new capitane many could not abide ye baseness
of his birth, nor the odiousnes of his former life, especialie they loathed him
for a disease he had, which was the falling sickness. He therefore to redeem
himself from this contempt, which is an easy matter among the foolish common
people, pretended a divinity in his doings, faining himself to enter
communication with God, and so when he talked, to be ravished out of himself,
and seemed like unto one afflicted with the falling sickness. And therefore he
said plainly, but untruly, how he was no more a capitane, and prince elected
through the favor of soldiers, but a prophet, and a messenger of the almighty
God, that under the show of divinity he might have al men the more obedient to
his words. But for so much as he was rude altogether and unlearned, he adjoined
to him self two masters and counselers that were Christians, the one whereof
was Sergius an Arian, Sergius the Arrians. Nestorians.
and ye other John Nestorius, to whom there came a third, who was a Jew, a
Thalmudiste. Every of which defended his several sect. Whervppon Mahomet
supposing that he should not only gratify his companions, but also the more
easily allure al nations unto himself, received al, that is, the pertinacie
of Arius, the error of Nestorius, and the vain inventions of the Thalmudiste.
And therefore he received from the Jew circumcision; from the Christians
sundry washinges as it were Baptismes; and with Sergius he denied the
divinity of Christ. Now some worshipped idols; others were baptized, and
somewhat instructed in Christianity, who, as soon as theie had left the
Roman Emperor for the hatred they bare against him, renounced foorth-with the
religion which he defended. Even after the example of those ten tribes of
Israel, which reuolting from the house of David unto Roboam, despised the laws
of their fathers, and went from the service of the only true God unto the
invocation of Devils.

Mahomets manner to enlarge and establish his kingdom was this, 3. How the
Turks multiplied, and increased.
which also his masters taught him: He said how God at the first to mankind
sent Moses, after him Jesus Christ, who were endued with the power to work
miracles. But men gave small heed to them. Therefore he determined to send
Mahomet a warrior without miracles, that whom miracles had not moved,
weapons might compel. He said how he was the last messenger, and that after
him none should come; how Christ in the Gospel had prophesied of him, and
how tidinges was of him through a wonderful light which passed from Eua by
succession of kind thorough al women even to his very mother. See the
subtlety of this knave Mahomet, who knowing that he was destitute altogether
of the heavenly gift to work miracles, which thing was at hand, he fained he
was sent with the sword. But this armed man at the length was vanquished, and
received a sore wound in his mouth, wherebie he lost some of his cheek teeth,
and was thrown into a ditch, and put to a shameful foil, and that the very
day before, he had from the oracle of GOD promised victory to him and his.
Yea and while he was yet a common thief he was oftentimes beaten sore of the
Drianites whose camels he set-vpon returning from Mecha.

And that city which has him now in honor, sometime adjudged him unto
death, as a very hurtful thief, and appointed a reward, if any could bring
him unto them either quick or dead. This champion of the Lord (for sooth)
first a thief, afterward a seditious soldier; then a runne-agate, after that
a capitane of a rebellious host, persuades light heads, enemies to the true
religion, how he is the messenger of God; wherebie we may gather how great
the power of Satan is in them, which embrace not the truth.

Whereof it is that at this day that adversary of God defends his
blasphemies against God by Turkishe and Mahometical force, according to the
prophecy of Daniel.

It follows that we speak of the laws of Mahomet, 4. The laws of Mahome^
which are partly political, and partly ceremonial or of service: but of
these I will touch very few, wherebie it will be easy to judge of the rest.
First of al, to his Arabians, that is, to poor men, accustomed to live upon
the spoil, he aloweth theft, and sets a law of reuengement. Hurt him,
says he, which hurt you. He says also, He that either kills his enemy, or
is killed by his enemy enters into Paradise. He permits men to have many
wives. He aloweth diuorcement for a trifeling cause, and receiving again upon
small occasion. Now, I pray you, what is more against nature than such laws,
if theie may be caled laws which pervert the law of nature, that is common
to all men? On the otherside he has given some laws which make to the
increase of love and goodwil among men. He commands alms to be given, and
promises paradise to such as give liberalie, if so be theie have courageously
foughten against the enemies. He wills punishment to be given to the poor
for their offenses: But to the good law he annexeth impiety, namely how
therebie theie do merit remission of sins. He has ceremonies, washings,
and circumcision; five times in a day he compels his to pray in the
temple. But that hypocrisy helps no whit, seeing theie are void of the
propiciatorie, without which there is none access unto GOD. He wills to
abstain from swines flesh. Hitherto of the laws.

The fables which he intermixeth, 5. Mahomets fables.
as divine mysteries, be very ridiculous and foolish, of which I will recite
four, yt by them the rest, as the Lion by his talantes, may be judged. This
stout souldior of the Lord, Mahomet by name, tells how by the conduction of
Gabriel the Angel he ascended into heaven to talk with God. Where first of al
meets with him an Angel ten thousand times huger than the whole world: for
whom he got a pardon of God, whom he had offended, being requested* to make
intercession unto God for him. Which done, God put his hand upon Mahomet,
whereby he was stricken with so extreme a cold, that it pierced unto the very
marrowe of his back. He said that God was carried in a chair by eight
Angels, whose head he vainelie reports is of such a bigness, that the swiftest
bird that is, in a thousand years can-not fly from one part thereof unto an
other.

The second fable like the same, A fable touching the absteining from wine.
where-vppon the prohibition of wine is builded, is this: There was says he,
two Angels of God, namely, Horroth and Marroth, sent from God on a time from
heaven into the world, appointed to govern and to instruct mankind, with
these commandementes, that theie should neither kill, nor judge unjustly, nor
drink wine. So a long time theie were so taken, and known to be judges over
the whole world. Upon a certain day a woman of al other the fairest came
unto them having a matter against her husband; who to make the judges like her
cause, invited them upon a certain day unto dinner. And being at their good
cheer, she herself brings fine meats and furnishes the table with boules
of wine, yea she serves, and sees that theie lack nothing, and bids the^
to eat, to drink and spare naught. What needs many words? her fair words
overcame them, and drunk with wine theie burned after their fair hostess
(see the chastity of Mahomets Angels!) being overcome theie desired her
company* she promises upon a condition, if one of them would tell her how
theie use to ascend into heaven, and the other how she might descend. The
condition they like. When she had learned the same suddenly she was
lifted-aloft and ascended into heaven. Which when GOD saw, and had sifted the
cause, he made her the day star, as beautiful among the Stars as ever she
was among women. To the Angels, called before his judgment seat, he appointed
that theie should choose either the pains of this life, or of the world to
come; who chose the pains of this life. Wherefore theie are hanged upon iron
chains with their heads downewarde in the pit Behil until the day of
judgment. For which cause the use of wine is forbidden to the folowers of
Mahomet, least theie fall into the like peril.

Such like stuff is the fable touching the prohibition of swines flesh. A
fable of Mahomet touching the forbidding of swines flesh.
When al living creatures, says he, were in the Arch of Noah, the Elephant
caste-backewarde, whereof sprang an hog, who with his snoute turned up
dongue, whereof sprang a mouse, the which gnawed the hemp wherewithal the
boordes of the ship were joined. Hence Noah was stricken with a marvelous
terror, and constrained to ask counsel of the Lord, who for remedy at that
pinch willed Noah to strike a lion upon the forehead, from the nostrels of
which Lion being moved, lepped-out a cat, which hunted the mouse, and delivered
mankind from so great danger. This was the grievous cause, forsooth, why
the flesh of swine is forbidden to be eaten of the Saracens.

Hereunto let us add the fable concerning ye last judgment. A fable of the
last judgment.
Of this he says, God shall give the Angel of death in charge, that he kill
every creature which does breath, as well all the Angels, as all the devils, and
all men, sheep, fishes, beasts, and cattle, that al may be dead except God
himself. This done he will call the Angel of death, saying, O Adriel, is any
thing yet remaining of al my creatures? And he shall answer, Nothing Lord,
but I thie weak and feeble servant. Then shall the Lord say unto him, seeing
thou have killed al my creatures, go thou thie ways between Paradise, and
hell, and afterward kill thie self, and die. So the unhappy wretch departed,
and in that prescribed middleplace, lieng on the ground wrapped in his wings,
he choked himself with such an horrible roaring, as had the celestial
spirits, and earthly creatures bin alive, theie could not choose but have
died thereat. After which time the world shall stand void 40. years together.
Which expired, the Lord holding heaven and earth in his fiste, shall say as
follows, Where be now the Kings, Princes, and Potentates of this world?
Whose is the Kingdom, the Dominion, and the power? Speak if ye have any
truth in your words? And these words thrice repeated, he will raisevp
Seraphuel, and say to him, Take this trumpet, and descend into Jerusalem, and
sound there. Then Seraphuel, having received the trumpet, which is as long as
a iourneie of fifty years, standing in Jerusalem shall blow the trumpet, and
out of the same shall blow all the righteous souls, which flieng all the world
over shal-be dispersed unto their bodies wheresoever theie be, and at this
first sound all the bones shall be gathered together. Then after forty years he
shall blow again, at which sound the bones shall take flesh. And forty
years after that again, when he shall blow the third time, al souls shall
come into their bodies. This done a fire flaming from the West shall drive al
creatures unto Jerusalem, whither when theie are come it shall cease. Then when
for the space of forty years theie have swimmed in their own sweat,
looking still for the judgment, theie shall call Adam saying, Father why have
thou begotten us for such miseries and torments? Can you so suffer us, Father,
to be tossed vncertainelie between hope and fear? O Father cal-vpon God that
he would altogether bring to an end whatsoever he will do with us between Hell
and Paradise. Adam will answer: O sons, ye know how thorough the
persuasion of Satan, I disobeied the commandment of GOD; therefore go ye
unto Noah. Then turning unto Noah, theie shall say, O Father Noah, thou elect
of God, make thou intercession for us. He shall answer, I did what I could, I
saved you in the flood: Mine office is now out, but go you unto Abraham. So
then theie shall cal-vpon Abraham, saying, O Abraham the Father of the faithful,
and of holiness, cast thine eyes of compassion upon us, and show mercy. To who^
Abraham, what pray you unto me? Remember you not, how a long while like a
vagabond, and idolater, and uncircumcised I went astraie; I cannot help you;
but call upon Moses. Then will they cry unto Moses, saying, O thou beloved
messenger of God, and prophet, thou servant of God, hear us. He will answer,
whom call you for? Did not I give you a law, and confirmed the same with
miracles, and yet you believed not? Had you believed me, I would do what you
require; but go ye unto Jesus Christ. Then turned unto Christ, they shall say, O
Jesus Christ, spirit, word and power of God, let thy mercy move thee, and go
between God and us. Then shall Christ say to them, what ye require of me your
selves have forgon. I was sent indeed to you in the power of God, and in the
word of truth, yet went ye astray, and after I had preached to you, ye made
me your God, and so ye have lost my benifite; but go ye unto the last prophet
of al, Mahomet, unto whom being turned theie shall say, O thou faithful
messenger and friend of God, how grievously have we sinned in giving no credit
to thy words, hear us o gracious prophet, beside whom we have no refuge. For
after thee there is none in whom we shall trust. Hear us by the power which God
has given thee. So Gabriel shall come forth, and shall not suffer his friend to
be of no power, his fellows shall come before the face of God, and God shall say
to them, I know wherefore ye do come, be it fro me that I should in any thing
make the prayer of my messenger to be frustrate. Then a bridge being made here
over bell, there shall be present a pair of balance whereby the deeds of almen
being waied, they shall walk upon the bridge. So the godly shall goe-ouer, but
the damned shall fall down into hell. To every one shall a book be given of al
his deeds, and the judgment shall endure 5000. years, then shall Mahomet say
to God, O Lord, al these with a right face do hasten to receive this book.
Last of al death shall be changed into a ram, and be brought between Paradise
and hell.

The Paradise that Mahomet promises to his folowers, The Turks Paradise.
is more meet for swine then for men created after the likeness of God. The
golden ground of Paradise, says he, is distinguished with precious stones and
swet flowers set thick together, planted with all fruitful trees, the pleasant
rivers running through the green feeldes, whereof some powre-out milk, others
white honey, others the purest wine, there shall they be clothed with all sorts
of colors except black. The first dish at the table shall be the liver of the
fish Albis; they shall never make an end of eating, and colling wenches. This
knave knew how these things would like foolish soldiers right well, which are
never satisfied with wine and women. with such ridiculous fables is the
Alchoran replenished, but these few I have written-out, that the vanity of
this villain being found-out, we may the more earnestly beg at the hands of
God, that he would not suffer this vagabonde and theife to enter upon his
Church, but show mercy upon us, and not punish us according unto the
multitude of our sins.

But how comes it to pass, What c^^seth the Turks to be strong.
seeing these are so fond and so ridiculous, that men of courage in Turkey do
not forsake this deceauer, and deluder of mankind? with four bulwarks as it
were he has hedged his law about, that no way be open to subvert the same.

First he commands to kill them which speak against the Alchoran.
Secondly he forbids conference to be had with men of a contrary sect or
religion. Thirdly. he prohibiteth credit to be given to any beside the
Alchoran. Fourthlie, he commands them to separate themselves altogether from
other men, and to say, Let me have my law, and take you yours; ye are free
from that which I do, and I likewise from that which you do. More-ouer to
driue-away al fear of damnation from the mind of his disciples, he says how
every man shall be saved by his own religion (he only excepted which
reuolteth from the Alchoran unto another law) the Jews by the law of Moses;
Christians by the law of the Gospel; and the Saracens by the law of Mahomet.
But seeing this altogether is frivolous and false, I will reason no more nor
dispute hereof: firm and immovable is this sentence: He that obeieth not the
son, John 3. 36.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

And although hitherto it has abundantly been showed how great the vanity
of the Turkish sect is: 6. Arguments to confute the Turk.
yet for the more confirmation of the minds I will hereunto add seven
arguments, whereby the fury of Mahomet is evidently refuted, which be these.

The first is, 1. Argument.
The voice of God in Daniel does pronounce that the kingdom, and service of
the Turks shall arise against God and his saints. Therefore there is no doubt
but this sect is of the devil.

The second, 2. Argument.
It is impossible that that company should be the Church of God, which of
purpose rejects the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, the which have
the testimonies of God, and that very many. But seeing Mahomet does reiecte
them, it cannot be that his religion is of God.

The third, 3. Argument.
It is impossible that those laws are of God which command theft, maintain
the lust of the flesh, and allow mixed Venerie, which the laws of Mahomet do.

The fourth, 4. argument.
It is impossible that that religion is of God, which places the chiefest
happiness in the pleasures of meat, drink, and Venerie, which Mahomet does
evidently.

The fifth, 5. Argument.
That is the true religion which shows the means whereby a man may attain
unto felicity, and whereby a man becomes as it were one thing with God, ye
image of God, whereunto he was made, being repared in him: which the law of
Mahomet does not.

The sixth, 6. Argument.
whatsoever springs of fraud, is defended by force and cruelty, and tends
unto the destruction of mankind, is not wrought by God: and what else, I
beseech you, may be found in Mahomet?

The seventh, 7. Argument
That is the most ancient and best religion, which has the consent of al
times, and the testimonies of Moses, of the Prophets, of Christ, and of the
Apostles. But with this ye pestilence of Mahomet spru^gvp 900. years sithence,
spread abroad by blodie war, is at extreme variance. Therefore there is no
doubt, but the auctor of the same is he which slielie deceived our first
parents, and brought mankind into these miseries, from whence it can not
escape, unless it apprehende Christ by the hand, that is, unless by faith it
rest-vppon Jesus Christ the only mediator.

Last of al, 7. Consolations against the Turks.
it is good to think-vpon comfortes against the rage of Mahomet, and power of
the Turks. The 1. Consolation.
The first whereof may be taken out of the Prophecy which Daniel subioineth to
ye prophecies of the Empire of the Turks. Dan. 7, 27.
The Kingdom, says he, and dominion; and the greatness of the kingdom under
the whole heaven shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and al powers shall serve and obey him. God
by this prophecy does signify how the saints after the troubles of this
life shall enioie an everlasting and heavenly kingdom so that al things shall be
in subjection to them. And then shall it fal-out that every knee both of things
in heaven, Phil. 2, 10.
and things in earth, and things under the earth shall bow to Jesus, and that
either willingly, as children; or perforce, as servants. For all things must
confess that Jesus Christ is the sovereign Lord. 11.
Now for so much as we see the event to have answered to other prophecies of
Daniel, we may not doubt of the event of this prophecy, which as-yet is looked
for touching the glory of the Church.

The second consolation may be fetched from ^ie doctrine of the Gospel, The 2.
Consolation.
which declares how the Church in this life is evermore subject to the
cross, according to these words, Judgment must begin at the house of God. 1.
Pet. 4, 17
For the children of God in this life through the providence of God are
chastised, and that for many causes, which afterward we will declare.

The third consolation may be taken from the example of Christ, The 3.
Consolation.
who so long as he lived in this world, was diversely afflicted:
notwithstanding he overcame the^ al, and through death found life. Hitherto the
examples of the saints are to be referred.

The fourth consolation may be fetched from the use of persecution, The 4.
Consolation.
and from the necessity of the cross: but of these things we shall have
occasion to speak more in the opening of the sixth verse.

CHAP. 9.
Against the superstitious Muscouites.
THE Muscouites, although they believe Jesus the son of the virgin Marie to
be the very Messiah; and acknowledge the Patriarch of Constantinople; and
think more rightly of some points, than Papists do (for they charge the
Bishop of Rome with defection from the seven first synodes) yet have they lost
the purity of the doctrine of the Gospel, and are ignorant of the true serving
of God. For they cal-vpon saints, and chiefly upon one Nicholas: they have
many monasteries of Nuns, and Monks, they tie the remission of their sins
to certain folish ceremonies: they fal-downe superstitiouslie before idols
and images: and have many laws contrary to the law of nature, and of the
ten-commandementes.

And albeit they minister baptism without salt and spittle: Muscouites somewhat
inclined unto religion.
yet for all that more superstitiously than either Jews or Ethnikes, they use
diverse washings, as baptism, at certain times of the year. Likewise they
disalowe not the horrible mixture with beast. So that if there be any Church
among them, it lurketh in bannishment as it were.

Merchantes report how the Bible is translated newly into their language;
Merchantes notable means to spread abroad the Gospel.
and how such as embrace the Augustane confession, are suffered to be among
them. Whereby there is some hope, that by little and little their doctrine may
be purged, and their manners amended: especialie, seeing even they them selves
do take longer nauigations than in times passed they have done, and many
strangers come unto them for traffic sake. So that we may hope that in time
they may be brought to Christ through godly merchantes, by whom the Lord in
these later days has begun marueilouslie to spead-abroad the Gospel.

CHAP. 10.
Against the idolatrous Papists.
For So Much as afterward by occasion of the third verse we shall entreat of the
threfolde state of the Church in this life, namely a quiet, troubled, and
bannished; and also of the outward marks, and inward properties of the true
Church, I will put-of this disputation against the Papists till I come unto
that place, Chap. 16. The sum of Popish impiety*
where I will show, how the form of the Papistical government is clean
contrary to the form of the kingdom of Christ; how the doctrine of the law,
of the Gospel, and of the service of God is foulie corrupted in the Popedom;
how the sacraments are partly mangled, partly defiled with human
traditions, and augmented contrary unto the word of God; Of the Papists you
shall read at large in the 23. 24. and 25. chap. of this 1. part.
how many foolish and ridiculous ceremonies are not received only, but
preferred also before the holy scripture; how the discipline both of the
clergy, and of the Church is utterly decayed; finalie, how al things are
full of abominable superstitions, and idolatrous worshippinges, that no man
with a clear conscience may join himself to their company.

CHAP. 11.
Against voluptuous worldlinges, Epicures or Atheistes.
The Epicures secretly to themselves deride al religion, Atheistes.
whose hearts the God of this world by his craft and subtletie has bewitched.
They say that nations are governed by the show of religion, even as horses
are by the bridle and spurs, and that religion serves to that end and for
nothing else. But this weakeneth not the power and nature of religion, Men
naturalie think there is a God.
but rather confirms the same. For it shows how God himself has
ingraffed a care of religion within the hearts of men: that even by the show
of religion, men may be guided as by the face of virtue, and art of wisdom.
Now if any do say, without wisdom assemblies of men, cannot be governed,
and maintained, what may ensue? Therefore that wisdom is nothing at al: who
can so gather of the same? yea rather yt wisdom is a great force, light, and
power of man's wit. So that man is borne unto godliness; but as through humane
ignorance he mingleth some wickedness, and folly unto perfect wisdom, and
other arts, and virtues: so does he the same to religion, whereby oftentimes
it degenerateth into superstition. And therefore Cicero says truly: Cicero
lib. 1. de legibus.
There is no people either so wild, or so savage, if it be ignorant what
kind of God it should have, yet it knows how it should have one.

What should I speak of the householde witness, By our conscience we may
gather how there is a God.
even the conscience, which we al carry about with us? Certes such is ye
force of ye same, that perforce it will compel thee to acknowledge yt there is a
God, which with due obedience will be worshipped. It testifies that God is the
revenger of wickedness, yea after this life. Plato writes; that many when they
are in health do think al but toies which is spoken of hell, but at the point
of death, when their conscience pricketh them, they are troubled and vexed out
of measure, caling their former life into mind. Such is the force of the
conscience even in the very wicked, especialie when they must needs die. This
testimony of the conscience is doutlesse the judgment of God: who has
imprinted in our minds a certain affection to religion, tending to this end,
that conjoined to God we may be perfectly happy: for which end we were both
at the first created, and afterward redeemed.

Now the Epicures seeing they cannot deny this power of the conscience, the
wretches, seek I cannot tell what comfort out of a fable of Lazarus, A fable
of Lazarus.
whom our Lord raised after he had been dead four days. They feign how
Lazarus was requested of his friends to tell the^ the state of the soul, when
his body lay dead in ye grave. He promised, as their fable is, that after his
death he would leave a book, whereinto he would writ such things as he knew
concerning the state of the souls after this life. What should many words?
They feign that, Lazarus being dead, a book was found, which opened, not
so much as one letter could be seen therein. Whereof, that is of one fable they
gather another, how that the souls either do perish with the bodies, or be so
drowned with deep sleep, that they do not so much as feel, much less
know, any thing at al. The Pope is keeper of the Epicures book.
By this restoratiue the Epicures, especialie the Pope, who, they say, is the
keeper of this book, and many of his Cardinals, and Bishops, who lack at no
time scholars at their will, chiefly among them, which bewitched either with
the pleasures, riches, or glory of this world, would gladly have the souls
perish with the bodies, that they might not or dare abide the pains of their
wicked life, endeavor to extinguish the power of the conscience.

But the holy scripture does very forcibly confute the vanity of these
men, Arguments to prove the immortality of the soul.
wherein first of al we may consider the creation of the soul of man, which is
created after the likeness of God. By which likeness undoubtedly beside the
conformity with God, the immortality of ye soul is signified: the which is
not of the earth as the body is, but the breathing of God, Genesis 2. 7.
as the scripture speaks, whereof the Epistle unto the Hebrews distinguishes
between fleshly parents, Heb. 12, 9.
and God, the father of the spirits.

Secondly, From the testimony of the holy scripture.
Christ adhorteth his disciples not to fear them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but to fear him, who is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell. Matt. 10. 28
Does not Christ hereby give us plainly to understand that the souls after
death do live? From examples.
But the state after this life is diverse according to the person either of the
believer, or unbeliever: which thing the Lord manifestly, does show in the
example of Lazarus and the rich man. Luke 16, 22. 23.
Whereof the soul of one in the bosom of Abraham, the soul of the other in
torments, do expect the day of judgment. In that it is said how Lazarus is
in the bosom of Abraham, What is to be gathered by Lazarus being in Abraham's
bosom.
we have to learn first that Lazarus through faith was the son of Abraham.
For children are wont to be carried in the arms of their parents. Secondly,
that Lazarus lives, is cherished, and fares well, even as a child in the
bosom of his father. Thirdly, that he is in the same state, and place of
happiness which father Abraham is. Fourthlie, how there is a certain mutual,
and sovereign good-wil between the souls that-rest in the bosom of Abraham.
For all are joined together with brotherly affection.

This very thing is taught by the saying of Christ unto the theife, From the
authority of Christ.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23, 43.
which is not, that the soul shall either perish or sleep, but to be happy,
and to perceive their blessedness, although not so fully as hereafter. Christ
gives us to learn that the souls of Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob do live, Mat.
22, 32
when he says, The God of Abraham, the God of Isaak, and the God of Iaakob is
not the God of the dead, but of the living.

What means Peter when he says, Christ his preaching unto the spirits in
prison, what is signifies.
Christ went, and preached unto the spirits that are in prison? In the days of
Noah the spirit of Christ preached to men, whose souls, Peter testifies,
were in prison. The same Peter affirms how the end of faith is the salvation
of souls. 1. Pet. 3, 19
The salvation surely can be neither death nor a sound sleep. 1. Pet. 1, 9*
Neither is it a dark thing which Paul says, Phil. 2, 23.
I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. Solomon in the last chapter of
Ecclesiastes, Eccle. 12, 7.
does say, until dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return
to God that gave it: Heb. 12, 9.
In which respect he is caled by ye Apostle, The father of spirits. Hitherto
belongs yt in ye wisdom of Salomo^, The souls of the righteous are in the
hand of God, Wisd. 3, 1.
and no torment shall touch them. With this agrees that saying of the Psalmist,
Psa. 116, 15
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. And Steven full
of the spirit: Act. 7, 59.
Lord Jesus recieue my spirit.

Moreover whereas they object how there shall be one judgment whereas rewards
shall be rendered for the godly, and punishment appointed for the wicked, we
confess the same is true, yet does it not follow thereby that the souls both
of the saints and of sinners do either perish with their bodies, or do
sleep until the last day. For although the souls of the righteous are in
Paradise, and the souls of ye ungodly in torments: yet have neither the
souls of the godly perfect joy, nor the ungodly al their pains until the
day of judgment do come. Chrysostom speaking of Abel, and Noah does say:
Theie prevented us in the fight, and they shall not preuen^ us in receiving the
crown. Because their is one time appointed of crowning al men. Augustine in
many places describes certain secret places, wherein the souls of the
righteous are contained, until they receive the crown, and full glory: whereas
the wicked in the mean while are in pain expecting the everlasting torments
of the righteous judgment. These things therefore are not contrary, the
souls of the godly are with Christ in heaven, and the ungodly in pain, and
that an universal judgment shall be, where the righteous shall receive perfect
glory, and the reprobate eternal torments, after the souls come again into
their bodies.

Notwithstanding although by these and such like arguments the Epicures are
convinced of ye state of the souls after death: An objection of Epicures.
yet are they not quiet, but they proceed in asking, and they urge, as they
think, very gravely. The Jews say they, Diversities of religion.
affirm how their laws be Gods laws; the Saracens, even the mayor part of
mankind, prefer theirs; the Muscouites defend their religion to the death;
the Papists, they glory of primacie and succession, and therefore they call
themselves Catholics, and blush not to term al other heretics; ye
Lutherans also stand to your religion, neither do ye agree very well together.
In this confusion of judgments, what is to be done? who are to be credited?

We have sufficiently already showed the vanity of the Jews, Answer.
Saracens, and Muscouites, as touching the Papists and us, hear us both,
confer weigh with judgment the reasons of us both, mark which of us do
draw our arguments out of the fountains of our Savior, and which out of
the filthy puddle of man's inventions; so shall you easily find out the truth,
and the way to judge aright. But if this shall seem tedious unto thee, stink
thou as thou will in thine own filthiness; what thou gettest thereby thou shall
one day find. If it plese you, behold your end in the 37. and 73. Psalms.
Now concerning the dissension between ourselves, it overthrows not the
truth of the foundation, which al of us in a manner with one consent defend.

And thus much against the Epicures. For I think it not good to spend any more
words to swine. And therefore once again I turn my self unto men.

CHAP. 12.
1. Of the true Church, what it is; 2. Whence it is; 3. How governed, and
defended, etc.
WHat is the true Church? The true church, wha^
The Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts, as our Psalm defines. That is, the
true Church is that which of the Lord is both gathered, governed, and
protected; which harkeneth unto, cleaves, and is obedient to the Lord of
hosts; which has ye Lord of Hosts dwelling in it; which is in a strange
country in banishment, tending toward her country by following her captain
Christ. These things are so linked-together and follow of the first, that no
way theie can be separated. 1. God the gatherer of the true church.


First therefore the true Church is gathered by the Lord of Hosts. For he by
his word gathers to him self out of mankind a Church, Mar. 16, 15 16.
according to that: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will
not believe, shall be damned. For seeing without the Church there is no
salvation, by the word of the Gospel men are caled without respect of
nations, and persons out-of the kingdom of darkness unto the kingdom of
light, that is unto the Church, and received by faith, whereunto ye outward
sign Baptism is added, The meditatio^s which baptism does offer.
as it were a watchworde of war, whereby theie are admonished of the purging
which is made by the holy spirit after a certain secret manner, as our Lord
does teach in the 3. Chapter of John* of thinking upon holiness continualie; of
the cross, and glory of the Church; of death, and resurrection from death;
and of the true God, which is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which
true and only God, theie are bound, being received into the Church, to
worship with true holiness both here in this world, and after the resurrection
for evermore. This true Church in the first Epistle of John, and also in the
Apostolical Creed, is caled The communion of Saints, that is, the fellowship
of al men that are sanctified in Jesus Christ, through the holy Ghost.

This sanctification is then wrought, How and when we are sanctified.
when we believe the word of the Gospel, and by a lively faith rest our
selves upon the Lord of Hosts, which is Jesus Christ. And that the true
Church is as we say, it may be proved by that notable example of our Father
Abraham. For he at such time as he was in Chaldea, Abraham a pattern of the
true Church.
heard the voice of the Lord, and obeyed him; being caled out of Hur of the
Chaldeans, and from the company of idolaters, he severed and separated
himself from the wicked world, both in heart, in will, in faith, in obedience
toward God, and in confession. Whereunto the name of the Church does fitly
agree. Fruit gathered from the e^ymologie of the Church.
For, as the Grecians caled that company, which by a common crier was called
from the other people, to hear the mind of the Senate, a Church; so the
Apostles take the Church of Christ for that company of men which by the
preachers of the word are called from the kingdom of Satan to the hearing,
and following of Christ, and to the seuering and separating themselves from the
wicked world, and swarms of the reprobate, both in heart, will, faith,
obedience toward God, and in confession. Who a member of the church.
So that whosoever disioineth himself from the prophanitie of the world, and
by faith ioineth himself to Christ with a purpose truly to serve him, he is
a member of the Church, and a partaker of all the good things of Christ.

And although great is the weakness of al men, How the faithful be holy.
and manifold flames of wicked affections do often arise, yea in the very
godly, against which in spirit theie do contend: yet he abides in the
Church, and is holy, whosoever keeps faith and a good conscience, or a good
purpose. For as the conscience being wast^d, shipwreck is made of faith: so
where there is a good conscience, there is faith, by which we enioie the most
excellent of al treasures, even the righteousness of Christ, wherebie we please
God. No respect of persons before God.
Neither must we think upon any difference here either of nations, persons,
or sex. For faith makes al alike, as touching the right of the kingdom. And
although diverse and sundry be the gifts: yet serve theie al for the unity of
the Church. This unity of the true Church gathered out of many and sundry
nations, Unity of the Church like unto a pome-granate.
as it were into one house or family, is excelentlie shadowed by a
Pome-granate tied to a bell. For as in the Pome-granate under one outward bark
many granes are inwardly vnited-together: so infinite people of the Church
are covered under the unity of the Church, the which agree together through
true charity, albeit in gifts and caling theie are distinguished. The bell
annexed signifies the voice of such as preach the Gospel, wherebie the members
of the Church are gathered as it were into one body.

This true Church, 2. God the governor and the protector of the true Church
seeing it is the tabernacle of the Lord of Hosts, is governed, and protected
by him, so that the gates of hell, that is, the counsels, snares, and
batteringes whether it be of the world or of the devil, cannot prevail
against the same. The Church a small flock in comparison yet immovable.
The Church in deed, compared to that huge company of the reprobate and
damned devils, is but a very little flock: yet continues it immovable
against the force and power of all adversaries whatsoever. For notwithstanding
many citizens of the Church be murdered, and put to sundry torments, yet is
not the Church abolished therbie, but in death it self theie get the victory
while theie keep their faith and confession. Psa. 116, 15
For precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, as that
which is the gate unto everlasting blessedness. Therefore was it well said of
Augustine, The men of this world are unhappily happy: but the Martyrs were
happily unhappy. For theie were for a time unhappy, The church like an Island
in the sea.
but happy for ever. The Prophet Isaiah compares the Church to an Island, in
his 2. Chapter. For as an Island placed in the sea, although it be beaten with
many a cruel storm and tempest that arise, yet abides invincible, because the
Lord has set a bound to the Sea, which it cannot ouerpasse: so the Church
abides safe notwithstanding manifold storms do beat upon the same. For the
Lord of Hosts defends and protecteth it, who will not suffer tyrants to use
more cruelty against ye same than it can well endure, or shall be good for it. As
often therefore as we hear, how the tyrants of the world do spoil the
Church, and murder the members of the same, let us comfort our selves with
this cogitation, the Lord of Hosts can not forsake his tabernacle, which he
has made, but will by his divine power and presence defend the same: and
withal pray we unto this Lord, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above
that we be able to bear.

Moreover this Church, 3. The true church, harkeneth unto the word of the Lord.
as it is gathered by the word of God: so will it faithfulie retain ye same
without al corruption. It knows how Christ alone is to be harkened unto in
the ministers of the Gospel. And that is it which the Lord himself does
say: John. 10, 27 5.
My sheep hear my voice: for theie know not the voice of strangers. This is
a special note wherebie the Church of Christ is distinguished from other
assemblies.

By which we are admonished to shun false-christes, and false-prophetes even
as we would the very devil himself: For this alwaie is the scope of Satan,
namely that, despising the voice of the Lord, we should hearken unto him.
For, as he environed our first parents by sophistry, and deprauing the word
of God: so always he labors to entrap the Church: after the same sort, and
manner. And therefore it stands us upon above al to listen-vnto the voice of
our shepherd, despising the voice of strangers, by whom the devil speaks.
So then when the Papists do bid us to hear them, let us answer that Christ
our shepherd has commanded to hear his voice only, and to content us
there-withal. This voice of our shepherd is comprehended in the writings both
of the Prophets and Apostles, and that not obscurelie, but plainly, as
touching the ground of our salvation. When the Pope does bid thee to call upon
saints; shun him as the serpent which by his lie cast our first parents
unto the death. For it is contrary to the words of our sheepeheard who says:
Matt. 4, 10
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Again,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50, 15
and so of the rest. For a godly mind is never at quiet unless it hear this
voice, and be truly persuaded, that thus says the Lord of hosts.

Again, this Church, for so much as it harkeneth only unto the voice of the
Lord of Host^s, 4. The true Church obeieth Christ only.
it cleaves to him, and obeieth him and none beside. Others follow other
masters, some cleave to worldly riches and pleasures; many are carried-awaie
with the tempests of their own affections, that theie make small account of
the Church of Christ: but the true Church possesses all the treasures of
riches in Christ alone, for which cause it cleaueth-to and obeieth him; it
knows how it was said of their master, Mat. 23, 8.
Be not ye caled Rabbi, for one is your doctor, to wit, Christ. To him alone
therefore it seeks, according to the words of the Church in the 73. psalm:
Psalm. 73, 28
As for me, it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare al thy works. But seeing others that are not in
the Church of God, to their certain condemnation do follow other masters,
theie do more and more estrange themselves from God, as in the same Psalm it
is said: Psalm. 73, 37
Lo theie that with-drawe themselves from thee shall perish: thou destroiest al
them that go a whoring from thee. But what is it to cleave unto the Lord of
Hosts? It is by faith to be espoused, and by hope, confession; and obedience
according to his word, To cleave unto the Lord of hosts, what;
to be joined to him. For as by faith we receive him, as our beloved spouse,
and are joined to him: So by hope, and confession we continue in him as it were
depending to a trusty anchor. Whereof we are carried-into his commendation,
esteeming of al things of no price in respect of the obedience we owe unto him.

Therefore when the godly for confession of the Gospel are compelled to change
their aboade, and see their substance to be seased-vpon, let them take
consolation from hence, and look not so much upon the present world, as for
the event, the ioieful event to come, which theie shall find if so be theie
abide constantly in the faith and confession; let them think how there
shall be a righteous judgment, wherein as theie, that cleave to ye Lord by faith
and confession, shall find the words of the Psalmist true, Psalm. 73, 28
saying, As for me it is good for me to draw near to God: so such as turn
themselves from God by incredulity, and renouncing of confession, shall
crie-out how theie are most miserable: let them think how confession is
necessary, according to this saying* Romans 10, 10
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation: Finalie, let them think, this is an earnest
commandment of God, 1. Co. 10, 14
Fly from idolatry.

Besides, 5. In the true Church the Lord of hosts does dwell.
for so much as this true Church is the tabernacle of the Lord of Hosts, it
has doubtless the Lord of hosts dwelling in her. And therefore not without
good cause is she termed the temple of God in the Scriptures. Hitherto
belongs that of Paul: The Church is the temple of God.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? 1. Cor 3. 16. 17.
If any man destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For the temple
of God is holy, which ye are. Hence therefore may be gathered how great the
glory of the Church is; what purity is required to be in the same; how
religiously it should serve God; and what punishments be prepared for them, who
shall profane this Temple of God.

The glory of the Church surely is very great, The glory of the Church.
in that the heavenly wisdom, that is, the word of God is committed to her;
in that God hears her prayers; and protecteth her continualie; in that she
has always bin invincible, notwithstanding all her afflictions, and troubles;
in that she has bin famous both with prophecies, and miracles; in that she
has excelled with many heroical virtues; finalie in that she is appointed to
be the heir of eternal life.

Now at the greatenesse of this glory none can sufficiently wonder. And yet
it is more wonderful than all this, that the divine majesty, to wit, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, does vouchsafe to elect, and to
consecrate the heart of man for their habitation, and there to dwell, according
to the promise of Christ: John. 14, 23
If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and will dwell with him.

See now what a great difference there is between the Church of God,
Difference between the true Church and other assemblies.
and other assemblies. The Church of God, is the Temple of God: but other
assemblies are in deed the houses of devils. As therefore nothing is more
delectable, nothing more clean, nothing better, nothing more holy than yt is:
so there is nothing more abominable, nothing more filthy, nothing worser,
nothing more profane than these assemblies are. Not without cause then did
David with great admiration break into these words, Psalm. 87, 3
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. The consideration of this
glorious condition of the Church should be a good cause to stirre-vp al men to
join themselves unto the Church of God. But, alas, such is the blindness, such
is the foolishnes of man's heart, that very few are moved with ye glory of the
Church, and many taken with pleasures, delights, riches, and promotion, can
no whit behold this glory.

What purity is required to be in the Church, The purity of the Church.
may appear in that she is taken-for, and called, The holy Temple of God.
For as a Temple made by man, and consecrated to God, should be clear from
idols, and al uncleanness, that men therein may meet syncerelie to serve the
Lord, through says according to Gods word, for which cause our Savior Christ
cast the biers and sellers out of the Temple of Jerusalem, Mat. 21, 1^ 13.
saying, Mine house shall be caled the house of prayer: So every Christian, that
he may be an holy Temple of God, must be separated from the profane
Gentiles, and have no place for idols and uncleanness within him, that all the
powers both of his mind and body may consent truly, and syncerelie to serve
the Lord God; and finalie that with unfeigned repentance he may throwe-down
himself before the Majesty of God, and rise-againe through confidence in the
gracious promise, and so in the fear of God by mortification of the flesh, and
quickening of the spirit go on forward daily more and more, until he
attain unto the mark he shoots at. And although none can be clear from al
sin while he lives in this world, as above also I have touched: How we are
holy and pure in this life.
yet who so reteineth faith and a good conscience, is judged pure and holy
before God, and that in two respects.

First by the imputation of the holiness of Christ: secondly by inchoation of
obedience. Wher-of it is, that in respect of the ungodly, and unpenitent
persons, the godly before God are counted for most holy, for most pure, and
perfect without al spot or wrinckle. For God imputes not the remnants of sin
unto them, but looketh-vpon them as theie are clothed, and adorned with the
righteousness of his son Jesus Christ.

Now, The holy service of God in the Church.
the Church being the holy Temple of God, God is necessarily to be served in
the same, and that purelie, and holilie. And this service is a work commanded
of GOD, Service of God, what;
done through faith, principalie for the glory of God. Then that this service
may be pure and holy, it is required first of all that the work of the
service be holy, that is prescribed by the word of God, and infected with no
humane, or devilish additions. For so the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, does
say: Walk in my commandementes, and not in the commandments of your fathers.
And that the works commanded by men are not the service of God of themselves,
the Prophet Isaiah teaches when he says: Isa. 23, 13.
In vain theie worship me, teaching for doctrines men's precepts. Matt. 15, 9.
And Paul in plain words condemns al such traditions of man. 1. Cor. 7, 23.
Hence therefore let us conclude a most certain rule. Colos. 2, 20. 21. and
No service pleases God, but what he ordeineth, and commends to us in his
word.

Secondly unto the pure and holy service of God, it is required that the
mind and conscience of the worker be holy and pure. For when the mind is
vnpure, it is abominable whatsoever a man does, although to outward show it
seem to be a right holy work exacted by the law of God; and although there
be great use thereof among men, according to that of Paul unto Titus, Ti^us.
1, 15.
Unto the pure are al things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. 16.
Theie profess that they know God, but by works theie deny him, and are
abominable and disobedient, How faith does purify the heart.
and unto every good work reprobate. And how the mind of man is made pure by
faith, it is manifest. For by faith, Act. 15, 9.
as witnesses the Apostle, the hearts be purified, not because faith of it
self can do so, but for that by faith the blood of Christ is applied, by the
sprinckling whereof our hearts be cleansed from dead works. Thirdly that the
service of God may be holy and pure, it is required, that the end of the
work be pure and holy, that is, that without al hypocrisy, with a simple
heart thou set the glory of God before thine eyes, that is, that thou do
whatsoever thou do, only because God has commanded the same to be done,
who^ thie mind is, with all thine affection, mind, will, and life to glorify. A
work so done, is a pure and holy service of God. And although the work it
self be apparent for the most part, and in ye eyes of men, very base: yet it
is a spiritual service of God: because it is the work not of ye flesh, but of
the spirit, before which is proposed the glory of God. And that theie, who
shall violate this holy temple of God, Punishment of such as defile the Church
of God.
shall not escape scot-free, this threatening of the Apostle does declare, If
any man does violate the Temple of God, him will God destroy. But this Temple
is violated by idols, and uncleanness, that is by erroneous doctrine, 1. Cor. 3,
17.
superstitious worshippinges, How and whereby the church is defiled.
schism, by wickedness and prophanes of life: who so is guilty of any one of
these vices, does violate the Temple of God. What then shall we say of the Pope
who ouerwhelmeth the doctrine of the Gospel with ye dreams of Monks; who
brings infinite superstitions into the church; who parts a sunder ye unity
of the Church by the manifold orders of Friars; who winketh at the monstrous
impuritie of Clergy men by using no discipline; and who is an example himself
to all the world of wickedness, and unholy conversation?

Furthermore by the name of Tabernacles, 6. The true Church in this world is in
exile and banishment never at rest.
we are put in mind of the Churches peregrination, and wandering from one place
unto another, until she come unto her true country. For as tabernacles or
tents of war, be removed hither and thither: so the Church of GOD in this
life has no sure, Of the banished state of the church read more afterward,
chap. 20. of this 1 part.
and quiet abode, but often is compelled to change her seat. This pilgrimage,
wherebie in deed every man, as Augustine does say, is a pilgrim in this
world, does admonish us of sin, which is the cause of this peregrination. For,
because of sin we are cast with our first parents out of Paradise into the land
wherein we soiorne. So yt we are removed from Jerusalem, Jerusalem
yt is from the sight and fruition of peace, Babylon.
into Babylon, that is into confusion, and exile wherein we wander-about far and
wide. And although we are al pilgrims: Sundry kinds of strangers.
yet the condition of al men is not like. For some are quite out of the way
into their country, and some are in ye ready way. For whosoever believes not, is
neither in his country, nor in ye way thereunto. And he that soiourneth, and
walks by faith, is not yet in his country, but for all yt is in the right
way. This was it which the Apostle says, Heb 13, 14.
We have not here a continuing city: but we seek one to come. As therefore
they, who often are enforced to change their seat in iorneieng, must suffer
many troubles, and quietly put them up: so the Church of God in this world
shall never be free from trappes, and troubles both of men and devils, so long
as it wandereth in the dark vales of this life.

Therefore we are to walk warily in this pilgrimage, and to beware of the
snares of false doctrine; of prophanes of conversation; of wondering at
novelties; least being taken with the inticements of this world we forget
our country, and reject the same in respect of our exile: as many of them
did, who being carried-awaie into the captivity of Babylon, refused to return
thence into their native country. In all hardness and adversity let us comfort
our selves with hope to return one day into our country again; and although
we are in body absent, yet in mind let us be present in heaven with our
capitane; and as Paul admonishes, Phil 3, 21.
Let our conversation be in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ; finalie let us bear in mind how ye Church in
this pilgrimage is governed by the providence of God, who will see yt no rage
either of Satan or of any limme of his shall utterly destroy the same. For as
God was always in the tabernacles of his people in the wilderness, and
miraculouslie did foster, and defend them: So Christ, our captain will never
be from his Church, according as he has promised, Mat. 28, 20
I am with you until the end of the world.

Finalie, 7, The true Church follows her captain Jesus Christ.
seeing the Church is in a strange co^trie, and tends home-warde, that is to
the heavenly Jerusalem, it stands her-vppon in this hard pilgrimage to
follow her captain rightly, that by his direction she may at the length
happily attain unto her desired home, For as the captain of the people of
God, Moses, conducted the Israeltes out of Egypt through the red sea; and after
him Joshua brought them into the promised land: So Jesus Christ, and none
else, shall bring his Church into the celestial country; according as he
testifies of himself, John. 14, 6.
saying, I am the way, the truth, and the life. And albeit Augustine does
featelie interpret that saying of Christ, when he says, He was the way not
erring; the truth not deceiving; the life not failing; the way in example;
the truth in promise; the life in reward: yet for so much as this asseueration
contains many good lessons, and comfortes, I will expound the same somewhat
more plainly, and at large.

These three things are diligently to be distinguished, The way, truth,
life. Whereby first of al generalie is signified, how Christ alone is the
beginning, middle, and consummation of our salvation and happiness: and
therefore, that works neither going before faith, nor conioined with faith,
nor yet following faith, do merit salvation, and happiness. Then particularly
the manner would be gathered out of the scriptures, how Christ is the way; how
the truth; and how the life.

How therefore is Christ the way? How Christ is the wale by doctrine.
He is the way both by doctrine, and by merit, and by example. By doctrine, in
teaching us those things which tend unto our salvation, according to that of
John, John. 1, 18.
No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten son of God, which is
in the bosom of the father, he has declared him: 1. Cor. 1, 30.
and Paul says, Jesus Christ of God is made unto us wisdom. For this eternal
son of God has always been present with his Church, and by his spirit
instructed the Prophets touching himself as witnesses Peter. 2. Pet. 1, 21.
And therefore whosoever abides in the doctrine of Christ, abides in the way of
salvation: but he that wandereth from the doctrine of Christ, runs headlong
into the way of perdition. So then let our only care be, to embrace, and
defend the synceritie of the Gospel, setting-apart al danger either of life, or
goods. And let us know, Mat. 10, 39
yt he was true of his word which said He that loaseth his life for my sake,
Luke. 9, 24.
shall save it.

How is Christ the way by merit? How Christ is the way by merit.
Because he alone by the obedience of the cross has cleansed us from sin,
and imputes to us his obedience whereby he has fulfilled ye law, that we may
be counted righteous before God, as though we our selves had fulfilled the
same. And this is it which Paul says, Romans 10, 4.
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes,
that is, Every one that believes, has as much as the law requires, namely
righteousness performed by Christ, but through grace imputed unto him; which
thing the Apostle at large expresses by a comparison, where he contains the
sum of his meaning in these words, Romans 5, 19.
As by one man's disobedience many became sinners: so by the obedience of one,
many are made righteous. And Augustine to the same effect does say, Our sins
he has made his sins, that he might make his righteousness to be ours. Of
this merit of Christ they truly do participate, who confess, and bewail
their offenses, and by unfeigned repentance do fly unto the mercy of God,
offered without respect of persons to so many as believe. For the believer is
cleansed from sin by ye virtue of ye sacrifice of Christ; is endued with Christ
his righteousness; and received gratis unto everlasting life, yt is in one word,
is justified. For justification is nothing else but an absoluing of the
believing man from sin; an imputing of the righteousness of Christ; and a
free accepting unto everlasting life for Christ his sake. And whosoever shall
patch his own merit with Christ's, as either a part, or a cause, or
consummation of righteousness, is doubtless out of the way, according unto
that of Paul unto the Romans, Being ignorant of the righteousness of God,
Romans 10, 3.
and going about to stablish their own righteousness, they have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness unto every one that believes. 4.
Wherefore abide we in the way of Christ his merit, least with the unbelieving
Jews, and idolatrous Papists we utterly forgo righteousness, and salvation.

How is he the way by example? Christ how the way by example,
In proposing himself for a pattern of godliness, according to that; I have
given you an example, that ye should do, John. 13, 15.
even as I have done to you. Again; Io 13, 24.
Love ye one another, as I have loved you. I am the light of the world, Ioh.
15, 12.
he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, Ioh. 8, 12.
but shall have the light of life. Now he does follow Christ, who both
embraces his doctrine, and rests upon his merit, and places the example of
Christ, as a light, before him.

Then by doctrine Christ does illuminate the mind, that he may show the
father; by merit he does justify; and by his example prescribes a rule to
live by: so that justly he deserves to be called the only way of
salvation, and happiness.

How is Christ the truth? Christ he the truth.
He is the truth, both in fulfilling the prophecies; and in performing
promises; and finalie in giving true liberty and freedom. For first all the
prophecies of the prophets, and figures of the old Testament are fulfilled in
him, according unto that of John: John. 1, 17.
The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: that
is, what Moses has shadowed by figures, Christ in truth has fulfilled.

Again he does constantly keep promise. He has promised to be with his
Church, and he gives an evident token that he is present by his wonderful
preserving ye same amiddes the rage of Satan and his limbs; Mat. 28, 20
He has promised that the gates of hell shall not overcome the Church, Mat. 16,
18.
which promise he keeps faithfully.

Finalie he is the truth also, in giving true liberty. John. 8, 31.
Hitherto is that of John, If ye continue in my word^, 38.
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free: that is, of the
servants of sin, he will make you the free sons of God, so that sin can
have no more power over you. And this was it which afterward in the same chap.
is said, 36.
If the son shall make you free, you shall be free in deed. And the son
makes free, when he endueth man with his spirit, according to the saying,
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

How is Christ the life? How Christ is the life.
By regenerating, sanctifieng, and glorifieng. By regenerating, because through
his spirit he regenerateth us into new men. Christ the life by regenerating us
For through believing, we by a certain secret blast, and working of the
spirit of Christ, are borne the children of God, according to that saying,
John. 1, 12.
He gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name.
The greek word in that place signifies not so much a power as a pre-eminence.
And therefore Nonnus did aptly expresses it (...), that is, a celestial honor
or pre-eminence. How this new spiritual nativity comes to pass, Christ
teaches, John. 3. The wind blows where it lists, John. 3, 8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes: so
is every man that is borne of the spirit, that is, As nothing of the wind is
perceived, but through the blast and sound: so we be regenerated after an
hidden form when we believe, but that regeneration is perceived through the
power, and working of the holy spirit in the man regenerate. A notable token of
this new regeneration, is Baptism. Furthermore here would be considered the
comparison between the life of nature, Life of nature, and grace.
and the life of grace, the more to stir us up unto the love of the life of
grace. The life of nature is very short: but the life of grace is the
beginning of immortality. As an image, has the shape, and not the substance:
So this present life has nothing permanent, nothing of continuance. And
therefore Paul does say, The fashion of this world goeth-away; 1. Cor. 7, 3*
for this present life has many sudden changes: But the life of grace,
wherebie we are the sons of God, has the things which evermore abide and
continue. The present life, is caled a natural life: but the life of grace, is
a divine life, as witnesses the Apostle. The present life is excluded out of
Paradise: but the life of grace is entered into the spiritual paradise;
wherefore henceforth beware we of trappes, least again, deceived of the old
serpent, we be excluded out of Paradise.

Again, Christ the life by sanctifieng us.
Christ is the life by sanctifieng. For the regenerate more and more daily by
the power of ye death and resurrection of Christ are mortified in the flesh,
and quickened in ye spirit. Romans 61, 3.
For so says ye Apostle, Know ye not, that al we which have been baptized in to
Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him
by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised-vp from the dead by
the glory of the father, so we also should walk in newnes of. Therefore
that the flesh is mortified in us, it is done by the virtue of Christ his
death; that the spirit is quickened, it is by the efficacy of Christ his
resurrection.

This mortification and this quickening, The (...) of the image of God in man
(...)?
be parts of sanctification, whereunto the Apostle testifies we are called.
This sanctification or separation of man from the uncleanness of the gentiles,
through the mortification of the flesh; and co^iu^ction of him with God
through ye quickening of the spirit, is ye renewing, or repairing of the image
of God in man. Wherefore as the image of Caesar in coin, puts men in mind
what is due to Caesar: So this image of God, does admonish man, what he,
bearing this image of God, owes to God.

Last of al, Christ the life by glorifieng us.
he is called the life by glorifieng. For by his own power he shall raise us
up, and being vp-raised, he will endue us with immortal glory. For they are
both the benefits of Christ, to wit, both the raising-vp of the dead and the
giving of eternal life, wherein we shall be conformable to him worlds without
end. This likeness of the Church with Christ which is the conjunction, Perfect
fe^^citie, what:
and knitting of him with God, is man's perfect felicity, yea and the end of
man. For if that be man's end, which makes him perfect and blessed, so that he
shall neither want, nor wish any thing, and is therefore named the end, because
it pertains unto the last, and most perfect; the^ the most perfect state of
man in the everlasting life, shall be yt conformity with Christ; wherein man
shall abide blessed for evermore. Since God has made man for this end, he
vndoutedlie will have al men to attain unto this end, 1. Tim. 2, 4.
according to this saying, God will that al men shall be saved, and because he
will the end, he will also the means unto the end: and therefore the Apostle
adds, God will that al men should come unto the knowledge of the truth. For
without this mean none can come unto the end. Therefore seeing the ministry
of the Gospel is appointed for this end, who sees not how necessary, how
divine, and how lovely it is! Whosoever truly puts this end before his
eyes, will not easily be terrified from the confession of the Gospel by any
threats, and afflictions of Tyrants.

Let this then suffice to be spoken touching the true Church. Upon the third
verse, God willing, we purpose to entreat, of the triple state of the Church,
to wit, upright, troubled, and exiled. Also of the inward and external notes of
the true Church. And upon the sixte verse we will discourse of the cross, and
of the comfort of the Church under the cross.

CHAP. 13.
The cause why the Church is so beloved, and amiable to the Lord of hosts.
IT follows now that we show, which I proponed in the third place, Above
cap. 3. Page 9.
why the Church is so lovely, and amiable in the eyes of the Lord of hosts.

The cause of this love is not founded in us, but in the Lord of hosts
himself, as Paul writing unto the Ephesians, Man. 3, 17.
does say, He has loved us in the beloved, and God the father gave this voice
from heaven, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. Every one
therefore who is in Christ through faith is beloved of God, and become amiable,
in respect of the goodness, that is the righteousness, and beauty, that is the
holiness of Christ, communicated upon him. For these two things, to wit,
goodness and beauty do allure the minds of men to love them who are endued
therewithal. The Church then is loved of God in the beloved, and that by reason
of the society which ye Church has with Christ. Now for the better
understanding what kind of society it has with Christ, Society with Christ.
for which the Church becomes so amiable to the Lord of hosts, certain
degrees of fellowshippe which men have with Christ both God and man, would be
considered.

Generalie men have a double society with Christ, the one whereof is not
healthful, Vnhealthful society of how many, sorts.
the other healthful. Of the vnhealthful society, there is a threefolde sort.
The first is of nature only, that mean whereby men are conioned with Christ
by the communion

The healthful fellowship with Christ is that, Healthful society of how many
sorts.
whereby men are associated to Christ, through participation of the spirit,
and application of the benefits of the Mediator; and this also is of three
sorts. The first is of nature, and of outward profession only: such was
that of Cornelius before he was baptized.

This society of the Church with Christ makes her to be most lovely in the
sight of the Lord of Hosts. And therefore David not without cause brake into
this admiration, O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles! Number. 24, 6.
And Balaam, Number. 24. How goodly are thy tents, o Iaakob, and thy
habitations, o Israel As the valleys, 6.
are they stretched-foorth, as gardens by the rivers side, as the aloe trees
which the Lord has planted. For when the Prophet with corporal eyes did
behold those outward tabernacles, by a prophetical spirit he was carried into
the contemplation of the beauty of the Church of Christ, which in deed is
goodly and amiable to God, in respect of her conjunction with Christ, in whom
all which believe, are both righteous, and holy, and beloved of God, and
abound with all spiritual gifts, looking for that blessed inheritance, whereof
they have for a most certain earnest penie, the holy spirit.

Seeing then this fellowship with God in Christ, and through Christ, is the
end of good things, yea and man's sovereign felicity, it is meet that we
have the same in hie price and estimation; yea, and prefer it before al
worldly things be they never so dear, and precious. Here therefore very
great heed would be had, that we neither through our own default, nor through
others, do forgo the same. Through our own default we leese it, when we wax
slothful, either in reading, or in meditating of the word; or in the exercises
of godliness, as in prayer, thanksgiving, frequenting the sacraments, and
soforth. For thereby the spirit of faith is quenched, and man full shamefulie
falls from this communion.

Through the fault of others we leese the same, when either through
sophistry, or hypocrisy, or tyranny, or frowardnes of the people, or by
offenses vanquished we castawaie the confession, and break the band of this
heavenly society; and choose to follow rather many that are wicked, than a
few good. For many there have been, which for not defending this fellowship
with such a zeal, as they were bound to do, have utterly fallen from the
same, and never returned-againe thereunto: such were Cain, Judas, and Saul.

Let it be had in mind how cursed the society of men with the devil, is, for
whom are appointed everlasting punishments.

Hereby now it may be gathered, why David so longed for the tabernacles of
the Lord of hosts, as in the second verse it follows.

CHAP. 14.
1 A description of the love of the Church toward God; 2. The sundry
significations of the h^^rt, and flesh.
Verse 2. MY SOVLE LONGS, YEA AND FAINTS FOR THE COVRTES OF THE LORD; MINE
HEART, AND MY FLESH HAVE REIOICED IN THE LIVING GOD.
IN this verse is showed, how the Church should be affectioned toward God.
For David by his example here teaches, how greatly we are to covet society
with the Church of God; that with true and spiritual joy, we may rejoice in
the living God.

Behold here a most goodly order of the cause, the effect, and end. The
first verse sets before our eyes the sovereign happiness, namely fellowship
with God himself; this second commends unto us the desire of ye chiefest
felicity in a goodly example. For by nature we are so framed, that unto the
good which we know we are carried with full desire, and covet after felicity
withal our strength that we may enioie the same; which enioieng is the end,
both of the knowledge, and of the desire. In the 119. Psalm, the Psalmist
does often show this desire, Psa. 119, 14
when he says: I have had as great delight in the way of thie testimonies, 24.
as in all riches. Again, Thie testimonies are my delight, Again, My soul is
even worn away by reason of the desire I have to thy precepts continualie.
123.
And again, Mine eyes have failed in waiting for thy salvation, and for thy
just promise. Which thing the 42. Psalm does very lively express in these
words, As the Heart braieth for the rivers of waters: Psalm. 42, 1.
so pants my soul after thee, o God. My soul thirsts for God, even for
the living God. 2.
When shall I come, and appear before the presence of God? Therefore as the
Heart, in hunting flies being pursued of dogs, and wearied by a long course and
drines, with all gredines desires the fresh waters: so the mind of David,
being now in exile, full earnestly longed-for the fellowship of the Church of
God, wherein ye word sounds, Word of god a living fountain.
and prayers with sacrifices are made. For that living fountain is the word of
God, from whence true life, and lively consolations are drawn. From the
cisternes of man, neither life, nor substantial comfort can be fetched.

Wherefore let us diligentile note the order. For first knowledge goeth-before.
For, as it is rightly said, That which is unknown is undesired.
Secondarilie, of knowledge arises a lust not of the flesh, but of the spirit,
or from faith. Thirdly, this lust by due means is carried to attain, to
possess, keep, and to enioie the end.

Here let every one examine his own heart, as by a most infallible rule, and
leuel, whether he burn with such a desire, as here is described, or no; and if
he perceive that he does not burn with this holy desire of the Church which
is the chiefest happiness, then some inward light is wanting, that is, he does
not rightly understand how amiable this fellowship of the saints is in God,
and among the^ selves. Therefore let him seek light, wherewithal his mind
may be enlightened, and the desire of his heart stirred-vp, and the darkness
of ignorance, and malice, expelled-awaie. But if he perceive this burning
desire, then let him think how he is moved with the holy Ghost; and let him
inflame this desire within himself by meditating of the word, and by earnest
prayer, that he alone may be desired, who alone can fulfill the desire, that so
all the grace, which we have received, may be sentback unto the spring of the
right fountain. For man naturalie does desire, both to attain the good thing
which he longs for, and haning attained to retain and keep the same.

But the true, and sound felicity of man is God himself. Therefore man
desires God: who because he is infinite, the desire of him also is infinite,
and cannot be satisfied but with him only: and having him it staieth and
ceasseth. This desire, although it should be in every man: yet in them only
it is pure, and holy, whose hearts are enlightened, and whose affections are
purged by the light of God. To this holy desire, and longing both a certain
care of the spirit, that we may attain the thing which we couet-after; and a
fear, warines, and courage of mind against troubles that would hurt, is
annexed.

But what means he in saying, He longs, yea and faints? This fainting is
not of one that is wearied, but one that contendeth; nor of one tired, but of
one that burns. For this holy desire ca^ never be so satisfied in this life,
but it will thirst yet more after ye living fountain. Isai. 12, 2.
For continualie this will be the voice of the Church. Behold God is my
salvation, I will trust, 3.
and will not fear, for the Lord God is my strength and song; He also is
become my salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw waters out of the wels of
salvation. 4.
And ye shall say in that day, Praise the Lord; and cal-vpon his name. And
therefore the Psalmist adds:

MINE HEART AND MY FLESH HAVE REIOICED IN THE LIVING GOD.

WHat? Heart of man Genesis 8, 21.
Is not the heart of man evil, even from his youth? Is not the flesh defiled?
Surely the heart of man before regeneration is perverse, stony and hard,
that is disobedient, and will not give place to the words of God. The flesh in
like sort before regeneration, is the storehouse of al manner wicked
affections, wherebie it ministers instruments to the committing of al
impiety and wickedness whatsoever. How true this is which I say, I will show
by two places of the Scripture: the former whereof shall teach us what in truth
we are without the grace of regeneration; the latter shall assign the causes of
the same. What we are, Paul out of the Psalm tells us, Romans 3, 10. 11.
when he says: There is none righteous, no not one. There is none that
understands; there is none that seeks God. Theie have al gone-out of the
way; 12.
theie have bin made altogether unprofitable: there is none that does good. The
reason why we are such, is expressed, where the Apostle uses these words, I
testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk,
Ephe. 4, 17.
in vanity of their mind, having their cogitation darkened, 18.
and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the hardness of the heart. By the hardness of ye heart he
understands an extreme nummednes, wherebie men are not touched with the sense
of their wickedness, nor covet after a better state. But after regeneration when
by ye hand of God the heart is reformed, yt is, made new by God himself, and
purified through faith, Pro. 51, 10.
according to that of David, Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me, then becomes it fleshie, that is, tender, and
obedient, and hearkeneth to the laws of God; then it is the place of new
affections, and chiefelie of the fear of God, of gladness, and reioicing. And
therefore in a certain Psalm it is said, Psalm. 2, 11.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling. This fear is a childish
fear, holy, and pure: and the reioicing is of the spirit. When after this
manner the heart is enlarged, and reioiceth, this enlargement, and reioicing is
shed over the whole body. For seeing the heart is the beginning of life in man,
from which diverse veins like conduct pipes do co^ueie an hot, and fervent
spirit over the whole body; marvel it is not, being enlarged, as it falls
out in a joy to embrace the object, if the more subtle vital spirits are
spread over the whole body, whereof tokens of gladness do appear in the
body. For, as the heart wrong together, and the vital spirit kept-in, as
when we are sad it comes to pass, the rest of the body, is unquiet, whereof
proceeded yt saying, Psalm. 6, 3. 4.
My soul is troubled, al my bones are grieved: So the heart being
stretched-out, and the spirits spread-abroade, the whole body is comforted.
And therefore Solomon does say, Pro. 17, 72.
A ioieful heart causes good health, but a sorrowful mind dries the bones.

Furthermore, for so much as the words, Heart, and Flesh are diversely taken in
the Scriptures, I will here set down the sundry significations which theie
have. For, when words have many significations, that signification is evermore
to be chosen, which agrees best to the sense and circumstance of the place.

The heart therefore in the Scripture is taken after three ways. Diverse
significations of the heart
First, and properly it is taken for one, and the most noble intral in man, as
that which is the beginning and fountain of life, and the first that receaueth
life, and dies last. For in the heart is the vital power, as says Augustine,
which by drawing-vp, and giving aer to cool the heat of the heart, brings
life and welfare to the whole body. For through good aer, it drives the
purified blood over ye whole body by the pulses, caled arteries. Secondly it
is understood metonymicalie. For, seeing the heart is the receptacle of the
mind, it is taken for the mind it self, and for the properties of the same,
as for reason, will, knowledge, wit, counsel, wisdom. Wherefore theie are caled
Homines cordati, Hearted men
that is, hearted men, which have wit, wisdom, and understanding. Thirdly it
is taken metaphoricalie, both for the middle of some thing; and also for that
which is hid, and secret. Whether then you respect the substance of the
heart; or the mind resting in the same; or the natural properties which it
has, God is the author thereof, who undoubtedly made nothing which evil was,
being himself most perfectly good. But the wandering motions in the heart
are wicked who proceed not from God, but from ye voluntary reuolting of man
from God. The most wise God, so created man, yt he had both power to seek for
things necessary; and virtue to desire them; and ability to defend his
state. Whereof come those three faculties in man, to wit, the reasonable,
concupiscible, and irascible, the which of themselves and in respect of their
creation are good, How the heart of man becomes froward and wicked.
but by an accidental sickness are become naught and evil. Whence it is that the
heart of man is oftentimes in the Scriptures said to be froward, and wicked.
Which thing comes to pass after this wise. First, when it is infected with
false and erroneous doctrine; secondly, when it is void of the knowledge of
the truth; thirdly, when it is troubled with unclean affections; fourthlie,
when it assenteth to sin, and follows the desires of the flesh, it becomes
vnpure, and diseased as it were with most grievous sickness; or to speak
more briefly, The heart becomes perverse, and evil, when it is either
infected with ye plague of erroneous opinions; or borne-waie by the storms of
evil affections against reason, and righteousness, whereof infinite evils, and
diseases breake-forth. But, when by the hand of God the heart is reformed, then
is it delivered from these noisome diseases, and made new, not by the
alteration of the substance, but of the quality or habit of the same,
wherebie it becomes pure and good. Which then comes to pass when ye word
of God is harkened-vnto; and faith fro the word is conceived through the
operation of the holy Spirit, which works in the word. For by faith the
hearts are purified. Whereof it is that we resist affections when theie do
arise, and prove better daily more and more, so that our only desire is, that
God may like and love us. Such an heart David requested of God, Psalm. 51, 10.
when he said, Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
me. Such an heart Jeremiah exacted when he says, Iere. 4, 4.
Break up your fallowe ground, and sow not among thorns: be circumcised to
the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your hearts, that is, be ye renewed,
Ephesians. 4, 22. 24.
and become a new creature, and casting away ye old man, put-on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. He therefore
terms the heart fallowe ground, and the field yt is capable of Gods word being
neither stony, nor dirtie, nor thornie, yt is not hindered with the thoughts
and cares of this world, from being a meet place for the celestial seed. Such
an heart the Prophet Ezekiel caleth both one, Ezekiel. 11, 19
and also a fleshie heart, in these words: And I will give them one heart, and I
will put a new spirit within their bowels: and I will take the stony heart out
of their bodies, and I will give them an heart of flesh. Here he caleth that one
heart, which cleaves unto God alone, and serves not God and riches, or idols
to, or the cares of this world: for it halteth not on both sides. As therefore
through the corruption of our nature we have a stony, yt is an ungodly, and
hardened heart against the word of God, which will not suffer any reprehension,
no more than the adamant stone will yield to the striker, and this was figured
by Moses tables of stone: So a fleshie heart is pliant, obedient, and believes,
wherein the word of God is engraven, and abides, so yt the only care which it
has is to obeie the will of God. And hereof theie are said to be without heart,
who are void of understanding, and wisdom, and obedience, and upon the head
do follow the desires of the flesh. So that David, when he says his Heart does
rejoice in the living God, understands the new heart, created thorough the
grace of God in the new creation.

Furthermore that our heart delivered thus from these pestilent diseases, and
renewed, may not run again into those infections, it should evermore be
occupied in these three things, Meditation what;
to wit, In Meditation, which is, a painful searching-out of an hidden truth;
In contemplation, Contemplation, what; Psalm. 34, 8. A virtuous life, what;
which is, a ioieful wondering at the manifest truth, hence says the Psalmist,
Taste ye, and see how gracious the Lord is; and in living virtuouslie, that
is religiously toward God, purelie in mind and body, justly and lovingly
toward the world, and painefulie in discharging the office and calling which
it has.

In like sort the word Flesh is in holy Scripture diversely understood.
Flesh how taken in the Scripture.
For sometime properly and naturalie it signifies, the earthly substance,
which signification is commonly known, 1. Cor. 15, 39
as There is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and other of
fishes, and another of birds. Secondly by the figure Synecdoche it signifies
every living creature; as when it is said, Genesis 61, 13.
Al flesh was in the arch of Noah, that is, living creatures of every kind.
Hence, namely by a Synecdoche, it is also taken manie-times for man. Thirdly,
by the figure Metonymie it signifies the accidentarie quality of man after
the fall of our first parents, namely for whatsoever is in man without ye grace
of regeneration, John. 3, 6.
as when it is said, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: Again, Flesh
and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 15, 50
In which places the word flesh does signify the corruption of nature
cleaving to ye flesh through the contagion of original sin. Fourthlie, it is
taken for the outward show or appearance of things, John. 8, 15.
as when it was said, Ye judge after the flesh; and as when Paul said, That I
now live in the flesh, Gal. 3, ^0.
I live by the faith in the son of God.

Now the circumstance in the Psalm requires the first and proper
signification. Mine heart, that is mine whole mind regenerated by the Spirit
of God, and my flesh, that is my body have reioiced in the living God.

The adjective Living has a singular force and Emphasis. For therebie the true
God is discerned both from the idols of the Gentiles, who neither live, nor can
give life and salvation: and also from al^ things of this world; which are
uncertain, as the favor of men. Therefore in the 146. Psalm it is written.
Put not your trust in Princes, Psalm. 146, 3*
nor in the sons of man, for there is none help in them. 4.
His breath departs, 5.
and he returns to the earth: then his thoughts do perish. Blessed is he
that has the God of Iaakob for his help, whose hope is the Lord his God. Here
he sets ye God of Iaakob, who always lives, against men, who both may
die, and change their minds, so that who puts his trust in them, builds
upon a tottering foundation. But God, for so much as he lives for ever, and
changes at no time, can not deceive: and therefore to rejoice in him, it is the
surest thing. And Paul in his 1. epistle unto Timothy charge rich men, That
theie trust not in uncertain riches, 1. Tim. 6, 17
but in the living God. Where Paul in yt place also opposes ye living God
against transitory riches. To conclude, God who lives everlastingly is put
against al things created. In him therefore who so hops, and does rejoice,
shall not be confounded.

Then by the example of David, let us both by reading, meditation,
contemplation, prayer, and other exercises of godliness, stirre-vp ourselves, yt
with David we may truly perceive this spiritual gladness both in our mind,
and in our heart, and let us not desist from prayer, until we feel this
spiritual exultation within us. David being in banishment is derided of his
enemies, and suffers punishment for his sins: yet he under this sense of Gods
displeasure ceasseth not praieng until he find some taste of this spiritual
joy, wherewithal he might comfort himself in his troubles. Job in his
affliction being both conte^ned of his own wife, and laughed to scorn of his
friends, filled with this joy does comfort himself, and therefore he burst
into these words, I am sure that my Redeemer lives. Job. 19, 25.
This comfort of the Spirit have the holy martyrs of God in all ages opposed
against outward pains. By whose examples let us also learn to feel in our
selves the joy of the spirit abiding in us. For as Bernard truly does say:
The vital motions do prove that the mind abides in the body: that the spirit
abides in the soul, the spiritual life does prove. A special part of this
spiritual life is to feel the Spiritual comfort in the living God through
Jesus Christ, the true life of the Church.

CHAP. 15.
1. Where the true Church may be found; 2. The marks of the same; 3. And the
triple state thereof in this life.
The third verse. FOR THE SPAROVVE HAS FOVNDE AN HOUSE; AND THE SVVALOVV a
NEST FOR HER SELF, WHERE SHE MAY LAY HER YOUNG ONES; EVEN THINE ALTARS, O
LORD OF HOSTS, MY KING, AND MY GOD.
IN these words is declared where the true Church may be sought; what be the
marks; and what the confession of the same. The sense of this verse is
therefore somewhat the more obscure, because ye particles of the similitude or
comparison are omitted, which is an usual thing among ye Hebrews. Thus the^ let
us fully make the comparison. As the Sparow, the Swallow, and other birds
(for he has put the special for the general) do build them certain nestes
wherein theie keep, foster and feed their young: So thou, O Lord of hosts,
have appointed thine altars for nestes as it were, wherein by thy word,
spirit, sacraments, and discipline, thou engenderest, nourishest, feedest,
and defendest thy young ones, which are the godly. So that by this comparison
is signified, not the affection only of the Lord of Hosts toward the
Church, which affection Christ (Matthew. 23.) applies to himself, when he
says: Mat. 23, 37
How often would I have gathered thie children together, as the Hen gathers
her chickens, and ye would not! But yt every one also, who tendereth his own
salvation, should join him self to the nestes of God, namely to the meetings
of the godly, where ye public ministry is. Marks of the true Church.
For the altars, by the figure Synecdoche, do signify ye public ministry of
ye church; the which is a most certain note of the visible Church. David then
does show how that congregation is the true Church, wherein are teachers and
learners of the word of God; and wherein not only the ceremonies appointed of
God are in use; but also God according to his word is worshipped; and public
confession of the faith is made. For these words, My King and my God, are the
voice of confidence and confession. Therefore wheresoever these things are,
there without al doubt is the true Church, and the fellowship of Saints.

But, Triple state of the Church.
least any should err in this place, it is to be noted that the state of the
Church in this life, is three-folde, either an upright; or a troubled; or a
banished state. The upright state of the Church consists of due order; of
lawful power; and of authority. The order is twofold, namely either of
persons, or of actions. The former is yt which in this place we make the first
part of the upright state of ye church: the latter belongs unto power and
authorite. I will speak therefore now of the order of persons in the kingdom
of Christ, which is ye church: which order the nigher it comes unto the form
of the primitive Church, the better and more perfect it is; and the more it
swarueth from that ancient simplicity, the worser, and more hurtful it is.

CHAP. 16.
1. Christ is the supreme governor in the Church; 2. The diversity of persons
in the Church of CHRIST.
FIrst therefore by due order in this spiritual Empire and kingdom of Christ,
Christ the supreme head, and ruler of the Church. The Church what;
there is one chief Monarch, even Jesus Christ, who by his word and Spirit
rules the kingdom received from the Father. The kingdom of this Monarch is
the Church, that is the company of al which believe through the universal
world, who although theie be far and wide dispersed; yet in most goodly
proportion theie do cleave together, that theie may make one house of God, and
one body knit and compacted together by the Spirit of Christ, by mutual
charity, by communicating of gifts and duties, by using the sacraments, and by
the confessing and worshipping of one God. Wherbie there is such a sweet
concent in this body, that each are touched both with the prosperity, Two
sorts of men in the Church.
and adversity of others. Moreover, seeing this congregation is governed by
the word of God, there be two sorts of men in the same, to wit teachers of ye
word, and learners. When these mutualie like parents and children, do reverence
and love each other, then is ye Church at a good stay. For so theie do both
take heed of corrupting the word; and mutual good will will not allow of
schisms. Diverse kinds of ministers in the Church.
But among the ministers of the word there has bin alwaie, and is great
diversity, according to the difference of gifts and of calings. For Christ
ascending into heaven, gave some to be Apostles, State of the ministry in the
primitive Church.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers,
who although theie were of equal power, as touching spiritual jurisdiction: yet
differed theie very much in honor and degree of office. Ephe. 4, 11.
Paul in honor, and in order surpassed Timothy, and Titus: Timothy in
degree and order excelled the other elders of the Church at Ephesus: Acts. 20,
28.
al which Paul in the Acts caleth Bishops, or Overseers. This preemine^ce was
very behoueful for ye church. For it is impossible yt any thing should be well
done, where al desire to be of equal honor, and degree.

The Church that followed the Apostles time, State of the clergy after the
Apostles
the Gospel now being dispersed over a great part of the world, and Churches
being established, Office of Patriarchs
did appoint as best served for the profit of the same, an order of ministers,
and ordained Patriarchs, whose office was to have a care, yt Bishops of every
Dioces were chosen rightly and ordained; that every Bishop did his duty as
he ought to do; and yt each Bishops clergy, and flock, were obedient to their
Dioceser in all things that were godly. Moreover it ordained Chorbishops, whom
Iustine caleth Proestotaes, which were Presidents. Again it ordained pastors,
Popes usurpers of authority in the Church of Christ.
and teachers.

And this was the ordinance of the purer Church, which the reformed Churches
for ye greater part at this day, do revoke, as far as it is requisite for
them, shaking of the yoke of the Popes, who from ye time of the Emperor Phocas
have usurped authority, and government over the Church of God contrary both
to the commandment of Christ, and examples of the Apostles; which thing some
of the holy Fathers with the Apostle Paul, did testify should be the proper
note of Antichrist. For since that time al Popes have borne one and the same
person, as theie, who covered with one and the same visour under the name of
Christ, do endeavor utterly to abolish the Gospel of Christ.

CHAP. 17.
1. What power the Church has; 2. The kinds thereof; 3. Of the keys of
heaven; 4. And of the discipline of the Church.
THe power which we made the second part of the upright state of the Church, is
an authority given to the Church by Christ, Porwer of the Church what;
wherebie it is ruled according both to the word of God, and to profitable and
godly constitutions of virtuous governors. For this power is of those things
which are appointed for the building of the whole body of the Church. The
which, as it is of Christ: so it must depend upon the word of Christ, and
according to his word be exercised for the welfare, and edification of the
whole Church. And therefore says Paul, 2. Cor. 10, 8.
Authority is given us not for your destruction.

This power is of two sorts, Ordinary power of the Church.
to wit, either ordinary, or iuridical. The ordained power is that which has
a certain rule to work by; which the ministers of the Gospel in the upright
state of the Church do follow, and require neither consultation nor the
judgment of the ecclesiastical senate, but do govern the Church according to
the rule prescribed. By this power the Preachers do receive such into the
Church as are converted unto the Gospel, and swear obeiesance to the king and
Monarch Christ, according to this commandment, Mar. 16, 15. 16.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature. He that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved: but he that will not believe shall be
condemned. Hitherto also belongs that of our Lord unto Peter: Matr. 16, 19.
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall
loase on earth, shall be loased in heaven.

But what are these keys? Keys of heaven, what.
These keys of the kingdom of heaven without controversy are that whereby
the kingdom of heaven is either opened or shutt. And that by the preaching of
the Gospel the kingdom of heaven is both opened and shut, all the godly do
confess, which give credit to the words of Christ, Matt. 28, 18
who in the last of Matthewe does say, Al power is given unto me in heaven,
and in earth, Go therefore, and teach al nations. And in the 20. of John: Ioh.
20, 21.
As my father sent me, so send I you. 22.
And when he had said that, he breathed on them, one said unto the^, Receive
the holy Ghost. 23.
Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

How do they open and shut? How the kingdom of heaven is opened or shut.
By remitting and by retaining of sins. How do they remit, and retain
sins? By preaching repentance, and remission of sins in the name of Christ.
Therefore the ministers of the Gospel as much as in them is, do open the
kingdom of heaven, and remit sins in his name who sends them in message,
when they preach the Gospel. Now if the auditors do believe the Gospel, the
kingdom of heaven is opened unto them, and their sins be forgiven, not by
the ministers, but of the Lord himself, in whose name the ministers do
pronounce remission of sins. But if the auditors do refuse to believe, the
ministers be said to shut the kingdom of heaven, and to retain sins, and
that for the events sake, not willing lie: for they would full gladly have al
their auditors to believe the Gospel, and be saved.

This power of Christ committed to the ministers of the Gospel, is very aptly
signified by keys. For as keys are delivered to stewardes appointed in
families, that they may serve the Lord, open and shut, not after their own
mind, but according to the pleasure of their master: So to the ministers of
the gospel power is given to open and to shut the kingdom of heaven, according
to the commandment and precept of Christ the householder. For they are
stewardes, not the goodmen of the house; and servants, not Lords. And
therefore they are to govern al things according to the prescription of their
Lord. For this cause Paul does name the ministers of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4,
1. 2.
Disposers of the secrets of God: in whom this only thing is required, That
they be found faithful.

To conclude, the sum of al is this: The keys of the Church are the word,
and faith. For as the preaching of the word of God concerning ye attaining
remission of sins through Christ is one keie to open, and to shut the kingdom
of God, (which keie has a double use. One is, of one nature, which is to open
the kingdom of heaven: the other is, through the default of the hearers, to
shut the kingdom of heaven. And therefore Christ himself is to some the savor
of death unto death, and to others the savor of life unto life. But, as he is
the savor of life of his own nature: so is he the savor of death through the
wickedness of men that will not credit the Gospel. So in that very deed it is
but one keie, but it has a double use.) So whosoever believes through the working
of the holy spirit he adioineth faith to the Gospel, which is as it were
another keie of the kingdom of heaven. By these two keys the kingdom of
heaven is shut up; and pardon of sins obtained.

Furthermore, as Christ, Peter, Philip, John Paul, and the other Apostles, do
apply this keie sometime to many together, and sometime to one by himself:
So godly ministers of the word both publicly, and privately may use this
authority of opening and shutting the kingdom of God, that is of binding and
loasing sins. What it is to bind.
For as this binding, is an adiudging of that man who believes not the Gospel,
What is meant by loasing.
but serves sin, and Satan, unto death and damnation, unless he repent: So
loasing is a setting of him free, who believes the gospel, from the woeful
bondage of sin, and the devil, and a giving of the most desired liberty in
Jesus Christ; that being now set-free from death and perdition he may serve
God by righteousness for evermore.

Hereby appears, both the excellency of this power; and also how it is not
tied unto men, as the Pope thinks, but to the ministry of the word; and
that ordinary regiment is subject to this power, as farfoorth as the Church is
guided by doctrine, sacraments, ceremonies, Iuridical power of the Church.
and discipline.

The iuridical power, although it depends cheifelie upon the power of the
keis: yet, because it requires deliberation and consultation in respect of
diverse circumstances falling out many times, which cannot be comprehended in
general rules, I distinguish it from the former power, which I called
ordinary. The iuridical power consists in three things, to wit, in alowing
sound doctrine; in rejecting false opinions; and in exercising ecclesiastical
discipline.

That the catholic Church, 1. The church has power to allow, and to establish
true religion
and every member of the same have power to know, and to allow religion, it is
manifest. For both Christ inuiteth al men unto himself, that they may learn
of men; and the Apostle send-foorth to teach; and God earnestly requires the
knowledge of his word, without which no salvation can be attained. Therefore
wicked wretches are the Papists, who keepe-awaie the lay people, as they are
called, from the reading of good books, and forbid the holy scriptures to be
imprinted and read in a vulgar speech. whereby doubtless they do show
themselves to be the cruel enemies of man's salvation; whom those words of our
Savior should terrify, me thinks: Woe be to you interpreters of the law:
Luke 11, 52.
for ye have taken-awaie the keie of knowledge: ye entered not in your selves,
and them that came-in ye forbad. This check belongs unto the Pharisees in all ages, who take to themselves the authority of teaching, but in the
meanetime by corrupting true doctrine, and that of mere malice and devilish
hatred, they stop-vp the ready way unto Christ.

An other part of the jurisdiction of the Church, 2. The Church has power to
forbid false doctrine.
is a power to improve, and to reject false and erroneous doctrine, as the
invention of devils. Therefore says Christ, Beware of false Prophets; Matt.
7, 15.
And, Take heed to your selves of the leaven of the Pharisees; Luke. 12, 1.
And Paul says, If any man preach an other Gospel, Gal. 1, 8. 9.
let him be accursed. Neither, as they think, does it make for the Papists,
that our Lord says, The scribes and the Pharisees do sit in Moses seat:
Matt. 23, ^. 3.
Al therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; For in
another place our savior speaks of the same Pharisees, Matt. 15, 14*
Let them alone, they be the blind leaders of the blind. Of which I will
conclude two things; one is, How they are to be harkened unto so long as they
sit in Moses seat, that is so long as they bring the pure doctrine of Moses.
The other is, how al words, whereby we are commanded to obeie the rulers and
teachers of the Church, have a condition though unexpressed, namely, how they
are to be obeyed, if so be they teach those things which the Lord has
inioined them to teach, that is, they are to be obeyed, if the Lord speak in
their mouths, and not that old serpent that seduced our first parents. And
this also is meant by those words of our savior: he that hears you (to wit,
Luke 10, 16.
uttering my words) hears me.

The last part of iuridical power, 3. The Church has power to use discipline.
is discipline, which is a schooling, whereby such as be received into the
Church are governed, kept in order, yea and framed to religion, righteousness
modesty, and other virtues, ye nothing unsitting for Christians be committed:
or in fewer words, Discipline what?
Discipline is an ordering of the life, and of manners; and a training (as well
inward of the mind, affections, and will; as outward of the tongue, gesture,
and deeds) of men unto godliness, honesty, and innocence of life.

The parts of this discipline are to, Parts of discipline.
namely direction and correction. Direction does govern and guide men in the
right way. Direction.
Which direction must be used after to the rule of Gods word; according to the
laws of godly magistrates; and according to the examples of good men. Rule of
gods word.
The rule of Gods word, teaches what is to be avoided, and what to be desired
and done. The catechism of children proposes this rule, which more at large
is declared in the sermons of the Prophets, and Apostles.

The laws of godly Magistrates do prescribe a rule, Laws of Magistrates.
as may seem to be most expedient in respect of the differences of ages,
and callinges. Hereof there be some canons made for the discipline of the
clergy, and some for the schooling of the common people. Examples of the
virtuous.
Examples of good men are as painted rules of the laws. For what the laws by
the rules of Gods word do describe, and offer to the mind, that by notable
examples is set before the eyes in a manner. And therefore Christ does say,
Ioh. 13, 15.
I have given you an example; Ephe. 5, 1. 2
And Paul, Be ye folowers of God, as dear children, and walk in love.

The best way then of teaching is, The best way of teaching.
to show that by examples, which is taught by rules. And therefore they be much
to be praised who live so, as they teach; if so be also they teach rightly,
as they live.

For so said Eusebius entering into the praise of Origin, Praise of Origin.
This is he who lives according to his speaking, and speaks according to his
living.

Correction is that, Of correction another part of discipline.
whereby such as wander from the right way are brought into the same. This
correction is used, either by telling men of their faults, or by exhorting: or
by reproving, or by threatening, or by punishing. Al these at one time always
may not be used, but according as he is given who has gone-astraie. For if by
telling the fault, and by exhortation he amend, other remedies are not
needeful. But here prudent Censors of of behavior, must endeavor in all
correction to show a fatherly mind, not cruelty. For, as the one increases
love toward the correcters. so the other engendereth hatred, and contumacie. As
Ambrose does say, He that cruelie is chastised, and chidden, receaueth neither
chiding, nor amendment. But if neither telling, exhorting, chiding, nor
threatening will bring a man from his error, then sharper medicines must be
tried, that is, it must be seen whether punishment will reclaim him into the
right way who has wandered, according to the doctrine of the Gospel.

This punishment is twofold, Punishment twofold.
to wit, either excommunication upon wicked livers; or cursing, upon obstinate
heretics. Excommunication.
But first let us speak of excommunication, the which when it is to be showen,
it must be done both wisely to edification, and gravely with much compassion,
the sentence of the superior officers being first pronounced against the
obstinate guilty person. Notwithstanding singular heed must be taken here,
that you do not so pluck up the tares, that ye destroy the wheat withal.
Which thing may be avoided if the ends of excommunication, which are three,
Ender of excommunication.
be had in mind. The first is, that a wicked liver to the great reproach of
God, and his Gospel be not suffered among Christians. The second, that the
good also may not be corrupted through the continual familiarity of the
wicked. 1. Cor. 5, 6.
For, a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. The last is, that he which has
fallen through shame of the world, may at length repent, and be reconciled to
the Church. These three ends are al for the edifieng, and unity of the
Church. And it is diligently to be considered, when excommunication does
edify, and when it does not. For if it does destroy rather than edify, it
must not be used at al. Which made Augustine, speaking concerning the remedy of
excommunication, to say, Let this be done, where there is no danger of
schism; tares be to be rooted out, so that the wheat be not plucked-vp withal.

Moreover of excommunication, as also of receiving the brother that fell into
the Church again, you may read both in my book Of a Pastor and likewise in
mine Enchiridion.

Curssinge is to be exercised only upon heretics, Curssinges. Who to be
curssed.
that is upon defacers of the gospel, such as after sundry admonitions do
obstinately maintain their errors, and will not repent. Heretics who.
These for so much as they are, Paul says, in themselves damned, they be
utterly to be cut from the body of Christ, Titus. 3, 11.
that is from the Church, that others by their contagion may not be infected,
and so by little and little the kingdom of Christ be destroyed. And yt this
punishment both may and ought to be executed upon heretics, first that
testimony of Paul twice repeated, Gala. 1. does confirm, Though we, Gal. 1, 8.
or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, the^ that which we have
preached unto you, 9.
let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man
preach unto you otherwise then that ye have received, let him be accursed.
Secondly that commandment of Paul belongs hitherto, Titus. 3, 10 11.
Reject him that is an heretic after once, or twice admonition, knowing that
he that is such, is perverted and sins being damned of his own self. 2.
John. 10.
Hitherto also makes yt of John in his second Epistle, If there come any unto
you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him,
God speed. Hitherto in like sort tend the examples of the fathers, who by
this curssing punished both Arrius, Sabellius, Manes, and others. And that this
heavy punishment of al other may rightly be used, special heed must be had
that it be not exercised rashly, through affections the matter being not
thoroughly examined, and known. Which when it is not done, the curssing does
not so much bind them which wrong^ulie are stricken, as it does the^ which
unjustly condemn. For, seeing yt God vnloaseth what man binds, the
rashness of man is not to be feared: insomuch as Christ also did foretell how
the Pharisees should exclude the preachers of the Gospel: as the Pope which is
very Antichrist does.

For, he casts not his thunderbolte of cursses against heretics, Whom the
Pope does curse.
but against the^ which syncerelie do defend the writings of the Prophets,
and Apostles; against them, who teach the sins of men are cleansed only by
the blood of Christ; against them that will not call upon saints; against them
which will not embrace all the toies and trumperie of the Pope; Finalie against
them, that worship not the Pope even as God himself, that is against them,
which prefer not the Popish traditions before the word of God. Wherefore the
Popes curssings be no more to be feared, then are the cursses of a filthy
fleshly lover, who blames such as he has been naught withal for leaving his
wicked company, and ioining themselves to honest men in godly marriage.

CHAP. 18.
1. Of the authority of the Church; 2. of traditions; 3. of the interpretation
of the scriptures; 4. and of the outward notes of the upright state of the
Church.
With this power there is authority joined, which I said Above cap. 15 page
149
was the third part of the upright state of ye Church. Under this authority
they put tradition, and interpretation of the scripture. Traditions.
By tradition the Papists understand the laws which the Popes, Bishops and
Prelates do thrust-vpon the Church beside the word of God, yea and often
contrary also unto the same. And that they may seem to stablishe, and to
build this their authority upon the word of God, they aleadge both the
saying of Paul, and the example also of the Apostles. The saying of Paul is
this: Keep the traditions which ye have been taught, 2. The. 2, 15
either by word, or by our Epistle. The example of the Apostles they
bring-out, who commanded the Gentiles to abstain from things offered unto
idols, Act. 15, 28. 29.
and blood, and that that is strangled. Hereof ye Papists do gather two
things: One is, how they have authority to make what traditions they list;
another that the people owes obedience unto them. But what answer is to be
made may appear, both by the exposition of the word Tradition; and also by
the difference of rites and ceremonies. First therefore let us show how this
word tradition is used. What the word tradition does signify.
For both ye Apostles, and ye holy fathers also took it far otherwise, than
do the papists; and by the comparing of scriptures we will make it evident.
Paul in his first Epistle unto the Corinthians, writes after this wise; 1.
Cor. 15, 3.
First of al I delivered unto you that which I received, how that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures: 1. Cor. 11, 23
And 1. Corinthians 11. For I have received of the Lord that which I also have
delivered unto you, to wit, That the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, Matt. 15, 2.
took bread, etc. Matthew. 15. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition
of the Elders? Of these places I do gather how there be three sorts of
traditions: Three sorts of traditions
the first of doctrine; the second of divine ceremonies; the last of humane
rites. Tradition of doctrine.
Tradition of doctrine is yt which is delivered touching the law, and the
gospel, and such things are conioined with them: which, for so much as they are
commanded of God may not be altered. Tradition of divine ceremonies.
Tradition of divine ceremonies, is of baptism, and of the Lords supper in
the new Testament; which likewise depends upon the authority of Christ,
Tradition of humane rites.
and therefore is immutable. Tradition of humane rites contains manifold
canons both touching ceremonies, and also concerning discipline of the clergy
and laity: this may be altered for the profit of the Church at the
discretion of governors. Irenaeus in his third book uses the word Tradition
oftentimes for the doctrine which the Apostles from God delivered to their
auditors; and the same auctor calls the Apostolical Creed ye the tradition
of the Apostles. Now then seeing the Church, according to the doctrine of Paul,
has authority to ordeine such rites as make for edification, 2. Cor. 10. 8.
for so he says; Power is given us for edification; 1. Co. 14, 40
Again, Let al things be done comely and in order: godly magistrates may
appoint rites for comelines, and order sake. Ends of comelines in the Church.
The end of comelines is twofolde; first by these helps to stir us up unto
godliness, secondly, that modesty and gravity may* be seen in the handling
of Gods matters. Why order is to be observed in the Church.
Order has three ends; one is, that rulers, and preachers of the word may
have a certain rule to work by; another, that auditors may be trained up
unto obedience and discipline; and the third, that peace and concord may be
provided for, the Church being set in a good stay. And herein the people does
owe obedience to ye magistrates of the Church; yet with certain conditions. How
many things are to be avoided in the traditions of men.
For in the traditions of man many things are to be taken heede-of. First,
that they be not contrary to the rule of faith; neither that they bring us
from Christ. As do many of the popish rites of invocation of saints; of
profanation of the mass; Mark. 7, 9.
ye rethe commandment of God, that ye may observe your own traditions: and
are at this day by the Papists; as may appear by the punishments whereby
the transgressors of Gods commandment, and of the Popes traditions are
corrected. It would therefore be known, that as the traditions of God through
the commandment of God do bind us unto perpetual obedience: so the
traditions of men must give place to Christian liberty and that ex opere
operato, as they use to say. Last of al, that under the pretense of
indifferency they destroy not religion. For as the Papists are subtle, such
things as appear to the eyes goodly, they do amplify; and under a sweet
bait the hide deadly poison. Some Papists do exclame how their Mass, is
neither commanded, nor prohibited by the word of God and therefore is a thing
indifferent, and was in the fear of God ordained by the godly fathers for the
memory of ye sacrifice of Christ. But under this goodly show of words, as
under a fair garment as it were, they conceal in abominable idol; whereof in
due place Chap. 24. of this first part.
we purpose to speak. And therefore it is wisely to be regarded, when true
consideration is had of comelines and of order.

Interpretation of the Scripture, Interpretation of the Scriptures.
(which is another thing theie put-vnder the authority of the Church) being a
free gift of God, which the Lord bestows upon whom he list, cannot be tied by
man's authority unto any certain caling of men. For as in old time God
bestowed not the spirit of prophecy, neither upon the ordinary Bishops
only, All the Levites, nor only the Levites did not prophecy.
naie few of them were adorned with that excelent gift; nor to the tribe of
Levy only, but at his pleasure made many of other tribes to be famous
therebie: So the Son of God will not have this gift to be tied to ordinary
succession, but bestows it upon whom he will. In the tents of the Hebrews it
is giuen-out how Eldad and Medad did prophecy in ye host; Number. 11, 25 26. 27.
28.
which thing when Joshua the servant of Moses could not brook, he requested
his Lord to forbid them. But what does Moses? 29.
What, says he, Enuiest thou for my sake? Yea, would God that all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them! So
then the spirit of prophecy, and exposition of Gods word, is the peculiar
gift of God. Which he bestows by means sometime, and sometime without means.
When it is given without means it is counted for a miracle: but when by means,
it is Gods ordinary gift, which he both imparteth upon such as earnestly call
upon him, and labor therefore; and increases in those who do use it rightly
unto his glory.

But three things in this place are to be observed. Touching interpretation of
the Scriptures three things to be noted.
The first, although God indue many with this gift, yet that none presume to
teach in the Church, being not lawfulie caled thereunto. For theie are never
blessed in their doings, which rush-into the office of teaching without lawful
caling; and do run before theie are caled. Which thing, if some factious
fellows would thinke-vpon, such troubles would not be in the Church at this
day, as there be. The second, that both the whole Church, and every member
of the same, have power, as above in the chapter immediately going before,
page. 157. 1. John. 4, 1. What things interpreters do utter.
also I touched, to prove the spirits. For so says the Apostle, Try the
spirits whether theie are of God. The third is, how all the words of
interpreters be not of equal weight. For some are probable, some certainly
true, and some are meerelie erroneous. Things probable, for ye authority sake
of the vtterers, are so long to be embraced, as theie be not drawn into a
wrong conclusion. Which if it fall out, we must not for man's credit, depart
from the manifest truth.

Things certainly true, such as are both gathered, and confirmed out of the
word of God, are none otherwise to be received, than if God himself had
pronounced them. For the truth of them depends upon God. Such are the Creed
of the Apostles, of the council of Nice of Ambrose, of Athanasius, and such
other things. Things meerelie false, contrary to the principles of religion,
are to be avoided even as the voice of the serpent that deceived our first
parents. Of this kind are the teachinges of al heretics; and such are most
of the Popes decrees, and canons. And to the detestation hereof, as things
accursed and abominable, we are driven by the commandment of God his word;
if so be from the heart we love true religion.

Hitherto concerning the parts of the upright state of the Church, Notes and
marks of the true church in the upright state, Luther in his book entitled,
D^ Consiliis.
whose outward notes, contained under these three parts, be eight as Luther
testifies. The first is the preaching of Jesus Christ, without the knowledge
of whom the true Church can not be at al, much less discerned. The second is,
the right use of baptism, which is the door as it were

Romans 8, 17.
according to that, If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified also with him.
The eight is, manifold offices of love between ye household of the Church,
wherebie theie declare, how theie are guided by the same spirit, and make
haste unto the same country.

CHAP. 19.
1. Of the troubled state of the true Church; 2. How the godly should behave
themselves therein; 3. Against an opinion of the Anabaptists.
THe troubled state of the Church is, How, and wherein the Church is troubled.
where either the offices both of civil, and Ecclesiastical governors be mixed,
and confounded; or the Prelates take Lordship unto themselves over the Lords
heritage, 1. Pet. 5, 3.
contrary to the commandment of Peter; or unity is violated by Schisms; or
the Church by heresies as by raging tempests is shaken; or discipline is
loased, or hindered either through the might of sinners, or through the
cowardnes and fear of Ecclesiastical governors.

When the Church is thus out of quiet, Parts of the godly when the Church is
in trouble.
it is the part of the godly to lament the wounds thereof; to acknowledge the
common infirmity and sins of man; and by earnest prayer to beg-at the hands
of God, that he would vouchsafe to assuage the miseries; and repress the
madness of Satan and his limbs, who set snares either utterly to destroy, or
greeuouslie to afflict the church. Also let them comfort themselves by the
examples of many good men, who have felt the same troubles. Let the^ know
that God causes such affliction for the trial of the elect, 1. Pet. 1, 7.
as by fire, as Peter says. Let them set before their eyes the stories of the
Church in all ages. For as the devil did beset our first Parents in Paradise:
so does he continualie set snares for ye godly in the church, he raiseth-vp
offenses, and horrible confusions, and persecutions. For between the kingdom
of Christ, and the kingdom, of Satan there is an unreconcilable war, according
to ye saying I will put enimitie between thee and the woman, Gen 3, 15.
and between thie seed, and her seed. He shall break thine head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. Neither be the Anabaptists, nor Staphile to be
hearkened-vnto, Against the Anabaptists Staphylus.
who deny that to be the true Church, wherein be heresies, and schisms, and
manners contrary to profession. For both Paul does plainly show the vanity
of those men, who do call the Church at Corinthus holy; in whose outward
assembly for all that there were horrible heresies, pernicious schisms, and
many dead members: and Christ himself too compares the Church not only to
a draw net cast-into the sea, Mat. 13, 47 48.
containing good fishes and bad that are taken, Mat. 13, 24 25. and
but also to a field, wherein both wheat and tares do spring-vp together.
Neither was Judas, both a thief, and a traitor, a let why the company of the
Apostles was not the Church.

CHAP. 20.
1. Of the banished state of the Church; 2. How the godly are to behave
themselves therein.
THe Church is in banishment, when the godly either do remain and live where
open confession of Christianity is not admitted; or violently be drawen-awaie
into such places, where the name of Christ is odious. Albeit this banishment
be a miserable thing: yet, when theie call into their mind the inward society
which theie have with the blessed Trinity, and Saints of God, the godly do
feel a wonderful comfort. And although it seem very grievous to them, to be
barred from the fellowship, and communion of saints in the sacraments, and
common prayers: yet for this wound theie have a plaster, namely the joy of
the spirit, wherebie theie rejoice and lift-vp themselves against the coming
of the Son of God, whom theie looke-for, a redeemer, and the finisher of
their salvation.

Secondarilie, Joseph.
as the saints in this banishment after the example of Joseph, Daniel.
and Daniel may bear civil offices, govern, and be in subjection to profane
people: so after their example to, theie will take heed, yt neither either by
superstitious service, or by impuritie of profane fellows theie pollute
themselves; nor yet suffer themselves, by any craft of Satan so to be
bewitched, Three children.
that theie fall therbie into the trappes of the devil. Those three companions
of Daniel were in the subjection of a King who was both a tyran, Dan, 3, 19.
20. and
and a wicked person, yea and in civil matters obeyed him too, but being once
bid to worship the image of the proud tyran, theie chose to be cast into an
whote burning oven, rather than to deny their faith. Dan. 6, 10.
So Daniel would rather be thrown into the den of Lions, than he would but
one day intermit the invocation of the true God.

But above al things beg theie by hearty and zealous prayer at Gods hand,
strength, and constancy of faith; and let them know that no refuge is neither
more safe, or more sure, than is the name of the Lord, that is, earnest caling
unto God. For so does Solomon say, The name of the Lord is a strong tower,
Romans 18, 10
the righteous runs unto it, and is exalted.

CHAP. 21.
1. Of sacrifices in general; 2. Of the sacrifices among the Jews what theie
were.
FVrthermore, seeing the Psalmist in this verse makes mention of altars, where
God lays as young ones the godly, and brings them up; and altars be
appointed for sacrifices, I will add hereunto something concerning sacrifices,
and that especialie for the Papists, who by this place would maintain their
idolatrous altars for masses, which the godly do know is nothing else but a
devilish profaning of the only sacrifice of Christ, who by his only
sacrifice once offered, has made the saints perfect for evermore.

But that the more distinctlie we may speak of sacrifices, I will entreat
first of the Jewish sacrifices; then of the sacrifices of the profane
gentiles; after that of the Papistical idol, that is of the Mass, which theie
say is a sacrifice; and last of al of Christian sacrifices.

The Jews by the commandment of God had two altars in the holy city
Jerusalem; Sacrifices of the Jews.
neither was it lawful for them in any place beside Jerusalem to have any
altars: the one was of burnt offeringes, Altars of the Jews. where, and what;
and was caled the altar of burnt offering; the other was of incense, and
thereof was caled the altar of incense: both of them were figures of Christ.
For as the altar of burnt offering did shadow Christ, as a purger of sin: so
the altar of incense did figure Christ, as he was an intreator and intercessor
for man. Psalm. 141, ^.
For incense did signify prayer. Or as witnesses David, who in his 141. Psalm.
does say, Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense; and the
lifting-vp of mine hands as an evening sacrifice. For when that holy man David
being driven into banishment could not be at the sacrifices which were made at
Jerusalem, Prayers.
in place of incense he dedicateth holy prayers unto the Lord; who be
therefore signified by incense, because prayers be of none effect unless theie
be lifted-vp with a godly affection of the mind. But omitting altars, speak
we now of the sacrifices of the Jews, and that after this manner. First let us
define what a sacrifice is; then show we the causes; after that will we note
the principal kinds; and last of al, add some general things of the
figurative signification of sacrifices.

The definition may be this. 1. The definition of the Jews sacrifices.
Sacrifices of the Jews were ceremonies of offering gifts, and burnt
offeringes ordained of God, and that either to pacify God being offended, or
to testify their service, and religion. Which sacrifices pleased not of them
selves because theie were done, but in respect of ye faith of the offerers, and
thinking upon the spiritual signification. And that these rites were instituted
of God, Jewish sacrifices instituted of God.
both the manifest commandment of God often repeated not in Exodus only, but
also in Leuiticus; and also the testimonies wherebie God did testify how he
liked well of such service, does prove. And although before Moses time there was
no express commandment touching sacrifices: yet that God accepted them being
offered by the godly, the examples of good men do witness. Whereof it may
very easily be gathered how theie were commanded, albeit no mention be made
thereof in the written word. Again Gods acceptance, does confirm that he
was the auctor of them, not only in tolerating them, Leuit. 9, 24
but also in commanding them to be used. For at four several times the
sacrifices of the saints with fire from heaven were inflamed, 1. Ki. 18. 38
which surely was an apparent token of Gods alowing them. 1. Chapter 21, 26
And yt these sacrifices pleased not of themselves, 2 Chro. 7, 1.
it may easelie be gathered. Sacrifices of themselves did not pacify Go^d.
For what wise man will think that God will be pacified with the slaughter,
blood, and burning of beasts set on fire? For the faith therefore of the
offerers, and cogitation of a spiritual meaning theie liked God: which thing
many sentences of the Prophets, do testify. David does say, Psalm. 51, 16.
For thou desire no sacrifice, though I would give it: thou delightest not in
burnt offering. And again, Psa. 50, 7.
Here O my people, and I will speak; hear O Israel, and I will testify unto
thee: for I am God, even thie God. I will not reprove thee for thie sacrifices,
or thie burnt offeringes, that have not bin continualie before me. I will take
no bullock out of thine house, nor goats out of thie foldes. The prophet
Jeremiah does say, Iere. 7, 22.
I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them, when I brought them out of
the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offeringes and sacrifices. Isaie. 1, 10.
And again, says Isaiah, Hear the word of the Lord, O Princes of Sodom:
Isaie. 1, 11.
hearken unto the Law of our God, O people of Gomorrah, what have I to do with
the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt
offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts; and I desire not the blood of
Bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats. 12.
When ye come to appear before me, who required this of your hands to tread
in my courts? 13.
Bring no oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me. These
sentences do seem not only to be contrary to yt commandment, which so often
is to be found in Leuiticus, but also to condemn the whole Aaronical
priesthood with the altars.

But for the concilement of these contrary speeches, we will aleage three
testimonies, and two examples out of the Scriptures, who plainly shall remove
away al doubtfulnes, Solomon does say, Romans 15, 8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord. Psalm. 50, 16.
David says also, Unto the wicked God said, what have thou to do to declare
mine ordinances, that thou should take my covenant in thie mouth, seeing
thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? And Isaiah
after he reprehended ye sacrifices of his people, Isaie. 1, 16.
adds, Wash you, make you clean. Take-awaie the evil of your works from
before mine eyes; cease to do evil. Learn to do well; seek judgment; relieve
the oppressed; judge the fatherless, and defend the widow. These places do
plainly show how the sacrifices of this people were reproved because of the
uncleanness of the heart, and il dealing toward man, or because of their
froward confidence, and wicked conversation. For as the hypocrites did offer
their sacrifices before God for a recompense: so the wicked thought how by
their burnt-offeringes theie were sanctified, albeit theie were touched with no
feeling of their sins. Therefore seeing God commanded sacrifices to be
offered, that theie might be exercises of godliness, surely the offerers ought
to bring unfeigned repentance and faith, without which no marvel it is if the
sacrifices were caled abomination. Genesis 4, 4. 5.
Caine and Abel did both offer sacrifices; notwithstanding God had respect unto
Habel and to his offering, that is, unto his sacrifice: but unto Caine and to
his offering he had no regard. Why so? Because Habel bought a faith in the
Messiah, whom his sacrifice did shadow: wherebie also his obedience in
sacrificing did please. But Caine sacrificed without faith, presuming upon the
dignity of his work. And therefore no marvel though God had no regard unto
his offering.

The sum of al is this: that sacrifice spiced with faith pleased as fat, and
grateful: but that void of faith it displeased as dry, and ungrateful. But
David most plainly of al shows in his 51. Psalm. when the sacrifices of
burnt offeringes do please; for thus he says: The sacrifices of God are a
contrite spirit; Psalm. 51, 17.
a broken heart, O God thou will not despise. Ioining thereunto by and by, 19.
Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the burnt offering
and oblation; then shall theie offer calves upon thine altar. Therefore let ye
beginning of each good work proceed from an heart purified through says,
without which every work, seem it to the eye never so holy, is abominatio^
before God.

This I have spoken the more at large, because of some among the fathers, who
not well understanding the words of David, and of Isaiah, do agree with
Porphirie, who most wickedlie did slander the sacrifices of the Jews, which
were in use, so long as the commonweal of Moses did stand. But the fathers:
somewhat to excuse these Jewish sacrifices, said how God did not command, but
only suffer them to the end theie might keep the Jews from idolatry
whereunto theie were inclined. 2. Causes of the Jewish Sacrifices


Now let us see the causes of Jewish sacrifices in order, as we did propose in
ye second place. First therefore the cause commanding offers it self, The
first cause of sacrifices.
who is God himself. Who, for that he is most wise, not without great wisdom
did command, and appoint this ceremony. Against whom, albeit dust and ashes
will set himself, and object manifold absurdities: yet content we our-selues
with the most wise counsel of God, the which let us oppose not only against
that Atheist Porphirie, but also against the devil and his members, who dare to
oppose the dotinges of their foolish brain against the wisdom of God. Romans
8, 7.
Let us know that the saying of Paul is true, who says, The wisdom of the
flesh is enimitie against God. Thorough this cause commanding, the godly among
the Jews, did know, both how their sacrifices pleased God, when through faith
theie were done unto Gods glory with true meditation of the spiritual
signification, and also that theie were bound unto obedience until Christ came
of whom those sacrifices were figures, and who by his own and perfect
sacrifice should set an end to all figurative sacrifices.

But, seeing the Jews at this day do object to us how their sacrifices
should not be abolished, because God is unchangeable: I do answer, so long
as the cause and condition of the decree is in force, The second which is the
material cause of sacrifices.
so long does God himself abide constant and unchangeable. The material cause
of Iewishe sacrifices was either the fruit of earth, or clean beasts, which
by certain tokens are distinguished in Leuiticus from the unclean. It was
furthermore enacted that theie should not use either leaven or honey in their
sacrifices, but that theie should season every sacrifice with salt. For God the
lawgiver would have them to acknowledge him to be auctor of al, as well of such
things as do spring from the earth, as of al living creatures beside that are
bread; and also crave his blessing, The third, which is the formal cause of
sacrifices.
and refer the use of al things unto his own glory. The formal cause was the
very manner of sacrifising; which for that it was diverse, it were much to
prosecute the same in this place; and therefore I remit the reader unto the
book of Moses caled Leuiticus.

The ends of the sacrifices instituted, The last, namely the final cause of
sacrifices.
were four: whereof the first was, that the people prone unto idolatry might
be reclamed therfrom by these exercises. The second, yt Gods people might be
kept in the service of one God, and have a daily occasion to exercise
godliness. The third, that the people might have a type of Christ the
sacrifice to come. The fourth, that by thinking of Christ the sacrifice to
come, the Jews might be warned of the grieuousnes of sin, the which
for so much as it could not be cleansed by the blood neither of bulls, nor of
goats, theie might know how to be cleansed thoroughly from their sin, theie
had need of the blood of the immaculate lamb, that is of the promised seed,
or Messiah, who alone could tell how both to abolish the works of the devil,
sin, and death, and also pacify the offended father. Secondly that in this
mind theie should fly unto the mercy of God proposed in the forenamed seed,
and by faith depend upon that seed, glorifieng ye Lord both in all their mind,
heart, will, and conversation, who of his infinite goodness, and wise counsel
would after such a sort redeem mankind. With such motions did the fathers,
Habel, Noah, Abraham, Isahac, Iaacob, Moses, David, Solomon, Elias, and many
other which feared God, sacrifice.

For these knew right well how by the outward work only, God was not
pleased, but that he respected besid, the faith, and the mind of the offerers.
Notwithstanding some as hypocrites and wicked livers among this people, did
think that God regarded the outward work, and thereby was pacified as by an
expiatorie sacrifice. And therefore the Lord does testify that their
sacrifices were both abominable to him, and never exacted of him.

In the third place the kinds of the old sacrifices do follow, 3. Kinds of
Jewish sacrifices.
the principal and chief division whereof is this: That one kind was
expiatory caled Olah, The first kind of sacrifices.
and burnt sacrifice, which was offered for sin by a certain show of
purging. For in very deed it purged not sin, but only bare a figure of
the purging to come through the only sacrifice of Christ, all this being lifted
up upon the altar was consumed with fire. Whereby was signified, that Christ
the Priest and the sacrifice should be lifted-vp upon the altar of the cross,
The second sort of sacrifices.
and with the fire of love be burned for our sins. Another was of
testification called Hodah. Sacrifice Eucharistical, or Propitiatory.
For it was done either for supplication, or thanksgiving sake, or else for
exercise of godliness: the which of the principal end thereof was termed,
eucharistical, as that other ilstical, that is propiciatorie. For as Paul
interpretes ye same, it signified purging to come through the blood of Christ.
For so he says, Whom God has set-forth to be a reconciliation through faith
in his blood. Romans 3. 25.
Whatsoever other sorts be mentioned, they are contained under these.

Touching the figurative signification of old sacrifices, 4 Figurative
significations of Jewish sacrifices.
the Epistle unto the Hebrews teaches generalie, how al were figures of that
only sacrifice Jesus Christ, which being offered, al other things as
figurative, ought to cease. But more particularly we will in this place
set-downe some things, especialie those, which may lead us as it were by the
hand unto a spiritual instructing of our life and manners. The priests office
in sacrifising.
First therefore commeth-forth the consecration of Priests, whose duty was to
offer the sacrifice: they had four things to do. First, they should wash
themselves with water; whereby was signified, how by nature they themselves
being unclean, were to be cleansed by spiritual water, which Christ the chief
Priest alone does sprincle; an effectual badge whereof Baptism is. Then,
they were to put-on garments, not their own but the priestlie garments, which
thing betokened the innocence of Christ, wherewithal being cleansed, and
clothed with his blood, they do seem righteous and bewtiful in the presence
of God. After that they were anointed, whereby the spiritual ointment,
wherewithal they are anointed for Prophets, kings, and priests; and whereby
they may be effectualie taught concerning the virtue of Christ his benefits,
is signified. Lastly, they filled their hands, that is they sacrificed; for
then obedience does please God, when it is shown of the^ who are purged
through faith; clothed with the righteousness of Christ; and vncted with Gods
holy spirit. When they offered burnt offeringes, they were admonished to
offer up themselves spiritualie to God. Whereunto Paul in his 12. chapter unto
the Romans had regard.

When these parts of living creatures, as the kidneie, the liver, the fat,
which parts of al others are prone unto concupiscence, were sacrificed, they
were put in mind of killing wicked lusts and concupiscence, that they might
addict themselves al whole to the service of God. The parting of the beasts
did give them to learn, how they should cut the word of God aright, and
apply the same according to ye condition of men. which thing Paul seems to
point-at, 2 Timothy 2. 25
when he commands to divide the word of truth aright.

Of the double signification of the altar we have spoken already. Neither may
we ouerpasse how it was decreed that neither leaven nor honey should be used
in sacrifices, but that they should besprincle every sacrifice with salt. For
as we be admonished by leaven that malice is to be excluded, according to the
teaching of the Apostle; and by honey, that al hypocrisy must be laid-awaie:
So the salt does signify that al works ought to be seasoned with spiritual
wisdom, faith, and prayer; otherwise they will not please God. More notes of
this matter you may read in our Commentary upon the Epistle unto the
Hebrews.

CHAP. 22.
1. Of the original cause of idolatry; 2. Of the diverse Gods in times passed;
3. Festiual days; 4. and sacrifices among the Gentiles.
Before we come unto the sacrifices of the Gentiles, we will say somewhat
concerning their Gods, and their sundry feasts, that thereby we may call into
mind, both what an horrible punishment the blindness of such as depart from God
is; and what a great and unspeakable benefit it is to have the word of God,
which not only shows to us the true God, but also prescribes a right form
of serving God, whereby we may be led through the kingdom of the grace of
Christ in this life; until we shall attain unto ye mark, yt is unto glorious
immortality, where we shall be conformable to Christ our Lord for evermore.
which conformity is the repairing of the image of God in us, and the last end
of our creation, and reparation through the son of God our only redeemer.

In the 31. chapter of Genesis mention is made of the Gods of the Gentiles, The
original of idolatry.
where Laban unto his son in law, Genesis 31, 30.
does say, Wherefore have thou stolen my goods? Whereof we may gather, that
the word of the promise being obscured among the posterity of Noah
foorth-with they invented strange Gods and fained worshippinges. For seeing, as
Cicero does say, There is no people, neither so uncivil, nor so savage, but
although they be ignorant which is the true God: yet they know that some God
is to be worshipped, having lost the true God, and his word, they made to
themselves fained Gods, which thing Paul does pronounce was the punishment of
their neglecting the true God, Romans 1, 21.
when he says. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankeful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was full of darkness. 22.
When they professed themselves to be wise, 23.
they became fools. For they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and fourefooted
beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts
lusts, 25.
unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves; which turned
the truth of God unto a lie, and worshipped and served the creature, forsaking
the creator, which is blessed for ever. Idolatri the just punishment of
forsaking God 2. These. 2. 11 12.
So then idolatry, and the invention of fained Gods is the just punishment of
apostasy from the true God. And this was it which ye same Apostle does say:
Therefore God shall send the^ strong delusio^, that they should believe lies, that
al they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Hitherto of the occasion, Gods of the Gentiles.
and cause of idolatry among the Gentiles, now ad we somewhat concerning the
diverse Gods which they had. The posterity of Noah, being gross and rude, did
not worship God the creator, and governor of the world, but the things which
to the sight appeared goodly, and wonderful in their blockish and most dull
judgments they took for Gods. This error flowed from the parents unto the
children, and daielie more and more increasing, through continuance of time it
waxed strong. The ages following deemed it impiety to resist the same. For the
posterity think they do owe that reverence to their predecessors, which
children do to their parents (even as many at this day will not depart from
Popery because of the reverence yt they bear to their forefathers.) And
therefore some because of their goodly show and greatness, worshipped the
heavens, the stars, the Sun, Moon, and elements. Some did number brute
beasts of whom they reaped any commodity, among the Gods; so did the
Egyptians oxen, cats and serpents. Some ascribed divine honor to men, either in
respect of benefits, or for fear, or for flattery. Some accounted even the
foul devils, for Gods. And others esteemed Palenes, Fear, the Ague, and such
like for Gods. Al those through the great, and most miserable calamity of
mankind were called and counted Gods. But, to speak only of men admitted into
the company of ye Gods, that was extreme madness of theirs, to choose them as
they did, not for their noble virtues, but for their notable and egregious
vices, as they did epicures, wantons, harlots, adulterers, and them which had been most shamfulie defiled with ye incest even of their own mothers, their
own sisters, their own daughters. The father of ye Gods they feign sometime in
ye shape of a bull, sometime of an Eagle, sometime of a swane, sometime of a golden
fleece to be disguised, and so to have defloured, and defiled virgins, and
women. They say Mercury ye president of sweet speech, changed himself into a
goat to obtain his desired pleasure with Venus. what should I make mention
either of Apollos heat; or of the in temperancie of Daphnie the virgin? What
should I tell, how the same Apollo embraced the body of a senseless
baie-tree, through intemperate lust? How Proserpina was stolne-awaie by Pluto?
How the mother Ceres did wander?

For these Gods, Festiual days appointed to the Gods.
the Devil, enemy to mankind instituted festiual days, solemn ceremonies,
and popular banketes to be kept, every one having a several title, or name.
To Jupiter, Panthea; to Juno, Herea; to Minerua, Panathenea; Dionysia, to
Father Bacchus; to Ceres, Eleusinia and Tesmophoria; Delia to Apollos; and
Phithia Hermea to Mercury; to Neptune, Posidonia; to Hercules, Heraclea;
Aesclepia, and Panasia to Aesculapius were dedicated. How the Gentiles holy
days were used.
At these feasts of the Gods al manner wickedness was committed; and wine so
immoderatlie quaffed-vp, that the next day they would be sick of surfeiting;
yea such as at al other times abhorred dronkenes, at these feasts would
commend the same as an holy work. And thereof the Greek word that
signifies dronkenes, Dronknes.
did spring. For Methe is nothing else but as it were Metha to thuein, yt is
after sacrifices. And because of the pain proceeding from surfeiting, the next
day after the feast, was called Episda. Whereof the name is translated unto
the time of reuengement for the wickedness before committed. Other things
committed at these bankets were so abominable, that for shame I cannot utter
them: wherefore let us come unto the sacrifices themselves.

Some did sacrifice frankencense to their Gods* Sacrifices of the gentiles.
others wine and herbs: afterward in process of time they offered sometime
even whole flocks of sheep; sometime an hundred bullocks. Whereof came that
name Ekatombe, which Homer uses. Some did sacrifice even whole herds of oxen
also. And at the length through the instigation of satan that murderer, who
by his oracles seduced the minds of men, they came to that pass that they
sacrificed men. Through which madness not one man alone, nor one country
only, but even very many nations were driven to think, that the Gods were
pacified by the offering of man's flesh. Diogenes, as Theophilus does report,
persuaded children to slaie their own parents in sacrifices, and to eat their
flesh. It was a custom among ye Grecians at the yeerlie feasts of Bacchus to
sacrifice quick men. The Lacedaemonians did offer to Mars the flesh of men.
The same people, with other nations, in ye time of a dearth, or of war did run
unto the sacrifice of men, as unto a last refuge. Whereof it came, that when
Eumoiphus king of Thracia had invaded Grecia with an army, the king of Grecia
fearing both himself and his people, sent messengers to know ye oracle of
Apollo, that was of a foul and wicked spirit, and to crave how the God
offended might be pacified: to whom the oracle made answer, that by the
sacrificing of the kings daughter, if her own parents did kill her, before they
encountered with the enemy, the wrath of the God would be pacified. When
Erechtheus the king, and Praxithea his wife heard this answer, they
foorth-with did offer their murdered daughter unto the devil, and thereupon
encountered with the enemy, and drove him from their kingdom. Aristodemus in
like sort killed his only daughter for the welfare of his country. It is
reported how that Aristomenes Misenius at one sacrifice killed 300. men. The
Herodians and Cretensians at the feast dais did offer to Saturn a dronken man,
and boys under ye age of fourteen years. The Phenices and Carthagenians
likewise did sacrifice to Saturn ye young children of Alderme^ set-out in
princely apparel: and for neglecting this oblation, after they were overcome
of Agathocles, to pacify the God offended, at one time they offered unto the
devil 200. sons of noble men. The Romans were of opinion that Saturn, and
Jupiter Latialis were pleased with the sacrificing of men, and besprincled the
images of them with man's blood. The Britanes for a long while did use to
sacrifice the blood of captives in their suits to ye Gods. The Frenchmen when
they waged battle did flee unto the sacrificing of men. The Germans likewise by
a barbarous custom thought it a great point of Gods service to sacrifice man's
blood to Mercury. So the Cimbrians bound to stakes guilty persons which they
kept for ye nonce, and offered them to their Gods for sacrifices. The^ Amonites
which bordered upon ye Jews offered their sons and their daughters to the
idol Moloch, ye which as some Hebrews do give out, was an holowe image made
of brass, wherein children were included, that fire being put there-vnder
they might be consumed. Other nations there-about did use this sacrifice after
another custom. For, having builded, and set-on fire two piles of wood, they
drove their sons and their daughters into the flames of fire* and so long did
enforce them to go up and down in the flame, until they died. This barbarous
ceremony did Achas and Manasse kings of the Jews imitate, and that by the
example of Mesa king of the Moabites, naught regarding the commandment of God
to the contrary in Leuiticus chapter 18, and 20. Which cruelty the Lord by
the prophet Jeremiah does condemn, Iere 7, 13.
Jeremy 7. where it is thus written, They have built the hie place of Topheth,
which is the valleie of Ben-Humon to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it in mine heart. For the
wicked hypocrites did think, that if calves for a burnt sacrifice did please
God; the oblation of their sons for a burnt sacrifice would much sooner please
him. And if God was delighted with the obedience of Abraham which offered his
son Isaak; why should he not like also the oblation of our children? And so
by their blind understanding they presumed to correct the manifest
commandment of God, which in express words forbids to sacrifice of their
seed to the idol Moloch. But what may be learned hereby? We may learn two
things. First, how extreme the cruelty of satan upon mankind is; and how
great the darkness of man's mind is, when they are destitute of Gods word.
For then they be carried from one idolatry unto another, and from one sin
unto another, until blinded in all manner wickedness and impiety, they delight
themselves even in their own filthiness: which doubtless is an horrible
punishment of defection from God, and from his word. Secondly, we, who by the
word of God are delivered from the tyranny of satan, and from the mistie
darkness of ignorance, hereby have occasion offered us continualie both to
praise God for his goodness toward us; and to pray him earnestly not to suffer
us to fall into old or such like darkness, For according to ye doctrine of
Paul, God does send them strong delusio^, that they should believe lies, 2.
These. 2. 11* 12.
and be delivered over into a reprobate mind, which will not believe the truth.

CHAP. 23.
1. Of papistical sacrifices; 2. of consecration of Popish Priests.
THe Popedom, or kingdom of Antichrist have their priests consecrated to
offer sacrifices, not according to the institution of Christ and example of ye
Apostles, but partly by wicked imitation of the old people the Jews, partly
after the custom of the heathen. For from both, that is from the Jews, and
heathen people they have borrowed such things as they thought would serve best
to the setting out of their toies, and fables. Therefore I will speak first of
the consecration of Popish Priests; then of the papistical sacrifice, or
mass; and last of al, of some other things which may be thought middle, A
popish Priest who.
and indifferent things.

A popish Priest is a person by ointment, and shauing distinguished from other
men, ordained both to sacrifice Christ, and also to offer prayers and vows in
the mass for the quick and dead, and for other necessities. That this is the
state of ye Popish priesthood, the whole papacy, the canon of the mass, and
the form of words, whereby the mitred Bishops are wont to consecrate their
sacrificers, do witness. We give you, say they, power to offer expiatorie,
that is peace offeringes, Hence is it that they brag how they are mediators
between God and men; and have power to sacrifice for the quick and dead.
Here, if according to the Proverb, we will call a boat a boat, and a spade a
spade, doubtless the Popish Priest, so much as in him is, does spoil Christ of
the honor, which the heavenly father by a solemn oath has confirmed, Psalm.
110. Psalm 110, 4.
The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchi-zedek. And the Epistle to the Hebrews acknowledges Jesus Christ to
be the only Priest who by his own sacrifice once offered, has for ever
made the^ perfect who are to be sanctified, and because of the perfection
thereof, says he has no need of successors, as those figurative Priests of
the old Jews had. And therefore the Popish Priesthood does not only fall
down by the word of God, and testimony of the purer Church, but also is
clean contrary to the Priesthood of Christ. Pope Gregory does say: Woe be
to us if we enter-in without making a noise, that is, if we boast that we are
sheepeheardes, and be yet but dumme dogs. For nothing is less tolerable, than
for him to be deemed a pastor in the Church, who does not speak, and whose
voice makes no noise to edification of the people. By these words Gregory
does apply the figure of the old law unto the new Testament. For, as bells
were hanged to the Priests garmente; and Moses does plainly command, that
a Priest come-not abroad without making a sound: So Gregory will not have his
Priests to be mute, but to teach. And therein he meant wel^ notwithstanding
he swarued from the truth. For, as the bells of the legal Priests, had God for
their auctor: So it shall not be sufficient for Gregory's Priests to have a
wide, and open mouth to iustruct al, unless that sound depend upon the
authority of God; that is, unless they vtter-out pure doctrine, as Malachie
speaks of the law, Mal. 2, 7.
The priests lips shall preseru: knowledge. And this was it which the Lord
by the Prophet Ezechiel does say, Ezekiel. 3, 17.
Hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. For the Lord
cannot abid yt they should take a part from his word, and a part from the
dreams of man; as it were intermixing corn and chafe together, but he will
have his own word without mixture of chafe to be heard. Ier. 23, 28.
For so he says, The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream; and
he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfulie: what is the chafe
to wheat, says the Lord? Here does God set a limit or bound for Priests
which they may not ouer-passe. As if he should say: I have not appointed
Prophets and priests to the end they should bring this or that
indifferently, and thrust the same upon the Church at their pleasure, but that
they defend ye pure word and service of God, which the word prescribes. For
as he compares the pure word of God unto wheat: So whatsoever men out of
their own brain do invent, he likeneth it unto chafe. If then this law of
God, and this limitation of ye power of priests does bind al, as indeed it
binds, let the Pope show us any word out of the writings either of the
Prophets or Apostles of the vncting of their Priests, of their shauing, of
their power to offer Christ for the quick and dead; and of their application
of the merits of saints. If the Pope cannot do this by plain doctrine
without sophistry, surely we are not bound neither to his laws, nor to
receive his sacrificers for mediators between God and men.

But they have a common refuge. Against good intents beside the word of God.
For they say, private masses were instituted by ye Ecclesiastical governors of
a good intent; and have been approved by long custom, yea and by miracles
confirmed too. As though good intentes had any place, where the word of God
does not shine. Yea four manner of ways theie make themselves guilty, which
of their own intent, which theie call good, do institute any divine service
without the warrant of Gods word. For, first theie are guilty of apostasy
from God. For theie go from this commandment given out by God himself, Ezekiel.
20, 18* 19.
Walk ye not in the ordinances of your Fathers, etc. but walk in my statutes:
Again, Theie worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandementes of
men. Mark. 7, 7.
Secondly, theie are guilty of rashness. For what is a more rash part, than
to presume to institute divine service contrary to Gods commandment?
Thirdly, theie are guilty of pride, wherewithal God is highly displeased, as
though he knew not well enough, with what service to be worshipped. Last of al
theie be guilty of others faults. For by their example other superstition
daily does spring out. For men are the more emboldened to heap ethnical
superstition together, when theie see others do so before their face. Touching
antiquity, I do say, Antiquity. Against eu^l custom.
that an evil custom, be it for continuance never so ancient, is naught else
than the oldenes of error. The miracles wrought in Mass, were doubtless the
illusions of Satan, who by that means would confirm idolatry to the
destruction of mankind. Wherefore we obeieng the word and commandment of God,
which is to be the rule of al our actions, let us avoid the Pope with all his
toies, and diuelishe inventions as accursed, the rather because, despising
Christ our only priest together with his eternal priesthood, he faineth a
certain new priesthod for profit sake to the reproach of Christ.

CHAP. 24.
1. Of the sacrifice of the Mass; 2. With the abominations therein contained;
3. A confutation of the arguments which Papists do allege to defend their
idol the Mass.
But that the matter may ye more evidently appear, let us see what manner of
thing the sacrifice of Papists is, that so we may give a more exact judgment
of Priests. But before we define the Popish sacrifice, that is the Mass, it is
behoueful for us diligently to behold the difference between the Mass it
self, Comparison between a bodily harlot, and the spiritual whore the Mass.
and the outward color wherewithal it is painted. For as an harlot who sets
her body to sale, does paint her self to al lasciuiousnes, and uncleanness;
does set-out her self with rings and jewels; and putteth-on costly apparel,
therwithal to alure to her self companions, whose substance she may
wast-awaie: So that whore of Babylon, caled the Mass, commeth-abroade set-out
as it were with gold and jewels, while she does use certain holy lessons,
and songs out of the word of God, wherebie she does easelie deceive the ruder
sort, and the simple, who deceived with the outward show, do think her to
be a very chaste virgin, who in deed is a most filthy harlot, hurting her
companions more than the vilest harlot that may be. For, as an impudent
strumpet does infect the body of her lover with contagions and poisoned
diseases: So this Babylonish, or Roman strumpet infecteth the soul of man
with most pestilent diseases, The Pope the spiritual baude.
which no way can be cured, before her baude, which is the Pope, be utterly
renounced; and, the filthiness of this harlot being known, Christ in time be
made the physician who alone knows the way to cure and heal the wounds of
conscience. And therefore we must not stick in the outward appearance of the
Mass, but in our mind we must have deeper cogitations, what one she is in
deed when her ornament is plucked from her. For being spoiled of the same,
nothing will appear either more odious, or more abominable, or finalie more
hurteful to mankind than it is. Now being forewarned by this admonition let
us define the Popish Mass as it is of it self without al colors, and
paintings.

The Mass with the Papists is both a sacrifice, The Mass a sacrifice, a
sacrament. The Mass how a sacrifice.
and a sacrament. It is a sacrifice, when it is offered by a priest occupieng
the place of a mediator between God and man for the salvation of the people,
that is for a cleansing of the sins both of the quick, and of the dead; and
for the obteining of other things from God.

And it is a sacrament, The Mass when a sacrament.
while the feast made of Bread, of Wine, and of water, is devoured only of
the sacrifising priest. For I speak not in this place of the Mass wherein
some pieces of bread are distributed among the people, without participating of
the enchanted cup. This definition of the Mass is collected partly out of a
Canon of the Mass, than which theie think nothing is more holy; and partly
out of the commentaries of the schoolmen, whom theie prefer before the
writings both of the prophets, and Apostles. And the Mass theie say,
signifies a transmission: because the people by the priest, who is in the
place of a mediator between God and man, does transmit, or sende-ouer prayers,
vows, and oblations. How horribly the Son of God with his priesthood is
dishonored herebie, no man sufficiently can conceive.

But, because the younger sort without instruction are not able to conceive the
ab homination in this Popish Mass, I will first say somewhat touching the canon
of ye Mass; and then gather reasons wherebie the prophanenes, and abomination
of this Mass may apeare. First therefore I demand of the Papists, of whom
theie have this custom of muttering this canon, wherein the mystery of the
Popish Mass, is contained. If theie say of ye Apostles, theie make Pope
Gregory, whom theie call Great, a loud liar. For he says it was
patcht-together by a cannot tell what schoolman. If theie say of Christ
himself, let them allege testimonies of the Evangelists, who at large do
testify the acts and saienges of our Savior Christ. Furthermore I ask
whether this canon be a part of the doctrine of the Church, or no? If it be a
part of doctrine, why do theie deem it unlawful distinctlie to utter the
same, that all the congregation may hear it? If it be no part of heavenly
doctrine, why show the Papists more cruelty against them which reject the
canon, than against either harlots, incestuous persons, adulterers, or
traitors? But the reason is plain; eue^ because theie prefer yea their
smalest traditions before the commandementes of God. If therefore this canon
does come neither from the Apostles, nor from Christ him self; nor yet is any
part of the doctrine of the church, doubtless very wicked are theie which will
thrust the same upon the Church of God, as though there-vpon the whole building
of religion did depend. As for me I am fully persuaded this Canon was brought
into the Church by the devil himself, the auctor of al idolatry, and
superstition. For the mumbling with their theatrical gestures agrees to the
incantation, and curssed superstition of the Gentiles, rather than to the
institution of Christ.

I will therefore speak what I think of the Canon. The auctors judgment of
the canon of the Mass
And first I say, that it is neither necessary, because it is commanded by no
word of God; nor profitable, because it makes not unto edification; nor yet
indifferent, because it is clean contrary to the institution of Christ: but
very wicked; because it spoileth Christ of the honor of a Mediator. For he
alone is both a cleanser of sin by his only sacrifice; and the only
mediator between God and man: which honor the canon ascribes to a sacrifising
Priest. It is also a polling thing; for it both was invented, and is defended
of Papists for lucre sake. It is a poison to souls; for it slaieth such as
repose any confidence therein. It is not only a profaning, but also an
abolishing of the Lords Supper. For it has no one jot of Christ his
institution.

It is furthermore an enchantment. Because, through the mumbling of these five
words, For this is my body; and breathing of the priest upon the bread, it
makes a transsubstantiation, as theie say, of the elements. Yea and it is
idolatrous. For these five words be no sooner spoken, but both the Priest
himself does adore the bread, and also offers it to be adored of all the
people round about him. And so in place of God theie bring-in a morsel of
bread, and that to the greater dishonor of God, than did Nabuchad-netzar, that
commanded an image which he had set-vp, to be adored.

Thus much briefly concerning the canon of the Mass. Now in order we will
recite the reasons, showing what vnholines, and impiety is in the Mass.

The first. 1. The first reason why the Mass is abominable.
It is horrible impiety, and sacrilegious impudency to appoint any service
in the Church, without the commandment of God. For such boldenes is apostasy
from God; whose word is the light of life, according to that of David: Ps.
119, 105
Thie word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path. And Solomon
out of the word of his father gathered this Proverb: Romans 6, 23.
The commandment is a lantern, and the Law a light. So that where the
commandment of God is not, men wander from the right way.

Where the Law of God is not, there is mere darkness. Hitherto in like sort
pertains the first commandment, Exodus 20, 3
Thou shall have none other Gods before me. And therefore it is for God alone,
upon whom each creature should depend, to prescribe the form how he will be
worshipped. David then instructed by this commandment did pray aright, when
he said, Psalm. 25, 5.
Lead me forth in thie truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my
salvation. Again, Theie worship me in vain, Mark. 7, 7.
teaching for doctrines men's traditions. Then all the inventions of man are
unnecessary burdens, as theie which detract from the authority of God.
Furthermore, Romans 14, 23.
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. For faith of the word is faith.
Wheresoever then the word is not, in vain does man purpose to please God.
Deuteronomy. 12, 8.
Again, Ye shall not do every man whatsoever seems good in his own eyes.
And Ezekiel, Eze. 20, 18.
Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, 19.
etc. Walk in my statutes. By these and many other places, that is confirmed
which we did propose. But this Mass, wherein theie feign an oblation to be
made for the quick and dead, not only has no commandment of God, which
thing is necessarily required in the manner of serving God, but also is quite
contrary to the institution of Christ, Luke. 22, 19
who bids the living to take, 1. Co. 11, 24* 25.
eat and drink, and to do that in remembrance of him. This reason should
satisfy al good men, especialie such as know that the Prophets zealouslie do
reprove the blindenes of those men, which without the commandment of God, do
institute worshippinges in the Church. This foundation made the diuorcement
between Luther and the Pope. This foundation does clear the consciences of
such good souls as forsake the baude of Rome, and fly unto their most
uncorrupted spouse, even our Lord Jesus Christ, the son of God. And this
foundation does strengthen, and comfort the saints, while theie be compelled
to sustein exile, affliction, shame, and loss of their goods for the
confession of the true doctrine, to whom long custom, and the authority of
their Elders is too too impudentlie objected. For as Tertullian says, none
may prescribe to the truth either spaces of time, or the authority of
persons, or the privilege of regions. Because our Lord Christ, who continues
for ever, named himself the truth, not custom.

The second. 2. Reason.
It is cursed impiety, and abominable reproach against the son of God to
turne-ouer ye glory due to Christ alone, unto a sacrifising priest. But this
is don in ye Popish Mass. For the sacrifising priest arrogateth the glory of
offering a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of all men both quick and
dead to himself, when he braggeth how he does offer for the quick and for
the dead. For, as above in the chap. next immediately going. before.
has bin showed, Popish priests are to that end consecrated. But now, seeing
the heavenly father will, that men do repose the eternal sanctification of
them selves only in the oblation of Christ (for so ye spirit of God in the
Epistle unto the Hebrews does say, Heb. 10, 12.
But this man, to wit Christ, after he had offeredone sacrifice for sins, 13.
sits for ever at the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarrieth til
his enemies be made his foote-stoole. 14.
For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
Heb. 9, 11.
Again, Christ being come an hie Priest, by his own blood entered he in once
into the holy place, 12.
and obtained eternal redemption for us. 14.
And again, How much more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God!) Who sees not that cursed impiety, and
abominable reproach is done to the son of God by a sacrifising priest, if he
arrogate even the smalest part of Christ his glory to himself! 3. Reason.
The third. The holy spirit in Paul does say: 1. Tim. 2, 5. 6.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men. In which saying of Paul
there be two things. The first, is an assertion wherebie Christ is made the
mediator between God and man. The second, a reason of the assertion: namely,
for that Christ alone, and none but he has given him self a ransom for all
men. For Paul will have these parts of Christ his priesthood, to wit
sacrifice, and intercession to be so joined together, that theie cannot be
severed. As therefore Jesus alone is the priest, which by his sacrifice once
offered does purge wickedness: so is he alone the mediator, by whom only we
have access unto the Father. For the intercession depends upon the merit of
the sacrifice. So that intercession can not be transferred upon any beside
him, whose duty it is to make propitiatory sacrifice. When therefore this
dignity of intercession is ascribed to a sacrifising priest, great injury is
done to the son of God. But this do the Papists in their fained sacrifice.
For theie do not only arrogate to themselves the honor of purging sins;
but also usurp the office of intercession, which is peculiar to Christ. For
this is in their prayer in the Mass: We offer to thie noble majesty of thie
benefits, and gifts, a pure sasacrifice, a holy sacrifice, an immaculate
sacrifice, the holy bread of everlasting life, and the cup of perpetual
salvation, upon which do thou vouchsafe to look with a favorable and gracious
countenance, and to accept them, as thou did vouchsafe to accept the gifts
of thie child Abel the righteous, and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham;
and that holy, and immaculate sacrifice which Melchisedech thie most hie
Priest offered to thee. We humbly beseech thee, o Almighty God, command
these to be carried-vp by the hand of thine holy Angels unto thine hie altar,
etc. And again in the same secret of the Mass theie ascribe the like honor
to the dead, when the priest craves that thorough their merits and prayers we
may be armed with the help of Gods protection. Here we do see a double
impiety to be joined together. For theie do not only make a Priest the
intercessor, who standeth-vpon the dignity of his sacrifice: but also theie
crave that through the merits and prayers of the Apostles, and Martyrs, God
would protect them. And although it follow through our Lord Jesus Christ: yet
most plainly theie bewraie their impiety, in that theie testify in plain
words how theie depend both upon the dignity of the sacrifice, and merits
of the Saints. But when the Papists do obiecte how Paul adhorteth, that
one would pray, and make intercession for another: I answer, the saints do
pray, and make intercession each for others, not with any confidence upon
their own worthiness and merits, but upon the worthiness and merits of the
only Mediator, our Lord, and savior Christ. But the Papists in making the
saints Mediators, do understand such patrons as by their own merits and
worthiness may purchase to us the favor of God. For this is a common principle
among them, that men living in earth do need patrons in heaven, in as much as
theie are unworthy to appear in the sight of God. By which saying, beside
that theie bereave Christ our Mediator of his honor, theie make themselves
guilty of threefolde impiety. For first, while theie make the dead
intercessors for the living, The hu^t which comes by making saints
intercessor^ for men.
theie do run beyond the limits of Gods word, and fool hardilie are
carried into damnable darkness, and upon the steep mountains of Hell. From
whence to return back, and to aspire aloft, that is a labor, and a sore
pain. But what a prophanenes this is, the godly alone do mark, who know that
darkness is there, where the torch of Gods word is not born-afore; who know that
al is abominable which God has not decreed; and who consider, that al which
dust and ashes does invent in religion, without the direction of Gods word,
does proceed from Satan. Secondly, when theie teach how we must depend upon
the merits of saints, theie depart from the true foundation of salvation, and
seek another foundation to build their salvation upon, without the word of
God.

For, seeing that mortal man by his own merit can not attain salvation, it
is impossible that the merits of Saints should bring salvation unto others:
which merits for all that the Pope faineth to be the treasure of the Church,
which he dispenses not gratis, but according to their disbursing, who
acknowledge the Pope to be the treasurer of the Church. Thirdly, in forging
such fained patrons to themselves, theie are drowned the more deeply in
darkness. For theie depart from the first commandment; and with cursed
impudency call upon Saints driven thereunto by the devil himself, Invocation
of saints why found^^s.
who has brought into the world the invocation of Saints, and that for these
causes. First to bereave Christ of his honor. Secondly to make the saints
infamous. Lastly, that in time to come theie may be partakers of his eternal
pains, who in this life do call upon saints.

The fourth. 4. Reason.
The Popish mass is laid open for filthy lucre sake. For theie not only
do sell Masses for the redemption of souls out of purgatory: but also make
them common to be bought for the obteining of any thing. In which of sins
many sins do meet together, of which I will recite a few, that with a perfect
hatred we may abhor ye most filthy lucre of the Mass. For first, this gain
strives against the foundation of our salvation, which is free mercy. Ephesians.
2, 8
For by grace, says Paul, are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, least any man should boast.
Secondarilie, it abolisheth the Lords supper. Lords Supper why instituted.
For who is so blind, but may see how it is far from the Supper of Christ
to seek filthy gain therebie, which supper the Lord would have to be a
notable argument of his inward love toward the Church, and a testimony of the
redemption of the Church by his death, which free redemption of his beloved
spouse he seals in his supper. Thirdly this hu^ting after gain does utterly
overthrow the Prophecies of the prophets concerning ye benefits of the
Mediator of the New Testament. Isaie. 55, 1.
Ho, says Isaiah, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye
that have no silver, come, 2.
buie, and eat: come I say, buie wine, and milk without silver, and without
money. By water, wine, and milk the prophet understands the benefits of the
Gospel, which he pronounces are freely bestowed. For as our bodies are
nourished by bread, wine, water, and milk: so our souls are nourished, and
sustained by the doctrine of the Gospel, by the holy Ghost, by the sacraments,
and other such free gifts of Christ. Fourthlie, the buieng and selling of the
Popish Mass does make miserable men drunk with carnal confidence.

For by paieng money for this feigned purgation, as it were for an effectual
medicine, theie persuade themselves that theie driue-awaie al diseases of the
soul, and that without faith, and repentance. And because by Masses purchased
theie trust theie be armed against the devil and death, theie goe-on the more
boldly in wickedness, and daily become the more obstinate. Fiftlie, this gain
of Masses is the ground of Purgatory. For to make their Masses the more
vendible, the Priests did teach how there was a Purgatory of souls after
death, The foundation of Purgatory.
wherein the souls of the dead should be detained, until theie were purged
sufficiently from the spots of sins committed in this life. And therefore
Masses were appointed to be sold to them, who desired that either them selves,
or their friends might be delivered from the fire of purgatory: wherebie
theie fained that the pains of purgatory were brought-out. Henc^ the
Patrimony of Peter, as theie call it, was exceedingly increased. And hence it
is, that the goods of miserable men are translated from the true heirs unto
balde Priests and Monks. Sixthe, this gain of the Mass, and* subtlety of
the Roman baude, is the strength of the Papacy, that is of the Antichristian
kingdom. And therefore marvel it is not, though the Papists do so fiercely
contend and fight for their altars. For theie fear much that their chimneies
would fall down, if their altars were once overthrown.

The fifte. 5. Reason.
It is abominable idolatry to worship a piece of bread in ye place of Christ.
For, as a little above we have touched also, the Priest after ye mumbling of the
history concerning the institution of Christ, does first of al adore the
bread himself; and then lifts the same up, that the people may worship
it. For the Papists be persuaded that by the virtue of the mumbled words of
the instituted supper, the elements of bread and of wine be
transsubstantiated into the very body and blood of the Lord; which they lay
open to be adored, but very erroneouslie. For this transsumbstantiation so
stiflie defended by Thomas, is contrary to the nature of a sacrament. For, as
in baptism it is required that the substance of water do remain, which while
it is sprincled according to Christ his institution, is a right sacrament, and
with that water after a secret sort the very blood of Christ, whereby the
inward man is washed from wickedness, yea and putteth-on Christ himself, is
present: So it is required that in ye supper of the Lord, the substance of
bread and wine do remain, which being reached-forth and taken after the
institution of Christ, are a very sacrament, and with that bread and wine
after a secret sort, the very body and blood of the Lord, whereby the
inward man is nourished, fed, and refreshed, are present. So that before the
use whereunto they be ordained, bread and wine are no more a sacrament, than is
the water of baptism. And therefore it is as great madness to worship the
bread and wine, as if a man would worship the water either to be sprincled
upon a man to be baptized, or sprincled already, and reserved for worship
sake. Now whereas the Papists do attribute to the reciting of the words of
the supper, virtue to transsubstantiate, to speak as they do, the elements,
surely they have learned that of the Magicians, and witches, rather than of
Christ. For he alone it is, and none other, that by his divine power works in
the supper, and by the hands of his ministers reaches to us when we do
communicate his very body, and his very blod, after an unsearchable manner.
And whereas in reformed Churches the ministers of the Gospel do pronounce the
history of the institution of the supper with a loud voice in a known
tongue, they do it, not that any virtue by that reciting should passe-ouer
into the elements; but otherwise for a most holy and profitable purpose. For
they know nothing is more comfortable to the godly, than to hear the history
of the instituted supper which contains the causes of the institution, and
commends to them the great love between Christ and his Church. And
therefore as the Papists by mumbling with themselves the words of the supper
commit heinous sacrilege, by keeping close the doctrine of Gospel, the sum
whereof is contained in the history of the institution of the supper: So do I
judge it an intolerable thing, sorelie to be punished, if any would
celebrate the Lord his supper without repeating the history of the same taken
either out of the Evangelists, or out of Paul. Here some perchance will arise,
and say, in the celebration of the supper in the reformed Churches ye bread is
co^monlie adored even as in ye papacy. Hereunto I do thus answer: If any in
our Churches do worship the bread and the cup, he sticks as yet in a
papistical error, from which he is to be revoked by the godly ministers of the
Gospel. Then I distinguish between the worship of the bread, and the reverence
toward the majesty of Christ, present in the supper, which reverence we do
testify by bowing the knee, and by outward gestures of the body, while we are
occupied in the celebration of the supper.

The which reverence, as I judge it laweful, and godly, and commended to us by
the Apostle Paul: so I do think the worship of the bread and of the wine, is
wicked, and profane, both because we have no commandment to do, without
which a godly mind can appoint nothing in religion; and also because it is
mere presumption, as that which is not content with that use of the sacrament,
which the Lord requires.

The sixth. 6. Reason.
It is contrary to the institution and nature of the Lord his supper, that
one seueralie by himself should have a banquet without more communicants. For
thus does Paul say, 1. Cor. 11. 20 21.
When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords supper.
For every man when they should eat, takes his own supper before. Again, as
no man can baptize himself alone: So neither is it lawful for a priest to
minister the Lords supper privately to himself alone. If then this Lords
supper be not a private banquet, surely in vain do those sacrificers vaunt
how with five words they can pluck-downe the body of Christ from heaven upon
their altar. For ye body and blood of Christ is only in yt place, where the
institution of Christ is maintained, and the communion according to the
institution. It is needful then that at the least there be one to minister, and
another to receive.

The seventh. 7. Reason.
By the help of this mass, the kingdom of Antichrist which was erected by
the devil, is augmented and established. For the storehouse of al ungodly
worshippings, whereby the kingdom of Antichrist is vp-holden, is the mass.
Which therefore the more forcibly does deceive, because it has a form
quite contrary to ye nature thereof. For it seems goodly, whereas nothing is
more abominable.

The eight. 8. Reason.
The application of the mass for the dead, yt they may be delivered from
purgatory, is a mere devilish invention. For no man is forgiven without he
have faith. wherefore they most horribly deface the glory of Christ, which do
feign that that offering does merit that remission of sins for the dead.
Furthermore al which depart out of this life, do depart either in faith, or
without faith. In in faith, they are blessed, according to that, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord. Reave. 14. 13
And Peter says: 1. Pet. 1. 9.
The end of faith is the salvation of souls. But if they die without faith,
the sentence of Christ stands sure: John 3, 36.
He that believes not on the son, the wrath of God abides on him. So then
there is a double way, to wit a way of salvation, which is of the faithful;
and a way of death, or damnation, which is of al such as refuse in this world
to believe on Christ. Where then is purgatory, from whence the souls by
masses be redeemed for money?

Notwithstanding, What the Papists do aleadge for them selves to maintain their
mass.
albeit the truth touching the idolatrous mass of Papists, be not unknown
to the Church of God: yet the Papists to show that they have some ground, do
object three things, as buclers for their defense. For, first they bring-out
the deed of Melchizedech. Secondly they oppose a place of Malachie touching
the sacrifice to come among the Gentiles, with the like. Lastly, they do
amplify the worthiness of the people of the new Testament. But what force they
are of, let us briefly consider.

The deed of Melchizedech, Against the first argument of the Papists.
from whence the Papists do seek to have their cause countenanced, is thus
described Genesis 14. And Melchi-zedek king of Shalem brought-foorth bread and
wine, Genesis 14, 18
and he was a Priest of the most high God. 19.
Therefore he blessed him, saying, Blessed art thou Abraham, of God most high.
Hence do they most impudentlie infer that Priests must offer to God bread
and wine for peace offeringes. With as good a consequent, might one make this
argument. Philip is in Spain; therefore the sea is sweet. For first they do
corruplie read He offered, for He brought-foorth and in place of the particle
And they read For. Whereby they testify who is their master, eue^ the devil,
the corrupter and slanderer of gods word. Secondly they do very naughtilie
distinguish the things which are to be compounded, and mingled the things
that are to be distinguished. For there be two distinct members of the
narration in Moses. The former is of the king, and his deed: The latter of the
priest, and his deed. Melchi-zedek brought-forth bread and wine; you have the
king, and his deed. And he was a Priest of the most high God, therefore he
blessed him; Where you have the priest and his deed. Melchi-zedek therefore in
bringing forth bread and wine, showed himself a liberal king, whereby he would
refresh the wearied host of Abraham: And in blessing Abraham, he showed himself
a Priest. For it was the office of Priests to bless the people. Nom. 6, 22.
23. 24. etc.
Numbers 6. Thirdly the Papists out of the Epistle unto the Hebrews should
know, yt Melchi-zedek was a type not of ye popish Priests, but of the son of
God, and yt too after a certain sort. Thou art, says the father unto ye son,
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchi-zedek Now if they say how they
are Priests after the manner of Melchi-zedek, Heb. 5, 5. 6.
they make themselves the successors of Christ in ye priesthood whom the holy
spirit in the Epistle unto the Hebrews does testify has a priesthood which
shall not pass by succession unto another; Heb. 7, 17.
and who, according to the witness of the father, shall have no successor, but
alone shall abide a Priest for ever. For so it is in the 110. Psalm. Psa. 110, 4.
The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchi-zedek. Fourthlie it is undoubtedly true, that the holy spirit
would not have pretermitted the same, had any mystery, touching the
sacrifice of bread and wine in the new Testament lien hid in the deed of
Melchi-zedek. For the holy Ghost both exactlie and plainly does number the
conditions wherein Melchi-zedek was likened to the son of God our eternal
Priest. By these reasons it is apparent, how the Papists do wrest the deed
of Melchi-zedek very il to establish their idol. Neither do we weie their
allegation of some saienges of the fathers, who have delivered to the
posterity ye error which they received from their elders. For there is no
authority of man so great, but it must give place to the word of God. Neither
is a long and erroneous custom ought else, then the auncientnes of heresy*
Before which ye word of God deserves to be preferred. Theodoret, Theodore^ in
Cap. 8, ad Heb.
whom alone I prefer before al Ecclesiastical writers, waighing the words of
the Epistle unto the Hebrews, says on this wise: If therefore both the
Priesthood which is of the law have taken an end; and the Priest which is
after the order of Melchi-zedek have offered the sacrifice, and brought it to
pass that al other sacrifices should be unnecessary, why do the Priests
of the new Testament use a mystical lyturgie, or sacrifice? But they who are
learned in divine matters do know, that we do not offer another sacrifice,
but call into mind that one, and wholesome sacrifice. Hitherto Theodoret. But
the age ensuing being seduced of satan through missevnderstanding of the
words of the fathers, did frame the idol of the mass.

The place of Malachie which they bringfoorth to confirm their opinion is
this, Mal. 1, 11.
Mal. 1. In every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure
offering: for my Name is great among the heathen. Of this saying of Malachie,
and such like, as that is of Ezechiel, Offer a lawful and continual sacrifice
to the Lord: the Papists do endeavor to establish their missatical sacrifice.
But even children, who have but tasted the beginnings of Logike will laugh at
this conclusion. For who can bear this conclusion? Beasts be in the market
place: Ergo, a Chimera is there. Yea that which is yet more absurd, of a
general undivided theie do infer a monster neither heard-of, nor seen before
of any man.

The force of the Prophets argument is this. The Prophets do fore-tel, how
among the gentiles there shall be a sacrifice, and in all places a pure oblation.
Therefore the Gentiles converted through the preaching of the Gospel shall have
sacrifices and oblations. Notwithstanding what kind of sacrifices, and
oblations they shall be, it must be learned not of men, but of God, and such as
have the testimony of God speaking within the^. But of this we shall speak
more afterward Chap. 26* 27. etc.
when we shall entreat of the sacrifices of Christians.

The third thing which the Papists object, Against the third objection of
Papists
is the worthiness of the people of the new Testament. To prove this dignity
the Papists bring-out many testimonies of the scriptures, especialie two
sentences out of the former Epistle of Peter: 1. Pet. 2, 4.
To whom ye come as unto a living stone, etc. ye as lively stones, be made a
spiritual house, 5.
and holy Priesthood, to offer-vp spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. And by and by in the same chapter, 9.
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should shew-forth the virtues of him that has called
you out of darkness into his marvelous light. By these and the like sentences
the Papists do well gather the worthiness of the people of the new Testament;
but for all that their conclusion, that therefore they ought to be massing
Priests, to offer sacrifice for the quick and dead, is naught. For Peter in
this place speaks not unto bald Priests, but unto ye whole people of God,
unto men, women, maids, old-men yong-me^, and infants, to al which he gives
ye honorable title of priests, as they who are in ye priesthood to offer
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. If therefore al
Christians be priests, to offer acceptable sacrifices to God, surely the
priesthood common to al Christians is one, and the priesthood of papists is
another, the which is committed only to shauelinges to offer acceptable
sacrifices to God, without the commandment of God, yea contrary to the
manifest scriptures: Therefore when the Papists do reason thus: The
excellency of the people of the new testament is far greater than of the
people of the old Testament: Ergo It is required that Christians also have
their sacrifices, and those greater than were in times passed, otherwise they
were of baser condition, than either the profane people have been or the
Jews under the law. I grant the dignity is very ample, I grant also that
the sacrifices are greater: but that the mass is the sacrifice of Christians
through the prerogative of worthiness, it can not be proved.

Seeing now we have both showed by strong reasons the vanity and prophanes
of the Popish mass; and declared the lightness of the bucklers, which they
object unto us; it remains that we shun their impiety even as the serpent
himself, who was the author to our first parents that they should tempt GOD
by correcting his commandment. What it is to tempt God.
For to tempt God is nothing else tha^ by dispising his word, ordinance, and
vocation, to seek another thing through trust of our own wisdom, which
better pleases us: which thing the Papists have done by inue^ting a mass for
the quick and dead; whereby they think both to confirm their kingdom, and to
increase the honor of their sacrificing priests.

CHAP. 25.
1. Of things indifferent.
Now briefly, as we promised, let us say somewhat touching those things
which may be counted indifferent. What things are good in the papacy.
For all things that are observed in the papacy, are not generalie wicked, so
that every whit should be avoided. Morning and Evening prayers, instituted,
as they call it, for the time, do consist of* Psalms and lessons taken out of
the sacred scriptures. A godly man may be at some service of Papists.
And therefore a godly man dwelling among the Papists may be at them with a
safe conscience, if so be the danger of offense may be shunned; and al
suspicion of plaieng with both hands, avoided. For I would not have a man so
to fly Scylla, that he fall into Charibdis. For these two extremes are alike to
be avoided, namely papistical impiety, and al suspicion of Epicurisme. For he
that always does avoid the meetinges of men, where public prayers be made
of the congregation, seems not so much to fly papistical wickedness, as to
follow them which are of no religion. And therefore I would have the godly
abiding among papists sometime to be at their morning and evening prayers,
especialie at those wherein neither invocation is made of the dead; nor their
little God of bread is offered to be adored, as it does fall out at the feasts
of saints, and at hie festiual days, as they call them, wherein the perfume
of franke^cense is blown before images.

Now as touching the baptism of infants, Popish Baptism.
the godly are to do two things. Let them both in heart reprove the
papistical toies, wherewithal Baptism after a sort is contaminated; and with
reverence meditate upon the institution of Christ. Which being done, I am of
opinion the godly are excused, which either do suffer their children to be
baptized of Papists; or otherwise do come as witnesses unto the baptism of
infants. Because somewhat remains there yet of the institution of Christ.

Here what shall we say of the mass, Whether a godly man may communicate
with papiste.
wherein distribution is made both of bread and wine? Because therein somewhat
of Christ his institution does remain, shall it be lawful for a godly man
instructed aright touching ye idol of the mass, to be thereat, and to
communicate with others? For if he may be present at the baptism of the
Papists, although it be foulie defiled with manifold additions, because
there is somewhat remaining yet of Christ his institution; why shall not the same
reason be of strength, in the communion of the supper. This question? although
it seem very intricate, yet I will plainly tell what I think thereof: leaving
the judgment to the Church, that is the true Christians, especialie to such as
have felt the cross, and lived among the pikes. First therefore I distinguish
between the mass, and the communion in the papacy. For I think there is as
great a difference between the mass, and that solemn communion celebrated
among Papists on Easter day, as is between heaven and hell. For in the mass
there does nothing remain of Christ his institution. Wherefore as I judge the
mass abominable, and therefore to be shunned, as an idol of Satan: so I
pronounce that holy which remains of Christ his institution. For it is
wickedness to think that so great a thing does depend upon the worthiness of
ministers. Because indeed, the mass, and the communion or supper, be clean
contrary actions. Popish ^asse one thing, and the communion another.
For the Popish mass being ended, the supper of Christ begins. So that a
godly man abiding among Papists, is bound to shun the idol of ye mass: and
may, so that both offense, and al suspision of halting be taken heed-of, be at
the communion, and with the elect of God, whereof many out of doubt do lurk
in the Popedom, communicate. What? Shall it therefore be laweful to
communicate under one kind, as they call it? Are not the lay people excluded
from the holy cup of the Lords blood? Many of our side supposing that
consecration (as they say) is done by reciting the words of the institution
of the supper, do judge it a most heinous offense, if any do communicate
under one kind. The Popish priests also do think that ye lay people shall
not be partakers of the Lords cup for the same cause, namely because ye words
be not mu^bled over the cup, out of which the laity are drunk-vnto. So yt they
think ye wine is without ye presence of ye Lords blood. Now if the case did so
stand, yt is, if so great a matter did depend upon ye repetitio^ of words
rather tha^ of Christ who in his supper reaches forth the sacrament of his
body and blood, I would not have a godly man communicate with papists.
Wherefore having these adversaries, it is hard to pronounce any thing without
offense: yet will I speak what I do think.

First of al we must consider, Consecration what.
that to consecrate, is not, as the Papists think, and halfe-Papistes do
imagine, by the pronounciation of certain prescribed, or conceived words on
magique wise to make a common and unholy thing sacred and holy: but to
consecrate indeed is to separate a thing from a common use, and to apply it to
an holy use appointed to God with praise, and thankegiuing to his name. That
this is a true definition thereof, he knows that either will compare the force
of the verb Cadosh which with the Hebrews signifies to consecrate with the
old custom of consecration: or consider both the deed of Christ who instituted
the supper, and the doctrine of Paul touching the blessing of the bread, and
cup. Seeing then this matter neither depends upon the virtue of words, nor
is hindered by the malice of men which envy the godly the participation of ye
cup; but depends upon the commandment and institution of Christ, who
according to his promise will be among the godly that call upon him; and think
upon, and acknowledge the benefits of his death, and resurrection: I doubt not,
but the godly in the popedom do take part of the body and blood, albeit
the popish incantation do not defile the cup. For both he that sanctifies is
the son of God; and he that reaches his body and blood by the hands of
the ministers is the son of God, whose divine power, and infinite mercy
neither is hindered by ye error of me^; nor broken through ye malice of envious
persons who suppress the recitation of ye words touching the supper.

But some may object: Theie which communicate together, do it that theie may
be one in Christ. 1. Co. 10. 17
For so says Paul: For we that are many, are one bread, and one body:
because we are al partakers of one bread. But the Papists who bring not faith,
are without the body of Christ. For none is in Christ, but through faith. And
therefore it seems how it is unlawful to communicate with Papists. A double
communion at the Lords supper.
I answer in the supper there is a double communion. One is of the faithful
soul and of Christ, whereof the same Apostle in that place does speak: 1. Co.
10, 16
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? Of this communion theie truly do participate, which bring faith with
them unto the holy supper. The other, which depends upon the former, is of
the brethren communicating among themselves. This communion is not hindered
either by the wickedness of the minister, or though some one Judas or other be
present. For it is a spiritual communion of all the godly under one head, yea
though theie lurk secretly among Papists, as doubtless many do.
Notwithstanding once again I admonish that al denieng of the true faith though
but fained, be taken heede-of.

But what if one do so abhor Popery, Whether a man not of the ministry may
minister the Lords supper in the case of necessity, or no.
yt by no means he dare communicate in ye kingdom of ye Pope; shall not a
godly householder, who has a virtuous wife, and a well governed family, in this
case privately in his own house, prepare ye Lords supper for himself, and
his? Some percha^ce will say, he may not so do; because ye administration of
the sacraments does pertain unto the public ministry.

Of this I demand again, whether many did not communicate in the primitive
Church, before any ordinary and public ministry was instituted, and before
any temples were erected to meete-together? For my part I am persuaded that
the houses of many good citizens were temples, wherein godly housekeepers
with their families did receive the Lords Supper together, and did strengthen
one another both with doctrine and comfort. I therefore distinguish between ye
Church well ordained, and between captivity and banishment, where the godly be
persecuted. There I will have nothing detracted from the ministry, but al
things to be done according to the ordinance of ye church well ordained: but
here, that is in the captivity or banishment of the Church either under the
Turk or Pope, I do think the godly are blameless, if theie imitate the
examples of the saints in the primitive Church.

Thus we have written in few words our judgment concerning ye use of the
Lords supper in the papacy, wherein if any man be not satisfied, I desire
friendly to be admonished. For I submit not only this our sentence, but also
whatsoever at any time I have written, or shall write, to the censure of all the
godly, who do cleave not so much unto doutful opinions, as to ye manifest
truth. And therefore I do fre^dlie request, yt no man would rashly judge, but
first compare my reasons, and of the adversaries together. Which if any do, I
trust mine opinion shall not be improued. And I beseech God, even the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, yt he would lighten our minds with his light; repress
the futie of satan and his limes yt persecute ye sound doctrine; and keep us
in true godliness, thorough and for Christ his sake, that so we may glorify
him for evermore, Amen.

CHAP. 26.
Of the sacrifices of Christians.
CHristians also, Sacrifices of Christians.
which syncerelie profess Christ, have their sacrifices. To wit, a
propitiatory; Propitiatory sacrifice of Christians.
and a sacrifice eucharistical: both named of their effects or ends. Christians
have a propitiatory sacrifice, not to be offered of themselves, but already
offered by Jesus Christ the most high priest and Mediator. For Christ the
priest has given himself a propitiatory sacrifice for all men, that the
father being appeased, the faithful might for evermore be sanctified through
him.

Eucharistical sacrifice is every obedience given of Christians to God,
Eucharistical sacrifice.
wherebie, as theie acknowledge God to be the fountain, and auctor of every
good thing: so theie testify their thankfulness toward him.

But that this doctrine concerning the sacrifices of Christians known to the
Church of God alone, may the better be understood, and seem the more
comfortable to us, I will more distinctlie entreat of both kinds. For that
which particularly is distinguished, is both read with the more pleasure; and
kept with more profit, as Bernard says.

In the propitiatory, or expiatorie sacrifice many things are to be
considered, which do make unto the plainer exposition of the same. Wherefore
first of al, I will entreat of the Priest who does offer this sacrifice. Then
of the priesthood and parts thereof. Afterward of the covenant. For every
Priest is a surety of some covenant. After that of the application of this
sacrifice. Last of al, of the continual use of this sacrifice in the
conscience, in life, and in death.

CHAP. 27.
1. Of the Priest which does offer the propitiatory sacrifice for Christians;
2. Of his nature; 3. and qualities.
IN the explication of this first member concerning the chief priest of
Christians, let us consider what need there was to have him; of what condition
he was for person; and who he was.

The necessity of the priest may be deemed from hence. The need that
Christians had of a Priests.
That al of us are sinners, and subject to eternal death, both through the
defection of our first parents from God, and also through our own sin, and
guiltines, it is well known: which thing, both the punishment laid upon us by
the most righteous God; and the word of God; and every man's conscience does
witness. Now one of these two must needs come to pass. For either we were to
perish everlasting lie; or must be reconciled unto God. But, because the
reconciliation should be righteous, that the justice of God might be satisfied,
it could not be done without man a sufficient amends to God for the injury he
sustained. Which amends was necessarily to be made by some mediator. That as
one Adam did cast us al by his own sin unto death, and damnation: so there
might be some one, who by his own merit should reconcile us to God offended,
having made a recompense for the trespass. Which Mediator between God
offended, and men offenders, is caled a priest. For so it is in the 5. Chapter
of the Epistle unto the Hebrews: Heb. 5, 1.
Every hie priest is taken from among men, and is ordained for men, in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts; and sacrifices for sins. By
this it plainly appears, how necessatie a priest was, to reconcile us unto
God who was displeased. But who could give such a priest, when al mankind was
guilty; and no man living could satisfy no not for himself, much less for
others? The most wise God brought-forth a counsel, which man could not give.
For he was as he was merciful, to take pity upon his creature: as he was wise,
to help man least he lost the end whereunto he was created: as he was
almighty, not to suffer the devil to exercise everlasting tyranny upon his
own image: and as he was righteous, not to let sin go unpunished. Therefore
God uttered his most wise counsel wherebie he declared both his sovereign
wisdom, and his incomprehensible mercy, and his infinite power, and his most
absolute justice. Wherefore, because the wrath of God against sinners, as we
are al by nature, (for we were by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2, 3.
) was greater than a mere man could bear; and because the justice of God did
require, that some one among men should be the auctor of life, as one was of
death, God of his goodness gave such a priest, who both could, because he was
God, and ought because he was a man, born of flesh and blood as al other men,
notwithstanding separated from sinners, that is righteous. Otherwise he had bin
unmeet for such an office. Genesis 3, 15.
For thus says God: The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, that
is, the whole consent of the Scripture approving the same, The eternal son of
God shall take-vnto him self the humane nature, that God and man may be one
person, a mediator or a priest between God and men, who taking man's cause upon
him-self shall suffer the punishment due to mankind; and reconcile men to God,
his own righteousness being imputed to them* which made Augustine to say: A
more convenient manner to heal our misery there was none, than by the passion
of Christ. For be, as the same August. says, made our sins his own sins,
that he might make his righteousness to be ours. Therefore ye condition of ye
Priest reconciling us to God by his own merit, was to be of two kinds. One of
natures; ye other of quality. The co^ditio^ of natures yt this our Priest
should be both God and man, in one person, otherwise he could not be a
mediator. For as to the father by his eternal divinity: so ought he to be
conioined to us by the society of humane nature. The Son of God therefore,
as Ambrose does say, taking our flesh upon him became man, that the man Jesus
Christ might be the Mediator between God and man. It was behoueful therefore
that the Mediator should consist of both natures, that he might reconcile both.
Of the divine, that he might talk with God, and appear before him: of ye
humane, that he might both be a debtor, and also have to offer up to God.
Whence in the Epistle unto the Hebrews it is thus written, Heb. 2, 14.
He took flesh and blood, that he might destroy through death, 15.
him that had power of death, that is the devil, and that he might deliver all
them, which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. 17.
Again, In all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be merciful; and a faithful high priest in things concerning God, 18.
that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he
suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

Hitherto concerning the conditions of the divine and humane natures of our
priest: now of the quality of the person, whereof the same Epistle entreats
on this wise: Heb. 7, 26.
Such an high priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separat from sinners, and made (...) than the heavens: 27.
which needed not daily as those hie Priests to offer-vp sacrifice, first for
his own sins, and then for the peoples. But of this quality we shall have
good occasion to speak more in the explication of the priesthod. And that Jesus
the son of the virgin Marie is the true Messiah, yea and priest and Mediator
both promised and given to us of God, we have above In the 4. Chapter. Page. 20.
declared where we opposed against ye Jews this invincible argument:

He alone, without al controversy, of certain truth, The Mayor.
yea and by the confession of al men, is the true and only Messiah, to whom
all the prophecies of the Prophets do point; and to whom properly, whatsoever
by Moses, and other holy Prophets of God has bin foretold of the Messiah,
does agree.

But the prophecies of all the Prophets do point unto Jesus the son of Marie
ye virgin; The Minor.
and to this Jesus alone, whatsoever by Moses, and other holy prophets have
bin foretold of the Messiah, The conclusion.
does agree: Therefore none but Jesus the son of Marie the virgin, is the
true and only Messiah. The minor which is in controversy we have already
proved above, where we refuted the vanity of ye Jews concerning the Messiah.
Turn unto our note upon 1. ver. of this Psalm against the Jews A ^ore Chap.
4, 5. etc.
.

CHAP. 28.
1. Of the Priesthood of Christ; 2. The parts thereof; 3. Of the Gospel of
Christ.
THe priesthood of the new Testament is a ministry ordained and appointed of
God, Priesthood of the new Testament what;
wherein Jesus Christ God and man being confirmed the most hie and eternal
Priest by the oath of God, does preach, and maintain the Gospel concerning the
remission of sins; and through the eternal spirit offers himself for a
propitiatory sacrifice, whereby he both cleanses sin, and satisfies the
justice of God for sinners; appeaseth Gods displeasure; does merit grace and
the holy Ghost for as many as believe on his name; and continualie makes
intercession for the Church, and is heard, so that the yoke of the devil enemy
of mankind, being shakenof, and the image of God lost through sin being
repared in us, we may be sanctified for evermore, yea and live blessedly,
being conformable to Christ the hie Priest worlds without end.

This definition is collected, both out of yt which we have spoken of the
Priest: and also from the consent of the whole Scripture, but especialie out of
the epistle unto the Hebrews. But every part of this definition, as theie
contain much store of good doctrine and comfort: so theie do require a longer
discourse. Parts of Christ his priesthood.
The parts of the priesthood of Christ expressed in the definition, be three:
namely, the doctrine of the Gospel; Sacrifice; and prayer or intercession. And
every of these are most perfect, and effectual, so that nothing in them is
either wanting, or not sufficient for salvation.

For all the virtue of these parts depends upon the majesty of Christ, in
whom neither wisdom, nor goodness, nor purity, nor will, nor power is
lacking. Of these three parts therefore we will entreat in order.

The first part is the preaching of the Gospel, The first part of Christian
priesthood.
without which we miserable, and blind sinners can hope for no favor and
grace from God. For without this doctrine of the Gospel we be wrapped in
miserable darkness; and through yt greatness, Benefit of the Gospel.
number, and filthiness of our sins, even by ye judgment of our own
conscience condemned, as so ouer-throwen, that we must needs despair. For,
both the law does threaten the wrath to such as fulfill not the law (for this
is the judicial sentence of the law: Gal. 3, 10.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in
the book of the law, Deuteronomy. 27, 26
to do them;) and our own conscience, which is a testimony of ye judgment to
come, does accuse us before the judgment seat of God; and the miseries of
mankind do witness that God is justly offended; and the horrible tyranny of
Satan upon man, together with the tragical chances at al times, do prove what a
detestable thing sin is. I say nothing of wars, nothing of the signs in
heaven, in earth, and in the sea testifying the rage (to speak with the
Prophet) of Gods displeasure.

Al these things are but ye beginnings as it were of their miseries, which
repent not at ye preaching of the Gospel. Al which our priest does heal, if we
like mad men with the furious, and blinded world, do not refuse his medicine.
For he from the bosom of the father does bring the most comfortable doctrine
of the Gospel concerning the remission of sins; which being pardoned, and
quite abolished, neither has the law in us any thing which he may condemn;
nor the devil, nor death over us any power at al. This doctrine of the Gospel
is called the mystery hid from the wise of this world; 1. Cor. 1, 23.
and is thought of them to be foolishnes. 24.
But to the miserable and afflicted sinners it is the wisdom of God: whom it
has pleased by the foolish preaching of Christ crucified to save such as
believe. 27.
Therefore we must show in a word or two what this doctrine of the Gospel is,
that this part of the priesthood of Christ may be the more comfortable unto
us. Christ in the 24. of Luke proponeth the su^me hereof in these words: Luke
24, 27.
It is behoueful that repentance, and remission of sins be preached in my
Name among al nations. The Gospel what*
Therefore the Gospel is a general preaching of the remission of sins, which
theie attain, who repent, and that through the Name, that is through the
merits of Christ. And although this definition as I say, does contein the
su^me of the matter; yet the better to conceive the greatness of the benefit of
Christ our Priest, I will set-downe another more at large. The Gospel is an
universal preaching of Christ our Priest, Another definition of the Gospel.
wherein tidings is brought of deliverance from the wrath of God; from the
curse of the law; and from everlasting damnation, and remission of sins,
salvation, and everlasting life is proclaimed to al such as believe in the
son, for his own merits, according to the promise made in old time to the
fathers, that the glory of God his goodness, may be commended evermore; and
besides that such as be delivered through Christ, may bring forth fruits
worthy the Gospel; and at the length enioie everlasting life. This definition
of the Gospel taken out of sundry places of the scripture does teach how the
Gospel in deed is a good and ioieful message, without which doubtless we
should perish in everlasting misery.

The parts of this definition for so much as else where we have explicated
them, I will not any more stand upon them in this place. The sum of al is
this: that by nature we are miserable, condemned, slaves: but by grace, which
the Gospel preaches, blessed, righteous, free, and heirs of eternal life
through Jesus Christ.

Christ the son of God himself brought this doctrine out of the bosom of
the Father; and proposed the same to our first parents, after their miserable
fall into the snares of the devil. The Gospel preached unto Adam and Eua.
For thus he says, The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent.
This he sounded by the ministry of Noah before the flood. Genesis 3, 15.
For Peter does affirm, The Gospel preached in the days of Noah.
that Christ by the spirit went and preached unto the spirits that are in
prison, because of their froward rebellion against ye spirit of Christ
preaching to them. 1. Pet. 3, 19.
This afterward he uttered by the Prophets, The Gospel preached by the Apostles.
as the same Peter does witness. This after his incarnation he preached also
three years and an half. This he commanded to be blown abroad by his
Apostles into all the world; ^. Pet. 1, 19. 20. 21.
which also he confirmed afterward with manifold signs. Mark. 16, 15.
By his doctrine, as he has always preserved: so does he preserve, and even
until the end of the world will preserve the Church against the gates of hell;
Act. 2, 2. 3. etc.
he will bless it, and give the holy spirit, and everlasting life to as many
as believe this doctrine. But on the other side horrible damnation hangeth-ouer
their heads, who give no credit to this doctrine so confirmed both with
signs, and with wonders, and with manifold virtues, and by the holy Ghost.
For, as it is in the Epistle unto the Hebrews, if the word spoken by Angels,
Heb. 2, 2.
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward: 3.
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Let us therefore, as
the same Epistle warns, take heed that we let it not slip.

CHAP. 29.
1. Of sacrifice, the second part of Christ his priest-hoode;
THe second part of Christ his priesthod is to offer sacrifice. Sacrifice of
Christ taken diversely.
Which sacrifice of Christ is taken sometime generalie, and sometime specialie.
When it is taken generalie it comprehends al whatsoever Christ our Priest
has either done, or offered to the father for our welfare. As al his works
are perfect odedience to the law, voluntary death and passion; and continual
intercession with the Father.

That obedience toward the law is a certain part of his sacrifice,
Obedience to the law a part of Christ his sacrifice.
it is aparent because therebie he makes us righteous before God. Of his
passion and death the Epistle unto the Hebrews does entreat, when it affirms
that Christ offered himself for our sins, and by his blood purged our
consciences. His intercession and prayers in the 5. unto the Hebrews, Heb. 9,
14. 6
are called oblations. For thus it is written: In the days of his flesh he did
offer-vp prayers and supplications, with strong crieing and tears unto him,
that was able to save him from death.

For these three, to wit, his perfect obedience of the law; his passion; and
his intercession, mutualie by a certain order, as effects of their causes do
depend each of other, and contrariwise. For in that he was holy, pure, yea and
most perfectly righteous according to the law, his voluntary obedience in
the cross was of power to purge all the sins of men; and because he was
obedient to the father even unto the death of ye cross, his prayers do
prevail for the Church everlasting lie; who therefore is the only
intercessor, because he and none beside, 1. Tim. 2, 6.
gave himself a ransom for all men, as Paul does testify. This consecution or
gathering together of Christ his merits does notably appear in our
sanctification. For by the merit of his death, he does so purge us from sin,
Merit of Christ his death, and passion.
that, if so be we believe, we do appear no more guilty in the sight of the
father; as Isaiah fore-tolde of him in his 53. Chapter: Surely he has borne
our infirmities, and carried our sorrows. Isai, 53, 45.
Again, He was wounded for our transgressions, Merit of Christ his obedience
to the Law.
he was broken for our iniquities. By the merit of his obedience to the law
he does cloth us, that we may appear righteous before God, not through our
own, but through his righteousness imputed unto us. For so does Paul say unto
the Romans, Chapter 5. As by one man's disobedience, Romans 5, 19.
many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made
righteous.

Both which merits, to wit of his passion, and obedience to the law, Gal. 4,
4. 5.
Paul comprehends ththese words: Christ was made under the law, that he might
redeem them which were under the law. For whereas there is a double sentence
of the law, one of malediction and of death for not fulfilling the law,
whereinto we do run through sin: another of blessing, that is of
righteousness, and of life, from which we are fallen by sin, it was needful yt
he should both take upon himself the curse of the law with the cause, that is
our sins, being made accursed; and subject to death for our sake (For so
says Paul, Gal. 3, 13
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse
for us;) and also restore the blessing of the law to us, which he has
deserved for us by his perfect obedience toward the law, under which he was
made not for his own sake, Romans 10, 4.
but for ours. And this does Paul mean where he says: Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness unto every one that believes. And because the
resurrection of Christ is a most evident testimony of this fulfilling the
law, Romans 4, 25.
Paul affirms how he is risen again for our justification. Merit of Christ
his intercession.
By the merit of his prayers and intercession he has made an entrance for us
unto the father; as Paul says unto the Romans, Romans 8, 33. 34.
Who shall lay any thing unto the charge of Gods chosen? etc. It is Christ
that makes intercession for us. Therefore when Christ is said to offer his
merits to the father, the general sacrifice of Christ, containing thistriple
merit, namely of his obedience to the law, of his passion, and of his prayers,
must be understood. Otherwhile ye sacrifice of Christ is morespecialie taken
for his death and passion; Sacrifice of Christ as it is specialie understood.
which death and passion is the only propitiatory sacrifice. The figures
whereof were ye sacrifices of the Jews, and by a singular form of speech was
caled propitiatory, because it was a shadow of this eternal propitiatory
sacrifice eue^ Jesus Christ. But because above, In the fourth chapter, Pa. 16.
where we showed the vanity of the Jews, who as yet do look for the messiah,
we have spoken of shadows, in this place we will speak only of the sacrifice
of Christ, which the scripture calls expiatorie, or propitiatory from the
effect thereof, which sacrifice may rightly be defined on this wise.

The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ the eternal Priest is the propitiatory
sacrifice wherein the eternal son of God, Propitiatory sacrifice of Christ
what;
made man, and of the father appointed an eternal Priest, by obeieng the father
in suffering even unto the death of the cross, offered himself through the
eternal spirit to the eternal father upon the altar of the cross, sustaining
the curse of the law truly, to the end that by this one, and most perfect
oblation he might satisfy the justice of God for the offense, and punishment
of ma^kinde; pacify the just displeasure of God; and by this only sacrifice
merit for all which from the creation of the world either have believed, or til
the end of the same shall believe, even eternal sanctification, that is
deliverance from the curse of the law; grace, benediction, life, and
everlasting salvation, that so being comfortable to Christ, theie may praise
and glorify God for ever and ever. This large definition Christ in very few
words does comprehend, John 17,
John 17, where he says; For their sakes sanctify I my self, that theie also
may be sanctified through the truth. But the holy spirit in the Epistle unto
the Hebrews does very copiouslie entreat of this matter, and that which
scatteringlie is spoken to this purpose in that Epistle, I have gathered
together as it were into one body, that at one sight as it were, we may
behold this wonderful work, and after a sort esteem the greatness of the
benefit, and be thankeful to God for this infinite mercy showed to us in
Christ. August. Lib 4. de Trin.
Augustine says how in every sacrifice there be four things to be
considered, What things are to be considered in a sacrifice.
namely who is ye offere^; to who^ it is offered; what is offered; and for
who^ it is offered: which four things are both expreslie and distinctlie
contained in this our definition. 1 Who the offerer o Propitiatory sacrifice.
For ye son of God made man, and of God the father himself ordained an
eternal priest, is ye offerer. For this priest, as he alone is holy and
righteous, and hier than the heavens: so could he alone offer a perfect
sacrifice for evermore. Because, in that he was a just man, he might lawfulie
take upon him the cause of us al; especialie seeing one man had brought the
rest of the posterity into the state of damnation with himself: and in that
he was hier than the heavens, to wit, very God, he was of power to offer
such a sacrifice, as was perfect, and effectual for evermore: again, in that
he was one person, all the deeds of his manhood are most pure, and of an
infinite price.

To whom does this priest offer? 2. To whom Christ offered himself.
Even to God himself. For to him alone the sacrifice was due, that his justice
might be satisfied, whom our first parents, and we in them offended; that the
sentence of condemnation for our transgressing the law being utterly
abolished, we might be made partakers of eternal blessedness through his merit.

What does this priest offer to God? 3. What Christ has offered for us.
The son of God the eternal priest has offered himself to the father upon
the altar of the cross, taking our cause, that is our sin, and punishment
upon himself. For the Epistle unto the Hebrews does witness, that the son
of God was made partaker of our flesh and blood, that he might have that which
he might offer. And Augustine does say, What was more meet to be taken of
men, for their oblation, than the flesh of man? And what so apt for this
sacrifice, as mortal flesh? And what so clean for the sins of the world,
as without al contagion flesh borne in the womb, and out of the womb of a
virgin? And what so gratefulie could be either offered, or received, as the
flesh of our sacrifice, How the sacrfices of the old Law were offered.
the made body of our Priest?

Furthermore, seeing every sacrifice in the old law ought, first to be
separated from other things of the same kind; secondly to be applied to the
altar, the hand of the Priest laid there-vpon; thirdly, to be offered upon
the altar; fourthlie, being done rightly according to the law, it was a
sacrifice accepted of God: let us see how these four things do aggree to our
sacrifice. First therefore Christ this our sacrifice was segregated from other
men not by nature, whereby he was to be joined to them, but by purity,
innocence, and excellency, wherein he surpassed al other men. Secondly, he
was applied to the altar being consecrated to God through his wonderful
obedience. For he was offered, even because he would. Thirdly he was offered
upon the altar, hanged on the wood of the cross, bearing upon his own
head our cause, that is both sin, and the punishment of sin, namely the
wrath and curse of God. Leui. 16, 20. 21.
Which thing was in old time figured in the goat upon whose head Aaron
(having confessed first his own sins, and the sins of the people of
Israel) laid his own sins, and all the sins of the sons of Israel, and
sent him away, Aarons goat a figure of Christ.
by the hand of a man appointed, into the wilderness. The truth of this type
was fully accomplished in Christ. For, as the Prophet says, The Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us al. Isai. 53, 6.
So does Paul apply the figure to Christ, 2. Cor. 5, 21.
when he says, He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that
we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Again, Gal. 3, 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us. For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on tree. Furthermore,
as that figurative goat was sent into the wilderness to be torn of wild
beasts: So Christ was delivered into the hands of the Scribees, Pharisees, and
people obeieng the commandementes of their prince the devil, to be slain for
our sins, and bare the punishment due unto them, as if it had been his own.
The difference between the goats bearing sins, and Christ his bearing
sins.
Here we must diligently distinguish between the shadow, and the truth: The
sins of the children of Israel were laid upon the goat, but in a figure
only: but Christ indeed bare the sins of the whole world. Neither is here
any trope to be admitted. For herein our whole hope does consist, herein the
infinite love of God, does appear, finalie hereupon our whole salvation does
depend, that our God truly and without trope has poured forth al his anger
upon his own son, as though he had been guilty of all the sins of the
world, who truly and without trope was made a curse, to deliver us truly and
without trope from the curse. For otherwise if the wrath of God had been
fained, the obedience of the son had also been fained; and the hope of glory
also which we look for, had been fained. Therefore Christ is to be considered
with those qualities which he has not in him self, but through imputation in
respect of his mediatorship which voluntarily he took upon himself, that we
likewise after the same sort, that is through the imputation of those things
which were proper to him, namely through the satisfaction of righteousness and
holiness, justified, and sanctified, might be made his brethren, and heirs of
one and the same kingdom. Fourthlie, the sacrifice Christ so orderly offered
upon ye altar of the cross, did so both pacify, and please ye father, the
force thereof shall evermore continue to the salvation of man.

The fourth thing which Augustine requires in every sacrifice, 4. For who^
Christ was offered.
is the circumstance of persons for whom it is offered. Whereunto Paul in
these words does answer: 1. Tim. 2, 6.
He gave himself a ransom for all men. John 1, 29.
And John says, Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world.

Moreover beside these four things which Augustine requires in our
sacrifice, we have added other four things more out of the Epistle unto the
Hebrews in our definition, namely the manner of the sacrifice, the perpetual
force of the same, the form of applieng it, and the final end of our
knowledge and confidence in this sacrifice. How Christ was offered.
The manner is, that Christ did offer himself through the eternal spirit. For
so says the Epistle unto the Hebrews: Heb. 9. 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works!
By the name of the eternal spirit he understands the power of the divinity
joined with the humanity, the which governed all this sacrifice, whereof it
comes to pass, that this blood, seeing it was the blood of that man who
also was very God, is endued even with the lively virtue, whereby as he made
us, so he was able also to renew us. In consideration hereof God is said to
have died, and to have purchased to himself a Church by his own blood, as
Paul does testify, Act. 20. 28.
when he says: Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. Hence then is that which we added concerning
the perpetual force of the sacrifice, whereof the Epistle unto ye Hebrews
does say, Heb. 10, 14
With one offering has be consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. Heb.
9, 12.
So, by his own blood entered he once into the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for us. Of the application which is through the word,
through faith, and the sacraments; and also of the final end of Christ his
sacrifice, we will entreat Chap. 39, 40. of thi^ first part.
afterward in their due places.

CHAP. 30.
1. Of diverse things to be considered in Christ his suffering, and offering-vp
himself unto God the father for our sake; 2. Particularly for man's misery
which made Christ to suffer.
BUT here we are to stay a while, and deeply to consider of diverse weighty
points, namely, how great the misery of men was, where-into they fell
through sin; how great ye displeasure of God was against man for sinning;
again, how great his mercy was toward man; how unspeakable the obedience of
the son of God was; how horrible the punishment that he suffered was; of what
an inestimable and incomparable a price the death of ye son of God was, in
that it could satisfy and make amends for the sins of all mankind; and
contrariwise, how cursedlie ungrateful the mayor part of men is, in that they
will not acknowledge this wonderful work of God, namely the sacrifice of
Christ.

First therefore it is be^ooueful to consider the misery of mankind without
the sacrifice of Christ, Job 14, 1.
whereof Job does say: Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance,
and full of trouble. Augustine defines the misery of man to be an abundance
of troble, and a scarsitie of comfort, when a man diversely does suffer, but
finds comfort of none. Homer with an out cry affirms that nothing is
either in greater peril, or more miserable than man is. But Homer considers
only the calamities and miseries, and tragical chances, whereunto men are
subject in this life. For he knew neither the beginning; nor the degrees; nor
the end of man's misery. The beginning or c^^se of man's misery.


The beginning from whence the misery of mankind has sprung, and
spread-forth, none knows, except he have learned the same out of the word
of God. This word refers the original of all sin unto the devil; the sin
of our first parents; and unto the propagation of the same sin unto al
posterity. Which thing Paul, Romans 5. expreslie does teach; and Isaiah the
Prophet does say, Isai 64, 6.
We al do vade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us
away.

The degrees of man's misery are manifold, 2. The degrees of man's misery,
and very lamentable. The first whereof is a pitiful separation from God. The
1. degree.
Your iniquities, says the Prophet Isaiah, have separated between you and
your God; Isai. 59, ^.
and your sins have hid his face from you. How great this misery is no man
is able sufficiently to conceive. For what can be more wretched than to be
separated from God; than to be excluded from the fountane of al goodness;
from al happiness, and salvation?

The second degree is, The 2. degree.
to be conioined with satan that lier, and murderer; and be under his laws,
which are of death and damnation. Through both which degrees, the temple of
GOD, which by creation was dedicated to God, is profaned; and the image of
GOD, after which man was fashioned, is defaced.

Hence insueth the third degree of the wretchedness of mankind, The 3. degree.
to wit, that man, who before was the temple of God, is now fallen into such
misery, that he is become the temple of satan, wherein ye devil is worshipped
by his own works, namely with lieng and murder, whereof infinite heaps and
swarms of sins do burst-out.

The fourth degree of man's misery is the huge heap of calamities both
spiritual and corporal, The 4. degree.
wherewith mankind is presseddowne, as are manifold tentations, infinite
diseases, and the tragical chances whereunto mankind is subject. For there is
no calamity, but man may fall thereunto. Whereof the proverb comes, A man
knows not in the morning what may betide him ere night. Again, either we
are, or we have been, or we may be, as this man is. Of many examples I will
allege a few. Adoni-bezek.
King Adonibezek in his great pride, had the thumbes both of his hands, and of
his feet cut off, and so lived in extreme torments. Judges 1, 6. Iezebel.
The destruction of Iezebel is known to all men. 2. king. 9, 32
Alcibiades was for his nobility high, 33.
for his substance rich, Alcibiades.
for his personage comely, for the favor of his people famous, for his
supreme authority honorable, for his manifold victories much commended. But
continued he so? Naie, he was afterward condemned, banished out of his
country, put out of house and home, hated extremely, and so at the length
died desperately. Cepio Seruilius,
Cepio Seruilius, who in respect both of the highness of his pretorshippe, of
the gloriousnes of his triumph, of the honor of his consulshippe, and of the
dignity of an hie Priest, was most rerenowmed, yea and had in such price and
estimation, that he was called the patron of the Roman Senate, lived not
until his death in such glory, but had a very miserable end. For he was
thrown into prison, and delivered to an hangma^ to be tormented, who with his
cruel hands tare in pieces the heart of Cepio plucked from out his body, and
hung it upon a ladder to the horror of all the Roman people. Belisarius.
Belisarius the chief capitane under Justinian the Emperor, after many famous
victories which he had achieved, was through envy overthrown, spoiled of his
goods, bereft of his eyes, and constrained daily to beg his bread in the
temple Sophie, using this speech to such as passed-by, Apeece of bread give to
Belisarius, whom virtue advanced, envy has overthrown. What should I speak
of that proud Herod who glitered in his gold, Herod.
and jewels, and kingly robes? was he not filled afterward with vermin
instead of jewels, which he feed with his own flesh, until what through his
own stinch, and torments, he desperately dispatched him self? I say nothing
of great Alexander, of Caesar, of Marius, Pompeius, Cato, Cicero, and of many
more, whose wretched ends do show, how wretched the condition of mankind is:
from which none is sure to escape, while he lives in this world. And
therefore wisely did Seneca counsel, The 5. degree,
when he said, Let no man trust too much to prosperity.

The fifth degree of man's misery is the giltines of conscience, Of this read
more above Chap. 11. upon the first verse of this Psalm.
which more does vex the soul than any hangman is able to torment the body.
This although it seem for a time to sleep: yet, as Plato says, before death
it will be wakened.

The sixth degree of the misery of mankindeis, The 6. degree.
even death it self joined with desperation, the which is most miserable to
such as know not Christ, and a certain entrance unto everlasting damnation.

But what is the end of those men which confess not Christ? 3. The end of
the misery of mankind.
The end, as I may say, is infinite, permanent, subject to no change or
alteration. For after death, and after the last judgment, The final reward of
sin.
there ensues the woeful knitting up of this misery, to wit, endless shame,
perpetual grief of conscience both in soul and body, fellowship with
unclean spirits in obscure flames of fire, in utter darkness, without al
light of God.

Of the shame Daniel speaks, when he says, Some, Dan. 12, 2.
to wit, the wicked, shall awake, to shame and perpetual contempt. Of the
everlasting torment, and grief with unclean spirits, the Lord in the 25.
chapter of Matthewe, proponing the iudiciarie sentence, does say, Depart from
me ye curssed into everlasting fire, Mat. 5, 241.
which is prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Isai. 66, 24.
Touching the grief of conscience, Isaiah speaks in these words, And their
worm shall not die. And although by reason of sin all mankind is thrown
into this so great misery: yet the Church alone escapes them all. For as her
sin, which is the cause of these miseries, is purged through the death of
Christ: So the holy spirit the comforter is present in the cross, and the
death of the body is the entrance unto everlasting felicity. Psalm. 116.
Wherefore the death of saints is called precious in the sight of the Lord.
15.


CHAP. 31.
1. The great displeasure of God against man for sinning.
OF the greatness, and manifoldenesse of the misery of mankind, may be
gathered after a sort the greatenes of Gods displeasure against impenitent
persons. For seeing GOD is righteous, Romans 2, 2.
and his iudgee, meant is according to truth, as Paul says, it follows of
necessity that the wrath and reuengment in God, do answer to his justice:
that is, that the punishment be not greater tha^ was the sin. But now the
punishment is most grievous, and without end: And therefore it must of
necessity follow that the offense is infinite, as that whereby the infinite
God is displeased. Wherefore the quantity of sin must not be wayed in false
balance, but must be levied by true scales. For in sin many things do
concur, for the which God is justly offended: As the contempt of Gods
majesty; proud contempt against the law of God; a shameful defiling of Gods
image according to which man was made; imitation of satan the enemy of God;
treason against his majesty; apostasy from the army of God; and as it were a
conspiracy with the devil; intolerable ingratitude, and foul forgetfulness of
God his benefits toward mankind. For there was never a sin alone, but
always it draws a whole chain of sins therewithal. As we may see in
the fall of our first parents, and of others which witting and willingly do
rushe against the commandments of God. Of this due waieng of sin many things
do follow. First, that God does justly in punishing sin with everlasting
misery in them which turn not unto GOD through faith in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, that they deride the justice of God, and his just displeasure, who
teach men, that by contrition, confession, and satisfaction, the forgiveness
of sins, is merited before the judgment seat of God. I say nothing of them,
who think some sins are of so small importance, yt by a little holy water they
may be washed-away. I omit them in like sort, who dream that by the Popes
pardons, and by Masses sins be redeemed, by which toies the Popes kingdom is
increased, vpholden, and preserved both to the great dishonor of God, and the
most certain destruction of infinite souls. Thirdly, of the due waying of
sin, this also follows, yt no pure creature could satisfy the justice of
God, make amends for the offense, and restore man to his former happiness,
where-from he did fall through sin. And therefore Christ was feign in the flesh
to take our cause upon him self, and to satisfy the justice of God. And
although this wrath of God, as we have showed, be infinite: yet is it tempered
with mercy, as the Prophet Habakuk does say. In wrath remember mercy: Hab.
3. 2.
And Theodoret, It is the property of God, by the temperature of mercy to
mitigate his justice. But of this mercy we are now to speak.

CHAP. 32.
1. The great mercy of God toward miserable man; 2. Where-unto it may fitly
be compared.
AFter the due examination both of man's misery, and of the wrath of God
against wickedness, the infinite mercy of God, which is the foundation of our
turning unto him, is to be caled into mind.

God is said to be merciful, How God i^ merciful.
not because he is subject to perturbations, and grief of mind, as man is; but
for that of his mere goodness and love, Whence the mercy of God does spring.
he helps man's misery. For the mercy of God issues out of love; and love
from the likeness which man has with God, being formed according to his image
and similitude.

This mercy of God toward man, Mercy of God whereunto compared in Scripture.
is diversely painted-out in the Scriptures; and the force thereof is commended
to us by sundry comparisons. First it is compared to the kindness of a mother
toward her tender babe. For so says Isaiah: Isai. 49, 15.
Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? Though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. And in the 103.
Psalm, it is likened to the natural kindness of a Father. As a father, it is
there said, Psalm. 103, 1^
has compassion on his children: so has the Lord compassion on them that
fear him. Of this natural affection of parents toward their children, the
word Mercy in the Hebrew tongue is derived. And therefore Zachary said
Through the tender mercy, Luke 1, 78.
therebie to express the force of the Hebrew word, and the affection of God
taking pity. Secondly, this mercy of God is compared by Isaiah to mountains,
and valeies, where he says: Isai. 54, 10.
The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but my mercy shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away, says
the Lord that has compassion upon thee. Thirdly, it is likened to the
largeness of the earth, as in the Psalm, The earth is full of the goodness of
the Lord. Fourthlie, it is likened to the hie heavens in the 103. Psalm, Psalm.
103, 11.
As hie as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him. Fiftlie, it is compared to the ornament of a Kings throne;
Isai. 16, 5.
In mercy shall the throne be prepared, and he shall sit upon it in
steadfastness. Sixtlie, it is compared to a cloud of rain in the time of
drought, Eccles. 35. Oh, how fair a thing is the mercy of God in the time of
anguish and trouble! Eccl. 35* 19.
It is like a cloud of rain, that comes in the time of drought. Seuenthlie,
it is compared to a buckler, or weapon of war, Psalm 103. Who redeemeth thy
life from the grave, (...). 103, 4*
and crowns thee with mercy and compassions, that is compasses on all
sides. And Psalm 5. Thou with favor wilt compass him, as with a shield.
Eighthly, it is preferred before life it self, than the which nothing is deemed
better, or sweeter, Psa. 63, 3.
Psalm. 63. Thy loving kindness is better than life. Ninthlie, it is preferred
above all other works of God, Psalm. 145. The Lord is good to all, Psalm. 145,
9
and his mercies are over all his works. Last of all it is compared even to
the majesty of God himself. For so says Ecclesiasticus: As his greatness is;
Eccles. 2, 21
so is his mercy. As if he should say, In God there is souereign majesty
linked with sovereign mercy, by the one whereof he has power to do what he
list, by the other he has will to preserve his chosen.

And although God by many arguments commends his mercy unto us: yet the
chiefest is, John. 3, 16.
that he gave his son. John 3. God so loved the world, that he has given his
only begotten son, that who so ever believes in him, should not perish,
Romans 5, 8.
but have everlasting life. Romans 5. God setteth-out his love toward us, seeing
that while we were yet sinners, Romans 8, 32.
That is, not converted unto God, Christ died for us. Romans 8. God spared not
his own Son, but gave him for us al. To be brief: No creature is able
sufficiently to commend this mercy of God flowing out of entire goodness, and
love. The wisdom of the world is not touched with mercy toward the
transgressors, but toward the unfortunate, and such as do seem unjustly to be
afflicted. For so says Cicero: They are to be pitied, who are in misery for
fortune, not for their offenses. But the wisdom of God does help
transgressors, and the greatest sinners, if so be they repent. For grace
proceeding from mercy abounds over sin. And Augustine does say: Greater is
God his mercy, than the misery of all sinners. So that David not without
cause does adhorte us to praise God for this his infinie mercy. Psalm. 117, 1
2.
Al nations, says he, Praise ye the Lord: all ye people praise him. For his
loving kindness is great toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for
ever.

But here some may well object and say, the mercy of God in deed is great,
but for all that it has an impossible condition annexed. For so says the Lord
himself, who cannot lie, I will show mercy unto thousands to them that love
me, Exodus ^^, 6.
and keep my commandments. This promise of God without Christ is plainly to
none effect, because a condition of impossibility is added thereunto. For no
man by his own strength can fulfill the commandments of God, notwithstanding
in Christ it is possible, and effectual unto a thousand generations of Christ,
that is, to al who are borne the sons of God in Christ. Romans 10, 4.
For, as he is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one tha^
believes: 2. Cor. 1, ^0.
so all the promises of God in him are yea and Amen, as Paul says. Hitherto
belongs that in Exodus: Exodus 34, 6 7.
The Lord, the Lord God is merciful, and gracious, and abundant in goodness,
and truth, who reserueth mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin. Neither may it be douted, yt God, when he made this
promise, did signify how both Christ should be the fulfiller of the law,
and that al which desire the mercy promised, must run unto Christ; that, as
they should find the law fulfilled in him: so they should be made partakers
of the promised mercy. And therefore this promise of mercy has one condition
fro the law without Christ, to wit touching ye fulfilling of ye law; and
another in Christ, name lie of faith, wherbie the end of the law, which is
righteousness, is obtained. So that as many as believe, have righteousness, which
is as much as ye law requires. Whereof the promise of mercy is ratified and
confirmed to them; and this is that covenant, Psalm. 25, 10
whereof the 25. Psalm does speak. All the paths of the Lord are mercy, and
truth unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies, that is, as another
Psalm does expound it, Psalm, 32, 10
Mercy shall compass him that trusts in the Lord.

The mercy then of GOD is moderated according unto the rule of justice, when
it is exhibited to such as repent. For this justice of God is a perpetual rule;
that as he will condemn such as be rebellious without al pity and mercy: so
he will of his infinite mercy, save as many as turn unto the Lord. This rule
of God his justice is to be thought upon, when we read in the Psalms, that
David prayed God, that he would hear him, for his righteousness* ^ For three
things together came into his mind, namely the promise of mercy; the free
pardon of his sins; and the price, wherebie the justice of God is satisfied,
namely by the sacrifice of his Son, (for he is unjust, that having received
a ransom, will not set free the captive) and by the merit of Christ, wherebie
we are justified before God, being converted unto him through faith.

Whence it is, that if he should not hear them which repent, and forgive their
offenses, he should be unjust, as one that deals against the rule of his own
justice; that denies his promise; that would accept no ransom; nor regard
the righteousness of his son, wherebie he did merit favor for us. So that
David after his adultery, murder, and betraieng the host of God, did crave
mercy, and remission of his sins through faith; and among other reasons,
brought this in for one:

That thou may be just when thou speak, Psalm. 51. 4.
that is that men may confess thee just for keeping thy words, whereby thou
promisedst pardon to as many as repent.

CHAP. 33.
1. Of Christ his wonderful obedience to his Father for our salvation; 2. The
fruit thereof.
NExt unto the mercy of God, we are to consider the wonderful obedience of
Christ, which would vouchsafe to take our cause upon himself; and feel the
wrath of God, to deliver us from eternal death. Of this obedience Paul unto
the Philippians on this wise: Phil. 2, 6. 7.
Who being in the form of God, thought it no roberie to be equal with God: but
he made himself of no reputation, and took on himself the form of a
servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He
humbled him self, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
cross. Here Paul entreats of the unspeakable obedience of the son of God;
and because equals cannot properly be said to obey one another, but inferiors
their betters: Paul shows, how the son being of one essence and power
with the Father, did humble him self, taking to himself the nature of man,
wherein he became obedient to the Father, even unto the death of the cross.
And in the 10. Chapter of the Epistle unto the Hebrews out of the 40. Psalm:
Heb. 10, 4.
Because it is impossible, that the blood of Bulls, and Goats should take away
sins. 5
Wherefore when he comes into the world, 6.
he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not: but a body thou have
ordained me. In burnt offeringes, and sin offeringes thou have had no
pleasure. 7.
Then I said, Lo I come (In the beginning of the Book it is written of me)
that I should do thy will, O God. Isaiah 53. He was offered, even because he
would.

But with this obedience how agrees that prayer thrice repeated in the garden:
How Christ was unwilling to die.
O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass fro me; nevertheless not
as I will, Matthew. 26.
but as thou will? 39.
This prayer seems to import that the will of the son differed, 42.
yea and was contrary also to the Fathers will. 44.
For the Fathers will was that he should drink of the cup, which he had
prepared: And the son desires that the same cup, if it were possible, might
passeawaie. This objection is answered by the words of our Lord afterward in
the same Chapter uttered: The spirit in deed is willing, 41.
but the flesh is weak. So that what he would not through ye weakness of the
flesh, the which naturalie, and without offense dreadeth death; the same he
would through the willingness of the spirit, wherbie he was obedient to the
Father. And thus does Cyril also distinguish the same, when he says: That the
passion of the Cross was not voluntary to Christ, and again was voluntary
for the fathers will, and for our salvation, you may easily perceive by this
prayer, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. For as the
word of God is God, and naturalie the very life, no man will say that any
way he feared death: but being made flesh, he permits flesh, to suffer
that which belongs to flesh, and therefore as very man he dreadeth death
standing at the doors.

Here an other question does arise, what obtained Christ by his praieng? The
Epistle unto the Hebrews makes answer, He was heard in that which he
feared, for the pains of death being removed away, he overcame those
conflictes.

The fruit of this wonderful obedience of the son of God, Fruit of Christ
his obedience.
is our iustificatton, and salvation. As by one man's disobedience, says Paul,
many were made sinners: Romans 5, 19.
so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. The Apostle highly
extolling this obedience, does say, Christ, 6.
when we were yet of no strength, at his time died for the ungodly. 7.
Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous man: but yet for a good man it
may be that one dare die.

But no tongue can utter, nor mind conceive how great the obedience of the
son of God was, who derived the wrath of God upon himself, and put himself
into our place, to suffer the pains due unto us for our salvation. Gal. 3, 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law* when he was made a curse
for us. 2. Cor. 5, 21.
Again, He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him.

CHAP. 34.
1. The greeuousnes of the pains which Christ endured, for our sakes; 2. What
theie signified.
WIth this obedience would be considered both the greeuousnes of the pain,
which the son of God endured for our sakes, both in mind, and in body; and
also the reproach against his person.

The grief of mind Christ does testify, Christ his suffering in mind.
when he says; My soul is heavy, even unto the death, Mat. 26, 3^.
that is the grief of mind which I suffer, is more grievous unto me than
death it self. Of this great sorrow of mind that Psalm is to be understood,
where in the person of Christ it is said: Psalm. 18, 5*
The sorrows of the grave have compassed me about, the snares of death have
ouer-tooke me.

By the sorrows of the grave he means, deadly sorrows, such as even kill a
man wel-nigh, and thrust him down to the grave. Of this anguish of mind in
Christ, I will cite some testimonies out of the Gospel. Mar. 14, 53
Mark says, He began to be afraid, and in great heaviness. And Luke shows by
an evident sign, how he was perplexed in mind, when for very sorrow he
sweat blood again: for thus he says: Being in an agony, Luke 23, 44.
he prayed most earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling
down the ground. For it was meet, that as his death was more bitter then any
death, according to bodily sense: so the fear in his mind was most bitter of
al other pain. And as the infinite love made the sense of death nothing the
milder: so did it mitigate nothing of the bitterness of the fear, which was so
great, that it stood in need of comfort, even of the very Angels. Luke 22,
43.
For, as Luke does say, there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven comforting
him. For ye divinity showed not it self, that Christ truly might feel the
weight of the burden laid upon him, and be in anguish through the sense of
Gods displeasure against our, not his sin, which notwithstanding he made his,
by taking our cause upon himself. And Irenaeus does say, As he was man to be
tempted: so was he the word, to be glori^ied. And the word in deed rested
while he was tempted, crucified, and put to death; but was assistant to the
flesh when he overcame, sustained, rose again, and ascended into the heavens.

But, for as much as it seems unworthy the divine majesty of Christ, that
our Savior should be stricken with such fear, and sorrow, many interpreters
here do seek refuges, and faigne tropes and figures, wherebie theie labor to
soften the narrations of the Evangelists and the fore-saiengs of David and
Isaiah; whereof the one says, Psalm. 18, 5.
He was compassed about with the sorrows of the grave: and the other, that he
truly bare our infirmities. Isai. 53, 4.
But let the word of God be our light. For if we be ashamed of Christ his
fear, and sorrow, our redemption shall vade, and come to naught. But Ambose
writing upon this place of Luke, Luke 22, 42.
Father, if thou will, take-awaie this cup fro me, shows the vanity of those
interpreters which do seek tropes. For thus he says: Here many do stick,
which do turn the sadness of our Savior rather unto an argument of an old
infirmity from the beginning, than to a weakness taken upon him for a time,
and they desire to wrest the sense of the natural sentence. But for my part, I
do not only think him not to be excused, but also nowhere do more wonder
at his goodness, and majesty. For unless he had taken upon him mine affection,
his benefit toward me had not ben so great. Therefore for my sake he
sorrowed, who had no cause to sorrow for his own sake; and the comfort of the
eternal Godhead being sequestered, he is vexed with the grief of mine
infirmity. For he took my sorrow upon himself, that he might bestow his
own joy upon me; and by our steps he descended even unto the pangues of
death, to call us back by his footing unto life. Then I do boldly name sadness,
because I commend the cross. Neither took he a show of incarnation, but the
very truth. Therefore he was to take the grief, that he might overcome, not
exclude sadness. Neither have their the praise of fortitude, who have suffered
the senselessenes rather tha^ the sorrow of wounds. Hitherto Ambrose. So that
the cause of the anguish, and great sorrow in Christ his mind, was the sense
of the sins of all men in his mind, whereof he had made himself guilty,
being forthwith to be betrayed into the hands of his enemies.

Beside this anguish of mind, Christ his suffering in body.
both his body was most greeuouslie afflicted, and his person most
shamefullie reproched. His body was with spitle defiled; with cuffes buffeted;
with whipping rented; with beatinges punished; with thorns crowned; and with a
most ignominious death executed. In his person he suffered reproaches, What
(...) against his ^^rson suf^^^^.
scoffinges floutinges. And albeit his divinity could not suffer: yet the
reproach redounded against it, for so much as it was personalie united to the
manhood.

These most grievous pains, The pains of Christ tokens whereof.
namely anguish of mind, torments of body, and reproaches against the person
of Christ; are tokens, first of the justice, the which by this punishment for
the sins of the whole world, is satisfied: secondarilie, of Gods mercy, who
of hearty love gave his own son into these pains for our sake, that al
mankind, which he had created after his own image, might not perish: thirdly
both of the obedience of Christ toward the Father, and also of his love
toward us, to who^ he chose to be linked in the likeness of man's nature, that
he might sustain these pains for man, the which we shall find to be most
comfortable to us, and profitable, when we depend upon him by a lively faith.

CHAP. 35.
1. Of how inestimable a price the death of Christ is; 2. How he could suffer;
3. In what respects, the price is infinite.
OF what an inestimable a price the death of Christ is, ought diligently to be
waied. For from hence remedies against all the wounds which sin does* does
afflict us with all, are to be fetched. And therefore says Augustine, Behold
the wounds of him that hangs, the blood of him that dies, the price of him
that redeemeth. His head hangeth-downe to kiss; his arms be stretched to
embrace; his body lies open to redeem. The greatness hereof consider with
your selves; these things look you do weigh in the balance of your heart,
that he may wholly be fixed in your heart, who for your sakes was wholly
fastened to the cross. Paul unto the Romans compares Adam and Christ
together. Romans 5, 18.
By Adam, he says, sin came on all men to condemnation: but by Christ grace
came upon all men to the justification of life. If by the offense of one, 17.
says he, death reigned through one; much more shall theie which receive the
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, reign in life through
one, even Jesus Christ. The cause then why the obedience and death of Christ,
is of so inestimable a price, is because the man that suffered, was the only
begotten son of God, and very God too. For of that singular, unspeakable,
and reverend union of the divine and humane nature together, whereby God and
man is one Christ, or one person, is the dignity, price, estimation, and
infinite merit of all the actions, and passions of Christ. And therefore
rightly does ye Church say: He is the very lamb of God, who has taken away
the sins of the world, who by his death has destroyed death, and repaired
life by rising again. And Ambrose: So great was our sin, that unless the
son of God had died for us the debtors of death, we could never have been
saved. Wherefore when it is said, that the son of man has redeemed us
through the merit of his passion, a work of an infinite price and valor is
named, to wit, the work of the Son of man, who is very God too: when it is
said how the death of Christ is a satisfaction, an infinite price is proposed,
even of that man, who also is the only begotten Son of God.

And although the Godhead neither suffered, How Christ could suffer.
nor died: (for how can it be that either an unchangeable thing should
suffer, or an immortal thing suffer death!) yet the eternal person, which is
God, has suffered, yet not in the divine, but in the humane assumed nature
which could suffer. Act. 20, 28.
Therefore Paul does say, God has purchased the Church with his own blood.
1. Pet. 4. 1.
And Peter affirms how Christ has suffered in the flesh, that is in the
humane nature, in soul, and body. And the Epistle unto the Hebrews does
say that Christ took part of blood and flesh, Heb. 2, 14.
that he might destroy through death him, that had the power of death, that is
the devil, signifying plainly thereby how the divinity could not suffer,
but flesh did: and because the divine nature could not suffer, he took yt
which could suffer. And Theodoret does say: Why the price of Christ his
suffering is infinite and inestimable.
He therefore took flesh, that through it which could suffer, that which could
not suffer might sustain punishment.

Therefore in respect of the union of the divine and human nature in one
person, the price and merit of Christ his suffering is infinite, for time,
valor and efficacy. For if you respect the time, it extends unto all ages,
unto all generations of men: If you mark the valor, it is able to purge the
sins of all mankind: if the efficacy, the force thereof is evident, in all,
and with-drawen from none which do hear the gospel, and by faith repent. For
the death of Christ does abolishe alike the sins of Adam, and of Euah, and
of Peter, and of Paul, and of such as have been since the time of Christ. And
this is it which is said in the Revelation, where he is called, The lamb
which was slain from the beginning of the world. Revel. 13, 8.
As sone therefore as our first parents gave credit to this promise, Genesis 3,
15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, by the power of Christ
his death, which was then appointed to be in the end of the world, they were
justified, sanctified, and redeemed from eternal death. By this faith Job
erected himself in the extreme miseries, when he said, I^b. 19, 25.
I am sure that my redeemer lives. And of Abram it is written, Genesis 15, 6.
Abram believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness. And
David was persuaded his adultery and murder could be washed away by the
merit of Christ his blood, when he said, Psalm. 51, 7.
Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean. And therefore in an other place he
says, With the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redeemption. It is great
in deed, because it is infinite, and can not be contained within the bounds
of any time, or estimation. So that the virtue of Christ his death extends
unto all times, and to al ages, and is of sufficient force to wipe all the
sins of al mankind. Because it is the death not of a simple man, but of that
man who also was the only begotten Son of God, and a very God too,
delivered unto death for our sakes; as Paul does say: Romans 8, 32.
He spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death.

CHAP. 36.
1. The horrible ingratitude of man toward God for the so infinite price of his
redemption. 2. The causes of man's ingratitude, with remedies for them.
THus howesoeuer we see both of what price the death of the son of God is;
and also for who^ Christ the Lord of glory has suffered: now on the
otherside let us consider, how, alas, ungrateful the mayor part of mankind
is for the same. For the Jews, Turks, and many profane people, can not
abide so much as to hear the name of Christ. For the Jews blinded with envy,
covetousness, and ambition, do interpret the benefit of Christ to be their
hurt. The Turks possessed with Mahomets fury like mad men are carried
tyrannically to abolishe the name of Christ. Many barbarous nations with the
auncientnes of error, as it were with a leprosy polluted, will not permit the
gospel to be founded. Others under the name of Christ and pretense of
religion to fight under the ensign of satan, and endeavor by the blood of
saints to hinder the course of the gospel, as does the Pope, the Cardinals,
the mitred Bishops, Abbats, and all the rablement of ye Antichristian
kingdom. Many are altogether indifferent, looking for the event, that they
rise-vp to that part which has the better hand. Who although they becounted
gospellers, and called defenders of the faith: yet in truth they be mere
Atheistes, such as measure the felicity of man by honor, authority, wealth,
and pleasure. Among these although some do cover the profaneness of their
mind by a certain outward ciuilitie^ yet the most part do imitate Nero and
Heliogabalus more truly tha^ Christ, of who^ they have their name. Of this
extreme ingratitude of the world, the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah, complains
on this wise: Isai, 1, 2.
I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, 3.
but Israel has not known, my people has not understand. This ingratitude
also the Lord bewayleth, when he says, How often would I have gathered thy
children together, Mat. 23. 27*
as the hen gathers her chickins under her wings, and ye would not?
Again, where he says: Mat. 20, 1*
Many are called, but few are choosen. By which saying the Lord both
commends the infinite mercy of God inuiting all men unto the knowledge of
his son, that by him they may be saved; and reprooueth the intolerable
blindness and ingratitude of very many men, who as if they were mad, lay
violent hand upon the Physician that would heal, and set upon him as if he
were an enemy rendering for life and celestial promotion offered death, and
evil words. This ingratitude is by so much the greater, as the benefit is
greater that is contemned. So that it is worthy the everlasting hatred of all
the chaste Angels, and elect of God. If you respect ye heaps of wicked men,
small is the number of them which esteem the benefits of Christ, as they
ought. Who, I beseech you can sufficiently bewail with tears this frenzy
of me^? But of force it must be some detestable evil thing which can withdraw
man formed after the image of God, from so great good unto such evil; from life
unto death; from a friend to an enemy; unto a traitor from a savior; unto
damnation from salvation; briefly from God the fountain of al goodness,
righteousness, life, salvation, happiness, and honor, unto the devil the auctor
of al wickedness, unrighteousness, death, damnation, and perpetual infamy.
But this evil which indeed is manifold, the blinded man perceaueth not. And
although sometime as it were through a casement it beholds a certain shadow
thereof: yet by and by it forgettes the same, as he who has seen his face in
a glass. Which thing doubtless is greatly to be lamented. For the first
steep unto health, as they say, is to know the sickness. For the knowledge
of the disease stirs such as love their health to seek a Physician. Let us
therefore, as the skillful Physicians do in healing diseases, seeke-out the
causes of so great evil, that knowing them, both a Physician may be sought,
and remedy may be applied to heal the same. We then will search-out the
causes of man's usual ingratitude; and contrariwise oppose medicines for this
common evil, that so by comparing them together, the contrary causes of
contrary effects may the better both be known, Ephe. 2, 2.
and discerned. Paul writing unto the Ephesians does recite six causes as well
of this evil, 3.
as of all other wickedness reigning in the world, which in order we will
declare.

The first cause is that which he calls the flesh; 1. cause of ma^s
ingratitude.
that is, the wickedness of the corrupted nature in men, after the fall of Adam.
This wickedness is like a filthy fountain from which pestilent vapors do
issue, Fall of Adam*
whereby all the cogitations, all the counsels, and actions of man are infected,
and corrupted as it were with deadly poison. And although this fountain can
not wholly be stopped, but oftentimes it will break out: yet the course
thereof as much as may be is to be repressed, which is done after thiswise.
Aremedie far this cause.
The Gospel of Christ must be harkened unto, which when we believe, we are
endued with the holy Ghost, Io^n 4, 14.
which is a new spring in the heart of man, from whence flows pure water
springing unto everlasting life. For from this new fou^tan, whereby ye course of
ye filthy spring which we have through ye corruption of nature is stopped, do
issue godly cogitations, counsels, and works like rivers from an everlasting
fountane.

The second cause of this evil ingratitude, 2. causes of mani ingratitude.
is the lust of the flesh, that whereby the flesh or original sin does work
to bring out most abominable fruit. The force of this concupiscence al mortal
men do feel in themselves, Concupiscence.
though diversely. And it is as a little river slowing from the fountain, and
infecting whatsoever it meets, with ye horrible stinch it has. Against this
the lust of the spirit is opposed, the which like a pleasant river flows
from the holy Ghost, A remedy for this cause.
wherewith such as have turned from their sins are endued, the which makes
the cogitations, and actions to spring at it were, and to prosper. But
concerning the works of the lust of the flesh, and the fruit of the lust of
the spirit, Gal. 5, 17. 19. etc.
read the 5. chapter unto the Galathians.

The third cause of ingratitude, 3. cause of ingratitude.
and of other sins, is the cogitation of the flesh, to wit, when ye cogatatio^
raised-vp by concupiscence enterpriseth to reason, and to dispute of those
things which concupiscence does offer as grateful, and pleasant to the
flesh.

This Paul to the Romans calls the Wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8, 7*
and enimitie against God. For seeing it swarueth not from her beginning, that
is from the flesh, and the lust thereof, it cannot savor those things which
are of God. Aremedie for the 3. cause.
To this the wisdom of the spirit is opposed, which the Apostle unto the
Romans, names, The wisdom of the spirit. Romans 8, 7.
This wisdom of the spirit when it takes the ground of her reasoning from
her fountane, as from a beginning, it cannot by reasoning conclude any other
thing but that which is of the spirit God, whom always it beholds.

The fourth cause of our ingratitude and disobedience toward God, 4. cause of
man's unthankfulness.
is The will of the flesh, and of the mind, As Paul says. This laboreth to
attain, and enioie that, which ye wisdom of the flesh persuaded unto as
delectable. Will of the flesh.
For in this will there is election and lust whose end is the use of the thing
desired. And although the will of reason do sometime reclame the reasoning of
the flesh: yet for the most part by the violence of the flesh it is
borne-awaie, even as a ship is violently carried-awaie by contrary winds,
strive the mariner never so much. For this will of the flesh the
Philosophers, Self-love,
yea and Paul too calls Self-love, which is a blind indiscreet, savage love
of the body, hurteful both to him that has it, and to others: which Socrates,
not knowing the fountane of evil, calls the head and the spring of al
wickedness. Because it takes away mutual charity, whereof all mischief
arises among men, while through the instinct hereof they seek after wealth,
authority, preferment, and pleasure: wherein they do place the sovereign
felicity of man. A remedi^ for this cause.
Against this will of the flesh and of the mind, is opposed the will of the
spirit, the fourth cause of good works: and commands such things as be
contrary to the flesh, and her will. Which will of the spirit may be called
also Self-love, A good self love.
but yet a right and commendable love, such as follows not the sense of the
flesh, but the judgment of the spirit. This right and commendable Self-love
drives a man to endeavor, to labor, and with earnest prayers to crave and to
beg that ye most excellent part of us, which is the mind, may be endued with
true godliness and virtue, and that to this end that it may be joined to
God the sovereign good, in whom only the true felicity of man does consist.
This difference between this double Self-love our Savior does teach, when
he says, Job 1. 13. 25
He that hates his life, (yielding nothing thereunto in these casual, and
transitory things) he does as he should love it, and desires to be saved:
but he yt loves (by yielding) he hates it, and seeks ye destruction of his
soul. As there is the^ a doble self love: so there is a double self hatred.
One, according to the right judgment of the mind, whereby we avoid the
enticements of the flesh, withdrawing us from God: the other of the
foolishness of the flesh, whereby we despise the things concerning virtue,
goodlines, and honesty. This is a profane and hurtful: the other is holy,
and a necessary hatred.

The fifth cause of man's unthankfulness to God, 5. cause of ingratitude.
is the perverse dealing of the world; the infinite offenses; and the
innumerable examples of all manner wickedness. This evil custom of the world
is the fodder of all iniquity, naughtiness, and peruersitie: whereby many
even of such, as purposed to fear God, are carried-awaie, so that they become
wild oftentimes, and spurn against GOD. Hereof it is that we see in all
states such contempt of the Gospel which reprooueth this darkness: Hereof
spring the detestable behavior of parents; the il bringing-vp of children.
For while men do looke-vppon the multitude, authority, and power of such as
sin, they excuse themselves by example: as they did who dispising the spirit
of Christ in Noah, 1, Pet. 3, 20*
at the length suffered due punishment in the floude. This wickedness does
deserve, that men should be punishod with a reprobate mind, as Paul says:
Romans 1, ^28.
GOD delivered them up into a reprobate mind, according to the threatening of
the law, Deuteronomy. 28, 28
The LORD shall smite thee with madness, and with blindness, and with astonieng
of heart. For such as are forsaken of God for their custom of sinning are by
little and little so berest of their wits, blinded and stricken with
astonishment of heart, that they become without feeling, and give themselves to
wantonness, not use Paul his words, calling virtue, dishonestie; good, evil,
wholesome things, hurtful; and judge clean amiss: than which no pain can
be imagined more grievous. When therefore we behold the most part of mankind
to rushe headlong as it were into al manner wickedness, let us call into mind
the greatness of Gods displeasure, who by his most righteous judgment
permits, that man's rebellion be punished with madness. Of which madness
Paul writes when he says: 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10. 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
God sent them strong delusion, that theie should believe lies. But most
horrible is it, that this punishment should stick in the posterity,
according to the saying of Solomon, Romans 17, 13.
He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. A
remedy for this cause.
Therefore when we see men to be delighted in the filthiness of sin, let us
avoid ye examples of iniquity, and against the^ let us set the obedience of
ye chaste spirits, and the examples of the sancts, who deemed nothing either
more pleasant, or more ancient, or better then faith and obedience, whereby we
are joined to God. And let every man take heed that he be not taken with the
deceitful counsels of the flesh. Against custom of sinning.
For there be which do purpose, but most foolishlie, before their death, to
repent, not considering how by too much using to sin, that sin becomes
even a nature as it were. For as Augustine does say, while custom is not
resesied, it becomes necessity. And the Poet, When a sickness has taken
root,
If thou take Physic, 2. cause of man's wickedness.
it will not boot.


The sixth cause of man's disobedience, and of all wickedness reigning in the
world, is the Prince of this aer (as the Apostle says,) even the devil
himself. He is present to all those causes above recited as a chief capitane.
For he insinuates himself to the corrupted nature, and stirs up the
concupiscence by obiectes and poisons; and confirms the cogitations of the
flesh; and moves the will; and by wonderful slights and snares increases the
wicked manners of men, to spread abroad his kingdom the farther, and to abolish
the kingdom of Christ by little and little. A remedy for this last cause.
Against this prince of the aer, is opposed the prince of the Church, even the
Lord of hosts, who is hier than the heavens, from whom are the causes of
godly actions above recited. For he does give the holy Ghost; cherishe the
lust of the spirit; strengthen good cogitations; keep the will; and proposes
the examples of holy men, but chiefly his own example to be imitated of us.
Or in fewer words: A lively faith in Jesus Christ is the general remedy
against all the wickedness and peruersitie of ye world. Faith in Christ
commended.
For this is the victory that overcomes the world, 1. John. 5, 4.
even our* faith. For by this Christ the conqueror of darkness is possessed; by
this a new spirit whereby we resist ye flesh, is obtained; by this the whole
body of sin is killed and mortified; and by this in all troubles we do fly
unto the name of the Lord, that is, unto prayer, the safest sanctuary, the
righteous runs unto it, Romans 18, 10.
and is exalted.

CHAP. 37.
1. Of Christ his intercession for us; 2. And of diverse notable things to be
considered in the same.
THE thide The other two are at large entreated of in the 10. Chapters
immediately going before.
and last part of Christ his Priesthood, is his intercession for ye whole
Church, and for each particular member of the same. For as Christ alone by the
sentence of the law is perfectly righteous; and alone has given himself a
ransom for the redemption of all: So he and none beside is the mediator of
intercession, inasmuch as intercession depends upon the merit of
righteousness, and of the price given for a redemption. 1. Tim. 3, 5. 6.
And therefore Paul does say; There is one mediator between God and man,
even the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men. Upon this
place Theodoret writes thus: There is one peace maker, who has joined those
things which were contrary and distant. He called Christ a man, because he
called him an intercessor: for man was made intercessor. And as he that would
reconcile two, ioining their hands together, does put himself between, and
taking one by the right hand, and the other by the left, does join them
together: So Christ when he had united the divine nature to the humane, did
procure such a friendeshippe, as can neither be violated nor broken. Romans 8,
34.
And Paul unto the Romans does say: Who shall condemn? It is Christ which
is dead, yea or rather, which is risen again, who is also at the right hand
of GOD, and makes request for us. Here the Apostle against condemnation
sets the intercession of Christ sitting at the right hand of the father, and
making intercession for the Church, and for every member thereof. And unto the
Hebrews it is thus written of him: This man, Heb. 7, 24. 25.
because he endures ever, has an everlasting Priesthood. Wherefore he is
able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives, to make intercession for the^. As therefore the force of ye obedience
of ye law in christ, and ye price of his passion; is of infinite valor, and
merit: so his intercession is most effectual, and precious. So that it can not
be but his prayer on our behalf, for whom he makes intercession, must be
heard. And for them principalie he makes intercession, who are made his
members through faith. Notwithstanding the difference is herein, because when
he was in this world, he was a fulfiller of the law, And with one oblation
once made has he, Heb. 10, 14.
consecrated for ever them, that are sanctified: But as yet he makes
intercession for us with his father, as the eternal priest of the Church. 1.
John 2, 1.
For so says John, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father,
Jesus Christ the just. Wherefore Christ makes intercession both now and alwaie
for ye Church, whose intercession depends upon the merit of his
righteousness, and the price given for our redemption. And this does John
mean, when he names him the just.

But five things here must be considered, Five things to be considered in
Christ his intercession.
which will open ye better this part of christ his priesthood touching the
intercession.

The first is how Christ is to be caled upon after two ways, 1. Christ is to
be prayed unto in two respects,
to wit, As the giver of al good things with the father, and the holy Ghost.
For when we are bidden to pray unto God, and Christ is very god of equal
majesty, and power both with ye father and the holy ghost, he is to be
honored even as God. When it is said therefore, Rom, 4, 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou fear, that
worship and fear is commanded, which is of that God, who is in essence but
one, and three in persons. For, seeing the essence of the divinity is but one
in number, and vndiuidible, it must needs follow that the worship ascribed to
God must apperteine to the persons which are of one, and the same essence.
Again, because the works of the divinity unto things without, as Augustine
says, are undivided; it follows, that the service of invocation is undivided.
This worship of one God, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
depends upon the patronage of a mediator, without whom there is no way open
unto God. Besides, Christ is to be praied-vnto as a Mediator, and intercessor,
that for his sake, we may be heard; and that he may entreat the Father for
us; and that he may carry our groans, and prayers unto the eternal Father,
according to that saying, Heb, 5, 6.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Therefore it is well
said, O Son of God, make thou intercession for us with the eternal Father. I
do beg in thie name, that thou would beg of the Father, that it may be
given me. Eusebius. Lib. 10. Eccles. Hist.
Eusebius does say, The great Bishop of the whole Church, even Jesus Christ,
the only begotten son of God, taking all men with a cheereful countenance,
and lifted-vp hands a sweet smelling savor, and sacrifices without either
blood or body, does offer them to the celestial Father, and the God of al
creatures, he first worshipping, and yielding due honor to the Father,
after-ward praieng him to abide pleased, and gracious alwaie to us al.
Furthermore, whereas the saints do seueralie cal-vpon the persons of the
trinity, sometime upon the Father, sometime upon ye son, and sometime upon the
holy Ghost, as Melancton in his form of prayers does show, theie part not
the vndiuidible unity of the divine nature, neither exclude theie one person,
while theie name another, but theie do both acknowledge the unity of the
Godhead, because theie know that God alone is to be called-vnto; and confess
a distinction and equality of persons; and do worship the distinct proprieties
of persons in the work of our salvation. Hereof the primitive Church, did
direct their prayer unto the three persons of the Trinity in this form of
words: Lord have mercy upon us; Christ have mercy upon us; Lord have mercy
upon us. A triple confession therefore of the Church is in this prayer. One is
of the unity of the Godhead, against the Grecians and Barbarians, who
brought-in a multitude of Gods. Another is of the distinction of persons, and
of their equality in one divine essence, against Arrius and others. The third
is, of the distinction of the properties of the divine persons in working the
mystery of our salvation. For although it be rightly said that the works in
his creatures are undivided: yet are not ye properties of persons to be
confounded, the Father saves; the son saves; and the holy Ghost does save.
Behold the undivided works of the Trinity in saving us: yet the father saves
by giving his son; the son saves by obeieng the father, by suffering, and
by intercession; and the holy Ghost saves by regenerating, and sanctifieng.
So then the properties are diverse in the same work of salvation. Therefore the
distinct inuocations of the Father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost,
admonish us of these hie matters. And who so at this day do find fault with
these forms, do hide poison in their mind, and secretly do either invade the
difference and equality of persons, or confound ye properties of persons in ye
mystery of our salvation. 2. In what respect Christ is an intercessor.
Seco^dlie, in this place it would be considred, how Christ is ye mediator and
intercessor, either in respect of his humanity only; or in respect of his
divinity only; or in respect of both together. Magist. Sent. Lib. 3.
Distinst. 19.
The master of the sentences, and in our days too one Stancar an Italian, do
say, yt Christ was a mediator in respect of his humanity only: Osiander on
the other side says, he was a mediator in respect of his divinity. But here
necessarily, and before all things this rule must not be forgotten, That the
names of Christ his office agree neither to the divine nature only, nor
only to the humane, but to the whole person which is God and man. For ye
Son of God did therefore take man's nature upon himself, that he might be the
savior of man according to both natures. Moreover the epistle unto the
Hebrews, ascribes the priesthod to Christ, according to both natures. And
although he suffered, and died only in his humane nature, and by the power of
his divinity overcame death: yet the benefit of redemption, a part whereof
intercession is, touches the whole person, otherwise that divine nature, had
never taken man's nature into a personal union. But whereas it is objected, None
is mediator for himself, Again, None is intercessor with himself: The
answer is easy, These things are true in one respect, and where the person
is simple. But here a difference must be put between the Godhead sending, and
the Son which was sent. The son in that he was sent, is a priest: Therefore
both a mediator, and an intercessor. Therefore the person sent is the mediatrix
with the Godhead sending. Hereunto agree the testimonies of ye Fathers.
Chrysostom says, Neither could man alone be mediator, because it was for the
mediator to talk with God. Cyril: And Christ is the Mediator of God and man:
Because in that one God and man are conjoined. Ambrose, That he might be the
mediator of God and man, Christ Jesus was God and man; because in God he was
man, and in man God, that through both he might be a Mediator.

Thirdly, 3. When Chrih is an intercessour, for us.
it is to be known, that through the intercession of Christ, we have the^
access unto the Father, when we abide in grace thorough faith. For in vain do
they pretend the intercession of Christ; and in vain do they vaunt of the
talk with God, who are destitute of faith. For it is necessary, that they be
members of Christ, which will call upon God aright. Romans 5, 10. 2.
Therefore says Paul, Being justified by ^aith, we have peace toward God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access through faith unto
this grace, wherein we stand.

Fourthlie, 4. When God does accept the prayers of the faithful.
it is to be noted, that the prayers of Saints, are therefore acceptable in the
sight of God, because they depend upon the intercession of Christ the high
Priest. For when we make intercession for others, we pray not trusting in our
own merits, or price which we have paid for redemption; but in the merit of
Christ his righteousness, and in the ransom which he has. John. 15, 16.
Therefore says Christ, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, that
is depending upon my merit, and intercession, he will give it you. Hitherto
pertains that compellation in the Lords prayer, Math. 6, 9.
O our Father. For as the name of a Father puts us in mind of Christ, in
whom through faith we are the sons of God, and he is our father: So the
pronoune Our does admonish us of faith, that through confidence in the son,
we should call upon the father, not trusting in any worthiness, or merits of
our own. For which cause the Apostle says: Let us approach unto God through
him. Heb. 7, 25.
For he ever lives, to make intercession for us. As often therefore as we
would pray, let us consider the cause why we say Our Father, that we may
both thoroughlie be persuaded, that for his sons sake we please God; and
without al doubting also believe, that for the intercession of the son, whose
members we be through faith, we are heard. Wherefore theie which bring not this
faith, do but waste wind when they pray. For theie have none access unto ye
father. Let such then look what they do, who contrary to the word of God* do
depend upon other patrons.

Fiftlie, 5. We are to make none our mediator save Christ only.
for so much as the son of God is the perpetual priest, which makes
intercession for the Church, whenever it does amiss* we may not fly unto
other patrons, but unto Christ alone as the only patron, and most trusty
anchor of safety. Therefore the Apostle John does say, If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the father, 1. John 2, 1. 2
Jesus Christ the just. And he is the reconciliation for our sins. But then
do we rightly approach unto this Advocate for the attainment of the remission
of sins, Properties of a lively faith.
when we are sorry for our wickedness committed; when we rest our selves with a
faith unfeigned upon Jesus Christ the propitiator, and intercessor; when we
purpose afterward through God his grace to lead a pure life; and finalie, when
we cast from our hearts a purpose to sin. Against a^ricular confession and
absolution.
Unless these be ioined-together, in vain do thou boast yt Christ is thie
patron. Some there be who think theie be pure, if once theie have poured their
sins into the bosom of some pastor; and some pastors too do think, that by
their magical absolutions, theie can unburden sinners: but both sorts do most
filthilie err out of ye way. For, both Christ alone is ye purger of sins, in
who^ if thou repose not a lively faith, which has those four conditions
which we have recited, in vain do thou unburden thie self in the bosom of
ye priest: and Christ alone it is yt absolueth from sins, unto whom if you
aproch not through faith, you sahlt die in thy sins. True absolution what. Of
this point somewhat more is spoken above Chap. 17.
But the absolution of a priest is then profitable, when the confession is
tempered with true repentance and turning from sin. And this absolution of the
priest is nothing else, than a testimony of the absolution which is given in
heaven, by our hie priest Jesus Christ. And therefore says ye Lord, Mat. 18, 18.
Whatsoever you loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. So that the absolution
which is pronounced by the minister of the Gospel, depends upon his faith
which requires absolution, not of the merit either of confession, or of
pronouncing any words whatsoever. This place would crave a confutation of them
who chose other advocates, beside Christ: but because this madness is already
mentioned above, Chap. 24. in the 3. reason why the mass is abhominabe.
where we dealt with Popish sacrifices, I will not with more words refute them
in this place.

And thus much of ye three parts of Christ his priest-hoode, to wit, of
doctrine; of sacrifice; and of intercession. The other point contained in the
definition of the priesthood touching the preservation of the church, the
remission of sins, the gift of the holy Ghost, and everlasting life, be
rather most pleasant fruits, than parts of Christ his Priesthood.

CHAP. 38.
1. Of the covenant which Christ our hie Priest has entered into; 2. The
special points to be considered therein; 3. Of the old and new covenant, or
Testament, wherein theie do differ; 4. The difference between the new
Testament, and the Gospel; 5. Whether with the old Testament, the ten
commandments be abrogated or no.
For So Much as every priest, as ye Epistle to ye Hebrews does testify is a
surety of some covenant (for it is behoueful, that some certain covenant be
set according to which the mediator, between the parties at controversy may
determine, that sure peace and friendship may be established between God and
men,) Christ our Priest has a certain covenant. For as the Leuitical priest
had his priesthood, and a certain covenant annexed to the priesthood: So
Christ our Priest, to whom the Leuitical priests with their sacrifice and
covenant gave place, has his priesthood, and certain covenants annexed to the
priesthod. For the priesthood being changed (as the Epistle unto the Hebrews
does say) of necessity there must be a change of the law. Heb. 7, 12.
Again, Heb. 9, 15.
for this cause is he the mediator of the new Testament, that through death,
which was for the redemption of the transgressions that were in the former
Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. 16.
For where a Testament is, there must be the death of him that made the
Testament. 17.
For the Testament is confirmed, when men are dead: for it is yet of no force,
as long as he that made it is alive. 18.
Wherefore neither was the first ordained without blood. For when Moses had
spoken every precept to the people, according to the law, 19.
he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water and purple wool, and
hyssope, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people, Saying, This is the
blood of the Testament, which God has appointed unto you. And although by
these words of the Apostle it is evident, that as the former, that is, The old
covenant what;
the old Testament, is a covenant annexed to the priesthood of Aaron,
confirmed by the blood of brutish creatures, whereby GOD did bind himself to
the Jews for to give them the land of Canaan to their possession, if so be
for their parts theie observed the condition, which was the fulfilling of the
law; The new coueant what;
so the new Testament should be a covenant annexed to the Priesthood of
Christ, confirmed with the blood of Christ; whereby God does bind himself to
forgive sins, and to give a celestial, The ancient fathers before Christ
partakers of the new covenant.
and everlasting inheritance in heaven, but with a condition of faith, whose
true and right fruit is perfect obedience toward GOD. And although this
covenant be ratified only to such as be called and do believe: yet, least we
should think that the Fathers before the incarnation of Christ, were
destitute of the grace of the new covenant, it is good that we make a better,
and a more distinct explication of this doctrine so necessary to be known.

First, The new covenant was in all ages.
therefore and above all we must constantly believe, that in all ages even from
the fall of our first parents, the way to be saved both was, and is yet one
and the same, to wit, by the Priest Christ alone, of whose righteousness
theie be partakers, and be saved, whosoever believe in him. So that as touching
the purgation of sin, and attainement of everlasting life, there is but one
perpetual covenant or testament of God, whereby God does bind himself to
pardon such as do ^lee unto Christ. And although, if you respect the express
word, there is no mention of this covenant concerning remission of sins,
before the Lord entered thereinto with Abraham: yet the things themselves,
which appertain unto the substance of this covenant, were very well known to
the Fathers before the flood. The parts of the covenant between God and man.
By the things I mean both the promise of the restoring of man through
Christ; and also the faith of this promise. For the promise in GOD, and the
faith in man, are the substantial parts, as I may say, of this covenant. The
covenant between GOD and Abraham was this: Genesis 17, 7.
I will establish my covenant between me thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be GOD unto thee, and thy
seed after thee. And somewhat before in the same Chapter there goes an oath of
GOD, 4.
Behold, I make my covenant with thee, that is, as truly as I live, I will
establish my covenant etc. 1. The matter or foundation of the covenant.


Here first of al would be considered ye matter or foundation of this covenant,
which is ye promised seed, by whose merit, and intercession there is an
atonement made between God and men. Wherefore whatsoever good thing the Lord
does promise, it is ratified in the Son, who has reconciled us and the
Father together. 2. Cor. 5, 19.
God was in Christ, says Paul, and reconciled the world to him self, not
imputing their sins to them, and has committed to us the word of
reconciliation. And for this cause this covenant is called by Isaiah, Isai 54,
10.
the covenant of peace.

Secondly, 2. The wonderful love of God to us ward in making this covenant.
we should call into mind ye wonderful humility of God, whereby the divine
majesty so debaseth it self of mere benignity and good will to manward,
having consideration of our humane frailnesse, that not only he does simply
promise free benediction to miserable and wretched sinners: but also binds
himself by covenant; that we may know his fatherly goodwil to us ward.

Thirdly, 3. The perpetuity of God his covenant.
the immutabilitie, and constancy, or perpetuity of this covenant confirmed
by an oath, would be thought-vpon. Whereof the Epistle unto the Hebrews does
say: Heb. 6, 13.
When God made the promise unto Abraham, because he had no greater to swear
by, he swear by him self, 14.
saying, Surely I will abundantly bless thee, and multiply thee
marueilouslie. He adds a reason, 17.
saying, So God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the stablenesse of his counsel, 18.
bound him self by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is
impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have
our refuge to hold-fast the hope that is set before us.

Fourthlie, 4. The largenes of the covenant.
we are to weigh, the largenes of the covenant entred-into with Abraham,
namely how it extends unto the seed of Abraham, Seed of Abraham what;
and that for ever and ever. But what is that seed of Abraham? Paul both in
the 4. and 9. chapters unto the Romans, and also in the 3. unto the
Galathians, defines the seed of Abraham to be even al those, of what nations
soever, which do walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, that, al which
believe the promise of grace, as Abraham did.

Fiftlie, 5. God bestows immortality upon his confederats.
when it is said how this covenant was entered into with Abraham, and his
seed for evermore, it is meant that God bestows immortality to such as are
linked to him in co^federacie. For if by death we should perish, the
perpetuity of the covenant could no way stand.

Now on the other side the faith of Abraham, and of his seed answers to
the covenant of God. How we do covenant with God for our parts.
For, when God binds himself to us by covenant to give salvation; he binds
us withal unto faith, and unto new obedience which cannot be separated from
faith. And therefore God says to Abraham, Genesis 17, 1.
Walk before me, to wit, in faith; and be thou upright, that is, serve me
syncerelie, and prefer obedience toward me before al things. Genesis 22, 4. 5.
etc.
This obedience through his faith Abraham declared, when he was ready most
willingly to sacrifice at the commandment of God, his beloved son Isaac,
whom he loved above all the world. Whereby it may easily be gathered, that
the endeavoring of the mind, obtains the praise of perfection before God.

Moreover, The covenant of God fulfilled and confirmed by the blood of Christ.
as this eternal covenant of God with the Church has for foundation and
substance the promised seed: So being shadowed by sundry types in the old
law, at the length it was fulfilled by the coming of Christ into the world,
and confirmed with the blood of Christ. For the remembrance and ratifieng
whereof, Baptism, and the Lords supper be instituted. Baptism and the L.
Supper seals that God has fulfilled his covenant.
For as Baptism is a covenant of a good conscience with God depending upon the
blood of Christ, whereby it is purged from dead works: So the Lords supper is
a commemoration of the same covenant touching our redemption, established by
the blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 11, 25
And therefore it is called the cup of the new Testament, The covenant beweene
God and man how i^ is defined.
or cup of the covenant. Wherefore you may rightly define this eternal
covenant of God, if you say, It is a covenant of atonement between God and
men, whereby both God and men are bound together; God for his part promising,
yea by oath, remission of sins, and everlasting life for the merits of
Christ, by whose blood this covenant is confirmed: and men for their parts do
both accept the promise through faith, and also do not only promise, but also
show due obedience through their faith. Which being so, it may be asked, why
in the scripture mention is made of a double covenant or testament, namely an
old and a new. For both the Lord by the Prophet Jeremiah does say so; and the
auctor also of the Epistle unto the Hebrews stands upon that same ground.
Iere. 31, 31.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with
the house of Israel, 32.
and with the house of Judah. Not according to the covenant that I made wi^h
their fathers, when I took the^ by the hand to bring the^ out of the land of
Egypt. 33.
etc. But this shall be the covenant I will make with the house of Israel: After
those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, 34.
and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for theie shall al
know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for
I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no more. Here the
Prophet in plain words makes mention of a double covenant, an old, and a
new.

So Paul unto the Galathians says, yt Agar the bond woman did signify mount
Sina: Gal. 4, 24. 25. 26. etc.
and Sara the free woman was a figure of the celestial Jerusalem; and he adds
by those two the two Testaments were signified, One gendering unto bondage; and
the other unto freedom. As therefore the old Testament to Agar gendering unto
bondage: So the new Testament is compared to Sara gendering unto freedom. By
which places we do see how there be two Testamentes, and those greatly
differing. The old Testament what.
Of which the old Testament was a mutual obligation between God and the
Israelites; God for his part promising the land of Canaan; the Israelites for
their parts binding them selves to obeie him according to the law of Moses,
Sign of the old couena^^.
whereof as the blood of the lamb where-withal the people was besprinkled,
End of the old covenant.
was the external sign: so the final end was, that among that certain people
the memory of the promise of grace might be kept until the coming of the
Messiah, who was to be borne of that people. But the end of the new Testament
greatly differed therefrom, as both we have showed, and the words of the
Prophet do most evidently declare, of which let us more deeply consider.
And that we may the better understand the words of the Prophet, we must note
that there is a triple time of the new Testament, to wit, when it was
promised, when it was represented, and when it is fully performed. Time of the
covenant promised.
The time of the covenant promised, continued from the first promise concerning
the seed of the woman, until Christ came into the world, and was hanged upon
the cross, by whose blood this new covenant is confirmed, and by whose
virtue, as many as have believed the promise are salued, as were the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings, and many more. Neither do the words of the
Apostle let this thing, Heb. 9, 17.
saying, The Testament is of no force, so long as he that made it, is alive.
For the testator even Christ, in Gods heavenly decree, died even since the
promise was first made. Revel. 13, 8.
Hence it is in the Revelation, The lamb was slain from the beginning of the
world. And therefore by the virtue of Christ his death and passion, both Adam,
and Habel, and Seth, and al believers before Christ did come in the flesh, were
salued. The Prophet Jeremiah speaks not of this time of the Testament
promised. The time of the covenant exhibited, was the time when our Savior
Christ died, and suffered, which time continues even until the end of the
world, into this time we are fallen, who believe on the Messiah come, as the
Fathers did on the Messiah promised, although as touching the knowledge of the
Messiah, a more clear light has shined upon us than did upon them. For as the
shadow, and a goodly image do differ: So the clear knowledge which we have
of Christ since he showed himself, does much differ from the shadow of the
old people. Notwithstanding, to both peoples it is very profitable. The time
of the Testament fulfilled, shall be after the resurrection of ye dead, when
everlastingly we shall enioie ye fruit of this wonderful covenant. For we shall
behold, not ye shadow, nor the image, but the very thing it self, namely
redemption and salvation through Christ. The Prophet Jeremiah then speaks of
this double time, to wit, of the time when the covenant was exhibited in this
life, and shall al in all be fulfilled in the life to come. Now let us see the
words of the Prophet: I will put my law, says he, in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts. What law, I beseech you, is this? What manner of
writing? This word Law, in the Hebrew tongue, is taken generalie for every
doctrine. And therefore an apt signification is to be given to every place,
according unto the circumstance of the place. Zacharias father of John Baptist
therefore does help us herein, when he says of his son, Luke 1, 76.
And thou, babe, shall be called the Prophet of the most High: for thou shall
go before the face of the Lord, 77.
to prepare his ways: To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the
remission of their sins, 78.
through the tender mercy of our GOD. The Prophet means out of al doubt the
knowledge of salvation, and the remission of sins through the blood of
Christ. For so he says: Al shall know me. And that this must be understood
of the knowledge of Gods heavenly will, he plainly does show, in the words
immediately ensuing; For I will, says GOD, forgive their iniquity, and will
remember their sins no more. Thus we know what law the Prophet means in
this place. But what manner of writing does he understand? Surely this
writing is neither an idle nor an hurtful knowledge: but it is a knowledge with
a lively faith in the heart, whereby we be persuaded, and feel in our minds
that God is merciful to us, and has pardoned our sins for the merits of
Christ the Priest; and whereby motions of the spirit agreeable to the law of
God, be raised-vp within us. Of which effect the Apostle calls it the spirit;
and so obedience of the law is wrought in man. This faith, and this lively
sense in the hearts of the faithful, is the writing of the law by the finger of
God, that is, by the holy spirit, at the preaching of the Gospel. For as the
tables of stone did signify the extreme hardness of man's heart, whereof the heart
of man not regenerate, is named stony. Eze. 36, 26.
So the writing of the heart does signify an heart softened by the power of
the holy spirit, at the preaching of the Gospel, that in the same as in a
new table, the grace of the Gospel, yea and the law it self, which ought to
be a perpetual rule for the godly to lead their life by, may be engraven,
whereof it is called a fleshie heart. And therefore the Lord by the Prophet
does say, Ezekiel. 36, 26
I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you an
heart of flesh.

But here some may justly demand, Difference between the new Testament and
the Gospel.
whether there be any difference between the new Testament, and the Gospel.
For by that we have spoken, it may seem that theie be one and the same thing.
Unto this question we are thus to answer: The new Testament and the Gospel,
as touching the substance it self, and the subject, are al one: but in a
consideration they differ. For substance, and for subject they are one; because
both are a preaching of Christ, and how to attain eternal life through
Christ. But in a consideration they differ. Because the one, which is the
Gospel, has a name from bringing ioiful, and good news, touching the
attainment of everlasting life through Christ: and by the other, that is the
Testament, is signified, that God not content with a simple promise, does bind
himself to us by covenant (an oath coming between,) that we may understand,
both the immovable decree of God, touching the attaining of salvation by
Christ; and how we also for our parts are bound to God by faith. For faith is
one part of the covenant, to wit, of man's part. For in all covenants, as above
also has been showed, mutual conditions, and laws be required. The same is to
be said of the old Testament, and of Moses law.

Furthermore, when the Scripture is divided into the law and the Gospel, it is
to be understood, that the difference is taken from the things subject: and
when it is divided into the old and new Testament, the differences are taken
from certain circumstances of the things subject. But, when the holy
Scripture, which we call the old and new Testament, is so caled, it is rather
of custom than of any difference of things subject, except you speak by the
figure Synecdoche. And therefore Augustine does say: Aug. Lib. 2. Retract.
Where I said the authority was included within the 44. books of the old
Testament, following the usual manner of speaking, which the Church has at this
day, I called it the old Testament. But the Apostle seems not to call any
thing the old Testament, but that which was given in mount Sinai. And therefore
ye same Augustine writing unto Bonifacius, Aug. ad Bonif. Lib. 3.
does say, how they might more truly be called instruments than testaments,
that that might be called the old, and this the new. I will add also hereunto a
question out of Augustine, whose words be these: How is it named old, which
after 430. years was made by Moses; and how is it called new, which before
so many years was made unto Abraham? The revelations are to be considered in
these names, and not the institutions. The revealing of the old Testament was
made by Moses: but the revealing of the new was done by Christ, when he
manifested himself in the flesh, in whom the justice of God appeared. Again,
because the old testament pertains unto the old man, from which man of
necessity is to begin: and the new unto the new man, of which man must
passover from oldnes: and therefore in that, earthly promises are contained,
but in this, heavenly.

Furthermore, Whether the ten-commandements be abrogated, or no;
seeing the Apostle says, the old testament is abrogated by the new; and the
old was given in mount Sinai, where the Ten-commandements were published-out,
it may in this place be asked touching the Ten-commandements, Heb. 8, 13.
whether they also be taken-awaie, Exo. 19, 16. 17. etc.
as part of ye old testament? Unto which question I do thus answer: The
Ten-co^mandements, as they be a part of Moses law, do no whit bind us; but as
they contain the eternal pleasure of God, they do and must continue, eue^ as
many other things in Moses which are natural. But a double use, according unto
ye consideration of double man, is to be respected in the decaloge. For if you
respect ye time of man before the revelation of Christ in man, that is before
the justification of man, through ye faith of Christ, as man himself is called
old, who is bound either perfectly to obeie the law, or to be punished
according to our Saviors words unto the proud Lawer: Mat. 19, 17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: So the
Ten-commandements by a certain analogy, may be comprised under the old
testament. For it is a certain Schoolmaster to bring unto Christ, Gal. 3, 24.
as the old testament, accusing and condemning man, for that he has not the
righteousness which the law requires, whereby man is driven to seek
Christ, Romans 10, 4.
who is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes.
2. Cor. 3, 13. 14. etc.
In this sense Paul opposes the moral law against the new Testament. But if
you have an eye unto the time of man after the revelation of Christ in man, as
man himself is become new: So the Ten-commandements is a rule how a new man
should lead his conversation, and shall never be abolished. Whose new
obedience does please, because ye person pleases for Christ his sake, whose
perfect obedience to the law, is imputed to the believing man. Now of that
which has been said, let us make manifest the differences between the old
and the new Testament. The which although they differ not in respect of the
last end, seeing they both do respect the reconciliation, and atonement of man
with God, as the final end: yet if we do consider the ends coming between,
and circumstances, the old Testament does go before the manifestation of the
new; if the mediators, the old by the servant Moses, ye new was administered by
Jesus Christ the Son; if the manner of the dispensation, the Old was but in a
shadow, the New has the very image of things. The shadow and the figure
was the deliverance of Israel from the bondage of Egypt, Pharao being
oppressed; The truth is the deliverance of the faithful from the bondage of
sin, Satan being overcome. The bringing of Israel into the land of Canaan,
and the possessing of the same, was the shadow; ye bringing of the spiritual
Israel into heaven, and the hereditarie possession thereof, is the truth. The
giving out of the law upon mount Sinai by Moses, was the shadow; The truth is
the word which came from Sion by Christ. The law written in the tables of
stone, was the shadow; but the law of God written by the finger of God in the
hearts of men, is the truth. The ministry of death, was ye shadow; but the
ministry of the spirit, and of life, is the truth. To speak in a word, al ye
Mosaical things, as his government, priesthood, purgations, sacrifices, and the
rest, were but shadows: but Jesus Christ, the eternal Priest with his
benefits, is the truth. Or to speak both with Augustine, In the old
Testament there is a hiding of the new; in the new a manifestation of the
old; Again, The old is the beginning, the new is the end: and with Ambrose,
It is called a testament, because it is dedicated with blood, the old in a
figure, to wit, by the blood of a brutish beast; The new in the truth,
namely by the blood of Jesus Christ.

Thus much concerning the covenant annexed to the priesthood of Christ, and
of comparison, between the old and the new Testament; whereof we have spoken
the more at large, because both old, and late writers do vary in this point:
but we hope, we have made it manifest according to the truth of Gods word.

CHAP. 39.
1. How man is to apply to himself the sacrifice of Christ; 2. Of Gods
word, the happiness of the imbracers, and the punishment of the contemners of
the same; 3. Of Faith, and of the righteousness thereof; 4. Of the sacraments,
how many theie are, and what theie signify.
THe sacrifice of Christ is applied both by the word, by faith, and by the
sacrament: but diversely. For by the word, which is written in the heart by the
holy spirit, it is offered as by the hand of God. By faith, being conceived
of the word through the holy spirit, it is received as by the hand of man.
And by the Sacraments, as by the seal of God it is signed. 1. How the
sacrifice of Christ is applied to us by the word.
For, he that believes the preaching of the Gospel, wherbie the benefit of
Christ his sacrifice is offered, by faith, which is a work not of nature, but
of grace in man, he receaueth Christ wholly together with his benefits, which
benefits are sealed by the sacraments, as that holy Apostle Paul does
teach.

Wherebie it appears how needeful the ministry of the word is, The
necessity of preaching.
as that which is ordained from heaven, to offer this incomparable treasure to
us, this is it which the Lord says, Mar. 16, 15.
Preach the Gospel to every creature; Again, Teach al nations. This
ministry the Apostles deli^ered by the hands as it were to posterity, and
from them it is come unto us, and shall not be abolished while this world shall
endure, although Satan with great rage do persecute such as syncerelie do
sound-out the Gospel. And therefore it is our parts, if we love our salvation,
to hear, to understand, to love the word of God, to meditate ther-vpon al our
life long, yea and to believe the same, and to live thereafter, that at the
length we may come unto the desired end of happiness. For David in the
beginning of his Psalms, sange not in va^e, when he sange on this wise: Psalm,
1, 2.
Blessed is the man who does meditate in the law, that is, in the doctrine,
of the Lord, day and night.

But wherefore is he blessed? Fruit of meditating upon the word of God.
Because the meditation of the word works two things: First, that thou
neither listen unto the counsels of the wicked; nor stand in the way of
sinners; nor sit in the seat of the scorneful: Psalm. 1, 2. 3.
Secondly, that thou become like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that
will bring forth her fruit in due season, until thou attain unto very
happiness it self. Psalm. 2, 12.
And therefore it is added in another Psalm, Blessed are all that trust in him.

But on the other side, Punishment of the contemners of Gods word.
where this word of the Lord is neither loved, nor hearkened unto, nor
thought-vpon, nor believed, nor done, man by little and little is wrapped in the
counsels of the wicked; carried violently into the way of the sinners; and at
length blasphemeth God, and al religion, and becomes a plain epicure, so
that at length he fears not in his heart to say, Psalm, 14, 1.
There is no God, although the lieng tongue say otherwise. Psalm. 53, 1.
And so he proves like a tree planted in most horrible filthiness, and
devilish mud to bring forth fruit meet for death, and damnation, according as
it is written in a certain Psalm, Psalm. 14, 1.
Theie be corrupted, Psalm, 53, 1,
and abominable in their ways. And that deservedly. For ye contempt of this
word, wherbie Christ himself does offer himself unto us, does highly offend
God; yea and brings upon the contemners themselves, and upon their posterity
too, blindenes, or a reprobate mind; al manner wickedness, and filthiness, as
Paul in his first Chapter unto the Romans teaches at large. And in another
Chapter the same Apostle does say: Because theie received not the love of the
truth, ^. Thessalonians 3, 10. 11.
and therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that there should believe
lies. And the event in many nations, where Christ himself, and the Apostles
have preached, does answer to this prophecy of Paul touching the punishment
of such as contemn the word of God. Wars of the Turk are token^ of God his
displeasure for contempt of his word.
Neither be the Turkish wars any thing else, but very tokens of Gods
displeasure, for the contempt of his word. And therefore let us be more
circumspect by the harms of other men; and esteem^ we greatly the benefit of
God, who has delivered to us his pure word, wherebie he does offer this
infinite grace and benefit of the sacrifice of his son, by whose merit we
be delivered from the power of sin and death; and endued with eternal
righteousness, and glory.

Secondly, 2. How the sacrifice of Christ is applied to man by faith.
in the application of the sacrifice of Christ, it is required that every one
of years do believe. For as the word does offer: So faith, which comes by
hearing of the word, does receive Christ wholly with all his merits, and
believes that al sins be forgiven, for the sacrifice sake of the Son of
God. And therefore in the Christian Creed it is said, Every man saved by his
own: faith.
I believe the forgiveness of sins, that is, I do know, and am firmly
persuaded, that God, according to his promise, will receive me into favor
because of the sacrifice, and obedience of his Son; and will not impute my
sins to me anie-more, but utterly blot, and forgive, yea and remember them
no more. For faith is not a wavering opinion, Faith what*
but a certain knowledge of the free promise; and a firm confidence that
sins be forgiven, for Christ his sake. Faith whereupon grounded.
This faith, as touching the certainty thereof, depends both upon evident
testimonies of the Scriptures, upon parables, and upon approved examples: but
as touching confidence, it rests only upon the merit of Christ. Romans 4, 7.
Paul after David, says: Blessed are theie whose iniquities are forgiven, 8.
and whose sins are covered. Psa. 32, 1. 2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. And Christ does say,
Matthew. 9, 2.
Son, be of good comfort, thie sins are forgiven thee. Mark 5, 36.
And to the ruler of the Synagogue the Lord says: Only believe. And to the
woman which had an issue of blood, Luke 8, 48.
Thie faith has made thee whole. Mat. 18. 21. 22. etc.
Among many parables, that is notable, which is in the 18. chapter of
Matthewe, of him which did owe ten thousand talentes, and having not
wherewith to discharge, he was of mere grace forgiven the debt. Luke 7, 41. 42.
Hitherto belongs also the parable of the two debtors; and of the prodigal
son. Among examples, Luke 15, 11. 12. etc.
the most excellent is of the Thief, whose sins were forgiven him, without
any merits either going-before, or comming-afterward. I omit David, Manasses,
Peter, Paul, Magdalene, and others.

With this faith of the remission of sins, 1. Grace.
two things are continualie joined, which although theie differ from the faith
of the remission of sins: yet can theie be separated at no time. And theie
are, to speak with the Apostle, Grace, and Gift; of which I will speak more
distinctlie, that we may the better consider, what a great blessing faith of
the free remission of sins is. Grace in this place is the very justification
of a believing man; Romans 5, 16. 19.
and from the cause is so caled. For Paul in the 5. Chapter unto the Romans
does say so, where he compares sin and grace together. The judgment came
of one offense unto condemnation: but the grace of many offenses unto
justification. And, As by the offense of one, the fault came on al men to
condemnation: So by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward al men,
to the justification of life. So that with faith of ye remission of sins,
grace, wherebie we are justified, and accepted before God, is joined: al which
are comprehended in the definition of justification. Justification what;
Which is defined to be, An absolution of him from sin that believes in
Christ, an imputation of righteousness, and a receiving unto eternal life,
freely for Christ his sake. When I say, for Christ, I include the merits of
Christ only. And although the imputatio^ of Christ his righteousness, be the
form of our justification before God: yet because these three benefits do
necessarily concur together in our justification, I have included them within
the compass of the definition.

Whosoever do either follow the righteousness of works; Against the righteousness
of works.
or compound righteousness of faith and works together, theie do pervert the
word of God. For Paul writing unto the Philippians does on this wise
distinguish the righteousness of works from the righteousness of faith.
Phil. 3, 7.
The things that were vantage unto me, 8. 9.
the same I counted loss for Christ his sake. Yea, doubtless, I think all
things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for
whom I have counted al things loss, and do judge them to be dongue, that I
might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ. What I pray could be more plainly said? Paul here compares two
righteousnesses together: one he says is manns properly, the which he
calls the righteousness of the law, it is in deed the righteousness of
man, as farre-forth as man does endeavor to fulfill the same, although he can
never perfectly fulfill the same; and it is also the righteousness of the law,
because it is required of the law: the other he says is of God, and is
obtained by faith; it is of God, because God of mere grace imputes it, and
gives it to man; and it is also through faith, for that it is obtained by
faith, Romans 10, 4.
wherbie Christ is thought to be the end of the law for righteousness unto
every one that believes. Which two righteousnesses he makes so contrary,
that together theie can not stand. For he which by the works of the law
seeks the righteousness, wherbie he may stand boldly in the presence of
God, is void of the righteousness of faith: and contrariwise who so depends
upon the righteousness of faith, does not think at all that he is justified
by the law. And although there is but one righteousness, which consists in
the perfect obedience of the law: yet in respect of the diverse manner of
justification, it is said to be twofolde. For he that discharges, and by his
works fulfilleth the law, which thing Christ only has done, is justified
after one sort: and he, which of himself fulfilleth not the law, but
believes on Christ, who has fulfilled the same, that the obedience of the
law done by Christ may be imputed unto him for righteousness, that so he
may have what the law requires, even the righteousness of the law, yea and
with righteousness life, is justified after another. So that in the manner of
obteining the righteousness of the law, the difference is. For he that does
the law, obteineth righteousness one way; and he that believes, another. And
yt mortal man can obtain the same by doing, but only by believing, Paul
shows at large, especially in his Epistles unto the Romans, Gal. and
Ephesians, that marvel it is how men can be so froward, as to resist the
manifest truth of God. Romans 3, 28.
What can be said more plainly? We conclude, that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law, To wit done of our parts? What more
evidently? Gal. 2, 21.
If righteousness be by the law, then Christ died without a cause. What more
distinctlie? Not of works, Ephesians. 2, 8. 9.
but through faith, it is the gift of God, least any man should boast
himself. Finalie what more absolutely? Romans 10, 4.
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that
believes, that is, Christ has so fulfilled the law, that every one which
believes, is righteous through his obedience. Romans 1, 16.
Again, The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes, 17.
for the just shall live by faith. In this most manifest truth, rest we our
selves, and leave we their subtilties to Sophisters, wherein they both
miserably entangle themselves, and curssedlie seduce others, that commit
themselves to such schoolmasters.

They which compounde righteousness of faith and works together, Against the
righteousness of faith and works together.
as of the parts thereof, are better liked of the unlearned, especialie of
politic men ignorant of the gospel. But the error of these even by one place
of Paul, as it were by a thunderbolt from heaven, Romans 10, 3.
we may overthrow. They being ignorant, says he, of the righteousness of
God, (that is of the righteousness of faith,) and going about to stablish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God,
that is, they are not capable of the righteousness of faith, who withal seek
righteousness from the law. For Christ is the end, that is, the fulfilling and
perfection of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes.

Faith then alone excludes all merit, and al works of man from the causes of
our justification before God; and depends upon Christ alone, who imputes
the obedience of the law to the believing man, yt he may have that which the
law requires, to wit, righteousness; which thing this argument also of Paul in
the 3. chap. unto the Galathians, does evidently confirm in these words:
Gal. 3, 11. 12.
And, that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident:
for the just shall live by faith. And the law is not of faith: but the man that
shall do those things, shall live in them. The arguments of the adversaries
against the doctrine of justification.


The adversaries now in alleging for their side against us, the Apostle
James, vary not from their old wont. For neglecting the the most constant
agreement of the whole scripture, and of all the saints, of Moses, the
prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, they wrest a doubtful saying very
subtlety against us. The true sense of S. James touching works.
The sense whereof would they seek at the occasion, and end why it was
written, they should find that James disputes not of our justification
before God, but of the declaration of our justification before men, and that
against hypocrites, who by their false, and dead faith, or shadow of faith, did
think themselves righteous; and yet in the mean while defiled themselves with all manner sins, and wickedness. The^, seeing that the word Faith is not taken
in yt sense of the Apostles Paul, and James, they do oppose themselves against
ye spirit of god, who out of their saying do seek co^trarieties. They allege
also other places, such as concern rewarding of good works; rendering to
every man according to his deeds; the blessedness promised to the poor in
spirit, to the meek, to peacemakers, to such as endure persecution etc. But
al those, and the like sayings are not contrary to our judgment, if any will
rightly distinguish between ye causes, and effects of justification, and the
qualities of the justified. For it is one thing to speak of the reward of
obedience, and of the qualities of those who are already justified through
faith; and another thing of the causes of the matter, that is of justification.
Again it is one thing, to use the words of Bernarde, to speak of the causes
of government, another of the way to the kingdom. Also it is one thing to
speak of the essential principles of a thing, another of the principles of
knowledge. But they object against us, as a strong buclar, the saying of
Christ, Mat. 19, 17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. That is, fulfill the
law. I answer: Christ showed a most ready way unto life, even the keeping
of the commandments, or fulfilling of the law. But for that the fault is in
us, that we cannot fulfill the law, Romans 10, 4.
Christ is become the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that
believes. And this is it which the same Paul says in another place, Romans 3,
31.
Through faith we establish the law, even because through belief we obtain
that which the law requires, namely righteousness.

The gift which we said is conioined with the faith of remission of sins,
Gift.
is the giving of the holy Ghost, whereby the man justified only by faith,
is regenerated, or sanctified, that is, is mortified, and quickened, and
becomes a new man, purposing thenceforwarde, as much as in him is, to order
his life according to the rule of Gods word. So that this gift, is the cause
and beginning of a new life, Luke 1, 74.
and obedience. For we are not justified freely by faith, to the end we
should henceforth live to sin, but that delivered from sin, 75.
we should serve God, in righteousness, and holiness, all the days of our
life. For Zacharias in his song makes this to be the end of the knowledge
of salvation concerning the remission of sins, through the tender mercy of
our God.

This end of justification Paul sets in the 6. unto the Romans, where by
most evident arguments he shows that sanctification is joined with
justification.

And thus much briefly touching ye grace of justification, and of the gift
of sanctification, the which are linked with the faith of remission of sins:
and can no more be severed from the same, than may heat from fire, or the
beam from the sun. Whereby it is apparent that the Papists offer us great
injury in saying, that we do abolish good works, and loase yt bridles to men,
because we say that by faith alone we are justified. For they mark not how
we do put a difference between the proper benefit of Christ, and our duty
which is joined with faith. But of justification, God willing, we will speak
more at large in the exposition of the last verse of this Psalm, the sundry
sorts of testimonies which are commonly handled in this controversy, being
distinguished.

The third place in the application of Christ we ascribed to the sacramentse,
3. How by the sacraments we may apply the sacrifice of Christ to our selves.
which not only do offer the merits of Christ, the priest, as the word
does: but also as seals do assure the^ unto us, if so be the merits of
Christ be retained fast in the hearts through faith. For as without faith the
word does not apply the merits of Christ: so without faith (I speak of the
elder sort) the sacraments do no good. The sacraments which Christ has
commended to his Church be two, Two, and no ^^oe sacraments.
to wit, Baptism, and the Lords supper: whereof baptism is a sacrament of the
entrance into Christianity, Baptism why but once ministered to man, and what
i^ signifies.
and therefore is but once taken, as Christ died but once for us. For as
baptism is an effectual token of the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ: so is it a sacrament of the covenant, which God entereth-into with the
baptized, touching ye purging of sins, and our reconciliation through Christ;
so is it also a sign of repentance, and of the cross, and a testimony of the
resurrection to come.

And the Lord his supper is a sacrament of the confirmation and conservation of
Christianity; The L. Supper what is signifies; why often received.
yea and a remembrance of the covenant established through the blood of Christ.
Furthermore it is the meat whereby we are spiritualie nourished in the body
of Christ, and therefore often it ought to be received. The sum of al is
this, that the sacrament of the new testament is both an external sign of
the covenant concerning our free justification before God through the sacrifice
of Christ; and also a testifying, and confirmation of the faith, and
righteousness of Gods people to him ward.

CHAP. 40.
Of the perpetual use of the sacrifice of Christ both in the conscience; in the
whole course of our life; and at the hour of death.
AND although the use of the sacrifice of Christ, is well nigh seen in the
application: yet the efficacy and power thereof is more apparent, when the
knoweledge is reduced unto practice as it were. This practice has place in the
conscience of every man; in the whole course of life; and at the agony of
death.

The conscience of each man is stricken sore with a deadly wound, The
conscience healed by the sacrifice of Christ.
until it be healed by the application of physike, with Christ alone the
Physician does minister by his word and spirit. Mar. 2. 17.
In which respect he calls himself the Physician of souls. So yt when the
conscience is stricken with ye remembrance of sin, it must be healed by the
faith of Christ his sacrifice: which if it be lively; it be sprinckeleth the
conscience with the most comfortable balm of the holy spirit, wherewithal it
is healed, and made quiet, so that now it is iocound, and merry, and reioiceth
as it were in the cross of Christ, whereas before it was troubled and greatly
vexed. Whence proceeds that saying of the triumphing conscience in Bernard:
Of the remission of sins, says he, I have an undoubted argument, even the
passion of Christ. For the voice of his blood cries more shrillie, than did
the blood of Habel, crying in the hearts of the elect, the forgiveness of
all sins. For he was betrayed for our offenses. And no doubt, his death is of
more power, and more effectual to help us, than our sins to hurt us. Such a
conscience is neither broken with the threats of the law, (for it knows
how it is not under the law, but under grace;) nor yields to the suggestions
of satan (for it knows, how the Prince of this world is already
condemned;) nor is moved with the arguments of reason (for it knows the
power of him which has promised, and therefore glorifieth him. Phil 3, 20.
) To conclude it rests quietly in Christ, 21.
looking for a full redemption through the coming of the Son of God, who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body
for evermore.

Whence this same confidence of the healed and quiet conscience does arise, the
epistle unto the Hebrews teaches, where it is said, We are assured that we
have a good conscience in all things, Heb. 13, 18.
desiring to live honestly. Therefore as the cause and foundation of a good
conscience, is not our own worthiness (for by nature we are sinners, and
unworthy;) nor merits (for of our selves we deserve nothing but death; Esai.
64, 6.
) nor any virtue of our own (for all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes)
but even mere faith in Christ which purges it by his blood from dead works,
through whom we have peace with God: Heb. 9, 14.
So the purpose of the same is in all things, Romans 5, 1.
with all men, and in all actions to walk vprightlie, namely by declining
from that which is evil, and doing that which is good. For continualie it
thinks upon a new life in Jesus Christ; it always detesteth the coat
defiled of the flesh; and evermore delights in that white garment which in
Baptism is put on. Gal. 3, 17.
For all we that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Which thing
David in the spirit did behold, when he said, Wash me, Psalm. 51, 7.
and I shall be whiter than snow, to wit, through the ornament of righteousness
of the Messiah, as with a most white garment, being first purged from sin
through his blood. Of this faith and conscience that sin is blotted-out,
arises a care of well-doing in David, according to that, Psalm. 119, 112.
I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statuts alwaie, even unto the end. And
Paul says, 1. Tim. 1, 18. 19.
Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience.

In the whole course of this life, we may behold a goodly, and an especial
use of the sacrifice of Christ, not only in adversity, but also in
prosperity. In adversity there is none so good a remedy as ye sacrifice of
Christ. For as adversity does put thee in mind of thy sin, either lurking,
or manifest: so the sacrifice of Christ apprehended by faith, does certify thy
conscience both of the forgiveness of sins, whereof arises spiritual comfort in all affliction; and also of the conformity of the elect with the son of God.
For so it has pleased the wisdom of God, that he will have his elect like to
his son, but in the cross, and also in glory. 2. Tim. 2, 12
And this Paul affirms, saying, If we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. Hitherto also makes the imitation of Christ his example in the
cross, which Peter commends unto us in these words: 1. Pet. 2, 21.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an ensample that we should follow his
steps. Read mine annotations upon the 2. chapter of the first epistle of
Peter.

In prosperity there is more danger. For albeit adversity do bring-done
many: yet prosperity does puffe-vp more. According to this of the Poet, The
minds of man through prosperity wax wanton oftentimes; The mind of a godly
wise man in prosperity.
Again, The mind lifted-vp through prosperity, remembers neither death, nor
what may happen, nor any measure at al. What then shall a godly man do in
this case? Four things he shall do. First let him way with himself the
things which are called prosperous in this world; and consider what they are in
them selves; Secondarilie, let him think what a perilous thing it is to enioie
prosperity, if the mind be not godly disposed; Thirdly, let him compare all the commodities of this world, with the blessedness to come, which Christ has
purchased for us by his death; and last of al, let him advisedly consider,
whether it be more behoueful to enioie prosperity of this life with hazard of
the soul, than to renounce them, if occasion serve, for Christ his sake.
Therefore seeing our flesh is ticled, and like a wild horse begins to winch
by prosperity, let a godly man think with himself, first, how uncertain,
brittle, mortal, temporal, fleting, and transitory ye prosperity of this
world is, which many enioieng at their hearts desire, be for all that in very
deed most miserable: secondly, let him think yt it has more deceit than
pleasure. For the pleasure which arises thereof, is like a serpent murdering
the soul; counsailing proudly and va^elie; even the spirit of covetousness,
and gluttony. This serpent lurking in the most secret corners of the mind,
seeks not but even destruction. Whereby it is apparent that prosperity does
more hurt the mind, than does adversity the body. Thirdly, let a godly
man think with himself that so great ods there is between the felicity
which Christ has purchased for his beloved, and the prosperity of this
world; as is between a minute of an hour, and eternity, between death and
life, between misery and happiness. For as the prosperity of this life,
depends upon a reed: so the happiness promised in Christ is vpholden by the
everlasting truth of God, that it is impossible that they should be deceived
of their hope, which continue in the fear of God unto their lives end.
Fourthlie, of these things let a godly man gather, how it is a much better,
and blessed thing to renounce worldly goods, as far as godly and
christianity they stand not according to Gods word, tha^ for the^ to bring the
soul into ye danger of damnation. To conclude that we be neither puffed-vp,
nor carried-quite from God by prosperity, there is no such thing, as to call
into mind the humiliation of the son of God upon the cross, who therefore
was humbled, that he might exalt us, if so be we do humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God, and are not ashamed of the cross of Christ. 1. Pet. 5, 6.
For whosoever exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he that humbles
himself, Luk 14, 11.
shall be exalted. We are therefore to take special heed, least our flesh
through prosperous success of things, do deceive and kill us being taken with a
certain bait. For that serpent which beguiled Euah of his subtlety,
snatcheth every occasion to withdraw us from Christ, 1. Cor. 1, 26.
and sets upon the principal part of man, to destroy it with prosperity.
And therefore says Paul, Brethren you see your calling, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. For
to the destruction of man satan abuses these three things, namely wisdom,
power, and nobility, (of which springs both the pleasure of the body, and
the pride of mind,) which if the foolish once get, they think themselves
happy and blissed me^. So then against this tentation oppose ye cross of
Christ, without which al wisdom is but mere foolishness; all might is but
weakness; all nobility is but ignominy; and all pleasure is but the food of
death. For all these mixed with too much bitterness, have an end with this life.
If therefore thou would have true wisdom, Col. 2, 3.
true might, true nobility, true pleasure and glory, seek them in Christ
alone, and thou shall find, in whom are hid all the treasures of celestial
restes.

To conclude, at the point of death, the sight of the priest Christ with his
sacrifice takes away all fear of death; and makes a man no more to dread
death than a sweet sleep. Whereof it is that a godly man desires death even
as a passage out of these miseries unto everlasting life. Then shall he find the
saying of Christ to be true, John. 8, 52.
If a man keep my word, he shall never taste death. Hence proceeds yt
willingness in many of the Martyrs, who had in mind Christ not only that
died, but also yt did rise again, by whose power we shall be raised unto
immortality; and our souls in the mean space, even until the day of the
last judgment shall possess the ioies of heaven with the chaste spirits, and
then joined to their bodies shall enioie the sight of God, and immortal glory
for ever and ever. And therefore it is not without just cause, Reave. 14, 13
said both in the Revelation, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; and
also by David, Psa. 116, 15
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

Thus hitherto we have spoken concerning the propitiatory sacrifice of
Christians, and of such things as do seem to make for the plane declaration of
the same: now we are briefly to speak of the other sacrifice of Christians,
which they call Euchatistical.

CHAP. 41.
1. Of the Priests of the new Testament, how they be consecrated; 2. the
covenant between God, and them; 3. The excellency of the Priesthood; 4. What
is Eucharistical sacrifice; 5. Why so called; 6. The kinds thereof; 7.
Ministers of the Gospel, why and how Priests.
THE Apostle Peter applied to such as do convert both from the Jews and the
Gentiles, Exodus 19, 5.
the promise of the Lord which is in the 19. of Exodus, to this purpose: If
ye will hear my voice in deed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my
chief treasure, above al people, though all the earth be mine. 9*
Ye shall be also unto me a kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye may shew-forth the virtues of him that has caled
you out of darkness into his marvelous light. Out of these words, to omit other
places, it is manifest, that all Christians be Priests to offer sacrifices of
thanksgiving and praise unto God.

First therefore it is to be noted, Ephesians. 2, 3.
that as by nature we be sinners, and the children of wrath: So by our own
strength, worthiness, and merits we can challenge nothing at Gods hand. And
therefore, as by that only sacrifice of Christ, we be reconciled: so of his
goodness we enter into the order of priests, and are consecrated to him for to
dedicate our selves, and al ours unto the glory of God.

This our inauguration into ye priesthood, How Christians are made priests.
because it is merlie spiritual and internal, is wroght by a secret manner, how
it may be declared, after a sort by co^paring the truth unto ye shadow. As
then they which were to be made priests out of the tribe of Leui, did first of
al wash their bodies with water; secondly, put upon them the garments
appointed of God; thirdly did anoint their heads; and fourthlie filled their
hands: so they which shall be priests in the new Testament be spiritual
ordained. For first the high priest eue^ Christ, does wash them both with water
and blood; Ephesians. 5, 26.
He cleanses us, says Paul, by the washing of water through the word, (to
wit, of God instituting, and ordaining baptism:) and Ioh. in the Revelation
says, He has loved us, Revel. 1, 5. 6.
and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us kings and Priests
unto God even his father. Secondly, the same Christ adorneth us with spiritual
garments, much whiter and cleaner than those Leuitical garments. Romans 6, 3.
For so Paul says: Alyee that are baptized into Christ, have put-on Christ.
And having him upon us, Gal. 3, 27.
we seem white, that is righteous and holy in the sight of God. Of this
apparel the Psalm means, where it is said, Psalm. 132, 9.
Let thie priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thie saints rejoice.
Thirdly theie are anointed not with material, and fleeting oil, as Leuitical
priests, but with inward, spiritual and immortal. 2. Cor. 1, 21.
Whereof Paul speaks, saying, It is God who establishes us with you in
Christ, 22.
and has anointed us. Who has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of
the spirit in our hearts. Of this ointment wherewith Christ annointeth us,
we be called Christians, and Priests, and Kings, and Prophets. Marvelous is
the force of this spiritual unction.

For as the nature of the oil, wherewithal the Priests of the old Law were
anointed, is to shine and to burn: so the holy Spirit, wherebie we are
anointed for Priests, both lighteneth our minds, and sets our hearts on
fire; that both the mind may understand what is good, and behooueful, and the
heart zealouslie covet after the same. And this comes to pass, when through
faith conceived by the preaching of the word, we be ravished wholly with
admiration of the great mercy of God, who has called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2, 9.
Last of al, theie fill their hands, that is, theie show themselves ready to
offer unto the Lord.

For now they are no more their own men, but consecrated to God theie
surcesse to live, and theie dedicate all the actions of their life unto the
service of God.

And being thus ordained, The covenant between God and Christians Priests.
we have a certain covenant also concluded between God and us; what that is I
will show out of the words of Malachie: The words of the Prophet are these, My
covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear, Mal. 2, 5.
and he feared me, and was afraid before my name. 6.
The law of truth was in his mouth, and there was none iniquity found in his
lips; he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity. 7.
For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and theie should seek the
law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

And although the Prophet here speaks of the Leuitical priests: yet it is
fitly applied also to al Christians, who are in the sight of God, much more
excellent priests, being roial, than were the Leuitical. Out of which words
of the Prophet, the form of the covenant may thus be made. As the Lord
promises life and peace: so does he require also fear through faith. For as
in all couenantes there is a mutual obligation: so here too God promises peace
and life, which two things are opposed against the wrath of God, and
everlasting death. But the parts of the covenant, in respect of our selves are
many in this place, Paries of the covenant between God and Christian Priests.
which naturalie do hang together. The first whereof is a sincere fear of God
springing of Faith, which the Prophet means when he says: The beginning of
wisdom is the fear of the Lord. Psa. 111. 10.
Again, The holy fear of the Lord endures for ever. The second the law of
truth in his mouth, that is true, holy, and sound doctrine. And although
every Christian may not teach publicly: yet is it necessary that all
Christians do both know, and confess too the doctrine of Christ.

The third; and there is none iniquity found in his lips, that is, he
shunneth false and forged doctrine, yea and abhors as the pestilence
whatsoever comes not from the mouth of the Lord. And therefore Christ says
to all: Beware of false Prophets. Matt. 7, 15.
The fourth, He walked in peace and equity, that is, he studied to order his
life according to the rule of my justice, by keeping peace, and equity with
his neighbors. And this part of the covenant Christ also and the Apostles do
apply to all Christians. The fifte, He turned many away from iniquity, to
wit both by word, by deed, and by example, and this every man will grant al
Christians ought to do. To conclude, as God promises life and peace: so we are
bound again to him through faith and obedience.

Moreover with the priesthood of Christians many things are joined, which
make much for the knowledge of the dignity, and excellency thereof. But the
special things are which Peter numbreth-vp, to wit, that Christians are, 1.
Pet. 2, 5.
a spiritual house, a holy, and a roial Priesthood, 9.
a chosen generation, an holy nation, a peculiar people, and that which
passes al, Romans 9, 26.
that theie are, and be called the children of the living God. Of this
excellent dignity of Christians, John 1, 12.
John speaks, when he says, To them that believe in his name, he gave power
to be the sons of God. Which sentence is both truly and elegantlie brought
into these Verses, by Nonnus: (...)
(...).


That is, to express them in a manner word for word: One happy state of
heavenly bliss to al gave he;
That sons of everlasting God, theie might called be.


This honor which none sufficiently can commend, ought both to reclaim us
from al filthiness unseemly for the temple of God, unseemly for roial
priests, unseemly for a chosen generation, for an holy nation unseemly,
unseemly for the peculiar people, and sons of God; and to provoke us also
unto the service of God, and continualie to offer acceptable sacrifice to God,
through Jesus Christ. For of right our consecration into the priesthood of
Christ does require the same.

Because we are priests to offer sacrifices, not propitiatory, which belonged
only to Jesus Christ the hie priest; but Eucharistical, and those perpetual.

Wherefore, as the Levites at certain days, and appointed hours did offer
according unto the Law of Moses, and after waited until their turn came,
after the Ecclesiastical ordinance of David: So are not Christian priests to
intermitte sacrifice, but continualie, and without ceassing theie must have full
hands, and offer continual sacrifice unto the Lord.

What is Eucharistical sacrifice? Eucharisticall sacrifice what;
The Eucharistical sacrifice of Christians is every action, and passion
commanded of God, separated from the profane actions and passions of the world
through says, wherewithal as seasoned with salt, it is inflamed and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, as by fire from heaven, and through the merit
of Christ is accepted of God into glory through ye same Jesus Christ. And
this is called an Eucharistical sacrifice from the proper end thereof; because
it is an oblation of our thankfulness. For being reconciled to God, through the
propitiatory sacrifice of Christ, we offer to him our obedience, we honor, and
praise him, and continualie give him thanks.

For Christ being apprehended by faith, gives the holy Ghost, which creates
a new heart within us, and a willing mind, wherebie we offer this our
gratefulnes to God.

Now it is necessary that we consider why our obedience is called a
sacrifice. For the opening of this phraze will notably stir us up unto the
study of obedience. The works of Christians why called a sacrifice.
So then the works of Christians are called sacrifices by a certain relation
unto the sacrifices of the old Jews. For as theie were commanded from heaven
to the Priests, were chosen, applied, sanctified, and accepted: so in our
sacrifices it is necessary that there be a commandment, a choice, an
application, a sanctification, and that they be accepted of God. In ye old law
it was not lawful to offer a sow, or any unclean beast by the law but only
such as were clean according to the law: So the works that Christians should
offer, must not be unclean, that is either forbidden by the word of God, or
hypocritical, or superstitious; but such as GOD commands. Therefore the Lord
says by the Prophet: Walk in my statutes. Secondly, as the clean lamb
which should be offered, was separated from the rest of the flock: So by faith
our works are to be separated from the like works of profane people. The
Pharisee gave alms, so did Cornelius the Courtier: yet was the Pharisees alms
unclean, and the courtiers clean, because through faith it was separated from
the alms of the Pharisee. Thirdly, as the ceremonial sacrifice was applied to
the altar by the hand of the priest being laid there-vpon: so our works shall
be applied to the altar through Christ, by whose handling they are sanctified.
Fourthlie, as those old sacrifices were consumed with fire from heaven and
sanctified, and so accepted: so our sacrifices through the merit of Christ,
inflamed by the holy Ghost, are sanctified with fire from heaven, and are
accepted through Christ, as Peter says. For seeing al our own obedience is
imperfect, and in every work we offend partly by omitting somewhat, partly
by doing more than we ought (for at no time our obedience is perfect, and full)
it cannot be that our sacrifices of themselves should please God. Wherefore as
through the merit of Christ theie are sanctified: so also through Christ, as
Peter says, theie are acceptable. For Christ makes our obedience grateful,
and deserves, that our obedience both in the cross, and also in the law of
sacrifice is commended. So yt our sacrifices please not in respect of any
excellency of merit, but through Christ, in who^ God waieth our works, yt he
may accept them as most worthy sacrifices. For as the faulty sacrifice of
the old people, which came to the altar through error, and touched ye altar,
was not changed for a better, but was taken as purged, and holy by reason it
had touched the holy place: so our works, albeit theie are very faulty, yet
become theie clean, and apt for holy sacrifice, and acceptable to GOD
through touching our altar Christ, who through faith is touched. And although
the sum of the doctrine of the Christians sacrifices may be understood, by
that which is spoken: yet to make it the more evident, we will more particularly
entreat of them, that it may appear how theie agree together, and follow
each of other.

Among the sacrifices of Christians in the first place, Kinds of Eucharistical
sacrifices.
is the offering of our selves, which is done in Baptism, and answers to the
washing which was used at the consecration of Leuitical Priests. 1. We offer
sacrifice as Baptism.
For through baptism we are visiblie, and sacramentalie severed from the
profane world, applied to God, laid upon the altar Jesus Christ, and
sanctified both by renouncing the devil and al his works, and by promising due
obedience unto God for the advancement of his glory.

In the second place of the elder sort, 2. Christians do offer sacrifice when
theie daily crucify their wicked affections.
there is required a continual, and perpetual oblation as it were, wherebie we
offer our selves wholly, and all that we have, unto God. Of this sacrifice
speaks Paul, where he says, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God,
that ye giue-vp your bodies a living sacrifice, Romans 13, 1.
holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving of God; and
fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by the renewing
of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, acceptable, and
perfect. In these words Paul does notably express what it was that shadowed
the sacrifices of the old law. For as the burnt-sacrifices did wholly savor
of the holy fire: so our minds must be wholly inflamed by the holy Ghost,
which is the heavenly fire; that both whatsoever is of the flesh, may by
little and little be consumed, and be brought unto dead ashes, as it were, and
that which is spiritual and of the mind, may be made truly spiritual and
heavenly, thorough the force of that celestial fire. A shadow whereof was the
prohibition to eat porke and the killing beasts* For as porke betokens
uncleanness, from which we must abstain; and beasts killed did signify that
beastly affections should be killed: So the mind and will must be renewed,
that it may allow, choose, and do such things as please God. And because al
sacrifices of Christians ought to be seasoned by faith as with salt, and laid
upon the altar, which is Christ, therefore Paul being justified through faith,
commends this kind of sacrifice. Here would be noted how fitly the name of
sacrifice agrees hereunto, and how aptly Paul does apply the same. First
he requires that we separat our selves through faith from ye profane
gentiles, Romans 12, 2.
when he says; Fashion not your selves like unto this world; Secondly he will
have us to be applied to god, when he says, But be ye changed by the renewing
of your mind, which change is made through the spirit of regeneration;
Thirdly, he will have us to give up our selves a living sacrifice upon our
only Altar, which is Christ. For as in the earthly Jerusalem there was
only but one Altar for Sacrifices: So likewise in the heavenly there is but
one, upon which we do offer, when we depend upon the merit of Christ that
our Sacrifice may be holy, and acceptable unto GOD, which we said was to
have the fourth place in our Sacrifices. But what is the cause why GOD
requreth this kind of Sacrifice at our hands? It is necessary that as sin
made us mortal, so we likewise slaie sin, by the virtue of Christ his death,
yea, and kill wicked affections in our selves. For if Christ on our behalf
would so do* how much more are we bound for his sake willingly to offer
this Sacrifice? Romans 6, 10.
In that he died, says the Apostle, He died once to sin: but in that he
lives, 11.
he lives to GOD. Likewise think ye also, that ye are dead to sin, but
are alive to GOD in Jesus Christ our LORD. This death of sin is caled of
Christ, Luke 9, 23.
A denying of our selves; of Paul, A Sacrifice. Romans 12, 1.
How necessary now this kind of Sacrifice is, Christ shows in saying,
Luke 9, 23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daielie, and follow me.

The third place among the Sacrifices of Christians I ascribe unto the
Sacrifice of praise: 3. Christia^^ do offer sacrifice when theie praise God.
which ought not to be separated from the former. Of this mention is made in
the Psalm: Psalm. 50, 23* 14.
He that offers praise, shall glorify me; Again, Offer unto GOD praise. And
the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 14, 3.
We will render the calves of our lips. Then we do offer the Sacrifice of
praise, when we acknowledge God to be the fountain of al good things; and
when by our confession we praise and glorify him. By which kind of Sacrifice
the flesh is bereaved of al glory of deserte, wisdom, righteousness,
power, etc. and it is ascribed to God alone. Which is then rightly offered
when through faith that praise is separated from the praise of the Pharisee,
and through the same faith is brought unto GOD, and laid upon our Altar, that
is, depends upon the merit of Christ; wherbie it is acceptable and grateful
to God. A part of this sacrifice I made confession of the faith, especialie in
ye time of persecution, which confession is necessary in four respects.
Confession of the faith in the time of persecution, why necessary;
First, that God may be honored; Secondly, that the truth may be defended;
Thirdly, that the godly may be confirmed; Lastly, that the wicked through
the constancy of Christians may be converted, and saved. For these causes
Paul says, Romans 10, 10.
That with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

In the fourth place set we the sacrifice of prayer; 4. Christians do
sacrifice when theie pray.
which was signified by the perfume of the old Law, as David interprets it,
when he says: Psalm. 14, 2.
Let my prayer be directed in thie sight as incense; and the lifting-vp of my
hands, as an evening sacrifice. Revel. 5, 8.
And John in the Revelation; The Elders had seven phials full of odors, which
are the prayers of the Saints. Mich. 6, 6.
And the Prophet Micheas does say, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? 8.
and, He will that thou humble thy knee. Prayer then made in the knowledge, and
faith of the Son of God, is said to be a sacrifice more sweet than any
incense. The name of sacrifice does therefore agree to the prayer of
Christians, because through faith it is separated from the prayers both of
Jews, Turks, and other profane people; and by the same it is brought, and
presented before God, and laid-vpon the altar Christ, while it depends upon
his merit, and is set on fire by an ardent affection of the holy Ghost.
Whereby it is acceptable before God, and hearkened-vnto.

In the fifth place follows the sacrifice of repentance. 5. Christians do
offer sacrifice to God when theie repent unfeignedly.
For seeing the Saints do daily offend, they have need daily to repent,
whereby they both acknowledge their own faults; and flee-backe through faith
unto their propitiation; and endeavor afterward to keep themselves from al
pollution of wickedness. So David having committed adultery, did vnfeignedlie
repent, and offered to God the sacrifice of a co^trite spirit, Psalm. 51, 17.
and of an humbled mind. For so he says: The sacrifices of God are a contrite
spirit; a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Isai. 57,
15.
And in Isaiah the Lord says; I dwell with him that is of a contrite and
humble spirit. Again, Isai. 66* 2,
To him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrie spirit, and
trembles at my words. This contrition, and this humiliation I take to be
inward, namely when we are truly touched with the sense of sin, and
unfeignedly are humbled under the mighty hand of God, who threateneth
everlasting wrath, and malediction for our sins. This power of the word of
God Jeremiah the Prophet, shows by a double comparison, in these words: Is
not my word like a fire, says the Lord; and like an hammar, Iere. 23, 29.
that breaks the stone? Moreover, this contrition of the heart, and this
humiliation is then an holy sacrifice to the honor of God, when through faith
it is separated from worldelie sorrow, such as Cains, Achitophels, and Judas
was, and when by the same faith it is laid upon the altar Christ, by whose
merit it is sanctified, and accepted, as we see in David. For he in the
midst of al his vexations of mind, ran unto the mercy of God, and
believed how his sin was pardoned through the sacrifice of Christ. This
kind of sacrifice proposes plentiful store of comfort before the eyes of
miserable sinners, which are griued with the heavy burden of their sins.
For when it tells the sinner that a contrite and a sorrowful heart is in the
nostrils of God as a sacrifice of sweet incense, it evidently shows both
that our repentance pleases God; and that GOD earnestly requires the same;
and that he will also receive such as unfeignedly repent into favor again. Let
us therefore beware that with Caine we say not, Mine inquitie is greater then
Gods mercy: but with Augustine rather, Thou lie Caine; for greater is Gods
mercy, then the iniquity of al sinners. And therefore let us offer unto God
the sacrifice of a contrite and broken heart, contrite with the hammer of the
Law; broken under the mighty hand of GOD; and let us believe that God for
his Christ's sake does truly pardon such as by true repentance forsake their
sins.

Let the sixth kind of sacrifice be obedience in the cross, 6. Christians do
sacrifice, when theie suffer affliction patiently.
and in every outward affliction. This obedience is likewise adorned with the
name of sacrifice, that we may know how God likes very well thereof. For, as
the obedience of Christ in the cross was a grateful sacrifice to God: so our
obedience in all troubles pleases God, not for it self, but in respect of
faith, whereby it is severed from the punishments of the ungodly, is laid upon
the altar Christ, through touching of whom, it is sanctified, and accepted of
God. So Job separateth his affliction through faith from the afflictions of the
wicked world, and presents it before God* and burns it upon the altar
Christ; while he depends upon the merit Christ, which he testifies he did,
in these words; Job. 19, 25.
I am sure that my Redeemer lives, which were the words of Faith, whereby
Jobs obedience v^der the cross was seasoned as with salt.

The seventh sacrifice of Christians, 7. The seventh sacrifice of Christians,
righteousness in conversation.
may be of righteousness, according to that: Offer the sacrifice of
righteousness. By righteousness I understand both general, and particular
righteousness, whereby the public welfare is sought. Psalm. 4, 5.
The Lord prefers mercy before the sacrifices of the old law, when he
says: I desired mercy, Hos 6, 6.
and not sacrifice. And in the Epistle unto the Hebrews; Heb 13, 16.
To do good, and to distribute forget not: for with such sacrifices, God is
pleased. Under this kind the chastity of Joseph is comprehended. For Joseph
his chastity thorough faith, differs from the chastity of Zenocrates, and
through the same, he brings it before GOD, and seasoned with the salt of
faith, he puts it upon the altar Christ: whereby it is both sanctified, and
accepted of God, and adorned with great rewards.

The sacrifice of each man's calling occupies the eight place. The 8. sacrifice
of Christians.
For when the lawful calling of every man is zealouslie exercised, through
faith unto the glory of GOD, and profit of mankind, it is a piece of
justice, which God vouchsafes the name of sacrifice. Scipio fights for his
country, and also David fights for his country: but David's wars enioined
him of God, differ from the wars of Scipio; and for the Messiahs sake
promised, he believes his warlike pains are grateful, and acceptable to God.

Beside the above numbered kinds of sacrifices, which are common to al
Christians, of what state or degree soever they be, there is one more peculiar
to the Ministers of the Gospel. Whereof Paul speaks after this manner: Romans
15, 15
Grace is given me of God, that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ, 16.
toward the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the
Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost. Here Paul
alluding unto the mysteries which were ministered by the Leuitical Priests,
says, he does minister the Gospel of God, that is, does make him self a
Priest in the ministry of the Gospel, while he brings the hearers of the
Gospel, from the wickedness of the world, makes them to obeie the will of God,
lays them upon the altar Christ, by whose blood theie be purified, by whose
obedience justified, and by whose spirit theie are sanctified, that their
sacrifice may be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Now seeing the like
reason is of all the ministers of the Gospel, and the same end, namely to
bring men unto Christ, having renounced the vngodlines^ of the world, that
through the holy spirit theie may be sanctified, to the end their oblation
may be holy and accepted of God through Christ, it is manifest that theie
may fitly be called Priests, by which title both theie themselves are put in
mind of the dignity of their ministry, of the efficacy of the word, and of
the courage of mind and constancy that is required in so great a place; and
the hearers to receive much comfort, while theie perceive that their obedience
toward the Gospel is set forth with the title of sacrifice. Wherebie we may
understand how grateful the conversion of sinners, The ministers of the Gospel
how and when priests.
is before God. As often therefore as the ministers of the Gospel through sound
doctrine either do convert Infidels unto Christ, or revoke such as go astraie,
or lift up those which were fallen, or convince ye obstinate, or finalie awake
such as are secure and sluggish, theie do the office of gods priests, and may
rightly be caled the priests of God. Who as the Leuitical priests under one
hie priest, so theie under one Christ, the only propiciatorie sacrifice, do
solemnize the holy mysteries, teaching the Gospel of Christ. But then and not
before deserve theie this honorable title, when both by sound doctrine and holy
conversation theie set upon the kingdom of Satan, and build up of the temple
of God* For it belongs unto the ministers of God not only by words to
teach, but also by good works to give light unto others, that therbie, namely
through synceritie of doctrine, and innocence of life, as it were by two
torches, they may conduct me^ out of ye kingdom of darkness into ye kingdom
of light. So that theie are, as to teach the truth of the gospel by words, so
to express the same by their lives, that outwarlie men may behold that with
their eyes in example, which by voice is uttered for the edification of their
minds. For when theie teach truly, but live wickedlie, theie become guilty of
most horrible sins. For theie bring the gospel into contempt with the
adversaries of the same; theie make but a mock at Christ; theie condemn
themselves while theie teach others; theie overthrow themselves, while theie
do comfort others, theie slaie themselves, while theie threaten others; and
finalie whereas theie should be examples to the flock, 1. Pet. 5, 3.
theie infecte them with most contagious diseases. I ouer-passe here that most
bitter reprehension in ye 50. Psalm, wherebie the Lord himself does sharply
take-vp these profane teachers; the words be these: Psalm. 50, 16
But unto the wicked said God, what have thou to do to declare mine
ordinances, that thou should take my couenantes in thie mouth, 17
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee?
Wherefore let both such as have taken upon them this holy calling, and such
also as in time to come are to be called thereunto, consider, what a great
account theie shall render to God, if, forgetting the honor wherewithal God
has adorned them, theie discharge not their office faithfully, both by
teaching syncerelie, and living virtuouslie: contrariewise, what great and most
ample rewards God will impart upon them, if with that zeal, and godliness, which
God requires of the^, theie do their duties as Daniel writes, Theie that be
wise, 1 Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many unto
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Proceed we now.

CHAP. 42.
1. Of true happiness, what it is; 2. The steps thereunto; 3. Where the
souls are, being separated from the bodies, and the happy state of the life
to come; 4. Against the vain imaginations of the Philosophers, concerning the
true happiness; 5. Who dwell in the House of God; 6. How God is served in his
House; 7. The perpetuity of the same; 8. With the use of the 4. verse.
The fourth verse. BLESSED ARE THEIE WHICH DWELL IN THINE HOUSE, FOR EVER AND
EVER THEIE WILL PRAISE THEE.
THis verse teaches us three things. The sum of this verse.
First how the Church of God, is happy and blessed; Secondly, what special
service God requires of the Church; Thirdly, that the Church is immortal, and
shall everlastingly continue, which agrees with the first verse. And because
above upon the first verse we have spoken of the House of God (which is the
Church) I will not in this place discourse thereof at large.

But because this verse makes mention of Blessedness, which thing man through
the instinct of nature desires (and is called of the Philosophers with one
consent eudaimonia, and of divines sometime felicity, and sometime blessedness, I
think it good in this place to speak somewhat touching the true felicity of
man: for which he was both at the first created, and afterward redeemed. And
this is evidently to be seen both by our creation after the Image of our God,
and also by the restoring of that same Image through Christ. And although al
men do grant, that the end of man's nature, is to atteine a perfect state,
which being atteined, it is judged perfect and blessed: yet foulie have diverse
Philosophers erred in defining this perfect state of man, wherein the true
felicity does consist. So that diverse and manifold are the opinions of the
Philosophers therabout: al which Platoes only excepted, shall come to nothing,
when we have set down ye true definition of happiness, and showen for what
thing chiefly man is borne.

Forasmuch as a miserable man and a blessed are contrary, Who truly happy.
it cannot be doubted, but he rightly and truly may be caled happy, who is
not only without al sense of trouble, and sorrow, and dreadeth none evil to
come, but also which does so abound with store of al good things, that he can
desire no more, being sure perpetually to possess the good things wherewith
he does abound. This is the definition of absolute and perfect happiness:
now whosoever binds himself with a right course to atteine the same, is called
happy, in respect of the event. By which definition it appears, God
principalie and through himself happy.
how God principally and indeed through himself, is happy. For, as he
through himself is subject to no misery at al, and void of al fear of evil:
so he abounds with all good things. (for he is even goodness it self) and
dreadeth no change. Secondarilie, because God has fashioned man after his
own image, his will is that man should be blessed through participatio^ of his
blessedness. For, as the principal and chief beauty of a godly body is in the
lively, and true face indeed; and next in the image and picture which does
represent the body: So man's nature, which is the image and portraiture of
supernal happiness, is then happy indeed, when it inioieth the possession of
this happiness; which doubtless is not frail, fleeting, or temporary, but
of continuance, perpetual, and everlasting. Wherefore one may rightly define
that to be ye end of man, End of man what.
which makes him perfect and blessed. The conditions of which end are diverse,
as that it is proper to man; that it belongs to al men that beside the same
nothing is to be desired; that it is void of al trouble; that it is eternal;
and need not be feared that it can be taken away.

Now that the true blessedness of man consists in this end, it is manifest
out of the word of God, which does testify how man was created after the
image of God, and placed in Paradise. Which thing may be seen also in ye
natural appetite of every man. For as Cicero says, Fall of man.
we al would be blessed. But because our first parents through their free will
did sin, yielding to the suggestions of Satan, in them and with them we fell
from this state of happiness. For as the Prophet says, Our iniquities have
separated between us and our God. So that through sin we are become of
blessed extreemelie miserable, and so blind, that of our selves we can
neither see, nor understand the perfect state of man's nature for which it was
created. And hereof sprang so many opinions of ye blind Philosophers touching
the true happiness, in all ages. Wherefore God, of his infinite goodness, taking
pity upon us, sent his Son the very image of his own substance, yt
through him we might recover the image after which we were made. For this his
Son shows the ready way, wherebie we may return unto ye happiness which
was lost, the image of God being repaired within us; wherebie as John writes,
1. John 3, ^.
we shall be like to God for evermore, being joined to ye chiefest blessedness,
namely to God himself, in whom who so does abide without doubt he shall
everlastingly be blessed, that is, be without al manner grief, and fear of
trouble, and shall abound with goodness and glory, for ever and ever.

But what? An objection.
says not our Lord, Blessed are theie that mourn, Matthew. 5, 4. 10.
Blessed are theie which suffer persecution? Certainly where mourning is and
persecution, there also trouble is, and want of good things, and fear of
greater misery.

I answer: 2. Tim. 2, 12
we must distinguish between the way unto happiness, and the full fruition of
the same. While we live in this world, we are in the way either toward
endless misery or eternal blessedness; but our bodies being raised again,
we shall be either everlastingly miserable, or everlastingly blessed. And
thereof the state of our life is said to be either happy, or wretched in
respect of the event. For which cause there is no truer happiness of this life,
than that which begins everlasting happiness, and no truer misery than yt
which leads unto everlasting misery. Wherefore, Christ saieing yt such as
mourn are blessed; and yt such are blessed as suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, speaks of them which are in ye way to everlasting
blessedness, which afterward they shall perfectly inioie, when toge with the
son of God, 2. Tim. 2, 1^
with whom theie have suffered in the death, theie shall reign in heaven.
Wherebie it is apparent, what those phrazes of speech do mean, in which
godly men are called blessed, namely because theie are in the way, and
go-forward unto that happiness, which theie begin in this world. Therefore says
David, Psalm. 119, 1.
Blessed are they which are upright in the way. And for instruction sake there
may four steps of this way be set-downe; of which in order we will entreat.

The first step, The first step unto heaven.
is to have, and to hear the word of God, that is, the Law, and the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. By the one, namely the Law, we learn how miserable we are
through sin, Isai. 5*
which has separated between us, and our God, the fountain of true
happiness; by the other, to wit, the Gospel, how blessed we shall be
here-after, if we hearken unto the word which points unto Christ, the only
way to bliss. Without this step, none, be he never so wise, never so mighty,
so noble, so rich, so at hearts ease and pleasure, can attain so much as a
small hope of blessedness. Wherefore when the Lord says, Blessed are theie
which hear the word of God, and keep it; Luke 11, 28.
And David, Psalm. 1, 1, 2.
Blessed is the man which does meditate in the Law of the Lord day and
night; Psalm. 119, 2.
Again, Blessed are theie which keep his testimonies, and seek him with
their whole heart, theie do point unto this first step unto blessedness.

Philosophy, Excellency of God his word.
and the wisdom of this world, be it highly commended; yet what is it, being
compared to this word, which directs us unto everlasting happiness?
Philosophy, Worldly wisdom.
and worldly wisdom, what else can it do, than rule this transitory, which
we call the natural life, which is contained within a very small compass of
time? But heavenly wisdom shows us the life of grace, which is immortal,
and the beginning of happiness. Hence then we may see, and weie the
worthiness of the doctrine of the Church, which shows the way unto eternal
life and blessedness to al men. But humane reason is much deceived here. For
when it sees many nations of men at this day to want the word of God, it
forgeth destinies, and is carried-awaie with Stoical imaginations, so that
contrary unto Gods word, it thinks that God is an accepter of persons, and
will not the salvation of al men, but only of a few. When this was objected
to Paul, Romans 10, 18
he made this answer; Have theie not heard? No doubt their sound went-out
through all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world. 1. Tim. 2, 4.
So that the Gospel has sounded over the whole earth; wherebie God does
testify, that he would have all men to be saved.

But many at this day neither have, neither do theie hear the Gospel? That
is very true. But the reason our Lord yields, where he says, Mat. 21, 43
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation, which
shall bring-forth the fruits thereof. The cause hereof in this place is
expressed plainly to be the extreme ingratitude of men toward God. For when he
offers them salvation, theie do kill his ministers, and abuse Christ with
contumelious speeches. And therefore justly he does punish them in taking the
mean of salvation from the ungrateful. So that the nations of men, which have
not the word of God, should not bring destinies into our minds, but these two
things rather. What is to be learned by seeing many nations at this day
without the Gospel of Christ.
First that the displeasure of God against the contemners of the Gospel, is
very grievous, whereof it is that oftentimes he suffers his word utterly
to be taken from the ungrateful, and their seed after them, who together with
their parents, do foster ungodliness in their hearts: Secondly, that,
being made more wary by the example of others, we show our selves thankful
to God for his Gospel, bringing forth fruits worthy the Gospel, which unless
we do, we shall, as theie are and perchance more greeuouslie, be punished;
which thing we may learn by the parable of the vine. Mat. 21, 33


Now in what sort we are to strengthen our minds against Stoical
imaginations touching particulars, we have elsewhere declared, especialie upon
the 9. Chapter unto the Romans, and upon the first unto the Ephesians.

Neither do I mean, How the word brings salvation.
that the Word simply is a step unto blessedness, but with an adiunct, namely
when it is believed. For unless we give credit unto the word when we hear
in the same, 2. Cor. 2, 16.
the sound of the Gospel is to us even the savor of death, that is, the very
way unto everlasting misery, not of it own nature, but through our default,
and cursed ingratitude. And that the knowledge of the word, and faith, are to
be ioined-together in the first step, our Lord shows, when he says, This is
life eternal, John 17, 3.
that theie know thee to be the only very God, and Jesus to be Christ, whom
thou have sent. For knowledge comprehends both an understanding out of the
word, and faith also proceeding from knowledge. Therefore when it is said,
Luke 11, 28.
Blessed are theie which hear the word, must be understood with a condition of
faith. Now why the hearers of the word, and believers are blessed, Paul
teaches, when out of the 32. Psalm he says, Blessed are theie whose
iniquities are forgiven. Romans 4, 7.
How so? Because theie which believe the word of God offering free
reconciliation, have remission of sins, theie which have remission of sins,
be righteous; but the righteous shall live, even by the sentence of the Law, an
everlasting life, which theie begin in this world; theie which live an
everlasting life, are blessed; therefore such as believe the Gospel, are
blessed, as theie which are now in the right way, and go on toward happiness.

The second step, The 2. step unto heaven.
is through obedience toward God to proceed in the way, according to the rule
of the word, and spirit of faith. This does David mean, Psalm. 112, 1.
when he says, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and delights
greatly in his commandementes; Psa. 119, 1.
Again, Blessed are those that are upright in their way; and our Lord when he
said, Matthew. 5, 5.
Blessed are the meek, blessed are the peacemakers, blessed are the pure in
heart, blessed are the merciful. Which forms of speech contain not, as the
Papists do guess, the causes of blessedness; but theie describe the qualities
and studies of such men as are already become the heirs of the kingdom of
God. For the nature of faith is such, that it stirs us, in whom it
dwells, to show obedience unto the Lord; or, as Paul says, to serve God
through righteousness, after such time as the burden of sin is remoued-awaie
from us, and we are made righteous through the righteousness of Christ, Romans
10, 4.
Who is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes.
So that the Papists do very il, when theie do not rightly with Paul
distinguish between the proper benefit of Christ, and our due obedience. For
so Paul unto the Ephesians does write: Ephesians. 2, 8
By grace are ye saved thorough faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, 9.
not of works, least any man should boast himself. This does Paul speak of
the proper benefit of Christ, afterward that follows which does concern
our due obedience, and the cause thereof: 10.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has ordained, that we should walk in them. What thing I pray you could
be spoken more plainly?

The third step, The 3. step unto heaven.
is, when necessity requires, to keep on the right way through the valeie
of tears. For as in the Acts of the Apostles it is said, Act. 14, 22.
We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God; 2. Tim. 3, 12
And Paul, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. It
can not therefore be otherwise, but that the godly going on to heaven ward,
must be enforced to suffer sundry and diverse troubles. Job 5, 17.
This Job does mean, when he says: Blessed is the man whom the Lord
corrects: therefore refuse not thou the chastising of the Almighty. 18.
For he makes the wound, and binds it up, he smites, and his hands make
whole. For, as Paul says, 1. Cor. 11, 32
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. And Christ, Blessed are then which suffer persecution
for righteousness sake. Matt. 5, 10.
Blessed are ye when men revile you; 11.
He adds the reason: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, toward which theie
go, while patiently bearing the cross theie follow Christ: which cross is
not the cause of reigning, but only the way unto the kingdom through Christ.

The fourth step, The 4. step unto heaven.
is, to run the course of this life, in the fear of God even unto the last
gasp of life. Hereof spoke the Lord, when he said: Mat. 10, 22.
He that endures to the end, he shall be saved. Reave. 14, 13
And in the Revelation; Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord: and theie
die in the Lord, that depart out of this world in faith, and calling-vpon God.
The end of which faith, 1. Pet. 1, 9.
as Peter says, is the salvation of souls. Wherebie it is apparent, that
blessedness is ascribed to the above mentioned degrees with a condition of
perseverance even to the end. Coloss. 1, 23.
Therefore says Paul, If you be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel;
And Christ, If you abide in me, John. 15, 7.
and my words abide in you; And unto the Hebrews, Heb. 3, 14.
We are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end the beginning,
wherewith we are vpholden. These are the steps unto life, and everlasting
blessedness, because theie keep us in the way unto Christ, who is the
only way unto happiness.

Wherefore he yt enters into the right way, proceeds in the right way, and
keeps a right course by night, and by day, in adversity, and prosperity
toward the happiness before his eyes, is called happy, because of the event,
for that he goes the right way unto felicity.

Moreover, Where the souls of the righteous are until the day of judgment.
the bodies being dead, the souls of the righteous until the last judgment
by the ministry of Angels be received into Paradise, there to enioie
blessedness with Christ, according to the promise: To day shall thou be with
me in Paradise. Luke 23, 43.
Hereof sprang that wish of Paul, Phil. 1, 23.
I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ; and that voice in the
Revelation, Reave. 14, 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Even so says the spirit; for
theie rest from their labors, and their works follow them. And although this
blessedness of the souls be unspeakable: yet it is not absolute. Because
perfect blessedness is of the whole natures not of a part of man, as already
we have showed, as at the last day shall come to pass, the bodies being
raised. For which purpose there is a certain last judgment appointed of God,
in which this full and absolute felicity shall be conferred upon the Saints. So
that the Saints, whose bodies do sleep in the duste, have received already
single robes, but shall not be endued with double, until we al meet together.

The first robe is the very felicity it self, and the rest of souls in
Christ. But the second shall be ye immortality and glory of ye bodies, which
shall be fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ for ever and ever.
Phil. 3, 21.
And so at ye length we shall perfectly be blessed, joined to God the
sovereign bliss with perfect love; the image of God, after which we at the
first were made, and afterward redeemed, being reformed in us. In this image
perfect righteousness, perfect holiness, perfect liberty, perfect wisdom,
perfect cleerenes and glory shall shine. David had respect hereunto when he
said: Psalm. 17, 15.
When I awak, I shall be satisfied with thine image. For in this world there
shall be no satietie. Which thing Solomon also does witness, Ecclesi. 1, 8.
when he said, The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing. By which saying, Solomon does signify, that nothing suffices man
before he come unto God, enioie God, and blessedlie to rest in him. For God
has ingraffed such a desire in the heart of man, that no good thing can
suffice him, besides the sovereign happiness: which having once attained, he
rests therein all blessed. So that the most perfect state of man shall be
eternal felicity, the which we begin here in this life, and in the life to
come shall perfectly enioie the same. Hitherto belongs that saying of
Prosper, The life to come is thought to be blessedlie everlasting, and
everlastingly blessed, where certain security is, and secure quietness, and
quiet joyfulness, happy eternity, eternal happiness, where perfest love is, no
fear at all. This happy state was offered in a vision to John in the
Revelation. Revel. 21. 2.
For he saw the holy city new Jerusalem come down from heaven, prepared as
a bride trimmed for her husband. Wherein neither sorrow, 4.
neither crying, neither death shall be, but joy, peace, quietness, and
everlasting life, 18.
the walls whereof are of Jasper, and the city it self pure gold. 22.
The temple whereof was God almighty and the Lamb; the glory of God did
lighten it, 23.
and the lamb is the light of it. Revel. 22, 5. 4.
They shall need no candle, neither light of the sun: For the Lord God gives
them light. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
fore-heades. This description of true happiness, which we look for, is set
down not so lively as the felicity it self, but only to stir us to desire
the same, and to make us to proceed in the race of godliness, until we attain
unto the mark of blessedness promised. For truly it is said of Paul after
Isaiah: 1. Cor. 2, 9.


The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came
into man's heart, has God prepared for them which love him. Again, 1. Cor.
13, 12
Now we see through a glass darkly, but then we shall see face to face.

Wherefore, live we through faith; walk we in the spirit; Romans 1, 17.
seek we those things which are above knowing that in this world we are
pilgrims, Gal. 5, 16.
let us go-on toward everlasting life; Coloss. 3, 1.
let us forget that which is behind, Heb. 11, 13.
and endeavor our selves to that which is before, Heb. 13, 14.
and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the hie calling of God
in Christ Jesus. Phil 3. 13. 14.
Let us consider that no evil can be imagined either more pestilent, or more
damnable, than through sin to be separated from God, from the everlasting
fountane of blessedness to be turned unto most loathsome misery, and from the
most pleasant life unto the most bitter death.

By this which has been said, Against the vain opinions of the Philosophers
concerning true happiness.
it is to confute the vanity of the Philosophers, who define man's felicity
otherwise than we do. For if the true happiness of man, be such a perfect
state, wherein neither any misery may be feared, nor any good thing
desired, or be wanting, as shall be in ye everlasting life, whereinto in this
world through godliness we haste^; doubtless they al are much out of the way,
which do measure happiness, and last and proper end of man by any thing in
this world, of what authority soever they be which teach the same. For they
are but dust and ashes, yea nothing, being compared unto that master even our
God, unto whose words we are sworn.

Epicurus the ringe-leader of Epicures, Against the Epicures.
does measure the end of man, by a pleasant life. For he taught that the
chiefest happiness of man was only the pleasure of the body, which consists
in dainty meats, and drinks, and deligh^^s of the flesh. But who were his
masters? Even very beasts. For he therefore judged pleasure to be the
cheifest happiness, because beasts also for company desired, and followed
the same. But Epicurus did neither wisely, neither well in following the
lessons of beasts, as the Stoikes reprehended him. For the beasts neither
desire pleasure before all things, but their own conservation: then pleasure
as aggreeing to reason. Now how il this impure opinion of Epicurus beseems
man, every man, have he but a mean capacity, may perceive. For what, I
beseech you, does so either weaken the understanding, or break the strength
of the body, as bodily pleasure, if it exceed the laws of nature? For all
the powers of the body are quickened by the work and labor of the mind: but
through idleness and voluptuous delights, they languish. As it is verie-wel
said of one: After the delectation of the body, follows the destruction of
the flesh. Because naturalie the companion of pleasure, is pain. For the cause
of corruption, which is a very pain, are sensual delights. And therefore
both Cicero and Solomon compares pleasure to an harlot, and that fitly. For
Cicero says, that pleasure among virtues, is like an harlot amongst honest
matrons; for by her flattery she destroieth man. And Solomon, Prou. 5, 3. 4.
The lips of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is more
soft than oil: but the end of her is bitter as worme-worde. For as Bees do
first give honey, and forthwith prick with their sting: so bodily pleasure
(of which the Epicurs make three sorts, namely to feed delicatelie, to
drink pleasantly, and to live lecherouslie, the rest serving hereunto,
whether they delight the eyes, or please the ears, or provoke the body by
what means soever unto pleasure they call appurtenaunces) bears a show of
goodness, while it ticleth the mind by her enticementes, but in the end it
brings most bitter sorrow. Because not only the word of God condemns
the pleasure of the body as hurtful to the soul; but also the very
Philosophers too of the wiser kind. Antisthenes Critolaus.
For Antisthenes called bodily pleasure, extreme misery. Critolaus the
Peripatetion did not only call it extreme misery, but said moreover that it
was the cause and spring of al evils. Architas the Tarentine, Architas
Tare^tinus.
as Cicero does report, says there is none more deadly a pestilence given of
nature to man, than is the pleasure of the body. For pleasure flaieth counsel,
is an enemy to reason, dazeleth the sight of the mind; Aristotle.
and has no dealing at al with virtue. And Aristotle, did say, that bodily
pleasure agrees to beasts rather then to men.

The reasons which the family of Epicures has to confirm the blessedness of
man to be pleasure, are foolish and ridiculous to those, who know that the end
and perfect state of nature is to be considered in those things which make
nature perfect, not in those things which destroy nature. Let us therefore
sende-back the Epicure to the hogs his masters, or unto Penelopes her woers, of
whom it seems he learned his philosophy; and let us bear in mind the
saying of Jesus the son of Sirach; He that resists pleasure, prolongeth his
life.

Pindarus capitane of the Lyrikes, 2. Against the opinion of Pindarus.
to currie favor with his princes, did thus define the felicity of man: Let
him know that he is happy in the sight of God, who has glory with goods.
For that is the only happiness of man. But for so much as riches are outward
things and glory is vane, and subject, oftentimes to alteration, who, I pray
you, can be blessed thereby: especialie seeing he is not happy, but
miserable, which fears any evil?

The Poe^t Simonides says, 3. Against the opinion of Simonides.
the best thing that man can have, is he health; the next to that, is to be
well favored; and the next to that, to get riches by good means without
fraud. This fellow also follows the counsel of his senses, not of reason.
Now that such a man is not blessed, it is manifest by this, that he is
subject to the mutabilitie of fortune, of whom also he stands in fear.

Aristotle the chief among the Peripatetikes, 4. Against the opinion of
Aristotle.
had the people, even the great Patron of error, and the perverse interpreter
of the truth, for his master. He with the Stoikes does well condemn the
filthy pleasure of Epicurus, as more meet for a beast than for any man: but
he seeks with the wiser men of the multitude, two other kinds of good
things; wherein erroneouslie he does place the blessedness of man. The one
he calls civil, the other contemplative. To these he annexeth the three
sorts of good things, to wit, of the mind, of the body, and external.
Both his Ciuilian and Contemplator, he says, stand in need of these
things, but the Ciuilian more, and the other less. Secondly he places the
blessedness of the civil man in virtue; and of the contemplator in
contemplation, that is in the deep action of the mind.

But each felicity, as he says, is by prosperity bewtified and increased;
and by adversity obscured, and diminished, and oftentimes defaced utterly.

The Stoikes with weighty arguments did shake this opinion of Aristotle, both
for calling them good things, which were not, and for saying yt outward
things did avail much unto blessedness, especialie seeing he himself had
placed the perfection of the same in the mind. Now, if there it be perfect,
doutlesse outward things, which come not nigh the mind, cannot alter the
mind: but the very mind as of external things he has set-downe. But to
be brief; seeing Aristotle's felicity is contrary to our religion, yea and
to reason also, who may embrace the same as true? What virtue, I pray you, is
perfect without godliness? What contemplation but is erroneous, if it have not
the light of Gods heavenly word? What goods of fortune are not transitory,
and uncertain? Undoubtedly, as Cicero does say, If a blessed life may be
lost, it cannot be blessed. Whosoever fears alteration, is not with out grief.
Let Aristotle therefore consider more advisedly what kind of happiness it is
which he promises to his Ciuilian and Contemplator. I ouerpasse in silence
that the end of man's nature is a far other thing, than a temporal function, or
office.

In the book of Job, 5. Ag^^ust the (...) wise m^^.
there be five things numbered, wherein the wise men of this world do place
their chiefest happiness, to wit, in the multitude of children, in abundance of
riches, in the health of the body, in sumptuous buildinges, and to be famous
in the world. These together are thought to make a man happy. But because
such as abound with these things, do hang between hope and fear, they are
in very deed most miserable. For they do always fear least some evil do
happen, and fortune change her face. And therefore miserable, as I may say,
is their blessedness, which is subject to so many chances, and whose end is
endless misery; as the Psalms 37. and 73. do teach. The vanity of all these,
we may overthrow eue^ by this only argument. Nothing is so great, or so
heaped-together in this life, that it can suffice him, which desires more,
according to that of Seneca: Fortune has given much to many men, but enough
to none. Wallowe thou in pleasures, exceed in banqueting excel thou
Sardanapalus, pass Epicurus, yet thine unclean mind will continualie wish-for
somewhat else. Gather thou so muchwealth as thou will; excel Craesus, pass thou
Crassus, yet thy mind will continualie desire more. Enlarge the bounds of thie
dominions as much as thou will, yea though thou overcome the whole world, yet
another world will be sought, which thou must overcome. In all other things
either we attain not so much as we would, because our desire is insatiable;
or we repent that we have our wish; and when man has best fortune, then
commonly either some woeful chance, or a gnawing conscience does trouble
him. And nothing is so fortunate in this life, but it has much misery and
bitterness admixed therewithal, as Pindarus said right well, One good thing
present, has two discommodities therewithal.

Socrates, The opinion of Socrates nearest unto the truth.
who in my judgment is more to be commended than all the above named
Philosophers, placed the felicity of man, not in this life, but in another
life, following therein, not the brutish beasts, nor the folish multitude, nor
Craesus, nor any of them, who in this world seem fortunate, but nature for
his capitan^ his argument which he used was this: The natural desire of man, is
not vane. But all men naturalie desire to be happy. Therefore this desire is
not vane. But none come unto this happiness in this life. For in this life
nothing makes a man perfect. Therefore it is to be sought for in an other
life.

Hitherto Socrates was in the right way. According to whose mind, Plato his
scholar, does call the true happiness sometime the contemplation of the best,
as the way unto bliss; sometime he makes the love and imitation of God the
end of man, or chief selicitie, as that wherein the sovereign bliss of man
does consist. And although Socrates and Plato approach nighest unto the
truth: yet because that small sparcle of the truth is often overwhelmed with
variety of opinions, and disputations, and as it were with dirt and dregs
bestained, let us acknowledge the great benefit of God, who by his word
shows us the ready way, both unto the knowledge of true happiness, and also
unto the endless enioieng and possession of the same. For the word of God
shows that only pearl, that sovereign bliss wherein the mind of man
does rest: the sweetness whereof whosoever once has tasted (for even in this life
also it is also tasted, though not unto satietie) he forthwith begins to abhor
al those things, which the miserable multitude, and men of power in this world
have in admiration. But that we may attain unto the quiet possession of this
happiness; godliness, the steps whereof we have before in this chapter set down,
brings to pass. Which godliness does marvelously couple us to God, Fruit of
godliness.
yea in such wise, that we become one with him, being conformed to him shall so
live for ever and ever in the life to come: where the chief happiness of man,
as above we have declared, does abide.

On the otherside ungodliness seuereth the wicked and the unbelievers from God,
Fruit of ungodliness.
so that being driven from the sovereign happiness, they become one with the
devil and his members. Psalm. 33, 12.
To conclude, as Blessed is that nation, whose God is the Lord: So miserable
are they, who are without God, be they never so highly in fortunes book. For
the more fortune does fan, the more she deceaueth; and him she makes a
very fool whom she favors ouer-wel.

This now being spoken concerning happiness, return we unto the words of the
Psalm, Blessed are they which dwell in thine house. But wherefore blessed?
Because they have begun that everlasting felicity whereunto they tend, and
for which they were both at the first created, and afterward redeemed.

But who are they which dwell in the house of God? Who dwell in the house of God.
Through sin we are all the sort of us with our parents Adam and Euah,
excluded out of the house of God: through faith of the promise we are brought
in again, being called through the sound of the Gospel; the state whereof by
the sacraments, as by the seals of God, is assured us, until we swerve from
the covenant, that is from faith and obedience toward God. And for so much as
great is our weakness, Difference between sins.
whereof it is that even a just man falls in a day seven times, we are to
set a difference between those sins which exclude us out of the house of
God, and between those that expel, and utterly separate us from the family of
God, and bring under the dominion of satan. Many are the infirmities in ye
faithful; diverse wicked affections springvp; and oftentimes they offend of
ignorance; notwithstanding so long as they retain faith and a good conscience,
they do abide in the house of God, not as of his household only, but as
lively stones also of which the house is builded. But when wittinglie and of
purpose theie sin, theie overthrow their conscience, and make shipwreck of
faith, and so are cast out from the spiritual family of God, until through
repentance theie come home again. For such is the goodness and mercy of God,
that this house is always set-open to such as unfeignedly repent.

And for so much as this house of God, How God is served in his Church.
is the Temple wherein God will be worshipped, therefore God makes mention of
the chief service in the same, when he says, for ever and ever theie will
praise thee. And as the ground of this praising of God is the goodness and
mercy of God, according to the saying of the Psalm, Why God is to be praised.
Praise ye the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
(Under which his goodness and mercy are comprehended al his works, Psalm, 116, 1.
al his benefits, and al ye promises of God, as may be gathered out of the
136. Psalm: Mercy of God what it comprehends.
) So ye praise of God consists in ye true knowledge of God; in the meditation
of the wonderful works of Grd; Wherein the true praise of God does consist.
in an assured trust of his promises; in true obedience; in prayer; in lauding
his goodness and mercy; in confession etc. Wherefore none can duly praise
God, but such as dwell in his house, Who do praise God.
namely such as are truly religious, whose praises God liketh-of, and
allows: whose ears are open, not unto the mouth, but unto the heart; not unto
the tongue, but unto the life of the co^mender, as Augustine says; So that
neither of the wicked, who sound one thing with their lips, and show an other
thing in their life; nor of hypocrites, because ye face of their soul, if so I
may speak, is filthilie defaced with the mire of vane glory, and under the
pretense of lauding God do seek their own praise; nor yet of hirelings is god
praised, for theie praise their belly, not God: but the godly which live
through faith, whose whole cogitations, and good works, are commendations of
God, they only praise God. Therefore says Augustine: Whatsoever thou do,
do it well, and thou have praised God.

And whereas the works of God, as the Sun, How the creatures praise God.
the Moon, ye stars, the fishes of the sea, lightening, and thunder be said
to praise God, it is by a figure called Metonymia, because through their
beauty, and great commodities which they bring to mankind, they provoke men to
praise God. Musical insthruments in the old Law what theie fignified.


Again, whereas God is said, as may appear in the Psalms, to be praised
with Cymbals, Tympanies, and sundry instruments of music, that was but
figuratiuelie done. For they signified how God in the new Testament, was to
be praised with ye sweet music and harmony of sound doctrine, Organs and
Music when to be retained in the Church.
and of godly behavior. Organs and Music may be retained in the Temples of
Christians, so long as they bewtifie and further the ministry, and do not
hinder the same: but from these things, let that Jewish persuasion, touching
the opinion of worship, be far abandoned. The like judgment may be given
of singing of Psalms, The perpetuity of the Church.
and other lessons in the Church.

Moreover when the Psalm says, For ever and ever: it signifies how the
Church shall abide for ever: yet that out of this life it shall be translated
unto immortal glory, and joined to the souerainge happiness, in which it shall
be blessed for evermore. And this is the end of our religion, which alone
reduces us unto the original from which we have estraied; and alone
restores us to perfection and blessedness, than which nothing is to be
desired more. Perfection (...)
For in very deed this is perfection and happiness, even for every thing to
attain the end for which it was created, and therein to rest, and be blessed.
Wherefore the use of this verse is three-folde. The use of (...) ^. verse.
The first is, that we study out of Gods word to know God the father in Jesus
Christ thorough the holy spirit; yt we shut our selves thorough faith into his
house, and therein continue; that we both in heart, and in conversation do
praise God whom we know, and being praised, do love, being loved do express
and imitate, and by immitating enioie him, and by enioieng be made immortal and
blessed; and finalie, that being made immortal and blessed we may abide
everlastingly in the sovereign happiness, singing Psalms and hymn^
continualie to God with all his elect. This continual praising of the
everlasting God has annexed thereunto most pure, holy, and comfortable
pleasure: Ps^t 14, 7.
According to the Psalm: Psalm. 16, 11.
Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad; and in an other Psalm, At thie
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Another use is, that in all afflictions and troubles we fetch comfort,
considering yt both we are in the house of God, and also that by the testimony
of the holy spirit, we are pronounced blessed, notwithstanding that in the
sight of the world, we seem miserable. For after night the clear day will
appear. So that the promise of blessedness ought to be in steed of a remedy
unto us against the bitterness of the cross.

The third use is, that so many as are out of this house of God, although
theie have many goodly children, outward peace, good success in their
matters, yea and in the eyes of men do seem blessed: yet theie are extremely
miserable, as theie which hasten the ready way unto endless perdition. From
which neither Epicurus, Zeno, nor Aristotle can fetch their families, whom
miserably theie have fed with a vain hope of blessedness.

THE SECOND part of the Psalm.
CHAP. 1.
1. The sum of the second part of this Psalm, generalie; 2. The invincible
courage of true Preachers; 3. Whether all the ministers of the Gospel, have the
holy Ghost.
THe second part of this Psalm, comprised in three verses, name lie in the 5.
6. and 7. describes the state of the Doctors of the Church. The members of
which description, are these. The first concerns the courage, and weapons,
wherewith Doctors are to be fenced; The second with what mind and study men
are to enter-into the ministry; The third, how theie are to pass through
the vale of tears in setting-forth, and enlargeing the kingdom of God; The
fourth, an allegorical representation of the ministers of the word; The fifth,
a promise of blessing, and of good success in the ministry; The sixte, a
final cause of this success. That it may appear how the ministry of the
word, is preserved by the presence, and power of God in the Church.

The fifth verse. BLESSED IS THE MAN, WHOSE STRENGTH IS IN THEE.
THis first part of the description does minister courage unto the Doctors of
the Church, for the withstanding of Satan, and the gates of hell. An evident
example may be seen in the Apostles, whom Christ did send into the world to
preach the Gospel. For he sent even rude men unto the most eloquent; plain
fellows unto the subtle; naked men unto armed; weak unto the strong; poor
unto mighty princes of the Empire, and of other nations; quiet unto cruel
persons; yet theie ouer-came, and spread-forth the kingdom of Christ, in so
much that in a very small time their sound went over the whole world.

But how came theie by such a courage? Even God gave it them, who alwaie
works in the ministry of the word. For being armed with the power of GOD,
theie entered battle with the world. And therefore Paul says: 2. Cor. 10, 4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to
castdowne holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, 5.
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. The
ministers of the Gospel armed with this courage, do prevail against the gates
of hell. For which cause theie are pronounced blessed, by reason of the
infallible hope, which both theie have themselves, and show to others. This
courage GOD in all ages endueth his ministers withal. This the Lord gave unto
his disciples, John. 20, 22. 23.
when he says: Receive the holy Ghost. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, theie are
remitted; and whosoeuers sins ye retain, theie be retained. Therefore the
holy Ghost is that fortitude, wherebie the ministers of the word, are
emboldened to oppose themselves against the gates of hell. This strength of God
his spirit, both makes the minds of teachers courageous, and brings power
to the word, wherebie it takes effect in the hearts of such as hear the
Gospel. Furthermore this fortitude of the spirit does give witness that the
doctrine of the Gospel is not forged, but from God himself. For it is a great
miracle, that the whole world, and especialie, that so mighty an Empire as the
Roman was, could not hinder those few disciples of the Lord, but maugre their
heads, theie scattered the seed of the Gospel over the whole world. Mart.
Luther.
Martine Luther, a man of holy remembrance, for the space of 45. years
through this power of the spirit, opposed him self against the whole Roman
Empire, and all the kingdom of Antichrist. And although at the first Luther had
no partakers against so mighty an adversary, the chief whereof was the Duke
of darkness, even the devil himself: yet so he prevailed, that all the power
of Satan, and rabblement of Antichrist, could not diminish so much as one hair
of his head. Such is the valiantnes, wherewith the Lord armeth his ministers.

But what? Whether all the ministers of the word have the holy spirit, or no.
have all the ministers of the Gospel the holy spirit? Are not many given
partly to ambition, (ah grief) and partly unto other sins? What has the
holy spirit to do with ambition, and wickedness? A difference must be set
between the ministry it self, and the ministers of the Gospel. An answer
In the ministry the holy Ghost is alwaie effectualie present. For what the
force wherbie we are nourished, is in the bread: yt is the holy Ghost in ye
word, whereby we are moved to believe, and born-anew. For the heavenly Father has
so decreed, yt the spirit of the Son shall be present, and work, both with the
word, and in the word. Hence it is ye ministers of the new Testament, are caled
of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3. ^
ministers, not of the letter, but of the spirit. So many therefore as resist
the word of the Gospel, whosoever, be he worthy, or unworthy, preaches the
same, resists the holy spirit. For so great a matter depends not either
upon the worthiness, or unworthiness of ministers. Judas.
Judas preached, and Peter preached, Peter.
and both of them baptized: but the word, and the baptism was Christ's, in
which his spirit did work.

Again, the question may be answered; that al preachers which teach the word
rightly, have the holy Ghost, but not al alike. For theie whose life
answers to the doctrine, have the spirit, as both a teacher, and a
sanctifier: But if the life agree not with the doctrine, theie have the holy
spirit, as a teacher, but not as a sanctifier: and that through their own
fault, because stubburnelie theie resist the holy spirit. That holy man of
God Moses he had the holy spirit not only as a prophecier, Moses.
but also as a sanctifier too. Because as his prophecies were most true: so was
his life most holy. Balaam.
But Balaam had the spirit of prophecy and of teaching, which undoubtedly
was the holy Ghost: but he had not the spirit of sanctification. Number. 22, 28
29.
For he was ambitious, and covetous, for the which his own ass upon whom he
sat, rebuked him. Peter had the holy spirit, Peter.
both of teaching and of sanctification, because his conversation agreed with
the purity of doctrine. Iud^^
But Judas, because he was not only covetous, but a thief too, had the holy
spirit as a teacher, but not as a sanctifier. Because he obeyed the spirit of
covetousness, that is of Satan, rather than the spirit of God.

Moreover, Ministers how called.
as touching the spirit of teaching, it is to be noted, that as there is a
twofolde calling by means, and without means: So there is a twofolde
probation of the spirit of instruction. For, if the calling be without
means, yt is, by God himself, and Jesus Christ, and not by men after the
ordinary manner, as was the calling of the Prophets, and Apostles, the spirit
of instruction, without al doubt is ye holy Ghost himself, whose doctrine,
for yt he is true, is also true, firm, and heavenly, without al mixture of
errors: it has also heavenly miracles, wherebie the truth of the doctrine is
confirmed. But if the calling be by means, then are the spirits to be tried,
whether theie are of God, and so farre-forth the holy spirit is to be
acknowledged for the teacher, as what is taught is agreeable to the word
received from the Prophets, from Christ, and his Apostles. Wherefore let him
be accursed of us, yt preaches another Gospel, than yt which the Apostles
through the commandment of Christ have preached, and has ye testimony of ye
Prophets. So that in vain is the holy spirit pretended, when a defection is
made from the voice of the Gospel.

CHAP. 2.
1. The special things required in a minister of the Gospel; 2. How the
knowledge of Gods word is attained; 3. State of wicked ministers.
AND IN WHOSE HEART ARE THI^ WAYS.

THis second member of the description, concerning the mind and study of the
ministers of the Gospel, is referred unto their knowledge of Gods word, unto
their feeling of the same in their hearts; and unto the direction, or rule,
wherebie the preachers of the word should govern the people committed to
their charge.

Then first of al it is required of teachers in the Church, 1. The knowledge of
God his word required in ministers.
that theie know the celestial doctrine. Which doctrine is for that cause
termed the way of the Lord; because it is to man as a way prepared of God,
to go therebie from death unto life, and from the troubles of this world, unto
blessed immortality. Walk in my commandementes, says the Lord by the
Prophet. Psalm. 119. 1.
Again, Blessed are theie which walk in the Law of the Lord.

Moreover, Knowledge of Gods heavenly mystery how attained.
the knowledge of this way, that is of heavenly doctrine, sometime is powered
in by a secret blast, and inspiration from God without the labor and care of
man: as may appear in the Prophets and Apostles. Sometime it is gotten by
the labor and pains of man. Prayer.
Which labor has two parts. The first and principal whereof, is, burning and
continual prayer unto God, that he would direct us in his truth, teach us, and
lighten the eyes of our mind. Psa. 127, 1.
For, except the Lord build the house, theie labor in vain that build it.
The other part is an earnest study of God his word and will. Study of the
Scriptures.
Now that men be rightly framed unto that study, six things be
necessarily required, of which breefelie we will speak.

The first is daily reading of the scripture. Six things necessarily
required in a student of the Scriptures.
Which who so will read with profit, must have the knowledge both of those
tongues, wherein the scripture was at the first written, without which. neither
the kind of speech, nor the phrazes can be understood; Knowledge of the
tongues.
and beside not only Logique, to epsy the order and method of the matter,
Logique.
but the knowledge beside of other arts, Natural Philosophy.
and especialie of that part of philosophy caled natural philosophy. Paul
commends this study of continual reading unto Timothy, (...). 4, 1^
when he says: Give attendance unto re^ding.

The second is an observation, Observation
and collection of the principal points of heavenly doctrine, without which
the pains in reading is to small purpose. For, as in all arts this care is
necessary to him that would be substantialie learned: so little shall he profit
in the sacred Scripture, which observes not the chief heads of religion;
neither brings all that he reads unto some special common place.

The third is a diligent regard unto common axioms, and sentences, which are
as general rules, ministering judgment in doubtful causes; as Rhetoricia^s of
general thesees, which therefore theie call consultations, do judge of
particulars, and causes in controversy. Hitherto makes observation of
examples, from which the determinations of matters in doubt are fetched
oftentimes.

The fourth is a sure reteining of the premises in mind, that when occasion
serves, theie may be drawn out of the treasurehouse of memory.

The fifth is contemplation, wherebie as it were at the first sight of the
mind, we behold the whole course of the Scripture. By this we compare things
like, and unlike together; by this we reconcile contrary places; and by this
we seek definitions, divisions, distinctions, interpretations of obscure
places, yea and make a constitution of the body of doctrine.

The sixth is tradition of elders. Tradition.
This declares what the holy fathers have thought of every thing. This
tradition, if it be confirmed by the word of GOD, is of authority and weight.
In which respect we faithfully embrace at this day the Creed, both of the
Nicene council, of Athanasius, of Ambrose, and that which is caled the Apostles
Creed, because theie are evident grounds gathered out of God his word. But
if the tradition be not proved out of the word of God, then is it, either
contrary to the word, and therefore we abhor the same, as the voice of the
serpent that seduced Euah; or it is beside the word, and we receive it, in
respect of such as delivered the same out, until it be drawn into an evil
conclusion by the enemies of true doctrine.

With this knowledge of the heavenly doctrine there should be joined, 2. The
second thing required in ministers, and preachers of the Gospel.
as in all men, so especialie in the ministers of the Gospel, a lively feeling
in the heart; without which, knowledge does not profit, but hurt rather,
through the fault of man. Feeling of the heart.
This lively sense proceeds from faith, and other motions agreeing to the
Law of God, which the holy spirit stirreth-vp in the hearts of believers.

And this sense is called the path-waie of God, because as God requires the
same: so through it we approach, and are joined unto God. And therefore Paul
requires these two things, namely knowledge, and feeling together, Phil. 1,
9.
when he thus writes: This I pray you, that your love may abound yet more
and more in knowledge, 10.
and in all judgment, that ye may discern things that differ, 11.
that ye may be pure, and without offense, until the day of Christ, filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory,
End of knowledge.
and praise of God. So that the end of knowledge is, that we should judge
prove, and approve those things, which are the better, and most profitable. To
feeling is subject synceritie, which is a good conscience before God,
innocence of life, that we offend no man, and plenty of fruits of the
righteousness of faith, which proceed from the grace of Jesus Christ, and tend
unto the laud and praise of God.

If this lively sense with the knowledge of heavenly doctrine be not in the
teachers of the Church, State of wicked ministeri.
nothing is more cursed in the whole world than theie are. For when they
reprove other me^ for sinning, theie condemn themselves; when theie lift up
others with comfort, theie ouer-throwe themselves; when theie teach others,
themselves are confounded; to be short, whatsoever theie do in the ministry,
committed to their charge, it is a testimony to their own damnation. For
theie are verie-like the makers of Noah's arc. For as theie, when the arc was
builded, wherein Noah, and his family was saved, perished in the flood: so
these men, shall perish in the flood of hell fire, when such as gave credit unto
the word theie preached, shall be saved. Wherefore let both them, which are in
the ministry, and them also which purpose to enter into the same, consider,
how grievous, the punishment is, that hangeth-ouer their heads, if the
feeling in the heart, and their life answer not to their doctrine: again,
what great glory is laide-vp for them, if theie do build the Church of
Christ with both hands, namely with doctrine, and with example. Of which
glory afterward we will entreat.

Moreover the teachers of the Church ought to show the way of the Lord to
men that go astraie. 3. The third thing required in the ministers of the
Gospel.
For which cause theie are called the guides of the flock in the Scriptures,
that going-before them both in learning and life, theie may both prepare the
way, and animate others to follow them. And therefore in the prophecy of
Isaiah, it is written: Isai. 62, 10.
Go-through, goe-through the gates, prepare you the way for the people,
caste-vp, caste-vp the way, and gather out the stones, and set-vp a standerd
for the people. Let preachers therefore of the word understand, that as theie
ought to go before other men, both by example of good life, and sound
preaching: so theie must first before others come into peril. For which cause
it follows in the Psalm: Who goes thorough the valleie of tears.

CHAP. 3.
1. That the Church of God, especially the ministers thereof are to endure
persecution; 2. Of the cross, the kinds thereof; 3. Special things to be
remembered of such as are punished deservedly; 4. The faithful how tried; 5. Of
martyrdom, who are martyrs, and how theie are to be thought-vpon; 6. Whether
idolatrous Princes are to be obeyed*
The sixte verse. WHO GOES THROVGH THE VAILEIE OF TEARS.
THis third member of the description purteth the preachers of the word in
mind of the peril, and danger which accompanies the ministry. For it
affirms how theie are to pass through the vale of tears, that is, theie
must advance the kingdom of God with much trouble, and persecution. For such
is the rage of Satan, and his members, that withal their force theie fly
upon the godly ministers of the word, that with the stream of their blood,
theie may stop the course of the Gospel, yea and abolishe the Church: but
vain is their hope. For stronger is he which takes the preachers part, than
all the gates of Hell. If God says the Apostle, Romans 8, 31.
be on our side, who can be against us?

Furthermore, David took this allegorical speech from ^ present occasion. For
being in exile, and seeing with what danger all the feasts which God had
ordained, the people went up to Jerusalem for to sacrifice, with spiritual
eyes he beheld the great perils and persecutions which theie should endure,
that in time to come, were to set-foorth the kingdom of Christ. So that the
sense is this. As ye people of God through the dry valleis, and for that cause
provoking unto weeping and tears rather than unto joy, went* up to Jerusalem
at the hie feasts to sacrifice: So the teachers of the Church, the Apostles
and others, through many afflictions, tentatio^s, and persecutions, as it were
through dry valleis do spread the Gospel, being ready to offer unto God the
people which obeie the Gospel. How greatly Paul was persecuted, that he may
be an example for all, appears in the 11. Chapter of the second Epistle unto
the Corinthians. Wherefore let the ministers of the gospel understand, how
theie are called not unto pleasures and banqueting, but to suffer great
conflictes, and most certain perils; and the more secure that theie seem,
the nigher theie are to the snares. For the devil is an enemy to the Church.
And therefore before al others he sets upon the builders of the same, that
theie being oppressed, he may the more easily overthrow the Church through
tyranny, and fraud.

Beside, for so much as elsewhere both we and others too, have spoken much
concerning the cross belonging to the ministers of the word, and to every
particular member of the Church; I will in this place only set-downe the
diverse kinds of the cross taken from the ends; The cross what it signifies.
and also annexe consolations, and remedies for each of them. And this word
cross, as the Church does understand the same, is that thing, which does
trouble, and afflict either inwardly or outwardly. Of which commonly there
be four sorts taken from the proper ends of them.

The first kind, 1. Kind of cross or affliction.
the Grecians do name Lytron; which generalie understood is a price given and
paid for a ransom from captivity. And because there is a double captivity,
namely a bodily and a spiritual, there is a two-folde Lytron, to wit, a
corporal, and a spiritual. But in the Church we speak especialie of the
spiritual. Which is defined to be a cross which is taken, and enioined for the
washing away the eternal punishment, and sins of mankind. And this Christ
only has paid, and endured. For he taking our cause upon him self,
suffered punishment, not for his own, but for our offenses, that he might be
imputed to us for a discharge of the pain, and fault due; that is for a price
of redemption; that the faithful might no more be counted guilty, nor held
captive of the devil for sin, but be righteous, free, and everlastingly
blessed. Of this kind of cross, the Lord speaks, Mat. 20, 2^
when he says: The son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to
give his life for the ransom of many, and so to take mankind from out the
power of darkness, making satisfaction to God, whom man had offended: Because
man through sin was bound both to God, and to the devil, but diversely. For
after that man by sin had offended God, and declined from him, he became the
captive to Satan, not as to a judge, but as to a torme^tor, and that by the
righteous judgment of God for the offense committed against him. Again, as
touching the punishment, man was bound to God, as to a judge and party
offended. This punishment the son of God to ^e upon him, and redeemed us from
the sentence of death and damnation, paieng a ransom for our redemption. And
therefore it is said, how he offered his blood to God for a price to redeem
us. For which cause also Paul does not say, that Christ redeemed us from the
power of the Devil, Col. 1, 13.
but delivered us from the power of darkness, as from the hands of the
hangman. But hereof we have spoken already, In the first part. Chap. 9.
and showed what comforts the faithful may fetch from hence.

The second is called Timoria (which Plato said was the punishment of
unrighteousness) and is the cross which any man does justly suffer for
certain sins, 2. kind of cross, or affliction.
to wit, when punishment in just proportion answers to the crime committed.
In the Epistle unto the Hebrews this word is used, where it is written, Heb.
10, 29*
Of how much ^^rer punishment suppose ye, shall he be worthy, etc. Christ
hanging upon the cross, paid the ransom: but the thieves which honge on
each side of Christ, suffered Timorian, that is punishment due by the laws
for their evil demeanors. Of this the Prophet Ezechiel speaks, on this wise:
I will do unto them according to their ways, Ezekiel. 7, 27.
and according to their judgments will I judge them, and they shall know that
I am the Lord. This punishment is laid upon men either by means through man,
or without means of GOD himself.

But what must he do that is punished justly for his offenses? Special things
to be considered of him who is (...) punished for his offenses.
He must do four things. He must in the devil note lieng and murder* in
himself weigh sin and misery; in God honor, judgment, and mercy; and in
the gospel seek counsel and help.

First, The devil given unto falsehood and cruelty.
he must note falsehoode and cruelty in the devil, who, as he slew our
first parents with a lie: so in these days every moment, by lieng and
tyranny, he lies in wait to destroy al mankind. 1. Pet. 5, 8.
For, as Peter says, As a roaring Lion he walks about, seeking whom he
may devour. He seeks indeed to have al men, but them only he deuoureth,
whom he takes in his snares of falsehood. For that impure spirit does
continualie labor to make al men impure as he is. He infecteth the mind with
false, and erroneous doctrine; the heart he troubles with raging storms of
wicked affections; the will he bewitcheth with the evil spirit of profit and
lucre; and he endeuoreth to defile the whole life of man with wickedness, that
so man being spiritualie killed, may be his companion in everlasting
torments.

The remembrance of the study of this evil spirit, the enemy both of God
and man, will stir-vp an hatred of sin, and engender a detestation of
ungodliness in the hearts of men.

Secondly, Man in affliction* is to compare his own sins with the
punishment he does either suffer or deserve.
in himself he must with equal balance weie sin, and misery; and think
how the misery which he suffers, is a deserved punishment of sin, and by
the greatness of misery esteem the ouglines, filthiness, and multitude of his
sins. He must think how by his sins he has offended God, who is
soueraignelie and infinitlie good. And thereof conclude, No man so punished in
this world according to his deserts.
that his present calamity is the very way unto everlasting misery, unless
some help do come. At the remembrance hereof man will tremble and quake.
Examples of this may be seen by reading the Psalms, of which I will allege
one for many out of the 38. Psalm. where David describes his grief and sorrow
for his sin on this wise. Psalm. 38, 2.
For thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me. 3.
There is nothing sound in flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there
rest in my bones, 4.
because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head; and as a
weighty burden theie are too heavy for me. My wounds are putrified, 5.
and corrupt because of my foolishnes. 6.
I am bowed and crooked very sore: I go mourning all the day. 7.
For my reins are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my flesh. I
am weakened and sore broken; I do roar for the very grief of mine heart.
Again, Mine heart pants, 10.
my strength fails, and the light of mine eyes, even theie are not mine
own. Here David in his own person depainteth the affections and sorrows of
those men, who in equal balance do weigh thy sins. How godly men do*
esteem of their sins.
For they conceive not of their sins, as hypocrites and Atheistes do,
according to their own judgment and fleshly imagination: but rather according
to the majesty of God that is offended; to the filthiness of sin; and to the
punishment which they do deserve by the sentence of the law. And although
worldly men seldom have such motions in their mind as David and Ezekiah had:
yet it is necessary, that he who is justly punished for offenses
perpetrated, be touched with true sorrow for his sin without hypocrisy.
Contrition meritorious with the Papists.
But here an error of the Papists is to be taken heed off, who teach that
such a sorrow conceived for sin, does merit forgiveness at the hands of
God. For although this sorrow do go-before the petition of forgiveness: yet it
is not the cause of mercy and forgiveness. But whosoever persisteth in weighing his
sin and his punishment together, and proceeds no further, shall be swalowed
up of desperation, as Cain, Saul, Judas, and many others were.

Thirdly, in God he must honor his judgment and his mercy. Of the righteous
judgment of God, it is, that sins are punished in all men: and of his mercy,
that they are punished, not to their utter destruction, but for their
salvation, if they despise not the salve. Unto his judgment it belongs by
degrees of punishment to correct sinful man, until he come to the last. And,
for so much as he professes himself to be ye Physician of souls, he does as it
were imitate skillful Physicians, who in curing do use certain degrees.
First they begin with gentler sorts of salues: and if they do little good,
they lay sharper remedies unto the wound. And as Hypocrates does say: The
diseases which medicines do not heal, the iron does heal; those which the
iron heals not, the fire does heal; but such as the fire does not heal,
theie, of my word are incurable: So God does sometime reprove man's wickedness,
by ye word; if ye does not help, he corrects with sickness, infamy, and
imprisoment; if they profit not, he inflameth the fire of his judgment in the
minds of men, and makes them aghast with the terror of everlasting torments;
if neither that can heal their cancre, he leaves them quite as incurable,
and gives them over into a reprobate mind, so that they have neither a right
judgment to discern things, nor any sorrow at all, by reason of the filth
of wickedness, wherein they wallow. To be short, God of his judgment does
punish that through his mercy, Isai. 28, 21.
he may save: This is it which Isaiah does say: He does a strange work,
that he may do his own, that is, he does kill and slaie, that he may
quicken and salve. This judgment and this mercy of God, are ioined-together
of David so often as he lamenteth his sins, as may appear both in 51. and
also in sundry other psalms, but especialie in those which are called
penitential Psalm.

Last of all, in the Gospel he must seek for counsel, and for comfort. The
thief which hong on the right hand of Christ, confessed his offense and
misery; saw the falsehood and cruelty of Satan; had the judgment of God
also in great reverence. For being on the cross, Luke 4, 23.
he spoke these words: We receive things worthy of that we have done.
Beside he praised the mercy of God fleing unto Christ, whom before his eyes
he saw embrued with blood, and defiled with the spittle of the soldiers:
whom notwithstanding he confessed to be the Physician and Savior of the world;
and so through belief on him was delivered from the sickness of his soul,
though not from the punishment of his body. Notwithstanding he heard his
comfortable voice, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. In like manner
those which with the theife in their deserved pains and affliction do return
unto Christ, be received and healed, although their sins are infinite, and
their offenses in quantity pass the sand of the sea, as Manasses confessed
that his sins did. For, as the mercy of God in Christ is endless, and a
ransom of infinite, and inestimable price: So the Physician Christ, who
affirms that he came to save that was lost, Mat. 18, 11
does offer himself into all men indifferently, and without respect unto
any calls al men unto repentance. Mat. 11, 28.
For so he says: Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease
you. Here he calls all that labor, and be laden albeit with infinite sins;
he excludes none, but admits al unto repentance; and ministers remedy to
such as come under his hands, and crave his help with the thief. For first
he remoueth away the cause of affliction, namely sin, when man at the
voice of the Gospel repents; when he besprincleth the conscience of the
penitent with his blood, and washes it from dead works; and withal imputes
his righteousness to the penitent, that by the same, he may appear righteous
in the sight of God, although before man he bears the punishment of sin.

Beside with inward consolation by his spirit he mittigateth present
affliction, and gives strength to bear ye deserved punishment with a quiet
mind. And although the cross seem in man's eyes an odious thing; yet is it
(yea, though it be deserved) a sacrifice highly pleasing God; as we may see
in David, and in the thief. The thief was punished for his enormous
wickedness: David suffers affliction for adultery and murder which he had
committed. Notwithstanding both the cross of that thief from the cross of
the other thief hanging on the left-side of Christ; and the affliction of
David from the punishment of Saul, differed in respect of their sorrowful
and repentant hearts: which being laid upon the cross of Christ as upon
an altar, it becomes consecrated, and a most acceptable sacrifice before God.
Of which kind of cross read more in our annotations upon the 25. Psalm.
Which commentary of this Auctor is extant in English.


The third kind of cross, is Dokimasie, which is a proof and trial of faith
and constancy in confession. This Dokimasie is done many ways, so that
easily it cannot be included within certain kinds. 3. Kind of Cross.
For faith is tried sometime in prosperity, and sometime in adversity;
sometime inwardly, and outwardly sometime.

Abraham was tried by banishment; Abraham how tried*
by hunger; by hazard of his wife; by differring of the promised seed; by the
barreunesse of his wife; by the commandment to kill his only son Isaak,
whom he loved more than his own life. Al these things seemed to be
cleane-against that great promise of the land of Canaan, and of the seed which
should multiply even as the sand of the sea. But how escapes Abraham? how
overcomes he these most grievous tentations? Even by faith alone. Hereby he
persuadeth himself that God is not only true of promise, but mighty also to
perform the same; hereby he glorified God; hereby he meteth with the course
of nature; hereby he preferred obedience toward God before the life of his
son; and hereby he strengthened himself in all his troubles.

Joseph also he was tried both on the left hand, Joseph how tried.
and on the right; on the left, by his envious brethren, by exile, by bondage,
by the inticementes of an unchaste woman, by imprisonment, etc. on the right
hand, by the gift of intrepreting dreams, by honor, favor of his prince,
by preferment above other Lords, and by his dexterity in the whole
government. Notwithstanding he keeps a straight course, declining neither
unto the left, nor unto the right hand, but through faith only persisteth
immovable. Troubles of Io^.


Job likewise was tried both by adversity and prosperity. First with happy
success of his affairs, with many children, store of riches, and with
worshipful friends: afterward with the soudden death of his children, with
loss of his goods, with loathsome botches and boiles, with a brawling and
cursing wife, with lack of friends.

Now holy Job tossed with these tempests, albeit sometime he seemed to
totter: yet by faith he rose-againe, and opposed against present misery that
blessed life, and happiness, which GOD, who can not lie, Job 19, 25.
has promised to his servants. For I am sure, said he, that my Redeemer
lives, and that I shall rise-againe at the last day. And this is it which
John does say* 1. John. 5, 4.
That which is borne of GOD, overcomes the world, That it may be a
testimony, as Bernard says, of the celestial generation.

This trial of faith is compared to the trial of gold in the book of
Wisdom. As gold is tried in the fire: Wisd. 3. 6.
so men are tried in the furnace of affliction. 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
And Peter: Through manifold tentations ye are in heaviness, that the trial of
your faith, may be much more precious than gold. For as by the fire gold is
tried whether it be pure or no: so by the cross faith is tried, whether it be
without al dross of hypocrisy.

But what? Is not the judgment of God according unto ye truth? What justice
can it be to afflict men without cause why? Although affliction comes
some-time without a manifest fault: yet it never comes without cause why.
For this cross of trial has many causes and those weighty, as the trial of
faith, yt stirring up of the hear to cal-vpon God, to meditate upon the word
of God; the sense of GOD his presence in affliction; the contemplation of
eternal happiness; the preservation from greater evils* Therefore albeit the
cross of it self be evil: yet for so much as it heals and driueth-awaie
poiso^, it is necessary, as the auctor of the Epistle unto the Hebrews
teaches. For as myrrh, notwithstanding it be sharp and bitter; yet it
heals wounds, and preserves from putrefaction: So the cross of the
saints, though it be irksome to the flesh, and grievous: yet it destroieth
no^, but heals rather. Exo. 15, 25.
And as the waters which were very bitter in Marah, Eccles. 38, 5
after that the wood was thrown thereunto, became sweet: so there can no
cross happen to the saints of God in this life, but it becomes most
pleasant, if the wood of the cross of Christ be added, as a sauce: but if
that be taken away the waters become bitter, and unsavory, that is every
cross is very sour, and intolerable, unless it be tempered as it were
with the cross of Christ. Manifold examples of this kind of trial may be
red in the 11. Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

The last kind of cross is called Martyrie. 4. Kind of Cross.
Hereby testimony is borne to the doctrine of the Gospel, the end whereof is,
that by it, as by a seal as it were of God, many may be invited to embrace
the religion of Christ. Aug. in Psalm. 119.
Augustine expresses the signification of the name on this wise: Testimonies
in Greek are called Martyria, which word we in these days use as a Latin
word. Whereof it is that, we call such as are humbled for the testimony of
Christ by sundry afflictions, and have foughten even to the death for the
truths sake, such I say we call not Testes, that is witnesses, albeit that is
their name in Latin, but Martyrs after the Greeks.

Now the children of GOD are in this world tried after two manner of ways,
Kinds of Martyrdom.
by reproaches, Wisd. 2, 19.
and by torments. Let us examine him, said the wicked, with rebukes and
torments. 1. Tim. 4, 10
And Paul, Therefore we labor and are rebuked, because we trust in the living
God.

The benefit coming by the martyrdom of ye Saints, Profit of Martyrdom.
Theodoret very notably expresses, Theod. Lib. 9. de Legibus.
when he says: As in time passed the bushe that Moses saw, was not consumed
with fire: Exodus 3, 2. 3.
So neither did the weapons of enemies consume Christians, although they were
mightily beset round-about of the wicked. But rather as after trees be
hewen-downe, much more impes do springe-vp, than the bows were that were
cut off: So now also after the slaughter of many godly men, more did run
unto the gospel, and that day, by day than ever did: yea, and the blood of
the slain bodies was a certain watering of the new plants springing-vp in
the Church. So that a Martyr in suffering, does not suffer, for himself
only, as Ambrose says, but also for every man. For himself he suffers
to be crowned, for every man he suffers, to give them an example: For
himself to his rest; for every man to their welfare.

And although the very fear of GOD only be a sufficient cause, why that
Martyrs should endure torments courageously (for the fear of God should
work so, that we must contemn all other fears, after the example of ye
Apostles, who at the first being sharply whipped, Acts. 5, 40. 41.
grieved no whit thereat, but triumphed, sorowed not, but reioiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus) yet the ancient
writers do make four causes of the same, which they mention on this wise: The
love of Christ commands; Fortitud^ overcomes fear; Faith confirms the
mind; and patience endures. How many things are to be in a Martyr.


But in a Martyr I require these things in order. The first is a firm
knowledge, and demonstration of the doctrine of the Church: the second, a
lively faith in Christ: the third, a constant confession and defense of the
doctrine: the fourth, courage of mind to bear the cross: the fifth, obedience
or patience under the cross: the sixte, an invincible hope: the seventh,
invocation of GOD, to which together with the cause he should commend his
soul. All which are evident in Stephan the Proto-martyr. Acts. 7, 55. 56, etc.
For neither, as Augustine says, can they have the life of Martyrs, Who suffer
as Martyrs.
who have not the lives of Christians; seeing it is not the punishment, but the
cause that makes a Martyr. Wherefore the punishment of Anabaptists, and other
obstinate heretics, is not martyrdom, but a just punishment due to them by
God and the laws. Many fanatical heads indeed approach without fear unto the
torments, but it is because they are deluded by Satan, who endeuoreth by
their pains to confirm erroneous opinions unto the destruction of the Church.
And therefore let us duly consider the cause, why we suffer martyrdom,
least through the delusio^s of ye devil we be bewitched: for to suffer
persecution, to be in prison, to be whipped, to be kept from liberty, to be
killed is no praise: but this is praiseworthie, to have a good cause. For ye
praise consists in ye goodness of cause, not in the bitterness of punishment.
Neither would I have any man for some certain opinion not contrary to the
foundation of religion, to bring himself into danger, especialie if the
judgments of the godly which agree-together in the ground, are diverse,
which notwithstanding may stand without shaking the foundation, I mean the
article of faith.

Here happily some enquirer of the judgments of GOD, Why God suffers his
Saints to be martyred.
may demand, how it comes to pass, that God being most righteous, can
suffer his saints, whom most entirely he does love, to be torn after
such an horrible sort, and to be mangled and deformed with such contumelies;
and that of Satan and his members? Here we must open the eye not of reason,
but of faith; not the sense of flesh, but of the spirit must be consulted
withal, that we may clerelie behold the truth, and know that nothing
comes to the Saints of God without his providence, under the shadow whereof
they are covered. I confess indeed it is a trim sight for the Devil to see
Abel murdered of his own brother; Daniel cast into the Lions den; Job
spoiled of his goods, and replenished with botches; Steven to be stoned; yea
and all the saints with torments and shame, to be executed to death: But I
confess too, that in the eyes of God (who testifies, Psa. 116, 15
that in his sight the death of his Saints is precious) it is a much more
goodly sight; yet not of it self, but in respect of the event. And therefore
both God and the devil also will the punishment of the saints, but not both
alike, but with a diverse affection, and purpose. For God of mercy suffers
his Saints to be afflicted; but the devil persecuteth them of malice: God,
that theie may be crowned; the devil, that theie may be confounded: God, as a
Father; the devil, as a tyran, and hangman; God, for his own glory; the
devil, to his own confusion. Of these causes Augustine speaks on this wise:
Every wicked man in himself has a will to hurt, but yet has no power in
himself that he may hurt, that he would he is now accused, that he may
through the secret dispensation of God, he is given to one to be punished, to
another to be proved, to another to be crowned. To be punished the Israelites
were delivered into the hands of strangers, because theie had sinned against
God. To be proved, Job was delivered to Satan: And Job was proved: but Satan
put unto shame: To be crowned the Martyrs were tormented of bloody
persecutors. And therefore a great deal more happy are the martyrs in their
torments, than the most mighty monarchs in their delitiousnes, riches,
honor, and pleasures. Which thing Augustine also does witness, when he says:
The men of this world are unhappily happy: but the Martyrs were happily
unhappy. For theie were unhappy for a time, but theie are happy for ever.
According to the word of the LORD: Math. 5, 10
Blessed are theie which suffer persecution for righteousness sake. This
success of the Martyrs is notably described by the Psalmist in these words:
Psalm. 126, 5 6.
Theie that do sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Theie went weeping and
carried precious seed: but theie shall return with joy, and bring their
sheaues. And hence it is that the holy Martyrs of God do cast their eyes and
their mind, not unto the time of sowing, and to the purpose of Satan, that
would utterly ouerwhelme ye Church of God in the streams of blood, but
especially unto the most ioieful time, when the sheaues shall be gathered
together with gladness, and unto the reverend providence of God who after this
manner by his wise counsel will have his saints to be exercised in this life,
that theie may be like his son, both in the cross, and in glory. Whence it
is that the holy Martyrs of God do comfort themselves in the mids of
torments. For theie know, 2. Cor. 4, 17.
That light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto them a far
more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory; and that, as it is in the
Epistle unto the Hebrews; Chastising brings the quiet fruit of righteousness.
Heb. 12, 11.
Hitherto makes that adhortation of Peter: 1. Pet, 4, 13
Rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. By the remembrance of this
providence of God, let us strengthen our minds against the offense of the
cross, and think-vpo^ a ioiful event, to wit, how theie who in this world
bear witness to Christ, How the Martyrs are to be worshipped.
shall in ye world to come be eternalie blessed with Christ. Furthermore it
may be asked with what service are ye martyrs to be worshipped, especialie for
so much as we see temples to be erected, wherein the names of martyrs, and of
others are placed, and festiual days ordained in their honor, and worship?
Unto this question out of Cyril, where he refelled the slanders of Julian, I
do thus answer: We do say how the holy martyrs be no Gods; neither have we
used to worship them. But we praise them with great honor, for so much as
valiantly theie have foughten for the truth, and kept the synceritie of the
faith. And Augustine: The examples of the saints are not set before us, that
we should of them be justified, but that following their foote-steps we may
know, how he has justified us, who justified them. Therefore if either
temples be erected under the names of Martyrs, or Feasts be instituted in
their momorie, I mislike it not, so it be done not for worship sake, but
only to retain them^in remembrance, and to recite their acts, that others
may both thank God for their constancy, and imitate their examples, if any
occasion shall seem to require the same. The things which Monks do tell of
martyrs, are but mere fables and illusions; As that Martyrs at the hour of
their martyrdom have begged of God, that so many as bear their passions in
memory, and worship them upon fasting, and ember days, may be delivered from
certain diseases. Which their lies are so abominable, as nothing can be more.
For did the holy martyrs make such a request, theie were extreme blasphemers
of God his holy Name.

Besides the Papists do faigne how the martyrs of God for three causes are
to be worshipped. Martyrs are not to be worshipped.
The first whereof is the need we stand in; the second, the glory of the
martyrs; the third, the reverence of God. But al these rotten reasons are
ouerthrown, as it were with a thunderbolt from heaven, by this saying of the
Lord: Mat. 4, 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thie God, and him only shall thou serve. If
then necessity do press thee down, follow the example of David: Psalm. 121,
2.
who says, Mine help comes from the Lord, which has made the heaven, and
the earth. For that is the commandment of the Lord, Psalm. 50, 15.
Call-vpon me in the day of trouble. And the truth it self does say: John.
16, 23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my Name; he will give it you.

And whereas theie say, the glory of Saints is more known through
calling-vpon them, to wit while we obtain that which we ask by the help of
them, that is open blasphemy, and reproach against the son of God, yea and
most filthy idolatry, which all the saints do abhor.

Neither is that of greater force, that theie say, the reverence toward God
does require, that a sinner who has offended God, should not approach unto God
himself without a patron, As though that patron did not suffice, whom we have
in heaven, 1. John 2, 1.
even Jesus Christ the righteous. If any man sin, says John, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just. 2.
And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also
for the sin of the whole world.

And therefore the Papists do both deceive, and are deceived of Satan, who
has brought the worship of Saints into the world, even utterly to abolish, or
at the least to blemish the office of our only Mediator Jesus Christ; to make
the Saints infamous; and finally, that ye idolatrous worshippers of Saints
may be partakers of his eternal torments.

So then omitting fables, and delusions of the devil, let us imitate the
examples of the saints in all their well-doing; and prepare we our selves to
enter into troubles for the truth of God, so long as we go on warfare upon
this earth. And that this is the true use of the memory of Saints, Augustine
also does witness, when he says: There is none have a better way to instruct
the people of God, than Martyrs: examples are of more force th^n words* and
better is it by deed, than by voice to teach.

Besides it is demanded, Whether idolatrous Princes are to be obeyed.
whether it be lawful for any man to se^ himself against tyra^ts, which
maintain idolatry, especialie seeing that Christians are commanded to obeie
even the cruel: For so Peter says: Be ye subject to your Masters withal fear,
1, Pet. 2, 18.
not only to the good and courteous, but also to be froward. This
commandment of the Apostle, whereby we are commanded to obeie even the froward,
is not so to be understood, as though we should obeie them in matters against
our salvation, Obedience to Magistrates.
but theie are to be followed, so long as theie command either such things as
are honest, or things against right, if so be theie only make us miserable
in respect of our bodies, not ungodly in respect of our souls. Therefore
Polycarp does ^aie: That honor is to be given to the Magestrate, which is not
contrary to religion.

If therefore he command thee to do against religion, Acts. 5, 29.
answer with Peter, we ought rather to obeie God than man. For we obeie the
Magistrate, even because God has commanded that we should. And therefore if he
command that which God has forbidden, theie are held excused by the
commandment of a superior* namely God; and delivered from obedience to the
inferior, which is man, be he notwithstanding for authority mighty.

But by the way, Tyr^^^ how to be resisted.
it is to be noted that tyra^tes are to be resisted two manner of ways. One
is, when subjects do improve wicked decrees, as those three yong-men of whom
Daniel speaks, Dan. 3, 12. 16. 17. 18.
refused to adore the image erected by the tyrant; and chose to be cast into
the burning furnace rather then theie would obeie the wicked commandment of
the Tyrant. For this commandment, 1. Cor. 10, 14
Fly from idolatry, binds al men be, theie of what state o^ degree so-euer.
The other way to resist tyrant^ is, when subjects fly unto their weapons,
wherebie theie remoue-awaie wicked commandementes.

Here a question is moved, whether it be lawful for the maintenance of
religion to resist tyrans, and by sword to hinder wicked and ungodly decrees?
In this place I distinguish between them that are under one chief head,
whether he be a King, or an Emperor, or any other Monarch. Who may by weapon
if need so require resist Tyran^.


For some are subjects simply: some are Magistrates next unto the cheef
Magistrate, and theie are caled popular magistrates, such were in time passed
at Lacedemonia the Ephors; at Athens the Demarches; at Rome the Tribunes of the
people, and are at this day the Septe^^^irie in the Roman Empire, the chief
Senator^ next unto Kings in every Realm. These for somuchas. theie are
placed of God, first to be the keepers of the first and second tables, yt is,
to see that true religion be professed ^ and honest discipline in use; then to
moderate, and if need require, to bridle the raging desires of kings and
monarchs when theie set-downe any thing against the laws and religion, these
I say both may, yea and are bound first by counsel, so much as may be, to
set themselves against tyrants; and by their wisdom stop their foolish
enterprises. But if by their wise counsel theie prevail nothing with the
tyrants, then are theie bound yea with weapons to defend godly subjects, and
remoue-awaie idolatry, and restore true religion: which thing if theie do
not, theie discharge their duties but fraudulently.

And although the Church does not increase by wars: yet outward violence,
which is offered to religion by tyrants, may by the magistrate placed
between the chief head, and private men, be repelled by force. Which thing
both nature teaches, and the office of the popular magistrate requires, and
the examples of holy men do confirm: wherefore let the magistrates, and
moderators of the chief head, have this saying of the Lord before their eyes:
Mat. 22, 21
Give unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, and give unto God, those
things which are Gods.

CHAP. 4.
1. An allegorical representatio^ of the office of ministers; 2. The sundry
significations of the word, Well, or fountain, in the Scriptures.
AND DIGGETH A WELL.
THis fourth member touching the teachers of the Church, is an allegorical
image of the ministers of the word. This pleasant allegory does admonish us
of many things. First it sends us unto the very fountain, God a well, and
in what sense.
namely unto God himself. And God is called a well, both because he has al
good things from himself; and also for that he does communicate from thence
with his creatures without any hinderance to himself. For God ministers to
al, lacking naught, and receiving nothing of any man. Of this fountain the
Psalm speaks: Psalm. 42* 2.
My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God. And ye Lord by the
Prophet Jeremiah does say: Ier. 2, 13.
My people have committed two evils: Ierem. 2, 13.
they have forsaken me the fountane of living waters, to dig them pittes,
even broken pittes that can hold no water. John. 4, 10. 14.
And the Lord in the Gospel calls himself a Well. The water issuing from
this fountane, The water of God, what; Joel. 2, 28.
is both the gift of the holy ghost; Therefore says the Prophet: I will
powre-out my spirit upon all flesh; and also the doctrine of the Gospel, or the
promise of Christ. These are wholesome waters indeed, wherewithal the hot,
and troubled consciences are cooled. And ye doctrine puffs not up, but is
spiritual, and withal cools the heart from the lusts of the world, and
inflameth with the love of GOD. Which wholesome waters Peter calls the words
of eternal life, John. 6, 68.
when he says: Master, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal
life. Therefore in the Revelation Christ says: Revel. 21, 6.
I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely.

And as this living water is offered through the preaching of the Gospel: The
water of life how received.
so by faith it is drawn, and taken, according to the words of the Lord:
John. 6, 35.
He that believes in me, shall never thirst. Hitherto makes that saying of
Isaiah, With joy shall ye draw waters out of the wels of salvation. Isai.
12, 3. 4.
And ye shall say in that day, Praise the Lord; cal-vpon his name.

Secondly it signifies that men are altogether unclean and dry, unless
they be watered with the waters of this fountane, and be filled. Because no
man, as Bernard says, is clean from filth, all men have need of the well of
mercy, and with a like desire should hasten unto this well with Noah, Daniel,
and Job. And the Lord says, Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him, John. 4, 14.
shall never be more a thirst. Of this water also the Prophet Zechariah did
prophecy in these words: And in that day shall there waters of life go-out
from Jerusalem, Zach. 14 8.
that is the preaching of the Euangelical doctrine, which having proceeded from
Judea, and Jerusalem, shall be sowed afterward over the whole world.

Thirdly it calls us back from puddles, and cisterns, which either have no
water at all, or if they have, it is muddie, and unclean, yea and infected
with poison, that is, it reclaimeth us from the doctrines of men, and devils,
the which do kill such as drink thereof with their poison.

Moreover David in this allegorical picture has an eye first unto the type of
the ministry of the Gospel, which is proponed in Genesis, Gen, 2, 10.
where it is said, That out of Eden went a river that watered the whole
world. Christ our Lord is that living fountane buried in the earth, but from
the heart of the earth it springs a living well to water the face of the
whole earth, that is to refresh so many as dwell upon the earth with the most
comfortable waters of his Gospel, that theie never thirst more. Secondly, unto
that fountain of water, which issued from the hard rock, and followed the
people. Which rock, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 10, 4.
was a figure of Christ. Whose water did signify the most delectable liquor of
the Gospel. Thirdly, he had respect unto the condition of men in his time,
which dwelled far-of from Jerusalem. For theie thorough the vales of ^eares
went unto Jerusalem at the hie feasts, and in their tedious iourneie with
great labor dug the earth to find water for the quenching of their thirst.
And therefore in the spirit saw how the great pains of the ministers was
signified, who not without infinite troubles and persecutions should draw
water out of the fountains of salvation, wherebie theie might refresh those
which thirst after their souls health.

CHAP. 5.
1. How the teachers in the Church are blessed, and prosper; 2. Their enemies
who theie be; 3. Whether in the time of persecution, theie may fly or no; 4.
Comfortes for the Ministers in their conflictes.
DOVTLESSE WITH BLESSINGS SHALL THE TEACHER BE CROWNED.

7 THEIE GO FROM VICTORY UNTO VICTORY.


THis fifth member of the description, contains a promise of blessing for the
teachers of the Church, and of good success in the ministry.

This promise co^prehendeth as most plentiful doctrine, so most sweet comfort.
The doctrine is, how the ministry of the word should prosper. Of this
efficacy the Prophet Isaiah speaks on this wise: Isai. 55, 10.
As the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring-forth, and bud, that it
may give seed to the sower, 11.
and bread unto him that eats: So shall my word be, that goeth-out of my
mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. As if he said, The
word of promise, which at my commandment ye are to preach, shall evermore be
of force. For as the rain which at my bidding waters the earth, and makes
it fruiteful, so that of a little seed the husbandmen gather such an harvest,
that not only, theie feed their own family therewithal but also have
sufficient seed for the year ensuing: so also shall the seed of my word be
fruitful, and prosper, so that the sowers of the word may bring-home
abundance of fruit.

Afterward when he adds:
They go from victory unto victory,
He signifies how the teachers of ye Church shall not want enemies, whom
notwithstanding they shall overcome through the power of GOD, wherewith they
are strengthened.

Moreover the enemies with whom the soldiers of the Church, Enemies of the
Church who.
that is, the preachers of the word do encounter, they are the devil and his
guard, tyrants, sophisters, hypocrites, and Epicures. Against these enemies the
ministers of the Gospel enter into the feelde being armed with spiritual
armor; of which armor we have already spoken In the first part, Chap. 3.
Page. 18. 19.
. The Devil he lays snares both for the doctrine, and for the life of the
ministers of the word, that by either, Purpose of Satan.
or by both, he may overthrow us. Against this enemy we are to fight by
synceritie of doctrine, by innocence of life, and by ardent calling-vppon the
Lord of hoastes. Submit your selves to God, Romans 4, 7.
says James, resist the devil, and he will fly from you. And as he is obedient
to GOD which gives credit to his word, and lives according unto the same:
So he resists the Devil, inuading the word and the life, who retains
synceritie of doctrine, lives innocentlie, and calls earnestly upon GOD.
But when this thadgeth not well with him, that is, when he is not able either
to corrupt the doctrine, or to mar the life, he flies, and confesses
himself to be overcome. And, because he is much more mightier than man is,
this promise is deeply to be engraven in the heart, And he will fly from
you, that is, nothing will hurt you, he shall not overthrow you by his
subtilties, so long as ye abide grounded upon faith. 1. John. 5, 4.
For faith is the victory of the world, that is of the devil and of al his
warriers.

But for so much as there is perpetual war between Satan and the Church of
Christ, we ought then especialie to be in arms, when he seems to fly away.
For he flies not as one without al hope of any buckling again, but that
after an other way he may return out of his ambushes with greater force. For
as he is unconstant and crafty, and of great experience: so he sets upon
the ministers of the Gospel now this way, and then an other way, and
therebie sometime he he makes great slaughter, as may appear in heretics
of al ages, among whom there have been many very learned, and godly men, but
being snarled and utterly blinded with the nets of Satan, and arguments of
blind reason, theie have yielded. And therefore the soldiers of God, and
guiders of the Church of Christ, will stand in the fore-fronte against the
devil, under the banner of Christ, keeping faith and a good conscience by all
manner prayers and supplications, praieng always in the spirit, and in
watching therein with all earnestness, that utterance may be given to them in
the opening of their mouth with boldness, that theie may make the mystery
of God to be known, for which theie are sent in embassage.

Tyrants also, Tyrans enemies to the ministers of the Church.
theie most furiously do persecute the ministers of the Gospel, theie kill,
and dispatch many out of the world. Notwithstanding they do not so much
overcome, as theie are overcome.

For as their better part, to wit, the mind is a slave to filthy affections:
So the souls of the godly in the mids of their troubles do triumph in
joy. For theie both comfort themthemselues with a constant hope of the glory
prepared for them; and also with the eye of faith theie do behold the miserable
destruction of such as persecute them.

Of which destruction David speaks after this wise: Psalm. 52, 5.
God shall destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee and pluck thee out of
thy tabernacle, and root the out of the land of the living. The righteous
also shall see it, 6.
and fear, and shall laugh at him, 7.
saying, Behold the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted unto
the multitude his riches, and put his strength in his malice. 8.
But I shall be like a green olive tree in the house of God: For I trusted in
the mercy of God, for ever and ever. And therefore Nero in killing Paul, was
overcome of Satan, through whose instigation he persecuted, and slew the
Apostle: But Paul was crowned, and went from victory unto victory. For not
only he himself received a crown of righteousness from the righteous judge:
but his blood beside was a certain watering of the Lords feelde, whereby the
young plants of the Church does more and more increase.

But here springs a question concerning flight: Whether the preachers in time
of persecution may fly, or no.
Whether in the time of persecution godly pastors may shifte for themselves
by flight to avoid the hands of tyrants, especially seeing at the first
show there be contrary sayings and examples to in the scripture? These places
should see^e to be contrary, Mat. 10, 13.
When they persecute you in this city, flee unto another: And, An hireling
sees the woulfe coming, John. 10, 22.
and he leaves the sheep, and flies. The examples, Christ fled into Egypt;
Mat 2, 13.
Paul was let-downe in a basket, 14.
and so escaped from his persecutors: Acts 9, 25.
On the otherside both Christ, and Paul, yea and infinite Martyrs and doctors
of the Church have voluntarily yielded themselves into the hands of tyrants.

The contrariety of these sayings, and examples may easily be reconciled,
if we mark the causes well. He that by fleeing seeks his own, and not the
things which are Christ's, is much to blame. Contrariewise, he that by flieng
seeks the glory of God, and not his own commodity, offends not. And
therefore says Augustine: The servant of God sins not, though seeing the
rage of tyrants, greedelie bent to destroy his soul, he changes his aboade,
if so be that he commend his flock to the hie shepherde sitting in heaven, and
saves himself for their advantage by flight.

But this commandment seems to be contrary thereunto, An objection.
Fear ye not them which kill the body, Mat. 10, 18
but are not able to kill the soul. Now what is flight, I pray you, but a
fear? If therefore fear be forbidden, flight also is forbidden. Answer.
I answerere, when thou art in the hands of a Tyran, thou must contemn death,
according to the commandment of the Lord, Fear not them which kill the body:
but if thou art out of his claws, thou ought to fly from the persecutor,
not so much to save thy self, as for thy sheep sake, provided always that
thy flight be not a betraing of the sheep. For he makes a tyrant, that
provoke; and he that shunneth, corrects him. And therefore this distinction
of Augustine is to be had in mind: Au. Ep. 180.
When persecution is hot, the ministers of Christ are to fly, if so be that
either there is no congregation where they are, or if there be, when there be
ministers enough to fulfill the ministry, which have not such cause to fly.
But when the people shall abide, and all the ministers fly away, what else do
they show themselves, but even cursed hirelings without all care of the sheep?

But if Tyrants do persecute without all respect all the ministers of the
gospel, and spare the common people, what is then to be done? Hereunto
Augustine does answer, That having made earnest prayer unto God, they are by
lot to choose who shall flee, and who shall tarry. For in so doing both good
regard is had for the present state of the Church, and also it is well provided,
that when the teachers of the Church be once killed, it shall want no ministers
for all that to instruct them.

Sophisters and Sycophantes being puffed-vp with the wisdom of this world,
Sophisters an other sort of enemies.
they subtillie lay snares to entrappe the preachers. The scope of whom is,
that the fountanes of Israel being either stopped, or troubled, that is, that
the heavenly doctrine being either utterly abolished, or depraved with
humane, or diuelishe devises, the Church, whose life is the purity of Gods
word, may be oppressed. Their sophistical art is fitly compared to a
brawling woman, Whom who so hides, Pro. 27, 16.
hides the wind, and she is as the oil in his right hand, that utters it
self, as Solomon says. For the slightes thereof are infinite. Whereof it is,
that he which would refute al Sophismes, does like him which would take the
winds in a net.

Then what is to be done? How are Sophisters to be resisted? The Pastors of
the Church above al things must keep in memory the strong and evident
testimonies concerning every principal point of doctrine; from which they
must not suffer themselves to be with-drawen by any sophistry of man: which
they shall notably withstand, if they have been well instructed in true
Logique. Logique.
Seco^dlie, by ardent prayer they must beg of God, that by his word he would
strengthen them against ye subtle reasons of man, least the truth be wound in
by the serpent, and so choked, that is, that by sophistry it be neither
utterly overthrown, nor at the least depraved.

Thirdly, they are to eschew all improper kinds of phrases, and unusual of
the Church, and to content themselves with the simplicity of speech, which the
truth does love. Finalie, if so instructed, they are not yet able quickelie
to answer unto all Sophismes, let them be contented with the simplenes of
doctrine, which is evidently expressed, and proved with manifold testimonies
of the scripture agreing-together. And the ministers of the Gospel being thus
armed, they shall easily beare-awaie the bell, from al their adversaries
notwithstanding the subtlety of the slipperie serpent.

A notable example hereof I will add, taken-out of the Ecclesiastical
history, following the usual translation: Eccles Hist. Lib. 13.
What force (says he) the simplicity of faith has, we do know by those
things which be reported to be done there. For when for the care of the
religious Emperor, the Priests from all parts of the world had
assembled-together, very noble and rich Philosophers, also came thither too,
moved through an opinion they had: among whom a certain notable Logician
day by day would move great conflictes of disputation to our Bishops, men
not vnprobablie learned in Logique. And great concourse of learned, and
lettered men there was to hear; yet could the Philosopher by no means be
either brought unto a blancke, or caught from flieng of any man. For by his
art of Logique he so met with the questions objected, that when he seemed
most of al to be taken, as a slipperie Eele he slidawaie. But (because God
would show that his kingdom consists not in word, but in power) among the
confessors (of the truth) a certain Bishop of a most simple nature, which
knew nothing beside Jesus Christ, and him crucified, was present. Who seeing
the Philosopher to insult over those which took our parts, and bosting himself
of his craft^nes through the art of disputation, craves of al me^ rome, and
faith he would speak a few words with the Philosopher. But they on our sid,
which knew well enough the simplicity, and blunt speech of this man, began to
blush somewhat, and to fear least peradventure his holy simplicity should be
made a laughing game among subtle felows: yet would not this father desist
from his purpose, but thus began his speech: In the name of Jesus Christ, faith
he, harken o Philosopher, unto the truth. There is one God, who made both
heaven and earth, and which gave life to man, whom he had framed out of the,
lime of the earth; he has created all things both visible, and invisible, by
the power of his word, and established them by the sanctification of his
spirit. This word and wisdom, whom we call the son, taking pity upon
the errors of mankind, was borne of a virgin; and has through the passion of
his death delivered us from everlasting damnation, and by his resurrection has
given us everlasting life, whom also we trust shall come to judge all things
which we go about. Do thou believe this to be true, o Philosopher? But he
the Philosopher) as though he had never learned any art to gainsay, was so
astonished through the power of the words, that he had nothing to say, but only
this that he did think so, and that there was none other thing true besid that
which he had said. Then the old man: If thou beleeuest these things to be so,
said he, arise and follow me unto Demonicus, and receive the sign of this
faith. And the Philosopher turning about unto his disciples, and unto them
which came to hear, harke^, says he, o learned men, while I was dealt withal
with words, I to words opposedwords, and by the art of speech did overthrow
whatsoever was said: but when for words, power proceeded from the mouth of the
speaker, words could not resist power, nor man prevail against God. And
therefore if any among you can of those things which have been spoken, perceive
the things which I do, let him give credit to Christ, and follow this old man
in who^ God has spoken. This story notably does teach by what weapons
victory may be atchiued against Sophisters, namely by a certain persuasion or
demonstration of ye ground of religion; by simplicity of spech; and by ardent
prayer, yt God may give strength to his word, as though himself did utter the
same by his own most holy mouth.

As ye hypocrites, Hypocrites ^ fourth sort of enemy (...)
I mean stage plaiers are not taken for them which they be, but do put-on, and
represent a strange person, or as Augustine says, they hid yt which they are
under a personage, and boast in a personage yt which they are not: Hypocrites
who.
So the scripture by a Metaphor, calls such hypocrites as by external
gestures and deeds boaste themselves for saints, when for all that their
mind is profane and wicked, that is, when the outward man appears meek as
a sheep, when the inward is ravening like a woulfe. Mat. 7, 15
For by this image Christ depainted hypocrites. Hypocrisy what.
Hereof hypocrisy is said to be an outward faigning of godliness under a
profane and wicked mind. So that a double sin is in hypocrisy, to wit,
impiety and lying. For which cause their damnation is doubled, for they are
condemned both as wicked against God; and as liers before men. Therefore the
saying of Aristotle against Xenocrates may well be applied to hypocrites,
(...) etc. Fair hands he has, but a foul heart.

These because they are not enemies, but citizens; not haters, but friends;
not strangers, but will be counted of the householde of the Church; they do
more easily overthrow the simpler sort, than do open enemies. For it is
truly said: A sase and a common way to beguile, is under the name of
friendship.

Now what hurt hypocrites have done to the Church, the histories of al ages
do abundantly declare. For, seeing they fight with outward superstition and
ceremonies, wherewith the rude people are most of all moved; and because they
cloak their supertion with fastinges, long prayers, alms deeds, and fained
sadness of the face, they set-vppon the doctrine of free justification, and
would obscure the same with a certain witchcraft, as may appear in the
sects of al monks.

But against this hypocrisy prudent simplicity must be opposed, which
consists in the knowledge of the truth, in ye love of goodness, and in doing
righteousness. Then by teaching, the visor is to be taken from hypocrites, that
the woulfe, which they do hide, may appear, filthiness be seen, the
subtilties detected, and inward wickedness be known, that all may learn
how that the kingdom of God does consist not in outward rites, not in
ceremonies, not in a sained show; but in the true godliness of mind.

Last of all, Epicures a ^isi kind of enemies to religion.
the Epicures they also insult over the doctrine of the Church, and persecute
the same; preferring pleasures, riches, and worldly glory, before the will of
God, celestial riches, and the eternal glory of the saints. These
objections are somewhat confuted in the 1. part, Chap. 12, pa. 120, 121.
Theie obiecte the stumbling block of the cross of Christ; theie object the
small number of those which vnfaignedlie do believe the Gospel; theie obiecte
the glory of the popish kingdom; theie obiecte the wisdom of the
adversaries; and finalie theie object the heresies, and schisms wherewithal
the Church is rent-asunder. But he which rightly has learned Jesus Christ,
and which measures the felicity of man, not with the falfe measure of humane
wisdom, but by the truth of the celestial doctrine, and by ye event or end
of each, that is of the godly and of the wicked, will easily contemn all
their mockes and scoffs. Of this event you may read in the 37. and 73.
Psalms.

Now because the doctors of the Church do encounter with these adversaries,
whose engines are ouerthrown by spiritual weapons and they break the force of
their enemies, theie are said to go from victory unto victory.

Moreover, Comforts for godly ministers in their troubles.
of the doctrine whereof now we have spoken, a most sweet consolation is
gathered, whereby the ministers of the word may stir-vp themselves in their
conflict with the forementioned enemies. For first they will comfort them
selves in this, that the cause is not theirs, but the Lords; Secondly, that
they come forth unto battle, being armed not with carnal weapons, but with
spiritual; Thirdly, that they have present with them a king or capitane,
under whom theie fight, even Christ himself, who is the vanquisher of the
whole kingdom of darkness; Fourthlie, they have an eye unto the incorruptible
crown of righteousness proposed before them by Christ their chief capitane;
Last of all, that the end of the fight shall be very ioifull and pleasant,
wherein God himself will show himself to their eyes, of which thing it
follows in the description.

CHAP. 6.
1. The final cause of the victory of Christ his soldiers; 2. how God is
continualie present in his Church.
THAT GOD IN SION MAY APPEAR.
THis sixth and last part of the present description contains the final
cause why the soldiers of Christ have got the victory, namely that God may
be acknowledged to be the defender and keeper of his Church, according to the
promise, Mat. 16, 18.
The gates of hell shall not overcome it. Hitherto belongs that prayer in the
115. Psalm. Psalm. 115, 1.
Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory, for thie
loving mercy, 2.
and for thy trueths sake, Wherefore shall the heathen say, Where is now their
God? As if he said, this blasphemy of men which deny the to have care of thy
Church, repress, giuing-out a testimony of thy presence in the Church.

And although God does testify his presence in ye whole world by his
providence, God how present in his Church.
gouerna^ce, and preservation of the nature of things: yet by certain peculiar
ways he shows that he is present in the Church, and in every of the
saints, as by preserving the ministry of his word and sacraments; by his
dwelling in the saints through faith; by inward comfort; by his miraculous
defending the^ against the rage of devils, and wicked men. Of this presence
these places of holy scripture do bear record. Number. 14, 13
When the Egyptians shall hear it (for thou broughtest this people by thy
power from among them) Then they shall say to the inahbitants of this land, 14.
for they have heard that thou Lord, art among this people, and that thou,
Lord, art seen face unto face, Joshua. 3, 10
etc. Again, Herebie ye shall know that the living God is among you. Again,
That all the world may know, 1. Sa. 17, 46.
that Israel has a God. Again, That all the gentiles may understand, how
thou only art God in the universal earth. Isai. 37, 20.
And again, Now therefore o Lord our God, save thou us out of his hand,
that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou only art the Lord.

This presence of God in the Church has a double end proposed. Ends of God
his presence in the Church.
One whereof unto the householde of the Church; the other belongs unto
strangers and profane people. And as touching the godly, or of the householde
of faith, this is the end of God his presence in the Church, namely that the
godly may be strengthened in faith; that theie may praise God under whose
wings theie are secure; that under the cross theie may call upon God who is
present before them; and that through patience theie may look for victory
over the devil, and the world. Hence comes that consolation of great faith,
Numb. 14, 9.
The Lord is with us, fear them not.

And as touching those which are without, and profane folks, this is the end
of God his presence in the Church, that either they may join themselves unto
the true Church, by repentance, having renounced all prophanenes and impiety;
or, if they do not so, that their own consciences may be witnesses of their
just condemnation. For it will come to pass at the length, according to the
saying of the Psalm, Psalm. 83, 17.
that they shall be confounded and troubled for ever, 18.
yea, they shall be put to shame and perish, that they may know that thou,
which art called Jehovah, art alone, even the most hie over all the earth.
Psalm. 52, 5.
And as it is in another Psalm, He shall destroy thee for ever, he shall
take thee, and pluck thee out of this tabernacle, and root thee out of the
land of the living. 6.
The righteous also shall see it, and fear, and shall laugh at him, saying, 7.
Behold the man that took not, God for his strength but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his malice. So yt no evil can
be imagined either so plagie or so hurtful, as through sin to be separated
from God; to be turned from the everlasting fountane of al goodness unto ye most
noisome dunghill of al miseries; from the most comfortable life unto the most
bitter death; finalie, from true happiness unto endless torments.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS PSALM.
CHAP. 1.
1. The parts of this third part; 2. whereupon true prayer is to be grounded.
THE third part of the Psalm is a prayer, wherebie David prays that the
Church may be defended, it is contained in the 8, 9, 10, and 11. verses; and
it consists of a proposition, and of a confirmation, of which as they stand
we will entreat.

The eight verse. O LORD GOD OF HOSTS, HEAR^ MY PRAYER; HEARKEN, O GOD OF
IAAKOB.
This proposition of ye prayer is vpholde^ with two reasons, the former whereof
goeth-before, the other follows the proposition. For petitions are not wont
to be proponed simply, and nakedlie, but most commonly they are adorned with
arguments of persuasion, often they are set out with epithetes applied to the
thing which is asked, the more to move.

The former reason, 1. Reason.
is contained in these words, O Lord God of hoastes, and it is taken from the
power of God, as if he said; For So Much as thou art that almighty Lord of
hoastes, whom nothing can resist, but all things do yield to thy
government, it is a very easy thing for you to maintain and defend your
Church, against all manner enemies which it has. And therefore I beseech you,
show forth this your power in defending the Church against the fury both of
the devils and wicked men, which partly by snares, and partly in open feelde
do set-vppon your Church.

The latter reason whereby the petition is adorned, The latter reason.
and vpholden, is this, O God of Iaakob. This reason is taken from the love of
GOD toward the Church. For when he mentions Iaakob, he has a respect unto
the promise made unto Iaakob the Nephew of Abraham, and to his seed, that is,
to so many as by the faith of the promise be received into the family of
Iaakob, that is into the Church. And the promise made to Iaakob is founded in
the blessed seed Jesus Christ; therefore it is so much as if he had said:
Hear my prayer, for our Lord and mediators sake even Jesus Christ.

In all our prayers let us have a consideration of these two causes; the former
whereof teaches how God is able to accomplish that which we desire; the other
how that he will, and that because of his fatherly promise. These two causes
the Lord ioineth-together in the form of prayer which he commends to his
disciples, Matthew. 6, 9.
when he says: After this manner pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven.
For, when we say, Our father, we signify ye fatherly goodwil of God toward
his sons, that is toward al ye faithful: And when we ad, Which art in heaven,
we show ye divine majesty and power of God whereby he is able to do whatsoever
he will. For he will do whatsoever he has promised. For the promise is
voluntary and free.

Furthermore of these two things are gathered. The first is how theie alone
can rightly and effectually pray, who have the promise; the second, that
the force of prayer depends not upon the dignity of man, but of the mercy
of GOD which promises to hear all, that through faith upon the promise, do
call upon him.

Touching the Lord of hoastes; his fight; his armies, and triumphs, look our
annotations upon the first verse of this Psalm 1. part, cap. 3. Page. 11. 12,
etc.
.

CHAP. 2.
1. The grounds of prayers; 2. God hears the faithful of what calling soever.
The ninth verse. BEHOLD, O GOD OUR PROTECTOR; AND LOOKE-VPON THE FACE OF THINE
ANOINTED.
THe repetition of the prayer is also adorned with two reasons, the former
whereof contains both the above mentioned, For it is taken both from the
power, and also from the willingness of God. For when he says, O our protector,
or shield, he does insinuate both the power whereby he can, and the willingness
wherebie God will assist. And when he adds also, Look upon the face of
thine anointed: He fetches his reason in like sort from the virtue of the
promise. For when God anointed David for king over his people, he promised
withal to help him so often as through faith he called upon him. And
therefore in a certain Psalm he says, Psalm. 32, 7.
Thou preseruest me from trouble. Psalm. 32. 7.
Save thou me that being saved, I may praise thy name. Very many such like
sentences are in the Psalms.

Moreover this reason is fitly applied to every godly man in his lawful
vocation. For, as David was called of God unto the kingdom; and therefore he
craves of God that he would defend his own ordinance: So every one that is
called unto any function, whether it be civil or ecclesiastical, should
persuade himself that his calling is of God, and therefore that God will
defend his own ordinance, and hear such as call upon him through faith.
This comfort they do lack, which rush-vppon every function through fraud
without lawful calling.

CHAP. 3.
1. What an honor it is to be of the true Church of God; 2. Causes why the
wicked continewe in their security.
The tenth verse. FOR ADAIE IN THY COVRTES IS BETTER THAN A THOVSANDE ELSEWHERE.
I HAD RATHER TO BE OF NO REPVTATION IN THY HOUSE, THAN TO DWELL IN THE
TABERNACLES OF THE UNGODLY.
THE reason of the last proposition, Look upon the face of thine anointed,
that is, grant that I, who am made a king of you, may be restored to my
kingly dignity. And although in this mine exile I could get me the favor of
the kings my neighbors, yea and dwell and live pleasantly together with them:
yet more do I esteem the Church of God, where the word is preached, and
according to the word of God both prayers be made, and sacrifices offered, than
the glorious palaces of kings: yea and so am I affected, that I would choose
to have the basest and vilest office in the Church of God, than without the
Church in the palaces of wicked kings which neither know nor call upon the
God of Israel, to florishe with riches, power, honors, and pleasure.

So that this place does teach what an honor it is to be a citizen of the
Church of God; so that the most contemptible function in the Church is to be
desired before ye greatest glory of worldly kings and princes, which without
the householde of God, do either serve idols, or be mere Atheistes, knowing
none other GOD besides their belly.

But how came this affection in ye most holy king David? The reason of this
affection is not seen with the eyes of ye body, but only with ye eyes of
faith; it is not learned in the courts, and palaces of worldly kings, but
in the sanctuary of God: as David himself acknowledges, when he says: Psalm.
73, 16
I thought to know this (namely why the Church is oppressed, and the wicked
do flourish) But it was too painful for me, 17.
until I w^nt into the sanctuary of God, then understood I their ends. 18.
Surely thou have set them in slipperie places, and castest them down into
desolation. 19.
How souddenlie are theie destroyed? They perished for their sin: 23.
yet I was alwaie with thee, 24.
thou have held by my right hand. Thou will guide me by thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory.

David therefore by the eyes of faith not only considers the glory of the
church, and the future happiness of the citizens of the same; but also
thinks upon the most lamentable destruction of those men, who call not upon
God in his congregation. Of both which, that is, of the happiness of the Church,
and damnation of the ungodly, David himself speaks on this wise: Psalm. 73, 27
Lo, theie which withdraw themselves from thee, 28.
shall perish; thou destroiest al them which go a whoring from thee. As for me
it is good for me to draw-neere unto GOD; therefore I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare al thie works.

But what is the cause why so many mighty men of the world, Why the wicked
go on in wickedness.
do not consider their ends, the better to order their lives as they should?
The causes hereof are three, as Paul says, namely, the vanity of mind; the
blindness of their understanding; and the hardness of their heart. The vanity of
mind brings to pass, that such honest things as are thought to be embraced
by a dream as it were, do forthwith vanishe-awaie without profit. Blindness
of understanding does so carry the^ away, that of those principles of virtue
imprinted naturally in the minds of men, they follow nothing but errors. And
through their hardness of heart, they are touched with no fear of God. Whereof
it is, that with a reprobate mind we embrace for goodness in deed, colored
good things; for true riches, false; vain glory for true praise; beastly
and most filthy pleasure for true delight; and for the right pre-eminence,
vain arrogancy.

Of this vanity, blindness, and hardness, the Lord by the Prophet
Jeremiah, speaks on this wise: Ierem. 4, 27.
My people is foolish, theie have not known me, they are foolish children,
and have none understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do well theie
have no knoweledge. Whence it proceeds that, according to the saying of
Solomon, Theie reioce in doing evil, and delight in the frowardness of the
wicked. To which kind of men Isaiah cries with a lamentable voice, Woe, when
he says: Woe unto them which are wise in their own eyes, Isai. 5, 21.
and prudent in their own understanding. For one day through the most
righteous judgment of God they shall be condemned to everlasting torments.
Notwithstanding Epicures which delight wholly in their filthy delights,
either because they think there is no God at all; or if there be a God, they
suppose he will not be angry, seeing he is all merciful; or if he will be
angry, that he will not always keep hatred in remembrance, they do not
regard any whit the wrath of God. But this extreme vanity both the day of
doom in the sight of all creatures, of devils, of Angels, and of men, shall
reprove, and also the very conscience, which is a witness of a judgment to
come does speak against.

CHAP. 4.
1. Why David chooses to be of no reputation in the Church of God; 2. The
manifold benefits and blessings which the saints of God enioie, yea in this
life.
The 11. verse. BECAUSE THE LORD GOD IS A SVNNI AND A SHIELD, THE LORD WILL GIVE
GRACE AND GLORY, AND NO GOOD THING WILL HE DEPRIVE THEM OF, WHICH WALK
INNOCENTLIE.
THIS is an Aetiologe. For it renders the reason why David does choose to be
the most abject in the house of the Lord, that is in the Church, rather than
to enioie even the greatest pleasure and delights in the tabernacles of ye
ungodly. And this reason is fetched from ye enumeratio^ of the good things or
benefits which are peculiar to the citizens of God his Church, the which the
forainers not only do lack, but also are wrapped in the contrary miseries.
Wherefore they are to be illustrated by way of Antithesis, that each may
appear, namely both how great the glory of the Church, and contrariwise
how much the misery of those is who are without the Church. 1. Blessing of
the Church.


The first good thing or benefit of the Church is, that God himself is in the
same as a most bright Sun; which thing I do refer both unto the clear
knowledge of God; and unto the affections agreeing with the knowledge; and also
unto the manifold consolations which the godly do take through the light of
this sun. For as from the Sun which we do behold, proceeds to the world
both light, heat, and beams, wherebie all things are quickened, and
nourished: So from God, who is an invisible Sun of the Church, there
proceeds both light, that is a clear knowledge of God; and heat, that is,
the burning affections of hope, faith, and love; and also beams, which are the
manifold consolations wherewithal the souls of the faithare quickened,
nourished, and made merry.

This Sun, as it arises upon such as fear God: So it goeth-down from
negligent, wicked, and profane folks. And therefore great heed is to be
taken, least the godly do suffer this Sun to be darkened, and hidden from
them. For as it is a most certain token of death to a sick man; as
Hippocrates says, if he dream that this visible Sun is hidden, or obscured:
So a most certain death of the soul is nigh at hand, if our Sun Christ be
darkened by abolishing or corrupting of the true doctrine. So that so many as
are destitute of this Sun, as are all theie which be without the Church, they
can not be otherwise than most miserable. For, they being blind and ignorant
of God, both do groape in the gross darkness of ignorance; and are
beaten-downe with an horrible amazement of their minds, when sin shows it
self abroad in their consciences. And although the consciences of many seem
to be seared as it were with an hot iron, as if it were void from all feeling
of sin: yet at the point and pain of death, it is awakened, yea and it
drives the miserable soul unto desperation.

The second benefit of the Church is, The second blessing of the Church.
that God himself who is the Sun, is also to the Church in place of. a
shield wherewith the householde of the Church are compassed, protected, and
saved against the kingdom of darkness. Hereof in the 5. Psalm it is spoken,
Psalm. 5, 11.
where it is said: Let all them that trust in thee, rejoice and triumph for
ever, and cover thou them: and let them that love thy name, rejoice in thee.
For thou, 12.
Lord, wilt bless the righteous, and with favor wilt compass him, as with a
shield. Again, Psalm. 18, 35.
Thou have given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has
stayed me. For it seems good in the sight of God, that the godly should not
only be compassed about with ye crown of his good will, but also be happy
through everlasting blessedness. When Paul writes unto the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6,
16.
Take unto you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, he signifies, yt then we are co^passed-about with the
shield of faith, 1. Tim. 1, 18
when reteining an vnshakened faith of doctrine with a confidence of mercy, 19.
and a good conscience, we fight a good fight.

Now what thing, I pray you can be more miserable than the enemies of God, who
have not this shield? For the king of darkness has full power over them, and
casts them down headlong from one wickedness unto another, til he bring them
to utter destruction.

The third and fourth benefits are Grace, The 3. and 4. blessing of the
Church.
and glory. For thus he says, The Lord will give grace and glory. Grace is
the favor of God both pardoning the sins of the faithful for the deaths
sake of his son; Grace what.
and also adorning the Church with an unspotted garment, namely with Christ
his obedience or righteousness. Now for so much, as the faithful do please
through this grace, they, can not be otherwise than happy and blessed: But
they which are without the Church, be destitute of this grace, guilty, and
damned in respect of their wickedness.

Glory is the attainement of adoption, Glory what.
the inhabitation of the holy spirit, and the hereditarie possession of
eternal happiness. But so many as be not within the Church, are the
bondslaues of Satan, moved with the spirit of the Devil, and reserved for
everlasting shame.

The fifth good thing, or commodity of the Church, which the ungodly do
want, is that which the Psalmist means, when he says: No good thing will be
deprive them of, that walk innocentlie Here by the fruit, judgment is given
of the tree. For a good tree bringethfoorth good, and profitable fruit: but a
rotten tree can yield nothing but hurtful and unpleasant fruit,

To walk innocentlie, To walk innocentlie and what is signifies.
or soundly, or perfectly (for the word which the Psalmist uses in this
place, is oftentimes expressed of interpretors by the word perfection) is when
the man which is justified, prefers obedience toward God before even the
most pleasant things of the world. This definition may be proved out of the
22. Chapter of Genesis. A twofolde perfection.
Now there is a double perfection of Christians, of imputation, and of
obedience. He is perfect by imputation, that believes in Jesus Christ; Romans
10, 4.
according to that, Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness unto
every one that believes. He is perfect by obedience, which loves obedience
to God ward more than all things of the world. Yet is not this perfection an
absolutnes of work according to the rule of the law: but it is a purpose, an
endeuorment, and a study of the mind, whereby a man daielie more and more
goes forward unto the mark of perfection.

Ths endeuorment throught the approbation of God, is called perfection.

And that this Christian perfection is to be referred unto the will, and
affection of the heart, these testimonies ensuing do witness: Fear the
Lord, Josh. 24 14.
and serve him in vprightnes and in truth of heart. 1. Chr. 28, 9
Again, And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve
him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. Hezekiah in the prophecy
of Isaiah, does testify how he fulfilled the same, when he said, Isai.
38, 3.
I beseech thee, Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And
this perfection Paul requires when he says, 1. Tim. 18.
Fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience. 19.
For through faith the obedience of Christ, which is the fulfilling of the
Law, is obtained: and a good conscience is kept by a willingness to obeie,
whereby a godly man prefers obedience toward God before all things;
although man cannot fulfill the same in such absolute form as the rule of the
law does require.

Moreover, when the Psalmist does say: No good thing will he deprive them of
which walk innocentlie, it is to be understood concerning the rewarding of the
obedience showen through faith. For in this place he speaks not of the
causes of salvation: but of the effect of faith, wherewith being justified, we
are saved: And therefore this and such like sentences, of which sort there be
many in the scripture, be thus to be unfolded. They yt walk innocentlie
shall not be deprived of good things. Why so? Because they which walk
innocentlie, do believe: And al believers are righteous through Christ his
righteousness imputed unto them: To the righteous, life and abundance of all
good things, in such sort is proposed, that they shall desire nothing to the
consummating of true happiness. And therefore so many as walk innocentlie
shall not be deprived of good things. After which sort the like sentences are
to be untied, that we may be led from the proper effect unto the proper
cause; and again, conclude from the proper cause other effects adioined and
following of the same, as when it is said; Blessed are they which suffer
persecution for the confession of Christ: here mention is made not of the
cause of blessedness, but of the effect of faith, and of that which
necessarily does follow faith. And therefore the sentence is thus to be
opened. They are blessed which suffer persecution for the confession of Christ.
Why so? Because they do believe. For it is a proper effect of faith to
confess Christ in the time of persecution. But the faithful be righteous
through Christ his obedience. And the righteous do live, and are blessed by
the hope of eternal felicity. Therefore they who suffer persecution for the
confession of Christ, are blessed.

Now the holy scripture uses this manner of speech, for two causes. One is,
that we should judge of true and lively faith by the natural properties
which it has, least for the true faith we embrace a fained and false faith.
Another is, that we may be stirred-vp with the promise of the reward of
obedience, the more cheerefullie to do our duties, and not wax negligent in
respect of the manifold difficulties which happen many times, and make many
slouthful.

But touching this point we have spoken more at large above, where we
confuted the errors of Papists, who very naughtilie do confound the causes
and effects; and many times of the qualities, affections, and works of ye
saints, do make the causes of justification and salvation, whose errors be
overthrown by the precious blood of our only mediator. For in the matter of
justification al man's merits are quite contrary unto the merit of Christ his
death.

Last of all, seeing the wicked which welter in their sins, fighting under
the standard of satan, are deprived of these blessings which the Church
only is partaker-of, doubtless there can be nothing more miserable than to
wander without the Church of God, and to be carried from sin unto sin
until theie fall headlong into everlasting wretchedness.

THE FOVRTH part of the Psalm.
CHAP. 1.
1. The sum of the fourth part of this Psalm; 2. Why the Church is happy.
THE fourth part of the Psalm, is a conclusion expressed with an admiration,
wherein is declared, how the true cause of the Churches felicity is a firm
confidence in God.

The 12. verse. O LORD OF HOSTS, BLESSED IS THE MAN WHICH TRVSTETH IN THEE.
HItherto by qualities, affections, and sundry actions, he has shown who
are the citizens of the Church, that shall be blessed, and saved: now he lays
before our eyes the cause of justification, and of happiness, namely, a trust
in the mercy of God, which is ratified in Christ alone. Blessed, says he, is
the man which trusts in thee. This confidence springs of knowledge
according to the saying of the Psalm: Psalm. 9, 10.
Theie that know thie name will trust in thee: for thou, Lord, have not
failed them that seek thee.

But why is he blessed that trusts in the Lord? Because he is the heir of
eternal life. Wherefore is he heir of eternal life? Because he is righteous.
Why righteous? For that he is in Christ; and of Christ has that which the
law requires, namely righteousness according to this sentence, Romans 10, 4.
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that
believes. And therefore confidence depends upon the promise of free mercy:
Free mercy depends upon fatherly kindenes. Fatherly kindenes is grounded
in the merit of the son: the merit of the son is the ransom for the
sins of the whole world; which ransom is by faith applied to man. For as the
medicine not being applied unto the diseased place, brings no profit to the
sick: So the promise of fre mercy in Jesus Christ although of it self it be
true and strong: yet does it not profit man unless he have faith whereby
application is made.

And yet may it not be thought that application through faith is made in
respect of the merit, or dignity of the believing man, but for Jesus Christ
his sake, whom man through faith apprehe^deth, that by his blood he may be
purged from sin, and endued with his righteousness, wherebie God may accept
him. For the law has nothing which it may accuse in the faithful: Because
theie have the righteousness which the law exacteth, and for which it promises
life.

Notwithstanding after that man is justified by faith, Effects of faith.
he is to live by the virtue of the spirit of faith. For it cannot be that a
man at one time can truly believe, and live after the flesh. Romans 8, 10.
Therefore says Paul, If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of
sin: but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. Here the Apostle puts
a double effect of Christ dwelling in us through faith, to wit mortification
and life. So then wheresoever a lively and healthful faith is, there also be
the natural properties of the same. Hence it is that the scripture does judge
of faith by the properties thereof, and that to the end, that no man should
deceive himself with a vane show of faith. As therefore we gather the life of
the body by the motion thereof: So we know the life of faith by good works.

But by the way diligent heed is to be taken that we do not confou^d the
faith, wherebie Christ is apprehended, either with his properties, or with the
qualities, affections, or actions of such as are justified. For theie which so
do, overthrow the doctrine of free justification.

Moreover the Hebrewe word, wherebie confidence in this place is signified, is
opposed against doubtfulnes; and expressed by many words of Paul, among which
are these: Elenchos, which is when the mind convicted with firm reasons
touching the truth of God, does rest it self: Hupostasis, wherebie the mind
sets it self against all obstacles or tentations; Plerophoria, by which a
godly man is carried with full course into the haven of blessedness;
Pepoithesis, confidence, of which arises boldness. For these causes, faith is
compared by the Prophet Isaiah to a girdle about the loins; Isai. 11, 5.
by the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 6, 10.
to a shield; by Hosea the Prophet, Hos. 2, 20.
to a token of marriage; and by Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 1, 7.
to gold which is tried in the fire.

CHAP. 2.
1. Of justification; 2. The sundry sorts of testimonies of the holy
Scripture concerning justification.
For So Much as David in this place does pronounce those blessed that trust in
God; and no man can be blessed unless he be righteous. (For the faithful are
therefore blessed, because they be righteous; for no man ever yet was, or
shall be blessed without righteousness, which righteousness is the cause of life,
yea and of salvation, and true blessedness) I think it good in this place to
adioin a brief discourse touching the justification of man before God.

And although this doctrine of justification is plainly delivered both in the
Universities, and Temples of this Realm: yet, for so much as much darkness is
often mixed to this clear light, especialie of politic fellows, and
hypocrites, whereof the one sort applieng themselves to the Civil Courts, do
measure righteousness by the measure of reason; and the other putting on the
visor of righteousness, will be counted righteous and holie^ and neither sort
know rightly to judge between those testimonies of Scripture, which
properly belong unto the causes of justification, and between those other
sentences to be applied unto other purposes, according as circumstances of
places, and the analogy of faith shall require; I will propose four sorts of
testimonies of Scripture, which are wont to be handled in this matter,
wherebie it shall most evidently appear, what is the true sentence of the
Church of God concerning the justification of man before God, and of what
account the obedience of the faithful toward God is. The sorts of testimonies
be these.

The first is about the extreme right of the law according to the rule of GOD
his justice.

The second, of the most comfortable equity of the Gospel according to the
promise of grace.

The third, touching the proper and necessary fruits of faith; and of the
properties, qualities, and actions of such as are justified.

The fourth, of the reward of the good works according to the promises of
God. This difference of testimonies being known, it will be an easy matter to
judge of this whole doctrine.

CHAP. 3.
1. The first sort of testimonies concerning justification, 2. That no man can
fulfill the law, 3. Against the Pelagians, and Papists; 4. Arguments that
none can fulfill the law by the power of nature.
THe first order of testimonies concerns the extreme right of the law
according to the rule of Gods justice, which is the law it self. Now the
extreme right of the law, is to bestow life and salvation upon none unless
by the sentence of the law he be pronounced righteous; and also without
respect of persons to adiudge so many to the curse, and wrath of God, and to
eternal pains, which have not yielded pure, perfect, and continual obedience
to the law. This right of the law is contained in the promises and threats
added to the law of God: And the sum thereof tends unto these two sayings
of Moses; Deuteronomy. 27, 29
Curssed be he that confirms not all the words of this law, Leuit. 18, 5.
to do them; And The man which does them, shall live in them, that is, as God
condemns the transgressor of the law: so he does justify the fulfiller of
the same. Cond. ^nwor^ on what;
For as to be condemned is by God through the accusement of Moses or the law,
the very conscience of man bearing witness against him named to be guilty
for transgressing the law to be pronounced unjust, and to be adjudged to
eternal death as accursed of God: So to be justified, Justification what;
is by God, through the quitance of Moses or the Law, the very conscience of
man excusing him to be named not guilty for fulfilling the law, to be
pronounced righteous, and to be adjudged to eternal life as blessed of GOD,
and that in respect of the covenant between GOD and man.

This being set down, I will propose a demonstration, whereby it shall appear
that no mortal man, since the fall of our first parents, can legalie be
justified before the tribunal seat of God, Jesus Christ only excepted, who is
both God and man, pure from all sin, and absolutely righteous according to
the law. And the demonstration is this.

Whosoever does perfectly fulfill the law of God, is righteous by the law,
and heir of eternal life by the promise of God. And contrariwise, he that
does not fulfill the law, is accurssed, and subject to the wrath of God, and
to eternal pains, according to the sentence of the law.

But no man since the fall of our first parents, Christ only excepted, was
ever found that could fulfill the law of God.

Therefore, no man is righteous by the sentence of the law, and heir of
eternal life, by the covenant of God, but Christ alone, who being free from
contagion of sin, did perfectly fulfill the law: but all other besides him,
are by nature subject to the curse, to the wrath of GOD, and to eternal
torments.

The mayor is proved from the extreme right of the law, that is, from the
promises and threateninges of God his law. And this no man will deny, as
apparent by the word of God: but the minor is in controversy. For both the
Pelagians, and the Papists do reiecte the minor, as untrue: but theie build
not both upon the same foundation. Pelagius.
Pelagius, because he tooke-awaie original sin, and taught how sin was
sent-ouer to the posterity of Ada^ not by propagation, but by immitation
only, ascribed to the power of man, yt theie could by their natural strength
of them selves fulfill the law of God, and by the merits of good works
attain everlasting life. And, for so much as erroneouslie he supposed that
Christ was a mere man, and yet for all that yielded perfect obedience to the
law, he concluded that other men likewise, if they would, might observe the
law, and thereby be justified, and saved.

But how weak, Against Pelagius.
yea how false the foundation of Pelagius is, the scripture in many places
does evidently declare. For in that he says, how sin is sent-ouer to the
posterity of Adam by imitation only, it is most untrue, as Paul in his
first Chapter unto the Romans does most cleerelie teach, where he handles
this very argument, namely that we are guilty not by imitation, but by
propagation. As by one man, says he, sin entered into the world, and death
by sin, and so death went over all men: for so much as all men have sinned.
Romans 5, 12.
Again, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned not
after the like manner of the transgression of Adam. 14.
Are not these words quite contrary to the saying of Pelagius, which
imagines that sin is sent-ouer by imitation only? Again, By the offense of
one, many are dead, that is, all which were borne of Adam according to the
common law of birth. Again, through one which sinned, 15.
death and condemnation came thorough one offense unto condemnation. Again, By
the offense of one death reigned through one. 17.
And again, by the offense of one the fault came on al me^ to condemnation; 18.
and, by one man's disobedience many were made sinners. What can be spoken more
plainly? 19.
David also he says: Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my
mother conceived me. Here David speaks not of a certain sin, Psalm. 51, 5.
of his parents, as though the work of marriage were a sin, which is well
known to be the holy and lawful ordinance of God: but of the contagion
whereby we al ye sort of us are both conceived, and brought into the world,
polluted because of the offense of our first parents, in whom the whole
nature of man is corrupted, and guilty. Therefore unto the Ephesians Paul
says, We were by nature the children of wrath, so well as others.

The foundation therefore of Pelagius being taken away, the building,
whereupon he had builded, does of it self come unto the ground. So that when
Pelagius does argue thus: We are borne without original sin, and only by
imitating sinful Adam we are made guilty; therefore by the power of nature we
can fulfill the law: the Antecedent is constantly to be denied, as that which
is contrary both to the course of the whole scripture, and to the judgment of
al good writers.

And whereas the said Pelagius does affirm that Christ was only man and not
God too, and yet notwithstanding yielded full obedience to the law; and
therefore others also may fulfill the same, it is a frivolous argument and
overthrown by the consent of the whole Scripture. Christ not a mere man, as
the Pelagians did teach.
For the whole Scripture does commend Christ God and man to us; says he is the
only savior; testifies that he is the beholder of hearts; and
acknowledges him to be present in all places.

Now ye Papists which also deny the minor of our argument, build upon another
foundation, to wit upon a false definition of God his law. For with the
Pharisees theie think that the law does only restrain the hand, as theie
say, and requires only outward civil works, which when men do, theie say
how theie are just before God, and do merit by their obedience eternal life,
original sin being abolished through the death of Christ. And therefore theie
define the justification of the ungodly, to be a remission of sins; and a
perfection of good works.

But how vane and frivolous this toieng of the Papists, is, first the Law it
self, which brideleth concupiscence, does show. Secondly, Paul compares the
Law of nature and of men together, as things clean contrary. We know, Rom 7,
14.
says he, that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, soulde under sin. By
which saying he does signify, that the carnal man, as carnal, can not yield
spiritual obedience to the Law. He calls him carnal, which in another place
he calls a natural man, who has not the spirit, Jude verse. 19.
as Jude does interpret the same, that is, which is not borne anewe by the
holy Ghost. Thirdly the Law it self requires a perfect, pure, and constant
love both of GOD, and our neighbor: which love undoubtedly is not an external
and outward work, but an inward and spiritual, exacting the purity of
affections, which are not to be found in men that are not regenerated. Last of
al, the interpretation of Christ, which he himself opposes against the
Pharisees, does sufficiently confute this dream of the Papists.

Moreover having thus laid open the errors of Pelagius and of the Papists, I
will gather four demonstrations out of Paul, wherewith I will confirm the minor
of our demonstration, which is, that no mortal man can yield no perfect
obedience to the law of God.

The first is taken from the common corruption of man's nature. For all men from
their birth are unclean and guilty: now seeing from an vnpure and stinking
fountain, there cannot choose, but issue foul and filthy water, it cannot be,
that an unclean man, can yield pure and clean obedience. For so says
Solomon, Eccle. 7. 22.
Surely there is no man just in the earth, that does good and sins not. And
Job, Job. 14, 4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? there is not one. For all the
sort of us do proceed from a sinful mass. For the effect cannot be better
than the cause. So that this argument is strong: Theie which are unclean,
cannot yield pure obedience: Al men by nature are unclean, Christ alone
excepted, who was exempted from the common law of such as are borne: Therefore
none can yield pure obedience to the law of God.

The second is taken from the general experience, The second argument.
or punishment of guiltines in all me^. Whosoever be subject to death, which is
the punishment for violating Gods law, theie are breakers of God his Law;
otherwise God should be an unjust judge for punishing the innocent: but now
Paul confesses, that the judgment of God is according to truth. Romans 2, 2.
But al men are subject to death, as the to punishment for violating Gods law,
which thing the miserable experience of al men from time to time, does
testify. Therefore al men are breakers of God his law. How then can theie be
righteous by the law?

The third is taken from the testimonies of Scripture, The 3. Argument.
which are the very voice of God both in the Psalms, in Moses, the Prophets,
Evangelists, and writings of the Apostles. In Moses it is written, Gene. 6. 5.
The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all the
imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil continualie.
Behold the fountain of man his righteousness. Job says, I know verily that
it is so: Job. 9. 2.
for how should man compared unto God, 3.
be justified? If he would dispute with him, he could not answer him one
thing of a thousand. 20.
The same Job says again, If I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall
condemn me. Psalm. 14. 1.
And in a certain Psalm, Theie have corrupted and done an abominable work,
there is none that does good. 2.
The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand, and seek God. 3.
Al are gone out of the way, theie are al corrupt: there is none that does
good, no not one. Psalm. 19. 12.
Again, Who can understand his faults? And again, Psalm. 130. 3
If thou, o Lord, straightly markest iniquities, o Lord, who shall stand?
Therefore David prays, Psalm. 143. 2
on this wise: Enter not into judgment with thie servant: for in thie
judgment shall none that lives be justified. Prou. 20. 9
Solomon also Pro. 20. has these words, Who can sat, I have made mine heart
clean, I am clean from my sin? And ye Prophet Isai: Esai, 64, 6.
We have al bin as an unclean thing and al our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes, and we al do fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have
taken us away. The preaching of repentance in the Gospel, is a witness of the
guilt of al mankind. Ioh. 9. 3.
And the Lord says, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. From ye
Epistles of ye Apostles I will allege only on testimony out of Paul, who unto
the Romans writes after this wise, Romans 3. 9. 10.
We have alredie proved, says he, that al, both Jews and Gentiles are under
sin. As it is written, 11. 12. 13.
there is none righteous, no not one. There is none that understands, there
is none that seeks God. Theie have al gone out of the way; theie have been
made altogether unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one. Their
throat is an open sepulcher; theie have used their tongues to deceit; the
poison of aspes is under their lips. 14, 15. 16, 17.
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness* their feet are swifte to shed
blood. Destruction and calamity are in their ways; and the way of peace
theie have not known. The fear of God is not before their eyes. Of these and
such like testimonies our proposition is proved, which is, that no man
perfectly can fulfill the law of God.

The fourth is taken from the necessity, The fourth argument.
and end of the mediator given between God and men. For if man by his natural
strength could have fulfilled the law of God, he had not needed a mediator.
For he had been righteous by the works of the law; and had by the covenant
of GOD obtained eternal life. Leuit. 18, 5.
For it is the covenant of God: If a man do my commandments, he shall live
in them. But now seeing man has need of a mediator and reconciler,
doubtless he breaks the law, and is guilty, unrighteous, and accursed.
Therefore the scripture, which contains either the promise, or the exhibition
of ye Messiah, does accuse mankind of sin, and sends unto the mediator,
pacifier, and intercessor. Hence Paul fetches an argument in his second
chapter unto the Galathians when, Gal 2, 21.
he says, If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died without a cause:
that is, the Son of God in man's nature, in vain did humble himself, even
unto the death of the cross, if man by the law may be justified, whereas the
Son of God took the nature of man upon him, that he might abolishe sin,
bring everlasting righteousness, and therein cause us to be adopted into the
sons of God. Let the Papists take the law in this place for what part it
pleases them: yet the same conclusion must follow. For whether righteousness
be by the law moral, or by the judicial, or by the ceremonial, or by
altogether, the same absurdity does follow, namely, that Christ died without
a cause. If he died in vain, he was also borne in vain, and al his benefitie
are in vain. By these four invincible arguments, the judgment of the
Church, which thinks together with the whole Scripture, that no man can be
justified by the works of the law, for so much as man yields not pure,
perfect, and continual obedience thereunto, is confirmed.

Now, Touching the use of the law.
this being so, to wit, that no man can observe perfectly the comaundementes
of God; nor by the works of the law be justified before God, it may be
demanded, what may be the use of the law. For we must of necessity
acknowledge that the law is not giuen-out in vain. Unto this question we must
make this answer: Although by the works of the law no man is justified
before God, because no man is able to satisfy the same: yet is there a diverse
use of the same, which is to be considered according to the condition of the
states of men. I do omit the external and political use, which is to govern
outward manners by discipline agreeing with the law: because we now are in
hand with that use of the law which concerns the conscience of man before
the judgment seat of God. Therefore before justification and regeneration, Use
of the Law in the conscience.
this is the use of the law in the conscience of man, namely to teach, to
accuse, and to condemn. It teaches both what is to be done, and what is to be
avoided of him, that seeks life by the law: It accuses the transgressor; it
pronounces him guilty, and condemns; and that to this end, that the sinner
having confessed his wickedness, and considered both the wrath of God, and his
own misery, may sue for favor, which thing he is not able to attain of the
law, by the strength of nature. Whereby the law is to the wounded conscience an
occasion of seeking Christ the Physician. And hereof is the law called A
Schoolmaster unto Christ. Gal. 3. 24.
Hitherto belongs that of Paul to the Galathians. 22.
The scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the faith of
Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe. This self same thing does
the Lord teach in a parable of the debtor, where a certain king does of his
servant, Matt. 8, 23. 24. etc.
whom he knew was not able to pay his debt, demand ten thousand talents due
to him by the law: which thing he did to the end that the servant confessing
his poverty, might fly to the mercy of his Lord, thereby to obtain a general
discharge of the whole debt. By this parable the use of God his law in the
consciences of men before free forgiveness of the whole debt and justification,
is depainted. For as this debtor pays nothing of his debt, but is freely
forgiven: so the law in the act of justification is utterly idle, as yt which
is neither the cause, nor a part of our righteousness as it is wrought of us.
The use of the Law after man's justification.
But after that man is justified, the spiritual use of ye law is, to prescribe
those things which belong unto a spiritual man, or a rule of spiritual serving
of God. And so the promises of the law be fulfilled in the faithful through
Christ.

These things being thus learned, A confutation of their arguments which
think that by the works of the Law me^ are justified.
it is no hard thing to refel the arguments of them, who conte^d that by the
wotkes of the law men are justified before God. Therefore when out of Moses they
do object: He that does the commandments shall live in them: Therefore by the
works of the law man is justified: It is to be answered that the argument is
untrue. Leuit. 18. 5.
For by the law it must be considered what the law in all respects, or the
justice of God does require, not what man is able to do; that we may fly unto
ye mercy of God, confessing our weakness, especialie seeing it is apparent,
that no man is able perfectly to observe the law.

Yet more forcibly they do urge, and they object unto us the saying of our
Lord, If thou will enter into life, Matt. 19. 17
keep the commandments. Hereof theie conclude a condition of keeping the
commandments of God, and that by keeping the^ men are are justified, yea and
saved. But what the Lord meant by those words, the parable which even now we
mentioned does teach. For as ye King there exacteth of his debtor ten thousand
talents, and frankelie forgave the whole det to him which had nothing to pay,
but flied unto the mercy of his creditor: So the the Lord unto the proud
hypocrite does say: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: to
the end that the hypocrite discending into himself, might confess his
filthiness, and poverty, and so crave pardon; Luk 7, 48.
which had he done, he had heard with the sinful woman, Thee sins are
forgiven thee. We must therefore acknowledge how the observation of God his
commandments is pronounced both by Moses and Christ himself to be the right
and most ready way unto life: but the fault is in our selves, why by that
way, though it be very direct, we enter not into life. For the condition
cannot be performed of us, as above it has been showen. So that by the
commandments the effect is not concluded, because the condition is not
observed, which is, If thou do the Law, but the defect of al men rather, that
acknowledging our imperfection, we may fly unto the mercy of God. And this
is the doctrine of Paul concerning the use of the law before conversion: By
the law says he, Romans 3, 20*
comes the knowledge of sin. Yet this knowledge is not to the end that we
should die in our sins: but that we should seek Christ, as Paul says in
another place, Romans 11. 32.
He has shut-vp al in unbelief, that he might have mercy on al. Gala 3, 22.
Again, The scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to the^ that believe. And therefore the
observation of the law is required to justification, that we may confess
how that we have, neither in our selves, nor of our selves, no righteousness
at al: and that through faith we should fly together unto Christ, Romans 10, 4.
Who is in the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes; whereof we are now to speak.

CHAP. 4.
1. The second order of testimonies; 2. That works and faith together do not
justify; 3. True justification what; 4. The things required in a justified
man; 5. The causes of man's justification.
THe second sort of testimonies of the holy scripture, concerning ye
justification of man before God, is euangelical, wherein ye most co^forequitie,
according to the promise of grace, is proposed to the penitent sinners:
namely, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, Matt. 9. 13.
as the Lord himself does say: I am come to call sinners unto repentance, that
is, unto conversion, and that according to the promises made unto the fathers,
and commended unto the Church of God by wonderful miracles.

But before I declare the judgment of the true Church touching this matter, I
will refel the opinion of them, who with the Pharisees compounde Christian
righteousness both of works and faith, as it were of causes and parts, least
by their prejudice, our cause be hindered. For doubtless it pleases political
fellows and ignorant folks marvelously, when the law and the Gospel, or
faith and works in the justification of man before God are coupled-together.
For thus theie say, we are debtors of the law, we grant a great defecte in
us, which Christ perfourmeth. Therefore let us do what we can, and beg that
which is behind of Christ. And so theie ascribe a part of righteousness to
their own works, and merits; and a part to Christ his merits: So, that
some do participate more, and some less of Christ his merits, according as
theie do abound, or want. Theie who thus do think, doubtless have no part
of Christ his favor, as most sacrilegious, who arrogantlie do take a part of
Christ his office, which is to say, to themselves against whom both the whole
Scripture, and the consent of the true Church is opposed.

But in this place let us only set Paul the Apostle, and doctor of the
Gentiles against them, who in many places disputes to the overthrowing of
this Pharisaical opinion. As Romans, Romans 3. 21.
3. The righteousness of God is made manifest without the Law, Romans 4, 13.
Romans 4. The promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not given
to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of
faith. For if theie, says he, which are of the Law, be heirs, 14.
faith is made void, and the promise is made of none effect. In which words
the Apostle most plainly does take justification from the Law, yea, and from
al works too; and ascribes the same to faith alone, teaching that the promise
is void, and faith a vain fiction, if before God we are justified by any
works, that is, if the works of the Law be either causes, or parts of our
justification before God. Romans 10, 3.
Romans 10. Theie being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to
stablish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. And in ye chapter immediate elie ensuing, he opposes
grace and works in the matter of salvation, so yt they cannot stand together,
as causes or parts of righteousness or salvation. Romans 11, 6.
If it be of grace (says he) it is no more of works; or else were grace no more
grace: but if it be of works, it is no more of grace; or else work were no
work. For, as Augustine says, it is grace no way, which is not free grace
every way. Ephe. 2, 8. 9.
Hitherto belongs that of Paul in an other place, By grace are ye saved
through faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of god, not of
works, least any man should boast himself. Could any thing be spoken more
plainly? Here Paul says not as ye Papists do of faith and works; but he
excludes works, that grace may be grace; that salvation may be a gift; and
that no man should glory in the sight of God, as bringing any merit, which
should move god to justify him. This boasting is excluded also by the Apostle
in another place, where he says, where is then the reioicing? Romans 3, 27. 28.
it is excluded. By what Law? of works? Naie, but by the Law of faith.
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
Law.

Hereby I suppose it is more clear than the day, that theie do err, which
compound Christian righteousness of faith and works together, as it were of
causes and parts. Moreover theie, who seek for licentiousnes of life from ye
doctrine of free justification, shall be answered, God willing, in ye third sort
of testimonies. Or in the chapter immediately following.


Now then, True justification what,
having laid open the errors touching the equity of the Gospel, I will
plainly deliver, and show which is the true way to be justified according to
the word of God, yt is, ye gospel. To be justified therefore according to ye
Gospel, is, for ye believing man, who is absolved from al guilt of sin, and
redeemed from the curse of the law, by God to be pronounced free for the
ransom sake paid by the mediator; to be made righteous by the righteousness of
the mediator imputed to him; and finaly, to be adjudged to eternal life, as a
believed son in the beloved, freely for the mediator Christ his sake.

So then, 3. Things required in justification.
for him that would be righteous before God, three things are necessary. One
is, that being absolved from sin, and redeemed from the curse of the law,
he be a free man; an other is, that he have righteousness, whereby he may in
deed be, and be thought righteous; the third, that being made righteous, he
be adopted for a son, and be liked and loved of God, as a beloved in the
beloved. These blessings no man can give but God only; and therefore Christian
righteousness is sometime called The righteousness of GOD, because it is God
that justifies; sometime The righteousness of Christ, for that his obedience,
being imputed to us, is made our righteousness; and sometime The
righteousness of Faith, for so much as it is free, as that which through faith
is apprehended, while we believe the gospel. Luke 24, 47.
Therefore the Lord says, Repentance and remission of sins must be preached
in my name among al nations. Remission of sins what;
The remission of sins is the very absolutio^ from guiltines, and the
redemption from the curse of liberty. With this remission two other things
are co^ioined, namely righteousness and adoption or free acceptatio^ unto life
eternal. Hitherto also belong the words of the Angel unto the Virgin: Matt* 1,
21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.
Here by the word of salvation, all the benefits of the mediator be understood.
But of these things we will entreat particularly, the more distinctlie and
cleerelie to understand these benefits which we obtain by Christ.

First therefore we attain remission of sins, as Paul says, by the blood of
Christ. For the obedience of Christ upon the cross, is ye price whereby the
justice of God is satisfied for the sins of al those which through faith do
convert. For so says Paul: whom (meaning Christ) God has set to be a
reconciliation through faith in his blood. Romans 3, 23.
So that ye merit of Christ his blood is the clea^sing of sins, which blood
is therefore a sufficient ransom, because it is the blood of the son of God.
Therefore in the Acts it is said: Act. 20, 28.
that God has purchased the Church with his own blood.

And that he which has remission of sins, that is, which is absolved from
the guiltines of sin, is also redeemed from the curse of the law, and
partaker of the liberty of God his children, Gala. 13, 13
these sentences do approve. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, when he was made a curse for us. Ioh. 8, 34. 36
Again, Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. If the son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free in deed. So then whosoever do
ascribe even the least merit of cleansing sins to any other thing beside the
blood of Christ, they do profane Christ his blood, and extenuat the merit of
the Lords death: of which merit we are then made partakers, when we believe in
Jesus Christ. Romans 3, 25.
Therefore Paul does say, through faith in his blood, that is, when a man
knowing the promise of grace, does verily believe that his sins are forgiven
him for the blood sake of Christ, he is truly partaker of the merit of the
Lord his death, through which he is absolved from sin; redeemed from the
condemnation of the law; and set free from the bondage of sin and Satan.

With the remission of sins righteousness is joined, whereby the believer is
justified, that is, becomes in very deed, and is judged righteous before
God. And this righteousness is the second benefit of Christ, in our
justification. Which righteousness is nothing else, than a perfect fulfilling of
the law, True righteousness what.
done indeed by Christ, but ascribed or imputed to us that believe. Romans 10,
4.
For so says Paul, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto
every one that believes, that is, so many as believe, have that which the
Law requires, namely righteousness, but not done of them, but imputed to
them. For so says Paul; To him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4, 5.
his faith is counted for righteousness. Now that this righteousness that is
imputed to us, is Christ his obedience, the comparion which Paul does make,
witnesses. Romans 5, 19.
As by one man's disobedience, says he, many were made sinners: So by the
obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous, meaning so many as
believe. 2. Cor. 5, 21.
And in another place, He has made him to be sin for us which knew no
sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, Christ
was made for us sin, which is a sinner through the imputation of the
guiltiness of al our sins to him, yt we might be made righteous with God,
and that by the righteousness, not sticking within us, but which, being in
Christ, is imputed of God to us through faith. Then we are so the righteousness
of God in him, as he is sin in us, to wit through imputation. And this is it
which Augustine does say: Our sins, he made his own sins, that he might
make his righteousness to be ours. Hereunto both Moses, the Psalms and
Prophets, do agree. Moses he writes: Gene. 3. 15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. Gene. 22*
Again, In thy seed (which is Christ) shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. This blessing cannot be without ye remission of sins, righteousness,
and allowance of God. If therefore blessing be through Christ, deliverance also
from the curse is through him; and through the remission of sins (we
atteine) imputation of righteousness and God his favor. And in the Psalm it is,
Psalm. 22, 31
They shall declare his righteousness to a people, that is, the Church shall
preach, not man's righteousness by works or ceremonies, but the righteousness of
Christ which shall be imputed for righteousness to so many as believe* Romans 10, 4.
The Prophet Isaiah says, Isai. 53, 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear
their iniquities. This testimony is very notable, for it teaches how sins
be washed away through ye sacrifice of Christ; it teaches yt Christ ye
righteous by his righteousness does make others righteous; and it teaches also
yt application is made through ye knowledge of the same Christ, yt is, through
an effectual knowledge of Christ, True knowledge of Christ, what.
And yt is effectual knowledge, when to the knowledge of ye mind, ye belief of
the heart is joined. Also by yt Prophet Jeremiah, Iere. 23, 6.
it is written, This is the name whereby theie shall call him, the lord our
righteousness. Here ye prophet commends Christ his divinity, and also
pronounces how we are justified through his righteousness. Touching the
application, the same Prophet speaks on this wise: Blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, Iere. 17, 7.
and whose hope the Lord is. Now he trusts in the Lord, who believes, that
being justified by his righteousness, he pleases God. For the obedience of
Christ, God and man, is the most absolute perfourmance of the law; the which
suffices al, because it is the righteousness of man who is God. This the
Prophet declares when he says, The Lord is our righteousness. So that from
our hearts we must believe, how the righteousness, wherebie we are just
before God, is not any quality, or action in our selves, but the obedience of
Christ imputed to the faithful. So does Paul most expreslie distinguish
between ye righteousness of man, and of Christ, when he says: Phil. 3, 8.
I do judge al things but doung, that I might win Christ, and might be
found in him not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, 9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, eue^ the righteousness which is
of God through faith.

Now, if we have remission of sins, and righteousness through faith, to wit
perfect righteousness, which is of Christ Jesus, doubtless we are no more
under the damnable sentence of the law, Deuteronomy. 27, 26
which is, Cursed is he that confirms not all the works of the law, Gala. 3,
10.
to do them. And this means Paul where he says, Romans 6, 14.
We are under the law (which condemns) but under grace (which justifies.)
Why so? Romans 5, 18.
For that as through the offense of one (to wit Adam,) the fault came on al men
to condemnation: so by the justifying of one (namely Christ) Grace abounded
toward al men to the justification of life. That is, As the sin of Adam was
the cause of condemnation unto eternal death: So the righteousness of Christ is
the cause of justification unto eternal life. Romans 8, 1.
Now then, as Paul says, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. 2.
For theie are free from the law of sin and of death, through Christ the
deliverer.

The third thing which we said was required, for to make a man righteous
before God, is, that being adorned with Christ his righteousness, he be adopted
for the son of God, and accepted unto eternal life. For, as by faith he
obteineth remission of sins, and righteousness: so likewise by the same faith,
we obtain the right of adoption, and the dignity of Gods children, Ioh. 1, 12.
according to that of John, He gave power to be the sons of God, even to them
that believe in his name, That is, he conferred this heavenly honor upon the
faithful that theie both be, and be counted the sons of God. Romans 8, 15.
And Paul: ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye
have received the spirit of adoption, wherbie we cry, Abba, Father. 16.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, 17.
that we are the children of God. If we be children, we are also heirs, even
the heirs of God, Adoption.
and heirs annexed with Christ. Moreover, this our adoption is two manner of
ways to be considered, to wit, as it is in the life begun through faith; and
as it shall be consumated when the bodies shall rise again. Both these adoptions
have their glory. For by the adoption begu^ we have peace with God, which is,
not only the reconcilement of us with God; but also a quiet conscience in
Jesus Christ; we have access unto god, through our Lord Jesus Christ; and we
have too a firm trust, that God has a care of us, Romans 8, 28.
as his children, so that al things worke-together for the best to us, yea
such things as do seem most bitter. Whereof it is, that the saints, even in
the cross, wherebie theie are made like the only begotten Son of God, do
rejoice; according to the saying of Paul: We do rejoice in tribulations, Romans
5, 3. 4. 5.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience; and patience, experience;
and experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed, because God loves us.

Of the adoption hereafter to be consummated Paul speaks on this wise: Romans
8, 23.
Even we do sigh in our selves waiting for the adoption, even the redemption
of our bodies. This redemption of the body, in the same chapter somewhat before,
the Apostle defines to be the glorious liberty of the sons of God, 21
that is, the full glory, wherein the children of God, being freed from al evil,
shall everlastingly and blessedlie inioie the most comfortable sight of God. Of
this longing for glory the Apostle speaks when he says: Romans 5, 2.
We rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. Together with this adoption,
the which at the last judgment shall be perfected, formal righteousness, wherebie
we shall be like unto God for evermore, is joined. Which righteousness the Apostle
says we do wait for, Gal. 5, 5.
when he says: We through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness
through faith. And what manner of righteousness that shall be, John declares in
these words; 1. Ioh. 3, 2.
We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, even holy, righteous,
chaste, and blessed for ever and ever.

Out of the things which hitherto we have spoken, touching the justification of
man by the method of composition, this definition may be framed. Justification
what.
Man his justification before God is an absoluing of the believing man from
sin; an imputation of Christ his righteousness; and a receiving of him unto
eternal life freely for Christ his sake.

Now the more fully to open this our justification, Causes of man's
justification.
let us in order, yet very briefly, behold the causes. The cause therefore
preparing is ye preaching of the gospel, which makes us to acknowledge and to
feel our infirmity, and just damnation. The which sense Paul does term the
spirit of fear, because at the preaching of the law it is raised up in men
through the holy spirit. Romans 8, 15.


When Peter in the Acts upon the day of Pentecost, had accused his countreimen
the Jews, for violating both tables of the Lord, they conceived in their mind
the spirit of fear, that is, a wonderful dolor and grief, or pricking in
their consciences for their sins. Therefore afterward in their perplexity,
doubtfulnes, and despairing as it were, Act. 2, 38.
he bids the^ to amend their lives, and be baptized every one of them in
the name of Jesus Christ, which was in deed a preaching of the gospel. This
conversion is made through faith, which men do conceive through the holy
ghost, when they hearken unto the gospel. By this faith Christ wholly, who of
God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, 1. Cor. 1, 30. 31.
and sanctification, and redemption, is conceived, that he that rejoices, do
rejoice in the Lord, and praise him everlastingly. And this is that knowledge
of salvation, hid from the wise and men of understanding of this world, but
revealed to the Church, through the word of the gospel.

CHAP. 5.
1 The third sort of testimonies; 2 How good works do justify; 3. Wherein
we and the Papists do differ about good works.
ALthough the fruit of the righteousness of faith, is never to be separated
from faith: yet with all diligence is it to be distinguished from our
justification. For the proper benefit of Christ, which we obtain by faith
alone, is one thing; and our due obedience, which, as the fruit out of the
tree springs from faith, through which we be regenerate, and borne the the
sons of God, is another. Whereof it is that by the natural properties that it
has, we judge of a lively faith; even as by the fruit we judge of the tree.
Hence it is, that in this order of testimonies, the word to justify, has an
other sense, than in the before mentioned orders it had. Justification what.
For in this place to justify, signifies to show and declare a man to be
righteous. As in the Epistle of James man is said to be justified by works,
Iam. 2, 24.
because through works he shows and declares himself to be righteous. And
in the scripturs oftentimes theie are pronounced blessed, which give themselves
to good works: not that good works be causes, or do merit happiness; but for
that they are true tokens of their cause, which is faith, or the spirit of
faith, Romans 8, 14.
For so many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And
hence it is that the Lord in the gospel after Matthew says, Blessed are the
meek; Matt. 5, 5. 7. 9. 10.
blessed are the merciful; blessed are the peacemakers; blessed are the
patient. For these virtues, if they be true, and not hypocritical shows of
virtue, do proceed from faith, whereby righteousness is laid hold on; and
they be undoubted marks of the children of God, declaring the adoption.
Therefore this rule is to be held in memory: when diverse effects do depend
alike of one and the same cause, the consequent does hold from one effect unto
the other, because of their common dependence. In Luke it is written, of the
sinful woman, Luke 7, 47.
how many sins were forgiven her: for she loved much. Now, because both, I
mean remission of sins, and love, depend of faith, as of a proper cause, the
argument is good from love unto the remission of sin, because of their common
dependence. Sophists, who think that Christ descended from the cause unto the
effect, and made love the cause of remission of sins, do pervert the meaning
of Christ: as by the parable which the Lord bringeth-forth before them, it is
manifest. There was a certain lender, Luke 7, 41.
says he, which had two debtors: the one ought five hundred pence, and the
other fifty: 42.
when they bad nothing to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore,
tell me, 43.
will love him most? Simon answered, and said, I suppose that he, to whom be
forgave most. Afterward, 50.
he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. Does not the
Lord here plainly declare, that remission of sins does go before love, and
both, to wit, remission and love to depend of faith, as of their very cause?
For many times effects, whereof some do follow others, which notwithstanding
should be referred unto their proper cause, to avoid the confusion of causes
and effects, be ascribed to one and the same cause. Hitherto belongs the rule
of Augustine, When, says he, we do find such places in the Scriptures as do
seem to attribute righteousness to works, special regard must be had unto
the foundation from which they do spring. And when they proceed from faith,
they are to be ascribed unto the root. For example, Blessed is he that judges
wisely of the poor; the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Here
mercy toward the needy and poor is not set for a cause of blessedness. For
mercy is a particular work whereby the law of God is not satisfied. But such
manner of speech David uses, because the effect is a most certain argument
of the cause it has. So that the man which has mercy on the poor is
blessed, because he believes. Now then through faith he pleases, the work
also pleases; not for the perfectnes thereof, but for that God accepts it;
because the person is not under the law, but under grace.

And that it is necessary, that the works, which God accepts of, must
proceed from faith, Rom 14, 23
it is manifest. For whatsoever is not of faith, Heb. 11, 6.
is sin. And, without faith, it is impossible to please God. The Lord
himself does say, Without me ye can do nothing. Ioh. 15, 5. 4
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: No
more can man do any thing, unless he abide in Christ through faith. For
before we be regenerate, we are evil trees, Which cannot but bring forth evil
fruit; Matt. 7, 18.
we are the children of wrath, Eeph. 2, 3.
and dead in sin; we are flesh, Romans 8, 7.
Whose wisdom is enmity against God; we are natural me^, 1. Cor, 2, 14
which perceive not the things of the spirit of God. And therefore whatsoever
God promises to such as do good works, that must not be promised
indifferently to al: but only to such as obeie through faith. For, seeing
the just do please by faith, theie do necessarily bring forth the fruits
of righteousness of faith, namely good works, which no more can be separated
from the righteousness of faith, than the natural property from the subject.
Wherefore as the argument is alwaie good from the subsistence of any subject,
unto the natural property of the same; and contrariwise, the property being
set, the subject of necessity must be seen: so faith which justifies man,
being set, good works, which are ye properties of ye spirit of faith, are
necessarily set. And again, good works being set, faith, from which theie do
spring, must needs be set: So whersoeuer faith is not, good works are not, and
where good works be not, there is not faith, the cause of good works. Therefore
says Paul, 1. Tim. 1, 18. 19.
Fight a good sight, having faith and a good conscience, which some have put
away, and as concerning faith, have made shipwreck. So often then as promises
do seem to be annexed to good works, we are to make recourse unto the root,
and ground, namely faith. For, as there be two beginnings of things, one is
that theie be; the other that they be known: so faith, as the beginning of
being, works so, that thou art righteous; and good works, as the beginning
of knowledge, bring it to pass that thou art known to be righteous. Hence the
Lord at the last day will propose the beginning of knowledge to the
righteousness of faith which shall be apparent in the sight of al creatures.
Mat. 25, 34 35*
For thus he will say: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the world. For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye
lodged me. 36.
I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. Here the Lord will not have the works of mercy
toward his members, to be merits of the heavenly kingdom; but by certain
tokens he declares who are the sons of God, upon whom the kingdom of God
freely for Christ his sake without any merits of man, shall be bestowed. For
so says Paul, Romans 6, 23.
The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And although by that which hitherto has been spoken, it is none hard thing
to judge how our doctrine concerning good works differs from the papistical
imaginations: Yet that the more distinctlie and particularly this difference
may be seen, I will add somewhat more hereunto, and that for two causes: the
first, to show the vanity of those men, who hearing that both we, and the
Papists do require good works, do think that we strive not about matters
of importance, but only about words, and that of pride only to gaine-saie.
Wherebie theie do sufficiently bewraie themselves to know nothing touching
this controversy of so great importance, upon which al our salvation does
depend. Secondly, that godly auditors may be rightly instructed in this
matter, and necessary doctrine; and may have alwaie in a readiness wherewith to
answer such as endeavor to overthrow our religion, and slander the same
without reason, either of mere malice, or of gross ignorance.

The difference therefore between us and the Papists touching good works
consists in four things, to wit, in the matter, efficient causes; in the
manner; and in the often doing of good works. If we shall prove this thing by
evident arguments, I think there is none but will grant, if so be he will
yield unto the truth, rather than to the vanity of his own mind, that for
just causes we are provoked thus to contend.

The first difference therefore is taken from the matter of works. 1.
Difference, concerning the matter of good works.
For the Papists do place their chiefest works, and worship in the
traditions of men, the which theie prefer before Gods comaundementes: which
traditions for all that partly be in their kind indifferent, Of Papists
works what the chief.
as appointed fastes, and certain songues, but in their use and end utterly
wicked; Papistical traditions of what sorts.
because theie put a confidence in them, while theie persuade themselves that
by observing of them, theie do merit the remission of sins: partly theie
are superstitious, and meerelie ethnical, as hallowing of water, of fire, of
herbs, of candles with infinite such toies, whereunto also theie do ascribe
the power to abolish sin, and drive away devils: and partly theie are
apparantlie wicked, as such are that are contrary to the word of God, as is
the invocation of saints; the merchandise of masses; the worshipping of
Images; the bearing about, and adoration of bread. These and the like
traditions, the Papists with fire and sword do vphould, caring little or
nothing at al for the breach of God his commandments, as evidently appears
by the very punishments which theie do appoint. How the Papists do
regard the commandementes of God.
For in the Papacy the contempt of the idolatrous Mass is more sharply
punished, than adultery or incest. A much more heinous offense is it among the
Papists to eat flesh upon a Fridaie, than to kill a man upon any day.
Wherebie it is apparent that the Papists do prefer their traditions before
the commandments of God: The proper note of Antichrist.
which thing is the proper note of Antichrist. For, as theie contemn the
sentence pronounced against the Pharisees, Mark. 7, 7.
which is, Theie worship me in vain, teaching for doctrine man's traditions: So
theie do rashly arrogate to themselves power to make laws in the Church of
God: which thing is doubtless none other thing than to exalt themselves above
God, who chalengeth to himself alone the authority to enact laws in his own
kingdom.

But we do submit our selves to God, The principal good works of Protestants.
whose commandments we both do believe, and teach also to be the rules of
good works. But the commandments and traditions of men, we do not
acknowledge for the service of of God, but rather with Paul we pronounce them to
be the doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4, 1.
For this commandment of God, Walk in my precepts, and not in the precepts
of your fathers, we do prefer before the authority of al men whatsoever,
and of Angels. Now let the godly reader judge, wether it be more convenient
to yield to the Papists or to us, in the matter or substance of good works.
For my part, I think no man is so mad, as to obeie men, who both can deceive,
and may be deceived, rather than God that cannot err.

The second difference is fetched from the efficient causes. 2. Differe^c^ of
good works.
The Papists with the Pelagians, do imagine good works to proceed from free
will. The efficie^^ cause of Papistical works.
For theie do teach that men before regeneration, by their pure natural
powers, can do good works (which theie do call merits of congruitie) and by
them merit favor* Whose error by evident proofs drawn from the word of God,
we have above Chap. 3. of this last part.
confuted.

But we with Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, do affirm that no good
works, as the service of God, can be wrought before we be regenerated. For
Christ does say, without me ye can do nothing. Ioh. 15, 5.
Moses and the Prophets do pronounce the heart of man naturally to be
wicked. Phil. 1, 6.
Paul he says; I am persuaded, that he that has begun this good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 2, 13.
And in another place, It is God which works in you both the will and the
deed. These words do plainly witness how good works do not proceed
from nature, but from grace; which thing how it is done, we now briefly will
declare. Three things necessarily required in a good work, or in a good
worker rather.
Three things therefore unto the actio^ of virtue, or a good work, namely
judgment of mind, will, and power, be required. The judgment of the mind,
God, by his light, that is, by his word, wherein the holy spirit works, does
inlighten, that we may both know what pleases, and what displeases God, a
certain some whereof is proponed in the ten commandments, and more at
large are opened in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. And this is it
which David says, Psalm. 119, 105.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet.

Secondly God makes the will of the wicked, good, while he does renew the same
in the regenerate by his holy spirit. The will of man.
The will, as it is a natural faculty, has in it self no quality at al; but
is altogether such, as yt is which it imbraceth. If the thing be good, the will
is good; but if the thing be evil, it is evil. And therefore Damascene does
rightly define it, That the will it self is of nature: but diversely to will,
is proper to the person. And Chrysostom, The will is ingraffed and bredde in us
by nature, and it is also of God. And the will of this or that thing is ours,
and our judgment, that is not of nature, but of the person. But now, when the
state of the person does change, the quality of ye will must change also of
necessity. But that the person is wicked, as that which is led by the sense of
the flesh, and understands not the things which are of the spirit of God,
before regeneration, it has above In the 3. Chap. of this 4. part.
been declared. And therefore there is no doubt, but the will of a person not
justified, is evil, that is, wicked, set against God, the slave to sin,
albeit it works freely, and not constreinedlie. For voluntarily it chooses
evil for good things. This will of man, before regeneration, would have God
altogether either not to be able, or not willing to revenge, or ignorant
altogether of ye wickedness it has committed. And therefore that would that he
were not a God, which so much as in it is, would have him to be either of no
power, or not righteous, or ignorant. Cruel, and altogether curssed malice is
it, to desire that the power, justice, and wisdom of God should perish.

But, for so much as in justification, man is at once both regenerated, and made
a new creature in Christ Jesus, according to the manner of this new state,
the will of the person takes a new quality, so that the will which before
regeration was evil, the slave of sin, and enemy to God, is now made good,
free, a friend of God, and deliting in his commandments. For the mind being
lightened by the word, and the heart through faith being purified, the will
commands those things, which the sound judgment of the mind does allow,
and whereunto the pure affections do incline. Therefore as the regenerate man
is a new creature: so the will of a new man, is created anewe by the holy
Ghost; even as David declares when he says: Psalm. 51, 10
Create in me a clean heart, o God, and run a right spirit within me. By the
heart he understands both pure affections, and also a will obeying pure
affections: by a right spirit he means the election of the will, and purpose
in that which is good. So that it is the work of God his spirit, that the will
is made good where it was evil; which being made good, it works cheerefullie
(yet through grace) and not constrainedlie, otherwise will should not be will.

In the third place, the judgment of the mind being reformed by the word;
and the will renewed through the holy Ghost, the strength also by little and
little is restored, and, according to the measure of faith, do grow, wherbie
we begin to do somewhat which pleases God, although in this life we shall
never be able to satisfy the law, according to the rigor of his justice. The
repairing of this strength is wrought by the virtue of the death, burial, and
resurrection of Christ in the faithful. This virtue of Christ is after a sort
depainted in our baptism, as Paul teaches in his 6. chapter unto the Romans.
Moreover, when the person which is just through faith, keeps a good
conscience, and thinks continualie of going forward, his defections are well
taken; for he is not under the law, but under grace.

The third difference between the Papists and us about good works, 3.
Difference about good works.
is taken from the manner. For theie do think that to be a good work, when
that is externallie done, that is commanded. For theie require no more unto
the form of a good work, than the action it self.

But we with Augustine do pronounce, that a work ought then to be called and
thought good, when the thing commanded is done as it should be, according to
the mind of the commander. The hypocritical Pharisee gives alms; and the
justified Publican gives alms in like sort. His, that is the Pharisees alms
the Papists define to be a good work; whereas before God it is abominable:
but we pronounce the Publicane his alms a good work, not only because it is
commanded, but specialy because through faith, whereby the Publicane was
justified, it was done to the glory of God. And therefore it has the form of
a good work, when the work commanded of God, by a person justified through
faith, is done principaly for God his glory. And a work so done, whether it
be an inward or an outward work, is the spiritual service of God.

Moreover, whereas certain civil works, done even of such as are not justified
by faith, are profitable and do good to many, and therefore thought good works*
I grant they are so caled, and be such too, but in use, not in service. For
whatsoever an impure person does, it is vnpure and abominable before God. And
though God sometime do recompense such works with rewards, he does it for
the use sake, not because they are the service that pleases him, or be good of
themselves.

The fourth thing wherein we dissent from the Papists in the doctrine of good
works, 4. Difference about good works.
is ye diversity of ends. For they do appoint other ends of good works than
we do, which follow the direction of God his word. For they say good works are
to be done, yt we may deserve favor, and be justified through our works before
God. But how false and absurd this Pharisaical opinion is, we have already in
the first order of testimonies declared. That no works do merit favor
justification, it is hereby manifest, because an evil tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Matt. 7, 18.
Therefore what can a man not renewed, seeing he is wicked, vnpure, without
understanding, unprofitable, merit by vnpure works? Again, if a man be
justified by works before God, it must needs of necessity be, either because
he fulfilleth ye whole law, according to ye rule of God his justice, or in
respect of particular observing some certain commandment. But each is false.
For as above Chap. 3. of this fourth part.
we have proved, no mortal man can fulfill the whole law of God, neither before
conversion nor after. Secondly, it is manifest that none is justified by a
particular fact, both because it is not the fulfilling of the law, which is
required unto ye righteousness of the law; and also for that he which fails in
one commandment, Iam. 2, 10.
as James does say, is guilty of al. Then seeing no man may be justified
neither by the whole law, nor by a part of the same, in vane do the Papists
contend, that the end of the law is, that men by their own works should be
justified in the sight of God.

But we do teach that good works be therefore to be don, The true end of good
works.
that being justified by faith, we may give due obedience to God, as children
to a most loving father; that we may be found lively branches, and bearing
fruit in the true vine, which is Jesus Christ; that men seeing our good works,
may glorify God, and be provoked unto well doing by our example; that through
good works we may be directed unto ye haven of blessedness; that by good works,
as by an undoubted mark of Gods children, we may show our selves enemies to
Satan, who^ in baptism we renounced; yt we may increase ye joy of the angels
in heaven, which are much delited with the repentance of men, and with holiness
of life; and that by works we may be known, and declared to be truly
righteous, that is, that we be not deceived with a vain show of faith, as it
happens unto hypocrites, as James in his second chapter declares; for whom
to be justified is to be declared and acknowledged righteous before the world.
Iam. 2, 23.
Abraham believed, and is was imputed unto him for righteousness. Bu when at the
commandment of God, he was ready to kill his only son, by his willingness
to obey, he declared how he was righteous, not only to others, but also to
himself. For lively faith has this property, that it prefers obedience
toward God before al worldly things, be they never so dear, as appears in
Abraham. So that he which is so affected, that he desires nothing so much as
to obey God, and to prefer obedience to him-ward before al things else, he
has a most certain token of a lively faith, and of the spirit of Christ,
whereby he is moved, dwelling with in him. Romans 8, 14.
For so many as are led by the spirit of God, says Paul, they are the sons
of God, to wit, through faith, a true note whereof is that motion of the
spirit, whereby we are moved to yield obedience to God with all readiness;
although we continualy do feel a combat of the flesh with the spirit, which
fight undoubtedly in this life, shall never cease.

The sum of this difference, tends to this point. The papists do make
works to deserve and to procure salvation: we with Paul number them among the
effects of faith, and fruits of the righteousness of faith. The Papists do
place the perfection of righteousness in works; we define them to be an
obedience begone, pleasing God, because of the person that is righteous, which
obedience can no more be separated from free justification, than the natural
property from the subject it has, as heat from fire, as above has been
showen.

CHAP. 6.
1 The fourth order of testimonies; 2. The rewards promised unto good works.
THe fourth order, as we proposed, is touching the reward of good works,
according to the promises of god, which the godly, without justification, do
lawfully behold, and through faith expect the things promised, as Moses is
written by faith to have had respect unto the recompense of the reward. Heb.
11, 26.
Moreover, the reward is promised to good works, sometime simply to every man,
sometime specialy to this or that man for a particular work, which is
obedience in some certain thing. And that rightly without error we may judge of
such common and special promises, this principle is to be kept in mind,
namely, that al promises without Christ be to none effect. For, if as Paul
says, 2. Cor, 1, 20.
all the promises of God are in Christ yea and Amen, that is, firm and
ratified; it follows, that no promises without Christ can take effect and be
firm. Whereof this also is gathered, that none obedience without Christ, does
merit reward. Now this foundation being cast, let us entreat of the promises
of reward, according unto the difference which we have proposed.

Therefore when reward is promised simply or in general to every man for good
works, as when both in the Psalms, and also in Paul it is said, Psalm. 62, 12.
He will reward every one according to his works, Romans 2, 6.
the promise must be applied by a distinction. For such a promise has a double
respect. Because it is to be referred either unto the unregenerate, or unto the
regenerate. If it be applied unto the unregenerate, which are without Christ,
by the principle which we have set down, it must needs follow that it is
neither ratified, nor performable: wherefore it is referred unto the first
order of testimonies. For it proponeth the judgment of the law concerning the
rewards of good works. But for so much as an impossible condition, namely,
Leuit. 18, 5.
if a man do my commandments, he shall live in them, is annexed, it cannot be,
but that the unregenerate are subject unto this damnatorie sentence of ye law,
Gala 3, 13.
Curssed is every man that continues not in all things which be written in the
book of the law, Deuteronomy. 27, 26
to do them.

But if such a promise be referred unto the regenerate in Christ, the promise
is firm and performed, 2. Cor. 1, 20.
in whom al promises are yea and Amen. But more things in order be to be noted
in this place. Rigor of the law.
First, how in the regenerate the rigor of the law is taken away, which rigor
consists in three things, that is to say, that none obedience likes God,
unless it be perfect; that life is not promised, but to them which fulfill the
law; that the curse is denounced to al which offend, yea in the least thing.

Secondly, we are to think, that a man now believing, pleases God, as
beloved in the beloved; and as an heir of eternal life for Christ his
righteousness imputed to him, which is the way of life and salvation, according
to these words of Paul, Romans 10, 4.
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes.

Thirdly, it is to be considered, that of the believing man, whom for Christ
his sake he accepts, God requires obedience; and that as a most loving
father he promises a reward to him not of det for any goodness, or price of
the work; but of mere grace, through fatherly kindenes, wherbie he imbraceth
the believing man in Christ Jesus.

Fourthlie, we must have in mind that works so done through faith, be
testimonies of religion, even as proper effects be undoubted arguments of the
cause, from which theie proceed. And therefore is the Lord said to reward
every one according to his works, Romans 2, 6.
as when Paul says, God will reward every man according to his works, which
works be tokens of faith, and most undoubted arguments of the fear of God. Of
these works mention shall be made at the last day, that al creatures may
acknowledge the justice of God in judging.

But if a special promise be made in a certain thing (as when Tobiah does
say: Tob. 12, 9.
Alms does deliver from death, and does purge al sin, and makes men to find
life; and Daniel, Break off thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor:
Dani. 4, 24.
for that shall be a salve for thine error,) this rule, which depends upon the
principle which we have above set-downe, is to be remembered.

Touching a particular fact, we must judge according to the quality either of
the deed, or of the person that does it. If we judge by the quality of the
deed, it is most true, that no deeds of man, be theie many or few, can
satisfy the law of God, as above Chap. 2. of this fourth part.
in the first order of testimonies we have declared: and therefore he cannot
merit either righteousness, or life. But if according to the quality of the
person we do judge, the judgment will be diverse, as the persons be. For the
person that works, either has faith, or he has not. If the person which
works, has faith, his work done according to the law does please, and is
imputed to him for righteousness, that is, it is thought to be righteous for so
much as it pleases God in respect of the person. But if the person that
works has no faith, it is impossible that the work should please, while
this rule shall hold, Romans 18, 23.
whatsoever is not done of faith, is sin. And therefore diligently it would
be considered, what good works be of themselves; and of what account in
respect of the workers. Of themselves theie are of no valor, neither do theie
merit any whit: because theie are not the fulfilling of the law. Phil. 3, 8.
Before the righteousness of faith theie are (...), even ye vilest doung, as
Paul speaks, and abominable: but after that righteousness is confirmed theie
are to be esteemed not according to their own desert, but according to the
goodness of God, which accepts them for the persons sake yt pleases him, in
which respect these are imputed unto righteousness, that is, are taken for good
works, as it is written of the zeal of Phinees, which thrust throw the
fornicators, Number. 35, 7, 8.
and theie merit reward, as Paul says* both in this life, and in the world to
come.

Now return we unto the saying of Tobias, touching which I do say first yt in
the old translation which a little before I cited, the words be very
corruptly red. For according to the Greek, theie should be thus red: Alms or
liberality does deliver from death, Tob. 12, 9.
and does purge al sin. Those which exercise alms and righteousness, shall be
filled with life. This sentence cannot be applied to the Pharisee, or to any
man yt is not regenerat. For, as the alms here commended is a particular work:
so in the unregenerate it is many ways polluted: So that it is to be referred
unto ye regenerat. But theie have remission of sins freely for Christ his sake,
by whose blood theie are cle^sed from al iniquity. But the last particle in ye
saying of Tobias, namlie, Theie shall be filled with life, that is, theie shall
enioie a long life, does show, how Tobias speaks not of purging of sin before
God, but in this life only before me^, who commend those for good and righteous
men which are merciful and liberal toward ye needy.

The like judgment is to be given touching ye place of Daniel, which in ye
hebrew is thus red: Redeem thy sins by righteousness, and thy iniquities by
mercy toward the poor; lo, so thie peace, yt is, prosperity and felicity
in thie kingdom shall be lengthened and prolonged. Here Daniel of necessity
must mean ye fruits of repentance, which are most undoubted arguments of
faith, and of the fear of God; and merit the mitigatio^ of punishments, and a
prosperous success of affairs both private and public, which thing Daniel
does signify in these words: Lo, so shall thie peace be lengthned and
prolo^ged. To be short, al ye sentences whersoeuer they be redin ye holy
scripture concerning good works, are to be understood according to their
circumstances, and as the matter does require, are to be applied to these four
orders of testimonies. But, theie which confound these orders, theie pervert ye
scripture and trample upon ye blood of the son of God with their feet, when
they endeavor to ascribe that to works which belongs properly to ye son of
God, our mediator Jesus Christ; to whom with the father and the holy ghost be
honor, praise, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

The use of this Psalm.
If thou would escape aie woeful death,
And endelesse bliss in heaven obtain:
Cleave fast to Christ, while thou have breath,
In God his fear se thou remain.
A general form of prayer.
O ALMIGHTY, eternal, and most true God, Father of our Lord and savior
Christ; maker of heaven and earth, together with thy Son Jesus Christ and the
holy Ghost: From the bottom of our hearts we do yield thee thanks, for
that of thine infinite mercy thou both have reueiled thy self unto us by
sending thie Son Jesus Christ; and by making the hidden and wonderful decree
concerning the redemption of mankind, kowne unto ye world: and also by the
ministry of the Gospel, and the holy Ghost, thou do gather to thie self
an eternal Church, and being gathered give both rest to the same, and al
necessary things for the sustentation of life.

These and other benifites we confess vndoutedlie are thie gifts; and to be
given and kept to us of thee for thie sons sake.

Again, we acknowledge that diversely we are polluted with manifold sins;
and with true and burning sorrow we do bewail that ever we have sinned against
the rule of thie justice: and therefore we humbly beseech thee, turn us unto
thee, and forgive us al our sins, even for thie beloved son Jesus Christ his
sake; kindle within us by thine holy Spirit, true faith, and true obedience,
yea and govern us, that as earnestly we purpose, so truly we may by thine
help amend our life, and obeie thee.

Moreover our request is even in the name of thie beloved son Christ our
Savior, that it would please thee among us, and in this country to gather
from time to time a Church, and therein maintain the purity of true doctrine,
that we may with true prayer serve thee, obeie thee, praise thee, and love
thee for ever and ever: And for the better accomplishing hereof, give unto thie
Church faithful teachers, and pastors, who both by true doctrine, and by
example of good living may illustrate thie glory, and benefit the Church.

Furthermore, for thie beloved son our Savior Christ his sake, we beseech
thee, give to this Realm godly, profitable, and quiet magistrates; defend our
Queen Elizabeth with her Counselors, and all the Governors of this land;
guide them with thine holy Spirit, that their whole government may tend both
unto the advancement of thie glory, and the quietness and welfare of this
Commonweal. Confirm also al godly Kings, Princes and Noble men in their
purposes, to maintain thie glory, true doctrine, and honest discipline.

Besides, we pray thee, chearish and bless whatsoever springeth-out of the
ground, the which thou impartest upon us, that mankind may have both
wherewithal to be relieved, and to serve thee; and of thie goodness give us
daily bread.

And for so much as our great frailty is known to thee, and thou have promised
with mercy to mitigate the greatness of thie wrath against sin, and that in
respect of the intercession of thie beloved son, we humbly beseech thee
mercifully to mitigate the punishment which deservedly we sustain; and with
thie holy Spirit comfort all the godly in their troubles, that theie may both
abide constant in true faith, and prayer, and also commend thie mercy for
evermore, Amen.

A prayer unto Christ.
O Most loving Lord, Jesus Christ, Son of God; without thie grace our mind is
ouershadowed with most gross darkness; al our affections carried into the
flames of concupiscence; the will of ye mind is borne-awaie with raging
affections; and finally al our actions not only inward but outward, do go
far astraie from the rule of thie will.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thee, o most sweet Christ our savior,
expel-awaie the darkness of our understanding by the light of thie word;
quench, of thie goodness, the flames of concupiscence with the fountains of
thie grace; replenish the will being purged by thine hand, with thine holy
spirit, that both the will may cheerefullie command, and all the powers both
of the mind and of body obeieng the governance of the will, carefully bring
to pass, whatsoever both the illuminated mind rightly does show, and the new
affections of the heart, godly do counsel. For thou alone art our
propitiator, our King, our strength and virtue, our only hope, only
salvation, only way, and the eternal life.

O most sweet Jesus, I beseech thee, assiste us, least that being either
seduced by false Prophets; or enticed by our own flesh; or persuaded by
Satan; or caried-awaie by the wicked behavior and examples of men; or else
offended by stumbling blocks, we fal-againe into former darkness; and wander
away from thee, the way of eternal life.

Lead us o Son of God, we pray thee in the light of thie countenance,
uphold thou us, which art the right hand of God the father, that we fall not
down; direct us, that at the length, thou being our guide, we may ^^taine
unto the immortal glory, which thou have promised to such as trust in thee,
sweet Christ.

To thee be praise, thanks, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

A form of prayer to be said of any man, by, and for himself.
O Most sweet Christ, Jesus Christ, unto thee do I call. For thou art my
light; thou art my life; thou art my salvation; thou art my living God; mine
holy Father; my merciful God; my living master; my good shepherd; my best
helper.

Thee do I pray unto, thee do I sue unto, thee do I beseech, yt through thee
I may walk; unto thee I may come; in thee I may rest.

Grant that by thine help, I may lead an holy, godly and righteous life.

Expel-awaie the darkness of mine understanding; restrain the wicked
cogitations of mine heart; quench the flames of evil affections; repress my
froward will by thie power: and illustrat mine understanding with thie light;
minister godly cogitations; kindle virtuous affections; and convert my will
unto thee, that those things which thou would, I may will also.

Furthermore, seeing my body is the house of my soul; grant I beseech thee,
that by thine help I may keep the same chaste and clean, that a pure mind
may dwell in a clean body; and that I may be sound both in soul, spirit,
and body, and so both in body and soul I glorify thee without ceassing.

To thee my shepherd, and only God together with the father and the holy
spirit, be blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, honor, and power,
and strength for ever and ever, Amen, Amen, So be it, So be it.

A form of prayer for a family.
For So Much as none can stand, without thou, o Lord Jesus Christ, do uphold
the same; I humbly beseech thee, vouchsafe with thie protection to preserve
mine household, my wife, children and family.

Grant I beseech thee, that both I my self, and my wife, children, and al mine
household, may do our duties, each of us according to thie will.

For when thou doste feed us, we want naught; when thou rulest us, we are
safe, and no man can hurt us; and when thou helpest us in our labors, we do
reap most plentiful fruit.

Wherefore, vouchsafe to be with us, driueawaie wicked spirits, the enemies of
thine ordinance; let thine holy Angels be our watchmen; and govern us
evermore with thie blessed spirit, that evermore in this life, and in the
world to come, we may praise thee, Amen, Amen, So be it, So be it.

FINIS.
THE FIRST TAble comprehending special names of Men, Women, etc. after the
order of the Alphabet.
A
Aaron his goat, page 254. Abraham, page 88. his bosom, 101. his faith, 418.
his seed, 309. a pattern of the true Church, 107. Absalon, 5. Acha^, 195.
Adam, 88. Adonibezek, 260 Adriel the Angel, 87. Egyptians, 191. Aesclapia,
192. Aesculapius his feast, 192. Alcibiades, 260. Amonites, 195. Amnon, 5.
Anabaptists, 173. Antichrist his strength, 216. his property, 512.
Antisthenes, 381. Apollo, 191. 192. his feast, 192. his oracle. 194. Architas
the Tarentine, 381 Aristodemus, 194. Aristomenes sacrificed me^, 194 Aristotle,
382, his opinion concerning true happiness confuted, 383. Arrius, 163. Atheist,
98. Augustane confession, 96.
B
Babylon, 119. Bacchus his feast, 192; men sacrificed thereat, 193. Balaam,
398. Barcoziba^, 18. Belisarius, 261. Ben-hinnon, 195. Brazen-serpent, 31.
Britans sacrificers of men, 194.
C
Caine, 181. Cepio Seruilius, 260. Ceres, 192. her feasts, 192. Christ Christ,
10. 89. The Lord of hosts, and why, 10. When and where borne, 21, 22. his
mother who, 22; his kindred, 23; worshipped of the wisemen, 23; offered-vp in
the temple, 24 carried into Egypt, 24; a Nazarite, 25; figured by Aarons
goat, 254, by Samson, 25; his disputation with Doctors, 25; baptized, 27;
tempted, 283 his preaching, miracles, 28; riding into the temple, 29; betrayed,
forsaken of his own disciples, 30; afflicted, crucified, 31; railed upon,
nailed unto the cross, 33; compared unto the Paschal Lamb, 35; his
resurrection, 38; his ascension, 39; a Prophet, a King, and a Priest, 44; his
kingdom; 50; a spiritual kingdom, 51; his kingdom how governed, 42; his
palace, 52; his people, 53; his office. 51; 60; his resurrection denied of the
Jews, 45; his resurrection confirmed by manifold testimonies, 46; his
benefits to us ward, 44; crimes laid against him, 60; accused for saying he
was the son of God, 60; how the way by doctrine, 122 by merit, 123, by
example, 124; the truth, 125, how the life; 126; the head of the Church, 149;
his Priesthood, 242; his sacrifice diverse, 247; his intercession, 249. 254;
how an intercessor, 249 when, 301; our only mediator, 302; nor a mere man,
481; Christians they are Priests, 344; and how, 344; their works why
sacrifices, 350. Cimbrians, 195. Cornelius, 192. Critolaus, 381
D
Daniel, 175. David, 146, his punishments, 5. Delia, 192. Diogenes, 193. Dives,
101. Doeg a figure of Judas 30.
E
Eldad, 169. Eleusinia, 192. Epicurus, 379, 449; his opinion concerning true
happiness, confuted, 380. Erechtheus, 194. Eumolphus, 193.
F
Frenchmen, 195. Sacrificerof men, 195.
G
Gabriel the Angel, 84, 89. Gentiles called, 39. Gentiles Gods, 190. Gentiles
holie-daies, 193. Gentiles sacrifices, 193 The Germans sacrificers of men, 195.
H
Habel, 181. Heracles, 192. Hercules his feast, 192. Herea, 192. Hermea Pythea,
192. Herod, 261. Hortoth, 85.
I
Jerusalem, 119; what it signifies, 53. Jews, 16; rejected, 43; why
rejected, 55. 74; they deny the resurrection of Christ, 45; they object
things to Christ, 45, 60; their altars where, and what, 177. Jewish
sacrifices, 177; what 178; instituted of God, 178; what they signified, 186.
Iezebel, 260. Job, 146; his troubles, 418. John a forerunner of Christ, 27.
Joseph, 175. Joseph Benzara, 18. Joseph tried, 418. Joshua, 121. Irencus
opinion of traditions, 166. Judas, 398; figured by Doeg, 30. Judas the
Galilean, 18. Juno her feast, 192. Jupiter his feast, 192.
L
Lacedaemonians, 193. Lazarus, 101; a fable of him, 99. Luther his invincible
courage, 397; why Luther forsook the Pope, 209,
M
Mahomet, 89; his death, 81; his fables, 84; his laws, 83. Manasses, 95.
Manes, 163. Marroth, 85. Mars, 193; men sacrificed unto him, 193. Martine
Luther his invincible courage, 397. Medad, 169. Melchizedek, 222. Mercury, 19;
his feast, 192; (...) me^ sacrificed thereat, 195. Mesa, 195. Messiah. The
belief of Christians concerning ye Messiah, 16 his office, 51. 61; his
palace, 52; his people, 56; against his government, 49; against the time of
his coming, 47. Michael, 12. Minerua her feast, 192. Moloch the idol, 195.
Moses, 88. 121. Muscouites, 16. 195; somewhat inclined unto religion, 96. The
Bible translated into the Muscouie tongue, 96.
N
Neptune his feast, 192. Nestorjus, 80. Noah, 88.
O
Origin, 160.
P
Pansia, 192. Panathenea, 192. Panthea, 192. Pelagius, 479. Peter, 398.
Pindarus his opinion concerning happiness confuted, 382. Pithia, 192. Porph^rie,
182. Posidonia, 192. Praxithea. 194. Proserpina, 192. Protestants their good
works. 513.
S
Sabellius, 163. Samson a figure of Christ, 25. Saturn his sacrifices, 154.
Seraphiel, 67. Sergius the Arrian, 80. Seruilius, 260. Simonides his opinion
concerning happiness confuted, 382. Socrates his opinion concerning happiness
confuted, 386. Staphilus, 173.
T
Tesmophoria, 192. Thamar, 5. Turks, 16; their beginning, 79; their
multiplieng, 81; their prophecies, 77; their paradise, 90* their strength, 91;
arguments against the Turks, 92; consolation for the godly against the
Turks, 92.
V
Venus, 191.
FINIS.
The second Table containing a view of the special points comprehended in
this Book.
A.
True Absolution what, page. 303. Abstinence from wine* 84 from swines flesh,
86. Adoption. 502. Adversity what it works. 338. Affliction incident unto
the true ministers of God his word 408; sent unto man justly of God, 420;
Christ his affliction. 30. Ages of the world. 48. The Ague taken for a god.
191. Aldermens children sacrificed. 194. Altars of the Jews where, and what.
177. Angel, Adriel, 87; Gabriel, 84; the warriers of Christ, 11. Antiquity.
201. Arguments Against the Turks, 92. of ye Jews against Christ 45; of
Papists to uphold their Mass, 222; that no man can fulfill the Law. 483;
Ascension of Christ. 39. Authority to make ministers a note of the true
Church. 17^. Auricular confession, confuted. 303.
B.
Banishment, The Church in banishment, 119; and why. 174. Baptism, Of Christ,
27. of Christians, 106; a note of the true Church, 171; why but once received,
334: what it signifies, 334. among the Papists. 229. The Pope a spiritual
baud. 103. Belief. Belief of Christians concerning the messiah, 16; beleuers
why saved. 372 Benefit. Benifites coming by Christ, 44; of the gospel. 243.
The bible translated into ye Muscouie tongue, 96. Birth of Christ when, 21;
where. 22. Blessedness of the Church in this life. 463. Bosom of Abraham what
101. Brute beasts worshipped for Gods. 191. Burnt sacrifice, 181. Bishops,
151.
C.
Calling of the Gentiles 39; of ministers, 399. Canon. Canon of the Mass, 205.
the abomination of the same. 206. Captives sacrificed. 195. Cats worshipped for
Gods, 191. Children. Children of aldermen and of noblemen sacrificed unto
Saturn, 194; children sacrificed by their own parents, 194, 195. Church. The
true Church what 105; gathered by God himself, 105; figured by Abraham, what
it signifies, who a member of the same, 107; the unity thereof, 108; governed
by God himself, 109; a small flock; like an Island in the sea, 109; it
hearkeneth unto Gods word, no; obeieth Christ only, 111; in it ye Lord of
hosts does dwell, the Temple of God, 113; the glory thereof, 114; how it
differreth from other assemblies, 114; the purity thereof, 115; the holy
service in the same 116. 389; how defiled, 118; in banishment, 119, 174; it
follows Christ, 121; preserved, 125; the marks it has, 148; 171; the triple
state thereof, 149; who the head of the same, 149; kinds of men in the Church,
150; kinds of ministers therein, 150; the power it has, 152; who teachers in
the same, 170 when troubled, 171; the perpetuity thereof, 391; the enemies
which it has, 438; God present in the same, 451, and why, 452. how blessed in
this life, 463. Comforts for the godly in their troubles, 451. Comlines in the
Church, 167. Commandments of God whether abrogated, 318. neglected of
Papists, 512. Communicating with Papists, 233. Communion of the Papists, 230.
Comparison between the Paschal lamb and Christ, 35. Concupiscence, 288.
Condemnation what, 477. Confession. Augustane confession, 96. Auricular
confession disproued, 303; confession of ye faith why necessary, 356
Conscience. The conscience, 99, 108; how healed. 335. Consecration, 231.
Consolation against the Turks, 94. Contemners of the Gospel how punished, 323,
371. Conte^platio^ what, 144, 402. Correction, 160; how used, 160. Covenant.
The covenant between god and man, 306; what it is, 310; the parts of ye same,
307, 347. the foundation thereof, 307. how fulfilled 310; old and new covenant,
306. The creatures do praise God and how, 391. Crimes objected against Christ,
60. Cross, What it signifies, 408; the kinds thereof, 408; a note of ye true
church; 172; the way unto heaven, 375. Curssings. Who may curse* 162; who are
to be cursed, 102; who curssed of the Pope, 164. Custom, 201, 289, 224.
Custom of sinning reproved, 293.
D.
A day diversely taken, 48. Day artificial, 48. Day natural, 48. Death of
Mahomet, 81. Destinies, 370. Difference between ye ministers, and the
ministry, 397; between the true church, and other asse^blies 114; between
ye old Testament, and the new, 319; between sins, 389. Disciples of Christ
forsake him, 30. Discipline, 159; the parts thereof, 159. Disputation of
Christ with the Doctors, 25. The devil tempts Christ, 28; the devil an
imitator of God and his works, 64. the Devil inuentor of praying unto saints,
214; Devils worshipped for gods, 191; the Devil can work no miracles, 69^ ye
Devil by nature false and cruel, 411; the Devil his purpose, 438. Diversities
of religion, 104. Divine miracles what, 64. Christ the way by doctrine. 122.
Dokimasie. 417. Dronkennes. 192
E.
Elements worshipped for Gods. 191. End, End of man, 128. 366. of man's
misery, 262. of knowledge, 404; of comlines in the Church, 167; of Jewish
sacrifices. 183. Enemies of the Church. 438. Evangelists differ not in
substance of doctrine: 57. Eucharistical sacrifice, 185; what, 236. 349; the
kinds thereof, 352. Examples, 160, 402, Christ how the way by example. 1^4.
Excommunication, 161; the ends thereof. 161.
F.
Fables of Mahomet, 84; concerning ye last judgment, 86; of Lazarus, 99. Faith
what, 325; it only saves, 325; the righteousness thereof, 330; it purifieth
the heart, and how, 117; faith a remedy against wickedness, 294; faith of
Abraham, 418; the effects of faith. 473. The faithful how holy. 108. Fall of
man. 367. Father of the Gods. 191. Fear of God. 137. Fear worshipped for a
God, 191 Perfect Felicity, what, 128. 137. Feast of A^s^^lapius; of Apollo; of
Bacchus; of Ceres; of Hercules; of Juno; of Jupiter; of Mercury; of Minerua;
of Neptune, 192. Festiual days. 192. Figurative significations of the Jewish
sacrifices. 186. Filthiness of sin. 412. Flesh how taken in the scripture.
144. Will of the Flesh. 289. Fortitude of the spirit. 396. Fruit of
meditation. 323. Fruit of Godliness. 387. Fruit of ungodliness. 388.
G.
Glory what. 466. Glory of the Church, 114. Goat of Aaron. 254. A God there
is. 98, 99. God ^ fou^tane, and how, 433. God his quantity* 84. God how
present in the Church. 451 God the governor of the Church, 109. How the
godly think of sin. 413. Why ye godly suffer martyrdom, 424. Fruit of
godliness, 387. Gods of the Gentiles, 190. The Gospel what, 326. 466. Benefit
of the Gospel, 243. Government of the Messiah spoken-against, 49. Grace what,
326. 466. Life of Grace, 127.
H
Right hand of God what, 40. True happiness, 365; what it is, 392; how it
comes, 366; al men desire it, 367, 377. Happiness what in the opinion of
Aristotle, 383; of Epicuru^, ^79, 380; of Pindarus, 382; of Simonides, 382; of
Socrates, 386; of worldly wisemen, 385. No perfect happiness in this life,
376. An harlot the Mass is, 203 Significations of the word Heart, 140. Hearted
men, 140. Heart of man, 138. Head of the Church, 149. The way unto Heaven, 369.
Hearers of God his word the soldiers of Christ, 14. Hearers of Gods word,
why blessed, 372. Heretics who, 162. How men are holy in this life, 116.
Holy days of the gentiles how spent, 192. Honey, 187; what is signifies,
188. Lord of hosts who, 9, 10. House of God, and who dwell therein, 389.
Hypocrisy what, 448. Hypocrites who, 447.
I
Idol Moloch, 195. Original of idolatry, 189. Idolatry a punishment for
disobeieng the Lord, 190, 196. Idolatrous princes not to be obeyed, 430.
Immortality of the soul. 100. Incense, 177. Ingratitude of man whence, 287.
Innocence what, 467. Good intents, 200. Intercession, 212. Christ his
intercession for us, 249, 294; diverse things to be considered therein. 296.
Christ how an intercessor for us, 299; and when, 301. Saints cannot be
intercessors for us, 213. Interpretation of scriptures, 169. Innocation of
Sanctes, 111; invented by the Devil, 214. A fable of the last judgment. 86.
At the last judgment persect happiness, 376. God his judgment in punishing
sin, 414. Iuridicall power of the church, 156. Justification what, 124, 326,
477, 495, 503, 505. Our Justification by Christ only oppugned, 331. Things
required in a lustified man, 495. Causes of man's Justification, 503
K.
Keys of heaven, 153. they being rightly used are a note of the true Church,
171. Kingdom of Christ what* 50; a spiritual kingdom, 51; how governed, 42;
how opened, or shut, 154. Knowledge, 136; end of knowledge, 404; knowledge of
ye tongues, 401; knowledge of God his word required in a minister, 400; how
attained, 401; knowledge of Christ what, 499.
L.
Word Law how taken in the scripture, 314; the use thereof, 487; no man
justified thereby, 489; the rigor of the same, 523. Laws of Mahomet, 83. Laws
of Moses abrogated how, 38. Leaven, 187; what is signifies, 188 Life of
nature, 127. Virtuous life what, 144. Logique, 401, 444. Love a badge of the
true Church, 172. Lytron, 409.
M.
Magistrates how to be obeyed, 430. Manna a figure of ye Lords Supper, 30.
Marks of ye true church, 171 Martyrdom, 421, kinds of martyrdom, 421; profit
of martyrdom, 421; why the godly suffer martyrdom, 424. Martyrs who, 421;
423. Martyrs not to be worshipped, 427, 428. Mass. The Mass, 168; none
indifferent thing, 168; an harlot, 203; the mass a sacrifice, and a sacrament,
and how, 204; Canon of the Mass, 205; the abomination thereof, 206; why it
is abominable, 207; not commanded of God, 207; contrary unto the institution
of Christ 208; the ground of purgatory, 216; the strength of Antichrist, 216;
with what argument maintained by papists, 222; the Popish mass one thing,
and their communion an other, 230. Material cause of sacrifices, 183. Christ
our only mediator, 302. Mediators between God and man, 212; a Mediator why
needeful, 486. Meditation what, 144; fruit of holy Meditation, 323; Meditation
offered by baptism, 106. Men worshipped for Gods, 191. Men by Aristomenes
sacrificed, 194; by the French men sacrificed, 195; by Germans, 195; sacrificed
unto Bacchus, 193. unto Ma^s sacrificed, 193; and sacrificed unto Saturn, 194.
Merchants, 96. God his mercy whereunto compared, 266; what it comprehends,
390; his mercy in punishing sin, 414. Christ ye way by merit, 123. Merits of
the saints the treasure of the Church, 214. Ministry of the Gospel, 129;
difference between the ministry and the ministers, 397. Ministers. Kinds of
Ministers in the Church, 150; authority to make ministers a note of ye true
church, 172; the the holy spirit how in ministers, 398; ministers how
called, 399; knowledge of Gods word required in a Minister, 400; state of
wicked ministers, 404; true ministers above al subject unto affliction, 408;
co^forts for ministers in their troubles, 450; ministers why priests, 361; and
how* 362. Miracles. Divine miracles what, and their effects, 64; why
wrought, and why not wroght in these days, 66 how wrought, 68; Miracles of
Christ, 28; how to know false from true Miracles, 67; devilish Mira^les how
done, 68; Miracles not wroght by the devil, 69. Misery. Misery of man without
Christ, 258; cause of man his misery, 258; the degrees of man's Misery, 259;
the end of man's Misery, 262. The Moon worshipped for a God, 191. Mount Zio^
what, 53. Music why retained in the Church. 391.
N
Natural life, 127. Natural philosophy, 401. Nature of oil, 345. Noblemens
children sacrificed, 194.
O
Obedience to the Law, 373. Obedience to the Law a part of Christ his
sacrifice. 247. Obedience to Magistrates, 430. Observation, 402. Office of the
Messiah, 51, 61. Office of the priest in the old Law, 186. Nature of Oil,
345. Opinions of Christ, 17. Oracle of Apollo, 194. Order why observed in the
Church, 167. Ordinary power of the Church, 152. Organs why retained in the
Church, 391. Original cause of idolatry 189. Overseers, 151. Oxen worshipped
for Gods, 191.
P
Pain follows pleasure* 380. Palenes worshipped for a God, 191. Palace of
the Messiah, 52. In the Papacy what good things, 228. Papists, 16; they
neglect the commandments of God for their own traditions, 512. Papistical
service, 2^^. Papisticall good works what, 511; the causes of them. 513.
Papistical traditions diverse. 511. Paradise of the Turks. 90. Parents killed
of their children in sacrifices. 93 Parents murderers of their own children
in sacrifices. 194, 195. Parts of Christ his Priesthood. 242. Paschal Lamb
compared to Christ. 35. The Passover, why instituted. 26. Patience a
sacrifice. 359. Patriarchs. 151. People of the Messiah. 56. Perpetuity of the
Church. 391. Persecution, 441; a twofold persecution. 467. Philosophy natural.
401. Pleasure of ye body a vain thing. 380. Pomegranate. 180. The Poor most
ready to embrace the gospel. 26. The Pope the keeper of Epicurns book. 100.
Whom the Pope curses. 164; his punishing of transgressor^. 168; 205; The Pope
a spiritual baude 203; why forsaken of Luther. 209* Popes usurpers of
authority. 151. The sum of Popery. 97. A Popish priest who, 197. Popish
priesthood contrary to the priesthood of Christ, 198; Popish baptism. 229.
Power of the Church. 152, 156. Prayer. Prayer, 401; true prayer what 456, a
sacrifice, 356; when accepted, 301, 302; signified by incense, 197; public
Prayer, a note of the true Church, 17^. Praise of God a sacrifice. 355. Praise
of God, 390; wherein it consists, 390; who praise God, 390; how the
creatures praise God, 391. Whether Preachers in the time of persecution, may
fly. 441. Preachers be the soldiers of Christ. 12. Preaching of Christ. 2^.
Preaching nccessarie. 322. Preaching a note of ye true Church. 171. Preaching
to ye spirits. 102. Presence of God in the Church. 452. God why present in
the Church. 451. Preservation of ye Church. 125. Priest. The Priest his office
in sacrificing, 186; the necessity of an hie Priest, 237; his condition, 239;
Christians are priests, and how, 344; ministers are Priests, 361; ministers
how Priests, 362; Priesthood of the new Testament, 242. Popish Priesthood
contrary to the Priesthood of Christ, 198. Princes idolatrous not to be
obeyed, 430. Gift of prophecy not tied unto any one calling of men, 169.
Prophecies of the Turks, 77. Propitiatory sacrifice, 235. 250. Prosperity
dangerous, 338. Punishment. Punishment of David, 5; of the ungodly, 118. 161.
190. 196. 323. 331. In deserved punishment, what to be considered, 411. God his
justice and mercy in punishing sin, 414. Pureness in this life, what* 116.
Purgatory, 216; a vane thing* 221; grounded upon the Mass, 216. Purity of
the Church, 115.
Q
Quantity of God, 84.
R
Reason of man is vane, 370. Reiection of the Jews, 43; causes of the same*
74. Religion, 99. Diversities of religion, 104. Remission of sins wha^, 496.
Repentance a sacrifice, 357. Resurrection of Christ, 38. 45; confirmed by
many testimonies, 46. Reward of sin, 162. Riches, 146. Righteousness what,
498. 500; a sacrifice, 359. Righteousness of faith, and works oppugned, 330;
righteousness of works oppugned, 327,
S
True Sabbath what, 62. Sacraments how many, 334. Sacrifice. Sacrifices of
the Jews, 177. 178; of the Gentiles, 193; of Christians, 235. Sacrifices of
the Jews of what kinds, 185^ the causes of them, 182. Sacrifices of
Christians how many, 247. Burnt Sacrifice, 185. Sacrifice eucharistical, 185;
236. 349. kinds thereof, 352. Sacrifice of good works, 349 of Obedience, 247.
of patience, 359. of prayer, 356. of Praise, 355. of propitiation, 235. 250. of
repentance, 357. of righteousness, 359. of the Mass* 204. Sacrifices of
themselves please not God, 178. In a sacrifice what to be considered, 251.
Sacrifices of the old Law how offered, 253. Captives, 195; children, 194,
195. men, 193. 194. parents Sacrificed, 193. Salt, 188. Saints. Saints
cannot be intercessors for us, 213. Saints inuocated, a service of the devil,
214. their worship, why invented, 429. Sanctification how it comes, 106.
Satietie not in this life, 377. Seed of Abraham, 309. Self hatred, 290. Self
love, 289. twofolde, 290. Serpent of brass, 31. Serpents taken for GOD, 191.
Service of the Church, 116. What Service of Papists may be heard, 228.
Society with CHRIST 131. Sophisters, 443. how to be resisted, 444. Souls of
the righteous where* 376. they Sleep not until the day of judgment, 103.
Souls immortality, 100. Spirit of fortitude, 396. Spirit of God how in
ministers, 39^. Spirits celestial, 11. Spirite^ preached unto, 102. Spirits
will. 290. Spiritual soldiers who, 11, 12, 13, 14. Spiritual warfare. 12.
Stars of heaven the soldiers of God, and why. 14. Stars worshipped for
Gods. 191. State of the souls after this life. 100. State of wicked ministers.
4^4. Strangers. 119. Strength of the Turks. 91. A Student in the Scripture
who. 401. Study of the Scripture. 40^. The Sun worshipped for a God. 191
Supper of the Lord, 30; figured by Manna, 30; a note of the true Church, 171;
why often received, and what it signifies, 334; whether in the case of
necessity it may be ministered by a man not of the ministry. 234. S^^ine^
flesh abstained from. 86. Sin filthy, 243; 41^; horrible, 264; how
rewarded, ^62; how gotten, 479; kinds thereof, 389. Custom of Sinning
oppugned. 293. Al me^ sinners, 237. Sinners hated of God, 263.
T
Teachers of Gods word the soldiers of Christ, 14. Teaching, 160. Who are to
Teach in the Church, 170. Temples of God, 113. Tentation of Christ, 28.
Tentation of God what, 227. Old Testament what, 312; difference between the
old and the new Testament, 316, 319. Timo^ia, 410. Tradition, 403. Tradition
Papistical what, 16^. 511; Tradition wh^^ in truth, 165; kinds thereof, 166.
Traditions of men how to be thought of, 167. Transubstantiation, 217; contrary
to the nature of a sacrament, 217, learned of Magicians, and witches, ^^^.
Treason against Christ, 30. Trial of Joseph, 418. Trial of faith whereunto
compared. 4^^. Troubles of the godly how to be taken, 173, 450. Troubles of
Job, 418. Truth of Christ, 125. Tyrants how to be resisted 431; enemies to the
Church, 440.
V
Valeie of Ben-Hinnon, 195 Vanity of bodily pleasure, 380. Vanity of man's
reason, 370. Virtuous life what, 141. Unity of the Church, 108.
W
Ways unto heaven, 369. Christ the way by doctrine, 122; by merit, 12^; by
example, 124. Warfare spiritual, 12; 439; the weapons thereof, 12. Heavenly
Warriers who, 11. Water of God, what, 434. Water of life how received, 434.
Who by Weapons may resist tyrants* 431. Will of man, 514. Will of the flesh,
289. Will of the spirit, 290. Wine absteined from, 84. Wine why forbidden of
the Turks, 85. Word of God. The excellency of Gods word, 370; the profit
thereof, 372; the Church harkeneth thereunto, 110; the knowledge thereof
necessary in a minister, 400; the contemners of ye same, how punished, 323
Works. Works of Christians a sacrifice, 350; of protestants what 513. the
matter of good works, 511. things necessarily required in a good Work, 514.
Works Papistical what, 511. causes of them, 512. Righteousness of works
oppugned, 327. righteousness of faith, and works together refelled, 330. In
this World no satietie, 377. Worldly Wisdom* 370. Worldly Wisemens
opinions concerning felicity confuted, 385. Worlds continuance, 48. Worship
of Saints why invented, 429. Wrath of God against sinners, 263.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
The first number signifies the page, the last the number of the lines.
Page 7 line 18 for whether this place, read, whether this Psalm. 22 in the
margin for Isai 52 r. M^cah 52 155 20 of one nature r. of it one nature 157 15
r. learn of him; and the Apostles are sent forth 165 24 and by the comparing
r. as by the comparing 166 10 such things are r. such things as are 181 6 r.
Habel brought 189 11 r. stolen my Gods; 199 16 r. to instruct vvithal 214 24 r.
in which offense 234 10 r. of these 237 25 r. without making 243 13 r. are so
overthrown 249 3 r. in these words 309 15 r. that is, al 335 25 r. which
Christ 338 18 r. both in the cross 340 19 Christianity r. Christianlie 359 19
r. merit of Christ 362 17 r. and build up the 379 13 rat is easy to 388* 12 r.
does faune 407 16 r. at the 413 8 r. do weigh their sins 416 10 r. self
unto al 426 4 r. but these 441 8 r. of his riches 448 16 r. (...) 484 4 r. as
to the punishment 493 3 r. which is to save 501 3 r. we are not under 508 3
r. then seeing through 519. 5 r. favor before justification.


