A LETTER FROM THE KING, to his Court of Parliament of Bordeaux, touching the
death of the Duke of Guyse.

(***) By S. Milanges, ordinary Printer unto the King, 1589.

By commandment of the said Court.

Newly translated according to the French Coppie.

CANTABO IEHVAE QUIA BENEFECIT MIHI
printer's or publisher's device

Printed for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Church yard at the sign of
the Black Bear. 1589.

The King his letter unto his Court of Parliament of Bordeaux.
Trusty and well-beloved, although you are sufficiently informed of the occasions
which the Duke of Guise now deceased has given us, to revenge our selves of
those troubles which he has spread in our Realm, and of the enterprises and
attempts which he has made of later years against our state and Crown, yea
our honor and life: nevertheless (expecting until we give you more
perticularlie to understand how he has used himself ingratefully toward us
insteede of a mendes, whereas we pardoned him all things passed, in hope that
our gentleness, and the good turns and honor which since then we have done
unto him, and did every day, to the misliking of our good and Loyal servants
and Subjects, which were still offended with it, might bring him to the right
way again.) We will only signify unto you, that of late his insolency was
grown so far, that despising our Authority, he has omitted nothing of
that which he might do, to bring us into trouble, and to take our crown from
us, yea our own life. And if he has not done it, it is because he could not
do it, which has given us just occasion to make him know that GOD has given
us the Authority, the means, and the courage to chastise him, according to
his desert, by the loss of his life. Whereof we have not thought amiss to
advertise you by these presents, to the end you may know the truth of it,
least by salse reports it be colourably altered unto you, giving you moreover
to understand, that we will by no means leave our holy entrprise to make war
against the Heritickes, and to root them out: but rather, as it was not
grounded either upon the late deceased Duke of Guyse his life or death, nor
his ambition; but upon the zeal and affection which we have allwaies borne,
and will always have engraued in the bottom of our heart, to the glory of
GOD, and the increase of our Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion; so
likewise it cannot be by any occasions whatsoever removed from us. Our will
therefore is, that our Subjects of our jurisdiction be informed of the just
causes of the punishment which they have received, and of our good and holy
purposes. And that likewise, you endeavor your selves to keep every one in
their obedience which they owe unto us, whereby they may assure themselves to
be eased as much as we can, and whiles they shall continewe in their duty, they
shall find us always their gracious King, ready to gratify them as far as
their fidelity shall deserve; and likewise to chastise them if they forget
their duty, and withdraw themselves from the respect and obedience which GOD
has commanded them to give us.

Given at Bloys, the 24. day of December. 1588. Sygned thus, HENRY.
And lower, REVOS.
Presented the second of January 1589.

And on the back side



To our trusty and well-beloved of our Court of Parliament at BVRDEAVX.
FINIS.
Drawn out of the Regesters of the Court.
THe Court and Chambers thereof being assembled by request made unto them by
word of mouth from the King his general Attorney, has, and by these presents
does make special inhibition unto all manner of persons of what estate,
quality, or condition soever they be, and under what pretense soever it be;
to make or renew any league or association, to withdraw and entice the
Subjects of our said Lord the King from his service, nor spread or use any
words tending to withdraw them from the Loyal heart, fidelity, and
obedience which they owe unto him, upon danger to be accounted as Rebels
and guilty of high treason. Enioyning all Bayliffes, Stewards, Vnderwardens,
their deputies, and all others to whom it shall belong, to make inquiry of
them that oppose themselves hereunto, and to proceed against the offenders,
according to the rigor of the Kings edicts, and to signfiie unto the same Court
of their endeavor done in that behalf within one month under pain to answer
it themselves at their own peril and danger.

Enacted at Bordeaux at the Parliament, in the Chambers thereof being
assembled, the 2 of January. 1589. Sygned thus D. ARNAL.


