THE CURTAIN OF CHVRCH-POVVER AND AVTHORITIE IN THINGS CALLED INDIFFERENT:

Drawn and laid open, to show the many infectious sores and maladies they
bring in, and cover.

Together with sundry infallible reasons, proving that the service of God, and
the general good of the Church and Common wealth require that they should be
abolished.

By Ia: Henric.

Isai. 29.13, 14. Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and
their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men: Therefore behold, I
will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people: for the wisdom of
their wisemen shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be
hid.

Ier. 8.22. Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? Why then
is (...) health of the daughter of my people recovered?

Printed MDCXXXII.

To the Christian Reader.
We may see clearly how it often fares between Christ and the Churches, by
that which he said against the Scribes and Pharisees, when he proved that in
diverse particulars they had made the word of God of none effect through their
traditions. The Church of Rome has in that evil exceeded them, Marc. 8.6. to
14.
Bellarmin, in his 4 book of the unwritten word of God Chap. 2. making three
sorts of traditions, calls one Ecclesiastical, which he says are introduced
from ancient customs by the Prelates, or by the people, and creepingly, by the
silent and unquestioning agreement of the people, have gained as it were
strength of law: with such are we to deal. Sess. 21. Chap. 1.2.
The Council of Trent declares that this power has the Church always had in
ministering of the Sacraments (having their substance) to ordain or alter that
which she judged to be most expedient for the utility of those that receive
them. I could wish the Church of England, at least in her practice, had never
inclined to such kind of opinions and traditions. But considering how things
go there, I thought my self so much bound to Christ, my Savior, that I must
discover the mischeivous wounds and soars they bring in and cover; that by the
mercy of God and care of them that are sensible of the hurts, there may
happily be found balm in Gilead to cure them. Ier. 8.22 Lame. 1.12
For stay and consider all ye that pass by, If the Church of England, like the
man m the Gospel, that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, be not fallen
among thieves, Luc 10.30 31.32.
that have stripped her of her raiment and wounded her; whether many Priests
and Levits have not come down that way, and seen her, and pass by on the
other side. Whether I, seeing the wou^^ th^^ ^re herein manifested, Verse. 37.
could do less then have compassion on her; whether I have not, as far as God
has enabled me, bound them up, and powered into them the wine of his law and
the oil of the Gospel: whether I had not reason to complain of them, that
have so cruelly hurt her: and if in ought I have done the part of a neighbor;
remember what our Lord says, go thou and do likewise. Be not of them that
cover with a covering, Isai. 30.1.
but not of Gods Spirit. But rather remember Christ's words, beware of false
Prophets, that come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves: ye shall know them by their fruits. Math. 7.15. and 16.18.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of Thistles? A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. The
presbiterie and the hierarchy may be these two trees, which thou shall know
by their fruits, he that seeks the good has adversaries about the bad. I may
find such in this work: but he that shall judge both them and me is able to
defend it. If then they constrain me to say with my Leader. I have labored in
vain, Isa. 49.3.
I have spent my strength for naught, I shall add, yet surely my jugment is
with the Lord and my work with my God. To his grace therefore and protection,
I must commend it, and rest.

Thine in the Lord: IA: HENRIC.

THE CVRTAINE OF CHVRCH-POWER AND Authority, in things called indifferent;
drawn, and laid open, to show the many infectious soars, and maladies they
bring in, and cover.
I Deny not, but that the Church may make ordinances, when they be but few,
easy, innocent, and tend only to the keeping of that, which is in effect
required, though not in terms expressed in Gods word. Aug. confess. lib. 1. c.
11.
In the primitive Church many put off their Baptism, either till age, when the
heat of sin was well over; or till they were sick, and in danger of death;
because they had a conceit, that sins after Baptism were greater, that in
Baptism all sins and stains were washed away, and in the mean they might
give more scope to their lusts: whereupon the Church made a Canon, that none
might be a Bishop, who had been baptized in his bed, because such a one
seemed to be baptized rather of necessity, then faith, and love; which was a
scandal, deserving such an ordinance against it; because those, who are chosen
to that office, should be blameless, etc. 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.7.
It is also a great scandal to Christianity, that there are many Christians,
so called, who are common dicers, that in half an hour deprive men, their
wives, and children, of half, and sometime of their whole estates: a vice that
is often accompanied with cursing, swearing, fighting, killing, and such fearful
concomitants: Synod. Co^stantinop. 6. c 50. Council. Elib. c. 79.
In remedy whereof, Councels have ordained that such should be put from the
Communion. What Christian will deny, but that there is need of such an
ordinance? as being in effect required, 1 Cor. 5.5.7.11.13. Other instances
might be given of the like nature.

As touching points of faith, and salvation, determined by Councels against
heretics, such as the Arians, Pelagians, Arminians, etc. they are not so much
to be observed, because the Council has so determined, as because it is
decreed according to Gods word, which the Council cleereth from false glosses;
that so the obedience in such cases may not be to men's ordinances, but to the
word of God, Isa. 2.4.
that should judge amongst the nations; and no man, or company of men may sit
in the temple of God, as God, ordaining laws, and points of faith binding the
conscience The decrees of that Council Act. 15. bound not but for a time,
touching abstinence from blood, See Moulin Buckler of faith. Sect. 91.
and things strangled. And every Council may not think it sufficient, in
like cases, to say as the Apostles might, It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost,
Act. 15.25.
and to us. The Apostles had a more warrantable authority and commission, then
provincial Bishops have. The first Council of Nice determined well against
the Arrians. They had almost decreed against Priests marriage; that had not
been so well: nor was well in such Councels as after decreed it against her,
and the word of God, which is greater: therefore the book of Articles says
well, That general Councels may err, and sometimes have erred. Art. 2^.
The same Council made the Bishop of Rome a Patriarch, and the first of the
Patriarchs; and so gave him a primacy of order before the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, and Antioch, who had like privileges over the other parts of the
Christian world; but this was not so well, because the Beast arose to his
Antichristian greatness out of this sea of Fathers, doctrine, and Canons, and
from this small beginning of preeminence. If the Church have taken on her to
ordain a feast for the blessed Nativity of our Savior, and another or two in
memory of his resurrection, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, Esth. 9.21.
because indeed the Jews did the like in a case of great deliverance from the
conspiracy of proud Haman: she must yet set bounds to her power, and not think
she may ordain what holy days, ordinances, and ceremonies she list, as the
Church of Rome has done; ordaining the feast of Candlemasse, or the
purification, in place of that feast the Heathen kept to the Goddess Febra,
the mother of Mars: and so diverse titular offices, ordinances, and Sa^^^s
days, in place of those the Heathen celebrated to their hee-Gods, and
shee-Gods. But leaving to make any further discovery of her presumptuous
imitation of Jews and Heathen in such cases; because it is sufficiently set
forth in a little book called, The root of Romish rites, translated out of
French into English: let us take a little view of some ordinances and
ceremonies received in the Church of England.

I deny not but the Church may ordain some orders for the decent worship of
God, as touching the time and place of meeting, and reverent behavior while
the people are there; that men should kneel, and be uncovered in the time of
prayer; hear the word with silence, and reverence, when it is read, or
preached; that a pulpit should be erected in a place most convenient for
hearing; a fit vessel set for Baptism, a Table, and a Cup for the Lords
Supper; that people should come orderly, and not confusedly to the same; that
collection should be made for the poor in the best manner that may be; that
there should be an uniformity in the manner of administering the Sacraments,
both in words, prayer, and ceremony, and that as near as may be to the
institution, and in that purity and simplicity, wherein they were left us by
the Apostles; that so one may not do these things after this manner, and
another after that; and some come to say, I like this, 1 Cor 1.12
I that Ministers way best; like those, I am of Paul, I of Apollo; that the
Pastors in every province shall meet once a year, or so often as need shall
require, to reform abuses, if any arise in doctrine or government. Ordinances
of this nature are not things merely indifferent, but convenient and necessary,
and do not only preserve peace and unity, but even tend to the due
performance of that which is commanded in the word, directly, or by
consequence, in such places as that, O come let us worship, and bow down, and
kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm. 95. 1 Cor. 14.
Let all things be done decently, and in order. There may and ought to be such
orders and ceremonies: but all are not thus necessary: for the very Article
confesses, Act. 34. Act. 20.
that some be changed and abolished (which cannot be said of such as are thus
necessary) and that nothing must be ordained against Gods word. There ought to
be nothing that may make Religion ridiculous, or the word of none effect.

In the Church of England, the Bishops will have an infant signed with the
sign of the cross, In token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to
confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner,
against sin, the world, and the devil, and to continue Christ's faithful
soldier, and servant unto his lives end. Now what a mockery is it to stand so
strictly on this ceremony, when in the mean while, they will not have such a
one, being come to be a man, confess the faith of Christ against the
Arminians, nor manfully contend for the faith against such Pelagian and popish
opinions? and when also they like a Minister the worse, if in the pulpit he
strive to beat down growing Arminianisme, and Popery, in things
controverted; as if they were not things revealed, matters of faith, profitable
for us to know, and of great honor to God being known: as that election is
wholly of grace, and not of foreseen faith, and works; that the death, and
merit of Christ preached, are more availeable for the conversion, and salvation
of the elect, than of others; that regeneration and conversion are of Gods
grace and power, and not of the will of man: that those whom God electeth, he
calls, justifies, and glorifieth; so that they cannot fall away finally;
that justification while we live here, and heaven after this life, are not of
our works, and merits, but of Christ, and on our part of faith in him, yea of
faith alone that works by love, and is fruitful in good works. That Christ
by one oblation of himself has made a full satisfaction for the sins of all
the elect: that he is the only mediator of intercession in heaven, that can
hear us, know our hearts, and by whom we may come to the Father, and the only
head of his Church to ordain laws binding the conscience; that his Testament
is sufficient in matters of salvation; that there is much error, and vanity in
the doctrine of Purgatory, Images, and other points of popery. Now I say it
is a mere mockery to enforce Ministers to sign every child with the sign of
the Cross, in token that he shall confess the faith of Christ, and manfully
fight against such spiritual evils, and enemies, and yet to hinder any, much
more Ministers, to confess, and defend the faith of Christ in these and the
like points, by disputes, books, and sermons, and to pretend, that knowledge
of Gods truth in these points is curious, and unprofitable not only in babes,
that have more need of milk, but even in divines and men of knowledge, and
that in a time when Papists, and Arminians strive so much to corrupt men in
them.

And the mockery is so much the greater. Because they teach all to pray: We
give thee humble thanks that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge
of thy grace, On the feast of Simon and Jude.
and faith in thee. Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us
evermore. Granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth. And touching the
Apostles and Prophets, grant us to be joined together in unity of spirit by
their doctrine. They make men pray thus, and yet are against the things prayed
for. 2 Because they make every Bishop and every Minister, at his ordinantion,
to promise See the ordering of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
to be ready with all diligence to banish and drive away all erroneous, and
strange doctrines contrary to Gods word. Mark, all without exception, which
cannot be better done, then by manifesting the revealed truth of God in these
points, and so striving earnestly to join men together in the unity of the
spirit by the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, as is desired in prayer.
For what a mockery is it first to make him thus to vow it and pray for it, and
then to hinder him from keeping that vow. 3. Because they forbid the defense of
Gods ordinances against the Hierachie, and those traditions thereof, which are
erroneous, of the world, and causes of temporizing and ignorance, making men
ambitious that should rather with the Olive tree refuse to leave their fatnes
for Dominion, like their Lord who says. Judge. 9.8. Luc 12.14
Who made thee a judge, or a divider? And what a mockery is it, when Bishops,
that cause all to be signed with the sign of the cross, in such a token,
have not been as careful to get our Princes, and people to send timely, and
effectual help, to them that fought under Christ's banner in the Palatinate,
and elsewhere; but rather flattered such Courtiers, and feigned friends, as
underhand betrayed them, and the common cause, in stead of an effectual going
out to the help of the Lord against the mighty? How much better is God
pleased when men are more in deeds, and less in sign of humane invention and
authoririe?

The article of traditions confesses that all things ought to be done to
edifying. But how does this ceremony edify? Have Englishmen that stand so
much for the Hierarchy, and for this sign been made by them better soldiers
of Christ then other Protestans? or have they not rather proved worse, and so
showed the fruits of the hierarchy and ceremonies? So ordinary is it with
God, that blesses his own ordinances, to punish men's inventions and
presumptions. May it not be said to such masters of ceremonies, you can see
the faith daily opposed, religion corrupted, poperye and Arminianisms increase,
and the poor members of Christ to fall by the sword, and practices, and yet in
the mean be contented with the sign of the cross, and the name of a soldier
without the work? neither doing it themselves, nor suffering those Ministers
that would, and might have prevailed by the word: these things must be left to
the only care and wisdom of the Prelates, who are well experienced in
flattery, and can best see that nothing be done to any purpose, and in the
mean take it for granted, that the Church might impose, and add to baptism,
the sign of the cross so superstitiously used, and abused by the Papists:
that it is fit to uphold that, and all other traditions, and ceremonies of the
Church (though the Article confess they may be changed according to the
diversity of countries, times, and men's manners) and that it is authority
enough for the use of the same now, because it was ancientlie used (so was salt
and other Romish trash) because soon after the death of the Apostles, or at
least soon after the victory of Constantine, Aug. confess. lib.
when diverse Jews, and heathen mocked the Christians with a crucified God, and
Redeemer, they signed themselves, to show they were not ashamed of him, when
who sees not, that if their reason were then good, not superstitious, yet there
is not the same now in England. Seeing there men live not amongst such mocking
Jews, and heathen, unles it be among such as scorn and mock them with the
name of Professors, Disciples, and factious Puritains, who strive against
Arminianisme, or the hierachie, and ceremonies. Indeed these are so much
scorned and persecuted, that no men in England do more truly bear the cross
of Christ, for his names sake, then they, whereas their adversaries strive by
all means to divert all men from bearing the cross in this manner, and by
allurements, and threats, to make them leave the cause, and temporise as
themselves do; who are therein enemies of the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18.
whose glory is their shame. For they in the mean while have only borne the
cross in a sign, made with the hand, like the Papists; which is but a
mockery in respect of the other. Besides no man ever as yet maintained, that
the Apostles, or any in their time, used the cross in baptism, much less in
sign only, without the work pretended to be signifed.

the truth, as against Anabaptists, and other heretics. Rev. 7.13.14.
These are they which come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
roabes white in the blood of the Lamb. Chap. 6.
This is a garment of joy and triumph given by the merits of Christ, to them
that have had not the sign and name, but the work of a soldier, in
confessing, and defending the faith, and cause of Christ against all opposers.
If I should say there may be amongst them some English Martyrs, that have
striven against Arminianisme, or at least against the hierarchy, and have
suffered for it, the Bishops could not prove the contrary. So that it is no
wonder, if men do not now offer to dispute with them, nor always set their
names to their books, seeing the power of the Prelates to be great, as that of
the inquisition, very dangerous, and the Bishops themselves so obstinate and
mighty in friends, that they keep their adversaries books, and arguments
from being seen, or regarded, and so plague them, that all their opposers
seem to have lost their labor, and do little other good then increase the
number of those Martyrs in white, Rev. 7.

This is one of the places alleged for the wearing of the surplesse, but here
still they dwell in the sign, they will not do the work of those Martyrs;
but rather are against some of them: and therefore because they can not look
to wear the white roabe hereafter, they will wear and make others wear an
unprofitable sign of it now: though men prove it to be a rite taken from the
Jews and ancient heathen, See the root of Romish Rites
as other of their pontifical garments, and ceremonies are. It is a custom in
England to bow toward the Altar or table; but what a mockery is this, while in
the mean they have no true compassion on the members of Christ, that have
suffered in the Palatinate and elsewhere, and so come to lie under the Altar
and cry: How long Lord holy and true? They also ordain holy days for the
Saints, and one for all Saints, but what a mockery is this, while in the mean
they will not suffer men, to confess, and defend the faith, and ordinances,
left by the Saints as above said? This is in effect to persecute the Saints,
and then make holy days for them, when they are dead, like them that builded
the tombs of the Prophets their fathers had killed. Mat. 23.29.
What a mockery is it to ordain that none shall hold two benefices with cure,
unles he be at least a master of art? Can. 41.
as if that degree might privilege him to be worse then others.

Can. 24.
What a mockery is it to ordain that in all Cathedral Churches the communion
shall be administered, upon principal feast days, sometime by the Bishop,
sometime by the Deane, and sometime by a Canon or Prebendarie, using a decent
cope, and being assisted with the Gospeller and Episteler; when none of all
these things are ordained in the new testament. That is neither Diocessan, or
provincial Bishops, Deanes, Canons, Prebendaries, Epistlers, Gospellers,
Cathedral Churches nor Copes; or as another Canon enjoyneth all sorts to wear
on their surplesses, hoodes suitable to their degrees, Can. 5 8
when they administer the Sacrament. These things nourish pride, ambition,
idleness, nonresidencie, temporising, and ignorance; Gods ordinances are not the
better observed by them, but the worse, as also by the petty Canons, See
Earls characters c. 69. of singing men.
and their singing, while the people can neither join with them, nor
understand them, they serve but for a vain show, to please ignorance, and
popish people.

Diverse Canons, courts and customs depend on the Episcopal office, authority
and Ministry, which must needs be sore burdens, because that office is not
ex jure divino, much less the Canons, courts, and proceedings. It would weary
a man to think of all the abuses in the Bishops courts, in subordinate
officers, the complaints of them that are oppressed by them, in every diocese,
show them to be popish, and intolerable, and therefore I will pass by them.

As touching kneeling at the Sacrament which also is an ordinance of humane
authority, I know there are many in the Church of England who, perceiving that
there is no quiet living there without obedience to this and the like
ordinances, consider that it is but a gesture, that the Sacrament is called the
Eucharist, which signifies thanksgiving, and the cup is called the cup of
blessing; that giving of thanks, or blessing of God, is a kind of prayer, and
this being the Sacrament of thanksgiving may be received kneeling, especially
where men are not permitted to receive it otherwise. I answer that as these are
the reasons of such as be conformable, because they know not how to help it, I
purpose not to dispute against them. But these are not the reasons of the
Bishops and such others as impose this ceremony of kneeling. Take the Church
representative, as they would have it taken for the assembly of Bishops, and
others in convocation, and of them that see their ordinances observed, and
there is no such professed doctrine or explanation of the reason, that because
it is a Sacrament of thanksgiving, and the cup a cup of blessing, men ought to
kneel in receiving it, and if there were, yet that is not a sufficient reason
for them to presume to impose it, without warrant of precept or example in holy
writ. For they know that all or most of the Psalms are express prayers,
praises and thanksgivings: yet neither do we read that Christ made men sing
them kneeling; neither do the Bishops, no nor the Papists themselves, make men
say, read, or sing them kneeling. It is true that in thanksgiving, it is not
only lawful, but best beseeming to do it kneeling, that as soon as ever the
Sacrament is received, it can not but be good to give thanks kneeling: so do
the reformed Churches, yet before and after meat men give God thanks standing,
yea many do it sitting, and the Bishops are not troubled with it. Besides the
act of receiving, is not an action or prayer of thanksgiving, but an act of
receiving. And it is out of question, that Christ administered this Sacrament to
his Apostles, as all, or the most part of them were sitting: Matthew says, As
they were eating, Math. 26.26.
Jesus took bread, blessed it, and gave it. Now no man will be so mad, as to
imagine that they were supping, or eating the Paschal-lambe on their knees.
Mark says: Mar. 14.18. verse. 22.
As they sat and did eat, Jesus said, one of you shall betray me: then it
follows, And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and gave it:
that is, therefore as they sat. If it had been necessary that men should
take it kneeling, Christ would have commanded them to rise, and take it
kneeling (a command that better beseemes him then a Bishop, or Minister) or the
Apostles would have so ordained, and ordered it: Luke says, when the hour was
come, Luc. 22. 14. verse. 19.
he sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him: and so (as Matthew, and Mark
add) as they did eat he took bread, and gave it. As in effect Luke himself
adds, And he took bread, or to show that though this banquet came after
supper, yet it was before they were risen: and therefore Mark says, it was As
they did eat.

After that, the Corinthians took the Sacrament as they were eating or
supping, wherefore the Apostle reproves them saying, In eating every one
takes his own supper before, and one is hungry, and another drunken, 1. Cor.
11.21.
what have ye not houses to eat, and drink in? He would not have them come
to Church to satisfye hunger; he does not reprove the^ for sitting at the Lords
supper, but for making a meal before it, and together with it: which was a
reason, why the time was changed, and appointed to be before men go home to
dinner. If any man hunger let him eat at home: then he adds, Verse. 34.
and the rest I will set in order when I come: that is, other matters, this is
already ordered: whence it appears, that in the Apostles time, it was received
sitting or standing, as a supper is received and usually eaten. And very
reason does manifest that this order could not suddenly be changed but by
degrees, and as superstition, error, and ignorance increased. Christ, that
instituted this Sacrament, did it to confirm and strengthen our faith, and to
make us show the Lords death, and the benefit thereof to our own souls, and
others. This is best performed by meditating, that as the bread is broken for
us, and given to us, so was Christ, that as it feeds, and saves our bodies
from perishing; so does Christ our souls; that as his promise is to save all
that believe in him, receive, and feed on those promises, so he ordained this
Sacrament as a sign, and seal of the same to every true believer, to whom in
particular it is given, and applied. His new covenant is to Iet. 31.33
write his law in our hearts, that we may, by virtue of that covenant in his
blood, walk in his ways; and for what is past to remember our sins no more:
and each man takes the Sacrament as an assurance thereof, to his own soul,
that groans under the burden of them. The Sacrament is best received, when
we mind and believe these, and the like things, and hunger and thirst for
them: therefore there is no more need of kneeling in the act of receiving, then
in hearing the same offered in the word preached; nor indeed so much Prayer on
our knees is necessary before receiving that we may be prepared, and receive
accordingly; and after receiving to show all humble thankfulness: but in
giveing us this Sacrament, at his table, the Lord would show us a great favor,
as a great Lord or Prince, does to a poor man, when he calls him to his table:
he requires him not to come, and eat kneeling: for that is not an action
fitting the intended favor, nor the act of eating a supper. It is the best
part of manners to be ordered by him, as the guests were that were first set.
In standing, or sitting he may behave himself reverently, as they do that so
receive in the reformed Churches.

If any do yet reply, it is better for men to command kneeling in receiving
the Sacrament, though the Apostles, and others in their time, received it
sitting; that is to infer, that the like may be commanded, that the witnesses
shall kneel while a child is baptized, or sprinkled that the Kings, and
Priests of Israel might have commanded the like; as most necessary in
circumcision, and in eating the Paschal-lambe, that is, that all should eat it
kneeling: for the eating of the Lamb before Christ's death, was in place of
this Sacrament: but this they could not do: for God says of the Passover:
according to all the rites of it and according to all the ceremonies thereof,
Number 9.3.
shall ye keep it. Not with others, much less with contrary. It may be,
that the striking of the door posts with blood, was not after so necessary;
nor perhaps, the eating of it in have, and with staves in their hands; because
the Angel had then past their houses, and the journey into Canaan was past: but
the rest of the ceremonies mentioned, verse. 12. were to remain. Verse. 12.
No man might presume to change them. No more indeed may any do these, save in
such as do not necessarily belong to the receiving of the Sacrament, as that
there should be a Paschal-lambe eaten at the same time, that it should be at a
supper time, when men make a meal, and not rather before dinner: the Apostle
changed one, that it should not be eaten when men eat a meal, or for hunger,
and the other was changed upon the same, or like reason. But this of the
gesture cannot so well be changed, much less to one so contrary, as that of
kneeling. The example of Christ, and his Apostles have the force of a precept,
that it should be eaten afer the manner of a supper; and the greatest
difference and contrariety of gesture that can be in such an action, is that
between sitting and kneeling, which of all others is farthest from that used
in the institution and time of the Apostles; and therefore must needs be
displeasing to God, the rather because it has been invented, imposed, and
practiced by idolatrous Papists.

It is the necessity of conformity imposed upon Ministers that furnishes
them with arguments to the contrary. You will say, many in the primitive
Church received it standing. This cannot properly be called a change, because
men do often eat standing; and it is likely that when Christ, and after his
ascension the Apostles, gave the bread, some might receive it standing. Besides
the conveniencie pleades for the gesture. For when as in Diepe, and Paris, and
some other Churches of France, there be about 4000 to communicate at a time,
thirty or forty of them come one behind an other toward the side of the
table, where the first three or four, standing still, receive, and then
passing forward give way to the next three, till all be served; whereas if all
should sit, and rise by companies, it would ask a far longer time. Besides,
this is a reverent gesture, and a lawful, and an indifferent mean between
sitting, and kneeling.



Plessis mystery of iniquity, progress. 50.51.
For it was Pope Honorius the third that first ordained kneeling at the
Sacrament, about the year 1220 when a little before the doctrine of
transubstantiation, determined in the Council of Lateran, in the time of his
predecessor Innocent the third: and then in the year 1264, that feast was
ordained by Urban the fourth, Platin in vit. Honor. 3. Annot.
which Papists call Gods day, or Corpus Christi, with them the greatest in the
year, when withal pomp, and ceremony the bread is carried in procession and
adored of all. Thence it followed that men ought to kneel before it. And that
this ceremony was held necessary, as also bowing to the Altar: both which
might be used by some, in an ignorant, and officious devotion, before the time
of Honorius, but ratified, and received, by all the Western Churches, it could
not be, till the Pope had power, and champions to maintain it. These were the
locusts, the Regulars. Innocent the third confirmed the order of Friars, whose
head was Francis, so famous for lying wonders; and Honorius the third, that of
the preachers, whose head was Dominick, canonized for a saint by the following
Pope Gregory the 9, these stouly maintained the cause against the Waldenses,
and Albigenses, whilst these popes were busy in sending Kings to conquer
Jerusalem, and persecuting the Emperors, King John of England, and other
Princes. Such was the religion of those times, and the ages next before; for as
one observes, If the Bishops of Rome sent into any country, it was not
principally to preath the Gospel, Plessis mystery iniquity. prog. 24.
but to broach their own ceremonies, their singings, their service in latin,
hours, organs, Altars, tapers, etc. stirring up Princes to enforce their
subjects to use and practice them, who would feign have kept themselves to the
first institution of the Church, in the purity of the Gospel. And as he
observes, the worser sort of men are most zealous in such things to shadow,
and obscure their evil acts, and indeed to serve them in stead of the
Religion which Christ ordained: therefore though they neglected and contemned
found doctrine, true faith, knowledge, zeal, and the like graces, yet they
would build stately Temples, bow to the Altar and to the bread, which is called
the body of Christ, and think they did God the better service.

I will not say that those English Bishops, and Doctors, who had hand in the
reformation, and ordained kneeling at the receiving of the bread and wine, did
believe transubstantiation, or consubstantiatio^, or teach men to do honor to
those elements, because they are called the body, and blood sacramentally: it
may be it was rather to draw Papists the sooner to Church, that this, and other
Romish rites were retained; as also because this had been so long used, in all
the world, they thought it too much as once to fall from kneeling, to sitting,
thinking that if they should, ignorant Papists, of which the land was then
peopled, would never be drawn to Church, or to hearken to the^, in other
things, when having once laid these things for Rules, like the Lutherans in
their tenets, they can hear nothing to the contrary, but above all, because
they knew the office of a Diocessan Bishop, could not subsist, in these days
of reformation, without maintaining them against all opposers of traditions,
and humane inventions. I know that as yet there is no public constitution,
teaching plainly that reverence ought to be done to the Elements, because they
are called the body, and blood of Christ: but if they that stand so much for
kneeling at the Sacrament have not some such superstition in it, why do they
bow toward the Altar or table, rather then toward the pulpit, or some other
side of the Church, seeing God is every where, and on all sides of us? And why
else do they begin to erect Altars, at the east end of the quier in Churches,
where there have been none since popery was abolished? These Popish
ceremonies should also have been abandoned, to show plainly, that they do not
favor superstition, and the worship of bread.

They vainly say it argues too much boldness, to sit or stand at the table of
the Lord: for it is a far greater presumption, to use, and ordain a ceremony,
so contrary to the institution, and practice of the Church in the Apostles
time. The greatest reverence we can do to God, is to stick close to his
ordinances, to obey and love them; and the greatest presumption to think any
thing can be better devised, performed, and practiced then it was in his
institution, with the Papists they do but mock God with a name of greater
reverence, whilst they withstand that of the institution, and command another
gesture, that is farthest from it. God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit and truth: In believing and following his word, and
ordinances, as Paul worshipped the God of his fathers, Ioh. 4. Act. 24.14. 1.
Cor. 11.
who delivered this ordinance, so as he received it of the Lord: and not as
they did whose fear toward God was taught by the precepts of me^, they
worshipped him in vain, he regards not their kneeling. It is not enough for
preachers to say we preach, and urge them, because our Princes, and Bishops
have commanded them, for he will answer Who required these things at your
hands? Isa. ^.1^.
which do but open a gap for Kings, and Prelates to command what they list.
Hence came that Besides that about the Saboath
order of King James, that men should not in pulpits confute popery in things
controverted, but leave that to the Bishops, and Deanes: and that which
succeeded, that Ministers should not in the Universities, pulpits and print,
dispute, preach, or write against Arminianisme: they that persuade a King, that
he may do this, strive in effect to make a Pope of him. And lastly thence
comes the great domineering, and strange injunctions of prelates in their
visitations, that none must dare to speak against any of their orders or
ceremonies whatsoever, unles he long to be silenced, and reckoned a mad fellow:
Dr. Clewit at the Bishop of London, visit. An. 1631.
thence comes the extreme flattery of their Agents and Chaplains who begin
to preach thus, Auctoritas praecipientis, est ratio praecepti, and no man
considers that thus the Church of Rome grew to an unlimited, and licentious
power; that such are the natural fruits of the hierarchy, and they must
needs grow worse, and worse.

In those reformed Churches where men sit, they come to the table more
prepared, with more knowledge, fear, Rev. 2.20.
reverence, and circumspection then such men: they dare not admit a notorious
drunkard, Adulterer, Arminian, or the like, nor any person utterly unknown,
because it tends to corruption, 1. Cor. 5.6
For a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump: Whereas in England all that
will may come bodly: even in the Cathedral Church in London. They that receive
are utterly unknown to them that administer: no man examines them, nor
testifies for them, they may be Arminians, excommunicate, profane, or
Church-papists, for ought that any man there knows: they look after no
religion but this, that he kneel at the Sacrament; which if he do but
observe, be his life, or religion what it will, he may come boldly.

Notwithstanding all these things, many say, so long as the Gospel may be, and
is freely preached, why should we trouble a Church, or leave it, our places,
and means for such faults and ordinances? Mark how God has suffered these
men to be punished, and deceived: the Gospel is there freely preached, by them
that will needs preach so; but not by the care of the Bishops, nor yet in all
points, much less in all places; Ministers are called upon to urge these
ordinances of men, yet in the mean, they are not suffered to preach Gods
ordinance, the Eldership, nor yet against Arminianisme. It is true, that after
the prohibition, the Parliament immediately succeeding, many courageously
preached against Arminianisme, and so do some to this day: but not in the
Court, nor in the University, much less before the Bishops, who are still
against such and have troubled many in the universities, and elsewhere. Neither
can they rest here: the fruit of the Hierarchy, that is not a tree of Gods
planting, must needs grow worse, Ioh. 15.2.
and worse: which shows it concerns the faith it self to have the hierarchy
abolished.

All which things considered do manifest, that their pretended devotion in
commanding to kneel at the Sacrament, is but like that of signing children
with the sign of the Cross, wherein they strain at a gnat and swallow a
Camel, God must needs regard their kneeling very little (as that of the
Papists, who exceed in that, and all other humble, and devout gestures)
because they are not better, or more obedient Christians, they do not more
fear God, nor indeed so much as Protestants, that kneel not when they
receive. For they ordain that men should bow the knee, so often as they hear
the name Jesus mentioned in the Church, which they do not at any other name of
God, nor when Ruffins swear by it, as also that all should kneel at the
Sacrament. But what a mockery is this, while in the mean, with the Papists,
they themselves neither bow to the word, and ordinances of God, nor
consequently to Christ Jesus who is the word, nor suffer others that would, in
such proofs of Scripture, as prove that there ought to be Act. 14.23. Acts.
20.17.28. Tit. 1.5. 1 Pet. 5.
Elders in every flock to govern the same, and no such Lords of Gods heritage,
as Diocessan Bishops: no such edicts against confutation of Arminians, nor no
such traditions, canons, set fasts as make the word of none effect. It is true
that the Lent fast is very ancient: but so is the mystery of iniquity, the
Popes usurped primacie, and dominion, and many other parts of Romish
superstition, and error: that English Bishops do not yet affirm plainly,
that it ought to be observed, as an ordinance of God, or pari pietatis affectu,
ac reverentiae, because it is an ordinance of the Church: but they so hover
about it, that men fear it will come to that, if their dominion stand.

As to this reason that Christ fasted forty days; they might as well tell us,
because he walked on the water, or suffered for sinners: so therefore should
we. And what a mockery is it to make this time of the year, the time of
repentance and mortification, when that is not to be put off till Lent, but is
due at all times of the year, as men's souls, by reason of daily sins, do
often stand in need of bodily fasting, and humiliation, the better to fit them
for prayer? Or if it were necessary, what a mockery is it to ordain
abstinence from all flesh, when men have liberty to eat the daintiest fish,
and other delicates used in fish dinners, banquets, and feasts, and that as
much, and as often as they lift? And if the Prelates themselves did not use it,
they would not be so fat and lusty as they are. B. Bangor.

March. 4. 1631.


They make great feasts at their consecration in Lent.

But, say they, it makes much for the increase of cattle, that the subject may
have them in more plenty, and better cheap. I could say, this might be much
better effected by forbidding many great, and superfluous feasts as was partly
practiced in that dearth 1630; but I answer, They might as well tell us, that
the great feasts used in the twelve days, and at other festival times cause
plenty, and cheapnes, as Lent, which costs men more in fish. For who sees not
that both the one, and the other make all things the dearer? That when they
approach all men striving to store their houses with flesh and fish, the
markets are raised to that extremity, that men's purses find a dearth in the
midst of plenty. Butchers and Poulterers pay dear for their licenses, which
makes all extreme dear to such poor, and sick, or weak persons, as must
needs eat some flesh: and Lent ended, people buy, as if they had never eaten
flesh before, which makes it want for no price. Besides, how many thousands are
there, who are not sick, and yet of such weak constitutions, that they cannot
live six weeks without eating some flesh? all these must needs abstain to
their hurt, or be reckoned Rebels, and vexed by promoters, resembling them of
the Inquisition.

But fishing and shipping would otherwise decay. This were somewhat if they had
been, or were like to be, used in the defense of Religion, or against the
enemies thereof, and not against such as the Rochellers, but howsoever, if men
were free to eat fish, when they list, they would desire it more, as
experience shows in other countries, where such freedom is. Or if there were
but one or two days in a week, as wednesday, saturday or both, wherein it
were prohibited to all under great penalties, sick persons excepted, and
especially to Inholders, Alehouses, Vintners, Cooks, and Victuallers, that
none should dress, or sell dressed any flesh, on that day, on pain of having
his house shut up, and paying some great fine, all thorow-fare, and market
towns, would strive to be furnished with fish for those days and there would
be more fishing, and fish spent in the land, in one year, then now there is in
two; and this being only a common law and but for a day or two in a week, and
not imposed as a fast, would be no burden.

But the laws are alleged, for this Lent fast, as for the dominion of the
Prelates, and observation of other their traditions, and ceremonies. I might
answer that the way to have laws observed, is to command things reasonable
and agreeable to Gods word, and such as may without hurt be observed: things
burdensome to little purpose, are as little regarded: That Ministers of the
Gospel should rather allege the law of Christ, that fasts, and alms, ought
to be voluntary, or obtained by the word preached, for private humiliation; or
public, being commanded by authority, when there is a public calamity, or
some great enterprise in hand, needing such humiliation to obtain the
assistance of God; and thus only are they used in the reformed Churches; but in
this and the like cases, there is an example noted in a history worthy our
observation.

Quarrels of Paul. 5. lib. 1. p. 9.
The state of Luca, finding many Citizens had changed their Religion and retired
into protestant countries, published an Edict, forbidding all their subjects to
have commerce with such persons: The Pope, that could not dislike their intent,
said, The Republic had no authority to make such an ordinance, which touched
Religion, for as much as the laicques have not any power to decree in matters
of Religion, although the law be in favor thereof, therefore he commanded it
to be raced out of their Records. If the Pope said this of States, and laws
helping and maintaining his Religion; how much more may God say it of Diocessan
Bishops, Councels, States, and all such their laws, Canons, and Edicts, as
help the dominion of Antichrist; nourish superstition, error, and ignorance,
are against Christ's Kingdom, and ordinances, or in any particular make the
word of none effect? whence it must needs follow, that because they, like the
Church of Rome, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
received not the love of the truth in these things, therefore God must needs
give them over to believe lies in other points: and because in these things
their fear toward God is taught by the traditions of men; therefore the
wisdom of their wisemen must needs decay, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.
and perish. A proof whereof we have seen in the Appealer now B. of
Chichester, Dr. Iackson and others justified in their errors, by the reward
they obtained for them: as also in their approved friend the Bishop of London,
who, besides the erecting of Altars and Images, has not shamed to urge the
Edict, forbidding to write, dispute, or preach against the Arminians. And to
put Mr. Davis by the lecture at Christ's Church, because he would not subscribe
to this, that in baptism orginall sin is wholly taken away in all Infants
baptized: Which is as much as to say, that the Sacraments confer grace ex opere
operato, and to overthrow all that the Scriptures say of Gods eternal election
of some, and leaving of others. It is true that when the parish besought the
Bishop, to admit Mr. Davis; answer was made, he had not satisfied his poser in
that point of baptism; where one may see, that whereas some say, there must
be Bishops to try such as would be admitted to cures; or lectures; this is
but a mockery, the Bishops stand like great Andirens in a chimney, which only
serve for pomp, and show, all the burden lies on the creepers their
Chaplains: which work might be better, and more uncorruptly performed by
three or four learned Ministers, dwelling near the parish, and being such as
do the work of Christ in their own charges.

For though the Bishops have not yet put that to every one which was put to Mr.
Davis; certainly if their Hierarchy stand, the power thereof must needs
increase, till they force all to subscribe to these, or worse things, or suffer
themselves to be silenced. And how prone divines are to follow, and flatter
them, is manifest in this B. of London, who being in high favor, mighty, and
able to reward whom he list, is flattered and humoured like a Pope by the
Bishops, Prelates, and Preachers. And because he is in such honor, and
authority; therefore it is held great presumption to task, or question any
thing he does: the Prelates that are best affected dare not, lest they should
be counted captious, envious and factious puritanes: ordinary Ministers are
overawed by his power. And yet because some have adventured it, he shamed not
openly to complain of them to the King, Feb. 15. 1631. Ier. 6.16.
in his last sermon on that text of Jeremy, Stand ye in the ways, and see,
etc. And first to infer that the Lent fast may be called the old and good way:
that yet many are so bold as to say, we will not walk in it. That disobedience
to God is commonly accompanied with disobedience to the King; and disobedience
to the King, with disobedience to God, which is true, but not as he meant it,
that they that do not obey the Prelates in such things are disobedient to God,
and the King. For if Prelates bind heavy burdens on men, and strive to make
them subscribe to error, whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken
unto them more then unto God judge ye. Act. 4.19.
Again he inferred from his text, that if Kings do not defend the Church, God
justly suffers the people to disobey them: which is true, if you take it of
such Church Governors, and ordinances as Christ ordained; but not as the
Bishop meant it, of English Bishops, and their power, constitutious, Rites, and
ceremonies, as if he, and a few such Prelates as himself, were the Church of
Christ, making it a great greivance, that any suffered to write, or preach
against their practices (which is the only hell they seem to fear) or to have
the benefit of a prohibition, when they are plagued for it in the High
Commission, where in though he did not plainly threaten the King, yet his
speech glanced that way.

It is true, that he said much for the authority of Kings, obedience to them,
and against the disobedience of subjects, which doctrine he pressed not against
the Papists, whom he scarce named in his sermon, so far is he from the old way
of Protestant preaching; but against such as he esteems puritans, and in such
cases, as were agitated the last Parliament; also in prohibitions forbidding
the convincing of the prelacie, or their government, traditions, and
ceremonies, Arminianisme, or any other points of revived Pelagianisme, or
popery, and as an enemy of calling Parliaments, and of other proceedings in
such cases. That he said that this was a fit subject for the court: for there
never was disobedience abroad, but there was a Court conventicle at home, which
was the head, or cause of it, striking at them. Who as he said, as well in
State policy, as in matter of Religion, find out new ways, and will not walk
in the old, and good paths: which was not so true of them, against whom he
intended it, as of his bosom friend the late Duke, of Buc: or of himself and
his faction, as the sequel will manifest: and namely, that they have traduced,
and wrested the most honest counsels, and endeavors of the most noble
Counselors and wisest Parliaments, under pretenses of maintaining the
prerogative, a trick that they have rather learned of Davus in the Comedy,
then of Christ in the Gospel, or if of any in the Scriptures, then of proud
Haman, who, for his hate to Mordecai, Esth. 3.6.8.
said unto the King touching the Jews, It is not for the Kings profit to
suffer the^, or of the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who with
praevaricating devices would prove Christ, and his Disciples, that convinced
them of error, and malice to be enemies of Caesar, and such as forbad tribute.

In the primitive Church, when Christians talked of the Kingdom of Christ and
the coming thereof in the free power, and use of the Gospel, and ordinances of
Christ, their enemies persuaded the Emperors, that this doctrine endangered
the Imperial government, the taking of the Empire from him, and was against
his prerogative. So when any talk of the restoring of Christ's Kingdom, and
ordinances in the government of Parochial Or Elders.
Bishops, and of the abolishing of Diocessan and Provincial Bishops, and their
unprofitable traditions and ceremonies; the English Prelates say, this
endangers the Regal authority, and is against the Kings prerogative, and
government; yea that is to refuse the old paths, the good way of God, and their
King, and impudently say, non ambulabimus in ea, we will not walk in it; as
the Bishop inferred on that text, Which indeed may rather be said of the
Bishops themselves, and their defenders; for though one prove never so plainly,
that the government of Diocessan Bishops, though as old as the pretended
primacy and usurpations of Antichrist, is but a new way, and very pernicious to
the kingdom, and people of Christ, and to the honor, peace, and happiness of
that King and kingdom that maintains it; and further that the government by
the common counsel of the Act. 6.5. Cha. 15.22 Cha. 20.17 28.

1 Cor. 5 4. Tit. 1.5. Jude 3.


Presbyters, and voices of the brethren, members of the congregation, is the
old, and good way of God, best for his Church and service; and likewise that
the convincing of Pelagianisme and Popery, defending of the truth, contending
earnestly for the faith, that was once delivered to the Saints, and walking in
the light thereof, are the old paths, the good way, be they proved never so
old, never so good, the Prelates and their pertakers, do but geere and scoff
at them, and further are so impudent as to say, non ambulabimus in ea, we will
not walk in it. Their manifest hating and persecuting such as show them these
old paths, this good way do sufficiently prove it. Judge then, Christian
Reader, if the Bishop have not abused his Ier. 6.16
text, and that Princely and most honored audience? Is such a man fit to
govern and order one of those two fountains of learning, and nurseries of
Divines, the University whereof he is Chancelour, and most of the affairs of
Religion in his Majesty's dominions, as a Pope of those Kingdoms? or to be the
spiritual guide of Princes, and Counselors, who only besides the Bishops,
bear all the sway in matters of Religion? How is it possible that they should
be well informed by such Prelates, or their partakers? And yet God knows, and
we see it plainly, they will hear no others: no not though it be manifestly
proved, that the Prelates are as deaf and obstinate in these points, as the
Pope, Cardinals, and Jesuits are in these points, and in others. Neither let
any man think it strange, that these shall be compared to them of the Church
of Rome. For the Bishop of Rome, and his Clerks, that are now corrupt in the
superlative degree, were not so bad in the days of the first Christian
Emperors: but beginning then to make the word of God of none effect by their
traditions, power, and ceremonies, they grew worse and worse: and so have our
English Bishops, who follow them apace. See an instance in the worst sort of
Papists.

The Jesuits being banished for their practices out of the State of Venice at
Padua, Quarrels of Paul. 5. lib. 2. p. 94
were found many copies of a certain writing of 18. Rules, under this title,
Regulae aliquot servandae, ut cum orthodoxa Ecclesia vere sentiamus. Certain
rules to be observed, that with the orthodoxall Church we may judge, or hold
aright. In the third it is ordained that men should believe the Hierarchical
Church, although it tell us that that is black, which our eye judges to be
white. Would not the Bishops have us believe the Hierarchicall Church of
England, when it says of the Presbyterall government, that it is black, which
our eye judges to be white? And of the other side, of their own dominion, and
traditions, so contrary unto Christ's, that they are white, which our eyes see
to be black? In the seventeenth, there is a prescription to take heed how men
press or inculcate too much the grace of God. Do not the Arminian Prelates
teach us the same lesson? Bishops were not so corrupt, or blind, in Queen
Elizabeth's days; they had not this art: but seeing their office and authority
has no root in Christ, the Truth, it is not of God, but of me^, they cannot
but grow worse and worse. They that think it strange that English Bishops
should be Iesuited, must yet confess, that it has been affirmed of the late
Duke of Buck: and some others of their abettors, supporters, and confederates.
Howsoever we may see, that these and the like, are the fruits of maintaining
their government, ceremonies, and traditions, against the light of Gods truth.
All these, and diverse other corruptions in religion, and mischiefs in the
State, are crept in, and covered under the Curtain of Church power, in matter
of order, decency, and things indifferent: And if they be still maintained,
greater abominations must needs follow: things cannot but grow worse and worse,
both in Clergy and people: ignorance and error must needs be thereby more and
more engendered and propagated.

For they see well enough, that many are so observant of these traditions and
ceremonies, that they dwell in them, they serve them for an entire Religion, or
a cloak of one, and of mocking, and persecuting of professors: they have little
or none besides; no love to the preaching and hearing of Gods most holy word,
whereby faith, knowledge, repentance, humility, and other graces are wrought in
the soul; but like many simple, and ignorant women, that will needs wear
kerchers at their churching, and yet in the afternoon, or soon after, run to
plays and alehouses: they are very observant of such ordinances, and yet
seldom come to a Sermon, and scarce once a year to the Communion. And these
and others are not ordinances, and ceremonies so innocent, indifferent, and
profitable, as some would make them. Yea therefore it is but a mere mockery
and delusion, to say, that though they be in themselves indifferent, yet being
commanded by authority, they become necessary; and men ought to be conformable,
not only that they may hold their Ministry, and do good in it, but even for
conscience sake. For 1. the Article says, They may be changed according to
times, and men's manners; but the times, and men's manners, who now make a
religion of them, and a cloak of persecution, do require that they should be
changed and abolished, therefore they ought to be changed and abolished. 2.
What a gappe do they hereby open for authority to impose what it list, and to
have it received by the same argument, though superstitious, and hurtful to
the kingdom, in the free power of the word preached? which is to abuse Princes
and Synods, and to infer they may impose, maintain, and increase ordinances
and ceremonies, that thus make the word of none effect. For grant that they may
impose these, and it follows, they may impose others as hurtful. Yet some are
not ashamed to preach and write much in the defense of them: Coloss. 2.8 2 Cor.
4.
but this is after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of this world,
and not after Christ, to corrupt the earth, and preach themselves, not the
Gospel; when they should rather put the higher powers in mind of that, Why
tempt ye God, Act. 15.10.
to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither our fathers, nor
we are able to bear? wherein they are the less excusable, that they do not
pretend Peter's chair, or that their Church cannot err.

All which I urge, not to drive men to helpless opposition now, much less to
separation; but to persuade all to seek and pray for an effectual
reformation. For can these things become necessary and pleasing to God, being
commanded by authority, which thus make the word and ordinances of God of none
effect, and are an unnecessary and a popish yoke, and only pretended to be done
unto edifying? 1 Cor. 14.^6.
Indeed the Apostle says, Let all things be done unto edifying. But these
things as you have seen, do not edify, but hinder the free preaching of the
Gospel in diverse particulars, as also diligent hearing, faith, knowledge, and
other graces; nourish ambition, temporizing, lukewarmnesse, and ignorance; and
withal carry this mischief along with them, that be they never so unnecessary
and hurtful, yet God must not have one servant to manifest so much, no nor to
speak in his cause. For if any do, presently to choke him, they brand him
with the name of a Puritan, and a factious fellow: and if that will not serve,
they can suppress him with power, he is troubled and silenced, the Church must
be deprived of him, for stumbling at a popish ceremony, though he be otherwise
never so peaceable, sincere, learned, painful, and powerful: when Diocessan
Bishops were first ordained, they had not this power, much less in such cases.

In the book of the ordering of Priests and Deacons, they say, there were
always Priests, that must needs be Presbyters, in the Church: If so, what a
mockery is it to retain the name Priest, as an order of the New Testament, and
neither distinguish that name from the sacrificers of the Law, nor let them
exercise the office of the Presbyters, which was as well to rule their own
flocks, as to preach, and administer the Sacraments? what a mockery is it to
stand so much on the surplesse, the hood, tippet, and square cap, worn with
such glory, and superstition by the Papists, and in the mean, by all these
things to bring religion out of square, and deprive the Church of her better
ornaments, good Preachers, Elders, hearers, faith, knowledge, humility, zeal,
and other graces? what a mockery is it to ordain, Can. 48.
that no Curate, or Minister, shall be permitted to serve in any place,
without examination, and admission of the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary,
in writing under hand and seal. Can. 51.
That no strangers shall preach in Cathedral Churches, but such as are allowed
by the Archbishop, or Bishop. Can. 52.
That the names of all Preachers strangers, that shall preach in any Church,
shall be taken by the Churchwardens, etc. when all this is extended against
few, or none, but such as stumble at some rites, or ceremonies, to keep them
from preaching, and have them silenced? and in the mean while diverse ignorant
and idle drones, non-residents, yea Arminian, and popish teachers, such as
Doctor Price of Westminster, lately deceased, are admitted to have and hold the
cure of souls, and the Bishops use this their power to hinder the people from
choosing zealous Ministers, that subscribe to be their Pastors, or helping
Lecturers: they reckon such dangerous: and if they have got admission, they
shall be watched, yea made offenders for a word, Isa. 29.21.
and turned aside for a thing of naught. If in the mean they will needs be
diligent, they may with much ado preach the Gospel, and apply it against
Popery, but not the whole counsel of God; not a word against growing
Arminianisme, much less for the Eldership, or against the Hierarchy, and
traditions.

What a mockery is it to appropriate unto themselves and their Officials, all
Ecclesiastical discipline, and especially that sacred and dreadful power of
excommunication; when in the mean they exercise it against few, but such as
are against their hierarchy, rites, and ceremonies, or men that have failed to
appear to answer for the opening of a shop door on a holy day, or some such
trivial offense? If a man plead necessity, and want constrained him to it, or
that God says, Six days shall thou labor, etc. neither reason, nor the holy
Scripture can be heard against their government, and traditions: but they know
how to geere him out, like the proud pharisees, that said, Thou wast altogether
borne in sins, Ioh. 9.
and do thou teach us? And indeed an incorrigible swearer, fornicator,
drunkard, blasphemer, or heretic, may more easily escape their power, then
such a Puritan, as they term him. And if he offer to prove that in this, or
any other thing belonging to their government or ordinances, they are somewhat
Antichristian; Doctor Lamb, or any like monster, may live more peaceably,
amidst all his known abominations, then such a wicked Puritan heretic, as they
call him. And in the mean while, they are ashamed to make the name of a
reformation as odious to all, as it is to themselves, and even to glory in
their Church, as the most pure and Apostolic that ever was since the Apostles;
not counting it in those Pastors and people that zealously and religiously
preach, and hear the word, to have it followed: for the Prelates would not
have such counted to be the Church of England, nor scarce of it; but themselves
assembled in a Synod, which they call the Church representative; or as they are
considered with all their traditions, and all the most conformable observers,
and maintainers of them. These make that Church that so glorifieth her self,
like Laodicea, Rev. 3.17.
that said, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and
knew not that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Wherein they that are so mighty in power, and so able to reward men,
cannot want flatterers and learned champions, and so the great places of the
hierarchy serve to corrupt men, and to make them mould religion after such men's
pleasures, as can advance them; like as woeful experience has also showed in
the Arminians, Isa. 29.13.14.
Their fear toward God has been long taught by the precepts of men: and so
because they as the Papists received not the love of the truth in matter of the
Eldership, Hierarchy, traditions, ceremonies: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
therefore God gave them over to strong delusions, to believe popish and
Arminian lies: and because they received not the love of the truth against
those Arminian errors, God that is ever just, must needs give them over to
greater blindesse, and error.

Such are the fruits of the Hierarchy, and the humane invention, and defense
thereof. Reverend Hooker, as they call him, shall in those cases be of more
authority with these men, then St. Paul; so much are they wedded to the
traditions and ceremonies of their Church. All these traditions, inventions,
officers, Courts, and superstitious rites, were not invented, much less
proposed to be received as laws, in the time of the Fathers, as now by the
Episcopal power: and if they were, there is (as was showed) no reasoning from
the consent or connivance of the Fathers, if the institution be not
warrantable by Gods word. There were then diverse things which had got
beginnings in those times, against which the Fathers did not much inveigh,
because they were then held indifferent, and not established as since for
matters of faith, and necessity, as the primacy of the Pope, single life of
Priests, set fasts, deferring baptism till death, the use of salt, holy water,
and diverse other things in their rites; the antiquity whereof makes them never
a whit the more lawful. Ioh 8.44.
The devil was a seducer and a liar from the beginning.

Whether it were in a vain policy of some Bishops of those times, the sooner
to draw Jews and Heathen to Christianity, as some of ours pretend the
indifferency, and wisdom of using some Romish rites, the better to draw
Papists to Church, or for other like reasons. Sure it is, that many
institutions of religion began in those days to be taken from the Jews, and
ancient heathen, as diverse have proved to the Papists, out of their own
authors. Among others, Mr. Derlingcourt, Minister of the Reformed Church of
Paris, in his book of the Iubilee, shows in it many things; to omit other
particulars: Iubile of the reform. Chur. part. 2. c. 11.
The whole Papal Hierarchy (says he) is founded on the example of the Jews,
who had their sovereign Pontife, their sacrificers, and their Levites, and
among them diverse orders, and functions. And that the Church of Rome has
founded her Hierarchy, and the diversity of her orders on the example of the
Jews, besides that the thing is clear enough, the Author of the Canon
Decretis acknowledges it: And Polidor. Virg. de invent rerum, lib. 4. cap. 5.
and 7. where he also confesses, Decree of Gratian part. 12. dift. 21.
that the Romish Priests have borrowed of the Jewish Priests, the most part of
their habits, and that it is most evident, that the institution is rather
Hebraicall, then Apostolical. And indeed the Apostles were never clothed in
the habits of Bishops, nor Popes. Read on this subject, Pope Innocent the 3.
Mysteriorum Missae, lib. 1. and the Bishop of Manda, Ration. divin. officior.
lib. 3. And a little after. We have seen that the Church of Rome authorizeth
her hierarchy on the example of the Jews, but she also avoucheth that it is
a pagan invention, for the decrees of Gratian, after he had represented the
diversity of the Roman Clergy, composed of simple Priests, Archpriests,
Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, Metropolitanes, Patriarchs, Popes, adds,
that this diversity proceeds principally from the ancient Pagans, who had
their Priests, their Archpriests, etc. a confession which is drawn from the
Master of the Sentences, lib. 4. did. 24. lit. M. The Bishop of Manda does
also acknowledge the same truth, Ration. divin. offic. lib. 2. c. 1. n. 22. But
there is none more formal in this subject, then G. du Chol. who says, G. du
Choul discourse. of the Religion of the ancient Romans page 337. and 335.
That Romans had another fashion of making their priestly dignities, as the
great Pontifes, the little Pontifes, Flamins, Archflamins: just so as we have
the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs, etc. And if we here
observe it curiously, we know that many institutions of our religion are taken
and translated from the ceremonies of the Egyptians, and Gentiles, as are the
copes, and surplesse, the Priests shaven crowns, the bowing of the head to the
Altar, the sacrificall pomp, the music of the Temples, adorations, prayers,
and supplications, processions, and Letanies, and many other things. which our
Priests usurp in our mysteries. Of which indeed many are anciently assumed of
Christians; but that makes them never a whit the more lawful. How little then
do they help themselves, who say, the Church of England in her hierarchy,
and ceremonies, is most like to the Church which was soon after the death of
the Apostles, that is, if it were so, as it is not; for they had not such
dominion over Presbyters, nor such Courts, Chancellors, Deanes, Officials,
power in probates of Testaments, to govern, and command, give licenses, and
dispensations; nor such rulcs, and canons to suspend and silence about
surplesses, ceremonies, etc. nor yet such service, and ceremonies: and if they
had, yet that were nothing, being thus invented, and received by the Papists,
and after retained in the English reformation, either for policy, or for the
profit and honor that comes by them. Many more zealously defend these, then
they do the Gospel against Papists and Arminians. Surely the Angel speaks
not of such men, but rather of such in the reformed Churches, as have abandoned
these inventions, Rev. 19.10 Ephesians. 1.13.
when he says, I am of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus; which is
to have the mark or seal of God in the forehead, by professing they will
receive no other doctrine, and religion, but what is rightly drawn from his
testimony; as on the contrary, to profess the Romish faith, and superstition,
is to have the beasts mark in the forehead by profession, and any way to defend
it, is to have it in the right hand by operation: and therefore though it seem
harsh to say, that the champions of the hierarchy, and ceremonies, have the
mark of the beast, because in other things they are Protestants; yet can it not
be maintained, but that they are guilty of having some part and print of that
mark, because they obstinately maintain them against all proofs, showing
them to be popish, in favor Jewish, and Heathenish, against the word of God,
and to make the same of no effect, in diverse particulars. The wisdom of God
says by the Apostle, Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not giving heed to
Jewish fables, and commandments of men, which turn from the truth. So do
these in England, in diverse respects. Because while some Prelates and Ministers
make a noise and a blustering, with crying out against Puritans, and a great
flourish with exalting the name and authority of the Church in such cases, and
the ancient use of the diocessan and provincial Bishops, ordinances, and
ceremonies; Princes and people think they serve God in obeying her in them,
and therefore stop their ears to all proofs to the contrary, and mock at
them (like the Bishops, that both scorn, and suppress them all) even as
others did in the Church of Rome, in the same and other causes; who otherwise
had never attained that dominion she thereby got, nor to have her traditions,
errors, and superstitious rites received for laws: which were the terrible
fruits of men's blind obedience to provincial Bishops, and their power, and
ordinances; which ever increased more and more, as they were more and more
obeyed, and defended, to the great hinderance of the kingdom of God, and the
due preaching and obedience of his word.

And though in England the hierarchy and her traditions and injunctions have
not had so many and so bad fruits, because it has not reigned so long; yet as
we have seen for the time, they have been, if not alike, yet very injurious
to Gods kingdom, and the good of the Church. It helps them not to say that
some great Divines in other Churches have approved them, or counted them
tolerable. For strangers cannot so well see the fruits of them; and be sure,
that if they were brought into the Reformed Churches of Germany and France,
diverse would be found to receive them, and give arguments of their necessary
use, they are so full of honor, and profit. For we have lately seen it in
Scotland; and we know the Scriptures say, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
Gifts blind the eyes of the wise. This made them think it a sufficient
authority, that the ancient Church invented and used diocessan and provincial
Bishops, though in a manner different from ours; that not only Councels, but
even Emperors and Kings confirmed and augmented their authority, and that much
good might be done by the same.

When first King Edward, and after Queen Elizabeth came in, the Nobles and
people were almost all Papists, and it was thought they would be the sooner
drawn to Church, if Bishops, and their power and authority were retained,
having still their Courts, Chancelours, Officials, Deanes, Subdeanes,
Quiristers, Organs, Surplesses, and other habits, the cross in baptism,
kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, bowing toward the Altar, and diverse
other ceremonies. For this end also the form of Common Prayer, and Service was
little altered, but taken out of the Masse-booke, and put into English: which
makes many Papists in Germany and France say, sure the Romish is the true and
right religion, else the heretics in England would never have received so much
of it: for some have avouched it to my face, that the service there is nothing
but the Mass in English: others, that it wants nothing but the consecration.
These things thus retained, it was also thought that popish Kings and Princes
would be the less offended; what marvel, seeing the Jesuits themselves are
so well pleased with the ceremonies and service, that I heard one of them (God
is my witness herein) make it his hope, that the maintenance of them against
the Puritans, Quovadis Sect. 4.
would make England the sooner return to Rome in the rest. Mine eyes and ears
(says Bishop Hall) can witness, with what approofe and applause diverse of the
Catholics royal (as they are termed) entertained the new translated Lyturgie
of our Church. Which is the less wonder, Cambden in an. 1560
seeing Pope Pius the 4. sending Vincentio Parpatia, Abbot of S. Saviors to
Queen Elizabeth, offered to confirm the English Liturgy by his authority,
if she would yield to him in some other things. Indeed it pleased them so well
that for the first eleven years of Queen Elizabeth, L. Cook de Iure Regis
Ecclesiastico. Fol. 34.
Papists came to the English Churches and service, as the Lord Cook shows.
All which things prove it to be a poor brag of some, who think it a good
justification in the common prayer book, that Papists have approved it; and
could never find any fault in it.

As it is true that there are many godly and zealous men (and some others also,
who thinking it a glory to be of their party, are more of faction, then well
grounded knowledge, and love to Christ) against the form, and some other
things in the book of Common prayer; So is it as true that there are many both
of the Clergy and laity, and some both learned and godly, such as sincerely
love the preaching, and power of the Gospel, that yet hold the book of Common
prayer both tolerable, profitable, and necessary, and are not willing to hear
any thing to the contrary: and therefore God may say of our times, as of those
wherein Jeremy lived, Ier. 5.1.
Run to and fro, and see now, if ye can find a man that seeks the truth. I
would desire such to take a few things into consideration. Where first I must
acknowledge, that though diverse faults are found in the book of common prayer,
which makes it so agreeable to the Papists; for there is scarce a Church papist
in England that does not applaud and admire it: yet do I not find it so
corrupt as some would make it. In it we find this prayer: O God from whom all
holy desires, all just counsels, and all good works do proceed, give, etc.
this is certainly translated out of the Romish Liturgy, yet is it in it self
so faultlesse, that I will not dispute against him that thinks he may daily
say it, either with a congregation, or in private: and so many other of the
prayers, that is, if he do not the less, but rather the more, hearken to Gods
word in all points, otherwise his prayer will certainly be abominable.

But if all the prayers be as incorrupt, why does Dr. Iackson, with the consent
and approbation of the Bishops, Pro. 28.9. Dr. Iackson. 1. part,
allege diverse of them for points savouring of Arminianisme and Popery? and
if they be so necessary to salvation, as some make them, other reformed
Churches are but in an ill case, that have them not, so was the primitive
Church also, especially for three hundred years. Howsoever what need is there
so much to flatter the Papists, as to translate prayers out of their Mass
book, and do so many things in service after their form when God says, 1.
Sam. 15.22. Isa. 1.12.
Obedience is better then sacrifice, Who has required this at your hands?
which are now so far from making them come the sooner to Church, unles it be to
continue papists there, and false brethren to us, that they hence draw
arguments to strengthen them in their religion, saying, sure theirs is the true
religion, or else these parts of it would not be so constantly defended against
the puritans; and in the mean that kept out, which Queen Mary ordained should
be razed out of all books of Rites, used in the time of Henry 8, and Edward
the 6, Hist. of the Council of Trent. pap. 385.
wherein God is prayed. To deliver the Kingdom from sedition, conspiracy, and
the tyranny of the Pope.

Can not other common prayers be made as good? The french Churches have some
that are used, in the pulpit by him that preaches, and no other, that so he
may not make a sufficient Religion, and service of prayer, nor account the cure
to be served without preaching. In them they pray. Deliver thy Churches from
the mouths of ravening wolves and all hirelings, who seek their own
ambition, and profit, and not the exaltation of thy holy name, and the
salvation of the whole flock. This also is ordinary before sermon to pray, that
the word may be then preached, in that purity and sincerity, wherein it was
left by the Apostles and Prophets. So that the preaching of the word is not
hindered by their prayers. Whereas in many Churches, they have nothing on the
Lords day but the common prayer: which many both of the Clergy, and people do
so highy extol, that they make an entry Religion of it, and not only neglect,
but even despise preaching in respect thereof. Many nonpreaching Ministers make
it the pretext of their idleness, and others of their nonresidence, and
pluralities, saying the people have one to read prayers, and the service is
performed. And that (say many) is sufficient, if they had no more. It is to no
end to tell them that God says. My people are destroyed, or lead into
Captivity for lack of knowledge; Hos. 4.6. Romans 10.17.
that faith comes by-hearing, and preaching; that certain of the prayers are
for knowledge: for they yet dare say, it does more hurt then good: therefore
they are all for common prayer: which diverse worldlings, usurers, drunkards,
whoremongers and other earthly, and profane people, second, and confirm,
making it their whole Religion, and admiring it above measure, because it does
not tax, and touch their sins, as preaching does; it serves not for doctrine,
reproof, correction, and instruction, as preaching the scripture does: which
therefore they have in contempt, and hinder, and slander the same, and all the
truest friends, and followers thereof: and yet in the mean while, they would
not only be thought the better sbjects, but the better Christians, and the
fitter to be Churchwardens; yea and to bear greater offices in the Church, and
common wealth: they count themselves more truly religious, then the greatest
preachers, and hearers, because they think they love the common prayer book
better, and it serves them for a Religion, and a cloak of scoffing
persecution, and some of them to be Church Papists, and false brethren, under
the name of protestants: whereas if the common prayer book were not, or there
were only such like common prayers, as are used by the French, and dutch in the
pulpit, they could not but make more profession of love to preaching, and
hearing of Gods word, otherwise they would appear to be, either without
Religion, or more open adversaries of our Religion, and so less dangerous.

In the French and dutch Churches they are not troubled with such dumb
Ministers, nonresidents, Church papists, and profane mockers: they that have
least Religion speak no hurt of knowledge, preaching, and hearing: for if they
should they know, all men would cry out of them, as of papists, or Atheists,
and order would quickly be taken with them by the Elders: they could not pass
as ours do, for the better men, and fitter for offices. The Bishops see all
this, and yet favor them the more of the two, as being ever very conformable,
and less dangerous to the Hierarchy: so careful are they that there may be
nothing in their Church like the Eldership ordained of God. Churchwardens, and
sidemen are but a mockery of it, these places being given to all sort of men,
drunkards and others: when the parson also is a tiplar, a nonresident, or
preaches little, there is a flock strangely governed. And thus the word of God
is made of none effect by the Hierarchy, and the traditious thereof, and
namely by the much defended, Tit. 1.13.
and admired book of common prayer: and thus these ordinances of me^ turn from
the truth, as Tit. 1.13

It will be objected the abuse of any thing in Religion should not take away the
use of it, which you grant. I do so, but that is in the things ordained of
God, as the Eldership, the Lords prayer, the use of the Psalms and some forms
of blessing, Nomb. 6.23. Romans 16.24. 1. Cor. 16.23.
like those Nomb. 6.23. Rom, 16.24. Which being common prayers, serve to
justify the use of a few such common prayers as may be in the reformed
Churches: but not the hierarchy never ordained of God, nor a service book
taken out of the Romish liturgy, in such a time, and for such reasons, as it
was: serving men for a whole Religion, and thus making the word of none effect.
For if those reasons had been good of drawing the papists the sooner to Church
etc. there are not the same now, when almost all go to Church; the Recusants
though many are nothing in comparison of those times; and by Romish subtlety,
the book of service is turned to do hurt to our religion, as abovesaid. Now
to call for the use of the service book and extol it, is nothing else but to
temporise with popelings to emulate knowledge, preaching, and writing, and to
provide one nail to drive out another, at least in such points as touch men's
corruptions in doctrine, and practice: which was a slight used of old by the
Romish clergy: for when the Prelates saw preaching discovered their errors,
and tirannie; they to put off that, and yet to seem no less religious, fell
to extol the use of their service, and mass, and cried out for devotion,
peace, and obedience to the Church, and above all for prayer; wherein diverse
flattering, and ambitious preachers, and even most of the English Bishops
themselves, follow them apace, and that in these days while men complain of
corruption in the clergy, and the increase of Arminianisme, and popery,
witness Dr. Cousens his cousening devotions, approved by the Bishops, and diverse
sermons, Speeches, and practices of theirs to the like purpose: But mark what
God says; He that turns away his ear, from the hearing of the Law, even his
prayer shall be abomination. Pro. 28.9.
What will become then of their devotion, who not only turn away their own
ears, but even the ears of others also from hearing the oracles of God, both
in this point of the Eldership, and in those maine points of the Gospel,
touching Gods free grace, and power in election, conversion, perseverance, etc.
It troubles them much that men should have knowledge, preach, or write in these
points, while in the mean they can let the contrary doctrines pass in the
books of the Appealer, Dr. Iackson, and others: these trouble them not in a
time when papists, and Arminians strive to infect Princes and people with such
Pelagian and popish opinion? God commands to contend earnestly for the faith,
which was once delivered to the saints, Jude. 3.
they yet presume that it may be forbidden in these cases, so the people be
stirred up to prayer, peace and obedience to the Church. I know the daily
exercise of prayer may be much urged: but by whom? by men that sincerely love
preaching, and hearing in all things that God has revealed, and taught; and do
not set the ordinances of God one against an other, that is, do not urge
prayer as enemies of preaching in many points, like the papists; norn
aemulation thereof, as those that oppose prayer to preaching, to eat out
knowledge, and bring-in blind devotion: these have but a form of Godliness, and
scarce that, we had need to pray continually that God would purge, and rid the
Church of such hipocriticall wolves.

It is a principle of Gods covenant of grace, that he will give us Pastors
according to his own heart, that shall feed us with knowledge, Iur. 3.15.
and understanding: knowing, that is, a curse to be led by blind guides, and
left in ignorance: they yet presume that Pastors may be hindered, and knowledge
forbidden in these things, so people be but incited to building and repairing
of temples, prayer, etc. As if God would hear such as will not hear him, nor
suffer others to hear him in such points, but punish, and terrify such as
produce any proofs in such cases, either in print or pulpit: which is not to
prevent schism, and presumptuous curiosity, as they pretend, but to make way
for Arminianisme, and popery, and against all opposers to say with them in the
Psalm. Let us break their bonds, Psalm. 2.
and cast away their cords from us: and should therefore be answered, with that
of the Apostles. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you
more than unto God, judge ye, we read of some that devoured widows houses
under color of long prayers, I pray God these do not devour Churches, and
states, yea the faith it self, under color of long prayers, Math. 23.14.
and standing, so much for the use of the common prayer book as the Papists
did for theirs. For are not ours men as well as they? And has not England also
an Hierarchy, and many places of honor, and profit in it? Are they not often
bestowed on such as set the fairest colors on the Hierarchy, and ceremonies,
and often on such as have flattered the Duke, and such other masqued Agents for
Arminianisme, and Popery? And so they serve as baits to corrupt, and make the
ambitious, form and mold Religion to the opinion, and pleasure of such as can
advance, and make them double beneficed men.

The Cardinal of Monte, (Prince Legate in the Counsel of Trent, under Paul
the 3, History of the Council of Trent page 191.
and after created Pope by name of Julius the 3,) hearing the complaints
against nonresidents, said. That the absence of the Prelates, and other Curates
from their Churches is the cause all the mischeifes of the Church. For the
Church may be compared to a ship, the sinking whereof is ascribed to the absent
Pilot, that should govern it, if he were prefent. It showed to them that
heresies, ignorance, and dissolution do reign in the peolple, and bad
manners, and vices in the Clergy, because the Pastors being absent from the
flock, no man has care to instruct those, or correct these: whence ignorante,
and unlearned Ministers have been promoted to Cures, and Bishopwricks; for in
regard they need not execute their duty in person, no fitnes is necessary.
Diverse Prelates following him. But the Bishop of Vesone said, that the residing
of Bishops, is notable to make the Clergy live holy; for that besides the
general exemption of all Regulars, every Chapter has one, and there be few
particular Priests that want it. The most followed his opinion, that it was
necessary to command residence, And to take away exemptious, pluralities, and
dispensations that hindered it: But it was after seen, that if, this were don,
the authority of the Pope, and Cardinals would be overthrown: therefore it
was ever hindered, though the Bishops labored to regaine their power to
superintend, and shake of the Popes yoke, by offering to prove that Residence,
and jurisduction of Bishops are de jure divino: for the Regulars, were still
protected, as champious of the papacy, and the Popes authority, and
dispensations were cunningly reserved. Indeed much was restored to the Bishops
in doubtful terms to superinte^d, as Delegates of the Apostolic sea: but
they could not regaine all, because it was perceived that would shake the
greatness of the Pope, and Cardinals, reform them, make them reside, and the
Bishops would be made so many Popes in their own Diocesses: Ibid. p. 170
219.496. and 497.501 and 502.
For if it were once decided, that they had the Charge from Christ to govern
the Church, it would be decided also, that they have from him authority
necessary for it, which the Pope could not restrain. They took this to be
proved by that Acts. 20.17. Take heed therefore unto your selves, Acts
20.17.20.
and to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops. Which
indeed is against the Pope, and all diocessan Bishops, as being spoken to the
presbiters: this and other places abovementioned being their letters patents,
to govern the Church to the worlds end. Therefore when the Bishops had almost
gained their cause by plurality of voices, the Pope, and Cardinals cried out
against it, Every one thinking he did already see Rome empty of Prelates, and
deprived of all prerogatives, and eminence that the Cardinals should be
excluded from having Bishopwricks, and all from pluralities, that no Bishop,
or Curate might have an office in Rome, nor the Pope dispense in such things,
which are most principle in his power: so his authority should be much
diminished, and that of the Bishops enlarged, therefore they thought these
novelties aimed to make many Popes; And afterward, they would neither have that
point of residence, nor that whether Bishops be instituted by Christ and
superior to Priests to be disputed, and concluded, though many Bishops often
labored therein.

But the Bishops of England, taking the later for granted, have what those
others could not attain: they have no Pope over them to take away their power,
unles peradventure sometime such a one as the Duke of Buck: was, who after his
way increases, but do themselves dispense with pluralities and uphold
nonresidents and Arminians as the surest champions of their hierarchic, such as
do not so much make ready a Clergy for Christ as Antichrist. They superintend
over all preachers in their Diocesses, with such unlimited power as the
Trent-Bishops could never attain, that all must subscribe to them and their
constitutions, and none may preach, dispute, or write for the Eldership, and
against the hierarchy, and Arminians, nor scarce against other popery; which
makes men say; they are Popes within themselves, and this power cannot rest
here, it will be more Antichristian, if it be not taken away. The French
Churches though often troubled with wars, and hurliburlies are yet in better case
herein, seeing they may write, print, and preach any divine truth, though most
repugnant to the Popish Bishops, that live among them, and cannot hinder them.

Indeed he that considers it well, shall find that though the Conncel of Nice,
made the Bishops of Rome Patriarchs; yet they did not for 300 years after
reign so much over Presbiters; in such cases as the English Bishops do.

Let us not wonder then when we see that many great Scholars, and some that
have been good preachers, when they have attained these great places, and
double benefices, or are in possiblitie of coming to them, or having living
under them, should be so loath so see any thing against them. For gifts blind
the eyes of the wise, and their ignorance in points of nonresidencie, the
hierarchy, and traditions, is a punishment on them for their frowardnes,
wilful blindness, ambition and covetousnes; at least for making tradition
sufficient authority in such cases. For indeed few men, such is the weakness of
corrupt nature, can be willing to see that, which would hinder them from
subscribing having a good living, or make them sorry they had subscribed, or
to be adverse to that, against which they may not be suffered to speak, much
less, to preach, or write, and least of all to reform, or amend: as also
because if they stir never so little in these cases, they are sure to loose
their liveings, to be by the Bishops, and their champious silenced, with
scoffs, power, and terror, in stead of good arguments; and so to be in more
danger then popish Priests and Jesuits. Some therefore will have no knowledge
at all in such points, least it bring them to misery, others think it best to
keep their knowledge to themselves, leave the amendment to God, and in the
mean do the best good they can by their ministry in other matters: but the
most know little of this argument, Math. 13.11.
because it is not given them of God to know it. They therefore think all
these things to be lawful, necessary, and the obedience an acceptable service
to God, because commanded by authority, and in some sort ordained, and used by
the ancient Church. This is as if they said, Kings, and Synods may command what
they lift in the Church: which is as good a warrant, as they had of old that
made a calfe in Horeb, frequented the high places, or Ieroboams Calves,
established by authority.

It is nothing that many of these men are learned, and of great knowledge, and
good conscience in other matters. For God says: For as much as this people,
Isa. 29.15.
draw nigh to me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
precepts of men, therefore behold I will proceed to do a marveilous work
among this people, even a marveilous work, and a wonder: for the wisdom of
their Wisemen shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be
hid. Wisdom should decay in some, and others should not dare to show it. God
that is ever just, must much rather do it now to our learned, and Wisemen,
seeing he has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances, which was contrary to
us, Col. 2.14.
and took it out of the way nayling it to his cross. For has he taken them
away that himself ordained, that men may load us with others? does Christ say,
Rev. 2.24.
I will put upon you none other burden, but which ye have already, hold fast
till I come? And shall men be persuaded that they may impose such as he never
ordained, and as make the word of none effect? The hierarchy is not only in it
self a humane ordinance, but the Bishops seem to look to nothing else but to
uphold it, and such canons, traditions, ceremonies and service, as it has
invented, or received from men. Sometime heretics, as Anabaptists, Arrians, or
the like, and sometimes persons, stained with notorious adultery, or Simonie,
are by them, and their officials, questioned, and cast out, as in the Church of
Rome. But these things, to rare, both may be, and are much better performed by
Elders in the congregations, where such delinquents live; as also against all
notorious drunckards, blasphemers, swearers, mockers, and other profane
persons: of whom Bishops nor their officials neither do, nor well can hear
any thing; and if they do: it is not amended, and therefore Diocessan Bishops
serve not to look to them, nor to nonresidents, nor to hinder the growth of
Arminianisme, popery, etc. they can see them increase, and never stir against
them; yea religion to be corrupted more, and never move to help it: but hinder
them that would.

If some others be better affected, and would stir if they durst: this is Gods
mercy to his people, who knows, that if all Bishops were as corrupt, many
would be ready to think, sure they hold the popish, or Arminian religion will
serve to salvation, and they are wiser then we. God therefore provides that
some Bishops, and conformists should a little distaste their Romish practices,
though they do little, or no good against them, but in the mean they can not
bate, a little of their hierarchy, traditions, and ceremonies, ordained, and
commanded by men; though they be proved to be most injurious, and repugnant to
Gods Kingdom, and the true peace of Christian Churches, states, and
commonwealth, making the word of God, wherein their wel-beeing consists, of
none effect, this is the order they preserve. No proofs of holy Scripture can
be heard against them, either by the Bishops, by the privy council, or by our
Princes, and Parliaments: but their fear toward God is, in these things,
taught by the commandments of men, what marvel then if not only in their
wisest counselors, but even in their most learned Clergy, wisdom be hid,
and perished in diverse points, and they become the scorn of all nations, and
religions, for upholding religion in ceremony only, and letting it in the
substance thereof fall daily at home, and abroad, and those of the papists and
Arminians increase? If they had not such a hierarchy such ceremonies, and
service to defend, and serve them for an entire Religion, or a cloak of one,
they could not for shame but defend the faith, and religion it self, and their
brethren that profess it, which seeing they do not, what wonder if God plague
them, not only with pestilence, famine, and shameful foiles in war, but even
with spiritual plagues, that their governers both spiritual, and
Ecclesiastical, should not see the things that belong to their peace, but have
them hid from their eyes, and turn religion into policy, such poor policy,
as serves to cosen the land of her religion, and her friends of true help
when they have most need of it, and most trust to her; and to provoke the most
high to be their enemy, while they seek to please his enemies? For the
Spaniards and French have gotten aid of men, munition, and shipping against
those of the reformed Religion.

The Protestants in other countries that think they may speak boldy, because
they have smarted for trusting to the English Say, that all this shows them to
be of a mixed, or middle Religion, part of the Romish, in service, and
ceremonies, which are most defended, part of the Reformed in points of faith,
less regarded, and part of the Arminians lately received, or tolerated; that
as middle Counsels, and courses do usually displease both parties and give
satisfaction to neither, so has it been in the Counsels and courses of the
English touching Religion, and the defense thereof. For though they somewhat
please the papists, yet they satisfy them not; but only imbolden them to get
greater advantages, for their Religion, to encroach, demand, practice, and by
degrees prevail by corrupting such lukewarm newters: that all these things
are the fruits of the English hierarchy, and traditions, the Achans and
Babylonish garments that trouble Israel; an hierarchy, and traditions, which
taking their greatest authority from Romish usurpation, and superstition,
bring forth such Protestants; and which therefore is a Church planted
accordingly. For, say they, in England it has been, and is taken for a
sufficient conversion from popery to come to the Church to the service, and
Sacrament: whereas in France, and other reformed Churches, before any papist is
received and counted a protestant, he is presented in the congregation before
the preacher, who asks him question to this purpose. First whether he hold
the doctrine taught in the old and new Testament to be Gods, and sufficient to
salvation? 2ly. whether he hold that the reformed Churches teach and hold the
same doctrine in their Religion, and he desire to be of it? 3 whether he hold
the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon? And so
he consenting to all this is received with joy; and there is no danger, that he
should be false, or popish, who makes this profession, whereas in England,
where allare admitted without any such profession they may be true, or false,
as they list. If they do but come to the Church to the service, and sacrament,
though they secretly favor the Romish religion, and it appear to many in
their practice, they may nevertheles be chosen parliament men, and if they do
but take the oath of allegiance, as very many papists have done, who dares
question them? which is the reason there has been so much disturbance in all
the late assemblies of Parliament, and so little fruit by them.

Some, say they, not only in private parishes but ever in the court have come
to church, like Henry Earl of Northa^pton, he Duke of Buck: and others, and
have favored the hierarchy, and service, spoke well of them, and of some men's
books and sermons as little or nothing repugnant to popery; and for it were
content to be reckoned protestants, that so they might get offices, honors,
trust, and power in great affairs, make some pretenses for the good of our
Religion, or the state, but secretly carry them for the advancement of the
Romish cause. To effect it the better, and withal to save themselves from
danger, these, say they, being great, and able to help others to offices, and
honor, plant such about Kings, as themselves are, and have had enough to
applaude, second, and justify them in their proceeding: for as the Apostle
says. A little leaven leaves the whole lump, Gal. 5.^.
how soever these, getting to be the Major and predominant part, will in time
work that there shall be no other but such, unles perhaps some that are neither
hot, nor cold in religion, or being poor, or less potent, are forced for
their own private interests, to be silent, and in time to depend on them, or
beswaied by them; and then they all, thus engaged in any cause, are prone to
justify their own acts for good policies, and there is so little hope of
getting sounder men into their places, that it must needs be as hard and
dangerous to convince them, as for an inhabitant of Rome to convince that
Church of any error; a Parliament of wise men suffices not to do it: which
has been the loss of the Palatinate, and the cause of all the evil our
Religion has suffered in Bohemia, Germany, France and at home. Eor say the
foreign protestants, if the house of Austria and the French had not been,
sure they had such friends in England, they durst never have attemtped that
they did: that they that are such, or flatter such as are much infected with
avarice, ambition, and lust, must needs be blind in spiritual things,
especially in the matter of the hierarchies; wherein the devil labors to
keep them more blind then others, that so they may be unfit judges in the
cause, and he may thereby set up traditions, to make the word of none effect,
eftablish the tyranny of the Bishops in the Church against the Eldership, and
all the friends thereof, keep men lukewarm, and newters, if not thus false
between Christ and Antichrist; and so make way to bring England again to
Romish error, or somewhat as bad: that such Lords were ever in grace with the
Bishops, and the Bishops with them, because it troubles them not to have
fellowship with Church papists; so unlike are they to Saint John, that would
not come in the bath where Cerinthus was; that diverse chaplains and preachers
also, set up, and fitted for their turns, seeing them able to advance whom
they would, have for their favor, broached, and maintained, Arminian and
popish tenets, wresting the Articles, and the very Scriptures to confirm them:
and thus say they, the English hierarchy, and service bring forth such
counselors, and protestants, and such counselors bring forth such Bishops
and Chaplains. For if Princes or their favorites be but corrupted in
religion, they cannot want flatterers, both of the Clergy and others to
corrupt, and be corrupted, to conform, and be conformed to them. For one that
is against them they shall have hundreds with them, as in Ahabs time: so
miserable a thing it is, when they will not conform their opinions to Gods
word, but it to their policies and opinions, as one said to Micajah: 1 Kings.
22 13.
The words of the Prophet declare good unto the King with one mouth, let thy
word I pray thee be like the word of one of them. Constantius fell into
Arianisme, and the Rivers and fountains, the Bishop and teachers were
corrupted.

To omit other instances, this desire of authority honor, and precedence, was
the bane of the Church of Rome, who being drunk with that poison, and thereby
swolme with a monstrous greatness, gave the cup to others: a cup that all
nations are but to prove to drink of. And indeed so much do the favor of
Princes and honors more then all other gifts, blind the eyes of the wise, and
bring them to temporising, and spiritual ignorance, that it may be counted a
work of Gods special grace, that any that seek, or attain wealth, honor,
and authority should have the true knowledge and fear of God, seeing as Paul
says of them, that will be rich, 1. Tim. 9.6
so it may be said of them that will be honorable, and great they fall into
temptations and snares, and many foolish, and noisome lusts that drown men in
perdition. And indeed such do commonly so abound in sensuality that it may be
said of the most part of them. Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor, has no understanding but is compared to the beasts that
perish. For nothing makes a man more like a beast then spiritual ignorance,
and sensuality. Nothing makes a man more ignorant in spiritual things, nor
more sensual, then thirst after great places. Libido dominandi bestia
ferocissima. It is with this lust after honor, as with that of uncleannes, the
mind is so taken up with it, that there is little room for better thoughts,
and the spirit of God will not dwell in that soul, which is filled with such
vainities, grows more and more emptye of grace. For surely many are cast away
by the deceitfulnes of Balaams wages.

And God knows that it is too manifest that many in the Church of England have
been made drunk with those Romish dignities, and rewards that remain
therein; that men bewitched with these, or the desire of them, stumble into
Arminianisme, and other errors, at the pleasure of them that can advance them:
such are the fruits of those great places in the Hierarchy. For though the
Duke were often accused in Parliament, as an open favourer of Arminianisme, and a
secret practiser by that, and other means to advance Romish Religion, and
other notorious crimes; yet many divines continued his constant friends, and
advocates, and have directly, or indirectly, maintained, and propagated the
same opinion and which is most miserable, the chief of that faction, being
Bishops and heads of Colleges, are they which now bear greatest sway in
Religion, govern the Church of England, silence, and trouble whom they list,
and in a manner give laws to the whole Church in his Majesty's Dominions.
Neither can it be better til Achan be found out, the corrupting, and Romish
places of the hierarchy, and such unprofitable traditions, and ceremonies
taken away; but ever worse and worse. For these things that were at first held
indifferent, and ordained to make Papists come the sooner to Church, and to
keep unity, and uniformitie, are now got into the place of the Scriptures,
the Appealer alleges the Articles wrested, and Dr. Iackson certain clauses
of the book of common prayers for Arminianisme, with such authority, as if
they were the words of the Apostles; making the Church of England to mean what
they list, and her meaning, or rather theirs, to be sufficient authority in
points of faith against them that bring Scriptures to the contrary, as the
Church of Rome did of old, to establish her tenets, and when these, and the
like have been questioned in Parliament, some to encourage others to follow
them, have counseled to reward them, with Bishoprics, denaries, Maisterships
of Colleges, Rev. 2.14.
or fat benefices, wherein they deal like Balaam that taught Balack to lay a
stumbling block before the children of Israel. For when divines see these thus
rewarded, this works upon corrupt nature, which being prone to covetuouses,
and ambition, first makes the differences seem small, or not worth opposition,
and then draws the mind to run headlong into the same opinions, and to think
they do well enough in the conformity. Hence also it comes that though
foreign Princes and States, have often desired aid of England, that it would
join with them in serving the Pope, and his champions, as they served them:
nothing was ever effectually enterprised by the English; because such Courtiers
as secretly favored Rome have ever been flattered by the Bishops and Clergy,
when the Palatinate should have been defended, and after recovered, by the
swotd; these flatterers hindered it, by crying out of wars of Chtistian against
Christian, and saying it would bring in the Turk; that it were better all
should join against him, and speak less of the Romish Antichrist, or Romes
ruin, as also by extolling peace, and King James his indeavouts by Embassages,
and treaties; which all men said would come to nothing, and but make the
adversaries to gain time, deceive us, and grow more resolute, cruel and
mighty.

And indeed it is impossible that the English Hierarchy should ever seek
Romes ruin, and not rather hinder it all they can, because the great places
thereof are Romish, and a Diocessan Bishop (as they are now) is no other then
the Pope of a shire or province: and to show reasons why Rome should be
ruined, were to argue against themselves, trench upon their own hierarchy,
and seek to ruin it. They teach that their Hierrarchie, and Rites ought to be
maintained: now the Romish is but an excess in these things: which the
nobility perceiving can find no reason, why men should be so hot against
Rome. The Hierarchy of the Old fathers was positive, the English is
comparative, the Romish superlative for as some have proved, if you grant the
one to be lawful, the other follows to be as lawful, save in the degree of
impiety, as in that between fornication, and adultery, or incest. And
therefore it is that Bishops cannot endure that Princes, and Nobles should know
the charter of the Elders, nor the mischeife of the Hierarchy, that they bear
more with Church papists, and whoremongers, then any such puritanicall spirits,
with gross ignorance, then such knowledge, with such as would set up popery,
then such as would pull down the Hierarchy, or that of Rome. If such a one as
the Duke hindered wars with Rome, or her chife champion the Spaniard, they
will be his helpers so he will but stick to them against the friends of the
Eldership.

And therefore the Hierarchy, and traditions with doctrine and arguments that
maintain them, are like the great river Euphrates, that hindered the sacking of
Babylon, For heathen Babylon, lying on the one side of Euphrates, between
Assiria, and Chaldea, was fortified by that river. So that Cirus the first
vanquisher thereof had not won it, but by a device of drayning the river
above, by sundry artificial sluices, giveing his men in charge, whom he left
before the City, that when they should observe the river to be decreased, and
fourdable, they should presently take the opportunity to wade over, and
suddenly surprise Babylon. And the Hierarchy I say is like this river, for
Bishops and teachers with their doctrines are called rivers, and fountains.
Diverse of these rivelets meeting in one make a great river, as many of them in
a general council make a sea of doctrines, canons, and traditions: the
English hierarchy therefore having but a few Bishops, and fewer canons, and
traditions, then any popish Kingdom, can not be called a sea, but is a great
river, and as a river often parts two Kingdoms, or provinces, pertaketh of
both soiles, waters them both and keeps the one from invading the other: so
does the Hierarchy and the doctrines, and traditions thereof, which
mistically lies both to the Protestant and Romish shores, waters both, is as
pleasing and helpefull to Papists, as to the reformation, if not more: the
great power, and places thereof are Romish; so are the traditions, canons, and
arguments they use to defend it, they serve as well for the Papists, as for the
English Bishops; for indeed they spring out of that sea, out of the which the
beast arose, who always alleged the ancient customs and counsels, and they
naturally run again into the same, as rivers through many windings, find way
into the sea. Nothing lies so newtrally between the Romish, and reformed
Religions, as the Hierarchy, and the traditions thereof, unles perhaps the
Lutheran Religion, which has affinity with it, and that nothing does more
fortify Rome, and hinder the ruin thereof, this whole work does manifest.
And as a river does water the bancks, towns, castles, and manors that lie
upon it, so do these water the noblitie, and people, who delight to dwell on
these shores, and drink of these waters, which cool, or quench their zeal
against mystical Babylon, and so fill them, with ignorance, and neutralirie,
that they relish them better then the waters of the sanctuary, which are those
of the Eldership, and in requital send into her those land waters, which
coming to them from heaven, or springing out of their grounds, fall into this
river, and make it swell with a terrible greatness, and these land waters are
riches, and authority: which streams must be exhausted or turned an other
way, before Babylon can be destroyed.

I am not so confident is to make this a full exposition of the sixth vial,
which yet is not the least probable, seeing that things are rather to be
mistically, then literally understood. But sure it is, that some have thought,
that as without England there is little hope, that the Protestants should
prevail, and not rather be daily consumed, as heretofore they have been. So
the Bishops with their traditions, and practices, are the greatest hindrances
of true unity, and confederacy among all protestant Princes and States, that
England does not effectually join with them against Antichrist, and his
champions; Papists therefore nourish the English Hierarchy, and all helps
thereof, knowing, that the Episcopal authority, is at such emnitie with the
Eldership, that they can never be so true friends of religion as to seek
unity, and confederacy with Churches governed by elders, that all such
Princes and States, as Kings of the East and Citizens of the new Jerusalem, may
join to make the whore desolate. Experience shows that they have hindered it,
and so are like, so long as the Hierarchy stands, and the waters thereof run
with so strong a stream. These therefore must be dried up by true light,
knowledge, and zeal, ere God can be well pleased, or the Church have hope of
victory. And sure they shall be taken away; Ioh. 15.
for Christ says Every branch that bears not fruit in me he takes away;
they therefore that stand for them do in effect show themselves Romes friends,
and the Churches enemies, as the Arminians and popelings do.

There are three things that breed all the stir in the world, and hinder Romes
ruin. 1 The greatness of the house of Austria, which is nourished by the Romish
Clergy, and that Clergy by it, and that has made some think this house, and
the power, and riches thereof, to be the mystical river Euphrates, which must
be exhausted, or turned an other way, before Rome can be burned; which is well
begun by the King of Sweden. 2. Want of true unity, and confederacy amongst
Protestant Princes and States against the common Adversaries of Religion: for
this has emboldened the Pope, the house of Austria, and others to attempt so
much as they have, to subvert all by power, and policy. 3. The pernicious
power, offices and greatness of Diocessan, and Provincial Bishops, and other
Clergy men, which hinder these good effects in the two former, and makes both
the Spaniard and Church of Rome to have strong parties in all the greatest
Kingdoms in Christendom, and even in England it self, though Protestants in
profession. And such Prelates indeed are a stronger fort to the great whore,
then the house of Austria, which if it be a fort, these yet are the deep
ditch, or more that goes about it; the great river that strengthens both it,
and the Church, and City of Rome: the banks of this river must be cut, the
stream of their power and riches let out and dried up, ere any great good can
be done.

It is a thing that will serve to astonish the ages to come, that any reformed
Christian; much less those that are reckoned, and so should be, of the wiser
sort, as Counselors of estate, Nobles, Divines, and many others, that seem
to have a greater share of preeminence, wit, and learning, then of true
knowledge, honor, and authority in such cases, should stand so steadfastly in
the maintenance of diocessan Bishops, and traditions, and other wordly
dignities, honors, and revenues, which the Clergy have obtained, besides
those that are given to the Ministers of Christ in the Gospel. Wherein though
it be true that all their defe^ders, do not willingly take the mark of the
Beast, because all that defend them, do it not on purpose to help the Pope,
and Church of Rome, or with the more ease to bring-in popery, as some have
said of the late Duke, and his faction; which indeed is to have the mark
secret in the right hand: nor wholly, because some that stand for Diocessan
Bishops, and their traditions, which are popish, and tend to popery, do
nevertheles hate other points of Popery: yet do they take it partly, in
effect, and by consequence, and in a way which is a step, help, and
introduction to all popery: which cannot but be Rev. 14.9.
dangerous, especially when like Papists they will not see it, or seeing it,
will not desist.

First because Antichrist, and they are of one, and the same brood, and
offspring, of one, and the same foundation, his rising was their rising, and
their traditions, and ceremonies are his; they had them from him, every
Diocessan Bishop is now a petty Pope in his Diocese. For at the first,
Plessis mystery of inquit. prog. 4 and 5.
the Pope only grew great as a Diocessan Bishop in a great city, having this
only privilege, that he was reckoned the Bishop of the first sea, and an
Archbishop, Rome being the seat of the Empire, but there were then others
that were reckoned Archbishops as well as he, and governed their seas as
freely, as he did his: and so did many Bishops also. It is well manifested by
Hierome on the first of Titus and by many other fathers, Bellar. de clericis
lib. 1. c. 14.
and modern writers cited by Bellarmine and Medina, as also by Pietro Scave
Polano in his history of the council of Trent, that at first a presbiter, and
a Bishop was one, Hist. of the Council of Trent. page 220.331.332.591.
and the same thing, that the Churches were governed by the common counsels
of the presbiters, and how the jurisdiction, and power of Diocessan, and
Provincial Bishops, crept into the church to withstand divisions; namely
together with the Popes: and therefore to defend their office is to defend his:
which only differs in the excess of power, and evil, and in supremacy, and
universalitie: neither have they so much withstood divisions as increased them,
for Plessis, and these other authors show; by the bounty and favor of
Constantine, and his Princes, the Bishop of Rome was made rich and great; but
so were other Bishops also. And as he began to have a tribunal, and courts,
and causes; so did others also; and thence grew corruption upon corruption,
contention upon contention, appeal upon appeal, division upon division. He
grew to be reckoned a Patriarch: but the Bishops of Alexandria, and Antioch had
the like privileges given them; which soon after was also bestowed on the
Bishop of Constantinople, because it was become the Imperial City, as Rome
had been before. And though the Greek Bishops would never acknowledge the Pope
for their head, because there was no reason they should, yet they must needs
confess that his rising was theires. Their rising, and greatness was but an
imitation of his: and so is that of the Archbishops of Toledo, Paris, Collen,
Mentz, Trier, Canterbury, York, and others, as also of the Bishops of
Angiers, London, Winchester, and Durham, and all others in the Christian world,
according to the greatness of the Provinces, Cities, and Countries, whereof they
obtained the title and jurisdiction. The Pope was the Beast, and Antichrist,
before he got the title of universal Bishop, which made him their head, and
the grand Antichrist: which hinders not but that before, and since, they by
their office might be petty Antichrists. This would quickly appear, if men
would try the spirits, try the doctrines, try the callings, and say. The
calling of Diocessan Bishops, is it of God or of men? But if Bishops may have
their wills, you shall neither try their callings, nor their doctrines by the
Scriptures. I wonder therefore that Princes and people of the reformed
religion, should have their doctrines and ceremonies in such admiration,
because of their persons and offices, as if Gods spirit must needs be with
them, more then with others when they should rather think it to be less with
them, whose calling, and dominion is not of God, then with others, and that if
their doctrines, traditions and ceremonies agree not with the Scriptures, they
cannot be of God, 2 Ioh. 9. Ioh. 8.44. Acts. 14.23 Act. 20.17.28.
seeing their authority, and office that impose them is not of God, but of the
same spirit that rules in Antichrist, they abide not in the government of
Christ, but are enemies to it.

For the Apostles ordained them Presbiters (that is Elders) in every Church by
election, Paul says to the Presbiters, to the Elders. Take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you
Bishops (the word is the same that is used, 1. Tim. 3.1.2. and may be
translated a Bishop, or an overseer, even as in the Greek a presbiter is an
Elder.) There were diverse of them over one flock. Therefore he says. To the
saints that are at Philippi, Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.
with the Bishops and Deacons: the presbiters were then the Bishops, which is
clear by that, I left thee in Crete that thou should set in order, the
things that are wanting, and ordain them Presbiters in every City (that is
by election, according to Act. 14.23. Act. 1.23. Chap. 6.5. and 1. Tim. 4.14.
as Beza well proves it, Verse. 6.7.
in his Annotations on these places, and so Paul adds) If any be blameless,
Act. 20. Phil. 1.
for a Bishop (that is the presbiter aforenamed) must be blameless; which is
so clear that Bellarm. that would feign deny it, Bellarm. de Clericis. lib.
1. c. 14.
is forced to co^fess that in all these three places the presbiters are called
Bishops, and consequently when Paul says, 1. Tim. 3. He that desires the
office of a Bishop, desires a good work: that is the office of a Presbiter;
they were one, and the fame, as Hierom, and others cited by Bellarmin have
affirmed. Otherwise Paull would not have them passed, 1. Tim. 3.
as he does, from the office of a Bishop to the office of a Deacon, but first
from the office of a Bishop, to the office of a Presbiter, and then to Deacons:
but there he only speaks of Bishops, and Deacons, because a Bishop and a
Presbiter is one, and the same thing. It is true that Timothy was an
Evangelist; which is greater then a Bishop: but as he is called a Bishop, that
is, a presbiter. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was give^ thee by
prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the Presbiterie. Chap. 4.14.
The presbiters ye see were then the Bishops that ordained presbiters, that is
Bishops: and in that sense, Titus a presbiter, that is a Bishop, was left to
ordain them presbiters in every City, that is Bishops: but Titus was not a
Bishop of Bishops: for if any of them were taken in a fault, the consistory of
presbiters were to look to it, Acts, 20.28. So it is said, against an Elder
receive not an accusation but before two, or three witnesses; 1 Timothy 5.19.
which is not to set one over the rest, to make a Bishop of Bishops: but as if
an Apostle should write to a senator of Venice, against a Senator receive not
an accusation but before two or three witnesses, which were to teach him, and
all Senators their duty. Christ says of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 16.
he shall not speak of himself, he shall take of mine to show unto you: to
teach us that the holy Ghost brings no new doctrine or ordinance, that stands
not with the old: for Christ changes not; he is the same yesterday, and to
day, and for ever. But Paul says of the Elders. The holy Ghost has made you
Bishops; this ordinance therefore is unalterable. Hebr. 13.^^. Act. 20.
They ought to have the government, and the honor due to Elders, so Paul
says: Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy
5.15.
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. Next to the Apostles, and
Evangelists the Eldership was the place of greatest honor in the Church. None
of the Apostles are called Bishops, but Elders, they disdained not the title,
but reckoned it an honor. 2. Ioh. 1.
The Elder to the Elect Lady, and saint Pet. says The Elders which are among
you I exhort, who am also an Elder: the Greek word signifies a fellow elder.
The Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter. Act.
15.8.22.23.
The chosen menand decrees went out in all their names.

Some object that Bishops succeed the Apostles, and Presbiters, the seaventie
Disciples. This is but a conceit. For Presbiters were the Bishops ordained of
God, to succeed the Apostles. Christ says to them. Lo I am with you always
to the end of the world. Mat. 28.20
That is in their successors, such as should teach their doctrine, baptize, and
govern according to his ordinance the Eldership, so they may have successors;
but not as they were Apostles, and over Elders, that is over Bishops: for as
Beza observes the Apostles excercised no tirannous dominion, Beza in Act 1.23.
or Lordship in the Church, but left them free voices, and free election, and
to be an Apostle is to be sent of God, with an immediate embassage to lay the
foundation in practice, and ordinances, as Paul did, but the Embassage of
Bishops is mediate, they have theirs from the Apostles: neither can they lay
another foundation, nor ordain new things, though they often assume it, in some
decrees, canons and ceremonies, as they did who established diocessan Bishops;
to say they might do it, or that their act was of the holy Ghost; it will
follow that others might with like reason ordain Archbishops, and Patriachs,
and in the end a Pope over all; and that all these their acts were of the holy
Ghost, but Bishops, and Counsels are not Masterbuilders, as the Apostles were;
for every one is willed, to take heed how he builds: for other foundation can
no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.10.11.
then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. In this sense each Apostle was a
general officer in all Churches, as Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.28.
He had the care of all Churches. But herein no Bishop will call himself his
successor: unles it be the Pope, who exalts himself above all that is called
God. 1 Pet. 5.
Peter would not have any Elder to be a Lord over Gods heritage: much less
over other Elders. It shall not be so amongst you, Mat. 20.25 Chap. 23.8
says Christ, One is your Master even Christ, and all ye are brethren. There
is no other Bishop over these Bishops, the Presbyters, or Elders. He is the
King of his Church, and the only chief Bishop. 1 Pet. 2.25 Chap. 5.4.
It is a poor answer to all this to say this opinion was condemned for an
heresy in Aerius, seeing Chemnitius has so well cleared him, Chemnit. examen
council. Trid.

Bellarm. de Clericis, lib 1. cap. 14.


and Medina alleged by Bellarmine, confesses that saint Hierom was herein
wholly of opinion with the Aerians, and not only S. Hierom, but likewise,
Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theoderet, Oecumenius, and
Theophilact. If these or other Fathers did yet hold diocessan Episcopacie to be
lawful, and necessary; it may be answered, that otherwise the mystery of
iniquity, could not have proceeded as it did: they lived not to see such
fruits of it, as we have seen; it was not then come to the height of
tyranny, they therefore were more excusable then we can be: and therefore the
cause is not bettered by this, that English Prelates hold with Bellarmin, and
Rome in this point, seeing other reformed Churches find it safer in this case,
with Calvin, Chemnitius, Beza, and others to cleave unto the Scriptures, and be
reformed by them. In the Revelation, Rev. 4.1.2 3.4. Cap. 5.6.
saint John seeing the Church that was to be after him, says, Behold a Throne
was set in heaven: and round about the throne were four and twenty Elders.
And in the midst of the throne, and in the midst of the Elders stood Christ; to
show they belong to his government, as Diocessan Bishops to that of Antichrist;
for note, he says not Bishops, but Elders, or Presbiters, lest after it should
have bin taken for diocessan Bishops. And when Babylon is destroyed, the Elders
give thanks. Rev. 19.4.
All this shows that Christ's Church ought to be governed by Elders, that so
it was, and so it shall be, this is the government of Christ, who is the king,
and anointed to it. Now Diocessan and Provincial Bishops hinder this
government, and are therein Antichrists; therefore that is true which John said
in his time, 1 John. 2.18.
Even now are many Antichrists. There is a veil upon some Protestants hearts,
a curtain of Church power before their eyes, that they cannot see this, and
the infectious sores and maladies that their power and ceremonies bring in and
cover. I hope this curtain is now so drawn, that Princes will for Christ's
sake, lay it to heart, and take away their dominion and riches, which make them
thus blind and corrupt. For that is the end of this work.

Secondly, Because it is clear to all the wisemen in the Christian world, that
as many great troubles have risen in former times, about Prelates, as in
England about Thomas of Becket, Stephen Langthon, and others: so of late all
the wars and stirs in Germany, and other parts, have risen from Bishops,
Jesuits, and other Clergy men: they have made the Emperor and other Princes
to kill, and drive the Protestants out of their Countries and livings. All the
do and hurliburly is raised to restore them to their Antichristian power in
Bishoprics, Deanaries, Cloisters, and their revenues. Howsoever the fire
began, these are the bellows that blow it, and such as minister the oil and
sulphur that have nourished and increased the flame. This ambitiousnesse of
the Clergy, that does so much mischief in the Church and Common wealth, is a
hellish flame, that cannot begin to go out, til Rome be burned, and the Clergy
reformed by the Scriptures. True peace and unity there can be none, till their
dominion, riches, and authority be taken away, and they reduced to the truth of
the Gospel.

Look into England, and see if these vices, and pride in the Clergy, have not
been cause of all the dissentions and disgraces of that Country. The late Duke
knew well that he could not stand, practice, and prevail, without their
countenance and authority: to maintain their greatness, save their honor and
power entire, keep their practices, and corruptions in matter of religion,
from being questioned and reformed, Parliaments must be disturbed, yea crushed
and dissolved, and, as men say, the most sincere lovers of justice and piety in
that high Court, must be disgraced, accused, and imprisoned, for discovering
the practices of the Arminian, Popish, or Spanish factions; and such
flatteries, and errors of the Clergy, as appear in Pulpit, print, and
practice. The Bishops see all this, and know that by all these means, their
power and authority is increased, as that of the Church of Rome, and other
popish Bishops was by the like.

But they that by these means cherish such factions, countenance or suffer
Arminian Books, and practices to pass, and do little against the Popish, are
not so cold in defending that tradition of theirs, or rather of the Papists,
that Diocessan Bishops, and their authority in things called indifferent, are
of God; but to show that like the Papists they are more jealous, sensible, and
zealous of any thing done against these, then against those that are done
against the kingdom, word, and ordinances of God, they are ever watchful,
careful, and zealous, to hinder all books and discoveries that are against
any of their traditions and ceremonies; not one must be suffered to be seen
that has any proof for the Eldership, or against the Hierarchy: pretending
still they are heretical, and dangerous, which is but a Popish trick, and a
mockery, while in the mean those of the Arminians are suffered to pass, and
the popish are not so severely suppressed, though heretical, and very
dangerous to the soul.

In the history of the Council of Trent it is showed that In the Church of
Martyrs there was no ecclesiastical prohibition, Page 472.
though some godly men made conscience of reading bad books for three reasons
of Gods law to avoid the contagion of evil: not to expose ones self to
temptation, without necessity or profit: and not to spend time vainly. About
the year 400. a Council in Carthage did forbid to read the books of the
Gentiles, but allowed them to read the books of the heretics: the decree
whereof is among the Canons collected by Gratian. And this was the first
prohibition by way of Canon. The books of heretics, containing doctrine
condemned by Councels, were often forbid by the Emperors, as by Constantine
those of the Arrians, by Arcadius those of Eunemius and Maniches, by Theodosius
those of Nestorius, by Martianus those of the Euticheans. It sufficed the
Councels and Bishops to show what books did contain damned or apocryphal
doctrine. So did Gelasius in the year 494. and went no further, leaving it to
the conscience of every one to avoid, or read them to a good end. After the
year 800. the Popes of Rome, as they assumed a great part of the politic
government, so they caused the books of those authors they did condemn, to be
burned, and forbad the reading of them. Notwithstanding one shall find but few
books forbid in that sort until this age. Martin the 5. does in a Bull
excommunicate all the sects of heretics, especially Wicleifists, and
Hussites, not mentioning those who read their books, though many of them went
about. Leo 10. condemning Luther, did withal forbid all his books upon pain
of excommunication. Afterward the following Popes, and the Council of Trent
did the like for all the books of the Reformists. In the year 1558. the King
of Spain made a law, that the Catalogue of books prohibited by the
Inquisition should be printed.

This discourse being larger in the Author, shows that it is a shame for the
English Bishops to follow their novell and popish course against them that
prove the Eldership to be Gods ordinance; and argues a bad cause in the
Prelates, which they dare not suffer to be disputed, nor the books against it
to be seen, though they hold the things to be indifferent, and of a positive
law: and that while they suffer those of the Arminians, and in the mean hinder
those that confute them, this argues plain policy, and Trent tyranny, for all
this is done at their instance.

It is pretended, that neither this knowledge of the Eldership, nor that which
convinces the Arminian tenets, are needful in a Christian; which is but a
mockery, while they would that men should know that there ought to be Bishops,
and that they should be obeyed, though they prohibit teaching of the revealed
truth of God, touching his free grace, in election, conversion, man's free will,
and the like; and in the mean suffer the contrary doctrine to pass in Arminian
books. For while they say, these things are too high for the people, let them
learn easier, and be taught to pray, etc. they are willingly ignorant, that
by such tricks the Papists at first put off the truth of God, and in time
established their own errors in matter of justification, transubstantiation,
merits, and the like; that if this be granted, the like art may after be used
in other matters; and thence others may in time say, Christ is given and eaten
in the Sacrament, Ministers do bind and loose, Christians are justified, it
is sufficient to believe these things, and not to know how, they are high
matters, therefore the mean knowledge is best: and so by degrees in other
points. Which being granted, after this second step to ignorance, error, and
popery, there would follow a third, that the Prelates would be corrupted in
them, set out corrupt glosses, multiply Canons, and then you must believe as
the Church believes, that is, as they believe, or be accounted a schismaticke,
and in the end an heretic.

I confess, that if Papists and Arminians did not strive to corrupt men in
these points, such exact confutations of them, and knowledge of the truth in
them, might seem less necessary; and in some sort to forbid it, were not plain
treachery, as now it is counted in the Prelates; That there ought to be a good
order in men's knowledge; not to mind nothing else but these points, nor to
begin with them, and then come to learn the first principles of the Oracles
of God: but they being first learned which touch a man's particular salvation,
then to come to those which touch the salvation and freedom of the Church, and
consequently of every particular soul in it, the knowledge of the like being
commended in the Revelation, Rev. 1.3.
that we may pray to God for a reformation; lest the Prelates reigning thus,
the faith come to be corrupted, and disesteemed, traditions, error, and
will worship advanced, as in the Church of Rome: who by keeping Princes and
people in ignorance in the matter of their Hierarchy, and traditions, and
pretending diverse points were too high for parish pulpits, and laics, brought
them to that height of impiety and error wherein they are. Whence we may see,
that lest the like evils come on us, as they begin, the knowledge of Gods
ordinances in matters of the Eldership, and things against the Hierarchy and
traditions, is more necessary in every understanding man, then one would think
at the first sight. It concerns the faith it self, and the keeping of it
incorrupt; because without it the Church is sure to be kept in bondage, many
points of faith lost or changed, as in the Church of Rome: and so many souls
corrupted and perverted to perdition. For they know that if Princes and people
know it not, the King and Parliament cannot come to know it, much less to
reform it; and by all this we see plainly that greater corruptions will
inevitably follow, and the Prelates will come to that power, that men shall not
dare to discover them.

When the light of the Gospel did but begin to be restored, and errors by it
to be discovered, the Emperors Ambassadors came in his name to the Legates in
Trent, desiring 20. points of reformation, of which observe these. That no
scandalous dispensations may be granted hereafter. Histor. of the Council of
Trent, page, 513.
That plurality of benefices may be taken away, and Schools erected in
Cathedral and Collegiat Churches. That every Ecclesiastical ministry be
exercised freely, and that rich benefices without cure, may be incorporated to
those that have cure, and small revenue. That the Canons against Simonie may be
revived. That the Ecclesiastical constitutions be abridged, the superfluity
cut off, and not made equal to the obligations of the law of God. That
excommunication be not used but for mortal sin, or notorious irregularity.
That divine service be so said, as that it may be understood by him that says
it, and by him that hears it. That a way be found not to chase away bad
parish Priests, because that is easy, but to substitute better. I omit others
of allowing marriage to Priests, and the cup to some nations.

Page 651.
The French Ambassadors had the like. The Priests should not be ordained before
they were old, and had a good testimony of the people, that they had lived
well. That a Priest should not be ordained before he had a benefice, or
ministry, according to the Council of Chalcedon, at which time a presbyterall
title without an office was not heard of. That the due function should be
restored to Deacons, and other holy orders, and they may not seem to bear
names, and for ceremony only. That the Priests, and other Ecclesiastical
Ministers, should attend to their vocation, not meddling in any office but in
the divine Ministry. That Bishops, Parish Priests, and other Ecclesiastickes,
unable to perform their charge, shall receive coadjutors, or leave their
benefices. That no man shall have more then one benefice, taking away the
differences of the quality of the persons, and of benefices compatible, and
incompatible, a new division not heard of in the ancient decrees. That he that
has two or more, shall retain that only which he shall choose, within a
short time, or shall incur the penalty of the ancient Canons. That the
mandates of provision, expectations, regressions, resignations in confidence to
be revoked, and banished out of the Church, as contrary to the decrees. If
either the people or Princes of England, should make these or the like to the
Parliament, or Convocation of the Clergy, they should presently be hissed out
for Puritans, as the Cardinals called those Vltramontan Bishops hypocritans,
that held residency to be ex jure divino.

Pa. 501.
Some think, if there were better Bishops all would be well enough. Indeed it
could not be so bad; but well it could never be: because Diocessan Bishops are
not ordained of God, they are no branches of Good engrafting, their office has
no root in Christ, Ioh. 15.
the true Vine, who is the Word: such officers and offices as the Father has
planted in him, bring forth fruit unto him: He is the door, by which all true
Shepherds enter; he that climbeth up another way (be it by a positive law,
Ioh. 10.1.
or otherwise) the same is a thief, and a robber, and brings forth such fruits
as diocessan Episcopacy has. Some Bishops there are indeed that have showed
themselves against the Arminians, and Papists, and to be lovers of preaching,
and sound doctrine; even as Christ had some witnesses or friends among the
Rulers and Pharisees; but these have been soon quailed, and kept out of grace
in the Court; howsoever they are great friends of the hierarchy, and enemies of
the Eldership, and true reformation, and so affected to those great places,
that they are blind on that side; and in that respect so against the kingdom
of God, that the devil and the Jesuits know well enough that they are herein
more helpers to the Romish religion, then hinderers, because they uphold the
reputation of diocessan Bishops, and ceremonies, with the most religious sort
of conformists, and so do but hold way for worse successors. It is strange
that wise men, and some both conscionable and well seen in Divinity, should
suffer themselves to be so seduced in this point, as to think diocessan and
provincial Episcopacy lawful and necessary. 1. Because they see it was very
anciently ordained and exercised by good men, and that the received custom was
confirmed by the Nicene Council: whereas they should rather consider, that it
was not in the Church of Martyrs, as it is now; the Bishops then differed
little from Presbyters in pomp and authority, and did not reign over them as
now: that though those Fathers might think to do good in ordaining it;
unless they had erred therein, and namely in taking so much on them, and yet
had seemed to do it as a thing necessary and profitable, it had not been
possible that the mystery of iniquity should have wrought so soon, and that
Antichrist, who was to be a Bishop, and to sit in the Temple of God, should
have found means, and step after step to rise to his greatness out of that
ordinance, as was showed he did: In an Epistle annexed to the history of the
Counc. of Trent.
That some evil things have been ordained in Councels very ancient, as Bishop
Iewed manifests: that this proved such in short time: that therefore it is
not good to think of reducing diocessan Bishops to their first estate, but
rather of taking them away, because such trees must needs bring forth such
fruit.

2. Because many zealous and well affected men have been, and some now are
diocessan Bishops. I answer, have they not read that some zealous Priests and
Bishops have come to be Pope? as of old Gregory 1. and diverse others: and of
late Adrian 6. reckoned holy men: which makes their papal calling never a whit
more tolerable or lawful: no more does it in those English Bishops, that
otherwise are sound in religion. For they standing so stoutly for hierarchy,
traditions, and ceremonies, which are Romish, and have their strength from
Romish ambition, power, and usurpation, even in these best Bishops, the tree is
known by his fruit; and in this respect, they are all drunk with the wine of
her fornication, though some more, some less. For they that have otherwise
been good Preachers, are the worse when they come to be Bishops, or to affect
such places: they make them so ceremonious, and zealous of the hierarchy,
canons, service, and ceremonies, that they stick not to preach them; and so
loath to displease Courtiers, that they are the less against Popery, and the
more plain enemies of such true Protestants, as seek the Eldership and right
reformation: whom they will not permit to write or speak, much less to preach
the truth of God in those points, but scoff, mock, punish, imprison and
silence them, keeping the Princes by these and all the shifts they can, in
ignorance in this point, as the Papists do theirs in this point and in others.
The ancient Fathers did not thus, they were not such Bishops.

Thus the whole counsel of God is not suffered to be preached in England,
shall I say in these points of the eldership, hierarchy, and service only?
wherein a man is not so much as suffered to distinguish between a sacrificer,
and a Presbyter, or Priest, as all Ministers are called? No, a mystery of
iniquity cannot rest in two or three evils: but those obstinately defended by
men, God gives them over to greater blindness and error. So was it in the
Church of Rome, and so has it been in England, where at first it was indeed
said, why should men stumble so much at Bishops and ceremonies, so long as the
Gospel may be freely preached in all other things, and no Minister hindered in
them? but now it is come to another evil, the bondage and limitations are more
increased. For the Clergy, and especially the Bishops, have not only
temporised with the Duke, and other hispaniolized and popish agents and
practisers; but even for their favor let in Arminianisme, neither opposing it
themselves, nor suffering others that would; but because light remedies always
cherish an evil, they got the King to prohibit disputes on both sides, not to
hinder Arminianisme, (for the books of Doctor Iackson and others, were
suffered to come out after that) but others from confuting it in their
disputations, books, and sermons; and in stead of the Scriptures to make the
Articles the Rule, and them the interpreters of them, who have not only
protected the Appealer, Doctor Iackson, Doctor Cousens, and some others that
savor of Arminianisme and Popery, hindered the Parliament, and others from
convincing them of error, and so emboldned others to broach worse errors in
flattery of mighty favorites, helped to get Parliaments dissolved, wherein men
had some hope of remedy: but have themselves preached some passages savouring
of Romish and Trent corruption, seeming to approve the vulgar edition, that the
Sacraments confer grace ex opere operato, and to tie the understanding of the
Scriptures, to the interpretation of the Fathers, to make the best of modern
Divines, little regarded. In these and the like, they being powerful in Court,
cannot want followers and flatterers; and therefore men of understanding say
they are not so well read in the Rules of piety, as in those of policy, used
against the desired reformation in the time of Luther, which being set forth in
the history of the Council of Trent, though it anger the Papists, in regard it
discovers a world of their various dissimulations, cunning shifts and
devices, yet it pleases them in this, that they serve to teach the Bishops,
and Arminians how to frustrate and delude all the fairest proofs and attempts
of their adversaries. And because some have written to discover the errors,
practices, and dangers, they have not only put all they could catch in the
high Commission, but lest such should get out, and themselves be any way
hindered or discovered in such proceedings, they have obtained authority, that
if any writer, Printer, or Bookseller, come with a prohibition, he shall be
presently censured. Some will say, this is but reason. I anwser, true, if their
hierarchy and practices were according to Gods word, and they seditious and
heretical that they trouble: but being as it is, and this power seldom or
never extended against any but such as stand for Gods truth against Arminians,
popish practisers and defenders of the hierarchy, they abuse the King and
Council, in getting them to be their protectors, and are themselves blind and
Antichristian tyrants. Such as in stead of following the rules of the Gospel
seem rather to incline to that of Paul 4. who set on foot the Inquisition,
Hist. of the Council of Trent. page 405. and 409.
which he said was the principal secret and mystery of the Papacy, the true
Ram to beat down heresy, and defend the Apostolic sea, by advancing
another, which like it shall prevail by power and terror in stead of good
reason, namely the high Commission Court.

The Counselors of the Parliament of Paris, seeing the Articles of reformation
published in the Council of Trent, opposed, saying, the Ecclesiastical
authority was enlarged beyond its bounds, with the wrong and diminution of the
temporal, by giving power to Bishops to proceed to pecuniary mulcts, and
imprisonment against the laity; whereas no authority was given by Christ to his
Ministers, but mere and pure spiritual: that when the Clergy was made a
member of the policy, the Princes did by favor allow the Bishops to punish
inferior Clergy men with temporal punishments, that discipline might be
observed amongst them, but to use such kind of punishment against the laickes,
they had neither from the law of God, nor of man, but by usurpation only. All
which shows, that diocessan Bishops are great impostors, though the Pope be
indeed the grand impostor. And let men be sure, that as they and their
hierarchy are more and more defended, so will their power increase, and grow
more popish, blind, erroneous, and Antichristian, as that of the Church of
Rome did; their fear toward God being in these things taught by the precepts
of men, the wisdom of them and their supporters, must needs decay and perish,
to the extreme danger of the Church and Commonwealth.

By all which may be seen, that the kingdom of God, in the true, free, and
full power of the word preached, is incompatible with the hierarchy; they
cannot stand together, but the maintenance of the one is the breaking of the
bands of the other, and of the true peace and happiness of the Church and
State; and that therefore there is necessity of a reformation in the Church,
and restoring the ordinances of God to that form, which not any humane, but
his divine wisdom ordained.

Some have pretended, that it is good policy to uphold the Hierarchy; for say
they, no Bishop, no King; there must be order in the Church, and Bishops are
they that preserve it. This is that bulwark which they used to beat off all
just complaints, and save themselves, their cause, their friends and followers,
such as the Duke, the Appealer, and Cousens, from the parliamentary power.
Crushed and dissolved it must be, rather then such a one or his treachery be
brought to trial; though they thereby make such the more bold to attempt the
like or worse evils, overthrow the power and use of Parliaments, that
confirmed their hierarchy, (a requital not so strange in them, as just with
God) and so alienate the heart of the King from his subjects, and the subjects
from the King, though they know, a kingdom divided in it felfe cannot stand;
that having their hearts he is strong, and a King indeed; that otherwise he
cannot well subsist, as a King should, nor be supplied with money and men: but
must be forced to make peace with the enemies of religion on the harder
conditions; and homebred Papists and Arminians would thereby grow the bolder,
to increase their religions and parties; the Palatinate could not well be
recovered, but the enemy must needs be made the more absolute and resolute, to
root out our religion and brethren in foreign parts, and at last, seeing
division in England, to venture thither to endanger the Church and Commonweal,
the Kingdom, and all. Wherein what have the Prelates showed less, then that
they had rather all these should be shaken and endangered, then their
hierarchy; or then one proud Appealer, one popish Cousens should be questioned
in disparagement thereof. For these evils could not have been effected against
so many endeavors of Parliaments, without the help of their religious
pretenses, nor passed without the cloak of their Episcopal gravity. And lest
things should be discovered or reproved, besides their diligence in
suppressing of books, they have got the Court and Cross supplied with
Preachers for their own turn, yea caused some men's sermons to be perused
beforehand, according to the policy used in the third convocation of the
Council of Trent, Histor. of the Council of Trent, page 468.
where the Bishop of Modena was appointed to peruse every sermon, and
whatsoever else was to be delivered in public.

By all which, he that will may see, that as it was ever in the hierarchy, so
has it been, is, and will be in this, the more Bishop and hierarchy, the
less King, the less good order in Church and Commonwealth. For they have
been in effect the Kings, nothing must be preferred, or heard against them,
or such friends of theirs, as the Duke, and others: but still they pretend that
these complaints are not so much against them, as against the Kings government
and prerogative: which is a mere trick and color to engage the King in their
cause, and so to save them, their friends and practices from coming to trial:
and so in conclusion it comes to be their prerogative that must not be touched
by the Parliament, nor indeed by the word of God. Is not this to bring all out
of order? And which makes the evil seem the more incurable, no man dares
manifest so much, so able are they to undo him. Which is a power the devil
has purchased them, that they and others may boldly proceed to propagate other
errors, and do what evil they list without control, like the Church of
Rome; and that to maintain them, their pontifical greatness, their Palaces
and Coaches, religion may abide in their power, be made a leaden rule for them
to turn which way they list, the truest lovers of Truth oppressed, the
kingdom of God invaded and usurped, and the whole Christian world disturbed
and afflicted.

Are not men ashamed, that living in the light of the Gospel, the love of
Christ constraines them not to be against these men, but that they should
nevertheless suffer themselves to be made the friends and protectors of them
and their hierarchy, and to think that therein they either serve God, or the
King and State, as they ought? For first that their hierarchy is against the
service of God, if enough has not been said, this may be added; that while
the office of Diocessan Bishops is falsely held to be ex jure divino, as we have
proved, Gods ordinances and officers being rejected, the Church is governed by
their greatest adversaries: who also having gotten the ruling and descissive
voices in Councels, (which should rather belong to those true Bishops and
Pastors the Presbyters) make their own opinions and errors of Bishops and
traditions to be received for matters of faith, as in the Council of Trent.
For though some hold that it is no matter of faith, but rather indifferent, and
at the pleasure of Kings, whether they or Elders should govern the Church; yet
it is of no less consequence; because even in England they make their Articles
to be received, and in a wrested or doubtful sense to be a sure Rule, and so
matters of faith, as themselves interpret them; yea this to be granted, that
themselves and their adherents, assembled in Convocation, as the Church
representative: which if it make other Articles more unsound or savouring of
Arminianisme, or other error, will think they should be received, especially
in matters of their authority: for who can hinder it, or dare say they have not
power to decide what is the faith? when indeed seeing the institution of
Diocessan Bishops is of a positive law, and not de jure divino, men should
rather consider the consequences: which were very aptly set forth in the
Council of Trent, Hist. of the Council of Trent. page 608.
where the Papalins maintaining that the institution and jurisdiction of
Bishops were not de jure divino, but that Bishops had their jurisdiction from
the Pope, and that he only had received institution and jurisdiction from
Christ in the person of Peter; the Bishop of Segna replied, That if they have
it not from Christ, neither can the Council have any from him, which
consists of Bishops, that if Bishops are not instituted by Christ, the
authority of them is altogether humane, and he that hears it spoken, that
Bishops are not instituted by Christ, must needs think that this Synod is a
congregation of profane men, in which Christ does not preside, but a power
received precarily from men, and it would be a great illusion generally of all
Christendom to propose it, not only as the best, but as the only and
necessary means to decide controversies; That he would never have come to the
Council, if he had not believed that Christ had been in the midst of it; that
if any Bishop should believe and think his authority to be humane, it had
been great boldness in him to denounce, in the former difficulties,
anathematismes, and not rather refer all to him, who had greater authority.

Now howsoever the opinion of the Papalins that the Pope is the only Bishop
jure divino, and that others ought to have institution from him, is most
erroneous; yet seeing it is certain that the institution and jurisdiction of
diocessan Bishops are not from Christ, but of a positive law, all those
consequences alleged by the Bishop of Segna do follow thereupon; and those
also which the Bishop of Paris added against the tenet of Laynez General of
the Jesuits, who exceeded in maintaining the cause against the Bishops: Page
614.
That in stead of a celestial kingdom (for so the Church is called) it makes
it not a kingdom, but a temporal tyranny; that it takes from the Church the
title of the Spouse of Christ, and makes it a servant, prostituted to man:
whence it follows, that the English Hierarchy, having no authority from
Christ, is a temporal tyranny, and the Spouse of Christ is made a servant, and
subjected to it. It is true, that where two or three are gathered together in
Christ's name, there is he in the midst: but to be truly gathered together in
his name, requires that their office be de jure divino, and they hare power
from him to assemble and handle such matters: this he never gave to diocessan
Bishops; for he never ordained them: they are but intruders, usurping that
which by Gods institution belonged to Pastors that are Presbyters. With the
Trent Fathers they pretend right by that place: Take heed to your selves, and
to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the
Church of God: Act. 20.28
which is spoken to Presbyters, and yet by usurping these letters patents of
the Presbyters, diocessan Bishops take the charge from them, exclude the
Presbyters, to whom they were granted, and what worse is, reign over them as
over their subjects, who must not preach any thing that dislikes them. That
election is of Gods free grace, regeneration and conversion of his power, and
not of man's free will; that men do believe and persevere, because they were
predestined, though they be plainly taught in the Scripture, yet they will
not have them nor the like points cleared by Preachers in Pulpit nor Print, nor
by Divines in the Universities, no not in a time when Papists and Arminians
corrupt men in them; but they must be left to them the Fathers and Rulers: as
if diocessan Bishops, never ordained of God, being many of them Courtiers,
swollen with ambition, depending on the interests of favorites, such as the
Duke, parties in such factions, corrupted with flatteries, contesting against
the endeavors of Parliaments, daily busied at the Council table, in the Star
chamber, or high Commission Court, should better know how to clear and
determine these and other high points, then Preachers that study nothing else
but Divinity, and are not led by such particular interests. There is no man
that has but an indifferent judgment, and any spark of true love to Gods
Kingdom, but will say, it is impossible that these men, or their flatterers,
should be fit Judges, or give just laws to men in such cases: yet they
govern all in Synods, and elsewhere; and if they have but colorable pretenses
like the Papists, who do resist or question them? These are they that ruling
all, and having many things in their gift, are sure to be flattered and
followed in Court Synods, and Universities: and if, as the Appealer does, they
can but allege the opinion of Bishop Bancraft, or any such politician Prelate
like themselves, they care for no better authority. Only strengthened by the
secular arm, they know how to prevail by power.

All which considered, it is no marvel that they have decreed so many things
to so little profit, yea to so great damage to the Church and kingdom of God.
And all true Christians are the rather to take heed of them and their decrees,
and not to say, it is either necessary to have Bishops, or a thing indifferent,
seeing they so much endanger the faith, and that in these respects it greatly
concerns the faith and all the faithful to have their government abolished,
and the Eldership restored, lest by them, as by the Bishops in the Church of
Rome, religion come to be corrupted.

It will be objected, the most ancient Councels were governed by Bishops. I
answer, that otherwise Popish errors could not have been established, nor so
long maintained against the truth; that at first Presbyters had their voices in
them, that Bishops of old differed little from Presbyters, had pastoral
charges, and were not like ours; but only began to decline: and therefore I
wonder not that Nazianzen so long since observed that there came little good,
yea much hurt of them, and that contentions have always been increased by the
Episcopal assemblies: as also Bishop Jewel proves in many particulars. In an
Epistle annexed to the history of the Counc. of Trent.
I wonder not if in our days some Bishops are learned, affect some good
things, make some good books, and tolerable constitutions. For some of them
have been great Divines, Pastors, and of a good conscience, in many things:
but might not a man have found the like in some of the Sadduces, Heredians,
Arrians, (...) P^pists, and other heretics? that is, take them out of their
heresies, in such things as they hold common with other Jews or Christians?
yet many things determined by them were dangerous; so must it needs be in the
diocessan Bishops of England, who are of a humane law, and heretics in matter
of the Eldership, if not Arminians. Therefore in this cause that may be said of
them which Paul 4. said of the Bishops of his time, that it was a vanity to
assemble 60. Pa. 339.
Bishops of the least able, and 40. Doctors of the most insufficient, as was
twice done already in Trent, and to believe that, by those, things could be
well regulated; All which considered, who can think that the Hierarchy, or any
Synod of English Bishops, can be for the service of God? In the mean the
Churches, or at least many thousands in them, in their practice, receive the
hierarchy, ceremonies, and traditions, Pari pietatis affectu, ac reverentiae,
with like affection of piety and reverence, as the written word of God, and
many with greater.

There are four pillars that uphold the Hierarchy. 1. Traditions and
ceremonies. 2. Spiritual ignorance and blind devotion in the Nobility and
Laity. For that makes them take it for granted, that Bishops and obedience to
their traditions are de jure divino: hence proceeds a 3. Riches and authority;
and from these a 4. reciprocal resolution and combination with such Statesmen
as the Duke and his confederates, so to maintain each others cause against al
accusers, as if they were one, and they each others Advocates. And as a branch
of this the severe suppression of all books and complaints that discover their
errors or practices. There is no need to prove further that the three last are
against the service of God, it will suffice to show that they are against the
service of the King and State. But first of ceremonies and traditions received
in the Church of England.

Histor. of the Council of Trent, page 259.
It is remarkable, that when some German Protestants for fear received those
appointed in the Interim, saying after they were indifferent: Others whom
necessity had not compelled, said it was true, that indifferent things concern
not salvation: yet, by means of them, pernicious things are brought in; and
going on, they framed this general conclusion, That ceremonies and rites,
though by nature indifferent, do then become bad, when he that uses them has
an opinion that they are good or necessary. Which has been proved of them in
England, and that generally they are men popish, neutrall, or of least
sincerity, that stand most for them, as for the best means to uphold the
hierarchy, because they know that rule to be true, No ceremony, no Bishop:
which (as it seems) is the reason that the Bishops look to little else,
though that be to confess, that they serve for nothing but to uphold their
own traditions and ceremonies: wherein they are very zealous, like the Trent
Bishops, that anathematized them that say that the ceremonies, Pa. 574.
vestments, or external signs used in the Mass, are rather incitements to
ungodliness, Pa. 548.
then offices of piety. Where, if by ungodliness you understand superstition
and ignorance, the Trent censure is extreme harsh: the rather because Antonius
of Veltelina, a Dominican, had proved unto them, that the Rite of Rome had
been received to gratify the Pope, but not in all places: and by a book
(called Ordo Romanus) that it has had great alterations, not only in ancient
times, but even in the latter ages also, that the Roman Rite, observed within
300. years, is not that which is now observed by the Priests in that City. For
the vestments, vessels, and other ornaments of the Ministers and Altars, it
appears not by books only, but by statues and pictures, that they are so
changed, that if the Ancients should return into the world, they could not
know them. Therefore he concluded, that to bind all to approve the Rites, which
the Church of Rome used, might be reprehended, as a condemnation of antiquity,
and of the use of other Churches. His discourse displeased, but the Bishop of
the five Churches justified him. If English Bishops would but with the Friar
consider the consequences that follow their enforcing of their Rites, they
would not be so extreme in them. And indeed in those wherein they differ from
the Reformed Churches, they do but mock the Christian world, while with the
Papists they hold that they ought to be so strictly received and reverenced,
and yet abrogate others more necessary: Page 163.
seeing as one says of the Papists, they grant not to the people the election
of the Minister, which certainly was an Apostolical institution, continued
more then eight hundred years: but deny it to them, with as good right, as the
Papists do both that and the use of the cup, which had been continued as long.

It is a seemly thing to see the Temples where Christians use to meet, in good
repair, frequented with grave, devout, humble, and religious behavior, in the
worship of God, the table covered with clean linen, when the Sacrament is
administered, the cup decent and not of the basest metal. But these and the
like things are the more acceptable to God, when the Church is not spoiled of
her better ornaments, diligent preaching and hearing, soundness in the faith,
knowledge, zeal, and holiness of life. For if the Temples be never so
glorious in structure, the table of the finest wood and workmanship, the cup of
gold, the Ministers in glorious vestments, the service full of grave and devout
ceremonies, and all things else in the most plausible manner for outward
ornament, God is but mocked for all these, if those better ornaments be
neglected and despised. When the Church of Rome began to abound in wealth and
authority, to have pluralities to maintain their dignities, to leave poor
hirelings in their cures, to neglect soundness in doctrine, knowledge, and the
like graces; that they might seem no less religious; they began in stead
thereof to be exercised in new manners of devotion, See Plessis mist. of
iniquity, pregress 24.
looking out of relickes, traditions, and ceremonies, to erect stately Temples,
Organs, and Altars, to guild and adorn them with images of Saints, to have
golden Chalices, and wooden Priests; to multiply feasts and holidayes, to
invent new orders and forms of will worship, to use all severity in bodily
worship, devout posture, and demure carriage; and to make all men conformable in
those things, to ordain a world of superfluous constitutions. But how was God
mocked in all these, while they did eat out religion? For people being taken
up in those, his ordinances were the less regarded: and while the stately
Temples were erected in Cities, Rev. 12.
the Church was feign to flee into the wilderness; while the beauty of the
outward stones were maintained, 1 Pet. 2.5.
the living stones were trodden under feet and despised; while lights were set
up in Churches, people sat in darkness and ignorance; while traditions were
observed, Gods word was the less respected, and in time could neither be
obeyed nor heard; while the tables and Priests were adorned, men of knowledge
and other the best gifts were least esteemed, while dead images of Saints were
set up in the Church, beautified and worshipped, the true and living Saints,
such as the Waldenses, Hussites, and Calvenists were persecuted and martyred,
and the very faith it self called heresy.

Look now a little upon the Church of England, see how they abandon the cause
of religion abroad and at home, despise and persecute such as seek that the
ordinances of God may be restored, Elders received, Popery, Arminianisme,
pluralities and non-residency excluded, the true faith preached and maintained
in Sermons and Lectures, knowledge, faith, zeal, and other graces, nourished
and increased; and in the mean seem no less religious, fall to building
Temples, Organs, Tables, Altars, to satiate, if it were possible, the Clergy
with titles of honor, jurisdictions, vestments, revenues and riches: and
because a Bishop precedes a Baron, to think that nothing is too much to
maintain his state, that is not too much for a Baron: and so for Deanes and
Doctors, according to their degrees and places, which are the nurseries of
pluralities and non-residency. To call for observation of ceremonies, canons,
fasts, holidayes, external gesture and devotion, and whatsoever else is
commanded or practiced in their constitutions and customs: wherein though they
do not yet abound so much as the Papists, yet it is the only religion in
credit and fashion; and as if Christ had ordained Bishops to look to nothing
else, it does and will eat out true religion and sincerity. Howsoever, while
Prelates and others, having pluralities to maintain their dignities, and
leaving poor hirelings to serve their cures, those better ornaments are
neglected and persecuted: are not these tokens that God is mocked by them?

I know well it is most irksome to Prelates to hear of these things: they
think no man should dare to manifest them, and especially that the Eldership
ought to be restored, according to Gods ordinance. They live as if they shunned
no other plague, nor feared any other purgatory then a reformation. This fills
their souls with Fiery indignation, and makes them, to be redeemed from it,
break out into threats, inquisitions, and persecutions, that they may overcome
their tormentors by censures, imprisonments, exemplary punishments, fines, and
torments. Howsoever, if they can but by flatteries, invectives, whisperings,
and other shifts, keep the King and Council so ignorant and blind in those
things, that they may remain firm on their side, they care for no more. But
may not a man protest as plainly for God and his Church, as the French
Ambassador did for the privileges of France and the French Churches, in the
Council of Trent: that protestation angered the Prelates, but he defended it,
saying, That those were ignorants, Hist. of. the. Council. Page 771. and. 774.
who having seen nothing but the Decretals, laws of 400. years, did think
that there were no Ecclesiastical laws before them, that if any would reform
the King by the Decretals, he would reform them by the decrees, and lead them
also to more ancient times, not only of S. Austen, but of the Apostles also.
Wherein the King justified him.

Now as the hierarchy and ceremonies make not for the true service of God, but
serve to eat it out by degrees, as the Romish did, so neither do they make
for the service of the King and State, but are against it, and very pernicious
for every Nobleman and Ruler, as appears, 1. Because while they are by them
kept from the knowledge of Gods truth in matter of the Eldership, against
Arminian errors, or any thing else the Bishops would not have them know, that
must needs be true in them, which our Savior says, He that walks in
darkness, Ioh. 12.35.
knows not whither he goes: and therefore their deliberations in matters of
preserving the Church and State (which in these times are so intermixed, by
reason of popish practices, that commonly the cause and good of the one
belongs to the other) must needs be accordingly canried, that is, with much
blindness and danger.

2. Because if any King or great Favorite like the Duke, be in this error of
the Hierarchy, Arminianisme, or any other, the having of these great places in
the Hierarchy in his gift, makes almost all the Clergy, and especially the
Prelates and Universities to be at his devotion, to temporize, temper, form
and keep bad divinity to their mind, by such power and policy, that all the
most skillful Divines in the kingdom, shall not dare, or at least not be able
to help it; but whatsoever become of the truth, or reforming errors and
abuses, the honor of the Prelates and their abettors, must be saved, as in
the Court of Rome: and by these things they are prepared to rule a Synod, if
occasion serve, as the Court of Rome did that of Trent; and in the mean so to
keep diverse errors and abuses from the knowledge of their King, and to guard
his ears from all just counsels and complaints made against them or their
confederates, or to pervert their drift by pretending his prerogative and
government are taxed or questioned, and the Episcopal government established
by his authority, is slighted and contemned, that nothing can be heard,
fearful divisions are made, Parliaments are for their sakes dissolved, the
best counsels rejected, reformation hindered, notorious delinquents, Papists and
Arminians emboldned, men in the greatest trust may daily be in the fellowship
of Iesuited Papists; what ever they practice, it is found in vain to accuse
them: and by this means the King is either the last that knows the truth and
right in diverse causes, or one that never comes to understand it, nor indeed to
be willing to hear of it. Which is far from the wisdom and diligence of the
Pope and popish Princes, that seek to supplant him and all true religion.

Histor. of the Council of Trent page 693.
Pius the 4. doubting that some Prelates and other great ones favored the
Protestants, resolved to discover them, and was wont to say, that he was more
wronged by the masqued heretics, then by the bare faced. Men, that love
their King and Religion, say as much of the masqued Papists in England, and
that therefore the Prelates and others vainly brag of the long peace and
prosperity England has enjoyed, while other Countries have smarted, when it
has been procured by such means; and more vainly think that God is well
pleased with them, seeing they have no changes, but he has suffered them to
prevail against such as sought the redress, when they should rather know that
the long suffering of God leads to repentance, that all these things as they
do more and more disable the king and his people from defending themselves in
the time of war, because the Popish and Arminian factions are by them increased
and God provoked; so without amendment, they will cause God to send a sword
amongst them to avenge the quarrel of his covenant, when, thus weakened, they
shall be less able to withstand it. Some foiles they have had, and their present
security is an ill omen of worse.

3. Because by these means Courtiers being nourished in spiritual ignorance,
Popist Princes that either labor to bring all to one Monarchy, or nearer and
nearer to Romish Religion, find fit instruments in court and Council to
negotiate withal, to get leauges, treaties and articles of peace or war to
their best advantage, to make divisions, factions to corrupt and be corrupted;
that is either for reward, or conscience, to help Romish Religion under
pretenses of State policy, or being against the puritans: wherein they could
never make things seem to stand with religion without the consent and
confederacy of the Prelates. For if there were no hierarchy, no Prelates to
countenance them, but the land were indeed of the reformed Religion, all would
be ashamed of such counsels as stand not with the good thereof: and Jesuits
could not find the means they do, to be stickling by their disguised
friends, to trouble the state, and by degrees and colorable pretenses to alter
Religion; wherein if Princes and favorites come to be corrupted, none so likely
or pote^t to get things decreed to their minds, in Sinods, as Bishops, that
are thosen by them and depend on them, as others on the Pope, the Trent fathers
showed it in many particulars.

All which is as ill for the souls of those Princes and statesmen, as for the
Church and State, what a miserable case is it that Kings and Princes, who of
all should love Christ and tender the good of his Church and people, as being
nursing fathers, will not take these things into consideration, nor suffer the
words of exhortation? and that such as are near them will not use the means
that they may know them? Ministers, dare not touch upon it, seeing the Prelates
flatter and are able to undo them wherein Romish Princes and Religion have
infinite advantages against them. The meanest Jesuits and Capuchins are
admitted into the closets of Kings and Sates men, and permitted to convince or
reprove in the cause of their Religion, to exhort and animate them to
constancy, vigilancie and courage, to vnmasque and destroy the secret and open
enemies thereof. When the Queen Regent of France had suffered Beza to speak
in Colloquie, a bold Jesuit reproched the Protestants and openly reprehended
the Queen for meddling in matters that he said belonged not to her, Page 454.
but to the Pope etc. yet was he not molested for it. They honor others,
punish zealous spirits. Papists and other children of this world are wiser in
their generation then the children of light; more zealous, more diligent, (as
is daily seen in France, Spain, and all popish countries) which is ill for
the State and Church of England. This therefore may be sufficient to excuse me
for making this manifestation.

4. Because if there be not a reformation. God for all these evils is forced to
plague such a Church and State in many things, especially in those spiritual
plagues. Isa. 29.14. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

It is pretended, that they that seek reformation of the Church, make schism.
The Church of Rome said as much for her self against them that sought to
reform her in the time of Luther. And indeed the schism is rather made by the
Bishops and their supporters from the reformed Churches, and such as hold Gods
truth with them: which has made the enemies attempt so much against them, and
prevail therein, while they saw the English to divided from them, and oposite
to them in these things, that they know the Bishops and their supporters could
not heartily favor them, and therefore would never get any effectual supplies
for them, but rather flatter and justify such friends, as under hand betrayed
them. So dangerous has this division been, and to is like to continue till
the Eldership be restored, and there be amongst Protestants more unity in
government and ceremonies.

They reply, this is Cham like, to discover the nakedness of ones father or
mother, that the men of Bethshemesh were smitten for prying into the Arc, and
Vzzah for putting forth his hand to support it: that so men meddle with things
out of their element, that it belongs to privy Counselors and Bishops to lock
to these things; which were the flattering arguments used to stop men's mouths
while the Palatinate and Rochel were in most danger, by the remissness and
suspected treachery of some disguised Courtiers: now all is lost, they must give
us leave to say these places were not well alleged then, much less now to
hinder reformation: that the hierarchy is not the Arc, nor any thing like it:
that the Church of Rome has ever used the same and like arguments to cover her
filthiness.

But say they, where got you this knowledge? if in the English Church, why do
you use it against her your mother? Do you think the Church of Rome might not
as justly say the like against John Husse, Luther, and others before them? The
truth is, there is but little of it in England, the Bishops are so vigilant to
suppress it, and in stead thereof to cry for prayer, devotion and obedience to
the Church: this is not to say, ignorance is the mother of devotion: but to
approach toward it.

To conclude, it is objected, that if we once go about to alter any thing, we
shall ever be subject to change; men will ever be mad on reforming, more and
more, till all be brought to Anabaptisme, or at least to Brownisme. O God what
poor shifts does the devil find to keep men in evil? For this is as if one
should say, Offer not to convert or reformed Papist, a drunkard, or a harlot,
lest the first turn Puritan, and then Anabaptist; or take heed you return not
into the right way, because it is narrow, and you may soon be turned into by
paths on the other hand. Wherein they follow the policy of the Church of Rome.
For when Luther had begun to dicover some errors, Pope Adrian 6. a German
borne, being called out of Spain the Popedom, hoping to reduce all by a
reformation, gave commission to his Nuncio the Bishop of Fabriano, to
acknowledge knowledge ingenuously, Histor. of the Council of Trent page 25.
that this confusion was caused by the sins of men, especially of the Priests
and Prelates; confessing that some years since, some abominations have been
committed even in the holy Sea; many abuses in spiritual things etc.
Promissing to use all diligence that the Court of Rome, from whence
Peradventure all this mischeife proceeded should be reformed first of all. And
he set himself to do it, but was diverted by the Cardinal of Preneste, who
told him there was no hope to confound and root out the Lutherans, by
correcting the manners of the Court, but rather that it would be a means to
augment their credit much more. For the people who always judge by the
events, when they shall be assured by the following amendment, that the Popes
government was justly reprehended, will persuade themselves likewise, that the
other innouations proposed have good foundation, and the Arch heretics,
seeing they have overcome in one part, will not cease to reprehend the rest.
That reading the stories past, of the times when heresies hare been raised
against the authority of the Church of Rome, it will appear, that all took
pretense from the corrupted manners of the Court. Nevertheless never any Pope
thought fit to reform them, but after admonitions and instructions used to
induce the Princes to protect the Church. That whatsoever has succeeded well
heretofore ought always to be observed and kept. That nothing did more ruin
a government then to change the manner of ruling it. That no man has ever
extinguished heresies by reformations, crusadoes, and exciting Princes and
people to root them out (that is with fire and sword) which he showed in the
examples of Innocent III. and other Popes against the Albigenses, Waldenses and
others. The Pope that was scarce warm in the Chair, relating these things to
his trusty friends William Encourt, and Theoderick Hezius said the condition
of Popes was miserable, seeing it was plain they could not do good, etc. yet
he was resolved to maintain his promises, though it were to divest himself
of all temporal dominion. And accordingly sent his Nuntio above mentioned to
the diel of Noremberg, where he confessed the abuses and promised the
reformation, which the Pope lived not to perform.

Clement the 7. that succeeded (and others after him) followed an other course:
For when the Emperor Charles V. to satisfy the Germans desired that a
Council might be called, the Pope answered, Page 50.
that it was probable that the multitude was deceived, but to give it
satisfaction in the demand of a Council, was not to give it more light, but
to bring in popular license. If it were granted them to make question or seek
greater perspicuitie in religion, they would immediately also pretend to give
laws for government, and to restrain the authority of Princes by decrees, etc.
For the Princes and Grandies, he might assure himself, their end was not
piety, but the making of themselves Lords of the Ecclesiastical goods, and
being become absolute, to acknowledge the Emperor little or nothing, mark
their cunning. But when the French Ambassador had made request for granting the
cup to the laics, with reason that it would keep them in the Romish faith and
from prying into other matters laid against the Church of Rome. Page 459.
Pope Pius the IV. suddenly answered, that he had ever thought that the
communion of both kinds and marriage of priests were de jure positive: and
therefore was thought to be a Lutheran in the last conclave. That the Emperor
had made the same request for his son demanding the like for his people, but
that the Cardinals would never yield unto it. Yet he promissed to speak
thereof in the next congregation. Where the Cardinal Rodolpho Pio de Carpi
said, that it was manifest, that this would not be the last Demand of the
Frenchmen in matter of religion, but a step to propose an other, that afterward
they will demand the marriage of Priests, the vulgar tongue in the ministry of
the Sacraments: which will have the same ground, because they are de jure
positivo, and must be-granted for the preservation of many, which for politic
reasons then alleged might not be granted. Before this there had been much
cry for reformation. Paul 3. caused diverse Cardinals and others to assemble,
Page 85.
and consider of the errors for redress. The Prelates made the Collection in
writing, the Pope proposed it in the Consistory. But Nicholas Scomberg a
Dominican and a Cardinal opposed the reformation, saying. It would give
occasion to the Lutherans, to brag they had enforced the Pope to make that
reformation; and above all it would be a beginning to take away, not only the
abuses, but the good uses also, and to endanger the whole state of religion.
For by the reformation it would be confessed that the things provided against
were deservedly reprehended by the Lutherans, which would be a great abetting
to their whole Doctrine. In the council, after celebrated, diverse things were
found amiss. Sess. 22. Can. 9.
The Bishops and Fathers of the Counsel made a decree for a reformation, but
little could be obtained, much was shufled of, because it could not be
effected, but the authority and practice of the Pope and Cardinals must be
questioned and reformed, if not overthrowen.

The like may be said of the Reformation of the Church of England, many things
have been propounded, in Books and Parliaments, but little or nothing can be
heard or reformed, least a gap should be opened, whereby the authority and
practice of the Bishops should be questioned and overthrowen, and if any
Bishops be better inclined to reformation then others, they shall be sure to be
hindered by the rest, as these Popes were by the Cardinals, and with like
reasons. For English Bishops, in like wisdom, will not be known of any error
in the hierarchy, canons, traditions, ceremonies and government, but maintain
all, least confessing somewhat amiss, they should loose all, and be reduced to
the government of other reformed churches.

There was a fault that hindered the Church of Rome from yiedling to
reformation. Cassander consult. 56. and 57.
And the fault (says Cassander a learned Papist) is to be laid upon those
which being puffed up with vain insolent conceits of their Ecclesiastical
power, proudely and scornfully contemned and rejected them which did rightly
and modestly admonish the reformation. That the Church can never hope for any
firm peace, unles they begin to make it, which have given cause of that
distraction That this cannot be effected unless those that are in place of
Ecclesiastical government, would be content to remit something of their too much
rigor, and yield somewhat to the peace of the Church; and hearken to the
earnest prayers and admonitions of godly men, will set themselves to correct
manifest abuses, according to the rule of the divine Scriptures, and the
primitive Church from which they have swerved. (He might have said, till the
Kings hate the whore, make her desolate, naked and burn her with fire) Shall I
say this may also be said of English Bishops in case of their hierarchy and
traditions? I may add this to it, that God can never be pleased, nor the Church
and State of great Britain enjoy true happiness, till the Prelates cast their
crowns at the feet of the Lord Jesus; or rather because men despair of that,
till they be taken from them, and they subjected to the ordinances of God, Rev.
5.6.
least otherwise Christ, that has the Elders about his throne, and is in the
midst of them, say in his wrath, Luke 19.27.
Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, etc.

When reformation is desired some flattering preachers, Canti. 8.4. Chap. 1.
to make men desist, put it off with preaching on those passages and the like.
I charge you o daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up nor awake my love
until he please, I am black but comely, etc. The church has spots, but they
should not be mentioned. Pray for the peace for Jerusalem, they shall prosper
that love it, which if they of the Church of Rome had not in like manner a
bused, they could not have proceeded so far in error, as they did: and yet
they might as well allege these plates and the like to prove that prelates
ought to proceed Earls and Barons, to have palaces and coaches, as to hinder
and reprove men that seek a due reformation.

Others would have the people believe in this point, as the Church believes,
to rely on the understanding and judgment of the priests and prelates, like
the papists, Mal. 2.7.
alleging that place. The priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth. which does as well serve the papists,
Buckler of faith.
as them in this point: For, as master Moulin observes this is not a promise
but a commandment. showing priests their duty, which they had not observed,
as the following words manifest; But ye are departed out of the way: ye have
caused men to stumble: which is as true, in this point, of the Prelates and
others in England, as of the Papists in the same point and in others. We are
therefore to remember that rule, 1 Ioh. 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit but try the Spirits, God gives such knowledge to
whom he pleases; the wind blows where it lists. John. 3.


They may perhaps find some other arguments to prove that the hierarchy,
traditions and ceremonies should be upheld, but none fairly deducted from the
holy Scriptures, but rather grounded on humane policy: which therefore are not
worth the answering. For we know likewise the papists press many
faire-seeming reasons, for the Popes supremacy, and succession in Peter's
chair, merits, praying to Saints, forbidding marriage to Priests and other
points of popery. To which it is answer enough to prove that those reasons
fight against the word and ordinance of God: and so do theirs that plead for
the English hierarchy and traditions, as is already proved. Men therefore
should not be carried away with them, nor with an opinion of their learning and
multitude that preach them; but rather think, Surely their kingdom is of this
world: It makes so many that fight for it, because there are in it many places
of profit honor and authority to reward them, like as in the Romish Church;
that if Christ's kingdom were of this world he should have as many for him:
that to be well informed in these points, it is no asking of them who are
interessed and partial in the cause, but to remember what God says, Isa. 8.
Should not a people seek unto their God? To the l^w and to the testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Which in these points, may be said of 100 many, to their great shame;
because it so muth concerns the faith, and all the faithful to have them
well known, as is proved above, least by the power and great names of the
Bishops, the faith come to be corrupted, the name of the Church, and the holy
Ghost, usurped and abused, as they have been in diverse Synods of Bishops to
the destruction of many souls.

Let us therefore pray earnestly and uncessantly to Almighty God the giver of
all grace to purge the Church of England and the members thereof, that they
with the reformed Churches may be like minded, in seeking the kingdom of God
and the righteousness thereof, And seeing questionles that God has many of his
dear and elect people there, that are only blind in some few things, let us
beg of God, that they may now see the things that belong to their peace, 1 Cor.
1 9. Heb. 10.23. 1 These. 5.24. Isa. 25.6.
least after they should be hid from their eyes. And let us ask with
confidence, that he is faithful that has promised, who will also do it. For
it is said. In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a
feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees, of fat things full of marrow,
of wine on the lees well refined. Seeing therefore his ordinances are corrupted
with men's inventions, we may press him with this promise that he will give us
wine fined and purified, even his purest ordinances; as also with that which
follows, verse. 7.
And he will destroy in this mountain, the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the veil that is spread over all nations. Chap. 30.21.
And thine ear shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk
yein it when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

And though we fear Satan will hinder it what he can, Romans 16.20.
let us believe that promise. The God of peace shall shortly bruise Satan under
your feet. Neither think this impossible because yet not only the Prelates,
but diverse religious Ministers have neglected this knowledge and reasoned
against it, so that there is great difference about these things, for God has
said. I will give them one heart and one way. Ier. 32, 39.
I will give you pastors according to mine heart which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding. Cha. 3.15.
Neither be dismayed because as yet those that have labored most in this
behalf have been forced into corners, and to live like Banished men in murh
sorrow, for we have this promise. Isa. 35.10.
The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with songs, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. Neither say how shall this be, seeing
as yet so many greedy and corrupt shepherds are over us? For thus faith the
Lord God. Behold I am against the shepherds and will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall the
Shepherds feed themselves any more: For I will deliver my flock from their
mouth that they may not be meat for them. Acquaint thy self with these and the
like promises, and believe that he sits at the right hand of God to intercede
for the performance, who says, whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, Ioh. 14.13.
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the son. And if we
believe not, yet he abides faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13.
he cannot deny himself. To him therefore with the Father and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one God, be rendered as due is, all power, might, majesty and
dominion now and for ever. Amen.


